MEDICINES FOR THE PLAGVE: That is, Godly and fruitful Sermons upon part of
the twentieth Psalm, full of instructions and comfort: very fit generally for
all times of affliction, but more particularly applied to this late visitation
of the Plague.

Preached at the same time at Norton in Suffolk, by Nicholas Bownd, Doctor of
Divinity.

And now published for the further good of all those that love and fear the
Lord.

Perused, and allowed.

Exodus 15.26. If thou will diligently hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear unto his
commandments, and keep all his ordinances, then I will put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Aegiptians: for I am the Lord that
heals thee.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Jslip for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at the
Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1604.

To the right Worshipful Master Doctor Tindall, Deane of Eely, and Master of
Queens College in Cambridge, his very reverend and good friend, the daily
increase of that blessing of God, which is promised to the merciful. Matthew.
5.7.
RIght Worshipful Sir, if this small Treatise had been a learned discourse of
some high point of Divinity in controversy at these days, it might well
have been thought beseeming the favor of him, who has not only spent all
his life in the University among the learned, but for his great learning and
vvisdome has many years been chief governor not only of those that are
studious and desirous of learning, but of great learned men themselves, and
those which are teachers of others. But seeing it contains nothing else but
common and ordinary instructions unto godliness, and consolations in trouble;
it may be judged more fit to be presented unto some, who though he were of
like worship, yet might be of less learning and authority among the learned.
But my Apology and defense for my self, is this, That such have been your
deserts a great while, not to others alone, but even unto my self, that they
have craved somevvhat at my hands long ago, as well as at others. Presuming
therefore of the thankfulness of many others unto you, according to their
duty, I could not satisfy my self in this my (I will not say unthankfulness)
but insufficient thanks; and so this opportunity being offered, I did not
consider so much what was meet for you to receive for your desert, and for
your place, as what I was presently fit for my ability to bring: even a
little fruit of my labors, for your abundant kindness toward me: 2. Sam.
4.15.33.
as the Prophet Elisha did to the Shunamite, for all her great favors to him
and his. And as the fruit of your favor has not been for a fevv days or
months, but has extended it self unto many years, so I was desirous to
leave behind me some testimony of my duty again, which might continue for
some years: and that as you have long since by many deserts attained unto that
commendation which the spirit of God gives unto Boaz, Ruth. 2.20.
That you have not ceased to do good to the living, and to the dead; so your
virtues might be remembered to the glory of God, not only vvhiles you live,
but when you shall be dead. Of which if I should say nothing my self, knowing
so much, and having so good cause; not only the many learned divines and
students in other arts, which under your wise government continue the studies
still in your College, with great encouragement from your self; but those
godly preachers especially, which these many years have come from thence into
diverse parts of this realm, with great profit unto the Church of God, will
speak sufficiently both for the time present, and this next age to come:
which do willingly and in all places acknowledge themselves, and their
learning, and the foundation of all their preferment to be wholy beholding to
your self. Which godly care of yours in aduauncing of learning and piety (you
being a professed patron of learning and learned men) shall so much the rather
continue and increase in you to the good example of others of your rank, when
besides the blessing of God upon your labors this way (which is principally
to be regarded) you shall perceive, that by oblivion it is not altogether
forgotten of men. And thus hoping that you will accept this, as a testimony
of my true thankfulness unto you, where better requital is vvanting, I pray
God to bless you in your College still, that from thence, as from an
excellent school of the Prophets, there may come continually many faithful
Pastors into the Church of God: not so much like those that were brought up at
the feet of the great Doctor Gamaliel, Act. 5.34. Chap. 13.1. and 11.26.
as those that were at Antioch, which gave the first name unto Christians:
that God may be honored, and the Church edified by your means more and more:
and so your self not only have the continuance of a good conscience here, but
most of all in the last day, They may be your crown, 2. Cor. 1.14.
and you theirs: when all of you appearing before the Lord, you may with much
comfort say unto him, Here am I, Isai. 8.18.
and the children whom thou have given unto me: and he again unto you, Matthew.
25.21.
It is well done good servant and faithful, thou have been faithful in
little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy. So very
humbly and heartely I take my leave. Norton in Suffolk. May. 1604.

Your Worships in all dutiful love. Richard Bownd.

TO THE GODLY and Christian Reader, perfect health of soul and body from our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the only giver and preserver of them both.
THese few Sermons, which at the first were meant but unto a few, I have now
published and made common unto others: not only that by this means the
doctrine and consolation contained in them, might be renewed unto the first
hearers (which for them is a sure thing, Phil. 3.1.
as the Apostle speaks;) but that according to the Communion of Saints, as in
the natural body, 1. Cor. 12.12. etc.
that gift which is in any part, the rest have the use of it; so in the
mystical body of Christ, that which he by his spirit, and by his own
ordinance had made proper unto some, others might have the fruit and benefit of
the same. For seeing we be all alike subject unto the same corruption and
unbelief in our souls, and there is no temptation appertaining unto man, but
every one may fall into it, as well as another: there is no instruction or
comfort out of the word of God, which any have received, but the rest of the
servants of God may receive the like from thence: especially seeing they
proceed from one and the same spirit of truth and of life, which quickening
the whole body, works in every member proportionably. Therefore as I am not
altogether out of hope, that others may be benefited by them, besides those
for whom they were first prepared: so if they be, J shall not repent me of this
double labor; the one in preaching of them, and the other in publishing of
them. I have entitled them, Medicines for the Plague, because they contain
many meditations fit for that evil, both to prevent it, and to bear it
patiently, and to be recovered out of it, and to die comfortably in it. And I
must needs confess, that I did not make choice of this text, to entreat of
that argument of purpose, for then I might have taken many other more fit in
the Scripture; and this (to say the truth) does not properly concern it one
whit: but having entered into this Psalm, before there was any great rumor of
the Plague, upon this occasion of the Kings Highness his first coming into
these parts of his dominion, and so in the beginning handling something of our
duty unto our sovereign prince, according to the general drift of the text;
when this new accident of the Plague fell out, because the Psalm did still so
far agree with the time, as it was a time of trouble, I held on my course,
and made a virtue of necessity: and so did apply the Scripture unto the time,
and all meditations of trouble arising out of it unto this one kind of trouble
of the Plague especially, proper unto that time, so far as it was necessary.
And so during the time of the public fasts, commanded by public
authority, and generally used for the most part every where, continuing in
this text, as the Plague increased, so in my whole course I did still aim at
that more and more. Whereupon it comes to pass, that the Medicines for the
Plague (so called) are inserted somewhat after the beginning, and so more
toward the midst, and in the end most of all, according to the time.
Therefore though this one thing be not dispersed through the whole book, and
in every Sermon, (though it be in the most) the whole book not unfitly has
his denomination thereof: even as some compound medicines are called not of
all, but of one principal ingredient, and that also which in the artificial
confection is added to the rest in the midst, or rather sometimes even at the
last. And as the same Apothecaries, though they have more of that stuff
remaining, put to no more than is fit at that time for the present receipt: so
though there was more of this Psalm remaining unhandled, yet I left it off,
when the Lord in so great mercy did put an end almost to the Plague,
especially in the chief parts of this realm; at what time also all men did
discontinue their weekly fasting. And though I meant nothing less at the
first preaching of them, than that they should thus be divulged; yet seeing the
Lord did afterward put it into my mind (as I am persuaded) and gave me good
success by his blessing in setting them down in writing, J do not repent me
of this labor. And it shall not be unprofitable for us all by this means so
long after, both to remember in what case we were then, to be still humbled by
it; and what we then prayed for, that now we may be thankful; and what we
then vowed, that now we may perform it: and that we may be prepared for the
like again. And thus hoping of your Christian patience and charitable
judgment of these my endeavors, and of my good meaning in them, I commend them
to your godly consideration, with my prayers for you, and for them, unto him,
who only gives increase to the planting and watering of all men according to
his heavenly wisdom; 1. Cor. 3.6.
and desire you also, that you would further me with your prayers this way, and
every way, that so we may all of us receive as much as we give, according to
the promise of our Savior Christ, Luke 6.38.
Look with what measure you mete unto others, with the same it shall be
mete unto you again. In hope whereof I rest, and bid you heartely farewell in
the Lord.

Norton in Suffolk. May. 1604. Yours in all Christian duties, for the Lords
sake. Nicholas Bownd.

GODLY SERMONS UPON PART OF THE TWENTIETH PSALM, full of instruction and
comfort: very fit generally for all times of affliction; but more particularly
applied to this late visitation of the Plague: Preached at Norton in Suffolk.
THE FIRST SERMON UPON THE inscription, or title of the Psalm. To him that
excels. A Psalm of David.
THis Psalm (as appears by the inscription) was made by the Prophet David,
The author of this Psalm: and to whom it was committed.
as most of the Psalms were; and not as a private thing belonging to himself
alone, but for the benefit of the whole Church, as the rest of the Scriptures
also were written to that end: and therefore it was delivered, or specially by
him commended, unto him that excels; namely in Music; that is, unto one of
the Levites, that was skillful in Music, to be sung publicly in the Temple,
and therefore by him to be set unto some tune fit for it: according to the
manner of Gods worship in those days, and according to the division of the
offices of the Levites made by David, for all kind of Music, both with
voice, and with diverse kinds of instruments: 1. Chron. 25.
as appears in the book of the Chronicles. And the whole Psalm thus made
and directed, is a prayer of the Church for David their King. The argument of
this Psalm.
For in the beginning, and end of the Psalm there are the words of
supplication and prayer, desiring some thing of the Lord: in the midst they
show with what faith they do pray. And it is evident that they pray not for
themselves only, but for another: for they say, The Lord hear thee, and
defend thee, etc. and they mean their King, whom in the sixth verse they call
the Lords anointed: it was made by David, as appears by the title. He then
teaches the people to pray for himself, desires their prayers, tells them
for what they should pray, and gives them a form of it. The occasion of it.
The time when he made this prayer for them, and the occasion of it is not set
down in the title, as it is in some other Psalms: but yet it is thought by
diverse, that it was when he went to battle against the Ammonites. Which thing
as it is but coniecturall, so we are sure of this out of the words of the text,
that it was in a time of great danger, not only to his own person, as
appears in the first and second verses: but to the whole realm, as is evident
verse. 7.8: and it was a time of war, for they speak of chariots and horses as
of means of defense, verse. 7. He then in a matter of great moment flees to
God for succor, as to his only defense: he uses all good means, but reposeth
his whole confidence in Gods defense: therefore he prays to him before he
begins any thing, and determines further in the whole course of his
proceeding still to pray unto God for direction and aid: And not only to do
it a little at the first, as may appear out of the verse. David did desire the
people to pray for him.
1.3.4: but because it concerned not himself alone, but all the people, and
finding his own insufficiency in prayer, and believing the promises of God
made unto the prayer of other, especially of the Church, he desires them to
pray for him, and namely to pray that God would hear his prayers, which what
they were or should be in particular they knew not, but generally they might
presume that they were good, and such as did concern that action: and so
whatsoever they were, he would have them pray to God that he would hear them:
as appears verse. 4.

The people do according to this direction and commandment of his; The
Prophet did use this form of prayer for him.
for they used this form of prayer which he had prescribed, and so did pray
earnestly for him, that God would both hear his prayer, and defend his person,
and to that end send him help from heaven, and declare by the event that he
had heard his and their prayers, in giving them victory over their enemies:
and God hears them all, and saves the king, confounds their enemies,
causes them to return home with victory and great triumph, as appears by
the next Psalm: wherein he and they together give thanks unto God for the
victory, attributing it only to God, and not to their own strength, or any
power of man; as in this Psalm they had professed, that they did not trust in
chariots and horses, and such warlike defense, as men use to do, and namely
their enemies did, but only in the protection and defense of God, which by
calling upon his name they sought for. And so this is the general argument and
sum of this Psalm, both in respect of David, who made this prayer, and of
the people who did use it for him.

By the inscription then it appears, that David making this prayer for the
people to use in his behalf, was desirous that they should pray for him, and
did as it were seek it at their hands. If he in so good a cause did not rest in
the confidence of his own prayers, but desired others to pray for him; and if
he did it then, when he had so many means to accomplish his desire, because he
knew God to be above them, and so as without him they could do nothing, and
he was able to hinder and to frustrate all; and if he that was so well able
to pray for himself and others, yet did desire the prayer of others, and of
those that were inferior unto him: Kings ought to take order that the people
should publikly pray for them.
Then no King, Prince, or Potentate is exempted from this, to stand in need of
the prayer of others: and therefore they ought to take order in their several
realms and dominions, that the people may usually pray for them in their
public places and assemblies: and more seriously and particularly to do it,
as there shall be any special occasion, as here was in the time of David.
Therefore this order that is among us established by law, that in all Churches
the Minister and people are willed to pray continually for the Kings most
excellent Majesty, both in common prayer and in preaching; and that as war,
or other thing shall fall out, so some special forms of prayer are set out by
public authority to be used in such cases: is according to Gods word, and to
the example of godly Princes. I speak not now of our duties to pray for them,
but of theirs, that they should think that they need it, and so require it of
the people.

Al men ought to desire others to pray for them according to their several
need.
And if Kings are bound thus to do, then Noblemen, and other inferior persons
much more, who have not so many means to accomplish their own desires, or it
may be are not so well able to pray for themselves, at leastwise as David was.
And so generally all men (for this, as well as the rest of the Scripture is
written for our learning) are bound, as at all other times to desire others to
pray for them; so also, as they shall have any special cause, to desire them
to do it a great deal more: and not only to pray themselves for themselves
continually, because prayer in all things is our special refuge and succor;
but to desire others to pray God, that he would from time to time hear their
prayers. And as David does it here in this special need of his, as being in
danger and fear of his enemies: so if we be in sickness and fear of death, we
should in the feeling of our own weakness, and in the faith of the prayers of
others, desire the^ to pray for us, and not only to pray our selves. And this
is the advice and commandment of the Apostle: Is any among you afflicted? Jam.
5.13.14.
let him pray: is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray for him. Now seeing sickness is but one kind of
cross, and the Lord has many ways else to afflict us; in any of them we
ought to do the like: yea and not only when affliction is upon us, that it
might be removed and taken away; but when we have just cause to fear it, that
it might be prevented, and so we escape it. And not only in outward
affliction, but all inward much more, by how much they are more dangerous and
grievous: as if we shall be distressed in mind, being tempted by Satan
either unto sin, or for sin: for if they be auailable in other cases, then
in these. And so to conclude this one point in a word, in every matter that is
of any importance either for our selves, or for any of ours, we ought so to
commend the same, and the whole success of them unto God in prayer, who must
only bring them to pass, as that we rest not therein, but desire also the
prayers of others to help us in the same.

This ordinance of his, By this God would have us united in love one to another.
the Lord in much wisdom and mercy has left, to unite us in brotherly love
one to another; that when we shall see by experience how much we are or may be
beholding one to another, in that by their prayers we have been helped in so
great distresses, we might from the bottom of our hearts unfeignedly love one
another. Thus the greatest Monarch may be beholding to all his subjects, as
David was here to his people; and the rich this way may think that they fair
the better for the poor; and the Minister for the meanest of his flock; And
it were well that this way we were all of us a great deal more beholding one
to another than we are: in that we would in brotherly love acquaint others with
our estate, and desire their prayers, and then they would pray for us,
according to the counsel and advice of the Apostle: Acknowledge your faults
one to another, and pray one for another, Verse. 16.
that ye may be healed, for the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it
be fervent. If we should for our own benefit and good, acquaint other with
some special sins, that have been the cause (and so consequently that may be
the cause) of some great cross; that they upon the knowledge of it might in
greater feeling and faith pray for us, that they might be forgiven, and we
delivered from the punishment of them: then should we make them acquainted
with other of our necessities to that end much more.

As in other things we need the help one of another, so in prayer: and
therefore should desire the same.
And that we might be persuaded unto this duty of craving the prayers of
others in the feeling of the great need that we have of them; let us first of
all consider, how the Lord has so made us all* that he would have us help one
another, and know that we need the help one of another, both for soul and
body and every way else: and therefore that we should seek for it one of
another; as in the natural body all parts do need the mutual help one of
another, as the eyes of the feet, and the belly of the hands, and do in a
sort seek unto them for it, and by a natural instinct, as it were beg and
crave it. And all experience teaches us, that in all other things none of us
is sufficient of our selves, and therefore we crave the help of others, as in
counsel, in labor, and in all worldly affairs; why then should it not be so
in prayer also? Yet such is our corruption, that we rather seek help in any
thing, as distrusting our selves, saving in this, wherein we most need it.
But we have found the other true by our own experience, and so do use it, if
we did believe this, and would do thereafter, we might find the fruit of it
as sensible. We desire men to sue for us to Princes, so should we do unto God.
Secondly, when we have suites unto Princes or great men, we desire those that
are in favor with them, to further our suites, and those especially that are
most gracious with them; and we rest not in our selves, though we be well
known unto them, especially if the matter that we sue for be of any moment:
why should we not then much more speak unto others, that they would pray to
God for us, and commend our suites unto his high Majesty? For though Gods love
be not partial, as man's is, Matthew. 18.20.
but his promise is to all alike: yet experience shows that some are more
acquainted with prayer, then other, and so have more access unto God, as it
were, and come oftener into his presence, and nearer unto him, and so there is
more hope that they should be sooner heard. Especially when God has made a
special promise, that when two or three be gathered together in the name of
his son, he will be in the midst of them, and therefore when diverse, or
the whole Church pray for us, there is more hope of being heard, than when we
pray our selves alone. The Papists pray to the Saints, that are dead, that they
would pray to God for them, that he would hear their prayers; for which there
is no warrant in the Scripture, but the whole word of God is rather against
them: but here is an example to desire the prayers of the Saints on earth that
are living, with hope of great fruit; and few do follow it.

Thirdly, when we pray, When we wrestle with men we desire help: so should we
when we strive in prayer with God. Genesis 32.24.
we do as it were strive with God to obtain some thing, as was showed to
Jacob in the vision of an Angel wrestling with him all night long; to teach
us, that when we pray we must not come coldly or sleepely unto it, but with all
earnestnes of desire, and not give over until the Lord bless us, as Jacob
would not let the Angel go, until he blessed him: and then the Lord will
assuredly bless us, if we persevere, as he did Jacob; and as Christ has
showed in the parable of the wicked Judge, who was overcome by the importunity
of the widow. Therefore as when we wrestle or strive with a man, Luke 18.2.
we knowing his great strength and our own weakness, and so how hard it is to
overcome, we would gladly have others to help and to strive with us against
him; and so we may more easily do that by the help of others, which alone
hardly, or not at all we could do: So when we strive with the Lord God in
prayer, being privy to the weakness of our own faith, and how many sins
there are to hinder us, and what an hard thing it is to obtain any thing in
respect of our great unworthiness, we should desire others to help us with
their prayers, and therein as it were to strive with us. And in this respect it
is a singular great blessing, if it were rightly esteemed, and accordingly
used, to have many in a family, or in the Church, to pray with us, and for us.

Thus speaks the Apostle, and thus did he practice, when he so earnestly
entreated the Romans to pray for him, Romans 15.30. 32.
saying, Brethren, I beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the spirit, that you would strive with me by prayer to God for me; that
I may come to you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.
He had often, and of a long time purposed to come to them, Chap. 1.10.
as he professes in the first chapter; and prayed, that by some means one
time or other he might have prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto
them: Paul desired the Church to strive with him in prayer.
now at the last he desires them also not only to pray, but to pray earnestly,
and to strive with him in their prayers, that he may come with joy: and does
beseech them that they would do so, even for the love of Christ, and of the
spirit. If he then after so many and earnest prayers did desire them to strive
with him: how had we need much more to do it, who pray seldomer, and more
coldly? And truly as great things may be done, when many strive together, which
none of them could severally do: so by the prayers of many great things are
obtained, which by the prayers of one alone are not so easily gotten. So the
same Apostle writes to the Corinthians, that God had delivered him from great
dangers, and would do so still, 2. Cor. 1.8.
so that they would pray earnestly for him: Brethren, (says he) we would not
have you ignorant of our affliction, which came unto us in Asia, how we were
pressed out of measure, passing strength, so that we altogether doubted even of
life. Yea, we received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should
not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises the dead. Who delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver us: in whom we trust, that yet
hereafter he will deliver us; so that ye labor together in prayer for us.
Thus he believed, that he might get great good by the earnest prayers of
others, and therefore does desire them, Great things may be obtained, when many
pray together.
even to be delivered by the power of them from many great dangers. And it may
be (if we have marked the experience of our selves, and others) that we may
well remember, what great deliverances have been granted, when others have
labored in prayers for us, or we for them: if not, we may see it by the
grace of God in time to come. But very few account prayer such a labor or
striving as it is, and so go to it coldly, and trust to their own strength, and
so obtain nothing. Paul's hope was in this, that others should strive with him
in prayer; so we might have greater hope, if we sought for help at the
prayers of others, and did not trust to our own too much.

If thus in all matters of moment we desire the prayers of others according to
our need, it will come to pass, What comfort we may have when we have desired
the prayers of others.
that we should not want the fruit of them, seeing the Lord has promised to
hear them; but howsoever things fall out with us, we shall have this comfort of
a good conscience, that we have neglected no means, that God has appointed for
our good. But if we be careless of the prayers of others, and so do not
seek for them, besides that it may come to pass that we shall fail of our
purpose through our own default: (as when one strives alone, he cannot
overcome, because he has none to join with him; or at least he shall not
obtain it so soon, as otherwise he might, as when one is about a thing
alone, he is the longer a doing it) we shall have the less comfort, or more
grief, because we neglected some means that might have done us good. We must
then be persuaded, that the prayers of others may do us good, and that we
need them, and so accordingly desire them. In the days of ignorance and
superstition men gave much to have a continual Mass for them, that is, In
Popery they maintained others to pray for them.
to pray for their souls: and there were Beadmen also (as they called them)
appointed for that purpose, to pray for the living and for the dead, and were
maintained by the goods of the Church to that end: which prayers of theirs
because they were in an unknown tongue, and so without understanding; and also
not according to the word of God, and so without faith; could do them no good:
yet this truth they aimed at though in darkness and as blind men, that the
prayers of others were so available for them, that even in that respect only
they gave much yearly unto those that should pray for them. And truly if they
had prayed aright, they might by their prayers have given more than they
received; for they might have obtained great things of the Lord for them. But
here was another great abuse of that time in these prayers also, that they
having others thus to pray for them, they rested in that, and so neglected
their own prayers the more; and thought that they might do it with the less
danger, for they had others that prayed for them continually, and so that that
was wanting in themselves, was supplied by others. David was of another mind,
for here by his practice we have an example of one, that so desires the
prayers of others, as that he purposes not to neglect prayer himself, or to
use it any whit the less for that; but to use it rather the more, willing them
to pray God to hear his prayers: so that if he did not pray himself, their
prayers should do him no good; but it should be al one with him, as if one
should desire a man to set his hand to a blank, and so he should prefer that
as a supplication for him to the Prince. So we are to desire others to pray for
us, but in the mean season we must not neglect to pray for our selves.

David should thus desire the prayers of the people: for they were his
subjects, and therefore as in that respect they did owe other duties unto him,
so this of prayer most of all; according to the exhortation of the Apostle, who
wills, 1. Tim. 2.1.2.
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men, and namely, for Kings, and for all that are in authority: therefore it
is like that they would not neglect it, though he had not admonished them of
it. Besides, it was a public cause that he dealt in, even against the open
enemies of the whole realm, against whom he went to war, and so it concerned
them as well as himself: for the enemies came not against his person only,
but against them all, and so they could not forget him their King, unless they
forgot themselves. Our dearest friends had need to be put in mind to pray for
us.
yea when they know our estate best, and what great need we have of the
prayers of others: for they may forget us sometimes, though they wish us well.
And as through forgetfulness they may neglect other duties, which yet they are
willing generally to perform, as not to visit us, to send to us, to write to
us, as often as they should, and we look for at their hands: so much more not
to pray for us; for many times they that do the former in great measure,
neglect this wholly, or in a great part. We find by experience, that many
times, yea when we are spoken to of our friends, we remember not all, but
forget many things: why should we not think then, that others may forget us, if
they be not put in mind? Parents are bound to pray for their children, and
they should know it well enough; yea their children kneel down and ask them
blessing, and put them in mind of it, and notwithstanding all this many do
forget it; and though they cast out certain words of course, yet they do not
thereupon determine seriously to pray for them: what would they do then, if
their children by asking them their daily blessing should not put them in mind
of it at all? Therefore every manner of way we see, what great reason there is
of this, to desire others to pray for us: and so much for this present.

THE SECOND SERMON upon the inscription. To him that excels. A Psalm of
David.
THat I might prosecute that argument which I began the last day, as you heard,
we want not examples in the Scripture for the practice of this duty, Example
of those that have desired others to pray for them. 1. Sam. 1.6.
in the faithful servants of God, men and women of al sorts, who have well seen
in how great need they have stood of the prayers of others, and have
accordingly desired the same. Hannah the wife of Elkanah a very godly woman
(as appears in her story) being barren, and thereby being vpbraided of her
adversary, was troubled in her mind, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore,
and she prayed for a manchild, not so much for her self, as for the glory of
God (for she vowed him unto God in her prayer): Hannah desired Hely to pray for
her.
Hely the Priest sitting in the Temple before her, and perceiving her lips
only to move, but not hearing a word, thought she had been drunken, and told
her so: but she said no, and told him what she did: then Hely prayed God to
hear her prayers, Verse. 17.
saying, Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thy petition, that thou have
asked of him: Then she said again, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy
sight: that is, I beseech thee pray for me still, as now thou have done, that
God would grant me my petition: for what grace or favor else could she mean,
seeing that in other things, as for the ill opinion he had conceived of her,
she had satisfied him before? and so God heard them both, as appears in the
sequel of that story. The Israelites also being in fear of the Philistims,
So did the Israelites desire Samuel to pray for them. Chap. 7.8.
came to Samuel the Prophet, and desired him, that as he had prayed for them
already, so he would not cease to do it still; saying, Cease not to cry
unto the Lord our God for us, that he may save us out of the hand of the
Philistims: and he did so, and the Lord heard him, Verse. 10.
and thundered with a great thunder that day upon the Philistims, and scattered
them: so they were slain before Israel. Here many seek to one for his
prayers, then much more may one seek to many for theirs.

When Rabshakeh was sent by the King of Ashur with a great host against
Jerusalem, and came up to the walls of the city, and spoke blasphemously
against the Lord, and against his anointed: Hezekiah the King came into the
house of the Lord, and prayed; 2. King. 19.1. Hezekiah desired the prayers of
Isaiah.
and sent messengers unto the Prophet Isaiah, desiring him that he would pray
for them, saying, Lift thou up thy prayer for the remnant that are left: and he
did so, and God heard him for them, and the same night the Angel of the Lord
went out, Verse. 35.
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundredth, fourscore and five
thousand. Paul also the Apostle (as we have heard already) desires the
Romans to pray for him, saying, Brethren, I beseech you for our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, Romans 15.30. And Paul of the Romans and Corinthians. 2. Cor. 1.10.
and for the love of the Spirit, that ye would strive with me by prayer to
God for me. And so does he to that end entreat the Corinthians with these
words: God has delivered us from a great death; in whom we trust, that yet
hereafter he will deliver us, so that ye labor together in prayer for us.
This holy man, who was often in prayer for himself, and for all Churches,
desires others to pray for him. Thus the best servants of God, as they have
not neglected this benefit of prayer from their brethren, so they had the fruit
and comfort of it in great measure: and truly if we believe rightly the
Communion of Saints, and that God has appointed one to do good to another by
the graces that he has bestowed upon them; why should we not think, that
part of the communion consists in this, that we communicate in the spirit of
prayer, as well as in the spirit of counsel or of comfort: and that this way
we may give and receive help one from another, as well as any other way?
Hester that noble and virtuous Queen, who as it seems had used often to pray
her self, Hester desires the Jews to fast and pray for her.
and with her maids, else she could not have promised that for them, which she
did; in a matter that greatly concerned the glory of God, and the good of his
Church, does not only pray her self with her servants three days and three
nights, Hest. 4.16.
and that with fasting, but does desire that all the Jews that were in that
city would do the like for her. So that sometimes we had need not only to
desire others to pray for us, but even to fast and pray for us.

The wicked have bin constrained to desire the prayers of others, and have
gotten great good by them.
And truly the virtue and power of the prayer of one man is so available for
another, that the very wicked have seen it, and been driven to acknowledge it,
and so have desired the servants of God to pray for them, and have had great
benefit thereby. Then if the ungodly and profane men of the world, who are not
at all acquainted with prayer, yet have thought that the prayers of others that
God will hear their fellow brethren for them? For as in a family if strangers
can hope, that if some servant of special account do speak to the master for
them, he will do some thing at their request; then they that are of the same
house may be assured much more that the entreaty of their fellow servants
shall do them much good: So in the house of God, Ephe. 2.12.
if they that are strangers from the covenant of promise, and have no hope, and
are without God in the world, yet think that his servants shall be heard for
them; then how much more may they that are of the household of faith themselves
believe, that God will hear their fellow servants for them, seeing that he
has not only given them leave, but commanded them to speak, and entreat one
for another, and themselves are such already, as he means to do good unto?

And this is that that we read of in the person of Pharaoh King of Egypt,
Pharaoh often desired Moses and Aaron to pray for him.
who though he could not abide Moses and Aaron, yet when the hand of God was
heavy upon him, he was many times compelled to seek to them for their
prayers; and his own conscience did tell him, that the Lord might happily
hear them for him, though himself was unworthy once to be regarded of him.
As when himself and his land was punished with frogs, he called for them, and
said, Pray ye unto the Lord, Exodus 8.8.
that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people: and
afterward, when they were punished with great swarms of flies, so that the
earth was corrupt with them: he said, I will let you go, Verse. 28.
that ye may sacrifice unto the Lord your God in the wilderness, but go not
far away, pray for me: and thirdly, when the Lord sent thunder, and hail,
and lightning, so that the fire was mingled with the hail, he sent, and called
for them, and said unto them; Chap. 9.27.
I have now sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked; Pray
ye unto the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunders, and
hail, and I will let you go, and ye shall tarry no longer. Where at the last
he confesses himself and all his people to be wicked, and to have deserved
these plagues, but he prays these his servants to pray to God for them, and
they do so; and at their prayers the Lord remoueth these several plagues.
Thus this wicked man when he was in the midst of his deserved punishments,
and had no heart in them to go to God himself, yet sought to others that he
was well persuaded of, and received great good often by their prayers.

Jeroboam desired the Prophet to pray for him when his hand was withered.
So did that wicked man Jeroboam King of Israel (of whom it is often said to his
shame, that he caused Israel to sin) when the man of God came out of Judah
(at the commandment of the Lord) unto Beth^el, where he stood by his
idolatrous altar to offer incense, and reproved for his idolatry, and cried
out against the altar; he hearing it stretched out his hand, and said, Lay hold
on him: but his hand which he put out against him dried up, and he could not
pull it in again to him. Then the King said unto the man of God, 1. King. 13.6.
I beseech thee pray unto the Lord thy God, and make intercession for me, that
mine hand may be restored unto me. And the man of God besought the Lord, and
the Kings hand was restored, and became as it was before. So though he could not
pray himself, and say, I beseech thee my God, with hope that God would hear
him; yet he desires the Prophet to pray to his God, and thought that another
might be heard for him, and so he was. Thus did Zedekiah King of Judah, though
neither himself, nor the Princes could abide Jeremy the Prophet, Zedekiah
desired the prayers of Jeremy.
neither did they reverence him, or the doctrine that he delivered unto them;
for they would not obey the words of the Lord, which he spoke unto them: yet
when they were in great distress, Jerem. 37.3.
because the Chaldeans did besiege the city, he sent certain men unto him,
saying, Pray now unto the Lord our God for us. Behold how the most ungodly are
driven to justify this holy ordinance of prayer, in such wise that they are
compelled to seek to those sometimes for their prayers, whom otherwise they
do not love, neither have any good opinion of, but rather hate them, and
account them their enemies. Even as those in our time, who though they never
cared for the ministry of the word, nor for the assemblies of Gods people,
nor for his servants, yet when they are in any great misery or fear, and lie
at the point of death, are enforced to send to them, whom they never cared for
in their life, and to entreat them to pray for them, whom they would never
entreat for any thing before.

Lastly, Simon Magus the Sorcerer heard Peter the Apostle justly denounce the
fearful judgment of God against him for his sin; he fearing it, Act. 8.24.
desired Peter to pray for him; saying, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none
of these things, which ye have spoken may come upon me. This wicked man, who of
a long time had bewitched the Samaritanes with his sorceries, And Simon Magus
of Peter.
saying that himself was some great man, hoped that all that evil, which his
sins had deserved, and which God had threatened against him, might by the
prayers of his servants be turned from him, and so he escape them. Shall not
we then much more, who have a desire to please God, and to walk in his ways,
hope that the prayers of others shall be available, to turn from us al those
evils, which our own consciences tell us we have just cause to fear, if we
seek unto them for them? Let us then in the fear of God, and as we love our
own wealth, determine to practice this Christian duty much more than we have
done: and let us be heartely sorry that for want of it we have neglected our
own good too much. What good we might have gotten if we had sought to others
for their prayers.
For many great things might we have obtained, many fearful troubles might
we soon have been delivered out of: yea some grievous things, that have
befallen us, might have bin by the grace of God wisely prevented, if we had
sought unto others, who might have entreated the Lord for us. In which respect
we have great cause to be sorry, The great loss when the good die, whose
prayers we had.
when the Lord takes away any good man or woman, for then we want so many that
might still have prayed for us, and for the Church, and so we are left the more
destitute of help. And if we ought to lament the death of those, who have
been beneficial to us for worldly things, whose help we see now that we want
to our great hindrance; then especially should we be grieved, that we are
deprived of the comfortable presence of those, to whom in all distresses of
body or mind, we might resort, and communicate our whole estate, as David
did to Jonathan, and might boldly have desired their prayers, and might with
great facility have obtained them for us.

Thus much for this part of the title, that this Psalm being a prayer of the
Church for David, he made it for them, and committed it to the singer, that he
might take order, that it should be used publikly, and so by virtue of it did
require, that thus they should pray for him. One thing more of David is to be
observed out of the title, and the discourse of the whole Psalm, namely with
what mind and purpose, or to what end he desired their prayers. Not as
purposing to neglect prayer himself, David in desiring their prayers did not
purpose to neglect prayer himself.
or to grow any whit more slack in it because of that, and so to put off this
as a burden from himself, as one that had other great matters in hand, and so
to commit it to them, that should have leisure enough: As if he should have
said, you know that I must go out to battle against the Ammonites, and in
war we shall have our hands full, and our minds taken up every way, I shall
have no leisure to pray to God there, though I know it to be necessary, and
would feign do it; I would have you therefore to pray for me; and so trusting
to them should neglect this duty himself, and so they might have prayed very
doubtingly for him: but that they might be the more willing to pray for him in
this case, he tells them, and professes it openly, that he would pray to
God himself: and as he should be in any special trouble, so he would do it
much more earnestly: and therefore he would have them pray to God for him, that
he would hear those prayers of his.

So then in requiring this of them, he did not leave them in suspense, to
think thus, he wills us to pray for him indeed, and so it is our bound
duty to do, and we will do it; but we cannot tell whether he will use any
prayer himself, which if he do not, ours shall do him the less good. But
as he required their prayers, so he bound himself to the like practice, No
more must kings when their subjects do pray for them.
and would have them also to know it before hand, that so they might pray
accordingly, that God would hear his prayers. So that first of all Kings and
Princes be they never so great, must not so require their subjects to pray for
them, that they should think it were not needful for themselves to pray at
all, for they had enough that daily did it for them every where. And all others
that desire the prayers of their brethren, must not for that be any one whit
the more remiss and sparing in their own prayers: which is diligently to be
marked of us, because it is contrary to the common practice of the Church of
Rome, and of diverse others. For the Romish Synagogue makes Emperors, Kings,
The practice of the Papists is otherwise.
and great men to believe upon their credit, that prayer does not so
necessarily belong unto them, or to such kind of men; that does peculiarly
belong to the Clergy, and Churchmen, (as they call them); they could pray
enough for them, and for all the world, if they may be well paid for their
labors. Therefore if such men as they will but give some lands and revenues
to an Abbey, or erect a Monastery, or some religious house, there to be prayed
for, they shall have so many continually to pray for them, that it makes no
matter though themselves very seldom or not at al pray. This kingly prophet,
or prophetical king was of another mind, and so ought all godly and religious
not only Princes, but men and women to be.

But to leave these men, And of some Gospellers.
and their religious practices to themselves, we shall find this corruption to
be in some, that are not of the worser sort; that when they know that others
do pray for them in sickness, or otherwise, they can be contented to let
pass their own prayers now and then in hope of that, and to become somewhat
remiss themselves. But as David's desire was here, not only that they would
pray for him, but after this manner, even that God would hear his prayers,
which he had and would make every day: so does the Apostle join these two
very fitly together, and requires them both of all men alike: Jam. 5.13.14.
saying, Is any man among you afflicted? Let him pray: Is any sick among you?
Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him: where he
would have al men to pray for themselves in their several afflictions, and to
send for others, that they might pray for them likewise. We must not sever our
own prayers from the prayers of others.
And as he would not have them in some cases to content themselves with their
own prayers, but send for others to pray with them; so he would not have them
pass over their own prayers in hope of that, but begin with them first, and
pray themselves, and if they cannot that way prevail sufficiently, then to
call for the aid of others; among whom it may come to pass, that the prayer
of some one righteous man or other might be so fervent, that it might avail
much for them. Therefore those things which the Lord by precept, and by the
practice of his servants, has joined together so nearly, let no man put
asunder.

Yet God hears his servants for those that neither do, nor can pray for
themselves.
And yet we do not deny, but that such is the goodness of God to all sorts of
men, to leave them without excuse; and that he has made so many gracious
promises unto the prayers of his servants, that he often hears them praying
for those, who neither pray for themselves at all, neither can pray, nor have
any purpose to do it. So did he diverse times, as has been declared before,
hear Moses and Aaron praying for Pharaoh King of Egypt, and for his Princes,
and for his people: all which had no purpose at all to serve God themselves,
neither knew how to do it, but did hinder, as much as lay in them, his people
from it: and as for prayer, they know not how to pray one word aright. So did
he also hear the man of God, that prayed for Jeroboam the idolatrous king of
Israel, when his hand was dried up, as we have seen even now; so that both
these were delivered from their several plagues that were upon them by the
prayers of others, when they neither knew how to pray themselves, neither had
any desire to learn. The like may be said of the prayers of Abraham, which he
in great compassion made for the filthy wicked Sodomites, Genesis 18.32.
that the Lord did hear him six times praying for them, though they were so
beastly minded, that they could have no care to pray for themselves.

Therefore though they, who in faith and love to their brethren pray for
others, may hope to be heard for them, that do not, neither can pray for
themselves at all: as the Israelites were willed to pray for the prosperity of
the King of Babylon in the time of their captivity; Ierem. 29.7.
and Paul wills the Church to pray for the Roman Emperors, 1. Tim. 2.1.
who were Heathen, and we do pray according to the will of God for the Jews,
Turks, and all Infidels: yet they that desire others to pray for them, But we
can have little comfort in the prayers of others, if we pray not for our
selves.
and look for some benefit by their prayers, must be sure that they pray
themselves for themselves, otherwise they can have little comfort in them. For
even as when we stand in need of the help of some great man, and he not
only pitieth our estate, but minds to do us good, and therefore wills us
to come to him, and to make our estate known unto him, and yet we should
neglect to do that, but go and desire others to speak for us, and they also
should do so; would not he say unto them, wherefore does he not come and
speak for himself? Will he set other men aworke, and take no pains for
himself? And so many times their speech for us, when we refuse to open our
mouths for our selves, shall not only not further our suites, but rather
hinder them: where if we did first entreat our selves, and then they come
after us, or with us, they might greatly further us: So when we come unto the
Lord to make our requests known unto him in supplication and prayer, as he
calls all men thereunto indifferently without respect of persons, saying,
Iam. 1.^.
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men
liberally, etc: and for all this in our great need we will not pray our selves,
or not as we should, but desire others to pray for us, and trust only to that,
it shall be said unto us by the Lord, Why do you not pray your selves? I have
commanded you to call upon me in the time of your trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
and I will hear you, and deliver you: whereas if we do pray earnestly our
selves, and others at our request do second our prayers, the prayers of many,
eue^ of two or three shall greatly prevail and further our prayers. Thus we
see what intent and purpose we must have when we desire others to pray for us,
namely not to neglect our own prayers because of that. David desired the
people to pray for him, and did pray himself also.
We have a notable example of this even in this Psalm in ye person of David,
who desiring many men, even the whole church of God at Jerusalem to pray for
him, did not only himself in all his actions from day to day use fervent
prayer, but openly professes it unto them before hand, desiring them to
further his prayers. So did that good King Hezekiah, when he was in fear of
the host of Senacherib, 2. King. 19.1.
he went himself first into the house of the Lord, to pray to him for his
defense: and then he sent messengers to the Prophet Esaias, Verse. 4.
and desired him to pray for him, and for the remnant of the people that were
left, and so he did: So did Hezekiah when he desired the prayers of Isaiah.
and therefore it said that both of them did pray, even Hezekiah as well as
Esaias, the King that sent unto him, as well as the Prophet whose prayers were
desired; and he rested not in this, that he had sent to the Prophet Esaias a man
of God, who was well able and willing to pray for him and for all the rest; for
thus it is written, that when the Captain of the host of the King of Ashur
had spued out his blasphemy against God, and against Hezekiah in the ears of
the people; that Hezekiah the King, 2. Chron. 32.20
and the Prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz prayed against it, and cried to
heaven. So did the Apostle Paul not neglect to pray himself for the obtaining
of those benefits, wherein he desired the help of the Romans, and of the
Corinthians. For he thus writes of himself, God is my witness, Romans 1.9.
whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his son, that without ceasing I
make mention of you always in my prayer, And Paul, when he craved the prayers
of the Romans and Corinthians. Chap. 15.30.
beseeching that by some means one time or other I might have a prosperous
journey by the will of God to come unto you. And afterward; Brethren, I
beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit,
that ye would strive with me by prayers to God for me; that I may come unto
you with joy by the will of God. And to the Corinthians; We trust in God, that
hereafter he will deliver us, so that ye labor together in prayer for us. 2.
Cor. 1.10.
So that in both these places he insinuates thus much, that as he had often
prayed for himself, so he would do still, willing them not only to strive,
but to strive with him in their prayers for him. For (to show it in that
comparison which the Apostle uses) as if one should be striving to obtain
some great thing, and then should desire others to put to their helping hand,
he would not give it over himself, and lay the whole burden upon them, but
strive still with them; so did S. Paul here, and so must we do. But the
example of Queen Hester is most fit for this purpose, And Queen Hester, when
she desired the Jews to fast and pray for her. Hest. 4.16.
who in that great and common calamity of the Jews, which Hamans malice had
brought upon them, she was determined to make suite to the King for them, she
commanded that all of them should not only pray, but fast for her, and that
three days and three nights: she did not purpose to take any liberty to her
self thereby, but said plainly, that she her self and her maids would do so
likewise. And thus when all prayed together, God heard them, and one of them
for another; as the people of Jerusalem for David their King; the Prophet
Isaiah for Hezekiah and the rest of the people, and the captiued Jews for
Hester the Queen, and her for them: so will he do one of us for another. So
that if we daily give our selves to prayer, and make conscience to use that
holy ordinance of God our selves, we may in great faith and hope desire the
prayers of others. And thus much for him that made the prayer, whose name is
prefixed in the title of it: now for them that used it, which was the Church of
God at Jerusalem, which is to be gathered out of the discourse of the whole
Psalm: but I cannot enter into it at this present, I will reserve it until
the next day.

THE THIRD SERMON upon the first verse.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.
The people pray for the King, as they were desired.
THese are the words of the people, which they spoke unto God in the behalf of
their King, and so they did as David desired them, namely pray for him. If they
did thus pray for him being desired thereunto, and it was their bound duty so
to do, and they knew it to be so, and therefore did make conscience of it, and
it had bin a very great fault for them to have failed in it; then by
consequence it follows of necessity, that whenever any of our brethren or
sisters in Christ shall desire this duty at our hands, So must we do for all
those that desire our prayers.
we must be careful to perform it, and it were a fault not to be excused in
us, both against God and them, to fail in it. Therefore we must not think,
that when godly men and women at their parting, or otherwise desire our
prayers, and say, I pray you pray for me, or remember me in your prayers, that
these are words of course (though I do not deny, but that many do so use
them; and so doing they take the name of God in vain) but we should be
persuaded, that out of the abundance of their feeling of their own wants they
speak unto us, and so be willing by our prayers to help to supply them.
Especially when they shall make their estate known unto us
And especially we should do it, when they shall make known their estate
unto us, as here David did to the people, giving them to understand, that he
should or might be in great danger of his enemies, and so it was a time of
trouble unto him, as he called it: and as the Apostle S. James speaks,
Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one for another, Jam. 5.16.
that ye may be healed: that when the sick should send for godly and grave
men, and so they should not only see their estate for bodily health, but they
should also for their own further comfort confess unto them their special
sins, which they find to have been the cause of them, that then they would
be most willing to pray for them, being sent for to that end especially. So
then if we see plainly that they have cause to desire our prayers, and that
they do it with earnestnes, then most of all should we think upon them, and
upon their estate, to pray for them, and it must needs be a great fault to
forget them. For, as if any should be in distress or want, and should stand
in need of our help for meat, and drink, and clothing, or other things,
and should come and make their moan unto us, and desire relief from us: if
we, seeing their estate to be so pitiful, as indeed it is, should not be
moved in compassion to help them, according to our ability, it were a token
of great hardness of heart in us: So much more when any shall make known their
wants unto us to that end, that we might pray to God for them, if we should
forget it, or neglect to do it, it should bewray too great want of
fellow-feeling and brotherly compassion in us.

Most of all this duty of prayer ought to be carefully performed, And most
of al when thereupon we have promised to pray for them. Psalm. 15.4.
when we have promised it unto any upon such notice of their estate: for as
all promises made to our brethren ought to be kept, yea though it be to our
own hindrance; so those most of all that so nearly concern them. And as if
when any should desire us to speak to some great man for them, and we promise
to do it, and they trust to it, hoping that we will be as good as our words;
it were a great deceit in us to fail them, and so to frustrate their
expectation: For all lawful promises must be kept.
So when any have desired us to speak to God for them, and upon our promise
they would comfort themselves over it, if we should by negligence deceive them,
it were a great fault in us, and that which the Lord would require at our
hands, though they should never know of it. Therefore as we ought d^^y to pray
one for another unasked, as our Savior Christ has taught us; O our Father
which art in heaven, give us this day: and forgive us our trespasses: and lead
us not into temptation, etc: so more specially and by name should we do it for
them, that have desired it of us. And so parents especially should not forget
their children in their prayers, which daily ask their blessing, and hope to
be blessed of God by their prayers.

Secondarily, if we should neglect to pray for them, that have desired it at
our hands; Else they that we trust unto shall neglect to pray for us.
how could we have any hope, that others whom we have desired to pray for us,
should perform that duty unto us? Nay, might not we justly fear, that they
would altogether neglect it, seeing we do neglect them? and should it not be
just with God so to punish us? according to the saying of our Savior Christ,
Matthew. 7.2.
Look with what measure you meat unto others, it shall be met unto you again.
And I remember that this was the saying of a reverend father in the Church, who
is now fallen asleep in the Lord, when any desired him to pray for them (as
many did, and more then any, that I have known) he would say unto them; I pray
you pray for me, and pray that I may remember you* and then I hope I shall not
forget you. Therefore if we would have others pray for us, let us pray for
them, for we can never have greater assurance that they will do it for us,
than that we are careful to do it for them; and the more that we do it for
them, the more may we hope that they will do it for us. For the spirit of God
that moves us pray, and knows much more that we do so, it being the
searcher and the mouer of the hearts shall also move them to do the like for
us, that this promise (...) be verified unto us. Which if it be true very often
of them that are not desired at all, that by the secret operation of the spirit
of God, which quickens the whole body of Christ and every part of it; then
much more of them that are desired, and know the estate one of another.

Therefore if the King would have his subjects to pray for him, he must pray
for them: Therefore if we would have others pray us let us pray for them.
if Noblemen would have their Chaplens pray for them of conscience, they must
pray for them also: if the Bishops would have the Ministers remember the^ in
their prayers, they must not forget them in theirs: and so these great
personages must not think that all should remember them, and yet forget all:
and that it should be a great fault in their inferiors if at any time they
should but once forget them in their public prayers, and yet it should be no
fault in themselves though they do continually forget them. So if the Minister
would have his people to pray for him (as the Apostle often wills the Church
of God to pray for him) then he must remember publicly and privately to pray
for them: so must children do for their parents, if they would have their
blessing and the benefit of their prayers: so must the husband do for the wife,
and one neighbor and friend for another. For the more we pray for them, the
more shall they pray for us, yea though they know not at all that we pray for
them: and if they should neglect it, yet no doubt some or other shall do it:
for this saying of him that is truth it self, must needs be true, Look with
what measure you mete unto others* Luke 6.36.
with the same it shall be mete unto you, even heaped up, pressed down, and
running over into your bosom. Prou. 11.17.
Therefore as he that is merciful rewards his own soul; so he that
performs this work of mercy to pray for others in their need, rewards
himself, and shall have others pray for him in his greatest need. And as he
that sows plentifully, 2 Cor. 6.6.
shall reap plentifully; so he that sows this duty of prayers plentifully
for others, shall reap again so many and more from others. The knowledge of
this should make us willing to pray for others, especially being desired
thereunto: f^^ ^ee shall lose nothing thereby, but gain greatly. Therefore, if
not for the good of others, yet for our own, let us be willing to pray for
others: and herein let us fulfill the saying of Christ; Whatsoever you would
have men do unto you, Matthew. 7.12.
even so do you unto them.

If we do not pray for others, we shall the less rejoice in all blessings of
God upon them.
Thirdly, seeing the end of our prayers for others is, that we might thereby
obtain such things for them as they need: when God shall lbesse them in soul
and body and every way else according to their own desire, and in these things
we shall have prayed for them also; we shall have so much the more cause to
rejoice with them, and to be thankful to God for them, when we not only see
that God has blessed them, but blessed them at our prayers, and so we have our
part in those benefits. Whereas if we should neglect it, God might hear them
selves, or others for them, or both: but we shall have little comfort in those
benefits, because by neglecting to pray for them we have had no hand in them.
Nay, we shall be the more sorry that so great things are befallen them, and we
have not furthered them therein as we might, and as we were desired. Romans 12.15.
For as if our friend have a suite to some noble man, and we by some means
have furthered them therein, and they have obtained it, as it were partly by
our means; we then speak and think of it with the more joy and comfort; but
if they prevailed therein by themselves, or by others without us, it will
grieve us that we have not yielded them that help that we might: so is it in
the suites that men make in their prayers unto the Lord. For if we should, as
the Apostle says, be so affectioned one to another, that we should rejoice
with them that rejoice, and be heartily glad of any good that God bestows
upon others, and be thankful to him for it, seeing we are brethren, nay
members one of another; then most of all should we do it when such benefits
are bestowed upon them partly by our means. Therefore that we might
continually rejoice in all the good that God bestows upon others, let us be
willing and careful to pray to him for a supply of all such wants as they
shall make known unto us. In which respect every one should be mindful to
pray for the Church of God in their time, especially for that part of it
wherein they live, and for the commonwealth, and for our governors in both:
Therefore we should pray for the church and commonwealth in our time.
that so we might rejoice with others, and be thankful to God with them for
all the common benefits of our time. As for example, if we have and do pray
for the life and honor of our most gracious King, how glad may we be to hear
of his miraculous deliverance from most notable treasons, as they profess
verse 5? And if we do pray for the staying of the Pestilence every where, how
may we rejoice to hear, that the Lord diminishes his heavy hand in any
place? So if we pray for seasonable weather with others, we may have the more
comfort in it when the Lord shall send it. And to conclude, if we pray for the
blessing of God upon the ministry of the word, 2. Thessal. 3.1.
that it may have free passage and be glorified, as the Apostle wills, and
that the Lord would give an increase to that that is planted and watered from
time to time; then how may it rejoice our hearts to see sinners converted unto
the Lord, or any good to be done thereby? Otherwise, as Mordochey said to
Hester, If she did not help, Hest. 4.14.
God could send deliverance to his Church from some other place: so if we
refuse to pray for these things, God may send help by the prayers of others,
but we shall have so much the less comfort in them.

Fourthly and last of all, We must believe that our prayers may do much good
to others.
that we might be the more willing to pray for others, we must be persuaded
that God will hear us for them; and that this way we shall be beneficial unto
them: for the Lord will bestow such and such blessings upon them, and deliver
them from the miseries that they be in both of soul and body at our prayers;
so far forth as may make for his glory and their good. And so we must not
think, alas our poor prayers can do them no good, as the devil is ready to
put this into our heads to discourage us from prayer: for the Lord who has
commanded us to ask one for another, has also promised to give. Therefore,
if we cannot otherwise profit our friends, and those whom we wish well unto,
yet this way by our prayers we may be beneficial unto them: and this way
always, even the meanest of us, when we want opportunity or ability to do
it otherwise. And thus David in this Psalm teaches them to pray for him,
believing that God would hear them for him, Verse. 6.
when they say, Now know I that the Lord will help his anointed, and will
hear him from his Sanctuary, by the mighty help of his right hand: where he
sets down this part of the prayer in the singular number, though many did use
it together, to show them that every one particularly should believe that God
would hear them for their King, and would at their prayers defend him against
his enemies, and so they should not pray for him in vain. And the Apostle
exhorts men in their sickness to send for the Elders of the Church to pray
for them; and that both the one and the other might do it in faith (the one
send for them, and the other be willing to come) he makes a gracious promise
in the name of the Lord unto their prayers, and says that they shall thus
obtain for the sick both health of body, and forgiveness of sin. Is any
sick among you? Jam. 5.15.
Let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and
annoint him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he has committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him. And in the next words he wills us all to
confess our sins one to another, and pray one for another, that so we might
receive health; for the prayer of a righteous man avails much every way when
it is fervent; And for whom? Not only for himself, but for another; as he
proves by the example of Helias; in whose days though that godly man Obadiah,
and the hundredth Prophets, whom he hid in caves from the persecution of
Iezabel, did pray for rain in that great drought, as we must needs presume of
them: yet he only by his prayers obtained that benefit for himself, and for
them, and for all the rest of the people of that time. Helias (says he) was a
man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might
not rain, Verse. 17.
and it rained not on the earth for three years and six months: And he
prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her
fruit.

And here if upon this occasion I should enter in this treatise, What great
benefits men have gotten by the prayer of others.
to show what great benefits men have obtained by their prayers, not for
themselves, but for others, the time would not be sufficient, the examples both
in the old and new Testament are so many to declare it. As how the Lord heard
Abraham for his son Ishmael, when he Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight:
Genesis 7.18.
so that he became a great man in the world, and was multiplied exceedingly, so
that not only twelve Princes came of him, but a great nation. And how Izhak
prayed for his wife Chapt. 25.21.
and the Lord was entreated of him, and she conceived, and brought forth
twins twenty years after they had lived together in marriage before. And
what Moses obtained for the Israelites by his Exodus 14.15.
And how Elias raised up from dead by his prayers the son of the widow of
Sarepta, with whom he soiorned. 1. King. 17.28.
Elisha did the like for the good woman of Shunam, 2. King. 4.33.
and many such things else might be showed to have been obtained by prayer. All
which are written for our instruction, to teach us that we should be willing to
pray for others, not doubting but that God will hear us for them: and this way
we may do them good, if we can do it no other ways. As for example, if in
the love and loyalty we owe to our sovereign King, hearing of the treasonable
practices maliciously intended against his royal person, and noble progeny, we
would be willing to do him the best service for his defense that we could,
what shall we do? Counsel can we give none, neither are we in place to do
it: we have no strength to resist his enemies of our own selves: yet we may
pray for him, that Christ Jesus who rules in the midst of his enemies would
bring things to light, and confound them in their devilish devices, and not
doubt but that God will hear us: as they say confidently here, Verse. 6.
I know that the Lord will help his anointed, and will hear him from his
Sanctuary. This should move us to pray for the Church of God universally
dispersed over the face of the whole earth, This way every one may be
beneficial to the Church of God.
and more particularly for that part of it wherein we live, and for all our
governors in the same, high and low, and for others also, not doubting but
that the Lord will hear us in all things for them agreeable unto his holy
will, and so this way we may in all callings be profitable unto them in our
time. So that no man can justly complain, that God has so disabled him that
he can do no good unto others: for if we were as poor as Job, if as full of
sores as Lazarus, if we lay sick in our beds, and in great weakness of body,
yet by our fervent and godly prayers we might do much good unto many. And thus
I remember a godly wise Father did comfort his weak brother, who continuing a
great while in a lingering sickness and weakness of body complained unto
him, that there he spent away his time unprofitably, and was able to do no
good: yes, says he, very much, for you may pray for the Church of God: and
that was true, though he did not then see it. For whatsoever we ask in the
name of Christ according to the will of God, shall be granted unto us; which
is true, whether we ask for our selves or for others.

We may be persuaded that God will hear us for others by the largenes of his
promises.
And the rather that we might be confirmed in this faith, namely, that the
Lord of his bountiful goodness will hear us when we pray for others; let us
first of all consider the promises that God has made unto prayer, which are
infinite in number, and unmeasurable in greatness, but take one for an example.
Christ says in the Gospel, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you; Matthew. 7.7.
which he delivers without limitation, that we might know that it is not to
be restrained to our selves, but if we ask for others, we shall receive for
them. Then let us set before our eyes the manifold and happy experience of the
truth of these promises in all the servants of God; And by the experience of
them in others
who by their prayers have obtained great things for others, as we have heard
already: that when we shall find this way, Gods word and all his promises
pure and most certainly to be trusted unto, as silver that is tried in a
furnace of earth, Psalm. 12.6.
and fined seven fold, we might rely upon them, and so be willing to pray for
others, knowing that we shall not lose our labor.

Thirdly, to these we must add the consideration of our own experience, But
most of in our selves.
and remember for whom we have prayed, and how often, and what has been the
success of our prayers. As how we have prayed heretofore for the life and
preservation of our governors, and namely of our late Sovereign Lady of
famous memory Queen Elizabeth: and how God has often delivered her from many
great treasons intended against her by the Jesuits and other Papists: how we
have prayed for others, as for the life, health, and prosperity of our
parents, husbands, wives, children, neighbors, and friends, in their several
griefs of mind and infirmities of body, and other distresses, and what has
followed thereupon, as how they have been recovered, and comforted, and
otherwise helped and relieved: how here in the Church we have sometimes prayed
for those that have been very sick even at deaths door, who have received the
sentence of death in themselves, and yet they have recovered, and some of them
are alive still; that so as David said upon his former trial, The Lord that
delivered me out of the paw of the lion, 1. Sam. 17.37.
and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistim: so we might upon our former experience boldly say, God that of his
mercy and goodness has vouchsafed to hear me for such and such, will hear me
also at this time for these. To this end also we must wisely observe and
diligently mark for our own comfort, and the good of others, what has
followed upon our prayers, and what God has wrought or done for them. Yea all
they that desire the prayers of others for any special cause, whether of the
Church generally, or of private men particularly, should signify unto them
afterward (which few or none do, and it is a great unthankfulness in them unto
God and man not to do it) what blessings they have found upon themselves by
such prayers; not only that they might be thankful to God for them, as they
prayed for them before; but that being confirmed by such experience, they might
the more willingly and boldly pray for them, and for others at some other time,
as there shall be need: and for want of this they cannot do it so cheerfully
and so confidently as otherwise they might do.

To conclude the sum of all that has been said in one word: How greatly men
fail in neglecting to pray for others.
we see what is here required of us, even that we be mindful to pray for
others, and what good reason there is for it, both in respect of our own
comfort, and of their good; let us examine our selves, to see whether we have
been so careful to perform this duty unto them, as we should. How often have
we, and do we pray for the good estate of the Church of God in other
countries, as in France, the Netherlands, Geneua, and such like, that God would
defend them from their enemies, and enlarge the kingdom of Christ among them?
Nay, how often do we pray for the Church of God in this land, and in the
kingdoms united? How often for the Kings Majesty, the right honorable
Counselors, Judges, and Magistrates, not only of this land, but more
specially of our own country? How often for our neighbors, yea particularly
and by name for them of our own family, as for all our children and servants?
Yea let us call into our minds how often we have prayed seriously and in good
earnest for those that have desired our prayers, and have as it were made a
covenant of prayer with us, by promising that they would pray for us, if we
would remember the^: whether we have carefully kept this promise and covenant
or no: and when we shall find that we have greatly failed this way; let us be
sorry that we have not done that good this way that we might, and that has
been looked for at our hands: and therefore that we cannot have that comfort
in the common blessings of God in church and common wealth, and upon private
men, that others have. And let us determine for the time to come to be more
mindful of others in our prayers, and let us be so indeed; especially of all
the Church of God, and of all those that we have made this promise unto, and so
have bound our selves to it by a covenant in the Lord: that so the Lord may
also reward us with the prayers of others, and with the fruit of the same in
our greatest need; when we shall have carefully performed this duty unto
them before. Especially let us remember to pray for the King, and for all our
governors, as we are bound thereunto both by the word of God, and the laws
of the realm; as if we had made a certain promise to them for it.

THE FOVRTH SERMON upon the first verse.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble.
THus the people do speak unto God in the behalf of their King, and so they
pray for him, The people pray for king David.
that God would hear him, and defend him. This practice of theirs must be our
imitation: for it is the duty of all subjects likewise to pray for their
Princes and governors: and as we do owe unto them tribute, custom, fear,
and honor, as the Apostle says, Romans 13.7.
so this duty of prayer also, and most of all: and therefore it is a great
fault in any to neglect it: let us therefore do it, So should we all do for
our King.
and that of conscience publicly and privately. Men for the most part are
addicted to themselves, or to their friends in prayer: the King they think is a
great way off, and so the proverb with them is too true, Out of sight, out of
mind: or they think he is well enough and has all things at will, therefore
he needs not so greatly to be prayed for, especially of us. Surely we cannot
deny, but that this duty of prayer for him is greatly neglected of many: for
how few do use to pray for him at home in their houses, And bind themselves to
it, as a matter of duty? and at Church also they pray not for him, as for
themselves. But the Apostle Paul charge Timothy a Minister of the Gospel to
practice and to teach this: I exhort (says he) that supplications, 1. Tim. 2.1.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty: First of all pray for all sorts, rich and
poor, bond and free: next for those, of whom there might be some question
then, as for Kings and governors, because they were enemies to the Church and
people of God. So then if we had the most wicked King and cruel tyrant set over
us, as some have in these days, and our forefathers have had in the days of
superstition and Popery, yet we ought all to pray for them: for though they
were naught themselves, yet the government is good, and of the Lord: much more
then should we do for those that are good: What great reason there is of it.
as for our King; he being a professor of the Gospel (which is rare among
Princes in these days) and after the purest manner: and truly called the
Defender of the true ancient Catholic and Apostolic faith. A great learned
man also, able to judge of things himself, and more learned than any Prince
that we know of, being brought up of a child in learning under most excellent
schoolemasters and tutors: his learned books also do sufficiently testify of
his great learning, both in the tongues, the Arts, and in the word of God. He
is one of great government in himself, both for apparel and for diet: lowly
minded, and not ambitiously puffed up with the access of so great kingdoms: and
for his wisdom he has been long exercised in government, and in governing of
a troublesome kingdom. A man of great courage for the wars, and of policy
for peace, and in a word the mirror of the world: What cause then have we to
pray for him?

And that we might do it, What great benefits we enjoy under the government of
our King.
let us remember how the Apostle tells us of the benefits that we receive by
our Kings, and to what end their government is appointed: namely not for
themselves, but for their subjects, that they by their means might live
peaceably, honestly, and godlily: which are three great commodities and
comforts of this life, and without which our life were not life. And first for
peace, nothing is more to be desired than that: for if we had all that we have
and a great deal more, and yet were subject to wars abroad, or foreign
invasions, or to robbers and thieves at home, it would do us little good: And
yet this peace without godliness is nothing worth, as if we had not the
means of our salvation, and might not thus come to the Church to serve God
according to his word, and to lead our lives thereafter. And if we had these,
yet if there should be no honesty among men, nor any true dealing one with
another, so that one man might not trust another, but there were lying,
deceiving, oppression, and such like without controulment. Now all these
benefits of peace, honesty, and godliness we have by the means of our King:
especially we may look for them under his government. 1. As to live peaceably.
For as for foreign enemies and invasions, which in former times we have been
in fear of, he is in league with all Christian Princes round about him, so
that we shall not need to fear them: and as for tumultuous and disordred
persons at home, the laws are still in force to suppress them, and it is like
that new shall be made, if there be any cause: and though some do break out in
hope of the Kings pardon, yet for the time present the laws will take hold of
them, and how far his gracious pardon will extend they know not: we may be
sure, that all such shall be exempted, who do evil before hand in hope of it.
2. Godlily.
And we hope to live godlily under him, for we doubt not but that the Gospel
shall be continued, and we hope that the estate of it shall be bettered: and
though the Papists seek for a toleration of their superstition, and comfort
themselves with false promises that way, yet we hope that their eyes shall fall
out with looking for it in vain: for seeing that he has kept it out of
Scotland all this while when he was of lesser power; there is no likelihood
that he should now yield unto them, when he is of greater power, and more able
to keep under the whole route of them. But the more obstinately that they
seek for it, the more earnestly had we need to pray to God for the King to be
zealous against them. 3. Honestly.
Lastly, we hope to live honestly under him, for he seeks already the good
of all his subjects, as appears by his proclamations, wherein he has given
all men that are any way oppressed, to complain of their griefs, yea though
it be against them that are in authority, with good hope of finding relief:
he has also put down the Monopolies, and such like kind of abuses, because
they stood not with the common profit of his people: and this he has done,
though his Majesty was interressed in some of them, and some, under the color
and pretense of that, hoped still to retain them. Therefore when we have and
look still to enjoy such great benefits by his most gracious government, what
great cause have we to pray for him?

What cause we have to pray for the life of our King.
And the greater that these benefits be, the more cause have we to pray for his
life, by whom next under God we look to have them continued. For if he should
miscarrie, (which God of his great mercy keep from us) then all these great
blessings might go away with him at once. For though by the grace of God he
has issue of his own body lawfully begotten in holy Matrimony, who shall sit
in the throne of the kingdom after him; yet they are all young: and it is no
great blessing, but rather a punishment, to have children reign over us, Jsai.
3.4.
as the Prophet says. For besides many great wants that would be found in
them, the Nobles and Peers of the land, and such great men could not so well
be kept in order, some of them, when there were none to complain of them if
they should offend; a Lord Protector or Viceroy carries not the majesty of a
King in the hearts of men: The foreign enemies would be more bold against a
child, than against a man both of wisdom and courage: yea there would be more
rebellions attempted at home. Therefore we have great cause to pray for the
life of our King: and the rather for that we see how his life has been
desperately sought by diverse: as appears by the confession of some who are in
prison, at the least for suspicion of treason. Now if they begin thus
maliciously and impudently so soon; what will they not dare to do hereafter,
if God and good laws do not suppress them? And truly by this experience that
we have, that evil things thus determined in secret, are wonderfully disclosed
and brought to light before hand, and the malefactors apprehended and taken, we
may see the fruit of our former prayers for his Majesty; and that should
encourage us with good hope to pray for him still. Nay we have longer
experience of the fruit of our prayers for our Princes, in the time of good
Queen Elizabeth, whose life was so often sought, and so desperately, that she
might truly say with the Psalmist, They have often times afflicted me from my
youth, Psalm. 129.2.
but they could not prevail against me: for she went to her grave with peace,
full of days, threescore and nine, which is a great age for a Prince, when she
had happily and peaceably reigned five and forty years. Let us labor then as
much as in us lies, to draw out by our prayers the life of our most gracious
Sovereign, as an even thread to the full: for as the Lord God has ordained the
thing, so also the means, which we for our part must not neglect. And let us
pray not only for his royal person, but also for his government, that under
him we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty,
1. Tim. 2.2.
as the Apostle speaks unto Timothy: and namely that at the next Parliament
good laws may be made for the reformation of all things that are amiss in the
Church and commonwealth.

This sermon fell out upon that day, which caused this digression
And seeing that we are commanded to keep the memory of this day with public
thanksgiving for a famous and memorable deliverance bestowed upon his Majesty
in his Realm of Scotland, from the treasonable conspiracy of the Earl of
Gowry and his accomplices: (of whom in that respect we may say as it is in the
Psalm; If the Lord had not been on his side, Psalm. 124.2, 3, 4, etc.
when men rose up against him, they had then swallowed him up quick, when their
wrath was kindled against him; then the water had drowned him, and the streams
had gone over his soul: But praised be the Lord, which has not given him as a
pray unto their teeth; his soul is escaped out of the snare of the fowlers:
the snare is broken and he is delivered) it falls out not unfitly with the
argument, that out of this text we have in hand. For as David in this Psalm
teaches the people to pray for him, and in the next to give thanks: so it is
our bound duty not only to pray to God for him, but to give thanks for him:
as the Apostle also speaking of the duties of the people to their kings, which
he exhorts Timothy to teach and to practice, joins these two together,
saying, I exhort that supplications, prayers, intercessions, 1. Tim. 2.1.
and giving of thanks be made for Kings, and for all that are in authority.
And there is great reason that we should thus do: What cause we have to give
thanks to God for our King.
for if we ought to be thankful unto God for other common benefits, as
peace, liberty, the Gospel, and such like: then also for him, by whom we
hold them. Therefore among other benefits, let us continually remember this,
and see how we fail therein; and in our thanksgiving remember other private
benefits, and not this great one, or not so much as we should. And though we
must needs confess, that we have great cause to be sorry for the death of our
late Queen Elizabeth, by whose wise government we inioyed so many great
benefits, that we might much more truly say of her, than David did of Saul in
his lamentation, 2. Sam. 1.24.
that she clothed us in skarlet with pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold
upon our apparel: yet we must see and confess to the praise of God, as the
truth is, that we have great cause to rejoice, that the Lord has provided one
to succeed in her room when her time was expired, that it might not be said
of us, as it was of the Jews in the days of the Judges, Judge. 18.1.
that there was then no King in Israel, and so we should have bin as sheep
without a shepherd, scattered here and there: as it is said of the Israelites,
when King Ahab was slain in the battle, These have no master, let them
return every man to his house in peace. 2. Chron. 18.16.
Then have we much more cause to be thankful, that God has raised up him for
us, In respect that he is right heir to the Crown.
even the right heir to the Crown both by father and mother, they two being
the lawful grandchildren of the Lady Margarite sometimes Queen of Scots by
marriage, and eldest daughter to King Henry the seventh: where if the Nobility
had set up some other of the blood royal further off, there must needs have
been great civil wars to the spilling of many thousand English men's blood,
and some of them should have died in an ill cause ignorantly or against their
wills, as when the two houses of York and Lancaster were a long time divided in
this land. And then also some forrainer might easily by their own power, and
by the help of the Papists, and other mutinous and malecontented persons have
soon set footing into this Isle, which would not so easily have been driven out
again.

And besides all this we have great cause to be thankful, And so rarely
qualited for the kingdom.
that he being the right heir is so wonderfully qualited for the kingdom;
that as the Queen lately deceased was a rare woman fit for the Crown by
election, if not by inheritance: so he a very rare man for all parts of soul
and body; and that the Lord did so fit him for this place, and then sent him
unto us, that he came not as Saul in Gods wrath, who was a cruel tyrant, but
as David in Gods mercy to feed his people in Jacob, Psalm. 78.71.
and his inheritance in Israel. And for his royal posterity. Act. 13.36.
And this is no small benefit, that he has a royal posterity to succeed in
the throne of the kingdom, least when he should have served his time by the
counsel of God, and so fall asleep, and be laid with his fathers, we should be
in a new fear. And what should we say of this; that he came to the Crown so
unlooked for? For though it was his inheritance, yet such was the wisdom of
our governors, that for certain causes best known unto themselves, (which it
is not meet for us to inquire into) it was not lawful for any of the common
sort to have discourses of the heir apparent; and so few of them thought of
him, that we have now, or of any other. But this is most of all to be wondered
at, And for his peaceable entrance.
that he came to the kingdom so peaceably, and with so great approbation of
all sorts of men; and traveled through the length of the whole land almost
even at the first: for meaner men have not come to their inheritances and taken
up the possession of them so quietly. For truly by the grace of God (to his
praise be it spoken) there is no more alteration in the land in any estate, or
in private men's condition, for the most part, than if the Queen were still
alive. And this benefit is the greater, because we feared the contrary, and
none could have looked for after her death such times as we have now. And if
there be any change at all, And that in this short time since his coming
things are bettered.
it is from worse to better; so that since his coming many things are better
in the Church and commonwealth: For by the gracious proclamations of his
Majesty many abuses of Plays and Interludes, with Bearebaitings and
Bulbaitings upon the Sabbath day are put down; with Monopolies and ingrossings
of wares into the hands of a few men: many worthy men are advanced to greater
honor and worship: the Papists in less hope of any toleration for their
Popish idolatry than before. And unto all these benefits this is none of the
least, And all things very cheap.
that God has added this plenty of all things even at this time, whereby
victuals and other things are reasonable cheap, least by scarcity there might
be occasion of dislike. Therefore in respect of them all let us be thankful
unto God: and yet again let us consider, that all these come not without some
punishment, as this plague, which is so scattered in many parts of this land,
especially the chief cities: wherein we must also acknowledge the great mercy
of God, But we are fallen into Gods hand by reason of the plague.
that we have escaped that, which we had deserved, and had most cause to
fear, even to fall into the hands of our enemies, that they might make a pray
of us, and of all that we have: which David accounted a great mercy, and chose
it, when both of them were offered unto him: saying, Let us fall now into the
hands of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the
hands of men: 2. Sam. 24 14.
therefore let us be thankful unto God for this mercy also: and so joining
thanksgiving unto prayer for these causes that we have heard, let us pray unto
God for the preservation and honor of our Lord and King, James, whom the Lord
at this time with so many great benefits has sent unto us: and let us take
these words of the Psalm into our mouths (from which I have a little upon
this occasion, that you have heard of, digressed) and say, The Lord hear thee
in the day of trouble, etc.

The Lord hear thee] These are the words of the prayer of the people for David
their King: but as Ioab taught the woman of Tekoah what she should say to the
King, Chap. 14.19.
and did put those words into her mouth, which she spoke before him: so David
made this prayer for them, and taught them what they should say unto God in his
own behalf, and did as it were put these words into their mouths, when they
should come before him. And so he not only as a King taught his subjects what
duty they did owe unto him; but as a Prophet also speaking by the inspiration
of the spirit of God, 2. Pet. 1.21.
as other holy men that wrote the Scriptures, informs the Church of God what
duties they owe to him, and to their superiors. David teaches the people
their duty to himself.
So that he does not in teaching them this duty of prayer for him, ambitiously
seek himself, and stand upon his own prerogative, to say, Oh I am your King,
you ought to pray for me, and to do so and so: but he knew it to be his own
duty to inform them that were committed unto his charge in all duties to God
and men, even to himself: and therefore does thus discharge it; knowing also
that in his own safety did consist their welfare, and therefore in praying
for him (which he taught them to do) they should benefit themselves. So may
and ought all superiors do to their inferiors.
So that by his example it is lawful for all public persons in the Church and
commonwealth, to teach those that are under them, what duties they should do
to them, and to require them at their hands without all suspicion of ambition,
vainglorie, or any ways seeking themselves. Yea they ought to do it, and no
man to find fault with them for it: not only because all superiors must teach
their inferiors, but also and especially because the inferiors in doing such
duties unto them, shall greatly profit themselves.

Thus may and ought all the Ministers of Gods word in wisdom teach the people
and flock that is committed unto them, As the Minister to their people and
flock.
what duties they owe not only to God and other men, but even to themselves:
and in so doing not to be thought of any, ambitious, proud, etc: or their
doctrine any ways disliked or suspected: and to show unto them, whether for
reverence of their persons, to have the^ in singular estimation for their
works sake; or for obedience of their doctrine, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Heb. 13.17.
to obey it, that they may go on with cheerefulnes; or for maintenance or
recompense of their labors in worldly things, 1. Tim. 5.17.
to give them double honor: or in any thing else, what they should do unto
them. Not only because they be faithful in Gods house as Moses was, Heb. 3.2.
and so deliver unto them the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.27.
as Paul did, and so teach them all-things, and therefore of necessity there
must be a time for them: but also because the people in doing these duties to
them, they benefit themselves. For in preserving the authority of the
ministry of the word inviolable in their consciences, and in the consciences
of others, consists the peoples welfare. So that as this people was not to
except against this prayer, when it came to them from David; for it came not by
the way of entreaty as an indifferent thing, but by a princely iniunction, or
prophetical instruction, and so as a necessary duty of theirs, and therefore
they were to think that they were bound unto it, and that he did necessarily
require it at their hands; and not to make exception against it, and to say;
Behold how he seeks himself, he has given us a form of prayer, but it is
all or most for himself: So when the Ministers of Gods word shall show what
duties the people owe to them, as they are Gods Ministers, they must not
scornfully reject it, saying; he has taught us indeed a good lesson to day,
but the greatest part of it did concern himself; see how well he can plead for
himself. For do we not see how the Apostle Paul (who was so humble and lowly,
that he did figuratively apply the faults of others to himself and to
Apollos, 1. Cor. 4.6.
that the Corinthians might learn by them not to swell one against another for
any cause) teaches the Churches and people of God to pray for him, Ephesians. 6.19.
and to reverence his person as the Minister of Christ, and the disposer of the
secrets of God, and also to bestow their worldly goods upon him for his
maintenance? 1. Cor. 6.1.
yea the maintenance of his wife and children, and whole family, if he had
any? and does he not justly find fault with them, when they had failed in
these things? Phil. 4.10.
Therefore though many (that I say not my self) do often wittingly and of
purpose pass by such doctrine arising necessarily from the words of their
text: or do teach it seldom and very sparingly, least any should stumble at
this without a cause: yet when any such thing is delivered, we see how it must
be received, and practiced.

The like is to be said of all governors in a family: And governors of
families to those that are committed to the^.
the parents, father and mother, or the master and mistress or dame, may and
ought without any imputation from any, teach their sons and daughters, their
maid servants and man servants what is their duty not only and principally
to God, but to others, even to themselves: and these inferiors must patiently
hear them, and not be offended at it, but willing to learn and do them. For
besides that they should thus think of themselves, that they are in place to
teach them, and so they must receive instruction at their mouths; the
governors also do know that in the performance of such duties to them
consists their good, and for the neglect of such, God will punish them. When
as then they shall hear them say, you ought to behave your selves thus and
thus to me, you ought so to speak, even reverently; your behavior to me, and
your obedience ought to be so and so; they must not proudly and disdainfully
cast it behind their backs, but willingly embrace it, and conscionably
practice it.

Yea, one man, in godliness, wisdom, and christian modesty, And one neighbor
may thus teach another.
may tell others what duties they owe to them in respect of their callings,
years, and such like, and say, you ought to behave your self toward me thus
and thus; do you not know that I am your elder, your better, your neighbor,
your kinseman, etc? without any suspicion of foolish ambition. For as if we
had an evil debtor, we might without suspicion of covetousness tell him that
he is in our debt, and that he owes us so much, and require him to pay it:
so other duties that any owe to us, we may without surmise of self-love
require at their hands. Therefore in what calling soever we be (though indeed
we should always and in all things be more forwards to do duties, then to
require them of others: yet we should not impose upon our selves such a
maydenlinesse, or Stoical modesty, that we should never challenge our right of
men, and show what duties they owe unto us: especially, seeing we should teach
and admonish one another whilst we have time, and whilst it is called to day:
and we also do know, Heb. 3.13.
that for them to perform such duties unto us, shall make for their good.

How hardly men will admit this kind of teaching.
And this that we have spoken, is the rather to be marked of us, because we
shall find naturally that we do more easily admit that kind of teaching,
wherein we are showed our duty to others, rather than to those that do teach
us. As if the Minister of the Gospel should publicly, or any other privately
tell us, what we should do to God, or to our King, or to our governors, or to
our parents, or to our neighbors, we may happily with quietness hear it (yet
it were to be wished that all would do so:) but if he come to show what God
requires to be done to himself, and to his ministry, then they are ready to
take exception against it, and they think that they may lawfully gainesay it,
at least wise pause upon it, and say, see what a fair tail he has told for
himself: and so though it be a duty, and God requires it of them, and they
hear it, and the conscience does sufficiently convict them of it, yet
forsooth, because it concerns them that speak, they little regard it: and
though in some cases they will give a man leave to speak for his own profit,
yet not for duties to be performed unto them, though it be for the profit of
others. Therefore seeing that we shall find this corruption so strong in us,
and so deeply as it were to be rooted in the bones, that it will not out of
the flesh; even that our stomachs will sooner rise against a man when he
speaks to us of himself, and of our duty to him, then of another, and we
can more hardly brook and digest such kind of teaching; we had need to be put
in mind of it, and to be made acquainted with it so much the more.

And thus we conclude by the example of David in giving this form of prayer in
his behalf, The conclusion.
and of the people in using it for him (and so do willingly perform this
duty of prayer for their King, though he taught it them) that it is lawful
for the Ministers of God, to teach publicly in their Sermons such duties as
belong to themselves: yea and for all sorts of men privately to admonish their
neighbors and brethren of the like, without any just suspicion of ill meaning:
and that all inferiors must with meekenes and reverence receive such
instructions willingly at their mouths; and be swift to hear them, and slow
to reply or speak against them; and be careful to follow them in the fear
of God: and not to think much of it, that they should come thus near them, as
to press upon them such duties as they owe not any to other, but to
themselves: seeing God has ordained one of us to help another, as the members
of the body do: and the superiors therein seek their good, and not
themselves so much: and the inferiors also shall find by experience, that it
is profitable for themselves to do such things as are required at their hands.

THE FIFTH SERMON upon the first verse.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.
The meaning of the words.
THe thing that he wills them to pray for in his behalf, is, that God would
hear his prayers that he should make in the time of his trouble, and
accordingly defend him, by sending help to him from heaven, and giving him
strength and courage against his enemies, from the place and means of his
worship and service, as it is in the second verse. The Lord hear thee, etc.
These words import thus much, that David was already in, or likely to fall into
some great trouble, that he did pray beforehand, or would pray in the time of
his trouble, and that he desired the people of God to pray to God for him, that
he would hear those prayers that he should make in the time of his trouble.
First then though he was a good King, David in his lawful calling was not free
from trouble.
and had a good cause in hand, yet he did not promise to himself to be
altogether free from trouble; he was to go to war against the Ammonites in
the defense of his people and kingdom; he was not ignorant of the manifold
dangers and troubles of war (for he had been a long experienced Soldier and
Captain) and so thought that some of them might befall him, and that he might
be driven to some great straites: Therefore as he was determined to pray to God
for succor in such cases, so he desired them to further his prayers that God
might defend him in his troubles, and deliver him out of them. By outward
things we must not judge of the lawfulnes of Kings titles.
We are not then rashly to judge of the lawfulness of Princes titles, and of
the goodness of their government, and of any thing that they attempt by the
outward peace and quietness that they have at home and abroad: or on the
contrary by the troubles and dangers that they fall into, of the unlawfulness
of the same; to say this is a good King in deed, and takes none but good
causes in hand, for he has no troubles at all: or otherwise to say, this is a
cruel Tyrant in deed, and takes ill matters in hand, for see how many
enemies do rise up against him, and seek his life: for we see it otherwise
here in the first words of the Psalm. And besides, David after that he was
anointed to be King by Samuel the Prophet, at the express commandment of
God; how many troubles did he fall into, both before he came to the kingdom,
by Saul? and after he came to it, by Adonijah, Absalom, and the rest? Neither
must good and godly Kings in their lawful proceedings against malefactors, or
otherwise, prejudice themselves and their own causes through some weakness, by
occasion of any trouble that shall befall them: to think thus with themselves,
surely I have not taken a good course, because such evil has befallen me.

This is true indeed, We ought as any crosses do befall us, to examine our
ways.
that upon such accidents of trouble every man should examine his own heart,
and his ways, whether he be in the ways of God, or no: and this is a great
fault in many that they do not: as in Balaam the sorcerer, who when he was
sent for by Balak the King of Moab, to curse the people of Israel out of his
land, and in hope of great reward went: though in that unhappy voyage of his,
undertaken with an ill mind, he was often crossed by the Angel of God with a
drawn sword, Numb. 22.23.
so that his Ass that he rode on turned out of the way, and afterward in a
strait she thrust her self so near the wall, that she dashed his foot
against it, and at the last the Ass fell down under him: yet he did not by all
these troubles that befell him in the way, examine himself, and say, Good Lord
what do I here? Whether am I going? and where about? But when men have good
ground and warrant for their doings, then they are confidently to go on,
whatsoever may betide them, with prayer unto God, commending themselves and all
their ways unto him. The blessed Lady Queen Elizabeth, how just was her
title? and how godly and lawful were all her proceedings? Not only with her
own subjects at home, but with her foreign enemies abroad? yet she fell into
many troubles both of professed enemies and secret traitors. So this our Lord
and King, James, who is in a right line descended from her progenitors as heir
apparent to the crown; and since his first entering into this land has sought
to reform many abuses, and to do much good, even to continue the Gospel, and
to keep out Popery; see how many troubles in this short time he is fallen
into: besides all those which in his former kingdom of Scotland he suffered.

All good men must look for trouble in the best actions.
And this is not only the portion of good Princes, Kings and Queens, but of
all good men in their best actions, they must look to find many days of
trouble in them. For as the Kingdom of Christ was most subject to all kind of
wrongs in the head (as David prophetically complains; Psalm. 2.1, 2.
Why do the heathen rage, and the people murmur in vain? the kings of the
earth band themselves, and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord,
and against his Christ:) so every member of the same, as he most seeks to
advance his kingdom, by doing good, and opposing himself to evil, so many
more troubles shall he sustain of the enemies of the same, then others. For
besides that the men of this world are against good men and their godly
actions, and therefore this way the more that they show themselves forward, the
more trouble shall they have; the Lord also by sparing them sometimes in the
deserved punishment of their sins, and causing them to find troubles, and to
suffer for righteousness sake, and for well doing, Therefore we must not judge
of things by the event.
does this way like a merciful father try their faith, and their obedience.
Therefore let no man be discouraged in any good action for any trouble, that
shall befall him in it: neither let us judge of things by the event: but be
sure that our cause be good, and agreeable unto Gods word: and then if trouble
come, let us bear it patiently: nay, let us look for it, that we may bear
it: and for want of this meditation many break off, and give over in their best
actions. And this is that that we have to observe from hence, that speaking of
the things that belonged to his calling, he makes mention of the troubles that
were like to befall him.

The second thing arises from these words, The Lord hear thee: In which, as
he confessed before, David prayed to God in his trouble.
that he looked for troubles: so in these he shows what he would then do,
namely, flee to God for succor, pray to him, and call upon his name, that he
might hear him, and defend him. He would use all good means fit for that
purpose, but he would not neglect this, knowing that all they were nothing
without this; for they must have their success and blessing from God by
prayer. For he knew that though he had men, and horses, and munition fit for
war; yet as he says in another Psalm, I trust not in my bow, Psalm. 44.6. and
33 16.
neither can my sword save me: and again, The King is not saved by the
multitude of an host, neither is the mighty man delivered by much strength.
An horse is a vain help, and shall not deliver any by his great strength: for
(as Solomon says) when the horse is prepared against the battle, Prou.
21.31. yet then salvation is of the Lord: who is truly and properly called the
Lord of hosts, because he is above all, and commands al: and therefore as
King Asa confesses in his prayer, it is nothing with him to help with many,
or with no power. 2. Chron. 14.11
Therefore he was determined especially to pray to God in all his troubles,
that he might save him, and so he did as appears by Psalm. 21. So did King
Hezekiah when the host of the King of Ashur came up to Jerusalem against him,
Jsai. 37.16. So have other good Kings done.
saying, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims,
thou art very God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth, thou have made the
heaven and the earth: incline thine ear O Lord, and hear: open thine eyes O
Lord and see, etc. Save thou us out of the hands of Sanecherib, that all the
kingdoms of the earth may know that thou only art the Lord. Thus also did good
King Iehosaphat one of his predecessors, when the Ammonites came to battle
against him, and did not only seek to the Lord by prayer, but proclaimed a
fast, 2. Chron. 20.3.
that he might pray the more fervently: and the form of his prayer is set
down there. And in thus doing he follows the example of his good father
King Asa; Chap. 14.9.
who when Zerah of Aethopia came out against him, with an host of ten hundredth
thousand chariots: he went out also before him, and set the battle in array;
but then he cried unto the Lord his God, saying, Help us, O Lord our God, for
we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come forth against this multitude: O
Lord thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee. So that it appears,
that this which David did now, has been the common practice of all the godly
Kings, when they have been in fear of their enemies, and so it has been a day
of trouble with them, as it was now with him.

So must all men seek to God in all kind of troubles.
Now that that is said of this kind of trouble, and of these kind of men, is
true of al other both sorts of trouble, and degrees of men: that whatsoever
troubles or dangers, not only Kings, but al others shall fall into at any
time, great or small, if they will have comfort in them, or look for any
deliverance out of them, they must seek for it at the hand of God by
supplication and prayer, who only can give it: of whom alone comes all the
means of our deliverance, and the whole disposition and wise using of them, and
the whole success and blessing upon them: from whom also may come that that we
seek for without all means, and without whose aid all things will do us no
good. For (as it is said) man lives not by bread only, Deuteronomy. 8.3.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: and (as Christ
says in the Gospel) no man's life consists in the abundance of that that he
possesses: Luke 12.15.
that is, in all things it is not the means, but the blessing of God upon
them, that must do us good: So that in all troubles we must put that in
practice, which the Lord speaks of, Call upon me in the day of trouble; Psalm.
50.15.
so will I deliver thee; and thou shall glorify me. We are ready to seek to
this body and to that, and to call upon them for help: but God says, Call
upon me; and that we might do it, he has bound himself with a promise, that
he will hear us, and deliver us. And this David believed, when he says in the
words following; Verse. 6.
Now know I that the Lord will hear etc. And unto this agrees that which the
Apostle Saint James sets down: Is any among you afflicted? Jam. 5.13.
let him pray: where he speaks unto all: and in what kind of affliction
soever they be.

Therefore as prayer is always requisite and necessary, according to the
doctrine of the Apostle, who says, 1. Thessal. 5.17.
Pray continually: and in another place, Pray always with all manner prayer
and supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
and watch thereunto with all perseverance: so most of all in the time of
trouble. For as Peter when he walked on the water, to go to Jesus, and saw a
mighty wind, so that he was afraid, and began to sink, cried, saying,
Master save me: Matthew. 14.29. The time of trouble is the special time of
prayer.
so all men, the more evident and dangerous their trouble is, the more
earnestly should they pray unto God for help. For the less able that they are
to help themselves, or others to do any thing for them, the more should they
seek for help from God, who is able sufficiently to afford it. And truly many
times God does of purpose bring us into trouble, that we might call upon him,
and so he might hear us in the day of our trouble. So that no trouble should
so dismay us, that it should hinder us from prayer, but rather quicken us up
unto it, and to a greater feruency in it. Psalm. 10.1.
For when the Church says, Why hidest thou thy self, O Lord, in due time,
even in affliction? it shows, that as that is the fittest time for the Lord
to hear and help us, so for us to pray unto him, and to seek for help at
his hands. Therefore let us not only not think, that trouble does exempt us
from prayer, or that it is so great that we cannot pray, and if we were out of
it, and so might have our minds quiet, we would pray: as that we believe
rather, that God at no time looks for so much prayer at our hands, as when
he lays affliction and trouble upon us. Both public and private.
So that if our troubles be private, we must often and earnestly pray
privately: and if they be public, we must have public prayer thereafter:
that so God may hear us every way in the day of our troubles; which he cannot
do, unless we then call upon him. Now at this day there are many troubles in
our land: as not only secret practices of traitors against the Kings excellent
Majesty, but also great sickness and mortality in many chief places, and
the same dialy spreading it self further and further by reason of the great
and dangerous contagion of the pestilence: As at this time especially.
therefore it is high time for every one of us in all places to pray earnestly
unto God; and as every day brings unto our ears the reports of new troubles,
so must we continue in our prayers: that God may hear us at the last, as he
has also promised that he will.

The third thing to be observed out of these words, is the form and tenor of
their prayer, which is this, that they pray to God, that he would hear ye
prayers of David, which he should make in the time of his troubles. Therefore
as it is our duty to seek to others in our troubles for their prayers, and the
greater that they be, to seek unto them for it the more, that they striving
with us in prayer, we might obtain: So when any shall thus desire us to pray
for them, it is our duty to do it: and so also to desire the prayers of
others, that in no case we neglect them our selves. (of which points severally
we have entreated at large before) So more particularly we see from hence,
how we may pray for any, We may always thus pray for men that God would hear
their prayers.
whether we are desired, or not desired thereunto; whether we know their
estate perfectly, or we be altogether ignorant of it; even that God would hear
them, and give them according to their own prayers. For as if one man should
have a suite to another, and should desire us to speak for them, or we know
of it otherwise, though not in particular, what the special thing is that he
desires; we might say, I pray you be good to such a man, grant him his
request; we might that ways do him some good: So this way we may benefit
men alo, Though we know not their estate.
when we pray to God to give them their requests, though we know not every
thing that they desire. And thus did Hely the Priest pray for Hannah the wife
of Elkanah, 1. Sam. 1.13.
that God would hear her prayer that she made, though he knew them not; for
she spoke in her heart only, her lips did move only, but her voice was not
heard: and when he did mistake her as though she had been drunken, As Hely
did for Hannah.
she said nay, but she was troubled in spirit, and did power out her soul
before the Lord; but did not tell him for what: Then he said, Go in peace, and
the God of Israel grant thy petition, that thou have asked of him. And she
desires him still that he would pray for her. And at the last, when she had
obtained her request, she returned to give thanks, and told him the whole
matter, and said, Oh my Lord, Verse. 26.
as thy soul lives my Lord, I am the woman that stood with thee here praying
unto the Lord: I prayed for this child (which she had brought with her) and the
Lord has given me my desire, which I asked of him: therefore also I have given
him unto the Lord: as long as he lives he shall be given unto the Lord: and he
worshipped the Lord there. Where we see how he prayed to God for her, that he
would hear her prayers, and grant her the petition that she had asked of him,
though he knew not what it was: and so requested him to continue his prayer
still for her, though she does not tell him the special thing that she prayed
for.

Indeed if we knew the particular estate of men, we might pray for them more
directly and more effectually: But if we know it we may pray for them more
particularly. Jam. 5.16.
according to that counsel which S. James gives unto all; Acknowledge your
faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed: for the
prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. Where he wills us
not only to make known the diseases of our bodies to others, by sending for
them in the time of our sickness, but even our special sins, that have been
the cause of them, that so in great compassion toward us both of soul and
body, they might pray fervently for us, when they shall see what great need
every way we have of their prayers. But if we do not thus confess unto them,
or cannot, yet generally and effectually also we may pray God to hear their
own prayers, which they do and should make principally themselves, according
to the commandment of the same Apostle: Verse. 13.
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: that God, I say, would hear them in
that trouble, that they be in, what and whenever. Therefore no man in
neglecting of this duty of prayer for others, is to say, I would gladly pray
for such an one, if I knew his estate, and what to pray for: for it is
sufficient that the Lord knows it, Ye are we not to neglect this duty of
prayer for any, though we know not their estate.
and that he knows it himself, and does pray for himself accordingly, then
may we safely pray, that God would hear those prayers of his. And thus did
Solomon in the dedication of the Temple, which he built to be an house of
prayer for all nations; and does himself pray unto God for all those that
should hereafter come unto that place there to pray, whose prayers therefore in
particular what they should be, he could not possibly tell: and does not only
desire the Lord to hear them in such and such particular things, as he there
names, as when they should be overthrown before their enemies, and when
there should no rain, and when there should be famine, 1. King. 8.33.
and such like, saying, If they then come, and confess thy name, and pray and
make supplication unto thee in this house, then hear thou in heaven, and be
merciful unto the sin of thy people Israel: but more generally says, That
what prayer and supplication so ever shall be made of any man, Verse. 38.
Solomon prayed God to hear them, whose prayers he could not know.
or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know the plague in his own
heart, and stretch forth his hands in this house; hear thou then in heaven,
thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and do, and give every man according to
all his ways, as thou know his heart, (for thou only know the hearts of
all the children of men). And in the end he concludes thus; These my words,
which I have prayed before the Lord, Verse. 59.
let them be near unto the Lord our God, day and night, that he defend the
cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel, always as the matter
requires: or (as the words are) the things of a day, in the day: meaning that
as every man's need was at all times, and God knew it to be so, so he would
hear his prayer, and give him accordingly. So that he prays unto God here
for all those that should pray in or toward that Temple, that whatsoever they
should pray to God for according to his will in their several needs, he that
was the searcher of the hearts, and knew them, he would from time to time hear
them continually. And this prayer of his, God did hear for all such. For he
did not only in the sight of all the people give an evident demonstration of
it, as it is said, that when Solomon had made an end of praying, fire came
down from heaven, 2. Chron. 7.1.
and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices: and the glory of the Lord
filled the house: but afterward he did signify the same privately unto
Solomon in express words: for it is written in the same place, that the Lord
appeared to Solomon by night, and said to him, I have heard thy prayer, Verse.
12.
and have chosen this place for my self to be an house of sacrifice. If I shut
the heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the grasshopper to devour
the land, or if I send pestilence among my people: if my people, among whom my
name is called upon, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek my presence,
and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be
merciful to their sin, and will heal their land.

Thus may we pray continually for them that be absent; for though new troubles
of soul and body may befall them daily which we know not; Thus may we pray
continually for them that are absent, or will not make their estate known.
and so we cannot always have a fit prayer for every change in them: yet if
they pray for themselves (as charity binds us to hope that they do) this
general prayer of ours shall do them good, that we desire God to hear their
prayers; and say as Solomon does, what prayer and supplication soever shall be
made of them, hear them in heaven, and defend their cause always, as the
matter requires. So that whether some men's case be such, that it is not meet
that it should be known unto many, yet many may be desired to pray for them
thus far forth, that God would hear their prayers: or whether they be loath
themselves to make it known (though it be for their good) yet may they thus
far desire the prayers of others, that God would hear them. And we again
our selves, if for want of knowledge we cannot tell how to pray so particularly
for men as we would: yet we must not wholly neglect prayer for them: for it
shall be sufficient, when we can do no more, to pray thus, that God would hear
their prayers. For when as many times we know not our own wants every one of
them, Romans 8.26.
and yet generally commending them all unto God, known and unknown, he
supplieth them in particular above all that we named, or could think of: for he
knows the meaning of his own spirit in us, and gives according to the same:
So then also, though we know not the particular necessities of our brethren
and friends, or of the whole Church, yet praying for them, God will give
according to the meaning of his spirit in our selves and them. As for those
that are v sited with the Plague.
There are many now that are in great sickness in diverse places, under this
heavy hand of Gods visitation, and some in great fear of it, because of the
infection, and some in great sorrow for the loss of their friends; we know
not, neither can we, their special troubles, or what pains they have in their
bodies, what want of outward comfort, what inward temptations of their mind;
yet let us pray for them, and desire God to hear their prayers, so shall we
do them good. And thus may we pray to day and always for the Church of God,
and for the several parts of it, especially upon the Lords day, that he would
hear the prayers of the Church in all places, and that we our selves might
have our part in them; and they shall be auailable for them, and for our selves.

It follows in this verse: The meaning of these words.
The name of the God of Jacob defend thee. In these words the people continue
their prayers for the King, and therein come to this particular, that God would
defend him: For by the name of God they mean God himself, who has by his
name made himself known unto us: and by Jacob they mean either that
particular person and holy Patriarch, to whom God had said that he would be his
God, and so had renewed the covenant with him, that was first made with Abraham
and Isaac his father and grandfather, and upon whom he had bestowed many great
benefits and deliverances: or by Jacob he means the posterity of Jacob, that
is, the Israelites, with whom also as with their seed he had couenanted to be
their God, and that they should be his people, and to whom he had made himself
known to be so by his word, Sacraments, and works, and upon whom also he had
bestowed many great deliverances in Egypt, in the red sea, in the wilderness,
and in their own land: or by it, he means them both. And so they pray, that
he that was the God of Jacob, and so their God, and had given himself that
name, and by it had showed how good and gracious he was, and would still be
unto them, would defend him from his enemies by his mighty power, and great
goodness. So then as they had before generally prayed God to hear his
prayers, whatsoever they should be: so here particularly, because he was in
trouble, The doctrine of the same.
or like to come unto it, they pray for Gods defense in it, that he might not
miscarrie, but happily come out of the same, and have a blessed issue therein.
Therefore as we may and ought to pray generally for others, when we no
otherwise know their esta^^, We must name in our prayers such things a^ (...)
need.
so when we do know it, we must accordingly direct our prayers, and those not
only for ourselves, but for others. For though God need not to be put in mind
of any thing that we need, who knows all our necessities better than we do
our selves, and therefore when we are ignorant of the estate of any Church, we
need not fear, that for want of naming things in our prayers, God should
forget them; yet he would have us name hat we desire, and so make our requests
known unto him in ^^pplication and prayer, Phil. ^ 6.
as the Apostle speaks: and to power out our whole desire before him, Psa^
(...).
as the Psalmist says: that it might appear that we are not ignorant of our
own estate, when we can name that that we lack; and might also see how God
blesses us, not only generally, but particularly, that we might be thankful
for the same. And therefore as a child asks not only things needful of his
father, but this and that; and as Christ says (but to another end) he asks
him an egg, or fish, or bread; so we must do unto the Lord.

And sow must particularly commend the estate of others unto God.
And as we must thus pray for our selves, so for others also: God would have
us to take knowledge of their estate, as much as we can, and be touched with
it; that we might pray for this and that according to their need in soul and
body. Thus must we pray by this example for our King, not only that God
would hear his prayers from time to time; but seeing that we hear that he
is subject to many dangers, and that his enemies do hunt after his life, and
besides the common casualties of all men that he is with them subject unto, his
life is specially sought for: therefore we must pray that God would defend him,
in these attempts, by discovering them in time, and bringing them to naught,
yea converting or confounding all his enemies. And this is the best use that
we can and should make of all the news that we hear of treasons breaking
forth; that we seeing the dangers, might pray to God to defend him. And as
we must do thus for his Majesty first and chiefly, so for any others: as
when we hear in what danger the Churches are beyond the seas, as Geneua and
others, how they are assaulted by their enemies, let us pray to God to defend
them. And so likewise for our brethren here at home. We hear how the
pestilence reigns in many places, we are not only to pray that God would
hear them; but more specially that God would defend them from it, that are not
in it; and those that are, that he would deliver them out of it* if it be his
holy will. And thus as we must pray one for another, so we see what we should
pray for. So did the Martyrs one for another, that God would give them comfort
in the prison, and strength against the fire. And thus it is written of Doctor
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, that when his fellow prisoners Doctor Ridley
and Master Latimer were burnt at Oxford for the Gospel, he looking out of the
prison where he was, cried, The Lord Jesus strengthen you. They had need then
of great patience and strength to bear such things, and so he prayed to God
to give them that which then they most needed. So then if we know any to be in
any distress of soul or body, we must pray for them according to their
several need: as if they be tempted for sin, that God would comfort them
with the forgiveness of their sin: if they be tempted unto sin, that God
would strengthen them against the same, and give them the shield of faith, Ephesians.
6.16.
whereby they may quench all the fiery darts of the devil: if they be fallen
into sin, that God would raise them up, and give them repentance: if they be
poor, and want meat, drink, or clothing, that God would give them all things
necessary for this life: if they be in sickness, that God would give them
patience and health: if they be oppressed with enemies, that God would revenge
their cause: if they be in any loss, that God would recompense it unto them.
And so it is not enough to say, God be with them, God help them, or God bless
them, but we must come further to this or that, and pray God to give it them
according to their need, as here they pray for defense for their King in this
danger that he was in. And so we see what we have to observe out of these
words generally. The rest we will prosecute the next day by the grace of God.

THE SIXTH SERMON upon the first verse.
The name of the God of Jacob defend thee.
All defense of all men comes from God only.
DEfend thee. We see from whence all defense and that of all men, even of
Kings, and of the greatest must come, namely from God: and so they profess
also in the next verse* when they pray, Send thee help from the Sanctuary:
that is, from heaven: and so they testify their faith in the sixth verse, and
say, that they knew that God would help his anointed: and further they
declare their faith in the words following, when they oppose their confidence,
that they had in Gods defense, to the vain confidence that their enemies had
in other things, saying, Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we
will remember the name of the Lord our God. We must then be persuaded that no
man can sufficiently defend himself in any danger, by any wit, policy, or
strength in himself; neither can any others do it for him: no not Kings and
Princes be they never so mighty. And therefore the wise man must not trust in
his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, Jerem
9 23. nor the rich man in his riches. And as we must always thus believe, so
most of all when we pray; that so we renouncing all worldly help, might look
up only unto God, and pray to him, from whom only we believe that all our help
must come: as it is said in the Psalm; Psalm. 121.2.
My help comes from the Lord, who has made the heaven and the earth. God
has appointed means for our defense in all things, Both in the commonwealth.
Psalm. 144.2.
as munition against foreign enemies: yet he says, that it was he that
subdued the people under him: and it is he, and not the watchmen, that keep
the city, as he acknowledges in another Psalm: Except the Lord keep the
city, the keeper watches in vain. Psalm. 127.1.
Therefore we for our part must ascribe this defense that we have had from
foreign invasion, not to the seas which do compass us in; or to our strength
of men and munition at home, but to God; and so give thanks to him for it, and
pray to him still, that he would defend us and his Church in this land. For
the Israelites though they had prevailed against their enemies before, yet when
they sinned, and broke the commandment of God, Josh. 7.5.
in the excommunicate goods, they were smitten and fled before them; so if the
Lord should for our sins forsake us, and be our defender no more, we see
what should become of us.

We have other means also to defend us in our houses from thieves and robbers,
as gates and doors, And in our houses.
locks and bars: yet they do not keep us night and day, but God: for they
may be broken open, as sometimes they are, or by negligence may be left open,
or there may be some false-hearted within the doors: therefore we must
commend the care of al unto God; who says, Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it. And, Psalm. 127.1.
It is in vain for a man to rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the
bread of sorrow; but he will give rest to his beloved. Therefore we must say,
and do, as David did, And 16.5.8.
Thou will maintain my lot. And again, I have set the Lord always before me,
for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide; Wherefore my heart is
glad, and my tongue rejoices; my flesh also does rest in hope. Where we see
how he commended the care of himself and of all that he had unto the Lords
protection; whereupon it came to pass, that he not only was defended, but had
a quiet mind and body; as he says also in another place: I will lay me down,
And 4.8.
and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. And
so we must ascribe all our defense for the time past to him, The defense of
our King is only of God.
and trust only to him for the time to come. And now for the present state of
our time, we must believe that all the defense of our King from all dangers is
and must come only from God: for though he be wise himself, and has a wise
honorable Council, and there are many that watch and care for him besides: yet
if God did not defend him, the devil by his subtlety might make his enemy,
wiser than all of them. Therefore as David says of himself, Psalm. 140.7.
It was God that did cover his head in the day of battle, that is, though he
had an helmet, and such like defense, yet if God had not covered his head, all
that had been nothing; so we must say, it is God that has covered not only
his head, but his whole body from the strokes of his enemies: yea we must
say, as Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 1.10.
God has delivered him from so great a death, and does deliver him daily; in
whom we trust that yet hereafter he will deliver him. Therefore when we hear
of any danger toward his person, or toward the State, we must not make small
account of it, and say, Tush, I but there are these and these means to defend
us, the King and his Counsel are wise enough to prevent all; but we must say,
That good God and merciful father who of his infinite mercy has defended him
and us hitherto, will do so still: and pray to him thereafter, that it may be
so, as this people does here, The name of the God of Jacob defend thee.

So is it in all sickness, and namely in this great mortality of our time, He
only can defend us from the pestilence. 1. Cor. 11.30.
wherein many are sick, and many are weak, and many fall asleep; none can
defend us in it but only God, and he is able to do it. In the Law God has
threatened great and incurable diseases to the disobedient: for it is said, The
Lord will smite thee in the knees, and in the thighs, Deuteronomy. 28.35.
with a sore botch. that thou can not be h^^led: even from the sole of thy
foot unto the top of thine head. And a little after in the same place: The
Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, Verse. 59.
and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and
sore diseases, and of long durance: I will bring upon thee all the diseases of
Egypt, whereof thou wast afraid, and they shall cleave unto thee: and every
sickness and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, will
the Lord heap upon thee, until thou be destroyed. And from them that walk in
his ways, he has promised to keep these diseases far away. If thou will
diligently hearken, O Israel, unto the voice of the Lord thy God, Exodus 15.26.
and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear unto his
commandments, and keep all his ordinances, then will I put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that
heals thee. These threatenings and promises he only is able to verify, and
does; who has said to that end, He will deliver thee from the snare of the
hunter, and from the noisome pestilence: Psalm. 91.3.
he will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be sure under his feathers:
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler: thou shall not be afraid of the
fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day: nor of the pestilence
that walks in darkness, nor of the plague that destroys at noone day: a
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come near thee. There shall none evil come unto thee, neither shall
any plague come near thy tabernacle: for he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee in their hands,
that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. Thus it is the Lord only that
keeps us from plagues and diseases by the invisible ministry of his holy
Angels, which he uses for the defense of his servants, and the punishment of
the wicked. For as when the Lord did send his Angel into the host of proud
blasphemous Sanecherib, he smote in one night an hundredth fourscore and five
thousand: 2. King. 19.35.
so that when they rose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead
corpses: And as in the time of David, 2. Sam. 24.15.
the Lord by an Angel did destroy with the pestilence seventy thousand men in
three days: So in the midst of all pestilent diseases, if the Lord bid his
Angel cease punishing, as he did then when he stretched out his hand upon
Jerusalem to destroy it; he said, Verse. 16.
It is sufficient, hold now thine hand: or if he will them to keep us in the
midst of it, it shall be so: and then shall that be verified upon us, Psalm.
91.13.
which is written, Thou shall walk upon the lion and aspe, the young lion and
the dragon shall thou tread under feet: that is, his Angels shall preserve us
in the midst of great dangers harmless. He only defends in these cases*
therefore let us trust in him, and in him alone.

As he did recover Hezekiah from death
He healed King Hezekiah when he was sick of a most deadly disease, even when
he lay sick of a pestilent fever, and had a Carbunckle or Plague sore broken
out in his body, and before that, had received the sentence of death in
himself. Isai. 38.1.
For the Prophet had said unto him: Thus says the Lord, put thine house in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live, that is, this sickness of thine is
deadly in it own nature. Then he turned his face unto the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord; and then the Prophet was sent again unto him with this message; 2.
King. 20.7.
Thus says the Lord God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, and
seen thy tears, behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years: and then
he had them take a lump of dry figs: and they took it, and laid it on the
boil, and he recovered. Thus though there were means used, yet God did cure
him, who had promised life and health unto him before. 2. Chron. 16.12
King Asa was diseased in his feet, and his disease grew to some extremity,
yet he sought not to the Lord in his disease, Asa died of his disease, though
he had all help of physic.
but to the Physicians, and he died of that disease: so though he had all
means of physic in his sickness, yet he dyed of it, because the Lord did
not heal him. And this is the only cause that some fall into sickness, and
some do not; and of them some recover, and some do not; even that the Lord
defends the one, and not the other. So that as when God sent his destroying
Angel, and at his commandment it went through the whole land of Egypt, and
all the first borne, from the first borne of Pharaoh, that sat on his throne,
Exodus 12.29.
to the first borne of the captive that was in prison, and all the first borne
of beasts, so that there was no house, where there was not one dead: yet the
houses of the Israelites were marked with the blood of the Lamb, and so none
dyed there; and that was, because that was a token, that when the Angel should
see the blood, he might pass over them, and so the Lord did not suffer the
destroyer to enter into their houses, nor the plague to come upon them to
destruction: for if God had not kept him out according to his promise, they
might have dyed also.

So then concerning all them that we wish well unto (as we should do to all
our brethren) and for our selves, Whether we have means, or have them not, all
defense from the pestilence is only from God.
we see who must be ours and their only defense: and who has defended us,
and them hitherto: even the Lord, from whom all things do come both good and
evil: therefore to him be thankful, in him trust, and to him still pray. For
what is the cause that this pestilence is so greatly in one part of the land,
and not in another? and in the same city and town, why is it in one part, or
in one house, and not in another? and in the same house, why is it upon one,
and not upon all the rest, when they all live together, and draw in the same
breath, and eat and drink together, and lodge in the same chamber, yea
sometimes in the same bed? what is the cause of this, but that it pleases the
Lord in wisdom, for some cause to defend some for a time, and not the rest?
Therefore let us believe, that in these dangerous times God must be our only
defense, and the defense of all others. There are ordinary means, I grant, to
bring the plague into a place, and means to keep it out by the blessing of
God: but who gives those means, but God? and who blesses them, and makes
them effectual, but he? or who works without them, or above them, but only
he? Therefore let us believe this, that all defense both in this sickness, and
all other dangers for our selves, and for others, is only from God; and so in
that faith let us pray as these do here, not only for our selves, but for
others that are in danger of the plague, The name of the God of Jacob defend
you.

Therefore when in any sickness or otherwise we have never so good means, let
us not trust to them, 1. Sam. 2.6.
but to the Lord, who only kills and reuiueth, brings down to hell, and
raises up again. King Asa (as we have heard) trusted to the Physicians,
Therefore we must not trust to the means: for God can frustrate the^.
and sought unto the^ in his sickness, and so though he being a King had many
about him, and the most skillful that could be gotten, and all helps that Art
could afford, yet he died. We ought then to use all good means in this time
of the pestilence; but not trust to the^, but in the living God; for without
him all Physicians and al Physic shall do us no good. For God can for a time
infatuate the wisest Physicians, that they shall not discern of the nature of
the diseases; and to be able to do it always is the special gift of God:
and when they have found it out, yet at that time they shall not wisely and
according to art prescribe, but commit some great error; if they do all this
well, it may come too late, when we are past help: if it come in time, we may
dislike it, and our heart go against it: if we be desirous to take it, the
things cannot be had, or not had in time convenient: and when all is ready,
we shall be so weak, that we are not able to take them, if we do do, they
brook not with us, and we cannot bear them: if we do, yet they have lost
their force, and are not well compounded; and if they be, yet they shall not
work at all, or to any purpose; if they do, yet not as they should; and so
they shall do us no good, though wisely prescribed, and carefully taken.
Therefore as in the great famine that was in Samaria, when a woman cried unto
him, saying, Help, my Lord, 2. King. 6.27.
O King: he answered, Seeing the Lord does not succor thee, how should I help
thee with the barn, or with the wine press? He said, that he could not help
her in this famine, unless the Lord did help by sending and blessing the
means, as afterward he did. So when we seek unto the Physicians, and cry
to them for help, they may answer, or we for them, that they cannot help us,
unless God help.

God can help us, and heal us, when all means do fail us. Deuteronomy. 9.9. 1.
King. 19.8.
But on the contrary, when all means fail us, God can defend us, if it
please him, from all danger: for he made all of nothing, therefore he can do
any thing without them. He that preserved Moses and Helias forty days without
meat and drink, can preserve us, when all means fail us. Jesus Christ, who
in the days of his flesh healed all diseases with his word, and did but say to
the dumme and deaf, Be open, and they could presently hear, and speak; Mar.
7.34.
and that said to the leapers (whose disease was deadly and infectiue, as the
plague is) I will, be thou clean, and they were immediately healed, even
sometimes many together; Matthew. 8.3. Luke 17.14.
is able by the same word of his now (when all power is given unto him in
heaven and in earth) to heal us by his word of most incurable diseases, when
we can get nothing to help us. Matthew. 28.18.
And he that said to the Centurion, Go thy way, Matthew. 8.13.
thy servant lives, and it was so: yea he that said not one word, and yet
healed the woman of her bloody issue, Mar. 5.29.
whereof she had been sick twelve years, and had spent all that she had upon
the Physicians, and found no help: and he that said to the man that lay sick
of the palsy eight and thirty year, Arise, take up thy bed and walk, Ioh.
5.5.
and presently he was able to do it: and he that spoke to Lazarus, when he
had been dead four days, and was laid in his grave, so that in the opinion of
diverse, his carcass was rotten, and began to stink, and said unto him with a
loud and effectual voice, Lazarus come forth, and he did so in the sight of
all the beholders: Joh. 11.43.
is able also much more to send his word, and heal us also, as the Psalmist
speaks; that is, Psalm. 107.20.
heal us without all means. Or when we are brought so low, that we lie upon
our beds (as Elihu speaks in the book of Job) and the grief of our bones is
sore; Job. 33.19.
so that our life causes us to abhor bread, and our soul dainty meat: so
that our flesh fails that it cannot be seen, and the bones which were not
seen do clatter; so that our souls draw to the grave, and our life to the
buriers: Though our estate be never so desperate.
if then there come a messenger of God unto us, an interpreter of his holy
word, who in that case is to be esteemed, as one of a thousand, and declare
unto us that righteousness of God, whereby we may be saved, and pray unto God
for us; then will he have mercy upon us, and will say, Deliver him, that he
go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation: And if he do
but thus say, then shall our flesh be as fresh as a childs, and shall return
as in the days of our youth: and he will deliver us from going into the pit,
and our lives shall see the light. And thus is he able to do twice or thrice
with a man, Verse. 29.
as he speaks in the same place, and as all experience shows to be true: So
that when we have received the sentence of death in our selves, as the Apostle
Paul had; 2 Cor. 1.9.
that we might not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises the dead: he is
able to deliver us from so great a death, 2. Tim. 4.17.
and to take us (as it were) out of the lions mouth, as he did him. Seeing then
that God alone brings al evil upon me, and he only keeps it away,
commanding the destroyer not so much as to enter into our houses, and if he
do, giving his Angels a charge over us, to keep us in all his ways: though
we walk upon the lion and aspe, yea and tread under our feet the young lion and
the dragon, that is, though we be in the extremest danger; let us believe,
that he only can defend us, as they do profess here, when they say, The name
of the God of Jacob defend thee.

And truly there is great comfort in this, that we believe, that in the
greatest trouble, that may befall us, God is able to defend us, Faith in Gods
defense gives great comfort in trouble.
and without him nothing can do it. For whereas others that have not this
faith, are very unquiet until they have the means of their deliverance
according to their own desire; and then also use them with great perplexity,
and great doubtings and fears: This will make us quiet, whether we have the
means, or we have them not: for if we have them, we use the^ with
cheerefulnes, but trust not to them; if we have them not, we are still
comfortable, knowing, that Gods power is not tied to them, and so he is able to
help us without them. And so if any thing fall out beyond our expectation, we
burst not out into impatient outcries, and say, Oh I wanted such a thing to
have done me good; if I had had this or that, it might have done me great
good; what ill hap was it, that I should now want it in my greatest need? Or,
oh that I had had it a little sooner, now it came too late, when it could do
me no good: or, oh that I had had so good luck, as to have used it after a
better manner; and a thousand things else which the devil and our own unbelief
will put into out minds. But let us by faith know assuredly, that it is Gods
will that it should be so at this time with us, as it is: if it had pleased
him, he could still have defended me, as in times past: but now I see it is
his blessed will to try me, I will take it patiently, and put my trust in him:
and say with Job; Job. 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? He that is
faithful, has promised, that he will lay no more upon me than I shall be able
to bear; and that though this depart not away from me, yet his grace shall be
sufficient for me: 2. Cor. 12.8.9.
and his power shall be made perfect in my weakness: for his holy spirit shall
help me in all mine infirmities; yea he has promised, that all things shall
fall out for the best to me, Romans 8.28.
so long as I fear him; though not in the beginning, yet in the end: and so I
will say again with Job, that if he kill me, Job. 13.15.
yet I will put my trust in him: for nothing shall be able to separate me from
the love of God in Christ Jesus my Lord and Savior; neither angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, Romans 8.38.
nor things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other
creature, nor life nor death: Romans 14.9.
For Christ therefore died and rose again, that he might be Lord of the quick
and dead; so that whether I live or die, I am not mine own, but his, who gave
himself for me to that end. And therefore I believe, that I being Christ's, 1.
Cor. 3.22.
all things are mine to bring me to him; not only Paul and Apollos, and Cephas
and the rest of his ministers, but the world: even life and death (as the
Apostle most confidently and comfortably speaks) yea things present and
things to come all are mine, and I am Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And
therefore if I die, I believe, that blessed are the dead that die in the Lord:
Apoc. 14.13.
and therefore if it be his good will to take me away, I am not only ready to
say with old Simeon; Luc. 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; and with our Savior
Christ, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: but also with S. Paul, Luc.
23.46. Philip. 1.23. and 21.
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, for that is best of al for me:
for he is unto me even in death advantage. And thus we see what comfort we
may have in this uncomfortable time of the pestilence, if we rightly believe
that God is our defender: as they profess here of themselves and of their
King, in saying, The name of the God of Jacob defend thee.

The name of God.
Now for these words, whereas they say, The name of the God of Jacob; thereby
they mean God himself: but they thus speak of God, because all the knowledge yt
we have of God, arises of the knowledge of his name: and as to that end he
has given himself in the Scriptures sundry names, that thereby we might know
not only what he is in himself, so far as it is meet for us to know; but
especially what he is to us: so by them, and by them principally we know him to
be, as he is, not only in himself, but unto us. As when he calls himself
a spirit, we are not bodily to conceive of him, as the Papists do: By it we
know what God is unto us. Jsai. 26.4.
and when he says of himself, I am that I am, and calls his own name Iah
and Iehoua: that is, he that so is of himself alone, that all other things
have their being of him and for him: and as the Apostle expounds it in the
Epistle to the Romans, Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and for him are all things; to him be glory for
ever, Amen. And when he is called God almighty, Genesis 17.1. Nehem. 9.6. 2. Cor.
1.3.
and all sufficient, Creator of heaven and earth, the preserver of all things;
most merciful, the God of all comfort, and father of all consolation: even our
father, and our God: who has made a sure covenant with us in Christ, Ierem.
33.20.
more sure than that of the day and of the night, which cannot be broken: as
to that end he calls himself the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
their seed, and here the God of Jacob, etc. So we by all these, and the rest
of his names and titles given unto him, know certainly what he is, and will be
unto us, and what we are to look for from him. And from this knowledge of the
name of God arises confidence in prayer: as when they know him, From hence
arises confidence in prayer.
and here call him the God of Jacob; that is, he that has made a covenant of
mercy with him, and with his posterity, that he will be their God, and they
shall be his people; they may be bold to flee to him for succor, and
confidently call upon him in the day of their trouble to hear them, and to
help them, as they do. And the more that they know of his name, that is, of
his goodness, mercy, truth, power, wisdom, justice, etc: so may they the
more boldly pray unto him: not doubting, but that he will be answerable to his
name. For if a mortal man stand so upon the credit of his name, that he will
do many things, to those that seek him, to preserve it: then God will much
more show himself to us to be such, as he has manifested himself unto us by
his name. And thus our Savior Christ to encourage us to call upon God, has in
that form of prayer, that he has taught us to use, set before it the name of
God, and wills us to begin thus: O our Father which art in heaven: that we
believing him to be a father in affection to us; and almighty, that is, to
have all power in his hand to help, ruling not only in earth, but in heaven: we
might be bold to pray unto him, and to ask, not doubting but that of his
fatherly goodness, and infinite power he will hear us, and help us.

For as among men, according to the good name that they have for liberality,
and pity, As men that have a good name are most sought unto.
so will men be ready to come unto them in their need: and the poor will
say, I will go to such an house, for they have a good name, and are counted
good to the poor, and merciful, al men speak well of them for their
liberality: and this name of theirs gives the^ encouragement to come boldly
and often: So when we know God thus by his name, it will make us bold to come
unto him in prayer. But if a man have an ill name in the country, and be
accounted hard-hearted, covetous, a miserable wretch, and one that will part
from nothing, unmerciful like the rich glutton in the Gospel, Luc. 16.19. 1 Samuel 25.20.
and even a very churl, as Nabal was; then few or none will come unto him, for
his very name drives them away: they know by the report, that goes of him,
what he is, The ignorance of Gods name hinders men from prayer.
and what they may look for from him before they come. Or if a man be never so
merciful, and others know it not, and so they are ignorant of his good name,
that he has, and that he is worthy of, they cannot with any good hope come
unto him, for they know not what he is, they have heard nothing of him at all.
So when by unbelief we hardly conceive of God and of his goodness, or for want
of knowledge are ignorant of his good name, even of al his mercy, and of his
truth, pity, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
and compassion that is in him, and so know not his great and glorious name: we
can have little or no heart at al to come unto him in trouble, and seek unto him
for help by prayer, as these did here. And this makes some so forward unto
prayer, they are so well acquainted with the name of God, that they doubt not
of speeding, and others again are so backward unto it, they are so wholly
ignorant of his name. Therefore as if we had any dealing by the way of
petition and supplication with a great man, we would inquire after his name,
and what report he had in the country, and according to that we would
proceed or stay: So, that we might come to God in our need with confidence,
(as David and the people do here) let us inquire after his name, that is, let
us in the Scripture see, how he is called merciful, yea the God of all mercy,
and the father of all consolation, Psalm. 65.2.
the hearer of prayers, our father, and our God, and all good is spoken of him
there: that so we may come boldly, hoping that we shall find him as good as
his name; and so pray, Exodus 32.11.12 Numb. 14.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.
as Moses does often in the wilderness for the people of Israel, that God would
hear him, and be merciful unto them, even for the glory of his name.

And this is the rather to be marked, because that the Lord, when he would
make himself best known unto Moses, Exodus 34.6.
and so did to that end proclaim his name, as it is said, speaks thus: The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, God is answerable to his good
name, though men be not so always.
slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth: reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, etc. See what a name
the Lord gives to himself, that we might be encouraged to come unto him. And
he not only has this name, but he is answerable unto it, and is so indeeded,
and we shall find him to be so. Many men have better names than they deserve,
though some have worse: for they are said to be pitiful, and gentle, and
courteous; but when we come to deal with them, we find it otherwise: for men
in judging are oftentimes deceived, and some speak according to their own
opinion. But the God of truth speaks of himself, as he is: therefore as he
is called merciful, so he is, and has always bin found to be so, and shall
be to the end of the world. Therefore as among men, to confirm us in their good
name, we consider how they have often bin beneficial unto others, and to our
selves, and how they have oftentimes helped others in their need: so yt we
might know God to be so wholly agreeable unto his name, consider how he has in
former times bin good unto men that have prayed unto him; yea to our own
selves. As how he heard the cry of the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 3.8.9.
when they were oppessed with his tyranny, and came down to deliver them: and
how he heard Moses for them at the red sea, Exodus 14.15.
and made a passage for them through it, that they might escape their pursuers:
and how often he heard him for them in the wilderness both for water, and for
flesh, Exodus 17.4. Numb. 11.11. Genesis 28.10. and 32.9.
and for deliverances from many plagues: how he heard Jacob when he fled from
his brother Esau, and when he met him again, and delivered him from him: how he
heard all the Jews in the days of Queen Hester, and delivered them from the
mischievous practice of Haman their enemy: Hest. 8.16.17.
yea how he has heard our selves praying to him publicly and privately, that
so by experience we might know him to be according to his name: and so this
name of his might encourage us to prayer; for he has a good name most
deservedly. But because of the time I must leave this somewhat imperfect, I will
proceed in it by the grace of God, the next day, for I see that all things
cannot be spoken at once.

THE SEVENTH SERMON upon the first verse, and part of the second.
The name of the God of Jacob defend thee.
COncerning the name of God spoken of here, I am further to add this; That
seeing neither we, nor any other can pray unto God, but according to the
knowledge that we have of his name: (As Solomon says in his prayer, that the
very stranger a far off hearing of the name of God, should be moved to come
to the temple, and pray there, and desires God to hear the prayers of such,
as well as of the Jews; 1. King. 8.41.
moreover as touching the stranger, that is not of thy people Israel, who shall
come out of a far country for thy Names sake, (when they shall hear of thy
great Name, and of thy mighty hand, and of thy stretched out arm) and shall
come and pray in this house: We are to pray that all nations might know the
name of God, that so they might seek to him.
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the
stranger calls for unto thee, that all the people of the earth may know thy
name, and fear thee as do thy people Israel, etc: where we see what should
move them to come to the Temple and pray, even the knowledge of Gods name^)
seeing then I say without this men cannot call upon God, we are to pray, that
all the Nations in the world, even the Jews, and the Turks, and those that
are a far off, might know the great and glorious name of God, that they might
join themselves unto the visible Church, and with them pray unto God, and
serve him: For according to the name of God, so is our fear of him, and love
to him, and faith in him, and also prayer unto him. Especially we are to pray
for our afflicted brethren at this time, and those that are visited with the
pestilence, that God in the midst of their troubles would make known unto them
his name; even how merciful he is to all that repent, as our Savior Christ
has most comfortably showed in the parable of the prodigal son, who after
he had forsaken his fathers house, and had wasted all his goods with riotous
living, at the last returned unto his father, Luc. 15.13. Especially they that
are visited with the plague.
and said, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy son: Then his father did not only willingly
receive him, and bad his servants bring forth the best robe, and put it on
him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet; and kill the fat
calfe, and make a feast for his safe return: but when he was a great way off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him. And as he has also showed the same mercy of God in his manifold
gracious promises, most lovingly calling unto him all those that truly repent;
as, Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you: take my
yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek, and lowly in heart; and ye
shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
And again, the Lord says, Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will
deliver thee: And, Psalm. 50.1^. Joel. 2.32.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, and such like:
that so according to the greatness of his name they might be moved to come unto
him, in this trouble of theirs, that God might hear them, and help them. For
it is to be feared, that many (whose case is to be pitied) for want of this
saving knowledge of the name of God, That by it they may know his name, and so
pray unto him. Hos. 7.14.
roar and cry out for the extremity of their pain, but do not unfeignedly
and from the bottom of the heart with true repentance and a lively faith pray
unto God: as the Lord complains of the Jews, They have not cried unto me
with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds. They are so ignorant, that
they know not the name of God, that is, his justice, mercy, power, and truth.
Now seeing Gods name is manifest not only in his word, but in his works of
mercy and justice: (for the invisible things of God are seen in the creation
and government of the world, as his eternal power, infinite wisdom, Romans 1.20.
mercy, etc. to leave all men without excuse): let us pray to God for them,
that he would sanctify unto them, the one and the other, even this fatherly
visitation of his unto us all, that thereby we and they may more and more
know, and fear his name: even that he is just, and hates sin, and will not
make the wicked innocent; Exodus 34.7.
but visits the iniquity of the father upon the children, and upon childrens
children unto the third and fourth generation; and that he is merciful to all
those that repent, at what time so ever, as we see in the example of the
thief upon the cross; who when at the last gasp he confessed his sins,
saying to his fellow, We are indeed righteously punished, for we receive things
worthy of that we have done; and cried unto God for mercy, Luc. 23.41.
saying unto Christ, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: he
received this most comfortable answer from him, Verily I say unto thee, to day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: That so we might all judge our selves
thoroughly now at the last, that the Lord in his good time might cease judging of
us, whilst that we shall exhort one another, (as the Prophet wills us) and
say, Come and let us return unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has spoiled, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up. And so many of us as do know the name of God aright, let us make
that good use of it that we should, namely that we seek unto him in prayer,
both for our selves and for others; and say, as it is in the Psalm, Psalm.
115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory, for thy
loving mercy, and for thy truths sake: that is, that he would help us even
for the glory of his name.

The God of Jacob.
The God of Jacob. Whereas he speaks not only of the name of God, but of the
God of Jacob; If by Jacob we mean that particular person, the holy Patriarch;
so called, because when he was borne, Genesis 25.26.
he held his brother by the heel: in token that though he was the younger, yet
in time he should supplant his brother, and prevail against him; as also he
did, when he got the birthright first, and then the blessing of God from him:
who was also afterward called Israel, that is, Chap. 32.28.
a mighty prince of the strong God, when he had wrastled with the Angel, and
prevailed with him in his return from Laban: to show, that seeing he had
prevailed with God, he should much more prevail with me^, even against all his
enemies, as he did against Laban, Esau, and others: If (I say) it be thus
taken, then they in their prayers have respect unto that great deliverance,
that God gave unto him against all his enemies, according to his name Jacob:
and so by it they confirm themselves by this great experience in him, They
confirm their faith by the example of Jacob: and so must we by his, and others.
that God would do so now to them in the like case: that as he defended Jacob
from his enemies, so he would defend David from his: and as he heard Jacob
praying in his trouble, when he fled from Esau, and from Laban, so he would do
David now. And truly this was a very good means to confirm their hope at this
time, to consider the former dealing of God with others in the like case.
Therefore by their example we must so read and search the scriptures, that we
may mark and apply the examples of Gods mercy and deliverances upon others to
our selves: That we may say, that that God has done so and so to others, let
him deal so mercifully with me now. For there is no change in God, or respect
of persons with him; but as he has punished the wicked in former times, and
helped the godly, so will he do still. And therefore as S. Paul does rightly
apply the examples of Gods justice in the Scriptures to the Corinthians to
keep them from sin, saying, Let not us commit fornication, as some of them
committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand: 1. Cor.
10.^.
neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed
with serpents: neither murmr ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. So does David here allude unto the mercy of God in
Jacob, and apply the example of it unto them, to encourage them unto prayer.
Romans 15.4.
For indeed whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope.

And truly if we would thus do, Then might we have great comfort in our prayers
for every estate.
then might we have great confidence in our prayers, for there should be no
estate of our own, or of others, but we might in the Scripture find some
example of Gods mercy showed to them in the like case, that have sought to him
for it. As if we consider the dangers and enemies of our King, which he has
had since he came into this realm, that we might pray for him with good hope,
we must set before our eyes the estate of King David, not only before he came
to the right of the crown by the continual and cruel practices of Saul; but
after that he was lawfully possessed of it, by treason at home, even by the
rebellion of his own children and others their confederates; but yet God
defended him from them all, that we might say, The name of the God of David
defend thee, that is, thou God that thus did maintain David in his right
of the kingdom against al his enemies, defend thy servant our King in his just
inheritance against all his enemies. But if we consider (as we have great
cause to do) this dangerous time of the pestilence, As in this pestilence from
the example of David.
that we might be encouraged unto prayer, let us bethink our selves how it
was in the days of David, when he and the people had provoked the Lord. He
sent such a grievous plague among them, that in the space of three days there
died of it threescore and ten thousand. But when David's heart smote him for
that that he had done, and he repented, and confessed his sin unto God, and
did judge himself for it, being willing to bear the punishment himself, that
the people might be spared, having pity upon them, as it is written of him: It
is even I that have sinned, 1. Chron. 21.17
and have committed evil, but these sheep what have they done? O Lord my God
I beseech thee let thine hand be on me, and on my fathers house, and not on thy
people for their destruction: Then the plague ceased, and God commanded the
Angel to stay his hand, saying, It is enough, let thine hand cease. So no
doubt if all men could come thus to confess their sins unto God, accusing
themselves, and not laying them upon others: yea to judge themselves for the^
worthy of death, as he did, and accordingly be humbled before God: and
especially if we could come to have that feeling of the misery of our
brethren, and pray for them in compassion; then this example might minister
unto us some comfort; when we should thus say, O God that did thus spare
thy people in the days of David, when they confessed their sins unto thee,
spare us also, and our brethren, who desire to humble our selves before thee.

Then also might we further consider, how when the Lord sent the Pestilence
into Egypt upon Pharoh and his people, according to that which he had threatened
before, saying, I will smite thee and thy people with the Pestilence, and thou
shall perish from the earth; Exodus 9.15.
it was a very great plague, for it was in every house in the land, but it was
in great mercy, for but one only in a house dyed, And of the Israelites, when
the plague was in Egypt.
even the first borne: then they marked the door of the Israelites by the
appointment of Moses, with the blood of a Lamb (which was a representation of
the blood of Christ) that the destroyer might not enter in. And by this we
might see, that as sin is the cause of al plagues, so in the midst of them,
God will be merciful to those that are his, though they be mingled with the
rest. In which respect we must confess, that it is no marvel if this plague
be so universal in the land, seeing that sin has so long abounded in all
places: nay, it is Gods mercy that it is not in all places, and in every house,
for all have grievously sinned against him. For if we rightly consider the
sins of our time, we must needs say, that they are many and great. For how has
this long patience of five and forty years of the Gospel bin abused of all
sorts? How little fruit of it is there in many places? what great ignorance is
there of the will of God every where, and less practice of that that men know?
How is the worship of God profaned, being placed of many in ceremony rather,
than in truth? Whether we consider the Egyptians, that were punished for their
sins justly.
for they content themselves with this outward coming to Church, but neglect
the power of the means there used: and thus the name of God is dishonored by
their carnal profession and wicked lives. The Lords Sabbaths have bin most
grievously polluted, by keeping of Faires on them, and by Interludes,
Bearebaitings, Bulbaitings, and by other disorders of football and such like:
and men would not be spoken to in these cases: if they were, they were ready
to stand in the defense of them, so far were they from amending the^: how
have these days, I say (which we should consecrate as glorious to the Lord,
Jsai. 58.13.
and call them our delight) how have they been abused by not coming to Church?
not bringing their whole families with them? by sleeping and talking here? and
not spending the rest of the day in the service of God? What great contempt is
there every where of superiors? How unruly the servants and children? How is
the aged despised, and the gray hairs brought into contempt? What little care
is there in the governors to amend these, by any good order in their houses,
either of private prayer, reading the Scriptures, and such like? Who almost
has the care of David to reform his house? who said, I will walk in the
vprightnes of mine heart in the midst of mine house: Psalm. 101.2. Verse. 7.
and there shall no deceitful person dwell within my house; he that tells
lies shall not remain in my sight. Who does determine, and say with Ioshuah, I
and my house will serve the Lord, let all the world besides do what they will?
Josh. 24.15.
Of how few can it be truly said, as the Lord says of Abraham? I know him,
Genesis 18.19.
that he will command his sons and his household after him, that they keep
the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon him that he has spoken unto him. How few also have any good orders
in their houses for prayers at morning and evening or other times? That it
might be said of them, Dan. 6.10.
as it is of Daniel, that it was his manner three times a day to fall upon his
knees to pray unto God, and to praise his God: yea then when he could not do
it without danger of his life. That so it might be said of them all as it was
of Cornelius, Act. 10.2.
that worthy Christian soldier and Captain, That he feared God and all his
household: when his family must needs be very great, being of that place that
he was, as it appears by the story, that indeed it was.

But to proceed (though I do it with an heavy heart;) what hatred, rankor,
and malice is there among many? that they are ready to kill one another, if it
were possible with a word; though it be said, that to call thy brother Raca, or
thou fool, deserves hell fire? Matthew. 5.22.
Oh how many thousand adulteries, and fornications without number have bin and
are still committed, for which there fell in one day among the people of God
three and twenty thousand? 1. Cor. 10.8.
In which kind of sin above all others (as the Apostle says) they sin
against their own bodies, Chapt. 6.18.
therefore God many ways punishes them in their bodies: and if there were no
sin among us but this, it were sufficient to provoke this great plague, and
it may justly reign in the bodies of a great many unto death, and in others
with noysom and painful ulcers and sores. And I have heard it observed (if it
be true that is reported) that in London this pestilence has been most hot, in
that part of the city that has been most polluted this way, as in Shoreditch,
and in the suburbs, and such out-places: where it has swept them away by whole
families and streets, like a devouring fire, as the holy man Job does fitly
compare the judgment of God against this sin unto that, saying, This is fire
that shall consume to destruction, Job. 31.12.
not only of the goods, whereof he speaks, but even of the body also.

But there are more sins among us than these, though these be too many, and
enough to provoke the Lords wrath against us: as the great hard dealing and
injustice that is among men, whereby they oppress the poor both in lending to
them upon usury, and when a man is under foot to exact the forfeiture upon
them (what is this but to grind the faces of the poor? Jsai. 3.15.
) and otherwise in bargaining with them: besides that unmercifulness, that there
is little giving to the poor, no not at this time, which is a time to receive
mercy from God, yet they that should receive it, will show little or none unto
men: when the very day of fasting does require at their hands, that they
should give something, yet they are hard hearted and shut up their compassion.
And what should I say of them, that under the color of the law have taken away
from the poor, even from the fatherless, and the widows all that they have
had? whereby it has come to pass that not only they have cried unto the Lord
against the^ out of the abundance of their grief: but even the very stones in
the walls, and the beams in the houses of these oppressors have made an
echo, Hab. 2.11.
and answered unto the same. If the Prophet Amos prophesying against many
nations did say, That for three transgressions, and for four, Amos 1.3.
God would not spare them: then when among us, not seven but many (though by
seven he there means many) have reigned long among us, and do still, no
marvel if God do not spare us. Which sins are so much the greater among us,
because God has borne with us so long in the^, and given us his word (which
they had not) and many means besides to call us from them, as benefits upon
benefits, favors upon favors without number. Therefore let us justify the
Lord in his righteous proceeding against us, and confess as Daniel does: We
have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we have
rebelled, Dan. 9.5.
and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments: for we would not
obey thy servants thy Prophets, which spoke in thy name to our Kings, and to
our Princes, and to our fathers, and to all the people of the land. O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open shame, as appears this day;
to every man of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, yea unto all Israel
both near and far off, because of their offenses, that they have committed
against thee. Which if we can come unto, the^ we see in this story of Exodus,
(from which upon occasion we have something digressed) what did preserve the
Jews in that plague, and what must preserve us, and all men; Or the
Israelites, whom God spared of his mercy.
even that the blood of the Lamb be sprinkled upon the posts of our doors,
to keep out the destroyer: that is, the blood of Jesus Christ (that immaculate
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world) be sprinkled upon our
consciences by faith, and that we earnestly repent us of all our sins, Iona.
3.8.
and turn from all our evil ways, as the Ninevites did, and from the
wickedness of our hands, and cry mightily unto God, that for Christ Jesus his
sake, whose most precious blood was shed for our sins upon the cross, he
would spare us: and say, Thou Lord, who of thy great mercy for Christ's sake
did command the destroyer to pass over the houses of the Israelites in
Egypt, when there was an universal plague over the whole land; set a mark now
at the last upon all places of this our land and country, that thy destroying
Angel might pass over them.

Thus also in this case might we set before our eyes the example of Aaron the
high Priest, And when the plague was among the Jews in the wilderness.
who when there was a plague begun in the host of Israel, for their sins,
even for their murmuring at the death of Core and his company (who justly
perished by the hand of God) took a Censer and fire therein of the altar, and
put therein incense (whereby the sweetness of prayer was represented) and
offered up his prayers with this incense unto God for them, Numb. 16.47.
and so made an atonement: and when he was come among them (for the plague
began in one end of the camp, and so spread it self further and further in
the host, after the manner of a plague) and stood between the dead and the
living, the plague was stayed. A great mercy of God; for it was a great
plague, for of it in a short time died fourteen thousand and seven hundred.
The cause of it (as of al others) was their sin, but by the prayer of Aaron
it ceased: if God did hear one for so many, then much more may we hope that
God will hear many in his good time for the rest. Let us then look upon this
example also, and say, Thou Lord, who at the prayer of Aaron wast entreated to
stay the pestilence among thy people, when there had died of it before
fourteen thousand and more; hear many, and all of us, or some one among all
the rest, that this plague now at the last, of which have died already twenty
thousand and more, may be stayed: and so some may stand between the quick and
the dead, that is, cause that the dead infect not the quick, and so it
proceed no further. Thus if we search the Scripture, we shall both in this,
and all other calamities by patience and comfort of them have hope, as was said
before.

The God of Jacob. If by Jacob they mean him and his posterity, with whom God
made a covenant, The God of Jacob.
as with Abraham and Isaac, that he would be their God, and the God of their
seed; then they look unto this, that they are of the posterity of Jacob, and
so of that covenant that God made with him and his. And thus the whole
posterity of the Jews is sometimes called by his name both of Israel and
Jacob, as in the Psalm: Often times from my youth up, may Israel now say, they
have afflicted me from my youth, but they could not prevail against me. Psalm.
129.1.
And in another place, Let Israel wait on the Lord; Psalm. 130.7.
and he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. And when Balaam the false
prophet was sent for to curse the Israelites in the wilderness upon the borders
of Moab, he often speaks of them by the name of Jacob: as, The King of Moab
has brought me from Aram, saying, Come, Numb. 23.7.
curse Jacob for my sake: and a little after, Who can tell the dust of Jacob?
and lastly, There is no sorcerie in Jacob. Verse. 10. and 23.
According to this sense they have respect unto the covenant, that God made
with Jacob and his posterity: (for the blessing came from Isaac to him and
his) which covenant included not only the promises of the life to come, but
much more of this life also: (as David expounds it in the Psalm, where he
having spoken before of many great outward blessings, concludes thus; Psalm.
144.15.
Blessed are the people, that be so, yea blessed are the people whose God is
the Lord) and not only deliverance from eternal destruction, but from all
other enemies and dangers, so far forth as may make for the glory of God.
Now God has renewed or rather confirmed the same covenant with us, and with all
believers in Christ, They pray in the faith of Gods covenant made unto Jacob,
and to his posterity. Heb. 1.2.
and for his sake; and is therefore called God the the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that is, not only his father, but of all that believe in him. And so
look whatsoever was included in the first covenant made with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, we are heirs of them by faith in Christ, who is heir of all
things, and in whose blood the covenant is established: who is also the
Mediator of it, Heb. 9.15. 1. Cor. 3.21.
and so if Christ be ours (as the Apostle says) all is ours. Therefore we are
to direct all our prayers unto God in the faith of this most merciful covenant,
and look to be heard for Christ's sake. As they consider here, not only of God,
and so pray to him; but as one that had made a covenant with them in Jacob, and
pray the God of Jacob to defend him: So we are to pray unto God, as to our
father, who has so revealed himself unto us in Christ, for whose sake it is
said, that whatsoever we ask of God according to his will shall be granted
unto us. Therefore though God be in heaven, Joh. 14.13. Eccles. 5.1.
and we in earth: though he be just and we sinful, and so we can look for
nothing from him in our selves, yet because of his covenant we come unto him,
So must we in the faith of his covenant made with us in Christ.
and pray him for Christ's sake to be good unto us, to save us, and to defend
us, calling him not God only, but the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so
in him our father. Part of which covenant is, that if we offend him, or (as it
is said by God himself) if they break my statutes, Psalm. 89.31.
and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with strokes, yet my loving kindness will I not take
from them, nor falsify my truth, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. And according to this part of his covenant
we must pray him to deal with us, that is, that though he does justly chastise
us with this plague for our sins, yet he would not take his loving kindness
from us, and so play as David does; O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger,
neither chastise me in thy wrath: Psalm. 6.1.
where he does not simply refuse to be chastised, (for then he should have
been out of the covenant) but not in the anger of God: Even in this time of the
plague.
so must we be willing to bear this visitation of the Lord so long, as it
shall please him to try us with it; only let us desire that his wrath may
cease from us, and that his loving kindness may not be taken away: and let that
be sufficient for us. Therefore (to conclude this point) that we might now and
always pray in faith, let us look to Gods covenant made with us, and to the
promises included therein, and to Christ, in whom only the covenant is
steadfast, and in whom only all the promises are Yea, and in him they are Amen,
to the glory of God.

2. Cor. 1 20.
It follows in the second verse. Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and
strengthen thee out of Sion. In which they continue to pray for their King,
that God would defend him from all evil, The interpretation of the second verse.
as before; and namely to that end they pray, that God would send him help
from his Sanctuary, and give him strength and courage against his enemies to
that end from Sion. Where by Sanctuary he means heaven. In the Hebrew it is
Holy (namely, place) that is, heaven, which is the holy place of Gods abode:
and in the sixth verse both are expressed, namely heaven and holy place. And it
must needs be then taken here: for from whence should God hear us, and help
us but from heaven? Do we not when we pray, lift up our minds, our eyes,
and our hands unto heaven? and Christ has taught us to pray, O our Father,
They pray for help from heaven.
which art in heaven, etc. He teaches the^ then to pray, that God would send
them help from heaven; and thus he shows his own faith, and taught them
also so to believe, that all his help in all dangers must come from heaven.
Therefore as it is God that i^ all troubles does defend us; so the means that
we have are of him, and the success and blessing of them, and so all our help
is from heaven. And this is that that we must believe in all dangers, that
what means so ever we have, as we must acknowledge them to be of God, so
unless he bless them, they will do us no good, for all our help is from
heaven. If we want all means, yet God can send us help without them: therefore
whether we have them, ascribe them to him with thanks, and pray to him to
bless them; or if we have them not, pray yet that he would send help from
heaven, where and when there is none in the earth.

We see then with what mind David goes to the battle; he was a valiant man
himself, Though they had many helps for war, yet they look for all their
help from heaven. 2. Sam. 23.8.
as appeared in his combat with the great giant Goliath; he had a great army
also, and all things meet for war, and had gotten many great victories
before, and so he knew by experience, what he and his company were able to
do: and he had many worthy Captains, whose exploites and valor are highly
commended in the Scripture: and yet they go not on confidently and
presumptuously, thinking that they should be able to make their part good
enough against their enemies, for they were able to do so and so: one of them
had slain eight hundredth at one time; another of them defended a place against
the whole host of the Philistims, and another slew three hundredth at once: and
three of them did break through the army of the Philistims to fetch water for
David, and returned safely, and such like things they might have boasted of.
But as though they were no body, nor ever had done any thing, or had no means
to help themselves, they pray, that God would send them help from heaven:
acknowledging that all that they had, or that they could say for themselves,
was nothing without him, and his help. Contrary to the common course of our
time, Contrary to the common course of captains and soldiers.
in which men run on desperately to the war, and never think of God, or of
his help, especially if they be any thing well provided against the enemy:
and so God forsaking them, whose aid they do not seek, they speed thereafter.
As Benhadad King of Aram boasted of himself and of his power, and thought that
he might do what he list, and therefore casted out blasphemous threats, saying,
The gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria be enough for all
the people that follow me, 1. King. 20.10.
for every man a handful: and after when his enemies came out against him, he
thought he might command them, and said, Whether they be come out for peace,
take them alive: Verse. 18.
or whether they be come out to fight, take them yet alive: but what came of it
in the end? The King of Israel came out against them, and made a great
slaughter. This became of his proud boasting of his own power before the
victory, as he was warned of it before, when King Ahab sent him this message,
Let not him that girdeth his harnes, boast himself, as he that puts it off.
And as David does teach them thus to pray for help from God, so in the next
Psalm he acknowledges, that it was God that had saved him, Who therefore
commonly speed thereafter.
saying, The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord; yea how greatly shall
he rejoice in thy salvation? If all Princes did thus, when they send out their
soldiers, and if the Captains themselves did look for all their help from
heaven, and pray for it accordingly, they might have had better success many
time, than they have had. And the want of this faith, and of prayer the fruit
of it, as it has brought great loss of men among other people, and made long
wars, so also upon the English men both in Ireland, and in the Low Countries:
and so we see how these evils, by the grace of God may be prevented for the
time to come. Now that that is said here of this particular, as of war, is
true of all other troubles and dangers whatsoever, that our help in them must
be from heaven, and therefore we must by prayer seek for it at the hands of God
(as these do here) if we will have it: but first of al we must believe that it
is so. And that we might so do, let us consider that that which Solomon says
of this thing, is true of all other: The horse is prepared against the day of
battle, Prou. 21.31
but salvation is of the Lord: that is, what means so ever we have to
preserve us from danger, All help in all dangers and troubles is only from
heaven.
yet our help and salvation both of soul and body, that must be from heaven.
And this is that which the Church of God confesses by the mouth of the
Prophet, and ascribes all their great deliverances (though they had means to
bring them to pass, which they also speak of) unto God, when they praise him
after this manner: We have heard with our ears, Psalm. 44.1. etc.
O God, and our fathers have told us the works* that thou have done in their
days, in the old time: how thou have driven out the heathen, and planted them;
how thou have destroyed the people, and caused the^ to grow. For they inherited
not the land by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them; but
thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou
fauouredst the^. Thou art my King, O God: send help unto Jacob. Through thee
have we thrust back our adversaries, by thy name have we trodden down them that
rose up against us. For I do not trust in my bow, neither can my sword save me:
but thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to confusion that
hate us; therefore will we praise God continually, and will confess thy name
for ever. In all which words we see, that they attribute all their former
deliverances from dangers unto God, and profess also that they looked for
help from none but from him, and put their trust in him, and so desire him to
send help unto Jacob, that is, to them that were of his posterity, and so the
people of God. And thus David again and all the people with him when they
fought against the Aramites did confess, and thus they did pray: Psalm. 60.11.
Give us help against trouble, for vain is the help of man: where they do
not only believe, and so acknowledge, that all their help is from God, but
all other help without it is vain, and to no purpose, neither can it do them
any good.

THE EIGHTH SERMON upon the second verse.
Send thee help from the Sanctuary.
WE heard the last day, that not only in war, but in all other troubles
generally, all our help must be from God, and so we must seek to him for it,
as these do here: And this is that faith that we must labor for in this
dangerous time of the pestilence, as in all other sicknesses and diseases, This
faith we ought to have in this time of the pestilence.
that it is God that must send help from heaven to our brethren, and to our
selves: and that neither we nor they can have any help at all, but from
thence: and that there is help to be had, when there is none in the earth,
but all help, and all means of help fail here below. For though there be
means to serve Gods providence for every purpose, yet all they are of God, and
the blessing of the^ also. As now at this time, the Magistrates in the places
infected, should take good order that the sick be well looked unto, and
provided for, and that there be care had that they come not abroad, and that
the whole may be kept from the sick, as by the law of God the leapers were put
apart from the society of men, because their disease was contagious, and when
they came abroad they should cry out alowd, Leu. 13.45.46
I am unclean, I am unclean, that all men might avoid them. And there are
means of physic for the preservation of those from the contagion, that are
necessarily to be employed about the sick, and that must come into dangerous
places: yet these cannot be had nor used, unless God give men this wisdom;
and when they have them, as David here had all good means for the war, yet
help and succor comes from God, as it shall please him to bless the
means. Thus true faith will make us place our trust and hope, where we
should, and where it will not deceive us: and truly that is no small thing in
any danger, And show it by prayer for our selves and others.
nay it is all in all. For if we trust to these means, besides that it may be
that we cannot have them, if we have them they may do us no good, and so
deceive us: but if we trust in God, and in his help, whether we have means,
or have them not, that will be an anchor, that shall not confound us; for we
trust in him, and in his defense, from whom only comes all help. Now if we
say we have this faith, it must appear by the fruits; and namely, that if we
have all good means, as David had here, we be not secure and trust in them,
but pray earnestly unto God, as though we had them not; much more when we have
them not in deed. Prayer then is a special token in all things that we go
about, that we look for our help from God: and therefore if we believe that it
is God that must stay this mortality and sickness, and that he must defend
others and our selves in it, we must pray earnestly and continually for our
selves and them: but if we let prayer alone, or use it seldom, whatsoever we
say with our mouth, we do not so believe it in heart as we should. For faith
must appear by the fruits of it, else it is a dead faith, and as a body without
a soul, which has no actions of life: and prayer is one principal fruit, as
the Apostle says; How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
Romans 10.14. 2 Cor. 4.13.
showing that as there can be no prayer without faith, so faith does
necessarily bring forth prayer. Therefore let us stir up our selves unto
prayer, and never cease calling upon God, even as we do believe that all our
help must come from him.

And here by the way we see the nature of true faith, Faith sees help in
heaven, when there is none in earth.
that it causes us to see help in heaven, and so to pray for it, when there is
none to be seen in the earth. And this is the difference between faith and
unbelief: that the very unbelievers can by reason conceive of help, so long as
they have any means to help them; but if they fail, they can see none at all:
so they are like unto those that are pore-blind, who can see nothing but near
at hand. But faith sees a far off, even into heaven, so that it is the
evidence of things that are not seen: Heb. 11.1.
for it looks unto the power of God, who has all means in his hand, or can
work without them, who made all of nothing, and calls the things that be
not, as though they were. So that as the holy Martyr S. Stephen, Romans 4.17.
Act. 7.54.
when his enemies were ready to burst for anger, and gnash at him with their
teeth, looked steadfastly into heaven, and saw Christ standing at the right hand
of God ready to defend him: so faith in the promises of the word, does see help
in heaven ready for us, when there are no means in earth. For as Abraham did
not consider his own body, Romans 4.19.
nor the deadnes of Sarahs womb, but considered what God had promised, and what
he was able to do: so if we look to the promises of Gods word, which are many
and most true, we shall see help from heaven, if no where else. Let us labor
then for that faith which may comfort us from heaven, for it may be in the
extremity of this sickness we shall see none in earth: so when others are
dumb, or not knowing what to say, our mouths shall be opened to speak unto
God, and say, Send us help from the Sanctuary, that is, from heaven.

Strength from Sion.
It thus follows: And strengthen thee out of Sion. Before they prayed for
help from heaven, now they pray for strength out of Sion: where by Sion they
mean that part of Jerusalem, called mount Sion, where afterward the temple
was built; where now the Arc (the visible sign of Gods presence was) where
they worship God in the word, sacrifice, and prayer: and by strength, thee
means not the strength of men and munition meet for war and for help, (which
was prayed for before) but inward strength of the mind, and courage which was
meet for the enemy: that he might trust in the defense of God, and might not be
dismayed by any power of the adversary, but that he might bear his estate as
was convenient. And this was very requisite; for if he had had never so many
means, Courage of mind is needful in all troubles.
and had had no heart, he should not have used them, or used them to no
purpose: and how should he have strength of heart, unless God gave it? and how
should God give it, unless he asked it of him? Therefore he taught them to pray
for that also. This shows that as in war, so in all other afflictions which
cause fear, there is requisite an inward courage of the mind to uphold a man:
for if he have a good heart he shall bear many things: and if he have no heart,
the least thing will dismay him. Prou. 18.14
Therefore Solomon says, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but
a wounded spirit who can bear it? 2. King. 7.5, 6.
The Aramites on the sudden heard a great noise when they besieged Samaria,
and they all fled away for fear, and left their tents and all things standingf
as they were, and so the Israelites came and spoiled them: they had men enough,
but they wanted courage. So is it said of all the Kings of Canaan, which were
many and mighty, that their hearts fainted, and so they could not stand before
Joshua. Josh. 2.12. and 5.1.


So is it in all other afflictions that we be subject unto, we had need of
strength according to the measure of it, to bear it: for if we have no faith
or confidence in God, what shall become of us? Job in all his great afflictions,
because he had a good heart, and trusted in God, bore them al patiently, and
said, Job. 13.15. Especially in this mortality of the plague.
If the Lord kill me, I will trust in him. At this time especially in respect
of this great sickness it is most needful to have strength of faith, to believe
Gods gracious providence, that things come not by chance, but by his fatherly
disposition: and to believe that he has a care of us, and that nothing comes
by fortune; for if a Sparrow falls not to the ground without his will, Matt.
10.29.30.
then much less do men dye, especially seeing the very heirs of our head are
numbered: that so we may commend our selves unto him, and take all things as
from him, and be contented with it. I say, as this faith is always requisite,
because we know not what may befall us on the sudden, so most of all at this
dangerous time. And this is necessary not only for our selves, but for our
brethren also, that accoridng to the measure of the sickness and pain, and
temptations of their mind, so they might have strength to bear al. For the
very want of this strength has bin the cause, that many even for fear have
been overcome: much more when the thing has bin upon them, have they fallen
into great impatiency and many lamentable outcries. Every one of us is well
acquainted with our own weakness this way, and do find by experience how small
things we can bear, and how the least thing does overcome us, yea, the very
fear of it many times: therefore we had need to labor for strength. And by
that weakness that is in our selves, we may easily judge what is in others, and
so see how requisite it is for them also, that God should strengthen them.

Further it is to be considered, God only strengthens and weakneth the heart
of man.
that as we have seen how requisite it is for us to have strength according to
the measure of our crosses and temptations: so of whom we shall have it, namely
of God, for they pray to him for it, and say, The Lord strengthen thee out of
Sion: he has the hearts of all in his hands, to order at his pleasure; and if
he give strength, then shall we be strong* and if he withdraw his hand from us,
and cast fear upon us, if we were as stout as Lions before, we shall be as
weak as water. And this truly as it is a great punishment to be too fearful,
so God has threatened to cast it upon them that break his law: and contrary to
be of a good courage, as it is a singular fruit of a good conscience, so God
has promised to give it to those that keep his law. Leuit. 26.7.
For it is thus written: If ye walk in mine ordinances, and keep my
commandments to do them, five of you shall chase an hundredth, Verse. 36.
and an hundredth of you shall put ten thousand to flight: But if they will not
obey me, nor do all these commandments, I will send a faintnes into their
hearts in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a leaf shaken shall
chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall no
man pursuing them: they shall also fall one upon another, as before a sword,
though none pursue them, and ye shall not be able to stand before your enemies.
Deuteronomy. 28.66.
And thy life shall hang before thee, and thou shall fear both night and day,
and shall have none assurance of thy life: in the morning thou shall say, would
God it were evening, and in the evening thou shall say, would God it were
morning, for the fear of thine heart which thou shall fear, and for the sight
of thine eyes which thou shall see. Thus strength and courage in all troubles
is the gift of God, as fearefulnes is a punishment sent of God: I^sh. 2.11.
for it is said, that the Lord cast a fear upon the Cananites, so that they
durst not stir. Thus we see who is the giver of al strength in all trials and
temptations, and that we have it not of our selves. Therefore no man must thus
presumptuously think of himself, that if trouble come he hopes he shall bear it
out well enough, for he has sufficient strength and courage: for if he were of
as great courage and valor as David, who slew a Lion and a Bear, yea Goliath
himself; yet when he comes to a new trial, he shall find himself altogether
insufficient, but as the Lord shall make a new supply of strength. The Apostle
S. Peter thought himself to be a stouter man a great deal then he was, and
that he would not shrink for a little, when he said: if all men forsake thee,
yet will not I: Matthew. 26.33.
but at the length God leaving him to himself for his trial, he had no
strength to stand, but did both deny and forswear his Master three times.
Thus we must ascribe all our former strength unto God, and he only it is, that
must strengthen us still.

In troubles we must pray to God to strengthen us. Iam. 1.5.
Seeing it is so, we must pray to him for it, as David does here; prayer is the
means to obtain all things from God: therefore not only if we lack wisdom,
as the Apostle says, let us ask it of God, but if we lack any thing else; as
if we be faint-harted, if we be weak in faith, if we lack patience, if we
fear that we shall not be able to bear things. Therefore as in trouble we
must pray for other things according to our estate, as for deliverance, or
mitigation; so especially for strength to bear whatsoever shall be laid upon
us: and we may do it in the greater faith, because God has promised it, 1.
Cor. 10.13.
even that he will lay no more upon us, than we shall be able to bear. So
then in all affliction let this be one part of our prayer; for if God
strengthen us, we shall be able to bear any thing. And whereas they pray thus
for David, it is our bound duty so to pray one for another: as if we hear of
any to be under any cross, pray unto God for them, that God would strengthen
them. And so strengthen those that are under the plague.
So did the Martyrs in persecution one for another, and so must we do now for
those that are, or shall be visited with this pestilence: that God would
strengthen them with faith in his good providence, with patience to bear all
things, with perseverance unto the end. And as he looked for good by their
prayers, so God that has commanded us to pray one for another, will not suffer
us to pray for them in vain. And thus though we cannot come one to an other by
reason of the infection, to minister any other comfort, yet we may pray unto
God to strengthen them; and though we cannot ease them of their pain, yet God
may strengthen them by our prayers to bear it patiently.

Out of Sion. As before he had taught them to ask strength for him, so here he
does show from whence he did look for it, Out of Sion, the place of Gods
worship.
and from whence he would have them pray that it might come: namely from Sion,
which was the place of Gods worship; unto which he had respect in naming the
place, which there, and there only, was to be had: without which that place
did not differ from any other. Whereas then these are the things that do
strengthen us in trouble, that we have says in the forgiveness of our sins,
and in Gods providence, hope that God will be with us, and defend us, and lay
no more upon us than we shall be able to bear, and patience that we may be
quiet: All these are wrought and increased in us by the word, Sacraments, and
prayer; which (...) Sion^ that is, in the place appointed for Gods worship
(...) wills them to pray for him, that God would so bless these means, that
he had used there before: and which now were, and should be used for him, that
by them he might be strengthened, and have a good heart in Gods defense, and
so he might not faint in his troubles. First then he shows, that he
believed, that all his confidence in trouble, and courage in danger, should
come from the means of Gods worship, and without the^ he should be as
faint-hearted, as might be: but by them he might be made confident and bold,
to behave himself in the midst of trouble, Comes all strength of faith.
as he should do. And this is most true, and that which all of us must
believe, and shall find to be true by experience, that into what trouble or
danger so ever we shall come, we shall have no more heart to bear any thing,
than as we have profited by the word, and Sacraments, and prayer, to believe
the promises that God has made unto us in his word. For as David confesses of
himself, I had perished in my trouble, if my hope had not bin in thy word:
Psalm. 119.92.
so thereby we see what did uphold him, and this must uphold all men, As from
the word of God.
the hope that they have of Gods protection and deliverance, as it is promised
in the word. So that take away the word, and there can be no hope; and without
hope we have no strength to bear any thing, and so we must needs perish in
any trouble. And hereunto agrees the Prophet, when he says, Psalm. 130.5.
My soul has waited on the Lord, and I have trusted in his word: he was in
great trouble, and prayed unto God, confessing his sin, believing the mercy
of God, and so waiting upon him for it: but how? trusting in the word: so al
his hope was from that. And indeed what hope can we have, but from it? For if
God had promised us nothing, or we knew it not, how could we have any hope? and
without hope there is nothing but impatiencie, and so no strength to bear any
thing. So that al our strength is from the word, and in that respect from Sion,
that is, the place, where it is publicly taught us, that we might believe it,
and so be strengthened by it.

Few believe that all their strength to bear things is from Gods word.
Thus though it be most true, yet few believe it, that when trouble comes, all
their strength to bear it, must come from the knowledge and faith which they
have gotten from the word: But without this they imagine that they shall bear
things well enough; for they have good hearts, and stout, and are not fearful,
as they say, they will not be daunted for a little: they have such and such
means to trust unto, and they will be merry, and have good company, and
pass away things lightly, and they shall not come near their hearts greatly to
trouble them: and so they will bear them out well enough. And therefore we see
that when trouble comes, few give themselves to think of that, which God has
promised in his word; or do determine to come more diligently unto the word
than before as though they believed that all their strength must come from
thence. But whatsoever men imagine of their own strength, this will be found
true at the last, that all our courage is from the means of our salvation; and
that all other confidence, that men have from any thing else, saving from them,
will deceive them. For though they may stoutly bear out things for a time, yet
in the end they will fall into great impatiencie and despair, or else into
hardness of heart and blockishnes, but as they shall be strengthened by the free
promises of God made in his word. Ephesians. 6.16.
For it is only faith that will quench all the fiery darts of the devil, as
the Apostle says: whether he tempts us for our sin in the time of our
trouble, as the tempter will do, (for he is not so called without a cause) or
he tempts us unto sin; in all these temptations only by faith we stand, and
that shall be as a shield, wholly to defend us, 2. Cor. 1.24.
and to quench the fiery darts of the wicked, that is, even those grievous
temptations, which otherwise are able to set soul and body on fire. But what
faith can we have, but from the word, and the free promises therein contained?
therefore all our strength is from thence, and from the rest of Gods worship in
Sion.

The want of this faith has pulled down the hearts of the stoutest; as all the
Canaanites, seven great and mighty nations, The want of says in Gods word,
has pulled down the hearts of the s^outest.
their hearts fainted them for fear of Joshua, they had no means from Gods
word to strengthen them in his defense. And Saul the King of Israel, though he
was a goodly man of stature, and of great courage, yet when by the means of a
witch he heard what should become of him, he died away for fear, 1. Sam. 28 20.
and there was no strength in him. This made Achitophel and Judas, 2 Samuel
17.23. Matthew. 27.5.
both of them traitors to their masters, to destroy themselves; when in their
wicked proceedings the fear of Gods wrath was upon them, they could have no
strength from God by means of his word. Genesis 4.14.
This also made Cain to become a vagabond, and a runnagate, so that his
conscience would not let him be quiet in any place, because he had committed a
most horrible sin, and did not repent him, and so could look for no favor
or protection from God in that case. And this causes many of the wicked to
tremble and shake as a leaf, Dan. 5.6.
as the King of Babylon did when he was in the midst of his profane cups
drinking and swilling, Act. 24.26
and Felix also in all his great pomp and bravery; because they were void of
faith, when the one saw the judgments of God against him, and the other heard
of them; and so they could have no strength from his word, which they did
neither believe, And is the cause of all weakness and fear in Gods children.
nor know. And this want of the knowledge and faith in the word of God, is the
cause of all the weaknesses, and impatiencie that has appeared in Gods
children, and of all their fears: even that they have not been sufficiently
persuaded of the forgiveness of their sins, and of Gods favor, and that he
has a care of them, and will diminish their grief and pain in his good time,
and give them patience, and lay no more upon them than they shall be able to
bear, and that he will turn all unto their good in the end: and so they have
not bin sufficiently strengthened by the word. For when they have come to this
by hearing, and reading, and meditating upon Gods word, and by prayer, then
have they felt themselves strengthened to bear all things, and not before, and
then only in that measure that they have attained unto this persuasion, and
have been thus strengthened by the means of Gods worship in Sion.

As appears in Job.
We may see both these in the example of Job, who is a pattern both of great
weakness, and of great strength: in the weakness of his faith, and before that he
was sufficiently strengthened by the word, he fell into great impatiencie, and
cursed the time that ever he was borne, saying, Let the day perish, wherein I
was borne, Job. 3.2.
and the night, wherein it was said, there is a manchilde borne, and so goes
on, and says much to that effect. See whether a man's weakness will carry him,
if he have no strength from the word, yea though he be a very good man, as Job
was. But when he was sufficiently strengthened by the word of God, and had the
feeling of it in his heart, he was able to bear all things: as not only when
he said, The Lord has given, Chap. 2.21.
and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord: but when in
greater affliction he said, If the Lord kill me, Chapt. 13.25. Chapt. 19.25.
yet I will put my trus in him. And also, I am sure that my redeemer lives,
and I shall see him, and mine eyes behold him, and none other for me. See
again what we shall be able to bear, when we have gotten sufficient strength
of faith and patience from the word, though we were never so weak before.
Seeing it is so, we may well know in this visitation of the plague (if it
should come among us) from whence we must have strength to bear it; yea and
any other trial also, that now or hereafter God shall lay upon us; even from
his word, and from that faith and hope that we have gotten from thence: and so
much strength assuredly shall we have, as we have true faith: and without that
we can have none; and the weakness of our faith is the cause of little
strength. This should make all of us diligent to come to the Church, Therefore
in this time of the plague all should labor to get strength from the word.
and to see that we have cause to do, as we now do: not only to come and
pray, that God would turn away his heavy hand; but to hear his word
carefully, that by it we might grow in faith and hope, and so receive
strength, to bear whatsoever God shall lay upon us. In so much that if a man
had no care before, now he had need to begin; and he that was diligent
before, must be more diligent now; for he has need of greater strength: and to
provoke all his family to come, that they also might be strengthened with him
against the day of trouble: else if affliction do come among them, their
weakness and impatiencie may trouble him: whereas if he have gotten any strength
of faith, he shall have it not for himself alone, but his strength shall do
them much good: and all of them being strong in faith, one shall comfort and
uphold another: For in all companies, the more strength that every one of them
has, the better shall it be for them all.

And let not men defer until Gods hand be upon them, and think, that they
will get strength then: And do not defer it until Gods hand be upon them.
Ephesians. 6.12.
for when they have done all that they can, they shall find that they have
strength little enough, to wrestle with the pains of their body, and
temptations of their mind: even with the prince of the darkness of the world,
and with spiritual wickednesses, and that in the matter of our salvation: so
that when we have the whole and complet armor of Christians upon us, even our
loins girt about with the girdle of truth, and the breastplate of
righteousness, and our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
and the shield of faith, and the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit; yet we shall have much ado to resist in the evil day, and having
finished all things to stand fast. Besides, it is not wisdom for a man to
defer to seek for any thing then when he should need it: in worldly matters we
would be glad to have them beforehand; let us be as careful for our souls:
and so I pray you for the love of Christ, and of your own souls, not only to
come still, but to profit by your coming, as much as you can, to get strength
against trouble from Sion: even from this place of Gods service, where it is to
be had. Otherwise it will come to pass, that besides many great weaknesses
that you must needs fall into, this shall be a grievous accusation to your
consciences, to think, and to complain somewhat too late, Oh how might I have
strengthened my self against these evil days, if I had made more account of
the word? if I had come to it more diligently, and profited by it more
effectually? but alas, now what great weakness of faith is in me? how full of
distrust, and of impatiencie am I? how am I out of all hope, because I have
neglected the means of my strength? Let every one therefore examine his own
strength, and according to the great weakness that he finds in himself, so let
him make more account of coming to the word; and let them now, whilst they
have time, give themselves plentifully to the reading and meditating of the
sweet and comfortable promises of the same at home in their houses, that they
and theirs may get as much strength thereby as they may, against the time of
need.

And as this is our strength, so it must be the strength of all our brethren:
and therefore as David wills them here to pray for him, In this respect, what
we should pray for those that are under the plague: both for the preachers, and
for the hearers.
that God would strengthen him out of Sion, that is, by the word, which he had
heard there, that now God would call it into his remembrance, and confirm his
faith by it: So we must pray for them, that with this visitaion of the plague,
they may still have his word among them, and that it may be diligently
preached: and to that end, that the Lord would watch over, and preserve his
faithful Ministers, the preachers of his word, as the chief captains that
should encourage and strengthen the rest: and that the people may reverently
esteem of the word, and of them for the words sake, and so be careful of the^,
and of their lives. And that all would willingly come to the word, that may:
and they that are sick, or shut up and cannot, that God would forgive them
their negligent hearing of his word in time past, whereby they might have
gotten more strength: and that he would bless that that they heard
heretofore, that by it they may be strengthened, and by it be assured of the
forgiveness of their sins, and may have hope of eternal life, and so patiently
abide whatsoever God shall lay upon the^: and further to pray, that the seed of
Gods word, that has been sown in the furrows of their hearts, may now appear
in them to their own comfort, and the encouragement of others, and all
patience, and hope, and joy of the holy Ghost: And also that they might be
stirred up to read it diligently, and carefully to meditate upon it, and have
wisdom to apply it to themselves, that so they may have sufficient strength
thereby. Thus shall it come to pass, that though we cannot visit them that
are sick according to our desire, for fear of the infection, to comfort them
in presence by the word of God in our mouths; yet we may pray for them, that
God would through the inward working of his holy spirit, strengthen them by
that good word of his, which they have heard before. That if it shall please
God to take the^ out of this world, that they may walk in the strength of that
spiritual food, which they have already received unto the kingdom of heaven:
1. King. 19.8.
even as Elijah the Prophet walked in the strength of his corporal food
forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.

And though in speaking of the strength that is to be had in Sion, we have
specially stood upon the strength that we have from the word: yet we exclude
not the Sacraments, and prayer, This strength also is increased by the
Sacraments, and by prayer public and private.
but include them rather, as parts of Gods worship, and means also from whence
we must receive strength against trouble. For the Sacraments are as seals to
confirm us in the truth of Gods promises, and we must use them to that end:
and by the prayers of the Church both the Word and the Sacraments are
fruitful, and of force to strengthen us: therefore whilst we may, we must
use them also, and make this account of them, that by them we may get
sufficient strength for all troubles that shall befall us. And let us know
assuredly, that how much we have or shall fail in the use of either of these,
so much may we justly fail of strength: and the more we use them, the more
shall we have strength, and be able to bear any thing. In this respect again
I beseech you, that you would come diligently to the Church, that ye may be
partakers of common prayers there, that so by them also ye may be
strengthened. For God has made a special promise unto many, that he will be
in the midst of them: and besides these, we must give our selves unto
private prayer in our families, that we and they may have strength thereby to
bear all afflictions: and every man and woman pray often by themselves, for
this is a special means to have faith and all other good gifts of God
increased in us: for Christ has promised to give to the^ that ask, Matthew. 7.7.
therefore now all should stir up themselves to all kind of prayer, that we
might do, as the Apostle wills us, namely, Pray always with all manner
prayer and supplication in the spirit; Ephesians. 6.18.
and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication: for this is one of
the parts of the spiritual armor, whereby we are strengthened against our
spiritual enemies: and this is placed last, as the greatest, and as that from
whence all the other have their force. And he speaks of all manner of prayer,
to that end that we might use them all, as publicly and privately, with our
selves, and with others, that so God might bless some or all of them, for the
strengthening of us. And let us pray for them that are sick, who it may be now
in great pain and weakness cannot pray for themselves, that they might have the
fruit of their own former prayers, and of others for them, that so they might
be strengthened from Sion: that is, from the means of Gods worship there used.
Which God grant for Christ Jesus his sake. Amen.

THE NINTH SERMON upon the third verse.
Let him remember all thine offerings, and turn thy burnt offerings into
ashes. Selah.
HEre the people continue to pray for their king, The interpretation of the
third verse.
namely, that God would remember al his offerings, and turn his burnt
offerings into ashes. In which their meaning is, that he would favorably
accept the prayers that he had made, and the sacrifices that he had offered,
and all the gifts and oblations that (according to the manner of those times) he
had brought unto God: and generally what service soever he had done for the
success and blessing of God in this action, before he went to the war, that
he would graciously receive it, and that now he would by the effect, and by his
defense, success, and blessing, show that he had done so in deed. This verse
consists of two parts.
So that there are two parts of this prayer: in the former they pray that God
would favorably remember what service he had done to him and accept of it: in
the latter, that he would show by his dealing in this matter between him and
his enemies in the course of his providence, that he had done so in deed. For
in praying that he would turn his burnt offerings into ashes, they have respect
unto that which God had done in time past, namely, with fire from heaven he had
consumed the offerings of some that have been made to him; whereby he did
sufficiently declare as by a demonstratiue token, that he allowed of them, and
had heard their prayers, that they offered with them. According to this the
people pray here, that God would by some sign or token show that he had
received them.

Let him remember: that is, They pray that God would remember his service and
offerings.
we would to God that he would remember, or we beseech him to remember what
service has been done to him, for the obtaining of his favor: and not only
remember, but with favor and acceptance: wherein they speak according to
man's capacity: for all things are present with God, and he forgets nothing
that is done to him, yea, all things that all men ever have done, are
continually before him. But as among men, if we have a suite to some great
person, and when we make it, that we might speed the better, we bring some
present unto him also: and afterward when we are gone, we wish that he would
remember us, and our suite, and our gifts, Or that he would smell them.
and deal with us accordingly: So they desire that God would think upon him,
and upon his suites that he made, and the gifts that he brought, and deal
with him in mercy thereafter. Some do read this text otherwise, but it tends
all to one end: namely that God would smell his gifts. Because that in the
time of the law unto their oblations there was by the commandment of God,
some incense adjoined and burnt, as Moses sets it down. Leuit. 2.1.
When any shall offer a meat offering unto the Lord, his offering shall be of
fine flower, and he shall power oil upon it, and put incense thereon: and
shall bring it unto Aarons sons the Priests, and he shall take thence his
handful of the flower, and of the oil with all the incense, and the Priest
shall burn it for a memorial upon the altar. Which was to teach them
(according to the dispensation of those times) that as incense and perfume does
delight the senses of men; so God would be well pleased with that which they
offered according to his word for Christ's sake, in whose mediation it should be
as it were perfumed. For he is that Angel that S. John speaks of, who stood
before the altar, Revel. 8.3.
having a golden censer, and much odors was given unto him, that he should
offer with the prayers of all the Saints upon the golden altar, which is before
the throne: and the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints went up
before God out of the Angels hand: Prayers compared unto incense.
whereby was showed, that in his mediation, and in the virtue of his prayers,
all the prayers and services of Gods Saints are accepted: incense then was used
to confirm and nourish in them the faith of this doctrine, which was not so
clearly revealed to them, as it is to us now in the Gospel; where we have
many gracious promises made, that whatsoever we ask in the name of Christ
according to his will, he will grant it unto us. Whereunto now they have respect
in these words of their prayer, when they pray that God would smell his gifts,
that is, favorably accept the service done. And according to this phrase of
speech it is said of the sacrifice of Noah; that he after the flood built an
altar unto the Lord, Genesis 8.20.
and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul, and offered burnt
offerings upon the altar: and the Lord smelled a savor of rest, and the Lord
said in his heart, I will henceforth curse the ground no more for man's cause.
The Lord did smell, that is, he did accept the sacrifices that were offered,
and so he was pacified, and his anger did cease, which for the sin of man was
kindled justly before, and caused the world to be drowned: but now his anger
being stayed, he said, that he would no more smite all things living as he had
done. According to this kind of speech usual in the Scripture, they pray, that
God would be well pleased with his prayers and service done unto him.

By this then we see, God remembers all our services done to him.
that the prayers that we make to God at any time, and the services which we
owe unto him, are not for the time present only, whilst they are a doing (as
some other things which perish with the use of them) but they are also for the
time to come: and God does remember them when they be past, and will bless us
for them thereafter: and we may pray to God in faith that he would so do, and
are by this example taught to do it with comfort. So that as incense burnt, or
a perfume that is made, leaves a good smell behind it, and the sweet savors
of it may be felt in the place where it was made a good while after: so our
prayers and service done in faith are so acceptable unto God for Christ's sake,
that they leave a savor of rest behind them before God for us, that he may
remember them, and us for them. So that many days after, we may think of it
with joy and delight, that we have done so and so unto God, and pray him to
remember it, and be assured that he will do so. This is a great mercy in God,
that he will thus vouchsafe to remember us and our poor services, and a great
comfort to us, to know that he does so. Therefore even as the sins of men,
that have been done long since, As he remembers all the sins of men to
punish the^ in time.
God remembers them, and will punish them in time; and though men when they
have done them, forget them, and so make no account of them to repent them of
them in time, but go on securely and carelessly, as it is said of profane Esau,
when he had sold his birthright, and so to satisfy his appetite for the time
present, had departed from the greatest testimony of Gods favor that he had,
Genesis 25.34.
he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way; so he contemned his
birthright: he was as merry as ever he was before, and forgot what he had
done: yet God did remember it well enough, and did punish him for it, for he
was afterward deprived of the blessing of his father, and of God. So it is
said in the Psalm of al those that are companions with thieves, and with
adulterers, and of all the wicked, These things have thou done, Psalm. 50.21.
and I held my tongue, therefore thou thoughtest that I was like thee: because
God did not presently punish them, they forgot their sins, and thought that God
did so too: but he answers, I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thee: that is, he does both know and remember every thing that they have done;
for he will set them in order before them, and punish them for them; and so
cause them also to remember them in time: as we see here it is said of the
cry of Sodom, Genesis 18.20.
that it was very great, and that God did hear it, and remember it, and sent
his Angels to destroy them for it: They continued in their sins, and God did
patiently suffer them, but at the last in sending fire and brimstone from
heaven upon them to consume them, he did sufficiently declare to the whole
world, that he did remember them.

If God defer to help, we are ready to think that he has forgotten us.
So does he remember all the services which men do unto him at any time, and
they are ever present before him, and he never forgets any, and will bless
them for the same in time. And though he defer this blessing of his, and do not
presently reward us for our service, or deliver us when we have prayed unto
him: yet we must not think that therefore he forgets us, and what we have
done, as though we had lost our labor: which the devil through our unbelief
is ready to suggest unto us; Psalm. 13.1.
as we see how David breaks out into such words, How long will thou forget me
O Lord for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? Where he
complains, that because God did not presently deliver him from his enemies,
according to that that he prayed for; therefore God had forgotten him, and did
not see him. For we by reason of infidelity are ready to judge of God, as of
mortal men: if we have put up any request unto them, and have not a present
dispatch of our suites, we are ready to think that they have other waightier
business which have put our matter out of their heads, and so we and all our
business is forgotten. So are we ready to judge of God, but it is not so: But
he will show in time that he has remembered us. Exodus 3.7.
for he remembers the prayers that al men make according to his will, and all
faithful services done unto him, and will therefore bless them in time to come.
Thus says the Lord of himself, I have surely seen the trouble of my people
which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, because of their taske-masters,
and know their sorrows: therefore I am come down to deliver them out of the
hand of the Egyptians, etc. They had been a long time in great trouble, and had
cried often unto God, and he did not only hear them, but remember them, and
came down to deliver them. And this was that which the Angel that came unto
Cornelius said unto him. Act. 10.4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up into remembrance before God: now
therefore send men to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is Peter, and he
shall tell thee what thou ought to do. So all the service that he had done
unto God, and duties of love unto men for Gods sake were not forgotten, As he
did to Cornelius.
but God did remember them, and sent an Angel unto him to tell him so, and to
reward him for them by sending Peter unto him to instruct him and his family in
the ways of their salvation: and (that I might use the words of Peter
himself) to speak words unto them, Chapt. 11.14.
whereby both he and all his househoulde should be saved.

According to this doctrine David teaches them here to pray, that God would
remember what he had done, The Lord remembers whatsoever we have done from our
birth, good or evil.
and what service he had performed unto him, and that the very smell of it (as
it were) might still be before him. From hence we may be assured, that God
remembers what all of us have done from our birth unto this day, for he will
judge us al according to our works, and that that we have done in this world;
and they are all written in his book (which at the last day shall be laid
open) be they good or bad. If we have done evil, and carelessly forgotten it,
and will not remember it, to repent us of it in due time; God he does, and will
remember it, to punish us for it in time. If we have done any thing well, and
have prayed to him, and served him in a good conscience, and done good to our
brethren for his sake, he remembers all those things also, to bless us for
them, 2. Cor. 15.58.
and we may be assured that our labors shall not be in vain in the Lord. To
come to this particular hand of God, that is now very heavy upon us; he does
sufficiently show thereby to all that are not wilfully blind, that he
remembers all the sins, wherewith a long time he has been provoked. As the
great ignorance and blindness that is every where in this clear light of his
glorious Gospel, By this visitation of the plague he shows, that he
remembers all the sins of this land.
the little account that men make of it, and care that is in them to profit by
it: How great the love of the world and of themselves is in men, and how little
love of God, and of their own salvation: the intolerable pride,
voluptuousnes, uncleanness, drunkenness, unmercifulness, and such like; he
remembers all these things, though men have forgotten them. And though by
sparing them in them, yea bestowing many blessings upon them, Romans 2.4.
he did lead them to repentance: yet now we see plainly that he did not
forget them. And we must thus profit by this visitation of the Lord: that as
the widow of Sarepta, where Elijah did soiorne in the famine, when her son
fell sick, and died, she said unto him, O thou man of God, 1. King. 17.18.
art thou come to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? and thus
by this punishment she did acknowledge and confess, And we ought so to profit
by it.
that God had remembered her sins: So must we all thus profit by this grievous
sickness among us, which is unto death, to see how God remembers all those sins
every where, which men have committed, and forgotten long ago, and they
thought that God had forgotten them also. And so no doubt there will come a
time for all men in the world, wherein it shall appear unto them, that God
has remembered their sins: either in this world to their amendment and
salvation, if they be his; or in the world to come to their everlasting shame
and confusion, if they be his enemies.

And he reme^breth those that have lived well in this wicked age.
So on the contrary, and more fitly for our purpose, they amongst us that have
lived well, served him in fear, prayed unto him in faith; and in these evil
days have not only kept themselves unspotted in the world, but have grieved
at the abuses in others, which they could not help; God knows them all by
name very well, and remembers what they have done, and will put a difference
between them and others in the day of his visitation, and they must be
comforted against it before hand, that they have thus served God in truth, and
he does remember it. And this is that which the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of, to
whom the destruction of Jerusalem was showed in a vision after this manner: He
saw six men with weapons in their hands, and one among them was clothed with
linen, Ezekiel. 9.3.
with a writers ynkhorne by his side: and the glory of God appeared, and
called to the man clothed with linen, And will bless them for it, when others
shall be punished.
which had the writers ynkhorne by his side: and said unto him, Go through the
midst of the the city of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheards of
them that mourn, and cry for all the abominations that are done in the
midst thereof: and to the other he said, Go after him through the city, and
smite: let your eye spare none, neither have pity: destroy utterly the old and
the young, and the children, and the women: but touch no man, upon whom is the
mark. Thus we see how in this great and universal destruction, wherein all
sorts old and young, children and women were slain, God remembered the sorrow
and grief of those that mourned for the abuses of their time, and did spare
them for it. And this blessing shall be upon all those, that desire unfeignedly
to serve God according to his word, when all the world besides forsake it, they
shall find by experience, that God will remember them, and their doings, as he
promised by the Prophet Malachi: where it is thus written (he first
complaining of the wicked, in the name of the Lord) Your words have been stout
against me: yet ye say, Malach. 3.13.
What have we spoken against thee? Ye have said, It is in vain to serve God;
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandments, and that we have
walked humbly before the Lord of hosts? therefore we count the proud blessed:
even they that work wickedness, are set up, and they that tempt God, yea they
are delivered. Then spoke they that feared the Lord every one to his neighbor,
and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before
him for them that feared the Lord: and they shall be to me, says the Lord of
hosts, in that day that I shall do this, for a flock, and I will spare them,
as a man spares his own son, that serves him. Thus we see that when the
Prophet preached, and some made a mock of it, and those that feared God,
conferd among themselves to comfort themselves in the ways of the Lord, he
did see them both, and did remember them, and in the day of his visitation
would put a difference between them: and so we see how God will remember us
for our faithful service, and bless us for it: and to that end according to
our capacity it is said, that there was a book of remembrance written for
them before the Lord. That is, as among men they that do any faithful service
to the Prince, it is recorded in writing and put into the Chronicles, whereby
it comes to pass that the memory of it is kept: as we see in the book of
Hester, when the King could not sleep, Hest. 6.1.
he commanded to bring the book of the Chronicles, and they were read before
him: where it was found written, that Mordecas had told of Bigtana and Teresh
two of the Kings Eunuchs, keepers of the door, who sought to lay hands on the
King. And he said, What honor and dignity has bin done to him for this? And
they said, There is nothing done for him. Then he commanded Haman to do him
that great honor, that is there set down. Thus we see how the good service
that he had done to the King was written, and so he was remembered and rewarded
for it. So the Lord does keep a more faithful record of all the good services
that any of us have done unto him, and he will reward us for them in his good
time: and this is that which they pray for in the behalf of their King.

When the Lord sent his Angels to destroy Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities
thereabout for their horrible wickedness, he made it known unto Abraham, Genesis
18.17.
saying, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? Because the cry of
Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is exceeding grievous, I
will go down now and see, whether they have done altogether according to the
cry which is come unto me: God remembered the prayers of Abraham which he made
for Lot.
and if not, that I may know. Then Abraham began to pray for them, and said,
Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? be it far from thee from
doing this thing, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and the Lord said he
would not, and so he went on six times praying for them, and was heard.
Therefore it is said in the next chapter, that when God destroyed all the
wicked, he remembered righteous Lot, according to the prayer of Abraham, and
delivered him. For when God destroyed the cities of the plain, Chapt. 19.29.
God thought upon Abraham, and sent Lot out from the midst of the
destruction, when he overthrew the cities, wherein Lot dwelled. By this
example we see that God remembers the prayers that we have made not only
for our selves, but for others, yea when they know not of it, as he did the
prayers of Abraham for Lot. Therefore when we pray to God, we must not think
that our words are vanished in the air, or yt they are for the time present
only, but for the time to come, even for all the days of our life. So that, as
it is said, that the blood of Abel did speak to God for him when he was dead,
and did cry out alowd and was heard: Chapt. 4.10.
so our prayers that we have made, and services that we have done, shall speak
to God for us when we sleep, and when we hold our peace, and God will
remember us for them, even then when he punishes all the wicked round about
us; as he did here hear Abraham, and delivered Lot when he overthrew the
cities of the plain, wherein Lot dwelled.

We have prayed often for this visitation, God remembers the prayers of all
men for this plague.
that God would be merciful unto us in it: we must not think, that because we
see not a present end, or lessening of it, that we have lost our labor, and so
grow weary, and give over. But let us assure our selves, that so many as have
with true repentance and unfeigned purpose of leaving all sins that they know,
and not wittingly please themselves in any: that God remembers their prayers,
and knows what is in them, and what they have done to him: as he also knows
the hard-heartednes and hypocrisy of the rest. And as he does remember them,
so he will in his good time make it known to them more and more: as he did
to Cornelius, when he sent an Angel unto him, and as he did to Abraham, when he
saw that Lot was delivered from the destruction of Sodom. He did remember them
before, though he made it known unto them, when it pleased him. And in time
will show it unto them.
As it is written also of Daniel the Prophet, who fasted and prayed for the
desolation of Jerusalem; whilst he was speaking in prayer, Gabriel came
flying, and foretold him, Dan. 9.21.
about the evening sacrifice, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth, to give
thee knowledge and understanding: at the beginning of thy supplications the
commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee. So though there the
commandment came out at the first, yet God did show it him at the last, even
when it pleased him. God must needs remember us: for Christ puts him in
mind of us.
So will he do with us; but in the mean season we must believe that he does
remember us, and take comfort in it. And truly it must needs be so, that God
should remember the prayers of his servants, and all their services, Romans 8.34.
for they have a Mediator and Advocate in heaven, even Jesus Christ at the
right hand of God, who makes continual request for us; for he is faithful
to do it, and he is in favor with God, and therefore he will remember us for
his sake. For if we have put up any supplication to the King, and we have one
in the Court to follow it, we hope we shall not be forgotten: especially if
we have the Prince the Kings eldest son to make suite for us. So seeing
Christ Jesus does deal for us in heaven, we may be assured that God will
remember all prayers made according to his will in repentance and faith.
Therefore if we have done any thing all this while, God will remember us, if
we have done nothing, then God must needs forget to bless us, for there is
nothing done, for which he might remember us.

This should make us forward in prayer, and in all good things.
This should make al men fervent in prayer, and forward in all duties, that so
they might leave the^ (as it were) with God, and they might be before him
night and day, for a remembrance of them. And that as we have many sins, for
which he may remember to punish us; so our repentance, faith, prayer, service
done to his Majesty, obedience to his word of conscience in all his
commandments, and that in secret, and all the good that we have done to our
brethren, might also speak for us, and put him in remembrance of us for our
good. That as it is written of Nehemiah that worthy servant of God, who often
in the testimony of a good conscience prays, Nehem. 13.14
Remember me, O my God, and wipe not out my kindness, that I have showed on the
house of God, and on the officers thereof. Verse. 31.
And again, Remember me O my God in goodness. So we may pray for our selves,
and others in faith for us, that God would remember us and them, according to
all the service we have done to him. This I say should make all forward and
zealous in Gods service, both as they be Christians, and in their several
callings, that there might be something, for which they might pray themselves,
and others for them, that God would remember them.

And whereas they pray for the King, that God would remember all his prayers,
and services: we see that we may not only pray to God, that he would remember
what we have done, and that we now do, and what we have done before the
staying of this visitation, and hope that he will remember all, nay, be assured
of it. Pray for them under the Plague, that God would remember their former
services, though now they can do none.
But pray also for all our brethren in all places, that God would remember what
they have prayed and done, and the fasts that have been in all places, and are
still, and that all our prayers together may still speak for us. Yea, we may
pray that God would hear them that are visited with his hand, and not only
that which they now pray, but that that they have done before, when they were
in health: and though they cannot do as they would, nay, it may be for pain
speak one word as he requires, yet if they have done any thing in truth
before, that he would now in this time of their need remember that, and them
for it, and so no doubt he will. And this is a singular fruit of those that
neglect not the time of prayer and of Gods service when they may, that they
shall be remembered for it hereafter, and for that which they have done before,
when for the time present they shall be able to do nothing: as David when he
was fighting could not always pray as he would, and as his need required, but
he desires them to pray that God would remember that which he had prayed
before, when he was able to do it.

It follows: And turn thy burnt offerings into ashes. The second part of
this verse.
This is the second part of the verse, where they pray, that God would turn
his burnt offerings into ashes, that is, that God would some ways declare that
he had heard his prayer, and received his services: for where he speaks of
sacrifices, it was according to the manner of Gods service in those days,
where they did so offer, but these were not without prayer, as we see in the
fourth verse in this Psalm. By which prayer they sought to God, that those
sins for which they did offer sacrifices, might be pardoned in the death of
Christ, whereof those sacrifices, especially whole burnt offerings were a type
and figure, to show that Christ should wholly offer up himself to God for us.
Therefore it is said, that the Priest when they brought their sacrifices, Leuit.
4.20.26.31.35.
should make an atonement for them, that is, pray to God for them to forgive
them. So that though he names only sacrifices, yet he means prayer, and
other services done according to the word. And when they pray that God would
turn them into burnt ashes, that is, consume them with fire, as it were sent
from heaven, God turned the sacrifices of Aaron into ashes.
he has respect to that that God had done before, thereby testifying that he
did accept of their sacrifices and prayers. For thus did he to Aaron when he
was first consecrated to the office of the Priesthood: That the glory of the
Lord appeared to all the people, Leuit. 9.23.
and there came a fire out from the Lord, and consumed upon the alter the burnt
offering and the fat: which when the people saw, they gave thanks, and fell on
their faces. Thus when the sacrifice was laid upon the altar, fire came from
the Lord, and consumed it; and so the people when they saw it, gave thanks: for
by this sign they did see, that God did allow of the sacrifice of Aaron, and of
his Priesthood. So they desire of God, that he would some way show that he had
heard the prayer of the King.

And of Solomon.
So again when Solomon dedicated the temple, and had made a long and zealous
prayer for all those that should pray in that house, 2. Chron. 7.1.
and had prepared a sacrifice to be offered: Fire came from heaven, and consumed
the burnt offering, and the glory of the Lord filled the temple: so that by
this sign God did show to them all, that he had heard the prayer of Solomon,
for the hallowing of that house to be the house of prayer for all nations. And
to conclude this point, And of Elijah.
when the Prophet Elijah in the days of king Ahab in great zeal to call the
people from their idolatry, caused all the Priests of Baal to be gathered
together, 1. King. 18.20.
and they had two bullocks to be offered, one for them, and another for
himself, and there should be no fire put to the offerings, but that God that
should send fire from heaven upon them, should be taken to be the true God
and worshipped of them. The Priests of Baal because they were many began first,
and continued crying to him for fire until noone, and could not be heard.
Elijah at the time of the evening sacrifice, prepared his, and caused ditches
to be made round about the altar, and to be filled with water, and then he
prayed unto God, and the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt
offering, and the wood and the stones and the dust, and licked up the water in
the ditch: and when the people saw it, they fell on their faces, and said the
Lord is God, the Lord is God. Thus the Lord also in those days by this token
did apparently show, that he had heard the prayer of his servant the Prophet.
Having then respect unto these things (which were well known to them that were
acquainted with the Scripture) he teaches them to pray, that as in former
days he did sufficiently declare, that he had received the sacrifices, and
heard the prayers of his people, when with fire from heaven he did turn the
burnt offerings into ashes: so he would now, or in his good time, some way or
other testify that he had heard the prayer of the King: but the time will not
suffer me to go any further.

THE TENTH SERMON upon the third verse.
And turn thy burnt offerings into ashes. Selah.
WE heard the last day the meaning of these words, They pray that God would
show that he had heard his prayers.
and the reason of this kind of speech, that they desire the Lord, to turn his
burnt offerings into ashes. The thing that they pray for is this, that God
would some way show that he had heard his prayers. He did not then so pray, as
though he cared not whether he was heard or no, resting in the bare work of
prayer: but he was very desirous that God would hear him, so that he wills
them to pray, that God would show it to him and them, that he had heard them
in deed. It is not enough then for us to pray unto God, and to believe that he
does hear us; but to wait upon him for the performance thereof, and to be
desirous to see it: so shall we be comforted, and God shall be praised. Many
come hither to the Church so carelessly to pray, that when all is done, they do
not so much as know what has been prayed for; so far are they from this, of
desiring to see, or marking how their prayers are heard: and so either they
receive nothing, or if they do, they see it not; or if they see it, they do
not observe and mark it, to be thankful unto God, and to be confirmed
thereby in hope of his goodness for the time to come. David prays in this
faith, that he doubted not but that God would hear him, and so desires them
to pray, that he would show it to him sensibly and plainly as he did to those
whose sacrifices he consumed with fire, and turned into ashes, by causing it to
come down from heaven upon them. We must so pray that we be desirous to see
that God has heard our prayers.
So must we do in all things that we pray for, not only believe that God will
hear us according to his promises, but also pray him, that he would some way
in his good time evidently show by the event, that he has heard us. When we
put up our suites unto princes and great men, if they say they shall be granted,
we never leave, until we have the things that we sue for, or that there be
some act done for us, that it may appear that they have heard us in deed. The
Lord has commanded us to ask, and has made a promise that he will give,
Matthew. 7.7.
saying, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you. Say then that we have asked of God and sought
unto him, and that we believe also that we shall receive from him according to
our asking; let us then come again unto him the second time, that either by
granting the thing, or some thing for it, or supplying the want of it, or some
way or other as it shall please him, that we might see that he has heard us.

And namely, that he has heard the prayers of all for this plague.
As for example (and this very time does put us in mind of it) we have prayed
long and often for the removing of this grievous visitation of the pestilence:
God no doubt has heard so many all this time as have called upon him in truth,
and have departed from iniquity; and he does well remember what they have
said and done unto him, and he will in time bless them for it accordingly:
this is that that al of us should believe. But we must now with new suites and
supplications second these prayers of ours, to this effect, that God would show
us that he has heard us; either by causing this contagion and mortality to
cease, or some way extending favor unto us in it. And we must desire to be
partakers of the prayers of our brethren, that by the benefit of their prayers,
we might see that God has heard us; as David here was desirous and willed the
people to pray for him to that end. And as they do thus pray for the King,
that God would show that he had heard his prayers; so we also are to pray for
them that are in trouble, and namely under this hand of God, that he would show
to them that he has heard their prayers. They that pray for fashion and
coldly, cannot thus do.
All they that pray coldly and for fashion, and so care not whether they be
heard or no, or mark not what they have prayed for, but utter words of custom
without desiring or feeling, cannot with any comfort make this second prayer
for any thing, namely, that God would show them that he has heard their
prayers. But al those that pray in the inward sense and feeling of their wants,
and in the faith of Gods promises, and so not only know what they pray, but
are desirous to have their requests granted, and look for the fulfilling of
them; when they have prayed most earnestly, they must come again unto God the
second and third time, and desire him that he would show by effect, that he
has heard their prayers. Seeing then that God is the hearer of prayers, as
David calls him, O thou that hear the prayer, Psalm. 65.2.
to thee shall all flesh come; and he has made many promises to those that
seek unto him in their need, that they shall not return away empty: let us
never cease calling upon him both for the taking away of this great judgment,
and for all things that we want, until he show, that he has heard our
prayers: so shall we see it in the end, as this people did, for in the next
Psalm they give thanks for that which here they pray for.

Now whereas he teaches them thus to pray, That we might see how God hears
our prayers, we must mark^ what follows upon them.
that God would some way, as it pleased him, declare that he had heard their
prayers; it was meet and convenient, and this must necessarily be presumed,
that after prayers they should wait upon God, and mark the course of his
providence, and consider what should follow, that so thereby they might believe
that God had heard them in deed. Else it might well come to pass, that God for
his part should sufficiently show that he had heard him, but they should not
regard it, and so they should make this prayer in vain, that he would show
that he heard heard him, for he has done it already, but they see it not. For
to make this point more plain in that very comparison that is here used, if
when the sacrifice was offered, and God did with fire from heaven burn it up
clean, and so turn it into ashes, as he did it to Aaron, to Solomon, and to
Elijah, as we have seen before; he that was there present being blind could
not see it, or if he turned himself from it another way. So if we be wilfully
or carelessly blind in the works of God, and do not mark what follows upon our
prayers, good or evil; we shall use this prayer in vain, to pray that God
would show that he has heard our prayers; for he has done it sufficiently,
but we do not regard it. Therefore it is meet for all men not only to know and
to wey what they pray for, and to mark it well, and to think of it
afterward; but to wait upon God for the same, and to consider what follows,
that so they may see how God hears them. For as when a man puts up a
supplication to the King, he is not quiet then, but his mind is running as we
say, upon it, and he is very inquisitiue what is done in that matter, and he
marketh all things that follow, to see whether they make with him or against
him, that so he might see whether it be graciously received or no: So ought
we to do in our prayers unto God, have our minds, as it were lingering after
the things prayed for, and mark how every thing that follows, may put us in
hope that God has heard us. And this is that that David professes of himself
in his prayer. Psalm. 5.3.
Hear my voice in the morning, O Lord, for in the morning will I direct me
unto thee, and I will wait: where he says, that he would do as suitors do;
they put up their suite, and then give their attendance for an answer; so he
would pray to God speedely and carefully, and then he would consider what
followed, that so he might see how God did hear him.

Thus should we do, when we pray at morning, and at evening. Psalm. 40.1.
So must we all do, when we have prayed to God for any thing, we must wait
upon him, and consider what follows. And David confesses that in so doing,
he did see plainly, that God had heard him. For so he says, I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: and so
shall we do, if we continue to pray unto him, and wait upon him. So that when
we pray to God in the morning, we should consider how things fall out all the
day after, well or ill, that we might see how God in bestowing many blessings
upon us has heard our prayers. Likewise at night when we go to bed, and pray
to God, that he would defend us from dangers, and give us quiet rest, and we
awake in the morning, and have our strength renewed for the works of our
calling, and al things well within the doors and without; these things though
they be ordinary, we should well mark, that so we might see and confess, that
God did hear our prayers, and so be thankful unto him for the same. And so in all iourneis that we take in hand, or matters that we go about, wherein we have
commended our ways unto God, as we should always do because upon his
blessing depends the success of all things, we should mark how they succeed
and prosper with us, that so we might see how he has turned our burnt offerings
into ashes, that is, how he hears our prayers. So likewise for this sickness,
And in all the prayers that are and have been made for this pestilence.
that has been a long time amongst us; we have prayed unto God to be
merciful unto us in it, and to show us some token of his favor: and we are
desirous also to see that he has heard our prayers: now then let us consider
if the extremity of it be stayed from increasing any where, or if it be kept
out from many places, where it was likely that it should come, as out of this
country, and out of this town; that so we might confess to the glory of
God, and our own comfort, that God has heard our prayers. And this is one
special use of the news, that we hear weekly from London, Norwich, and other
places infected, how many died this week, how many the last; how many of the
plague, and how many of other diseases; how many parishes infected, and how
many are clear, that so we might see from week to week, and from day to day,
that the Lord hears our prayers, that so by experience we might be moved
still to call upon him for that that remains. Or when we pray in the Church
for any that lie sick.
So when we have prayed here in the Church for any particular person (as we
have done for diverse, and do daily) whereof some have been at deaths door,
and yet have been recovered; we should have kept a register of them, and have
marked them a great deal better than we have done: and it had been happy for
us at this time if we had done so, that so we might have by great experience
been confirmed in the truth of this, that God does hear our prayers. And to be
short, if any of us have bin in poverty, or in any want, and have prayed to
God to help us; then we must mark and consider, how he stirs up some to
have a care of us, Or who have been in poverty, or in any need. Romans 1.20.
and how some do pity us, or any way how we be provided for; and thus wisely
observe all Gods dealing according to our prayers in every estate of ours. That
as the invisible things of God, as his eternal wisdom and power, and mercy,
and truth are to be seen in the government of the world and are in his
creatures as it were written in great capital letters for the most ignorant to
see and read, to leave them without excuse, so we might in the same wisely
discern and see them, and be accordingly affected with the same to believe in
him, and to be thankful unto him, that thus from time to time shows that
he does hear our prayers. And truly if we had thus done all the days of our
life, and in every thing that we have prayed for; we might have seen better
than now we do, or can do, how many times God has heard us, for our selves,
and for others, day and night, at home and abroad, Then might we often have
seen how God did hear our prayers.
in the Church and in our houses. And for want of this diligent observation,
(the more is our loss, and the greater should be our grief) though God has
done many great things at our prayers, and has declared by blessed events that
he has heard us, yet we have not considered of it, and so have not seen it;
and so do want the comfort of this that they do pray for here, even that God
would turn their burnt offerings into ashes, that is, show that he did hear
their prayers.

Now that we might come to a more conscionable practice of this, we may
consider what will follow: first of all, when we do desire to have our prayers
heard, and will accordingly mark the dealing of God toward us, If we mark
how God hears our prayers, we shall the more esteem of the benefits that we
receive. Psalm. 21.3.
it will come to pass that we shall greatly esteem of those benefits that are
thus bestowed upon us, and be much affected with them; and so we shall be the
more thankful to God for them. For though we ought highly to esteem and make
great account of the goodness of God in the benefits that he bestows upon us
unasked, in that he preuenteth us with his liberal blessings, as the Ps lmist
says; and I cannot tell whether we should not do it a great deal more: yet
such is our nature for the most part, that we esteem of things the more, the
more hardly that we come by them, and the more pains that we take for them.
Hereupon it comes to pass, that when we have prayed earnestly unto God, and
so have gotten things that way, and have taken some pains for them, then shall
we think our selves the more beholding to God for them. Even as when a man
has obtained a thing by long suite, and it has cost him much, then if it be
granted to him at the last, he will esteem of the thing the more, and think
himself the more beholding to him that has granted it. Therefore we our
selves when in the morning we pray to God to bless us in his ways that day,
and to prosper us in all our actions, and then observe how the Lord preserves
us from much evil that might befall us, and does much good to us, that we were
unworthy of; shall we not greatly rejoice in this goodness of his, and be
thankful unto him for the same? And likewise at night when we commend our
bodies and souls, and all that we have to his blessed protection, that he
would keep us waking and sleeping; and find in the morning that he has done
so indeed; shall we not in the observation of this merciful providence of God
toward us, be confirmed in his goodness to be thankful unto him for it? And
so in any trouble and danger that we shall be in much more, wherein we do pray
to him to preserve and bless us; As in this time of the plague.
as when we pray to him in this deadly sickness of the plague, for some
favor in it; and then mark how things fall out, that they are better rather
than worse, and so therein see the goodness of God toward our selves and
others; shall we not rejoice in Gods deliverance, and be so much the more
thankful unto him for the same? Even as we see David and this people do
here: for they are not only thankful to God for it, but they say, that they
do greatly rejoice that God had heard their prayers. Psalm. 21.1, 2.
The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, yea how greatly shall he
rejoice in thy salvation? for thou have given him his hearts desire, and have
not denied him the request of his lips. And so did that godly woman Hannah the
wife of Elkanah, when she prayed in the temple for a son, and God gave her
one, for she went home and presently conceived, though she had been barren a
long time before; she did so mark the issue and what followed upon her
prayers, and the prayers of Hely the Priest for her, that she confesses to
him, that God had given her that that she desired, saying, O my Lord, 1. Sam.
1.36.
I am the woman that stood with thee here praying, I prayed for this child, and
the Lord has given me my desire: and therefore she did not only consecrate him
unto God; as the best gift that she could bestow upon him, but makes a solemn
thanksgiving unto God for him, and in the same she confesses that she did
esteem of him, as if she had had seven, saying, Chapt. 2.1. Verse. 5.
My heart rejoices in the Lord, my heart rejoices in the Lord, etc. And then
after, They that were full, are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no
more hired; so that the barren has borne seven, and she that had many children
is feeble. See what estimation of Gods benefits, and thankfulness to him for the
same, follows upon the diligent observation of them after our prayers.
Whereas on the contrary when we neglect this; many great things, which God
gives us, either we regard not at all, or at the least not as we should, and
so God has not that praise from us for them, that is due.

By this observation we shall grow in hope of Gods goodness for the time to come.
Romans 5.4.5.
Secondarily, by this observation of Gods dealing toward us after our prayers,
it will come to pass, that we shall grow in faith and hope of Gods goodness
toward us for the time to come; and so we shall be imboldened to pray to him
afterward, because we have seen and marked how he has heard us before. For
(as the Apostle says) experience breeds hope, and hope makes not ashamed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost: that
is, former experience shall confirm us in Gods love, and so give that hope for
the time to come, that confounds not. And truly if we had marked all our
former experience this way public and private, how many times, and for what
God has heard our prayers; what great hope might we have had of it now in
this time of our need? When we could have said, 1. Sam. 17.37.
as David did, God that delivered me from the paw of the lion, and from the
paw of the bear, will deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistim: that is,
God that has heard me at such and such a time, I hope will hear me now. But
for want of this we are new to seek in any great danger, as though God had
never given us any thing at our prayers before: and that makes us also to have
so little hope now. And by the same we shall confirm others in their hope.
Thirdly, we shall be able to confirm others also by our own experience, and
encourage them to call upon God with good hope by our own example: for we shall
be able to say unto them, that we have observed how God has dealt with us in
the like case of theirs: and this shall be no small comfort to them to hear
it: or to our selves from others, to hear at their mouth, how God has dealt
with them in former times. And so does David to this end speak to other of his
own experience which he had gotten, by marking how God dealt with him after
his prayers; when he says, This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and
saved him out of all his troubles. And a little before: Psalm. 34.6. Verse. 4.
I sought the Lord, and he heard me, yea he delivered me out of my fear: they
shall look to him, and run to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed,
saying, This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him. We see how confidently
he speaks unto others, and assures them, that if they pray to God, he will
hear them: for he had well marked how the Lord had so dealt with him before.
Let us then in all things wherein we have prayed unto God, so mark his dealing
toward us, that we may see how he has turned our burnt offerings into ashes,
that is, how he has declared unto us, that he has heard our prayers, that so
we may rejoice in Gods benefits the more, and he may be praised for them, and
our selves and others be confirmed in hope by experience through them.

Turn thy burnt offerings into ashes. Lastly, concerning these words, whereas in
them he teaches generally to pray, We must not limit the hearing of our
prayers to any one particular thing.
that God would show that he had heard his prayers, and does not limit it to
any particular thing, as to say, show it, by doing so and so: but that
concerning the things that be prayed for, he desires that he would show
which way it pleases him, that he had heard them, and that he and they might
as evidently see it, as those did who had their sacrifices consumed with fire
from heaven: It teaches us, that in all outward things especially, we should
not tie the favor of God, and the hearing of our prayers to any one special
thing, as to say, If God would give me such a thing, that I have prayed for, or
deal so and so with me, I would believe that he had heard my prayers, but
until I have that, I cannot be persuaded of it. For in all things we ought to
pray, that God would give us such and such things, so far forth as it is his
holy will, as he knows it to be good for us, and for his glory: and with
these conditions also must we pray for others. So then if the Lord see it not
expedient for us, and so do not give it us at all, or when we would have it,
or in that manner that we would: yet we must desire this, that he would some
way show that he has heard our prayers: by giving us minds ready to submit
our wills unto his, and patience to bear things; and that he would give us
some thing else for recompense or supply of it, and that he would turn all to
our good, and that we might also see it to be so; and this must be sufficient
for all. Romans 8.26.
For we many times know not what to pray, as we ought, but the spirit of God
in us makes request then for us unto God with sighs and groans, which cannot
be expressed: and the Lord who is the searcher of the hearts, For God will give
not according to that that we name, but that his spirit in us means.
knows what is the meaning of the Spirit, for it makes request for the
Saints, according to that that they asked or named, which in temptation
themselves knew not well, but according to the meaning of the spirit in them.
For even as those that are sick of some hot pestilent burning fever, or some
other disease that distempereth their brain; when they ask any thing, those
that attend upon them will not give them that which they have named, but some
other thing in steed of it, which is better for them in that case; and in so
doing they give them according to their meaning, for they did mean that that
was best for them, though they erred then through distemperature or ignorance
in the particular; and so when they are well, and can judge of things,
themselves will confess: So does the Lord deal with his servants, and so must
we be contented to be ordered by the Lord, that whatsoever we ask he would give
us that which he knows to be best for us, and so give us according to the
meaning of his spirit in us, that so we may see that he has heard our
prayers.

2. Cor. 12.8.
Saint Paul prayed three times that the messenger of Satan which buffeted him,
might depart away from him; and the Lord heard his prayers: but how? he gave
him this answer; My grace is sufficient for thee, Verse. 9.
for my power is made perfect through weakness. So that when in all temptations
of the devil he held out in a good course, and God did uphold him in his
weakness, As he did to the Apostle Paul.
that he was not overthrown; though the messenger of Satan did not depart from
him, according to that which he had named in his prayers; yet he saw well
enough, that God had heard his prayers, by giving him strength against him.
This is worthy to be diligently observed, because we are given wholly to tie the
hearing of our prayers unto the receiving of that particular we ask, and
cannot for the most part otherwise discern of it: as for example, if we ask
health and wealth, and God give them, then will we believe that he has heard
our prayers, and otherwise not: whereas the Lord may no less show that he has
heard our prayers, and deny us both of them; when he shall give us minds
contented with our estate, and to wait upon his blessed will in all our wants.
We have now a long time prayed unto God for this sickness and mortality, and
we desire to see that God has heard our prayers: and so we may also, though
it be not lessened, but increased; yea, though it should come among us, and be
upon our own bodies. So will he do in this visitation of the Plague.
For in that he has not begun with us at the first, according to our deserts,
nor is come unto us with this visitation as yet, but shows himself slow to
anger, and uses great patience toward us; yea, that he daily warns us by
the harms of others, and not makes us a spectacle unto others, therein he
has sufficiently showed that he has heard our prayers. And now further if he
should come and deal with us in our own bodies, and then with all should give
us grace to profit by it, to amendment of life, if he should also give us
patience; yea, if he should take us away in this plague, and should assure us
in the midst of all pains and fears of death, of the forgiveness of all our
sins, and give us good hope of everlasting life, and of the resurrection of
our bodies, that when we give up the Ghost, we might boldly say, Father into
thy hands I commend my spirit: might we not be well assured by these, that
God had heard our prayers? Therefore if affliction and trouble do come, let us
see how we profit by it, and what patience God gives, and so accordingly be
assured that God has heard our prayers. And that the Lord in mercy will thus
deal with us, we may be assured of it, so many as pray to him aright: and
this must be sufficient for us, and a sure token that God has heard our
prayers, that we might be thankful to him for it. Therefore let us not cease
praying unto him night and day, not doubting but that God in his good time will
turn our burnt offerings into ashes, that is, some way or other show, that he
has heard our prayers to his glory, and the comfort of our selves and of our
brethren.

Selah. The use of it for music.
Selah. The Hebrew word retained in the Latin and English translations (for
the Greek has it not) used for the most part only in the Psalms, which were
made to be sung in the temple, notes a vehement lifting up of the voice, and
especially thereby also a contention and affection of the mind; so that the
Musitions when they came to this word, (which was unto them as a direction in
Music) did not so much sing it or say it, as we do now: but letting it pass
thereby did know that they should lift up their voices on high, to that end,
that thereby their minds, and the minds of others might be moved with that that
was then sung, according to the matter thereof. And so it was a note of some
change in the music, and thereby also in the minds: even as we when we
speak of any weighty matter we put in some note of exclamation, or word to
stir them up to attention, and to mark it diligently; as our Savior Christ in
the Gospel often in such cases, and to this end uses this word. Behold. So
was this word used to stir up their voices, and thereby to stir up their
minds. That kind of music that was then used in the temple (for which this
was written) is now ceased with the rest of that Leuiticall kind of service,
And for the affections of the mind.
and so there is no more use of it that way: yet still it is carefully retained
in the text, and there is good use of it in the Church: for it serves to the
stirring up of the mind with some special affection unto that whereunto it is
affixed: which affection must always be according to the matter contained in
those words, whereunto this is adjoined. And therefore it notes out not any
one special affection of the mind, as some interiections do, but diverse, and
generally all kind whatsoever, which must be in us diversely according to the
matter. As in the third Psalm it is used three times, for three several
affections, according to that that is said there: Psalm. 3.2.
as Many say to my soul, there is no help for him in his God. Selah. As if he
should say, O what a great calamity or cross is that? I am greatly affected
with that, and would have others to be so too, and pity me thereafter. Verse
4.
And, I did call unto the Lord with my voice, and he did hear me out of his
holy mountain. Selah. They said God had forsaken him, but he prayed unto God,
and God heard him, and then he adds Selah, as if he had said, Oh what a
good God is that? and how is that to be marked? And lastly, in the same Psalm,
Salvation belongs unto the Lord, Verse 8.
and thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah. As if he had said, God only can
save, and he saves his people: and then affixeth, Selah. As if he had said, Oh
what a blessed thing is that? and how should we therefore put our trust in him?

So here, when David had willed them to pray, that God would remember his
prayers, and show that he had heard them; he adds, Selah, to stir up their
minds and his own: Theirs, that they might pray this earnestly for him, and
know that he had great need of it, for he commended it unto them with some
feeling: and he knew that it was a great thing to offer up any thing to God,
that should be acceptable unto him, if we consider his excellency, and our own
unworthiness: And for himself, that he would esteem this as a great benefit,
if the Lord would show that he had heard his prayers; even as he confesses in
the next Psalm. Psalm. 21.2.
Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the request of
his lips: where he does also add this note, Selah: to show, that as before
they did earnestly pray for it, so now they should be greatly affected in
thanksgiving with it: and as they had a feeling of their want in praying for
it, so they should have of the goodness of God, in giving thanks for the same:
and so both in the one, and in the other to have their minds specially moved
with that they said. Generally wheresoever this is used, The general use of
this word.
we must carefully mark it, and make some good use of it, according to the
matter where it is used: For though the whole Scripture be excellent in it
self, and in every part of it, as being given by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, 2. Tim. 3.16.
and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness; that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works: yet some parts have more special use to us in some cases than
other; and therefore some are commended unto us with the title of excellency;
as all the Psalms commonly called of degrees: Psalm. 120.1.
or as others read it, of excellencies, because in that shortness they contain
some excellent matter. So also in the same Psalm some part may be of greater
use, and of more note and observation for some causes, than some other part of
the same: as here in this Psalm, though he commended the whole Psalm unto
them, and whole matter of the same, as appears by the title and inscription
of the same, and the whole discourse of it: yet in it, the matter of this verse
he does specially commend unto them for some causes, with this mark or note
(then well known because it was in great use) when he adds, Selah. So also
in another Psalm, David commends one thing unto them with a double note:
Psalm. 9 16. Higgaion. Selah.
as when he says. The Lord is known by executing judgment, the wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah. This Psalm was made as
a solemn thanksgiving for the conquest he had over the proud Philistim
Goliath, as appears in the title: therefore when he comes to this, to show
how the Lord was known by executing judgment upon him, and even this
judgment, that he was snared in the work of his own hands (as many other
wicked men are) for he was slain in that combat by little David, and that
without armor, even with a stone and a sling, as it were with the hand of God
miraculously; in that combat I say, whereunto he had proudly challenged all the
host of the Israelites, with blasphemous words, tending to the dishonor of
God: he adds these two notes, Higgaion: that is, This is worthy to be
meditated upon, and thought seriously on of all men, that the wicked are snared
in the works of their own hands. Selah: As if he had said; yea in deed, this
is worthy most seriously and with great affection to be thought upon. But we
shall make further use of this doctrine hereafter.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON upon the third verse. Selah.
WE heard the last day, the meaning of this word, By Selah, here they were
stirred up to the affections of Prayer.
namely that it served to note out some special affection, according to the
matter where it was used. We are then now to consider what special affections
were in him, and should be in the people here: and so what is and was the use
of it in this place. Generally it being joined unto a prayer, they were to have
the affections meet for prayer, and for this thing that here they prayed for.
Therefore the special affections that ought to be in the people, when they
prayed thus, were these, or such like. First, when he wills them to pray,
that God would hear his prayers, and show that he did so, and then adds,
Selah, a note of affection, or stirring up of the mind; it was to teach them,
As namely to pray earnestly.
that he would have them affected with it, to pray for it earnestly. And in
requiring this earnestnes here, his meaning was not, that they should be cold
in the former, and negligent: but here he required a special feruency of the
spirit; that after a special manner they would pray that God would hear his
prayers, and declare it. By which example we learn, that though we ought
always to pray from our hearts, and never with the tongue only, as many do,
and have done: not only in Popery, when if they had said a certain number of
prayers, it was thought sufficient, though they knew not what they said, it
being in an unknown tongue, and so could not possibly have any desire at all
unto that which they prayed for; and so that was verified of them that Christ
speaks of in the Gospel; Matthew. 15.8.
This people draws near unto me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me: but also in these days, when many though they say, Amen, at the end
of prayers, yet have had their mind occupied about other matters, and so though
their tongue has spoken, yet their minds have desired nothing: John 4.24.
whereas God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in our spirits: and he is the
searcher of the hearts, which when it is prepared, then he hears, as it is
said, thou preparest the heart, Psalm. 10.17. Psalm. 57.7.
and bendest thine ear thereto. So that whenever we pray, we must say as the
Prophet does, My heart is prepared, my heart is prepared O God, I will sing and
give thanks. Therefore we must not come rashly to prayer and unadvisedly on
the sudden, but prepare our hearts beforehand; as Christ teaches us in that
form of his, O our Father, which art in Heaven, etc: willing us to consider of
Gods fatherly love, and of his almighty power, and so pray to him, as to one
whom we are persuaded is most willing and able to hear and help us.

Greater earnestnes is requisite in some part of the prayer, then of other.
Ephesians. 6.18.
And though we must always thus pray, if we will be heard; yet we are to
strive with our affections in prayer: and as something shall be more material
for us, and we stand in more need of it; so there, and for that, to pray more
earnestly: and as we must continually strive with our own dullness in prayer,
and as the Apostle says, watch thereunto; so we must offer violence as it
were to our selves in such things as do most concern us. So that our prayers
must not flow from us like a still stream, which is always like it self,
and never stands still like a poole: so we must not have always the like
desires in prayer; yea, though they be desires of the heart in deed, and the
heart be truly moved with it, and not stand still senseless and dead in the
affections of it, like a lake which is without motion: (which yet it were well,
if all men could come unto: and it is a great work of the spirit, if we can
do so) but our hearts in prayer must be working, like the great Ocean Sea,
that sometimes comes with great billows, so that it brings up things that
are at the bottom of it. So we according to our special need, and the
necessity of others, that we pray for, must stir up the least desire that we
have, even from the bottom of our hearts: and though our hearts were moved
before, yet when we come to such a thing, they must be moved a great deal
more; that God may see how earnestly we desire them, that so he may fulfill
them.

And this we must do, not only in our private prayers, And that is true, not
only of private prayer, but of public.
according to that that we stand in need of (as we all find, that we need
something more then other) for that we must be most importunate, though we
must always pray earnestly. But also in the public prayers of the Church (as
these of the people were) as we must always during the time of prayer, mark
diligently what is said, and have not only our mind occupied about it, but
our desires going with his words, that prays, as it were, step by step: that
thus they may all wait upon him, and as it were hang upon his mouth (as it is
said the people did upon our Savior Christ) but when there is any special
thing prayed for, which concerns us nearly, Luke 19.48.
or any of ours, or the glory of God, and Church of Christ; there to stir up
our minds with some more earnest desire to call upon God for it: and as it were
to say, Selah: that is, Oh that God would grant that: so would it come to
pass, that God would give us our desire, Luke 1.53.
as he has promised to fill the hungry soul with good things. But for want of
this, because by the coldness of our desires, it appears that we do not
esteem of them, or but smally regard them, therefore we have them not. And
this is that that the Apostle speaks of to the Romans; I beseech you, Romans
15.30.
that you would strive with me by prayer to God for me; and to the Corinthians
also, saying, So that ye labor together in prayer for us: 2. Cor. 1.11.
where he compares prayer unto laboring and striving: Therefore as when we
strive for any matter of moment, we will always put to our strength, that we
may do our best that we can; but yet sometimes we will put to all our strength,
As our Savior Christ did before he came to the cross.
and strain our selves to the uttermost, that we might prevail: so we in our
prayers, though we must always be earnest, yet in somethings we must
stretch out our affections unto the full. And so it is said of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, both before, and when he was upon the cross, as it is
set down in the Gospel; He prayed, Father if thou will, take away this cup
from me. Luke 22.42.
Nevertheless, not my will but thine be done: and being in an agony, he
prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down
to the ground. Where it is said, that he was in an agony, that is, in a great
conflict of the mind with the wrath of God, as appeared by the bloody sweat
that came from his precious b die, when he kneeled upon the cold ground, and so
he prayed the more earnestly. He prayed always in the spirit, but in this
distress of body and mind he enlarged his affections: as appears also by
his words, when three times he prayed, that if it were possible, that cup
might pass away from him.

Chap. 23.46. And after that manner he prayed upon the cross.
So afterward when he was upon the cross, he cried with a loud voice, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit: and when he had thus said, he gave up the
ghost. Thus being at the last gasp, as we say, he strained himself to the
uttermost not only in body but in mind, and so earnestly prayed, and
declared his earnestnes with the loud cry that he made, that with it he
spent all his strength in soul and body, so that at the end of his prayer he
gave up the ghost, and died praying. So must we always watch in prayer, as
Paul speaks, that is, watch over our affections, Ephesians. 6.18.
that as any thing seems more needful, so we more earnestly desire that. As
if we had many suites to a Nobleman, and something did specially concern us,
and wherein consisted (as we say) our making or marring, we would move him most
earnestly in that: and as we would desire him to remember us in all things, so
most of all, and especially in such a thing. So does David here, he wills the
people to pray for him, that God would send him help, and strengthen him
against his enemies; yea and that God would hear his prayers, and declare by
the event, that he had done so indeed: and then he adds, Selah: as if he had
said, Oh, I pray you remember that especially, and do not forget above all
other to pray, that God would some ways declare, that he has heard our
prayers. So must we do in all things when we pray to God. Thus must we pray
for this Plague.
As now we have many things to pray for, but among them this is the chiefest,
that we thus weekly twice in one day meet for, even to pray to God that he
would forgive us our sins, and be reconciled unto us through the blood of his
son, and so stay in his blessed time this heavy hand, that so long, and in
so many places, to the loss and destruction of so many thousands has lien
grievously and uncomfortably upon us: Unto these prayers of ours, and when we
come to this one thing, must be added Selah, that is, every one must pray for
this most earnestly. For our Savior Christ has taught us by the parable of
the wicked Judge, what importunity of earnest prayer can do; Luke 18.7.
even that God will hear them that thus cry unto him day and night, though
he defer for a time. Therefore let us stir up our affections, and by how
much the benefit of health is the longer a coming, and we most unworthy of
it; by so much let us pray most earnestly: and let us do as Christ Jesus did;
that is, seeing we are in distress, let us pray more earnestly: as David
says also of himself, when he was in great troubles, and could not tell how
to get out of them; Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deep places have I cried unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice. So
that as a man if he were fallen into a great pit or well, and could not tell
how to get out, he would not only call and cry for help, but he would
strain his voice, as much as he could: So let us in this forlorn hope, and
desperate estate of ours, not only pray to God, but strain all our desires to
the uttermost. Those that use to sleep at prayers, or talk, or have their
minds otherwise occupied; this doctrine and the practice of it cannot concern
them one whit, but those that are devout in prayer, and the most devout of all,
that they would learn this, as occasion shall serve, to show their devotion in
prayer to the uttermost, and not think that always one kind of devotion is
sufficient.

Secondarily, when he teaches them thus to pray, that God would show that he
had favorably accepted his prayers, We must think it a very hard thing to
do any service, so as God may accept of it.
offerings, and all services that he had done to him, and then adds, Selah.
This note of stirring up the affection, it was to show how he thought of this
thing, even that it was a great thing to do any service, or to offer up any
prayers, that might be acceptable unto God: therefore that it might be so, that
is, well pleasing in his eyes, it was to be commended unto him again and
again. And truly thus must we think of the service of God, and we shall
find, that if we consider rightly the high majesty of God, and what is meet
for him on the one side, and then our own unworthiness and insufficiency to
bring any thing at all unto him on the other side; we must needs confess,
that it is a very hard thing to do any thing after that manner, that he may
vouchsafe once to regard it. Every thing is not meet for him, it must be
agreeable unto his word, otherwise he refuses our will worship, and says, Who
has required these things at your hands? Isai. 1.12.
So then we must not obtrude unto him our own blind devotions as they did in
the time of Popery. Besides, we must do all things after that manner that
he has prescribed in his word, with pure consciences, 1. Tim. 2.8. 2. Tim.
2.19.
and lift pure hands in all places, as the Apostle says, and he that calls
upon the name of the Lord, let him depart from iniquity; for God hears not
sinners, as the blind man in the Gospel said, John 9 31.
but if any be a worshipper of him, and does his will, him he hears. And for
want of this he refused the very sacrifices and oblations of the Jews, yea
their solemn fastings, as we may see in the Prophet: and namely in the
Prophet Esaias. Jsa. 1.11.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices (says the Lord) I am
full of the burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts; and I
desire not the blood of bullocks; bring no more oblations in vain: Incense is
an abomination unto me, I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabbaths, nor
solemn days; they are a burden unto me, and I am weary to bear them: and
so forth as follows in that place, and after he shows the cause of it,
that their lives were ungodly, and so they offered them with an il conscience:
and therefore he adds: Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your
works, cease to do evil, and so forth. So then we must be of this mind,
Therefore therein we must use all diligence and preparation.
that it is a very hard thing to serve God, as we should, and therefore in all
parts of his worship we must use great diligence, that they may be done in
that manner, that he may favorably accept them. As now thus to come to the
Church weekly (as we do) to serve him in hearing of his word, in prayer and
fasting, are things commanded of God: but to do them so, as God may receive
them favorably, and bless us for them, and to be assured of it, this is a
great thing; and every one must strive to do them so, as God may graciously
receive them at their hands. We must be far then from that Prophets mind,
which is in some, to think so basely of God, and of his service, that every
thing should be good enough for him, and that he must needs accept all things
at our hands, and so care not how we do them: as how we pray, how we hear
his word, how we receive his Sacraments, etc. Does not our Savior Christ say,
Take heed how you hear? Luke 8.18.
to show that all kind of hearing is not sufficient, unless we hear his
word as we should: and, He that has ears to hear, let him hear, that is,
as he should; namely, diligently and carefully: and as the Apostle says, Let
him be swift to hear. Jam. 1.19.
So that in nothing we are to use so much diligence and preparation, as in the
service of God, that it may be accepted.

This lesson does Solomon teach us very well in the book of the Preacher, in
these words: Take heed to thy foot, Eccles. 4.17.
when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more near to hear, than to
give the sacrifice of fools; for they know not that they do evil. Where by
the feet he means the affections of the mind, for as the one carry the
body, so do the other the mind and body. Therefore says he, It is not
sufficient to come to the church, but we must come prepared, as we ought. 1.
Sam. 15.22.
think not enough to come to the Temple, but consider with what minds you
come, that is, come religiously, soberly, devoutly, and as you should come: and
be ready to hear what God requires of you, and do that; and do not rest in
the outward sacrifices, as though they were sufficient, as many foolish men
do. For obedience is better than all outward service of God, and all
sacrifices, as was said to Saul. That so we may offer up our selves unto God,
that is, our souls and bodies to be ready to serve him with both, as living
sacrifices, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable unto God, as the Apostle says, which is our reasonable
serving of God. For without this all is evil, even our coming to Church and
prayer to God, though foolish men do not consider of it, as Solomon says,
They know not that they do evil. Prou. 15.8.
For the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer
of the righteous is acceptable unto him. So then it is not enough to come
hither, but every man must consider with what mind he comes, that so God may
accept of him, of his coming, and of his service. And this we had need to
be put in mind of, because men for the most part are more careful about
their own business, Men use greater diligence about their own business, than
about Gods service.
yea about other men's business that all may be well done, than about Gods. In
the six days of the week how busy are men at home? but upon the seventh
day, which is the Lords, and so called in the Scripture, how slowly do they
come, and how sleepely do they behave themselves here? as though it made no
matter at all how they served God. Yea servants are commonly more diligent
about their masters business at home, more careful to please, and more loath to
offend, than they are in the Church about the Lords business: and so they show
by their deeds, that though it be an hard thing to please their masters, yet
(as they think) it is an easy thing to please God. Why does David then desire
them so earnestly to pray, that God would favorably accept his services, and
to enforce them unto it does add this word, Selah, if it were so easy a
matter to serve God, as they imagine, and that he were bound to take any thing
at our hands?

We see then by this that few men in deed know rightly, what it is to serve
God, when they come to it so hypocritically and so coldly. But every one as
they are desirous to serve God in truth (as David was here) so they find it to
be more hard to do any thing in such manner, But the best servants of God have
thought so highly of his service, that when they have done the best, they have
found fault with themselves, that they have done no better. Act. 2.37.
as may be acceptable unto him. And this is that that the best servants of
God, that have been tender hearted have found fault with themselves for, and
have been greatly troubled in their minds about; not so much for any great
sins that they have committed, which by the grace of God they have been free
from; as that their prayers that they have made, have not been in that faith,
and feeling, in that power of the spirit and assurance of being heard, that
they should, and so God might reject them: and that in other part of his
service they have failed, or that they have not trembled at his word, nor been
pricked at the heart, when they heard their sins laid open, as those did that
are spoken of in the Acts of the Apostles: but that they have been hard
hearted rather, and not so moved as they should. So that they have had a godly
fear, that their best services might have been refused. And David this holy
man of God it seems, being privy to the corruption of his own heart, was
somewhat afraid, that all that service which he had done, was not as it should
be, when he so earnestly desired the people, and by this note, Selah, did
prick them forward thereunto, that God would accept with favor his services,
and show by the event that he had done so. And this is that godly jealousy that
Job had of his children in the days of their feasting together, which caused
him to do as it is written of him. Job. 1.5.
And when the days of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent, and
sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings
according to the number of them all. For Job thought, it may be that my sons
have sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts: thus did Job every day. When
they had done feasting, the next day he called them to the sacrifice and
service of God; but that they might do it, as they should, he bad them
sanctify themselves, that so they might come holily to it, as they ought: so
that he would not have them come suddenly from feasting to the sacrifices, as
though it made no matter how they served God, but bad them prepare themselves:
and besides he says, it may be they have not blessed God in their hearts, that
is, they have not so served God, and given thanks to him from their hearts, as
they should have done. So that the best servants of God knowing what an hard
thing it is to serve God, have been desirous to do all things so, that they
might be approved unto him: and when they have done best, they have somewhat
feared that they have not done so: and so have earnestly desired to see some
way, that God had accepted of their services and prayers.

Contrary to this, the hypocrites and all formal men, The hypocrites think
that any kind of service is good enough for God.
who know not what Gods service does mean, they think, that if they do any
outward service to him here in the Church, or elsewhere, he is bound to take
it, let it be done after what manner it will be; and they think that they
have great wrong offered, if it be not. And this is that which the Prophet
Malachi speaks of: Ye offer unclean bread upon mine altar, Malach. 1.7.
and you say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the
Lord is not to be regarded: and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not
evil: and if ye offer the lame and sick, it is not evil: offer it now unto
thy prince, will he be content with thee? or accept thy person, says the Lord
of hosts? Where he complains that for the service of God they brought the
worst things, and they said it made no matter if they brought not of the best;
where all things in and for the service of God should be of the best. Where
besides that he says, that this way they brought the service of God into
contempt; he bids them go and carry it to their governor, or any mean man
of authority, and see if he will take such gifts: if they will refuse such
presents, and think themselves abused with such gifts as are not meet for
them; then the high majesty of God much more, does not only not receive such
service of men, as is done carelessly, but he is displeased with it. Therefore
if it be an hard thing to present the King with any thing that he may like of,
and they that undertake such a matter, will use all diligence to that end: then
we much more must be persuaded, that it is a very hard thing to do any service
of prayer or otherwise unto God, so as may be acceptable unto him: and so
prepare our selves for it, and be careful to do all things in that manner. Yea
and when we have done all, let us pray unto God to forgive the weakness and
imperfection of our services, and to accept them in the righteousness and
perfect obedience of Christ. Which also that they might be, they must be
according to his word, with all our heart being sorry that we can do no better
than we do. For herein consists the perfection of our obedience, that we
acknowledging with sorrow the imperfection of it, and laboring daily after a
greater measure of perfection, do present it unto God in the perfection of
Christ's sacrifice, wherein not only all our sins, but our imperfections much
more, are pardoned* and not imputed unto us.

He did esteem the hearing of his prayers, as a great favor of God.
Thirdly and last of al, when to this prayer that they make, that God would
hear the prayer of the King, and some ways show it, he adds this note of
affection, Selah; it was to show how he did esteem of this, and how all they
should also esteem of it, as of a special benefit and great favor of God, if
he would so do: and so for it they should be thankful unto him. As if they
had said, Let God hear his prayers, etc. Oh what a great blessing of God were
that? how should we be bound to him for it? what great cause should we have to
be thankful? So then when they prayed for it, he would have them esteem it
as no common benefit, and have that affection to it. Therefore when God had
thus done, he does not only make another Psalm for the Church to be
thankful to God for it: but when in the same he comes to make mention of
this very thing, that they pray for here, namely, that God had showed, that he
had heard his prayer, he adds this Selah again. As, Psalm. 21.2.
Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the requests of
his lips; Selah. As if they had said, Oh how much are we bound to him for this?
what great cause have we to be thankful? what a singular benefit is this,
worthy always to be remembered, that God has heard our prayers? Here then
we are taught to make great account of this, that God at any time does hear
our prayers, whatsoever we pray for. And as we must make this account before
hand, when we do pray; so afterward also. If we pray for any thing for soul
or body; for our selves or any of ours: for the Church or Commonwealth, we
must thus think: Oh if God will hear my prayers and give me this thing, how
shall I be beholding to him for it all the days of my life? So did Jacob also.
Genesis 28.20.
So does Jacob in that prayer that he made when he went toward Laban, as may
appear by his words: If God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey
which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on; so that I
come again unto my fathers house in safety, and if thou will be my God: then
this stone, which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house; and of all
that thou shall give me, I will give the tenth unto thee. And truly it must
needs be so, So must we do, if we consider our great wants.
if we do but consider our great need of every thing, and what we are if God
do not supply them. As if a poor creature, that has neither bread nor
meat, nor cloth, nor money to help himself, should come and ask alms, and
receive; must not he needs think, how am I beholding to him that has thus
refreshed me? and what should have become of me, poor soul, if he had not
had compassion on me? As Job says of himself, that he did feed the hungry,
and clothe the naked, so that the very bellies of them that were fed with his
meat, Job. 31.20.
and the loins of them that were clothed with the fleece of his sheep did
bless him. So then when we see, that if God do not thus and thus for us, we
are ready to perish, must we not think, that if he do, and when he does
bestow it, we shall have great cause to praise him for it? We must not then
pray, as though we cared not for it, but in the great feeling of our need; so
shall we esteem of all things, when God shall hear our prayers, as we ought.

Especially if we well way our great unworthiness.
Moreover, concerning this one point, if we consider our own unworthiness even
of the least benefit and favor: nay, how we have deserved the clean contrary;
then much more must we think, when we pray for any thing, that we shall be
greatly beholding to God for it. And for our unworthiness, remember, that we
not only have no goodness, that can commend us unto God, for we have not in
all things done our duty as we should; but because we have been unthankful
for that that we have, and have abused many things, we are worthy to have all
taken from us: yea when we remember other of our sins, we must think that
we have deserved his punishments in steed of his blessings. When then we ask
any thing, and shall see so many things to hinder us from receiving; if it
shall please God in the multitude of his mercy to pass by them all, and to
give us our desires, must we not needs think our selves greatly beholding to
him for it? And though it may be we have in some sort repented us of our
sins, yet when we are privy to our own hearts, that our repentance is so
small, and when we find our faith so weak, and that we ask that that we
do with so much doubting; if God give us any thing when we come to him after
such a manner, must not we needs confess that we shall be wholly beholding
to his Majesty for the same? So that every way we see, that when we pray, we
must do it with this affection, that we think it a great mercy of God, and
for which we shall be greatly bound unto him all the days of our life, if he
give us any thing.

And truly if we could come to pray thus, If we did thus pray, we should see how
God would hear us.
not only in the feeling of our great wants, but also in the conscience of our
great unworthiness, and so acknowledge in respect of both, how much we should
be beholding to God for any thing: then we should see a great deal more than
we do, how he would hear our prayers. For as a man when he is sued unto, if
he hears us confess, that if he will grant us our request, we and all ours
shall be beholding to him as long as we live; this is a thing that will greatly
move him. So the Lord, when he sees that we esteem the hearing of our
prayers, to be so great a benefit, as it is; then is he ready to hear us: for
he will have us see how much we are beholding to him for that that we
receive. We pray now that God would stay this heavy hand of the pestilence,
and that he would proceed no further in judgment against us: but to our
prayers we must add, Selah, that is, we must stir up our affections so to
desire it, as that we profess it to be an inestimable benefit, And namely
for the removing of this mortal plague.
if this way he shall show that he has heard our prayers. And indeed this we
must needs do, if we consider how unable we are to help our selves in it,
unless God help: and how unworthy we be of his help: and so let us
determine when we pray, to be thankful unto him for it. Thus must we do also
for all other things that we pray for, if we will be heard. So that if we ask
the forgiveness of our sins, the increase of faith, the assurance of Gods
favor, and the feeling of his love, we must do it as David did, Psalm. 4.6.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us: thou have given me more joy
of heart, than they have had, when their wheat and their wine did abound: as
if he had said, If the Lord shall give me this thing, I shall be more beholding
to him for it, than if I had had all the wealth in the world given me. When
that godly woman Hannah prayed for a man-child, she does it so earnestly, as
may appear by her words, and with such protestation, that she did clearly
show how she did esteem this, that God would hear her in this thing. For she
says, O Lord of hosts, if thou will look on the troubles of thine handmaide,
1. Sam. 1.11.
and remember me, and not forget thine handmaide, but give unto thine handmaide
a man child, then will I give him unto the Lord, all the days of his life.
Where we see out of the abundance of her feeling, how many words she uses, as,
if thou will look upon me, and remember, and not forget me, etc, and what she
promises for it: and God heard her prayers, and she did according to her vow,
and made a song of thanksgiving for it.

Few me^ have these affections in prayer: or in desiring others to pray for
them. Romans 9.1.
We have prayed unto God for many things, but have we done it with that
acknowledging, that we should be so greatly beholding to God, if he hear us?
Have we added Selah? that is, have we thus stirred up our affections? and did
we then determine to be thankful to God for such a mercy? and since have we
remembered to be thankful? I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not (that I might
use the words of the Apostle) that I have been desired of many often to pray
for them in their several troubles; but of very few desired again to be
thankful for the same: which shows that though at the first it may be they
desired the prayers of others with Selah, that is, with great earnestnes in the
feeling of their own estate: yet afterward they were not so much moved with
it, as David was here, and so forgot to be thankful themselves, at leastwise
did not desire others to be thankful for them; or not with that feeling that
they desired them to pray for them before. Let us then I pray you consider how
we esteem of this, that God hears our prayers at any time. We esteem it
may be of the things themselves, that God bestows upon us at our prayers,
whether it be health, or wealth, or any thing else; our own need drives us
unto it: but do we account it to be so great a favor of God, and confess
our selves to be so unworthy of it, that we shall be bound to serve him, and
praise him for it? When we have it, I beseech you, do we enter seriously into
the consideration of the mercy of God, and of our own unworthiness, to say,
What a good God is this, that has dealt so graciously with me? Surely,
surely, we shall find that few do it, either before they pray, or when they
have done; to say, What a thing is this? I that am so vilde a wretch, that have
no goodness in me at all, that have so many ways offended God, that he should
notwithstanding hear my prayers; whereas he might justly have brought upon
me that curse, that is spoken off in the Prophet, That as the Lord cried unto
me often in his word, Zach. 7.13.
and I would not hear him: so I should cry to him in my prayers, and he not
hear me. Therefore it was needful for them by this word Selah, to be stirred
up; and we must learn thereby to make more account of the hearing of our
prayers, than we do. For though God has made a promise unto us in Christ,
that if we ask, we shall receive; Let us stir up our selves to make more
account of the hearing of our prayers.
yet when we consider how many ways for our part we have broken the
covenant, and how weak our faith is, whereby we receive all; we may justly
think, that God may deny us all things, and that it is his great mercy, if
he hear us in any thing. And namely so must we do at this present for this
sickness; acknowledge our selves unworthy of all his former mercies, much more
that we are unworthy of any new: as Jacob did, when he said; O God of my
father Abraham, Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and truth, which thou have
showed unto thy servant. Therefore if it please God to show us any mer^^ ^is
way, we must so esteem it, that we bind our selves remember it, and to be
thankful to him for it all the days of our life: and then let us remember
what we have promised, and labor to perform it: which grace God grant us for
Christ Jesus his sake. Amen.

THE TWELFTH SERMON upon the fourth verse.
And grant thee according to thine heart, and fulfill all thy purpose.
The meaning of the fourth verse.
THese are the words of ye people unto God for their King: and part of the
prayer which they made for him; namely, that God would grant him according to
his hearts desire, and fulfill all his purposes: that is, whatsoever his heart
did wish and desire, that God would give, and whatsoever he purposed, God
would bring to pass. As if they had said, O Lord, whatsoever he desires in
his heart, that grant thou: and whatsoever he purposes in his mind, that
bring thou to pass. Now, David teaching them thus to pray, we may presume that
he did determine to have nothing, but good desires in his heart, and good
purposes: and the people by the great experience that they had had a long time
of his goodness, did thus judge of him: else neither could he have desired them
so to pray for him, neither they have done it in faith. First then as in all
other things we must approve our selves unto God, from our very heart, which is
the chiefest thing that he looks unto, and that especially he requires of
all according as it is written, My son give me thy heart: Prou. 23.26.
so in our prayers most of all: that we desire in our heart nothing but that
that is just and lawful, and according to his will. All the desires of our
hearts in prayer, must be agreeable to the will of God.
And so again whatsoever we go about, the means that we use must be lawful,
and such as God may allow of, that so in our prayers we may commend them unto
God. Then may we boldly pray God to fulfill them, and desire others also to
do so: and they being so persuaded of us by good proof, may safely and with a
good conscience thus pray for us, though they know not all our hearts desires
and purposes. For God has promised, that whatsoever we ask according to his
will, he will grant it unto us. And all the promises that are made unto prayer,
are thus to be understood and no otherwise. As when Christ says: Ask and it
shall be given you, seek and you shall find; Matthew. 7.7.
knock and it shall be opened unto you: for whosoever asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. And again,
Whatsoever ye ask in my name, Joh. 14.13.
that will I do: that is, which is good, and according to Gods will. As it is
evident by that which the Apostle writes to the Romans: Likewise the Spirit
also helps our infirmities: Romans 8.26.
for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
request for us with sighs, which cannot be expressed: But he that searches
the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the Spirit, And such prayers God
will hear.
for he makes request for the Saints according to the will of God. So that
when a man prays by the instinct and motion of the Spirit of God, which
directs him to ask according to his will and word, then he hears: and such
we may boldly desire others to pray that God would grant.

So likewise it is said in the tenth Psalm; Psalm. 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their hearts:
thou bendest thine ear thereto. Where the Prophet confesses to the comfort of
the Church, that God is ready to hear the prayers of his poor Saints: but
how? when their hearts by Gods spirit be prepared to desire good things
according to Gods will, then he is ready to bend his ear: and the more that
our hearts be thus prepared, the more may we be assured of it. David here in
this Psalm being privy to the goodness of his own heart, that in sincerity
and truth he desired to please God, was bold to commend his desires unto the
people, that they might commend them to God, And such we may commend unto men.
that he would grant them. If then we would have our prayers heard, and also
have any comfort in the prayers of others for us; let us have no wicked or
ungodly desires, nothing contrary to the will of God. For such desires we can
neither our selves commend unto God, nor any other for us: neither will he
fulfill them, if we should. And here that we might not wander and go astray
in our desires to our own hearts, our Savior Christ has directed us in that
form of prayer, which he taught his Disciples. In which we are taught first
to pray for such things as concern the glory of God, To this end we must
follow that form that Christ has taught us.
the advancement of the kingdom of Christ here upon the earth: and then for
all outward things appertaining unto this life, and for life it self, so far
forth as they may stand with these: and afterward for the forgiveness of our
sins, and for power against our temptations, that we be not overcome. If then
we pray after this manner, God will hear us: as it is said in another place;
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.33. And seek for the direction of
his spirit to teach us to pray.
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.
Therefore it is agreeable unto Gods will to pray first for heavenly things, and
then for earthly; and such prayers God will hear. And yet though we have this
form as a direction to guide us in our prayers; many times we may be so
distracted, especially in some temptation, that we shall not know what to ask
aright, Romans 8.26.
as the Apostle says: then Gods spirit in those that be his, helps their
infirmity herein, and stirs up in them at the least sighs and groans,
that cannot be expressed: which being of the spirit of God, and so also
according to Gods will, he hears and grants the meaning of them. Therefore
for our further direction we must pray to God for the assistance of his holy
spirit in prayer, that it may moderate all our desires, and teach us thus to
pray according to the will of God, that so he may grant according to our
heart, and fulfill all our purposes, as it is said here.

Thus did our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself pray, who when he was in
such great agonies, that he said, Matthew. 26.38.
My soul is very heavy even unto the death, he prayed unto God, and said, O
father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; and this he did three
times: but in the end he said, Verse. 42.
O my father, if this cup cannot pass away from me, but that I mu t drink
it, thy will be done: and so God heard him, as the Apostle says; Heb. 5.7.
That in the days of his flesh he did offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared. Luke 22.43. Christ in prayer
submitting his will to Gods will, was heard.
For there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven, comforting him. Thus his
hearts desire (as at all other times, so in this distress of his) being
according to the will of God, he did grant it. So look to all the prayers of
Gods servants in the old and new Testament, and we shall see, that when they
have submitted their wills to Gods will, then he has granted their desires. Now
the will of God is, that we should absolutely and first of all desire those
things, that might make for his glory, and the salvation of our selves and of
our brethren: but al outward things so far forth, as they may stand with
these, and further them: and so far will God grant them. Jacob when he went
to Laban, makes his prayer in the way after this manner: Genesis 28.20. The will
of God is that we prefer heavenly things before earthly.
Desiring God that he would be with him, and keep him in that journey which he
went, and give him bread to eat, and clothes to put on; so that he might
come again to his fathers house in safety; and in a word, That he would be
his God; for so do the best interpreters read this text. So that this he
desired principally, though it be last named, That God would be his good God,
and continue his covenant of favor with him, to forgive him his sins, to
increase in him all graces needful for his salvation, etc: and to show his
favor this way in protecting him in his journey, though it were but in giving
him things necessary, as meat, and drink, and clothing. Now because his
prayer was thus agreeable to the will of God, that he first desired the
continuance of his favor, and then all things needful for this life, so far
as it might stand with that, God heard him; and he confesses it afterward in
his return, that the blessing of God had been greatly upon him, when he says,
Chap. 32.10. And he has heard his servants, that have thus prayed.
I am unworthy of the least of all the mercies and all the truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant: for with my staff came I over this Jordan, and
now have I gotten two bands. The like may be said of the prayer of King
Solomon; That when in Gibeon the Lord appeared unto him in a dream by night:
1. King. 3.5.
and said, Ask what I shall give thee: and he prayed thus Give unto thy
servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I may discern
between good and evil. So that he asked wisdom that he might be fit to
serve God in his calling. This did so please the Lord, that he gave him this
answer: Verse 11.
Because thou have asked this thnig* and have not asked for thy self long
life, nor riches, nor the life of thine enemies, but have asked for thy self
understanding to hear judgment: Behold, I have done according to thy words:
lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there has
been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall arise the like unto
thee. And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches
and honor, so that among the Kings there shall be none like unto thee all thy
days.

This must teach us all to know the will of God, that it might direct us in
all things, even in our prayers; that we do not rashly hand over head, ask
we cannot tell what. Let us ask that that may further us in our salvation, as
the forgiveness of our sins, Thus must we pray in this time of the plague,
that all men may profit by it.
repentance for them, strength against them, faith in Gods promises, the
feeling of his love, and all those things that appertain to the glory of God;
and those we are sure are according to his will; and if we did ask these
more, we should receive more. But all outward things, as long life, health and
wealth, let us desire in the second place, both with less desire, and with
minds contented to want them, if it be not Gods will to give them: and so
far we may be assured that he will hear us. And namely for this visitation
of the Plague let us thus pray; that all might profit by it to repentance and
amendment of life, for to that end we are assured that it is sent. For as the
Apostle says to the Corinthians when there was great sickness among them, so
that many also dyed; For this cause (meaning sin, 1. Cor. 11.30.
whereof he named one that was common among them) many are weak and sick
among you, and many sleep, that is dye: for if we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged, but when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
because we should not be condemned with the world. So that if either we had
not sinned before, or having sinned we had repented us in time, and judged our
selves, God would not thus grievously have entered into judgment with us. For
as David says, he is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, Psalm.
103.8.
and of great kindness: and will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever,
though we offend him continually. For if he should straightly mark our
iniquities, Psalm. 130.3.
and deal with us thereafter, who should stand? that is, no man should be able
to abide it. But he deferreth his punishments often, to see if men will repent
them in time; and in deed he gives all men sufficient time for that, and
calls them to it daily: as he did the old world before the flood, by the
preaching of Noah, Genesis 6.3.
giving them an hundred and twenty years to repent in: and so did he to the
wicked Sodomites by the Ministry of righteous Lot, before they were consumed
with fire and brimstone from heaven: and so did he to the Israelites, and to
the Jews by all his Prophets, before they were carried away into captivity:
and so has he this long time and often forewarned us of his judgments, and
called us earnestly unto repentance by the ministry of all his faithful
servants in our time, before this plague came upon us. So that we cannot say,
as the devil did falsely challenge Christ in the Gospel; Matthew. 8.29.
Why art thou come unto us before the time? But when for all this men go on in
their sin, and will not be reclaymed, nor judge themselves one whit, he is
constrained to judge us. Therefore let us pray that we may profit by it, and
all his people also every where: and whosoever have any such good desires in
them, we may help them with our prayers, and pray that God would give them
their desire (as the people do here for the King) for this is according to
Gods will.

And we may safely pray for those that are under this visitation, that God
would give them patience and strength to bear whatsoever it shall please God
to lay upon them: for this also is according to his will, as the Apostle says:
God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.13.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but will give
the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. And that they
may patiently bear it.
So that if any have this desire, that they are contented to be tried even
this way as well as any other, if it be Gods will, so that he would
strengthen them to bear it; we may all of us further them in their prayers,
and desire God to give them their hearts desire. And thus far also we our
selves may be assured, that we have our part in all the prayers of our
brethren this day, and at all times; as we do desire to profit by this hand
of God, and to have patience to do his will in this, and all other crosses of
his. But as for the removing of it, And how far for the remoouing of it.
we may and ought to pray, that it may be in his good time, when it is his
holy will, and as it shall please him, so it may be: and that we might be
willing to wait upon his leisure, and prescribe no time unto him, nor any
measure of his dealing, but that his will may be done, and not ours: as our
Savior Christ prayed in his greatest agony, Father, not my will, but thine be
done: then will he hear us as he did him. But if we shall be impatient and
murmur against God, and think that he deals hardly with us, in continuing
so great a plague so long; or have any such wicked desires in our minds, which
flesh and blood is ready to offer unto us: as we must not dare to offer them
up unto God, so if we do, none must further them, to desire God, that he
would give us according to our heart. If we submit our wills to Gods will, then
all the Church prays for us.
Therefore let every one examine his own heart, both for this, and for any
thing else, that he prays for; and see what it is that he desires, and
how: that if he finds it to be according to Gods will, he might have
comfort in the prayers of the Church; for in what case so ever he be, all the
Church prays with him and for him, Thy will be done. So that if his will be
agreeable to Gods will as it ought, then all good men and women pray for him
continually in all his troubles, both of body and mind. And truly this is and
may be a great comfort for us at all times, and in all distresses, that in
what estate so ever we be, night and day, if we pray unto God, if we can
bring our hearts to this, that the desire of them be according to his will:
and though we would feign have this and that, yet evermore with this condition
and no otherwise, if it be his blessed will; and we submit all our desires to
his holy will, and be contented, that not so much our wills, as his might take
place: then the whole Church every where prays for us, and will do: as they
did here for David: and so we need not doubt but God will hear us and them
in his good time, that so we might wait patiently upon him.

But many men have such wicked and ungodly desires, Many men's desires are so
wicked, that they are not to be commended to God or men.
and the purposes of their heart are so bad, as they dare not commend them unto
God, but hide them from him as much as they can. And though some do ignorantly
and presumptuously pray to God to fulfill their foolish and sinful desires;
yet none can pray for them, neither have they part in the prayers of the
Church, and so God hears them not. And this is that which the Apostle says
to the Jews, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, Iam. 4.3.
that ye might lay the same out on your pleasures. Where he says, that
because they did ask worldly things, first with an insatiable mind, and then
to a wrong end, even to consume them upon their own lusts, and not that they
might glorify God in doing good, and so it was not according to Gods will:
therefore they had them not; for such desires of the heart God will not grant.
They that are covetous, they have such desires in their hearts for the world,
that neither themselves, As the desires of covetous men. 1. Tim. 6.9.
nor any for them can pray, that God would grant them, and give them according
to their heart. For they that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares,
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction: for the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while
some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows. This is a wonderful, yet a true saying; For if every
covetous man might have according to his desire; what should become of all the
world? al should be little enough for themselves. Nay what should become of
themselves? they would ask that that should be hurtful for them. As it is
written of one, that he desired that all that he touched might be gold, and
it was granted unto him: and by this means he soon starued for want of meat
and drink: for not only his cups and dishes at his touching were turned
into gold, but even the meat and drink that was in them: and so could neither
eat nor drink any thing: and thus his desire through covetousness was not
only foolish, but also noisome and hurtful, as the Apostle said, whereby he
was drowned in perdition and destruction. Which though it be but a mere
fable, and poetical fiction, yet it does show the truth of this that we
speak of: namely, that covetous men's desires many of them are such, that they
are not to be desired of God. Other men their hearts are so full of hatred and
malice, And of the malicious.
that all their desires for the most part tend to the hurt of others, and to
the good of few, especially they desire the hurt of those whom they account
their enemies: if they might have their desire (I speak not of the Papists
only, for then none of us should be alive) but of some other that profess the
Gospel, many of their neighbors should be a great deal worse than they are.
I pray you what had become of all the nation of the Jews, and of the whole
Church of God, Hest. 3.13.
if malicious Haman had had his devilish desire; who sought in one day to kill
and to destroy all, both young and old, children and women? Against these and
such like, David teaches us to pray thus; Psalm. 104.6.
Bring not their desires to pass.

Other have their hearts full of the lusts of the flesh, and the saying of our
Savior Christ is verified in them: They look on a woman and lust after her,
Mat. 5.28. And of the voluptuous.
and so they commit adultery with her in their heart: and they have many
ungodly desires this way, which they cannot bring to pass: yet can they not
themselves, or any for them pray, that God would grant them their desire, and
give them according to their heart: and so they consume and pine away in their
wicked desire, as Amnon did; 2. Sam. 13.2.
of whom it is said, That he was so sore vexed, that he fell sick for his
sister Tamar, for she was a virgin, and it seemed hard to him to do any thing
to her: and that wicked desire continued upon him, that from day to day he
waxed lean, because he could not accomplish his filthy desire. Of these and
such like the Psalmist says, The desires of the wicked shall perish; that is,
Psalm. 112.10.
God will not fulfill, but disapoint them of their wicked desire: and so may we
pray, not for them, but against them; and so no doubt does the whole Church of
God pray against such continually. To be short, And of the proud and ambitious.
some are ambitious and proud, and seek the overthrow of others for the
raising up of themselves; as some traitors have done in our time, though they
have not prevailed: And so did Absalom conspire against his father, and
Achitophell did help him with counsel in that action: but David praeid against
the^, and said, O Lord, 2. Sam. 15.31.
I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophell into foolishness: and so God
did hear his prayer, and did overthrow his wicked counsel, and disappointed
Absalom of his ambitious desire. And not only by this example, but otherwise
he has taught us generally to pray against all such: Fulfill not o Lord their
desire, Psalm. 140.8. These men have no part in the prayer of others.
least they be too proud. Thus we see, that no wicked man that has his desires
disordered in any kind whatsoever, and will not submit them to the word of God,
can look to have any part in the prayers of the Church generally, or of any
godly man or woman particularly, be they never so near the^, or wish they
never so well unto them. And we our selves must look to our desires, least we
be deprived of the benefit of the prayer of others: For as if our hearts be
sound and upright with God, and we desire nothing but according to the will of
God, then all pray for us, and every where by virtue of the communion of Saints
we enjoy the fruit of the prayer of the Saints; so if our hearts be turned from
God by our crooked ways, Psalm. 125.5.
and we desire things that are unlawful, then all forsake us, even our dearest
friends, and none can pray for us in any faith. And we had need to be put in
mind of this doctrine, because for the most part our minds are more set upon
earthly things, than upon heavenly, and we are more ready to lay up our
treasures here on earth, than in heaven, where the true treasure is: and so
because where the treasure is, there will the heart be also, as our Savior
Christ says in the Gospel, Math. 6.20.21. Nor have any unlawful desires.
therefore we desire earthly things above heavenly; and so our hearts desire
being not according to Gods will, none can pray for us, that God would grant
them: and so through our own default, we loose the comfortable fruit of the
prayer of others: and whereas prayer is compared unto striving, when we strive
about things so unlawfully, none can strive with us. Therefore let us not have
such running lusts, and wandering desires as the men of this world have, who
desire earthly things, and say (as David describes them) Who will show us any
good? But let us pray, as he teaches us there, Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us: Psalm. 4.6.
and let us esteem of that, as he does there, above all worldy things, saying,
I shall have more joy of heart thereby, than they had, when their wheat and
their wine did abound. And then we are sure, that our desires be well ordered,
and so all good men will help us in their prayers, and say of us as the people
do here of their King, The Lord grant thee according to thine heart.

If then at any time we have asked any thing at the hand of God, and have not
received it, If we ask, and have not, let us examine, and correct our desires.
1. Pet. 3.9.
let us consider what it is, and how we have asked it: if it be any thing that
is evil, as the destruction of our enemies, the curse of God upon our
neighbors, whereas we should rather bless them, as the Apostle says, knowing
that we are called to be heirs of the blessing of God; then no marvel, if
God do not give us our desires. Or if it be a lawful thing, yet we desire it
not lawfully, that is, not according to Gods will; as for example, If we desire
earthly things above heavenly, as most do: or as concerning this visitation of
the plague, if we more desire that it might be taken away, than that we our
selves and others might profit by it: and generally, if we more desire health
and wealth, estimation and worldly prosperity, than faith and repentance and
the true fear of God, and such like; then these desires of our hearts no
marvel if God grant not. Or again, if we desire not these outward things,
so that we can be contented to want them, if it be not Gods will to give them;
and to say with the Apostle, I can be abased, and I can abound, Phil. 4.12.
every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, and to abound and to have want; and what state soever I am in,
therewith to be content. For otherwise neither can we pray our selves, How we
should pray concerning this plague, if we will be heard.
nor other for us, That God would give us according to our heart; because the
desires of the same are not fashioned according to his will. Therefore both for
the removing of this plague, and for all other things we must be of that mind
that David was, when by the conspiring of his son Absalom he was driven out
of Jerusalem: who said, 2. Sam. 15.25.
Carry the Arc again into the city; if I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and the tabernacle thereof:
But if he say thus, I have no delight in thee; behold here I am, let him do to
me as seems good in his eyes. Thus he resigned both his kingdom and life
into Gods hands, to have them or loose them according to his will; and then he
received again of God both the one and the other: for Absolon was destroyed,
and he safely returned into Jerusalem. So should we now much more receive life
and health in this great mortality, if we did pray for them with these minds,
Heb. 11.17, 19.
that as Abraham was willing to offer up his son Izaack unto God, and then he
restored him unto life as it were again, so we be willing to have all, if it
be Gods will, then will he restore all things unto us again. Therefore if God
give us not that which we ask, let us thus profit, to the examining and
converting of our desires.

But to conclude for this time, whereas all men generally desire, that they
might have their heart satisfied, and that whatsoever they have a mind to, they
might have it: and this all sorts covet and seek after, and therein consists
great contentation and quietness of mind, That we have our desires in all
things: let us nourish in us continually none but good desires, for those God
will fulfill. The comfort of those that have good desires: and the vexation of
them that have evil.
But if we have wicked and ungodly desires in our mind, as the Lord will not
fulfill them, so this shall be no small cross unto us, that we are abridged of
our desires. So that all they that so live, that they make conscience even of
their desires, and labor to keep them within the compass of Gods word and
will, their life is most pleasant and comfortable, and full of contentment, for
they shall soonest have the desires of their heart from time to time. But if we
give scope to our affections, and suffer our desires to range beyond the bounds
of Gods word and will, as therein we displease him, that they are so unruly; so
we shall not be quiet, for God will cross them, and not suffer us to prosper
in our wicked desires. For though the wicked many times do so, for their
further condemnation, who often have more than their hearts desire: yet this is
the ordinary portion of Gods children, that if their desires be good, God will
fulfill them: as these of David's were, and therefore God did so unto him, as he
confesses, Psalm. 21.2.
Thou have given him his hearts desire. But if they be evil, he will keep them
from them: and we are to pray, that he would do so, to that end, that we might
seek to purge our hearts from all such sinful desires. And God grant, that
we may thus profit by the not having of our desires, to examine them whether
they be good or ill, and to amend whatsoever is amiss: and so shall it be more
profitable for us, to be hindered in such desires, than to have them fulfilled.
But we shall have occasion to speak more of this the next day: in the mean
time let this be sufficient.

The thirteenth Sermon upon the fourth verse.
And grant thee according to thine heart, etc.
COncerning these words, besides that that has been observed out of them
already, it is further to be considered; that whereas he had willed them, in
the tenth verse, to pray that God would hear his prayers, and that he would
evidently show, that he had done so: and now, that he would give him according
to his heart: he declares, that as when he prayed unto God, he would do it
not with his lips only, but from the bottom of his heart; so he would have
the Lord to take knowledge of his prayer from the desires of the same, and give
him thereafter: True ptayer is a desire of the heart.
and so to show that he had heard his prayer, by giving him his hearts desire.
From whence we learn, what is the nature of true prayer; even that it is an
inward desire of the heart unto God for some thing: which he, that is the only
searcher of the heart, knows, and so is able to satisfy. Which is so to be
understood, not that we should use no words at all in prayer, for they are
sometimes necessary; as not only when many pray together, that one should
speak out aloud, that the rest might hear and say Amen: but even many times
when we pray alone by our selves, that by our speech our minds might be stirred
up, and also kept upon that that we speak. But even then, the substance of
our prayer is in the desire of the heart, and our words are but signs to
testify and declare the same: Though words be used, yet the desire of the heart
is the chiefest.
so that there can be no true prayer at all without the desire of the heart,
but there may be very effectual prayer without words: and when in prayer both
does concur, words, and desires; God respects this later more than the
former, and the desires of our hearts do cry louder in the ears of the Lord
of hoasts, than all the words that we can use, be they never so many and so
vehement. And though desires without words are effectual, yet words without
the desire of the heart is nothing worth: and therefore David though he used
both, yet here names this only: and after, when he gives thanks to God for
hearing of his prayers, though he names both, yet he places this first,
Psalm. 21.2.
as the chief, saying, Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
denied him the request of his lips. Therefore when we pray, let us prepare our
hearts, that they may be full of holy desires: and in prayer let us hold out in
them, and not suffer them to fall; for when they decay and die, then do we
cease praying, though our lips move still never so fast. And so all they that
pray in a strange tongue, and know not what they say (as is the manner of the
Papists) and so cannot possibly have any desire in their heart of that that
they speak, do not pray at all. And therefore though they boast greatly of
prayer, and say, that they did continually pray, because they had their beads
about them, Without which, words are not regarded.
and their lips were going; yet in truth there was not, neither could there be
any prayer at all among them. And besides all they in our days, who in the
time of prayer have their minds otherwise occupied, than about that that is
prayed for; though they kneel down, lift up their eyes and hands, and say
Amen with the rest; do not pray one whit, but are as far from praying as can
be, though they seem unto others to pray very devoutly. Therefore when we come
hither to the house of prayer, to pray together, and one of us for another,
they, and they only, have the benefit of common prayer, who have their minds
attent upon that that is said, and desire from their heart the same thing with
the rest. For here we pray to God, that he would give to every one according to
his desire: if then either they be asleep, or talking, or gazing about, or
otherwise busy; then we pray that God would give them nothing, for they desire
nothing. And hereunto agrees that, which the virgin Marie says in her song,
He has filled the hungry with good things, Luke 1.53.
and sent away the rich empty. Where she confesses, that those who desire
good things of God earnestly, as the hungry and thirsty desire meat and
drink, those he fills, and bestows plentifully upon them unto their
contentment: but they that are rich, and full as it were in their own opinion,
and so desire nothing of God as they should, they receive nothing, but are sent
away as empty as they come.

And this is so certain, that in prayer God looks into the heart wholly,
that it that be moved to desire earnestly, though we speak not a word, it is
sufficient, he knows well enough what we pray for, and will grant it as
soon, as though we had used all the words that might be to persuade. For thus
it is said of Hannah, when she prayed in the temple, because she was barren:
She spoke in her heart, her lips did move only, 1. Sam. 1.13.
but her voice was not heard: and when Hely thought that she had been drunken,
because he saw her lips move, but heard no voice, God hears the desire of
the heart, when there are no words.
and told her of it, saying, How long will thou be drunken: she answered, and
said, Nay my lord, but I am a woman troubled in spirit, and have poured out my
soul before the Lord. Then he prayed unto God for her, that he would grant
her this petition that she had made in her heart without words: and the Lord
did so, and gave her a manchild, which she prayed for, as her self does
afterward confess. Thus we see, that God hears the desire of the heart,
when there are no words; as on the contrary, he cares not for all the words
that can be used without this desire. After this manner also did Nehemiah pray,
and was heard: for when he was waiting at the Kings table (for he was his
butler) by reason of the ill news which he heard of the Church of God a little
before, it was perceived that his countenance was more sad than it was wont to
be in former times, and the king asked him the cause of it, seeing that he was
not sick, and said, certainly it was nothing else but sorrow of heart. Nehem.
2.1.
Then Nehemiah told him the cause of it; and the king most graciously bad him
require what he would: and so he desired of him, as it is set down there. But
first of all it is said, Verse 4.
That he prayed to the God of heaven: which must needs be thus understood, that
he did stoutly lift up his mind unto God, according as the time and place did
then require, and desired him to bless him, and to move the heart of the king
to be favorable toward him; for it was not fit for him then to have kneeled
down, and to have spoken aloud, and so have made a long prayer, when the king
was at meat: and so he offered up the desire of his heart unto God, though he
spoke nothing, and God granted it. And this is so undoubtedly true, that God
in prayer looks to the desire of the heart, Romans 8.26.
that it is said, That when we know not what to pray, as we ought, the spirit
of God it self makes request for us with sighs, that cannot be expressed,
and he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the spirit;
for he makes request for the Saints, according to the will of God. So that
when we for pain of body or grief of mind cannot speak one word aright,
then the very sighs and groans which are stirred up in us, the Lord
acknowledges, and answers us according to them. Therefore we must hearken to
the exhortation of the Apostle, and practice that, Ephe. 6.18.
Pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in the spirit; and watch
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication: so that what kind of prayer
soever we use (as he speaks of all manner prayer) whether long or short,
with words or without, public or private, alone or with others, it must
always be in the spirit, and from the heart; and that it might be so, he
gives us counsel to watch thereunto, that is, to have an eye to our heart,
and to set a watch upon the affections of our mind, and suffer them not to be
carried away: and this we had need to do carefully, because else they will too
soon wander suddenly before we be aware, as all of us do find it to be true
by too great experience.

Seeing then that prayer is a work of the heart, and of the spirit (as we have
heard) and not of the lips and of the tongue so much; every one that comes
unto prayer, must especially labor in this one point, that he may bring his
heart unto God, and not to stand so much upon words. If we have good desires,
the want of fit words must not hinder us from prayer.
And this must be no bar unto any to keep them from prayer, to say, I have no
fit words, I cannot utter my mind well, I have a good heart, but my speech is
naught, etc. For first of all, if we be sufficiently touched with the feeling
of our wants, we shall have words enough to utter the same: for all experience
shows, that every one can complain well enough to the understanding of men,
of any thing wherein they are grieved, be they never so simple: as the poorest
creature that is, that is pinched with hunger and thurst, can ask bread and
meat, and no man need to instruct him what words he should use in such a case:
and if any be oppressed, they ca^ sufficiently lay open their wrongs, we see
that young children can do that, and almost natural fools. Then assuredly if
we had that inward sight and feeling of our sins, and of the want of the
graces of Gods spirit, that we should have, we should have words enough to
utter the same unto God, and to pour out our whole mind unto him, and to say,
Good Lord give me this, and give me that. Therefore let us first labor for
that, and then the other will soon follow, that is, let us have the feeling of
our own wants, and we shall want no words in prayer. But say, that we want
words indeed: it makes no matter one whit, God looks not to that, but to the
desire of the heart: and he hears that sooner than the other, For God looks
to the heart.
nay without the other. Hannah said nothing, spoke not a word with her lips, no
more did Nehemiah (as we heard even now) but they both prayed in the spirit,
and powered out their souls before the Lord: and God heard them. Therefore if
we could say nothing at all, nor speak one word, yet if we do but sigh and
groan in our hearts, that shall be as acceptable unto God, as all the well
ordered words in the world. King Hezekiah when he was sick unto death, prayed
most earnestly unto God for life, and he added fifteen years unto it: but how
prayed he then? and what were his words? he speaks thus of it himself, Isai.
38.14.
Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove: where he
confesses, that if God had respected his words, his pain and fear then was
so great, that it was more like the chattering of a Crane, and the confused
noise of a dove, than any thing else; yet in his heart he had great desires, and
God satisfied them. Let us pray for our brethren that are visited with the
pestilence, that God would give them their hearts desire, and therefore that he
would put into their minds good and holy desires: and according to those, when
they shall be so weak, even at the point of death, and all the powers of the
body shall fail them, that he would deal with them in mercy, either for
comfort, or for deliverance, or for both. And so must we labor with our own
hearts, that not only they be free from ill desires, but that they may not be
empty and barren of good; that others may pray for us, Give them according to
their heart; and we may have the fruit of their prayers, when our desires shall
be good, and even then when we shall not be able to speak a word.

Give thee according to thy heart, Thus he wills them to pray for him. But
what was he? he was a king, It seems that all kings may soon have their
desires, and so need not pray to God to fulfill them.
and a mighty prince, therefore if any might have their hearts desire, then he
most of all. For what can a king desire, but he shall have it? if it may be
bought for money, if it may be gotten by sea or by land, if it may be compassed
by the wit and strength of men. They can desire nothing, but there are ynow
that will procure it for them: if they be kings and princes, all at their
command, and are glad to please them with their desires in all things: what
needed he then to be so careful for this, that he might have according to his
hearts desire, and that they should pray so earnestly for it? was there any
need of it? was there any fear of it? if he had been a mean man, it had bin
another matter; or one that could not have helped himself, nor had had any to
do for him: but all seek to satisfy the desires of kings, if it be with the
hazard of their own lives. David had experience of this himself, who when he
was in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistims was then in Bethlehem, he
longed, and said, 2. Sam. 23.14.
Oh that one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem,
which is by the gate. Then three mighty men brake into the host of the
Philistims, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, and brought it to
David; who would not drink thereof, but powered it out for an offering before
the Lord, and said, O Lord be it far from me, that I should do this: is not
this the blood of the men that went in ieopardie of their lives: therefore he
would not drink it. Thus though he repented him of this rash and foolish
desire, yet we see how soon he had his desire, and how ready his men were to
satisfy it, even in a very hard thing, and wherein they did hazard their lives
for him. Having then so many worthy Captains as he had, what might not he
presume that they would do for him? and so why needed he to doubt of any of
his desires? The like may be said of Ahab the king of Israel, when he desired
the vineyard of Naboth, and could not get it at the first, whereupon he was
greatly displeased, and laid himself upon his bed, and would not eat: How
soon was there a way devised for him by his wife Iesabell, 1. King. 21.4.
to satisfy his desires, though it was unlawful? And first of all she
comfort him over it, Verse 7.
and said, Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel, etc. as if she had
said, what, I perceive thou know not who thou art? Thou art a King, thou
may have what thou will, one way or other, by might or by wrong, thou
need but desire and have. Up, eat bread, and be of good cheer, I will give
thee the vineyard of Naboth, etc. And then she wrote letters, that he might be
accused and condemned of treason, that so it might fall to the king by law, as
it did, and as it follows in that story. But this is that which principally
for our purpose is to be observed, that she was of this mind, That a king might
have whatsoever he desired. And so many foolish people think that kings, And
so do many worldlings think of themselves, and of others.
and noblemen, and rich men, and those that have wealth enough, they may have
all things after their hearts desire, and so have nothing to cross them in
their desires: so that if they were in their case, they would live at their
hearts ease, for look whatsoever they desired, they would have, and who should
hinder them from it? and so they would set their heart at rest, and live as
merrily as the day is long and broad; and they marvel why others should not do
so, and that they should at any time complain, that they have not their
desire. Luke 12 16.
Wherein they are like unto that Epicure that is spoken of in the Gospel;
whose ground, when it brought forth fruit so plenteously, that he could not
tell where to lay it, until he bethought himself to enlarge his barnes, and
then he said to himself: Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years,
live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime: so that he thought, because he
had wealth enough, that he might have his hearts desire in all things, and be
beholding to none but to himself for it, no not unto God, for he speaks as
one that never thought of him. But the Lord did disappoint him of it, and said,
O fool, Verse 20.
this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose shall those
things be which thou have provided. And thus will he say and do to all such
foolish worldlings or worldly fools. For it is added, So is he that gathers
riches, and is not rich in the Lord.

But David here shows, that he was of another mind: for though his desires
were never so good and lawful in this action, and he had never so many means
to accomplish them (as indeed for his desire in war he had as many as could
almost be desired; for he had many worthy captains, 2. Sam. 23.18.
and we read not of any the like, as their courage and great valor is set
down in the Scripture) yet he believed, and would have his subjects to believe
also, that neither himself nor they for him could accomplish his desires, but
as God should grant them; and therefore he willed them to pray to God, that he
would so do, saying, Grant thee according to thine heart. This then is that,
But only God gives to all men their desires.
that from hence we must believe, that it is God only, that does and must
accomplish the desires of all men and women, and none is sufficient of
themselves to do it, be they never so great and mighty, nor any other for
them. And this is the first article of our faith, That we believe in God the
father almighty, maker of heaven and earth; that is, that he made all things
of nothing, and does still bring al things to pass: and therefore as nothing
is done without him, so he only does all things, Psalm. 135.6.
as it is said in the Psalm: He has done whatsoever he would, in heaven, and
in the earth, and in all the deepes. So that whatsoever good any has desired
in time past, if they have obtained it, they must confess to the glory of
God, that it was not themselves, or any other for them, but God alone, that
gave the^ their hearts desire. For though they had these means, And this we
must confess in all things that we have received.
yet God could have hindered them all, that they should have done them no good.
And therefore that which Moses forewarned the people of Israel of, when they
should come into the land of Canaan, That they should take heed that they did
not ascribe any to themselves, but all unto God, who was the only giver of the
same; is true of all other things, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
when he says thus unto them: Beware least thou say in thine heart, my power,
and the strength of mine own hand has prepared me this abundance: but
remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get substance
to establish his covenant, which he swear unto thy father, as appears this
day. Where he forbids them not only proudly to boast of themselves, but
not so much as to suffer it once to enter into their thoughts: Say not in thine
heart, etc.

Thus did David confess of himself, that God had given him his desire: and in
that Psalm that he makes of thanksgiving for the victory, he teaches the
people to praise God for it, under this title, That God had brought to pass
his desires: and that he saw his desire upon his enemies, he ascribes it
neither to himself, nor to his worthy captains, Psalm. 21.2.
but to the Lord, saying, Thou have given him his hearts desire. As if he had
said, O Lord, I desired such and such things in my heart, but I could not
procure them to my self, therefore I prayed unto thee for them, and I desired
others also so to do; and thou have given us the thing that we desired, and
therefore we give thanks unto thee for it. And this is that also, which the
Psalmist says of the Israelites, whilst they were in the wilderness: they
longed for flesh, but they could not satisfy their own desires, though they
were never so many; but the Lord he sent them meat enough, and so did satisfy
their desires, He rained flesh upon them, as dust, Psalm. 78.27.
and feathered foul, as the sand of the sea: and he made it fall in the
midst of their camp, even round about their habitations: so they did eat,
and were well filled, for he gave them their desire. So must we all say of our
selves, for all things that we desire and have, even our meat and drink, Even
in our meat and drink, wherewith we are satisfied.
that it is God that gives us our desire. For when as many in the world do
want, and are pinched with hunger, and do eat and drink by measure and by
weight, because they have not enough; when as in the mean season we eat and
drink of the best, and are well filled: must we not needs confess to the
praise of God, that he has given us our desire? For many have as great desires
to these things, and yet are in extreme want, and so might we have been too,
but that God has provided better for us, and given us our desires, and denied
them unto others. Besides, some that have much, have not the heart to bestow it
upon themselves, and so they desire, and have not: and this is one of the
vanities of the world that Solomon co^plaineth of, There is one alone, and
there is not a second, Eccle. 4.8.
which has neither son nor brother, yet is there none end of his travail,
neither can his eye be satisfied with riches: neither does he think, For whom
do I travail, and defraud my self of pleasure? this also is vanity, and
this an evil travail. Therefore he says, that this is all that a man can have
of all that he possesses, chap. 2.24.
To eat and drink, and to take his part of them: and yet to do so, is the
special gift of God, and all have it not. And to conclude, thus does the
Prophet confess of others, and of himself: Lord thou have heard the desire of
the poor: where, Psalm. 10.17.
by poor he means the humble and lowly, and so also do some translate it,
that is, those that are afflicted and humbled that way: so that all men, rich
and poor, must confess, that it is God that must give them all their desires.
And therefore whether we desire health or wealth, long life, or any thing else;
or we desire an end of this grievous calamity of the pestilence, And in taking
away of this plague.
and that the places where it is, might at the last be set free from it, and
that all places might have their accustomed health, to the comfort of us all:
God alone is he that must give these things, or else we shall never have our
desires.

We must show this faith in praying to God to fulfill our desires.
This doctrine though it be so evident and clear, as it is, yet few do rightly
believe it: for if they did, then they would do as David did here in the like
case, that is, they would in all things pray to God, that he would give them
their desires. But the most part covet and desire many things, and never ask
them of God; as though they imagined, that they could have them without him. So
says the Apostle, and charge the Jews out it: James 4.2.
saying, Ye lust, and have not, ye envy and desire immoderatly, and cannot
obtain: ye fight and war, and get nothing, because ye ask not. That is,
they trusted greatly for these worldly things, one for one thing, and another
for another, and they had a world of desires in their mind, and they envied
also others that went beyond them, and had that which they had not, and they
did strive and take all the pains that they could to get more; and yet they
had not according to their desire, because they asked not those things of God,
who only could fulfill all their desires. So that if a man believes, that it
is God only, that must give him all his desires, else he shall desire and
desire in vain, as these did; he must commend his desires unto God in prayer,
that he might so do: and the want of prayer in all our desires, argues the
want of faith in them. All those then that have their heads occupied about the
world, that they have a multitude of desires in their mind, to this and to
that, and to they cannot tell themselves what; and do not from time to time
ask of God, that he would fulfill them, do not rightly believe that he only
can do it: but trust to their own wit and policy, to their own strength and
power to themselves, or to some other. And yet God many times disappointeth
them of their desires, when they think themselves surest of them; that they
might by experience see that in themselves, which they will not hear out of
the word: Ye lust, and have not, because you ask not. And that I might apply
this to the time present, And namely our desire to have the plague taken away.
and to the occasion of our meeting: all men desire, and have done a long time,
that God would stay his heavy hand, and that we might not thus still hear
continually of the death of our brethren in so many places: But none of us all
can have our desires herein, but as God shall give it. Therefore let us pray
unto him, and ask it of him, (as the Apostle wills us) and the more
earnestly we desire it, the more fervently let us pray unto God for it: so will
the Lord grant it unto us in his good time; and so shall it appear, that we
do not only say in word; but believe in heart, that he only can give us our
desire. And let us remember for the further humbling of us, how many desires
we have had in our mind in time past, and never thought upon God, or sought to
him for the accomplishment of them: and so no marvel if we have mist of many
of them; for God thereby has punished our unbelief, that we did not by prayer
(the fruit of faith) acknowledge that he was the only giver of all our
desires: yea and that we have desired many great things, and such as have
concerned us very much, and yet have not asked them of God, and therefore
worthily have gone without them.

And seeing God gives all men their desires, and we must pray to him for them;
it behooves us to live well, and to serve him, and to desire nothing but good
continually: that so he may from time to time give us our hearts desire, even
as David did here And then God has promised to give us our desire, Prouer.
10.24.
as Solomon says, That which the wicked fears, shall come upon him: but God
will grant the desire of the righteous. What we must do, that God might
fulfill all our desiers.
Where he says, that the wicked shall be so far from having their desire,
that even that very thing which they fear most, and would most willingly
escape, God will bring upon them: but he will give the righteous man his
desire. So that if we serve God, and do live well: then he will give us all
our desires, that is, so far as they be good, and agreeable unto his will.
And thus also is a righteous man described in the word of God, namely, That he
is a righteous man, and she a righteous woman, that has good desires: and so
far God will fulfill them. Therefore that we might pray in faith unto God for
all our desires, we must live righteously, and look that all our desires be
only good. For though he does sometime give the wicked their ungodly desire,
and that in many things, as we have seen it in Ahab, and Iesabell, and might
have seen it in many more; yea they have more than their hearts desire: yet it
is no blessing at all, but a punishment of God upon them, to be given up to
their own lusts, to desire evil things, and then to have their desires:
though (I say) he deals thus often with the wicked, yet no man can pray for
any such thing in faith; neither can he look for it at Gods hands: and if it
should come unto him unlooked for, he cannot take it as a blessing from God.
We are rather to pray, that in all our wicked and ungodly desires he would
cross us, and never suffer us to thrive in any of our unlawful desires: and
that shall be a great blessing of his upon us, to have our ungodly desires
denied unto us. But we shall find it to be true by all experience, that when we
have lived in the best course, and have had most godly desires, then the Lord
has most often and soonest fulfilled them: so this must teach us to live well,
and to desire good things of God, that he may still fulfill them.

And the rather that we might believe, God can hinder men of their greatest
desires.
that God only can and does fulfill the desire of all men: we must consider
that he can also, and does many time hinder them from their desires: that
though they have had never so great a desire to a thing, yet they could never
obtain it. And this is threatened to the ungodly, as a punishment from God,
that they shall not have their desire: He shall gnash with his teeth, and
consume away, Psalm. 112.10.
the desire of the wicked shall perish. And all experience does show, that many
times he has frustrated the desires of the wicked. Hester. 3.6. 2 Samuel 17.2. 1.
King. 19.2. Exodus 5.7, 8.
As the desire that Haman had to root out the Jews; that Achitophell had to
overthrow David; that Iesabel had to take away the life of the Prophet Eliah;
that Pharao had to oppress the Israelits with cruel bondage, and to keep
them still in his land; Act. 12.6.
that king Herod had to kill Peter: how was he disappointed of his purpose,
when he thought all was sure? for Peter was in prison, and the night before
that he thought to have brought him out to the people, he slept between two
soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers before the door kept the
prison, so that it seemed all was sure enough: but God sent an Angel, Verse 11.
and delivered him out of the hand of Herod, and from all the waiting for of
the people of the Jews, and so disappointed them all of their ungodly desires.
And all the enemies of David that sought to keep him from his kingdom, whereof
he complains, Why did the Heathen rage, and the people murmr in vain, etc.
Psalm. 2.1.
God did laugh them all to scorn, and would not suffer them to have their
desire of him, but said, I have set my king upon Sion, m ne holy mountain; as
if he had said, he shall be king in despite of you all. How were all the
great and mighty tyrants, and cruel persecuting emperors disappointed of
their devilish desires to destroy the poor Christians? So that though they
were many, and their persecutions extreme and very long, enduring certain
hundred years; yet therein they so little prevailed, that the number of them
still increased: whereupon arose that proverb, That the blood of the Martyrs
is the seed of the Church, that is, the more that they did put to death, the
more did rise up in their stead. So that the two last cruel persecutors being
tired with the slaughter of the Christians, and fretting at this, that they
could not have their desires of them; in great coffeehouse gave up their
empire, and led a private life. What should I speak of the Papists, and of
their holy league, who were not yet able to satisfy their desire against the
professors of the Gospel, in that wicked practice which began at the bloody
massacre in France? And how were all that crew of Papists disappointed of
their wicked desires in the end, here in England, by the death of Queen Marie?
And what should I say of some of those bloody blasphemous persecutors, who so
greedily desired the death of Gods Saints, that they openly threatened, that
they would see them burnt; but themselves by a sudden death of the hand of God,
were taken away before their blessed martyrdom. So that all the wicked, be
they never so many and mighty, they cannot have their desires always, but God
can hinder them as it pleases him, that only must give to all men their
desires. Therefore when men threaten that they will have their wills of men, and
they will do so and so, 1. King. 19.2. Genesis 4 23.
as Lamech did, saying, I will slay a man in my wound, and a young man in my
hurt, that is, if any man touch me, I will do so and so unto him: we see, that
they must first ask God leave, or else they shall never have their desires. Nay
David has taught us to pray in faith against all the ungodly desires of wicked
men, Let not the wicked have his desire, Psalm. 140.8.
O Lord, perform not his wicked thought, least they be too proud. Selah.

The fourteenth Sermon upon the fourth verse.
And grant thee according to thine heart, and fulfill all thy purpose.
THat which should have been added the last day concerning the former part of
this verse, is this: That whereas we have heard already, how we ought to show
our faith in this point, that we believe that God can and does give to every
one their hearts desire, by praying unto him beforehand for every thing that we
do desire: Now it remains further to consider, That if we do believe indeed,
that God only does give to all men their desires, We must praise God for all
our desires that have been fulfilled.
and that without him they cannot have them; then we must declare this faith of
ours, after that we have our desires, by acknowledging, that for all things
which we have desired in the whole course of our life, and have had them, that
we are wholly beholding to the goodness of God for them, and so praise his
holy name for the same. For if we desire any thing of a mortal man, and he
bestow it upon us, we are bound to confess so much, and to be thankful unto
him for the same: then much more unto God, who moved the heart of that man
toward us, and made him an instrument of his goodness unto us, to fulfill our
desires. And thus does David even for this very thing, confessing openly, that
God had satisfied his desires, when he says, Thou have given him his hearts
desire, Psalm. 21.2.
and have not denied him the request of his lips: where he speaks of
himself, and made that Psalm as a form of public thanksgiving unto God for
giving him his desire in the overthrow of his enemies. We in our time have
desired many things in our hearts, and we have not been disappointed of our
desires: but have we in all of them so considered God to be the author of them,
that we have given thanks unto him for the same? If we do rightly examine our
selves, But most men fail greatly in this praise.
and call to mind the time past, we shall find, that for many things for which
we have prayed, O Lord give me according to my heart, we have not returned with
this thankful confession, O Lord thou have given me my hearts desire, and have
not denied me the request of my lips. And this is that that our Savior Christ
complains of in the Gospel, Luke 17.12.
That when ten lepers did meet him, they stood a far off, and all of them
lift up their voices, and said, Jesus master have mercy on us: and all of them
were healed. But one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and
with a loud voice praised God, and fell down at his feet, and gave him
thanks: And Jesus said, are there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?
There is none found that returned to give God praise, save this stranger. Thus
though all of them had a great desire to be cleansed of that foul disease, and
did cry out earnestly unto Christ for it, yet but one of them did testify his
faith, that he had received this benefit of Christ. And this is a common fault
in the world, that scarce one among ten, when they have their desires, and that
of God, and when they have asked the same of him, that are mindful to give
thanks unto God that gave them their desire. Many in their wants come to
Christ, and say Miserere, to have their desires satisfied; but few afterward
return with Alleluia, to give praise unto him for the same. This is that then,
which the Psalmist not without just cause so often and so earnestly calls
upon men for, and all sorts of men: That when they have been in great
affliction some one way and some another, and so for their relief and comfort,
they have desired this and that according to their several estates; that when
God has delivered them, and given them their desire, they would as well by
giving thanks unto him declare, that they believe that he only did satisfy
their desire, as they did before by praying unto him. For he says, That some
have been in captivity, Psalm. 107.3.
and scattered into the enemies land, and there they have wandered in the
wilderness and desert out of the way, and found no city to dwell in; both
hungry and thirsty, and their soul has fainted in them. Then they cried
unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from their distress. Let
them therefore (says he) confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and
his wonderful works before the sons of men: for he satisfied the thirsty
soul, and filled the hungry soul with goodness. Where he provoke them to
be thankful, acknowledging of the goodness of God with praise, when they
have found by experience how he has satisfied their desires; and would have
them show that they believed, that God gave them their desires, by a thankful
acknowledging of the same. And so afterward in the same Psalm he speaks of
others, whereof some are delivered from sickness and from death, and some
from prison and yrons, and some from extreme hunger; and all these according to
their own desire: for he says of all them, Then they cried unto the Lord in
their trouble, Verse 13.
and he delivered them from their distress: and would have all of them
likewise confess, to the glory of God, and the good of others, That God had
given them their desire: when he says thus, Verse 21.
Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men: and let them offer sacrifices of
praise, and declare his works with rejoicing: Verse 23.
and let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the Elders. Where we see, that though he confesses that all
of them in their several troubles do cry unto God for help, as believing
that he only can give them their desires: yet he does not say, that all after
their deliverances do declare their faith in Gods providence, by giving him
thanks: but this he exhorts them unto, and wishes that it might be so,
saying, Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness: or,
oh that they would thus do. So must we do when he shall give us our desires,
in taking away the plague.
Showing that though it be men's duty, yet many of them are so far from it,
that it is rather to be wished and desired, than to be looked for at their
hands. Therefore if it shall please the Lord to be merciful unto us, and this
way to give us our desire, by taking away this grievous rod from our backs,
and causing this pestilence to cease, which has a long time walked in the
darkness, Psalm. 91.6.
and destroyed at noone day; and of which there has fallen a thousand on the
one side, and ten thousand on the other: we must remember to be thankful
unto him for it, and let him have as many praises from us for giving us our
hearts desires, as now he has prayers for it: and let us remember it the
rather, because we are more prone to cry unto God in our troubles, as others
have done, than we are afterward to confess his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men; and to exalt him in the congregation
of the people, and to praise him in the assembly of the Elders, as we have
heard even now out of the Psalm. And let us be heartily sorry that for so many
desires of ours, both for soul and body, for our selves and ours, we have been
so unthankful; which might justly move him to abridge us now, and to cut us
short of our desire in this thing, which does so greatly concern the good of
us all, and of many thousands of our brethren. And this is that, which we have
to observe out of the first part of this verse.

Fulfill all thy purpose or counsel.
The second follows after this manner: And fulfill all thy purpose. This
latter part of the verse contains almost the very same petition that the
former did, saving that here is somewhat more, namely, that whereas men, when
they have a desire unto a thing, and would feign have it, they begin to
bethink themselves how and which way to accomplish it: and then taking
counsel with themselves or others, they devise and determine to do so and so:
as David might do in this case. This counsel of his and purpose, whatsoever
it was, he wills them to pray to God for him, that he would fulfill, that so
he might have his desire, and Gods providence might be served thereby. This
word, Purpose, the most and the best do translate, Counsel. And so the
meaning of it is, that whatsoever he should advise himself to do by good
counsel, for the effecting of his desire, and whatsoever things he should put
in practice upon mature deliberation to that end: that that counsel and those
means God would bless, and give a good success unto, and so bring the thing
to pass. So that we see with what humility and distrustfulnesse of himself
he speaks, acknowledging his own insufficiency to be so great, that he was
so unable of himself to bring to pass his own desires, though they were
good, and in a lawful cause; that when he had taken the best counsel for it,
yet that should be in vain and altogether frustrate, and do him no good at
all, unless God bless it. Therefore here he prays unto God for his blessing
upon his consultations, and good purposes, and desires them to help him with
their prayers therein: both that God would direct him to those means that might
best serve his providence, and that he would give good success unto the same;
and that he might not fall into any vain courses, or as it were crooked ways,
They ask of God good counsel, and the success of the same.
which the Lord did not purpose to work by. This then must pull down the high
minds of those proud conceited men, who think so highly of themselves and of
their own wit, that they presume that for every thing they are all sufficient
of themselves: for in all matters that shall befall them, they can tell
presently what to do, they can tell how to advise themselves sufficiently,
they have counsel enough at home, and so can bring all their matters to pass.
For though I grant it to be true, that it is a great blessing of God upon any,
that in time of need they know what is to be done (for many times for want of
good counsel men are in doubfull matters greatly perplexed, and almost at
their wits end:) yet they must thus think, that when they have the best advise
that can be from themselves or others, yet the success of it depends only upon
the blessing of God: and so they must seek unto God for it, as David does
here, though he was very wise of himself: For it is said of him when he was
but young, 1. Sam. 18.30.
That when the princes of the Philistims went forth, at their going forth to
war, he behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that
his name was much set by.

And for the repressing of this foolish presumption of our own wisdom, to be
able to bring all matters to pass, the Prophet Jeremy gives a good lesson,
saying, Thus says the Lord, Jere. 9.23.
let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me. For though a man have
wisdom to devise, God only establishes and overthrows men's counsels.
strength, and riches to bring to pass, (and where these three concur there
is likelihood of great matters) yet even then God only brings the purpose to
pass. For either we shall not resolve upon the best, or take good counsel
when it is given us, or if we do, God can destroy it. This we see to be true
in the counsel of Achitophell, who was one of the wisest men of his time, in
so much, that that which he counseled, was like as one had asked counsel at
the oracle of God: 2. Sam. 16.23.
when in the conspiracy of Absalom he gave counsel one way, and Hushay the
Archite gave counsel another way; though the first counsel was best at that
time, yet it was not followed: Chap. 17.14.
but all of them said, The counsel of Hushai is better than the counsel of
Achitophell: For the Lord had determined to destroy the good counsel of
Achitophell, that he might bring evil upon Absalom. Thus we may here learn
that it is in God only to overthrow or to establish the counsels of men, even
of the wisest, according as he is purposed to do good unto, or bring evil
upon them. So was it also in the days of King Rehoboam the son and heir of
Solomon, when in the beginning of his reign the people came unto him with this
petition, 2. Chron. 10.4.
That he would make the grievous yoke which his father had put upon them,
lighter, and they would serve him: and he bad them depart for three days, and
then come again for an answer: and in the mean time he asked counsel of the
wise, ancient, experienced men, which had served his father; and they gave him
good counsel, that he should yield to them in this request: and he after
conferred with the young men, who had been his pages and brought up with him,
and they gave him ill counsel, (as appeared by the sequel) That he should
take it upon him like a king, and speak roughly unto them: and so he did,
refusing the good counsel of the ancient men. And thus though their counsel
was good, God did not fulfill it; and though it was offered unto him, he did
not take it; because the Lord would bring that upon Solomon, which he had
threatened by Ahiiah the Prophet, That for their idolatry, 1. King. 11.31.
ten tribes should be rent away from his kingdom, in the days of his son:
as also came to pass: for when they heard the answer of the king, ten tribes
fell away to Jeroboam, and could never be recovered. So that whenever we
determine to do any thing, as we ought to take counsel, and do nothing
rashly and unadvisedly, as many do (for then we shall thrive thereafter:) so
we must also believe that God must bring all things to pass, and so pray to
him for it continually. So that all men when they have the best counsel in the
world, if it were as good as Achitophels, they must seek to God by prayer for
his blessing upon it, if they will have things to thrive and prosper with them.

When we have taken the best counsel, we pray to God for the success of it.
And this is true in all things: as if we have to deal with men that seek to
oppress us any ways, we must take the best counsel that we can to defend our
selves, and then pray to God, that he would bring things to pass: otherwise
our own counsel and purpose shall do us no good against their oppressions.
So was it in the time of the Jews captivity, when Haman for malice that he
bore unto Mordecay, sought his destruction; and because his malice was
insatiable, he thought it too little to lay hands upon him only, Hest. 3.6.
but because they had showed him the people of Mordicay, he sought to destroy
all the Jews at once that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahashuerosh:
and to that end under the color of the kings profit, he gat a decree to be
sealed with his signet, That upon such a day all of the^ should be rooted out
and destroyed, both young and old, women and children. This seemed unto him
very good policy to bring his purpose to pass; and when the posts with the
kings letters were sent out into all places, he might have thought himself
sure of it: but God did not prosper it, and so it came to naught, and his
purpose was disappointed, because God did not fulfill it. Chap. 5.14.
And afterward when Zeresh his wife and all his friends gave him this counsel,
That seeing he was in so great favor with the king and the queen, as to be
invited with the king unto a banquet which the queen had prepared, and none
but he was invited; that he would make a gibbet of fifty cubits hie, and in
the morning when he went unto the king, that he would speak unto him, that
Mordecay might be hanged thereon; and then he should go joyfully with the king
unto the banquet. And that also pleased Haman well, and he purposed to do so.
But this took no place neither, because God did not prosper it, but
contrariwise himself was hanged on it by the commandment of the king: and
thus he could not bring his purposes to pass, because God did not fulfill
them. But on the other side, when Hester and Mordecay did hear of this wicked
decree, and did advise with themselves what was best to be done for the
safeguard of the life of the Jews; and at the last did resolve upon this, Chap.
4.8.
That the queen should go into the king, and make supplication for her
people: and she did so. This good counsel, and the success thereof, they
commended unto God in prayer, yea in fasting and prayer, three days and three
nights together; and this God blessed, and brought it to pass: so that they
had liberty from the king, Chap. 8.11.
both to stand for their own lives, and to destroy all the power of the people
that vexed them, both children and women, and to spoil their goods: and they
did so. And truly, if all men in all controversies which they have with their
adversaries, would first take good counsel, according to Gods word; and then
acknowledge, that the success of it is in Gods hand, and pray earnestly unto
him for it: they might prosper more in their suites at the law, than they do.
But because they neglect this, and for the most part seek for crafty
counsel, such as has no promise of Gods blessing, because it is contrary to
the law of charity; and then in such cases they neither do nor can pray to
God for his blessing upon it, that he would fulfill all their counsel:
therefore it is not so. And thus we see, why some are overthrown in their good
causes: namely, they seek not to God, that he would fulfill all their
counsels, but think themselves sufficient without his blessing, and so God
leaves them to themselves, that by experience they might see it to be
otherwise. Therefore let us profit unto our duty by other men's harms.

Furthermore, whereas David was a king, and now gone out to war, and wills
the people at home to pray to God for him, That he would fulfill all his
purpose and counsel; we must understand thus much, that as he was wise
himself, so he had his counsel both for war and for peace, as all kings
have; and they were to advise him in every action what was best to be done: yet
he rested not in that, We ought to pray that God would bless the consultations
of the king and his counselors.
but desires the people, that they would pray, That God would fulfill all,
which by his grace they should determine: and they did so. So must we do for
the kings highness. And though he be godly and wise himself, and has many
worthy noblemen of his most Honorable privy Counsel, who are of great
wisdom and long experience: as they must not rest in their own devices, but
commend them unto God in prayer, and desire others also that are about them,
that they would do so; and by this means might they greatly prosper: so is it
our bound duty to pray unto God for them, that he would bless their
consultations, and bring them to pass, for the good of his Church, and profit
of this realm. And as they do weekly meet at the Counsel table, and
sometime oftener, for matters of State; so we should continually commend them to
God in all our prayers: so shall we have the benefit of our own prayers, when
God shall fulfill the good things that they purpose. And as we ought to do
thus alwais, so especially against the Parliament, we should pray that God
would fulfill all the good purposes of that great assembly, for the rooting out
of Popery, and all remnants of superstition, Especially all consultations in
the Parliament house.
and all other abuses, and for the establishing and enlarging of the preaching
of the Gospel, and all other good orders in all places. Otherwise we see, that
good counsel may be given, but not followed; and if it be, yet not brought to
pass: and so there shall not that good be done that might, and which many good
men in the Parliament house intend. Therefore as we desire to enjoy the common
benefit of our time, so let us pray, not only for the King, but for all our
governors in the Church and Commonwealth, That God would fulfill all their
purposes.

Then ought we much more thus to pray for our selves, if we were a great deal
wiser than we are; for when we have taken the best advice, and thereupon do
things to one end, they may fall out to another, And all our own counsels and
purposes.
yea clean contrary to that which we purposed, and so we shall be
disappointed. As for example, in matters of marriage (which is an ordinary
thing) some think to join themselves or their children in alliance with such
and such, hoping thereby to advance their houses: As in matter of marriage.
but it falls out otherwise, and by that means they come to ruin, and so
God does not fulfill their purpose. And this was the very case of king
Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 18.1. Chap. 21.6.
who joined himself in affinity with Ahab king of Israel, by joining his
eldest son Iehoram in marriage with his daughter: and though Iehoshaphat had
riches and honor in abundance, yet the king of Israel was greater than he, as
having more tribes and people to rule than he, and so his kingdom much bigger:
yet that was the cause of the overthrow and utter ruin almost of his house.
For, to say nothing of this, how Edom presently rebelled, and fell away from
him, and made a king over them; Verse. 8.
nor how Iehoram fell into idolatry after the manner of the kings of Israel,
and compelled the people thereunto; Otherwise they may fall out to a clean
contrary end.
for which he came to a miserable end, being sick of sore diseases, so that
his guts fell out at the end of two years: all his children afterward were
slain by the Aramites, saving the youngest, whom they made king in his fathers
room: and this man Ahaziah was slain by Iehu: Chap. 22.7.
and it is said, that his destruction came of God, in that he went to Ioram his
fathers brother by marriage, being the son of Ahab: for when he was come to
him, he went forth with Iehoram against Iehu the son of Nimshi, whom the
Lord had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab. And so does it fall out with
many in this kind, even in our days, when they do not commend their purposes
to God in prayer, to direct them, and bless them: as Iehoshaphat, though a
good man, yet in this action had not his direction from God, neither is it set
down in the text, that he sought it of him. But it fell out well in the
marriage of Izaak.
But it succeeded more happily with Abraham, who when he sent his servant to
provide a wife for his son Izaack; as he did direct him in the right way, and
assured him of good success by the promise of God, Genesis 24 7.
saying, That he would send his Angel before him: so this man his servant
prayed unto God, that he would prosper him, Verse 42.
O Lord, God of my master Abraham, if thou now prosper my journey which I go,
etc. And Izaack also, for whom this marriage was sought, did not neglect to
pray unto God for good success, and to fulfill his fathers good purpose
toward him: Verse 63.
for it is said, that whiles his fathers servant was in his journey, he went
out to pray in the field toward the evening: and so God did hear all their
prayers, and gave good success to this purpose of marriage. So is it in all
matters for the world.
So is it for matters of the world, a man thinks to enrich himself, and
therefore he minds to buy and sell, or to take a farm, or to deal in
merchandise, etc. and even the same things turn to his utter decay: and by
that means they find it to be true, Psalm. 127.2.
That it is in vain to rise up early, and to go to bed late, and to fare
hardly: for either in them they shall not prosper, or else there shall come some
great loss that shall hinder them; that they might learn by experience to
commend all their purposes to God in prayer. Therefore whatsoever good we
purpose either for our selves, or for our children, or for our friends, let us
pray heartely unto God to fulfill them; else we may purpose one thing, and God
by the same means that we use, shall bring to pass another. And how God can
alter men's purposes, we see it in the example of Jacob, God can alter all men's
purposes. Genesis 37.14.
and of his children. He sent his son Joseph into the fields to his brethren,
who were there keeping of his sheep, with this errand, Go see whether it be
well with thy brethren, and how the flocks prosper, and bring me word again.
Thus we see what he purposed in sending him forth. But when he came among them,
they sold him into another country, and sent his coat home to his father
dipped in blood, as though he had been slain with some wild beast: so Jacob
was disappointed of his purpose. And so were the brethren of Joseph also: for
first of all, they sought to kill him, and after they sold him for a servant,
that he might never be above them, according to that which God had showed him
in dreams: but by this means he came into Egypt, and there in process of
time he was made ruler of the whole land: and in the time of famine his
brethren came thither to buy corn, and bowed before him, and did him great
reverence, when they knew it not: and so Gods purpose was established, and not
theirs, who had sent him thither beforehand for their preservation, Chap. 48.5.
as himself afterward does confess unto them.

The like may be said of our own iournies: As when they purpose any journey.
A man shall purpose such a thing, to go to such a place at such a time, and
either things shall so fall out from day to day, that he shall not compass it,
and so it shall still be deferred against his will; or else when he does go,
things shall fall out otherwise with him, than he thought, and so he shall go
to another end than he purposed at the first. And this the Apostle Paul by
good observation confesses of himself, Romans 1.10.
That he had a long time purposed to come to Rome, that he might preach the
Gospel there to them, as he had done unto others: yet he was put off from the
execution of this purpose many years, and at the last he comes thither; but
after another manner, and not as he looked for: for he was sent thither as a
prisoner, and was carried by force, he being compelled beforehand by the malice
of the Jews (who sought to kill him secretly, Act. 23.12.
and forty men had bound themselves with an oath to do it) to appeal unto
Caesar the Emperor of Rome. Let us therefore submit all our purposes to the
will of God.
Thus he had not his purpose in his journey, when and as he would. Therefore
let us submit all our purposes unto the will of God, and desire him to have
them fulfilled, so far forth as it pleases him, as Paul did, praying, that
at one time or other he might have a prosperous iourny by the will of God to
come unto them: and when we see that it is not his will (as Paul says, Romans
1.13.
he was hitherto let) let us be contented to stay at home, and to be crossed
in our purposes. And yet if our desires be good, let us continue in them, and
pray as he did, that at one time or other we might have a prosperous journey by
the will of God. And let us not be so obstinatly set upon any thing (as the
manner of some is) that we should be restless, when we have not our mind and
purpose in every thing: for then if we be headstrong, as the Lord can hinder us
whether we will or no; so if we will needs do according to our own purpose,
we shall find, that all things shall not fall out as we looked for. And this we
see plainly in the example of Balaam the sorcerer, who would needs go at the
request of Baalack king of Moab, Else he can cross and punish us in them.
in hope of great gain and preferment that was promised unto him, to curse the
Israelits, and so to root them out by his enchantments. The Lord did
sufficiently show him (by the course of his providence, and ill success that
he had in the way) that it was not his will that he should go; Number. 23.7, 8.
yet he would needs go on. But when he came there, he was driven to do clean
contrary to his purpose, even to bless them, though he sought diverse times,
and set his diuinations to curse them: whereupon the king of Moab was greatly
angry with him, and it is most like that he lost his reward, and so he was
disappointed of his purpose in this journey, where he was not contented to be
ordered by the Lord, but would go (as it were) against his will. And in his
return home he was slain in battle by the Israelites. Number. 31.8.
Thus when he thought that he had had his purpose, then did he most of all
miss of it, because God did not fulfill it.

Therefore when we purpose any thing, and have taken counsel for it, and have
also very good means to bring it to pass, let us pray unto God, that if it be
his holy will, he would fulfill it. And in matters of great moment, let us not
content our selves with our own prayers, but desire others to pray to God for
us, as David did here desire the people thus to pray to God for him, The Lord
grant thee according to thine heart, and fulfill all thy purpose: so may we
speed well of our purposes, as he did. And when we have purposed so and so; and
it has fallen out otherwise, not according to our purpose, (as in many things
often it does, and they that are wise to observe things, shall soon perceive
it) it is to teach us to depend upon Gods providence, who only brings all
things to pass, according to his own decree; and let us make that good use of
it. That when we see, how in disappointing us of our purposes, the Lord has
sometimes How we should profit, when we are disappointed of our purposes.
we might be thankful unto him, and learn thereby in all things to depend
upon him, who has so greatly showed his care over us, and not to trust too
much to our selves. As we must needs confess, that in many things the Lord
has thus dealt with us. But if things fall out And when they be fulfilled.
whatsoever the means were: for both they and the success of them were of
him, and so let us be thankful unto him for the same. And let us not and
power, as though we were sufficient in our selves: as many are too ready to
say, I may thank my good fortune for such a thing, or I may thank my self
for it, or

The fifteenth Sermon upon the fifth verse.
That we may rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banners in the name of
our God, when the Lord shall perform all thy petitions.
HEre the first part of the prayer is continued and ended; The meaning of the
fifth verse.
I mean the petitions, which the people make for the king: where they show
why, and wherefore they are so desirous, that God would thus hear and defend
him; namely, that so not only he, but all they, even the whole Church of God
might rejoice in that salvation that God should bestow upon him. For they spoke
before of the king, and for him they did pray, and so this word (thy) is to be
referred unto him: and they mean that defense and safeguard that God should
bestow upon him and his army. Wherein they were taught to acknowledge
themselves to have a part in the affairs of the king, were they prosperous or
unprosperous; as all subjects must thus think of their kings and princes. This
word (rejoice) others do translate, sing, of thy salvation: which is all one
in sense, saving that the one is the cause, and the other is the effect. For
joy often causes singing: and singing commonly argues joy, as the Apostle
says, Is any among you merry, Iam 5.13.
let him sing. What then would they sing? of the salvation and defense of
their king: and so they mean, that they would praise God for it. And thus the
end of their prayer is, the glory of God: that they reciuing so great a benefit
from him in the person of their king, might be so affected with joy, that they
might sing forth publicly the praise of God for it: as afterward they did.
And this they express more fully in the next words, when as they say, And set
up our banners in the name of our God, etc. that is, That we thus having the
victory, and triumphing over our enemies, might as conquerors, not only
inwardly rejoice, but outwardly declare it; not to our own praise, or the
praise of our king so much, but to the glory of the name of our God. When he
shall fulfill all thy petitions (as it follows in the text) namely of the
king, for whom they pray. So that here still they pray God to grant all his
petitions; but they bring this as a reason to move him thereunto, or to
confirrme their own faith, that he will so do; That they might have cause to
praise the name of God. And so they show before hand, what they mind to do,
when God shall thus bless the king and his people, namely, they will by all
means praise and magnify the name of God, as the only author of it.

So that here they shut up all their petitions with a public profession of the
inward desire of their hearts: The end of all our petitions should be the glory
of God.
saying that they seek and ask all these things of God, for the glory of his
name. Wherein they were taught rightly to pray, and so God did hear them, as
he will do all those that thus pray: for this should be the principal end of
all our prayer, and of all things that we ask in them, That God may be
praised; that is, that his goodness, mercy, wisdom, power, justice, and
truth, might be known, and so he have the whole glory of all his works, and
of all his gifts; when he is not only acknowledged to be the author of them,
but loved served and praised for them. And this our Savior Christ has taught
us in that form of his, that must be the pattern of all forms; in all our
prayers principally to respect the glory of Gods name, when he wills us to
begin thus, Mat. 6.9.
Hallowed be thy name: and so after to desire all other things, as they may
stand with that. And lastly to refer all unto that, when we say, For thine is
the kingdom, Verse 13.
the power, and glory, etc. ascribing to him the praise of all, and in all
desiring, that his kingdom, power, and glory might more and more be known and
set forth. Thus have the servants of God prayed, and have obtained great
things, when they have desired them for the glory of God. As Hannah that godly
woman, when she had been barren a long time, prayed to God for a child: So did
Hannah pray for a child.
but she did it not as a natural woman in any carnal respect, that she might
leave a posterity behind her, but for the glory of God; and therefore she
vowed a vow to God before hand, 1. Sam. 1.11.
That if it were a man child, she would give it to God all the days of his
life, and no razor should come upon his head: that is, she would consecrate him
to the service of God, and make him a Nazarite, to be separated to God, after a
special manner. And as she did this way sufficiently show, that she sought not
her self in it, but God: so afterward she did it much more in praising God
for it, and in performing her vow; when she brought him to the house of the
Lord in Shyloh, Chap. 2.18.
so soon as she had weaned him, and there left him with Hely the priest:
whereby it came to pass, that he ministered before the Lord being a young
child, girded with a linen Ephod. Thus she was contented to depart from him so
soon as she had him, whereby she declared, that in her petition she respected
Gods glory more than her self. And thus if any desire children, not so much to
uphold their name, as to inherit their lands and goods, or to serve God in the
Church and commonwealth, and to be instruments of his glory, and determine to
bring them up thereafter; they might both be blessed with children above the
course of nature, and in them above the common sort, as this woman was in her
son Samuel, who proved a very rare man, and singular prophet.

King Solomon when he prayed for wisdom, 1. King. 3.6.
uses the same reasons to persuade the Lord, and to confirm his own faith,
namely, That whereas God had made him king in his father David's room, and that
over a great people, therefore it would please God to give him wisdom, And
King Solomon for wisdom.
that he might be fit to serve him in that place whereunto he had called him,
by being able to judge both good and evil. Thus he propounds the glory of
God in his calling before his eyes, when he asked this; and it so pleased God,
that he gave him that, and a great deal more. So no doubt if men were desirous
to glorify God in their callings, and did ask of him gifts meet for them to
that end, and in seeking for gifts of the mind did make the glory of God the
principal end, they might obtain great things of God. But for the most part
men seek wisdom and learning, to set forth themselves, and therein seek
their own wealth and credit, either wholly, or more than the other; and not
the discharging of a good conscience in the right use of them, to the glory of
God: and so either miss of them, or have them not in that measure that others
have, and as they might attain unto themselves. The Prophet Elijah was wholly
taken up with the glory of God, when he contended with the priests of Baal,
and so by prayer obtained fire from heaven to consume his sacrifice: And Elias
both for fire from heaven.
for the contention was, Whether God or Baal were the true God. 1. King. 18.37.
Therefore he prayed thus, Hear me, O Lord, and let the people know, that
thou art the Lord God. And then his zeal appeared afterward in killing all
those false Prophets and priests of Baal, that had a long time seduced the
people: and after in the same zeal he prayed for rain, Verse. 42. And for
rain.
and did obtain it after a great drought of three years and an half. Thus we
see what great things may be obtained of God by prayer, when therein we seek
his glory. This example the Apostle sets before our eyes, when he wills us
to pray for them that be sick, with hope of obtaining health, and forgiveness
of sins for them: Iam. 5.17.
For says he, The prayer of one righteous man avails much, when it is
fervent. As Elias, being a man like us, yet inflamed with Gods glory, did pray
that there might be no rain, that the people by that punishment might be
brought to know God; and after prayed, that there might be rain, that by his
mercy they might know it much more: and he obtained both. And so if in our
prayers we were thus touched with the glory of God, we might obtain great
things: but for the most part, men respect themselves in their prayers, and not
God, and so obtain little or nothing. And the same Elijah when he prayed for
fire to consume the captains and their fifty men, when they came to fetch him
to the king of Israel by force, saying, Thou man of God, the king commands
thee to come to him, as if they had said, Thou say, that thou art a man of
God, well let us see whether he can keep thee from the king. He answered them:
If I be a man of God, 2. King. 1.10.
let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee, and thy fifty: and so it
did. He did not thus pray in any private revenge, but that it might be known,
that he was a true Prophet, and that that message was true that he sent unto
the king before, namely, that when he was sick, and sent to Beelzebub the god
of Esron, to know whether he should recover or no: Verse. 2.
he sent him this message, That because he had forsaken the true God, and sent
to them that were no gods, he should not come from the bed on which he was, but
he should die there, as also he did. Now when the disciples of Christ desired
that fire might come down from heaven to consume the Samaritanes, and their
cities, because they would not receive him, when he was going toward
Jerusalem; they obtained it not, though they pretended the example of Elias,
saying, Master, Luc. 9.54.
will thou that we command fire from heaven, and destroy them, as Elias did?
He said, they had not that spirit, and did it not to that end that he did:
namely, the glory of God, but in respect of themselves. So then, if we will
obtain any thing at the hand of God, we must therein seek his glory, and
desire it to that end, that thereby God may be glorified and praised; as the
people do here, when they say, That we may rejoice, and set up our banners in
the name of our God, when he shall fulfill all thy petitions.

This was the ground of the prayer of Moses for the Israelits in the
wilderness, whereby he often obtained great things for them. As when the Lord
would have destroyed them for their idolatry with the golden calfe, Exodus
32.12.
and have made of Moses a mighty people, he prays unto God, that he would
not do so: for then the Egyptians would speak ill of God, and say, that he
maliciously brought them out from thence, to destroy them in the wilderness:
and so he not seeking his own glory, but the glory of God herein, obtained,
that they were spared contrary to their deserts. And Moses, that God would
spare the Israelits for the glory of his name.
And so afterward, when the spies, that were sent to spy out the land of
Canaan, brought up an ill report of that pleasant land of promise, contrary to
all truth, Number. 14.13.
and by that means discouraged the people, so that they all murmured against
Moses and Aaron, that they had brought them thither, to fall by the sword of
their enemies, God said, That he would destroy them with the pestilence, but
make of him a mightier nation than they: Moses prayed for them and said, That
the Egyptians would say, that God was not able to bring them in: and so to
stop the mouths of the enemies, and for the glory of God, he desires that he
would spare them; and so he did. Thus ought we to pray for our selves, and for
the Church of God, that he would turn from us all those evils that we have
most righteously desired, even for the glory of his name; and therein not
respect our selves so much, as Gods glory, that we professing his name, it
might not be ill spoken of for our punishments. And truly this should be one
principal reason to move us to pray for the remoouing of this plague, So
ought we to pray for the remoouing of this plague.
that the Atheists, and Papists, and worldlings do not speak ill of Gods
name, and of his people, and his Gospel, when he so greatly punishes them
that profess it. And also, that we our selves and others might (by remoouing
of it) have cause to praise his holy name. And indeed, if we did less respect
our selves herein, as for the most part men do wholly, and be more careful of
Gods glory; as that by the staying of it, he might be praised: yea, and
justice might be executed to the glory of God, the course of which now for a
while has been stayed in many places, because they could not so safely meet
for fear of the infection: and that good things might be established, and ill
removed by a Parliament (which it is like should have been long before, if
this pestilence had not been so universal, and so mortal;) we might obtain
by our prayers a great deal more than we do.

Psalm. 79 8.
Therefore let us pray as they did, Remember not against us the former
iniquities, but make have, and let thy tender mercies prevent us, for we are in
great misery: Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and
deliver us, and be merciful unto us for thy names sake. Wherefore should the
Heathen say, where is their God? Here we see they pray to God to forgive them
their sins, and to remove that punishment that was justly laid upon them for
the same, even for the glory of his own name: and so must we do at this
time, if we will be heard; that it may be known that he is a God of mercy,
that he is the hearer of prayers, that he will be found of the^ that seek him,
even in due time, Psalm. 10.1.
in affliction. And if the glory of God did more take us up, then might we
hope to obtain more things at his hands. And thus again the people of God
prayed in their miseries, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, Psalm. 115.1.
but to thy name give the glory, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths
sake, wherefore shall the Heathen say, when is now their God? Our God is in
heaven, he does whatsoever he will. Where they pray God, that he would do
that, that might make most for his glory, not for their selves, but for his
mercy and truths sake, that he might be praised. So must we pray, that God
would so deal with us in this visitation of his, that he may be known to be
our God, and so honored of us, and of all others: so that whether he remove
it, or it continue, his glory may be set forth by it, and that done that may
make most for it. If we did pray in the zeal of Gods glory, we might obtain
great things.
And assuredly, if we could come to these indifferent minds, to have or to
forgo health and other things, as they might make most for the glory of God;
then we should see how the Lord would deal with us in this, and all other
things besides. Therefore let us be so inflamed with the zeal of Gods glory,
that we may pray, as the people do here, Give me this, and give me that, that
we may sing of thy salvation, and set up our banners in the name of the Lord
our God, when he shall fulfill all our petitions. And we shall find by
experience, that the more we seek the glory of God in any thing, the sooner
shall we have it, and in greater measure: for God though he should forget us,
yet he cannot forget the glory of his name, nor those that be careful of it.
So then, whether we ask the forgiveness of our sins, or the increase of
faith, or any other of the graces of God, to lead an holy life, we must respect
the glory of God in them, and that we and others may praise him for them. Or
whether we ask life, health, wealth, or any outward thing else, we must do it
so far, and to that end, that God may be glorified in us by them: as the
Prophet does, Be beneficial to thy servant, Psalm. 119.17. As David and
Hezekiah did.
that I may live and keep thy law: where he desires to live so, as by his
godly life he might glorify God; and he did esteem of that, as of a great
benefit. So did David pray, when he was banished by Absalom, he desires God to
spare him, and to continue his life, that he might praise him, for in death
there was no remembrance of him, Psalm. 30.9.
saying: What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall
the dust give thanks to thee, or shall it declare thy truth? And after the
same manner did king Hezekiah, when he was sick unto death also, and had
received the sentence of it against himself, by the Prophet Isaiah: he prayed,
That God would not take him away in the midst of his days, for the glory
and praise of his name; and this grieved him most, that he should be cut off
from partaking of Gods goodness, and praising him for it in the land of the
living. Isai. 38.11.
I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living: and
afterward he adds, Verse. 18.
The grave cannot confess thee, death cannot praise thee, they that go down
to the pit cannot hope for thy truth; but the living, the living, he shall
confess thee, as I do this day. So we see to what end he desired life, even
that he might have occasion still to praise God: and the Lord heard these
prayers of his, and added fifteen years to his life.

Let us then examine our selves, to what end we desire all that we do; whether
God may be glorified in us by them or no: if we do, then may we be assured,
that our prayers are according to Gods will, and he will hear us so soon as
it shall make for his glory. As for example, if we desire life principally to
this end, We must examine our hearts, to what end we desire every thing.
that we may still praise God, and glorify his name, both in our calling, and
as we be Christians, as David and Hezekiah did: and whether we desire children,
that they might be instruments of Gods glory in this world, to serve him in the
Church or common wealth, as Hannah did: and whether we desire wealth and
credit, that we might be the more fit to do good unto others, and to set forth
the praise of God by our alms, and good deeds, as Job, Job. 31.16. Act. 9.36.
and Dorcas did: and to be short, all other gifts of body to this end
especially, as Solomon did ask wisdom for that cause: and Queen Hester did
put on her royal apparel, Hest. 5.1.
and dressed up her self well, that so in the presence of the king she might
find favor in dealing for the Church of God: then may we be bold with great
comfort to commend them to God, for in them we seek not our selves, but his
glory, which is most dear to himself also. But for the most part, men in all
things seek themselves only, or principally, and so have them not as they
desire. Therefore if we lack any thing that we have desired, and prayed for,
consider whether we did seek Gods glory in it, or our own benefit; if we had
respect to our selves, then no marvel if we did want it, that we might learn
to reform our desires. For though God gives unto men, that seek only
themselves, as he does to the wicked, yea unto the bruit beasts, because he is
goodness it self, and would hereby draw all men unto him; yet how much more
would he do it, if men did seek his glory therein? For though a master will
give his servant that, which is for his own profit only; yet he will grant
him that suit especially, which shall make for the credit of his master, and
whereby he may do him the better service: most of all, when he sees that he
seeks for it in that respect principally: so will the Lord deal with all his
faithful servants much more, give them (I say) that sometimes wherein they
respect themselves only, but most of all that whereby they desire to be
furthered in his service, and to glorify his name, a great deal more.

That we may rejoice in thy salvation, etc. As he has in these words noted
what was the end of their desires, beforehand; so also what should be the fruit
of them afterward, and what they would do for them; namely, Rejoice in this
great benefit bestowed upon them, and praise his name for it. And this should
be the fruit of all Gods benefits upon us, The fruit of all Gods benefits in
us, should be the praise of his name.
both public and private: that as he by them offers us occasion of praising
him, so we should do it for them; as we see in the next Psalm this people
do, according to that that they profess here. And truly then do we rightly
profit by all Gods benefits, when we give him that praise for them, that is due
unto him: and when we so use them, and speak of them, as God the author of
them, may be honored. For to this end God gives all, and this is all that we
can do for all, To praise him in heart, word and life: therefore if we do not
this, all is lost upon us. And every one as he receives more from God, so is
he bound to this the more, to sing of them to God, that is, to praise his name
for them; And to set up their banners in his name, that is, to set forth his
glory. So that the poorest that is, is bound unto it, for their life, health,
food, and raiment, etc. and other common benefits that they enjoy: for when
they have least, they have more than they have deserved. But the rich are bound
unto it a great deal more, by how much they go beyond others in Gods
benefits; for he did owe them nothing, and he might have made them like others:
yea and he can so do when he will; Daniel 4.30.
as he dealt with Nebuchadnezzar, whom of a proud king he made a vile beast.
And this is so proper unto all the benefits of God, that where he speaks of
many of them, he begins and ends the Psalm thus, My soul praise thou the
Lord. And in another, Psalm. 103. Psalm. 40 3.
speaking of a new benefit that God had bestowed on him, he says, Thou have
put a new song of praise into my mouth: showing what we should do when God
blesses us, for every benefit give him new praises. And in another Psalm
praying for the forgiveness of his sin, he says, Open thou my lips O Lord,
Psalm. 51.15.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: as if he had said, If God shall
bestow this benefit upon me, then I will praise him for it.

As we should do thus for all Gods benefits, We should more specially praise
God for those benefits, which we have asked of him.
so most of all for those, which we have asked of him: as they say here; When
he shall fulfill all thy petitions: they had prayed before, that God would
hear them, and now they promise this, That they will set up their banners in
his name. And there is great reason of this, for besides the benefits that we
receive, which deserve praise, we have thereby experience of the goodness of
God in hearing our prayers. Thus we read in the Gospel, that when ten leapers
were cleansed, all of them having begged it of Christ before, saying, Jesus
master have mercy upon us; Luke 17.17.
but one returned to give thanks: and Christ asks for the other nine, and so
shows what was their duty also, namely, that as they had asked this benefit
with him, so they should have returned with him to give thanks. And to this
end is it said so often in the Psalm, where he shows how in sundry
afflictions men cry unto God, and he hears them, and delivers them: Psalm.
107.8.15.21.31.
Let them therefore confess before the Lord, his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men: where he exhorts all to praise God
for those benefits which he has bestowed upon them at their prayers. But
indeed this doctrine is so well known, that it needs no great proof, there
is none so ignorant or so unthankful, that will deny it: only we had need
to examine our selves, how we do practice it: whether we have endeavored to
praise God for all his benefits, and especially for those that we have most
desired: and when we have had the^, whether we have been any whit the more
careful to set forth the praise of God for them, than before. Now if we find
by this trial, that the more that God has given us, the more we have
glorified him; then may we have comfort and hope of the continuance of them:
but if in the abundance of all Gods benefits, Let us examine whether as Gods
benefits increase, so we set forth his glory the more
we take our ease, and set out our selves to the world, and grow more proud,
and be less careful to glorify God (as most commonly it falls out;) then
we provoke God to take them away, or to punish us in them. Therefore let every
one consider, what good he does with all that he has, and how by Gods
blessings (as wealth and such like) not his own name is advanced, but what
good he has done since for the service and glory of God. If he see they go
together, the increase of Gods benefits upon him, and the increase of Gods
glory in him, it is well, and he has cause to rejoice: but if the one increase
greatly, and the other decay, or stand at a stay, then it is the next way to
loose all. As we are taught in the parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25.24.
he that hid that one that he had, in a napkin, and did no good with it, nor
use it to his masters advantage, it was taken from him, and he is called an
evil and unprofitable servant: So all are unprofitable, that in their several
callings use not that which God gives them, to his glory: and this shall be the
end of them, That all that they have shall be taken from them, and they shall
have their portion with the wicked.

That we may rejoice, etc. As they have desired help of God for the glory of
his name, and promised to praise him for it; so more particularly they say,
that they shall rejoice in the salvation of the king: They pray for this
benefit, that they might rejoice
namely, if God would help him out of the hands of his enemies, and give him
victory over them. For in the preservation of the king, was the good of the
whole Church, and common wealth; therefore if he did well they should rejoice,
and in his hurt and loss was the loss of them all, and so they should have
cause to sorrow. Therefore they use this also as a reason to persuade the Lord
to hear them, That whereas now they were doubtful or rather in great fear, he
by the victory would give them cause to rejoice. And though they show
whereunto their joy should tend, namely to the praise of God, singing unto him
of his salvation, and setting up their banners in his name; yet they exclude
not this, but rather include it, namely, the common joy of all the people, and
of the whole Church of God. So that we may lawfully desire of God such things
as we want, to this end, even that we might rejoice: and this one thing is
sufficient to move the Lord to give them; even that thereby we might have cause
to rejoice: as we must confess, that then we shall have cause so to do. For
besides the comfort of the thing that he gives, which may clear up the
outward and inward man: the invisible things also of God are to be seen in his
creatures and benefits, as his wisdom, power, Romans 1.20.
goodness, and mercy, etc. and so in the sight and feeling of the same, we
may rejoice much more: especially, when we have prayed to God for them, we may
rejoice, that God has heard our prayers. And so we may desire God to hear us,
that so, not only for his benefits, but for his goodness toward us in them,
and especially in hearing our prayers for them, we may rejoice. God is willing
to bless his people, that they might rejoice.
Behold then I pray you the wonderful goodness of our God, who desires our
joy and comfort, and gives us things to that end, that we might rejoice, and
would have us ask them of him to that end, as this people does here. For as
among men this often moves them to hear us, that we profess to them, and
they see it also, that if they shall do so and so for us, we shall have great
case to rejoice and be glad: and whereas now we for the want of it are in
heaviness and sorrow, this will cheer up our hearts. And this is sufficient
to move them that are of any good disposition, that in doing for them that are
in need, we see that we shall make them and theirs right glad: and the poor
when they sue to them, they use this as a reason, and it is accepted. Then may
we urge this unto the Lord much more, and we may be assured, that it will move
him.

As parents are willing to do good to their children to that end.
For so good is the Lord to all that are his, that he delights not in their
sorrow and grief, no more than parents do in the grief of their children: nay
a great deal less, by how much his love infinitely without all degree of
comparison exceeds the natural love of the most tender parents. Therefore as
they are willing to do any thing for them, when they see their children sad
and heavy, to cheer them up; and the very bowels of the mother yearneth upon
them, to bring them out of their heaviness; so does the Lord God, of his infit
compassion, in whom that is sea-full, whereof we have but one drop. And we may
desire of him our comfort, and the means of our comfort, and therefore pray
that he would give us this, and that, according to our particular need, even
that we might rejoice: whereas now and and without them we are full of grief.
Therefore if a man be in fear of some trouble (as these were of enemies) which
makes him sad, at the least he cannot rejoice, as he would: he may pray to God
(as these do) and say, O Lord hear me and help me, And we may pray God to
help us to that end. John 16.21.
that I may rejoice: now I am heavy and have no joy, bat if I were out of this
fear, then should I rejoice: O Lord make me to rejoice. A woman in travail,
(as Christ says in the Gospel) when her pains are on her, is in great
heaviness; but soon after all is forgotten, for joy that a manchild is borne.
And he compares the afflictions of the Church generally, and of every one
particularly, unto them. Heb. 12.11.
Now because, as the Apostle says, no affliction for the time present is
joyous but grievous, but after the fruit of it, is joyous to them that are
exercised therein, and their deliverance also. Therefore as a woman in her
travail may pray to God, Lord make an end of my pains, and deliver me, that I
may rejoice: so may all those that are in any distress pray for deliverance
out of their adversity, that they might rejoice; and God in his good time will
give them cause of joy. For (as the prophet says) joy is sown for the
righteous, Psalm. 97.11.
and gladness for them that are upright in heart: and therefore if they tarry
the time they shall reap it: Psalm. 126.5.
for they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: as it is said of the
Israelites when they were carried captives into Babylon, They went weeping and
carried precious seed, but they did return with joy, and brought their sheaues
with thm.

Besides, if any be in sorrow and grief for their sin, As when we are
grieved for our sins: that by the forgiveness of them he mould make us glad.
22. 1, 2. Psalm. 32.3.4. Psalm. 6.6.7.
or for the want of the feeling of Gods favor, they may pray to God to give
them their hearts desire, that they may rejoice: and say, now there is nothing
but heaviness in me, but if God would assure me of his favor, how should I
rejoice. As David complains that he roared out night and day, the hand of God
was so heavy upon him, and that his hands were wringing wet with the tears
of his eyes, and that he watered his couch with tears, and that he mingled his
drink with his tears, and that his eyes were sunk into his head with grief,
yea that his eyesight failed him; and many such grievous complaints he
utters: but if God would forgive him his sin, and assure him of his favor,
then he should rejoice exceedingly. As he says, Psalm. 4.6.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and I shall have more joy
than if I had all the goods in the world. So in another place, when he was
troubled for his sin, he prays to God to forgive him, that he might
rejoice, Have mercy upon me O God, Psalm. 51.1.
according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy
compassions put away mine iniquities, wash me thoroughly, etc. Where we see how
uncomfortably he begins, and how he confesses his sins with great
grief, and prays earnestly for the forgiveness of them: and what reason
uses he to him? this one, even that he might rejoice. Verse. 8.
For he says, Make me to have joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice: that is, that I may rejoice, who am now wounded in my
mind with the conscience of my sins, and for fear of those judgments, which
thou by thy servant have denounced against me. Verse. 12.
And a little after, Restore me to the joys of thy salvation: where he
desires, that he might have that joy in his salvation, that he had before.
Thus in all grief of mind, especially for our sins, or for any judgment of
God upon us, or like to befall us, we may pray, That God would be merciful
unto us, To this end we may pray, that God would remove this plague.
that we might rejoice. As now this great mortality every where has been the
cause of much sorrow; to some for the great loss of their friends, and to
others for fear of that that might befall them and theirs: and none can
rejoice any where in this time of heaviness, as before. Now we may pray to God
that he would make an happy and a speedy end of it, not only for the glory
of his name, but for the joy of his servants: that they who a long time have been in heaviness, might now at the last be comforted, and rejoice. And no
doubt as this would be a matter of exceeding great joy to the greatest part of
this land, so in that respect let us not cease praying unto God, that we might
rejoice in his salvation, that is, in that health that he should bestow upon
us, and the rest of his people. And let us do it the rather, Psa. 30.5.
because he has promised, That though heaviness be in the evening, yet joy
shall come in his morning: that is, in his most blessed time, which let us wait
upon him for.

For it is said of the people of God, in Egypt, That God did certainly see
their trouble, Exodus 3.7.
and knew their sorrows, and heard their cry, and so was come to deliver
them: showing that he would have them in sorrow no longer: and so it appeared
in the end, that they went out with great joy, That our brethren in all places
might rejoice.
laden with the spoil of the Egyptians. So we may be sure, that he is not
ignorant of the trouble and sorrow that many in this land a long time have been
in, and he has heard the cries that they have been driven to make: let us
beseech him for them, that it would please him in his good time to deliver them
from it, and from the cause of it: especially, seeing he is so merciful, that
it is truly said of him, Psalm. 103.9.
He will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever. And as in the days of
Hester it is written, Hest. 3.15. Chap. 4.3.
That not only the chief city Shushan was in great perplexity; but in every
place whether the kings commission came, there was great sorrow among the
Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and many lay in sackcloth and
ashes: but they all prayed unto God, and he delivered them, and saved them from
their enemies, Chap. 9.17.
and turned the days of famine into the days of feasting and joy. So let us
give our selves unto continual prayer, that the Lord may be entreated of us at
the last, and so in his appointed time it may come to pass, that whereas many
of the chief cities and towns amongst us have been a long time in great
perplexity, by reason of this grievous pestilence and contagious mortalititie,
and in all places of this realm besides, whither tidings of their estate has
and does weekly come, they have been in sorrow and great heaviness, and in
weeping and mourning, and fasting: now there may be cause of rejoicing and
praising God, and these days of sorrow and fasting may be turned into the
days of great joy and feasting. That so we may (as this people wish for
themselves here) rejoice, when he shall fulfill all our petitions. Which the
Lord of his infinite mercy grant, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

The sixteenth Sermon upon the fifth verse.
That we may rejoice in thy salvation, etc.
AS they bring this for a reason in their prayer, to move the Lord to bestow
upon them this benefit: so here they profess, that if he will vouchsafe so to
do, they would rejoice indeed, and be glad, and as they should have cause.
From whence we may learn how we ought to be affected with the common benefits
of our time: We ought to rejoice in the common benefits of our time.
as here they speak of public blessing, namely, victory over their enemies,
and so of common peace and tranquillity that should follow; namely, that we
should take them from God, as matter of great joy. And as when there is any
common affliction and plague in the land, of what kind soever, we should be
affected with it, and be sorrowful for it: and not have that stoninesse and
hardness of heart that is in too many, whereby it should come to pass, that
we should make light of such things, and not be moved with them, as we ought.
So we should be touched with the consideration of the common benefits, to
rejoice in them, because we have our part in them: and the greater that those
benefits be, the more should we rejoice in them, and the more should be our joy
for them: or else we cannot be so thankful unto God for them, as we ought.
We should not then be so careless, that we should not mark the common
benefits of our time; nor so blockish and hard hearted, that in marking of
them, we should not rejoice in them. For we see, that the servants of God in
their several ages and times, have not only greatly rejoiced in the common
benefits of the Church and Commonwealth, wherein they have had their part with
the rest of their brethren; but they have openly professed it, to the glory of
God, and the good example of others: As when they returned from the captivity
of Babylon, where they had been long, not only in a strange country, but
under idolaters; now, when they come home, and have the freedom of their
conscience in Gods service, and that in their own country, they were not only
filled with joy, but they speak of it among themselves to their mutual
comfort: and as when they went out, they wept, and were touched with the common
misery of that time, and put away all tokens of joy from them. Psalm. 137.2.
(For by the waters of Babylon they hanged their harpes upon the willowes, and
said, that they would not sing the Lords song in a strange land:) so in their
return they speak otherwise of themselves: for as the benefit was so great
and so unlooked for of many, Psalm. 126.1.
That when the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, they were like them
that dream: so their joy was so great, that they say, Then was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy: and they say, The Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice. The Lord has vouchsafed us and our
forefathers the like mercy, in delivering us long ago from the tyranny of the
Pope, As that we are delivered from popery.
and of his idolatry, and given us this freedom of the gospel in our own
country: we must so consider of it, That as those holy men that wanted it, so
prayed for it, that they might rejoice (as this people does here, for another
benefit:) so now we that have it, might rejoice in it indeed, and not to be so
senseless and void of feeling, as many are, not at all or very little to be
moved with so great cause of joy.

The like may be said of all other common benefits whatsoever: as when Solomon
was appointed to be king in his father David's room, and this was done with the
common consent of all the nobles and chief men of the realm, it is said, they
gave thanks unto God, and were exceedingly glad. 1. Chron. 29.20.
For David said unto them, Now bless the Lord your God: and all the
congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads,
and worshipped the Lord, and the king. And they did eat and drink before the
Lord the same day with great joy: and they made Solomon the son of David king
the second time. So this great benefit, to have one good prince to succeed
another peaceably, And then we have one good prince to succeed another.
was unto them matters of great joy. In which respect we have no less cause to
rejoice than they, that after the death of our late Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, of blessed memory, by whom we did enjoy many great benefits, who
did restore religion, and took order for the service and servants of the Lord
(as David did) we have one in Gods great mercy to succeed, that maintains
the Gospel: and that he is peaceably come to the Crown (as Solomon was then)
so that neither we are fallen into the hands of our enemies, nor given up unto
Popish idolatry (as both of them were greatly feared.) But as this benefit was
greatly desired of many before, and they thought that then they would rejoice,
and otherwise they could not: so we that enjoy it, must rejoice in it, and so
consider of the greatness of it, that our hearts may be made glad with it: and
that we may eat and drink before the Lord, and use other of his benefits, as
in his presence, with great joy. So is it said afterward in the days of this
Solomon, when he had builded and made an end of the temple of the Lord, and had
with solemn prayers and sacrifices dedicated it unto his service, all the
people of the land that came up to Jerusalem to the dedication of that house
(when all things were finished) The king sent away into their tents joyous and
with glad hearts, 2. Chron. 7.10.
because of the goodness that the Lord had done for David, and for Solomon,
and for Israel his people. Thus they rejoiced again in this great blessing,
that God had set up the place to his worship among them, so that all knew
whether to resort unto it: In regard whereof we have as great cause to rejoice
at this time, as they had then; for God has given us his holy word and
Gospel, and we have public places appointed every where, And that the Gospel
is planted every where.
whether we and all the people may resort with the freedom of our consciences
to serve God, and we are not by the grace of God unprovided for this way: let
us do as this people did here, consider of it, as a matter of great joy. And
truly so it is, if we do rightly weigh and esteem of it: for what I pray you,
would our forefathers have given, to enjoy these great benefits that we do?
and how comfortable would they have thought their times to have been, in
respect of that they were then, if they might have had them, as we have? I
mean, this liberty and freedom from persecution: this good government, and
peaceable inioying of all that we have, especially the purity of the Gospel,
and the peace of the Church. And if any one of them severally be sufficient
cause of joy, then all of them together a great deal more: let us then seeing
we have them, not loose the comfort of them, but so esteem of them, and so
consider of them as causes of great joy, as in their own nature they are.

And as we ought to do thus at all times, so especially and most of all, we
had need to do it in the time of any sorrow or grief, that thereby we might
bear the same so much the more easily, when in so many great benefits we shall
see what great joy we have. In the time of sorrow most of al we ought to
rejoice in Gods benefits
And truly if we could come to this, as we ought, we should find, that though
many times for this and that, and such things as do befall us, we have cause
to sorrow; yet for these and such like we have again cause of joy: and so it
might happily come to pass, that we setting the one against the other, we
might easily overcome at the least the extremity of grief, and find fault with
our selves for being grieved too much, Psalm 42.11.
and say as David did to himself, Why art thou cast down my soul? and why
art thou disquieted within me? wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, he
is my present help, and my God. So we might say to our selves, why am I thus
grieved? have I not these and these causes of joy? And so though all grief be
not taken clean away from us, yet at the least it should by this be so
moderated and mitigated, as the furious spirit of Saul was with the pleasant
music of David, that it might be tollerably and in some good sort borne. So
shall our sorrow be the more easily borne.
When as it should be with us, as it was with them that built the second
Temple at Jerusalem, where some wept, and some rejoiced, and so among the
people there was joy and sorrow mingled together. Many of the Priests and of
the Levites, Esra. 3.12.
and of the chief fathers, ancient men, which had seen the first house (when
the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes) wept with a loud
voice, and many shouted aloud for joy: So that the people could not discern
the sound of the shout for joy, from the noise of the weeping of the people;
for the people shouted with a loud cry, and the noise was heard far off. Some
here wept because they had no more, and some rejoiced because they had so much;
and they could not tell which of them was the greatest, the noise of them that
mourned, or the noise of them that rejoiced. So it might come to pass that in
the midst of our sorrow there might be some joy: and our joy might be as
great as our grief; and so much the greater, by how much the cause of the one
is greater than the other: and thus when we began to be sorrowful, we might
also begin to rejoice. For it is said in a song of one of the confessors of the
Church (who desired to have been a Martyr) Some men for sudden joy do weep,
and some in sorrow sing, etc. Betwixt them both (says he) will I begin, etc.
meaning, that he would so sorrow for his sins, that he would rejoice in
Christ, in whom he saw more cause to rejoice, than he could see of sorrow in
himself: and so he would begin between both, and that did make a very good
mean. So must we do, think as well what cause we have of joy, as we do of
our sorrow; and so neither rejoice without sorrow when there is cause, nor
sorrow without joy, when there is cause of both, but as he said, begin between
both.

And let us be willing to do thus the rather, because few have any care at all
to do it, as they ought: whereby it comes to pass that they loose the
fruits and comfort of these benefits: Few do truly rejoice in Gods benefits.
and though they have them, yet they are not so comfortable unto them, as they
might be. For these things that we have spoken of, namely, the common benefit
of peace, and good government, and the Gospel, are common to all in our time,
as well as to our selves: but how few do truly rejoice before the Lord in
them? or in the causes of their joy, do at any time think or consider of
them? or when they would make themselves merry, do enter into the serious
consideration of these causes of joy? but what is the cause of it? Surely they
neither have prayed unto God for them (as this people did here for this that
they speak of) neither have they esteemed of them, as of great befits (as they
did of this, that they prayed for) and so they cannot rejoice in them, as they
should: and by that means also it comes to pass, that they cannot be so
thankful to God for them, as they ought, and as others are. For these two go
together, and cannot be severed; To rejoice in Gods benefits, and to be
thankful for them: so that the more we rejoice, the more thankful should we
be: and the want of joy in Gods benefits, is the cause of unthankfulness for
them. As we see here also, that in this verse they are joined together, when
they say, That we might rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banners in the
name of our God: as we shall hereafter see by the grace of God, out of these
words, What should be the fruit of all true joy in Gods benefits (whereby this
joy of the holy Ghost differs from all carnal and worldly joy) even
thanksgiving to God, who has bestowed them upon us, and in them has given us
so great cause of joy.

All private benefits are causes of joy.
And as all common benefits are causes of joy, even as this people profess
here, That if God bestow this upon them, they shall rejoice in it: so are also
all private blessings so many causes of joy to all those that enjoy them:
whether they be upon their souls or bodies, for this life or the life to
come, upon themselves or any of theirs. And as the things, that they enjoy, are
more and greater than others have, so they ought to confess, that God has in
this vale of misery given them so much cause of joy. For who is he or she, or
where are they, that being in never so mean an estate, do not enjoy many
great benefits from God? as life, and health, liberty, convenient food,
lodging, raiment, for which they have cause to rejoice: In which respect the
poorest has great cause of joy.
but especially if they have faith and repentance, and the peace of conscience,
and assurance of the forgiveness of their sins, and hope of salvation, what
cause have they then to rejoice, though they were in never so great want
besides? Therefore in their poor estates they must so consider of their wants,
as that they do not forget Gods benefits, which may make them to rejoice even
in their poverty, and in their affliction. So that as the Prophet Elisha said
to his servant, who was in great fear, and cried out, when he saw the great
host of armed men which the king of Aram had sent, 2. King. 6.16.
to take them at Dotham, Fear not, for there are more with us, than against
us: (for God had sent horses and chariots of fire to defend them.) So every
one may say, when his estate is at the hardest, that there is more with him,
than is against him: that is, that he has more benefits, and so more causes of
joy, than crosses, and so in them causes of sorrow. For if we do but live
especially in these days to serve God, and to save our own souls, it is
better than the estate of many nobles and princes in other parts of the world,
that have not these means of their salvation that we have and may have, and in
that measure, and with that peace and freedom that we have them: in which
respect, the estate of the poorest is better, if they do see it, and can so
consider of it, than not only of many nobles, but of the great Turk himself,
and of the Emperor, yea, the Pope himself, who takes himself to be king and
prince of the whole world. For that which David says of himself, is true of
all, if they could so esteem of it: A day in thy courts, Psalm. 84.10.
is better than a thousand otherwhere: I had rather be a dore-keeper in the
house of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness: for the Lord
God is the sun and shield unto us: the Lord will give grace and glory: and no
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Therefore when any of you shall be in such a case, that you shall spend away
the whole day in sorrow, and then at night lie down in heaviness, as wanting
many things necessary, both for food and raiment, for lodging and firing,
besides health and countenance, which others have in great measure, and yet
little pity those that have not, like unto that rich glutton, that in his
great abundance had no compassion of poor Lazarus; then consider I pray you
for the love of Christ, and for your own consolation, how many benefits you
enjoy: And in the midst of their wants they must think of Gods benefits,
that they might rejoice.
look into your soul, meditate upon the graces of God in it, if you have any,
think upon faith, hope, and charity, with the fear of God, and such like,
which the Lord in mercy has bestowed upon you; and rejoice in them. Be not
still harping all of one string, of your wants, for that will give you but one
tune of sorrow. But as David says; I will sing Mercy and Judgment, Psalm.
101.1.
unto thee O Lord will I sing: So let us have two strings at the least to our
harp, one, of our wants; and another of Gods benefits: that is, consider you
as well of Gods benefits, as of his crosses, and more of them than of the
other; because you had need to find out matter of joy, the cause of sorrow will
offer it self unto you fast enough. And therefore if the string of your sorrow
be somewhat too high, let it down lower, and stretch up the cord of your joy
one note higher; that is, think more of the causes of your joy, and less of
the causes of your sorrow: and thus your instrument shall well accord, and make
good music, which was too doleful and untunable before. And thus the more
cunning you are, and the more you can do, the better harmony shall you make
to your self and others; that is, the more you shall rejoice even then, when
to the worldward you have cause of nothing but sorrow. Act. 16.23.
Thus shall it come to pass, That as Paul and Silas after extreme whipping
being cast into prison, and into a dungeon, and had their feet made fast in the
stocks, did sing Psalms unto God at midnight: so shall you rejoice in the
midst of your affliction, be it never so great. For they at this present not
only or not so much considered their imprisonment, beating, and stocking (which
did minister nothing to them but matter of grief) but rather other great
benefits and favors of God, which with them they enjoyed: and so must you do
likewise, consider the one as well as the other. So shall not only your selves
have comfort, but God shall have praise: and for want of this wise
consideration of both, neither have you joy in your selves, nor God honor from
you in that estate, though he has given you sufficient cause of both.

And as for the rich, what great cause of joy they have in the multitude of so
many great benefits as they enjoy, (of whom it may be truly said, as the
Apostle says of the Gentiles, Act. 14.17.
when he preached unto them, That God had filled their hearts with food and
gladness) themselves do best know, I need say little or nothing to them. So
that in such an estate as many are in, if they cannot rejoice, but live in
heaviness, and discontentedly, whereby they can neither serve God so
cheerfully, nor praise him so continually, as they should; they are altogether
unworthy of all. I need not therefore say any thing to them, their own eyes
and hands, their backs and their bellies can tell them sufficiently, what
cause they have to rejoice: What cause the rich have to live joyfully and
comfortably.
their apparel and their clothing, wherewith they are kept from cold, when
others go half naked and quake for cold, their food in abundance, and of the
best, both for necessity and delight; when others are pinched with hunger,
have but bread and drink, and not enough of that, who themselves and their
children do eat by measure and by weight, to draw out their food at length:
their soft and warm lodging, when others lie hard and cold, and scarcely can
be warm all night. These and many things else can put them in mind, from day to
night, and from night to day, what great cause they have to rejoice above many
others. Let them then in the name of God so consider of them, that they may
rejoice; for God has given them to them to that end: as Solomon says in the
book of the Preacher, Eccle. 2.24.
That this is the fruit of all that a man can have of all that he has, to eat
and to drink, and to rejoice in the blessings of God: and yet that also is the
gift of God, as he confesses there. Therefore they above all others must
confess, that God has given them great cause of joy: and nothing can so
befall them (unless God take all away from them, as he did from Job) but they
must needs acknowledge, that still they have cause to rejoice. So that it is
not only lawful for them, in and for these to rejoice, but it is necessary
that they should do so, and it is required at their hands; insomuch, that if
they were so blind, that they would not confess, that they had great cause of
joy, all men would by the benefits which they enjoy in great number, witness
against them: and if they were so froward, that they would not rejoice, all men
would condemn them for it. And thus we see, that all sorts in respect of Gods
benefits which he has bestowed upon them, have cause to rejoice.

The praise of God must be the fruit of our joy.
But what is to be done in this joy, and for all these causes of joy? it
follows in the next words of the text on this wise, And set up our banners in
the name of our God, that is, praise God for them: for we see here how they are
joined together, That we may rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banners
in the name of the Lord our God. So they say, that this should be the fruit of
their joy, they would praise God in it, for the cause of it. And this ought to
be the fruit of true joy in all men and for all things. For as all good and
godly sorrow should drive us unto prayer, that God might turn that away from
us, or remove it, for which we do sorrow: so on the contrary, all true and
godly joy should drive us to thanksgiving for that, which is the cause of our
joy. And as herein, godly and wordly sorrow differ, that the one many times
drives to despair, or causes sickness, and so death in the end; 2. Cor.
7.10.
the other causes repentance, never to be repented of; and so prayer to God
for the forgiveness of our sins, which have justly brought upon us that
cause of sorrow. So on the other side, herein godly joy differs from worldly
joy; the one, makes a man secure, and to forget God, and to rest in himself,
and sometimes to be profane, and to keep no measure in things, but to abuse
that that he has: but the other inlargeth the heart to praise God, and makes
him to go out of the things themselves, the causes of his joy, unto God, the
author of them. And thus does the Apostle very excellently by these fruits note
out unto us true sorrow, Iam. 5.13.
and true joy, when he says: Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any
merry? let him sing: where he makes prayer the fruit of sorrow in
affliction; and thanksgiving the fruit of joy in Gods benefits. And S. Paul
does show us at large the difference between the worldly joy of the wicked,
and the godly joy of the righteous: when he says to the Ephesians, Ephe. 5.18.
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be fulfilled with the spirit,
speaking unto your selves in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the Lord in your hearts: And therein true joy differs
from all worldly joy.
giving thanks always for all things unto God, even the father, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ: wherein one kind (as in feasting) which is lawful,
and common to the good and bad, and which is an honest means to make men merry
and glad, he shows the diversity of the mirth of the one and of the other.
The men of this world they exceed, and fall into the abuse of Gods creatures,
sometimes till they be drunken, or have surfeited, and so also give themselves
unto that mirth which is excessive and immoderat, and sometimes, yea commonly,
joined with profane scoffing or some wickedness. The children of God using
his creatures soberly, and in his presence, even at their feasts, do thereby
provoke one another to praise God, and make themselves merry in God, and as in
his sight. We see then what should be the fruit of our joy in Gods benefits,
namely, the praise of God; and to what end also he gives to us so many things
wherein we may rejoice, even that he might have the whole glory and praise of
them. So that whether we be poor, or we be rich, have we more, or have we
less to rejoice in, this must be the fruit of all, that we praise God for such
things as make us to rejoice. And so as there is none in the world, but he
has some cause of joy, so the Lord looks for continual praise at the hands
of us all: but, as many have more cause to rejoice than others, Thus all have
cause to praise God.
by reason of the manifold blessings which they enjoy above them; so he looks
for more praise and thanks at their hands, than of others, as there is good
cause: For to whom much is given, of them much shall be required. Which if
they do not labor to perform, and profit by Gods benefits, and by their joy
in them to that end, it may come to pass, that the wicked may have as much joy
in the things that they possess, as themselves; yea, the very unreasonable
creatures, and the brute beasts in their kind: for if our joy end not in the
praise of God, what are we better for it than they? Therefore it is not enough
for a man to say, I live merrily, and at my hearts ease, I have many causes of
joy, I am void of sorrow and grief, I have nothing that does trouble me, but
am in continual mirth: it is not enough (I say) to be in this estate, and thus
to boast, and say; but we must labor to be thankful unto God for it, who is
the cause of it, and let our joy in these things lead us unto him: then shall
it appear in truth, that our joy is not so much carnal as spiritual, not
altogether worldly, but heavenly.

Thus have the servants of God behaved themselves in time past in the midst of
their joy: as that good king Iehoshaphat and his people, when God gave them
victory over their enemies according to their prayer, even over that great
host of the Ammonites and the Moabites, and those of mount Seir, of whom it is
thus written, 2 Chronicles. 20 25.
That they destroyed one another. So that when Judah came to Mizpeh in the
wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, The godly have ended their
greatest joy with tha^ksgiuing.
and behold the carcasses were fallen on the earth, and none escaped: and when
Iehoshaphat and his people came to take the spoil of them, they found among
them in abundance both of substance, and also of bodies laden with precious
jewels, which they took for themselves, till they could carry no longer: for
they were three days in gathering of the spoil, for it was much. Then every
man of Judah and Jerusalem returned with Iehoshaphat their head, to go again
to Jerusalem with joy, for the Lord had made them to rejoice over their
enemies. Thus they rejoiced greatly, as they had cause, both for the victory,
and for the spoil: but what followed upon that? the praise of God: for it is
said in the verse going before, That in the fourth day they assembled
themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the Lord:
therefore they called the name of the place, the valley of Berachah, that is,
of blessing or praising of God, unto this day. So that as their joy was great,
so was their thanksgiving and praise to God, great and famous, so that the
place had the name of it. And they did not tarry until they came home to
Jerusalem to give thanks there, which yet it is most like that afterward they
did but even in that place where God gave them cause of joy, and whilst that
lasted, that they might do it the better. So we see that they practiced that
which is spoken of here, they so rejoiced in the salvation that God gave to the
king, and to all the people, that they did set up their banners in his name,
when he had fulfilled their petitions which they had made unto him before. So
must we also in all fears that we be in, when God shall deliver us out of them
(as he did these) and so give us cause to rejoice, we must praise his name for
it, as they did. As for example, when it shall please God to put an end every
where unto this great mortality of the pestilence, that has a long time been
in many places of this land, and is still, then all shall have cause to
rejoice. So must we do, when God shall make us glad by taking away this plague.
But as we meet now from week to week, and from day to day to pray to God for
it: so must we then meet again in the valley of Berachah, to praise him for
it, that is, we must publickely and often meet to give thanks unto him, and to
set up our banners in his name, that has so graciously fulfilled our
petitions. And in the mean season, look in how many fears we have been in,
either of that, or of any other thing, and have escaped it, and so now we are
glad; we must yield so many praises unto God for the same. That virtuous woman
Hannah, when she had by prayer obtained the benefit of a son, she greatly
rejoiced, as she had cause, and as she confesses her self, saying: My soul
rejoices in the Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord, 1. Sam. 2.1.
etc. Before that she was sad, and wept, and could not eat her meat, nor hide
her grief, because her barrenness was reproachful unto her: but now she
rejoices, and in this joy looks up to God, and prayseth him, saying, Mine
heart rejoices in the Lord: and she makes a song of thanksgiving unto God,
as appears by the words following. So must we do in all the benefits that
God bestows upon us; I mean, not only rejoice in them as natural men, but
praise God for them, as spiritual: that so our joy might be such as it should.

Let us then consider in the fear of God, how many times we have rejoiced, and
that with exceeding great joy when, God has had no praise nor thanks from us
at all: and know assuredly, that that joy has not bin rightly ordered; for God
does make us rejoice, not for our selves alone, but for himself also: yea
principally that he might be praised for it. Therefore we must be careful that
these two go together always, namely, our own rejoicing, and the praise of
God. As the blessed virgin Marie does join them together in her song, Luke
1.56.
My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior: where
she joins her own joy with the praise of God, and makes the one the cause
of the other. So that whether we joy in the common benefits of our time, we
must praise God for them, as Iehoshaphat and his people did; or we rejoice in
our private benefits, as Hannah and Marie did, we must praise God for them: so
shall our joy be not only comfortable to our selves, Our joy and Gods praise
should go together.
but acceptable unto God, and profitable unto others: when as the more benefits
that we have, the more we rejoice: and the more we rejoice, the more thankful
are we to God for the same. We do not therefore find fault with mirth, we
forbid not men to be merry; be it far from us, that we should be so Stoicall
and severe; nay we exhort all men to it, and show that they ought, when God
gives them cause: only that kind of mirth is condemned in the Scripture, which
tends to the dishonor of God, or when they fall into excess: or they cannot
be merry, but they will be mad also, as we say, so that they throw firebrands
and deadly things, and say, Prou. 26.19.
They are but in sport, as Solomon speaks of them: or that kind of mirth,
wherein God has no praise at all; which is the best kind of mirth that the
wicked, and men of this world have. We allow of that, wherein God is praised,
and of that only: for though we be not bound in all our mirth to sing Psalms,
neither indeed can we; yet after all our mirth, both for it, and for all causes
of it, we should give thanks unto God. But many are so far from this, that
they rejoice in such things, for which they cannot praise God, yea for such,
which it is shame once to name; whom we leave unto God, that he may give them
better minds: and others, though they have cause of honest and lawful joy, yet
they forget to be thankful for it; for whom let us pray also, and for our
selves, that we may so rejoice in all Gods benefits and ordinances, and so use
them with joy, that he may be praised for them. Which he also grant unto us,
for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

The seventeenth Sermon upon the fifth verse.
That we may rejoice in thy salvation, etc.
WE must consider who they be that speak thus, and of whom they speak it:
they are the subjects that thus speak of their king: and they say, that they
will rejoice, when God shall save him: so they speak not of themselves, but of
him. Such then is and ought to be the unity of the prince and the people, as of
the members of the body and of the head: that they acknowledge the safeguard of
the king to be sufficient cause of their joy. We must then thus pray for the
life and honor of our liege lord and Sovereign king, The welfare of the king
is the peoples ^^y.
not as one a loofe off from us, with whom we have nothing to do, nor he with
us, and whose estate does nothing concern us at all; but as one in whose life
is our preservation, and whose honor is our advancement, in whose decay is our
loss, and in whose overthrow is our utter ruin. Therefore as we must think
that we should have great cause to be sorry, if any thing did befall his
royal person otherwise than well; so that in his preservation and prosperity
we have always cause to rejoice: Romans 13.4.
For we know (as the Apostle says) that kings and princes are ministers of God
for our wealth: that is, they are called of God unto those high places, not for
themselves, but for the good of the people: therefore in their salvation we must
rejoice, for it is joined with our own wealth. And Saint Paul unto Timothy
shows this point more fully, 1. Tim. 2.3.
when he says, That under them we lead a peaceable and quiet life, with all
honesty and godliness: This benefit then we get by them, when they be good, we
live by their good government, peaceably, honestly, and godlily: which are
three great benefits, and without the which our life were no life: therefore we
must pray for them, In this respect they ought to pray for his life.
that by them we might enjoy these great benefits, and so rejoice in his
preservation by whose means we do enjoy them. For if the prince miscarie any
ways, we are in danger to leese all our wealth, yea peace, and all honest and
godly living. For if there were no king at all, we may easily see in what
lamentable estate we should be; when as it is said in the time of the Judges,
Judge. 21.25.
In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was
good in his eyes: Thus would it be with us, and with all people, every man
would do that, that seemed good in his own eyes: and then what confusion and
disorder would there be in the world? what peace, what godliness, or what
honesty could there be among men? And this is not once but three times at the
least set down in that book; in the beginning, midst, and endding of two
notable and famous stories, which show what kind of life was then amongst them,
even such as was neither peaceable and quiet, nor honest, nor godly. The one is
of the Leuits concubine abused and oppessed even unto death; and the other is
of that idolatry which began in the house of Micah, and so did spread it self
over the whole tribe of Dan, and of the rest; besides that, the Levites and
ministers of God were neglected then, and not sufficiently provided for: in the
narration of which, this is often interlaced as a grave sentence, showing the
cause of all that disorder: In those days there was no king or supreme
governor in Israel, and so every man did that, which was good in his own
eyes: as if it had been said, Surely if they had had any good governor among
them, and namely, one chief to ouersee and rule the rest, these abuses had
never broken out, or if they had, they should never have grown to such an
head. Besides this, where there is a continual succession of kings, yet even
in the change of them to death, without a special grace and blessing of God,
there is great danger of change in the state of the people. Therefore all
people had need to pray for the life, health, and preservation of their kings,
that so themselves might rejoice, as they do here.

And for proof of this, we may easily conceive how the people of Israel did
flourish, and abound in all things in the days of king Solomon, by that which
is written of them: he was a peaceable prince, and so the people had peace and
wealth, 1. King. 4.25. and 10.27.
For every man did sit quietly under his vine and under his fig tree, and
none did raise them up: and in his days silver was as plentiful as the stones
in the street, and Cedar in as great abundance as the wild fig trees which
grow abundantly in the plain: and such almost was our case all the days of
our renowned and worthy Queen Elizabeth; for we had peace, and wealth, with
the Gospel also, in great abundance. But when Solomon died, For in the death
of the prince there is great fear of alteration to the state.
what great alteration was there in the kingdom of Israel? when his son
Rehoboham refused the ancient counselors of his father, and chose new in
their room, like to himself: whereupon there grew a faction and division,
first among the nobles, and then among the rest of the people: so that ten
parts of his people fell clean away from him, and from God too, even to
idolatry, and to the golden calves in Dan and Bethel: so that there was much
war between them, and bloodshed among them. Now when all this fell out, how
did they see by experience, that they had cause before to pray for the life of
Solomon their king, as the chief and only cause of their welfare and joy? So
we in like manner had great cause in this respect to pray for the life of our
Queen, as we did, to preserve her both against foreign invasions intended,
and also secret treasons and practices at home: for in her life we had great
cause of joy. And in all deliverances of her from danger (which were many and
great) we had cause still to rejoice: and so in her long life we did enjoy the
fruit of our prayers, for we did so much the more and longer rejoice in her,
and in all benefits which we enjoyed by her: and we had just cause to fear,
that in her death we should have had more cause of sorrow, than by the grace
and mercy of God we had. But now we would be loath to have any more changes on
the sudden, and therefore we are to pray earnestly unto God for this our
Sovereign King, James, by the grace of God king of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, defendor of the true ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic faith,
and in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and over all persons
within these his realms and dominions, next and immediately under Christ Jesus
supreme governor and iugde: we are to pray for his life, and for the life of
the Queen, the Prince, and all their noble and worthy offspring: and for his
majesty's person, that God would save him from his enemies (as we see, that he
has not wanted some in this short time of his reign) that we might still
rejoice. And we must be thus persuaded, that his salvation shall be still our
joy, as this people does thus here think of David their king. Therefore as we
desire the continuance of our joy and comfort, so let us still pray for the
preservation of his most excellent majesty, the means and cause of it.

For that which is said of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, is true of all
good kings, and namely of our sovereign Lord King James most of all, Dan. 4.9.
What benefits we enjoy under his Majesty's government.
He was like a goodly great tree, whose bows were fair, and the fruit thereof
much, and it was meat for all: it made a shadow under it for the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the branches thereof, and all
flesh fed of it. So do we under his gracious government enjoy defense and
protection from all enemies, injuries and wrongs, and it is as a shadow to us
against the scorching heat of the sun: and by his means we peaceably enjoy
the use of all that we have, both for meat and drink, and all things needful
for the preservation of this life, and so we (as it were) feed of his fruit.
Therefore we had need still to pray for his preservation, not only that all
these great benefits might be continued, but that we might still rejoice in
them, as now we do: and let us be persuaded, that as long as God shall
preserve him out of the hands of his enemies, and prolong his life, so long
shall we have cause to rejoice. What shall we think then of them that have
sought not the preservation, but the utter ruin and final overthrow of their
natural princes, kings, and Queens? as we have had too great experience of
it in this land, both in the days of our late good Queen Elizabeth,
especially, and also in this short time of our now worthy king James: we must
needs judge of them not only as traitors to their persons, but as common
enemies to all the people of this land; in that they have sought to bereave us
and them of the chiefest cause of our joy, Traitors are enemies to the common
joy.
and so to cast us into untimely sorrow. For as there was great lamentation
among the Jews, and not without cause, 2 Chronicles. 35.24 25.
at the death of that good and godly king Josiah, so that Jeremy the Prophet
trembled also, and seemed to be the chief mourner: so had we no less cause to
lament at the death of our noble and virtuous Queen, and the ministers of the
Gospel most of all, and all the unfeigned professors of the same; and should
have had a great deal more, if she had been traitorously taken away before
the full number of her days were expired, to the great disturbance of the
whole Realm, according to the desperate and continual attempts of her enemies.
And so should we now still have, if any such thing should be offered unto his
majesty's person. Therefore we must judge of them, as of our greatest enemies,
who seek to bring upon us a common sorrow before the time. But let us lift up,
though not our hands, yet our voice against them, and pray unto God still to
disappoint them of their treasonable devises and devilish practices, and to
preserve our king, and all his, that so we may still rejoice in their
salvation, even for Christ Jesus his sake.

In thy salvation, etc. As all subjects principally should by this example
learn to pray for their kings, and all chief governors under them, That God
would preserve and bless them, that they might themselves rejoice, because
they be worthy instruments of Gods goodness unto them; which is the thing that
has bin handled already: so all inferiors may here see as in a glass, what
minds they should carry to all their superiors, and those that God has placed
in any room, of what kind so ever they be; that they should be persuaded,
that in their preservation and welfare consists their own joy and comfort:
All inferiors should count the welfare of their superiors their own joy.
and that they cannot miscarrie, or any ill befall them, but themselves must
needs be sorrowful, and in that respect pray for them continually, be they
never so mean. As with this mind and persuasion the people should pray for
their minister's and teachers, who watch for their souls, Heb. 13.17.
and for the salvation of them, as the holy Apostle says: For it is true that
Christ says of them, and was found most true in his own person, That when the
shepherd is smitten, Matthew. 26.31.
the sheep will be scattered: that is, when God takes them away, who are
their guiders, the people are in danger to fall into all kind of error,
heresy, and sin, and to be distracted and scattered among themselves, not
only in judgment but in affection: besides, they may want the comfort of Gods
word, and of their prayers. So should all children be affected to their
natural parents, fathers and mothers; and also servants to their masters and
governors: That seeing God has placed them over them for their good, and they
enjoy so many great benefis in their houses, and by their means, and so have
so many causes of rejoicing from them and by them, they should pray for their
lives, health, and welfare, that they may rejoice there still, for they shall
have their part in it, and it shall be the better for them. And they must
think before hand, that when God takes them away, they shall have great cause
of sorrow: And their death or hurt, their sorrow.
as we see how greatly Joseph lamented for his fathers death: who when he gave
up the ghost, Genesis 50.1. Verse. 11.
His son fell upon his fathers face, and wept: and so he continued mourning
for him a long time: and at his burial there was such great mourning for him,
that the place had the name of it. And Esau the son of Izack, though he was a
wicked and disobedient child, as appears in his story, Heb 12.16.
yea a profane person (as the holy Ghost calls him) yet he had so much grace
in him (as we say) that he thinks of his fathers death before hand, as of a
time of sorrow and mourning, and so speaks of it, Gene. 27.41.
saying, The days of mourning for my father will come shortly, that is, my
father is old and will shortly die, and then I must mourn for him: which
though he spoke with an ill mind, and to an ill end, (for in the hatred of his
brother Iaakob he comforted himself, that he might shortly kill him, when his
father was dead) yet nature, and the good education which he had, had taught
him to confess, that when his father died, he should have cause to mourn.
Therefore if there were no commandment of God to bind them unto it, or any
other reason to persuade them, this were sufficient to move them to pray for
the life and health of their parents, that themselves might still rejoice: and
not be graceless, as to think, that if their fathers were dead, they should
be merry, and live well enough, yea better than they do now, and so not to care
whether they live or die, yea, to wish rather that they were dead than alive;
as there are too many such in the world, who in a wrong persuasion gape after
their fathers death, as Absolon did: but God can well enough disappoint the^ of
their long hope, as he did him.

We ought to pray for the good of others, that we might rejoice therein.
But this doctrine is yet more general, and does concern every one of us, and
shows that we ought to bear that affection of brotherly love all of us one
toward another, that we should desire and pray for the good and welfare one of
another, not only, that they themselves, but that we might rejoice in that
good, which God shall bestow upon them at our prayers: and if we were thus
affected in love to the good one of another, then should we pray a great deal
more often, and more effectually than we do. For this is that which the
Apostle teaches unto the Romans: Be of like affection one to another, says
he: and how, rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep,
where he would have us so affected with the estate of our brethren, that if God
blesses them, we should rejoice with them; if he afflict and punish them any
way, we should sorrow with them: and so we should count their sorrow and joy
our own, and therefore when they are in any destresse, we should pray for
their deliverance, that we might rejoice with them and in them. And truly if we
come to pray for our brethren with this affection, (as our savior Christ has
taught us, willing us to say, Give us our daily bread, etc. so that we should
pray for others as for our selves) we might obtain great things for them.
Therefore when we pray for any, let us put their estate upon us, and be moved
with it, as though it were our own, and so speak to God for them, as for our
selves, and think, that if God shall bless them, we shall rejoice. And this
measure of love in prayer, the more that we can come unto, the more assurance
may we have, that God will hear us for them: nay indeed without it we can have
little or none at all, that God will hear us for any. As for example, if any
in their sickness do desire that we should pray for them here in the Church,
and we do so: we must desire their health and recovery, not only that the
party himself prayed for might rejoice, and his family, wife, and children,
and the rest of his friends, but that we all might be glad and comforted by his
life and health: and we must account his recovery our joy, and think that if
God shall hear us for him, we our selves shall be bound to give thanks unto
God for it. And when the Lord shall see, that that will be matter of joy unto
many, then will he the sooner bestow it upon us. And thus does the Apostle
speak of the sickness and of the recovery of Epaphroditus, a minister of
the Gospel in the Church of Philippi: Philip. 2.25.
I supposed it necessary to send him unto you: for he longed after you all,
and was full of heaviness, because he had heard that he had been sick: and
no doubt he was sick, very near unto death: but God had mercy on him, and
not on him only, but on me also, least I should have sorrow upon sorrow. Thus
if he had died, Paul and all the rest of the Church of God should have
sorrowed for the loss of such a worthy instrument of the glory of God,
therefore they being in great heaviness already, God would not by taking him
away increase their grief by this new cause of sorrow; but as they all desired
his life for their further comfort, so God did raise him up, that they all
might rejoice.

Few pray for their brethren with this affection.
But for the most part men are not thus affected with the estate of their
brethren, no, not when they pray for them: but for want of love, as if their
affliction continue still upon them, they will not greatly sorrow for them; so
if it be removed and taken away, they will not greatly rejoice; but it is all
one with them, howsoever it falls out with them: and so it comes to pass,
as it must needs, that they pray very coldly, and therefore obtain very little
or nothing for them. And yet our Savior Christ has taught us (as was said
even now) to pray with this affection and fellow-feeling of the estate of
others, both in soul and body, where he has commanded us to say, Give us
this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, and lead us not into
tentation, etc. So that when we pray for others, we should account their estate
our own. But men commonly, through self-love, which reigns in them, are so
taken up wholly into their own estate, that they can neither sorrow nor
rejoice, nor any ways be moved with any thing, but with that which
concerns themselves. The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, gives a reason
of this sympathy that should be among all the true believers, drawn from a
comparison of the parts of the natural body; among which, they all have the
same care one for another, and the same affection both of joy and sorrow, 1.
Cor. 12.25.
when he says thus: God has tempered the body together, and has given more
honor to that part which lacked, least there should be any division in the
body: but that the members should have the same care one for another.
Therefore if one member suffer, all suffer with it. So ought it to be in the
mystical body of Christ, which we are, and every one of us members of the
same, as he says there: Verse. 27.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part. Therefore as when
any part of the body is pained, all the rest by a natural instinct desire the
ease of it, not only for the benefit of it, but for their own comfort, which
otherwise cannot be quiet: so should we by the motion of Gods spirit, much more
pray for the ease and release of the affliction of our brethren, that we may
rejoice. Here then we have another reason to persuade us to pray for those that
are and have been a long time visited with the pestilence and the grievous
hand of God, We should pray, that the plague might cease from our brethren,
that we might rejoice.
for which they are in great heaviness and fear night and day; entreating the
Lord, that when it has wrought his good work in the hearts of all, for which
it is sent, to command it to cease, and to take it clean away: not only,
that their sorrowful hearts might be cheered up and comforted after this long
sorrow, and so some light might arise unto them after this darkness; but that
all we our selves, and the rest of our brethren in all parts of this land,
might rejoice in their salvation. That so we might take into our mouths the
words of the Psalm, which were uttered after a great deliverance: Others said
of them, Psalm. 126.2.
The Lord has done great things for them: but they said, The Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice. So we should not count our selves
strangers from our brethren, and from their good, and speak of them as it were
aloof off, when we should hear how the plague is stayed in such and such a
place, The Lord has done great things for them: but as though it were our own
case, say, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice: and so
we to rejoice in their salvation; we accounting the good that is done to them,
as done to our selves. And truly, if all men did thus, it were to be hoped,
that God would soon hear us. This affection was in Paul, when he wrote unto
Philemon, and entreated him for his servant Onesimus, who had stolen something
from him, and was come away, and cast into prison for it; and Paul had
converted him, and then desires him to pardon him, and to receive him again,
not only that his poor servant might be comforted, who was now greatly
troubled for his sin, but that Paul himself might rejoice in this great
blessing bestowed upon him, when he says thus: yea, brother let me obtain
this pleasure of thee in the Lord, Phile. 20.
comfort my bowels in the Lord: where he entreats him, that in pardoning and
receiving his servant again, he would bestow that great benefit upon himself,
and comfort him in the Lord, for so he would account of it: and thus he
prevailed for it; and so might we with God much more for our brethren. Whether
then we look to this visitation of the pestilence, or to any other calamity
that our neighbors shall be in, we in their preservation or deliverance must
think our selves greatly comforted in the Lord, and therefore in all things
pray for their good, that we might rejoice: so God may hear us, if not for
their sakes, yet for our own. And this is that which we have to observe out of
the fifth verse: it follows in the next.

The interpretation of the sixth verse.
Verse. 6. Now know I, that the Lord will help his anointed, and will hear him
from his sanctuary, by the mighty power of his right hand. In this verse
David professes beforehand, that he did believe that God would hear him, and
would defend him from his enemies according to his prayers (for he was the
author and penner of this Psalm.) And in teaching the people thus to pray for
him, he would have them also believe, that God would hear them concerning
these requests which they made in his behalf, that so they likewise might pray
in the same faith. And this faith of them all, is expressed and declared not
only when they say, that they did know that God would hear and send help;
but especially and most significantly in changing the number. For whereas in
the former verse they spoke as a multitude, even the whole Church together,
saying, That we may rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banners in the
name of our God; where three times they speak in the person of many: Here, as
though there were but one that prayed, they say, I know: and this they do
according to the nature of true faith, which is, to apply Gods promises and
his merciful deliverances particularly to every man and woman, and so say, as
it is in our Creed, I believe in God, and not we believe; that is, I am
persuaded that he is the God not only of others, but of me. And so here,
though many did use this prayer together, yet every one was to have this faith
in themselves, that they did know that God would hear them. And what do they
or should they believe? That God will help his anointed, that is, their king
David; so called, because he was by the commandment of God anointed by
Samuel the Prophet unto that office: 1. Sam. 16.13.
and that he would hear his prayers, and grant his requests from his
sanctuary, that is, from heaven. And thus they believe that God would do, by,
or with his right hand; that is, by his great power that he has in himself,
whereby he is able to do all things; and by the mighty help thereof, that
is, that great help, which he shall and will give, which none is able to
resist. And thus for the further strengthening of their faith, they set before
their eyes the great power of God, whereby he is able to defend all those that
put their trust in him, in all dangers whatsoever: as also in the verse
following they do by comparison of the confidence of their enemies more fully
express it, saying: Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God: that is, whereas others did trust in
outward means, as chariots, and such like, they did trust only in the power
and grace of Almighty God.

This teaches us to come so prepared unto prayer, that we believe beforehand,
that God will hear our prayers, We must pray in faith, believing that God will
hear us.
and that we shall not pray in vain, but he will give us the thing that we
ask. And this faith is so requisite and necessary, that without it neither are
our prayers acceptable unto God, neither can we look to receive any thing at
his hand. Heb. 11.6.
For without faith it is impossible to please God, as in no other duties that
we do, so not in prayer. And faith is requisite in all those that ask any
thing of God, even as all they that came unto Christ in the days of his flesh,
to receive any thing of him, he required of the^ this first, That they should
believe. For as it is said of them of his own country, when he was among
them, Matthew. 13.58. Marc. 6.5.
He could not do many great works there, for their unbelief sake (he could
have done enough, his divine power was sufficient, but they had not faith to
receive them;) and as himself said to his disciples, That they could not cast
the devil out of the child that was brought unto them, Matthew. 17.20.
because of their unbelief: So there upon that occasion he shows, what great
things by faith might be obtained, Without faith we can receive nothing of God.
in these words, Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith, as much as a grain
of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder
place, and it shall remove. And then he gives this general doctrine, That
nothing shall be impossible to them that believe. And S. Mark the Evangelist
reports that story thus; That when the father of the child laying out the
pitiful estate of it, as how the devil did oftentimes cast the child into the
water, and into the fire, to destroy it, at the last burst out into these
passionat words: Marc. 9.22.
But if thou can do any thing, help us, and have compassion on us. Christ
made him this answer, If thou can believe it, all things are possible to him
that believes: showing that he was able and willing, if there wanted not faith
in him: for faith is as it were an hand, whereby we do receive all things from
God. Therefore, as without the hand of our body, and unless we hold it out,
we can receive nothing from men, though it be offered unto us; so though God of
his infinite goodness be rcadie to give, we for our part cannot without faith
receive, that is, not so plentifully as otherwise we might; and by that, we may
receive all things that we need: and therefore that they might obtain
something for him, David teaches them to pray in faith, when they say, I know
that God will help, etc. But the time will not suffer me to finish this
doctrine at this present, we shall hear more of it the next day by the grace
of God.

The eighteenth Sermon upon the sixth verse.
Now know I, that the Lord will help his anointed, etc.
THe last day, By faith only we enjoy all Gods promises.
besides the general meaning of the whole verse, this first point of doctrine
was delivered out of it, That by the example of this people we must learn
always to pray in faith, if we will receive any thing at the hands of God: and
now for the further confirmation and use of the same, we must consider, that
all the promises of God are made unto us upon this condition only, and not
otherwise, namely, That we believe them, and then God will verify them. As
when he promised to Abraham, that in his seed all nations in the world should
be blessed; by faith he obtained this promise, though his wife was barren, and
both of them so old that by the course of nature they were past children: For
the Apostle says of him, Romans 4.18.
That above hope he believed under hope, that he should be the father of many
nations, according to that that was spoken to him, So shall thy seed be: and so
likewise, whereas it was promised unto Sarah, That she should have a son,
Gene. 18.10. Heb. 11.11.
she by faith did enjoy that above the course of nature: as it is written of
her also; That through faith Sara received strength to conceive seed, and was
delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful
which had promised. And thus have all holy men and women enjoyed the promises,
as is showed at large in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrews. And therefore
Christ himself, Matthew. 1.21. Christ required faith of all that came unto him.
as he was promised to be a savior, and so come into the world, according to
his name Jesus, to save his people from their sins: so all they that came to
him for health of soul or body, so many did receive it as did believe, and in
that measure that they believed. And therefore it was said to the Centurion,
that came and sued for his servant that lay sick of the palsy and was
grievously pained, Go thy way, Matthew. 8.5.
and as thou beleeuest, be it unto thee: and the servant was healed the same
hour. He had beforehand professed his faith sufficiently, when he said, That
Christ needed not to come, but might speak the word, and do it: neither was
he worthy, that Christ should come under the roof of his house. Thus he
asking in faith, received not only for himself, but for another. And so in
the next chapter following it is said, That two blind men followed Jesus,
Matthew. 9.29.
crying in the way: O son of David have mercy upon us: when he came into the
house, he said unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? and they
said, yea Lord: then touched he their eyes, saying, according to your faith be
it unto you: and their eyes were opened. Thus praying in faith these men
obtained also. And in the same chapter he said to the woman that was healed of
the bloody issue, by touching the hemme of his garment, Verse. 20.
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole: for she had said
in her self before, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. Thus we
see that as all that had faith (coming to him) they did receive: so on their
part, faith was the only cause that they did receive: and therefore the health
of their soul and body is imputed unto their faith, Thy faith has made thee
whole.

Now all these things, as the rest of the Scripture, Romans 15.4.
and whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: I mean
hope, that if we pray thus in faith, as these did, we shall obtain whatsoever
we ask according to Gods will, We ca^ receive nothing, unless we ask it in
faith.
though the matter be never so great. As we see also, that this people did
here: for in the next Psalm they give thanks for that, which here in their
prayers they assure themselves that they should receive. And so all men shall
find that to be true in praying unto God, which the Apostle speaks of, asking
wisdom: That if they lack any thing, let them ask it of God, who gives
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him: Jam. 1.5.
but then he adds this caveat, saying: But let him ask it in faith, and
waver not: for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind,
and carried about: neither let that man think, that he shall receive any thing
of the Lord. Where he shows what is the right manner of praying, namely,
that as we cannot pray at all for any thing, unless we have Gods word and
promise for it; so before we do pray, we must believe it. Therefore as by
prayer we do show, that we believe and hope for the grace promised; so he
that has not this faith in Gods promises, prays hypocritically, that is,
more with his tongue, than with his heart. Seeing then, that Gods promise is
sure and certain, he would not have us so to pray, as that we should doubt and
call into question, whether we should be heard or no. And this he shows by
an excellent and very fit comparison: for as the waves of the sea are tossed
and carried away; so they that believe not, both are unquiet always in their
minds, yea though they have prayed, and are altogether unworthy to receive any
thing. Therefore when we come to God in our prayers, let us beforehand
believe, that he will hear us, and so pray in faith, and say, as this people
does here, I know that God will hear and help: so shall our prayers be
acceptable unto God, so shall we receive that that we ask of him; and so shall
our minds be pacified and quiet.

Few pray in any assurance that God does hear them:
Let us then examine our selves, and see whether always when we have come to
prayer, we have had this faith and assurance, that God would hear us and help
us: and then we shall find, that some have been so far from it, that they
have never once thought of it; but they have come to prayer, neither knowing
any such thing, nor regarding it. And thus have they done not only in the days
of ignorance and superstition, when they held it an error for a man to think,
that he might be assured of any thing from God, though he prayed for it never
so earnestly, and when they prayed in an unknown tongue, and so knew not
themselves what they said, and therefore could not by prayer have any assurance
that they were heard: but also in this clear light of the gospel, many have
and do still both in their private prayers, and in these public, come so
coldly to God, and as it were for fashion, that they neither know, nor desire
to know, nor think it possible to know, that God will hear them. And so these
wavering minded men being uncertain in their minds, and tossed too and fro
like the waves of the sea, may be assured, That they shall obtain nothing of
God, Iam. 1.7. And so obtain nothing of God.
as the Apostle says. But let us endeavor to put that in practice which the
people did here, that every one of us may say, I know that God will hear: so
shall we obtain such things as we ask. Matthew 17.17.
For if the disciples of our Savior Christ could do nothing for the fathers
child possessed with a devil, when there was most need, because of their
unbelief; then shall we also for the same unbelief of ours obtain nothing
neither for our selves nor for others, when there is most need. And as on the
other side he said again unto them, That all things were possible to him that
believes, so shall we find it to be true in our selves; then when we pray in
faith, it shall be possible for us to obtain all things according to Gods
will, even those that unto the unbelievers shall seem impossible.

Now though this place of Scripture does not so properly require, to show how
we shall come to this faith and assurance in prayer, that God will hear it;
but rather only that we ought to have it, and not to pray without it: yet
that I might not leave this doctrine imperfect, it is necessary to say
somewhat of it. First therefore, as every good and perfect gift is of the
spirit of God, Iam. 1.17.
and comes from above, even from the father of lights, so does this most of
all. Act. 16.14.
And as the Lord by his spirit opened the heart of Lydia, that she believed
that which Paul preached: so Christ Jesus is he, upon whose shoulders (as the
Prophet speaks) is laid the key of the house of David, that is, Isai. 22.22.
of the whole Church of God, so that he only opens, and no man can shut, and
he shuts, and no man can open: that is, he only by his holy spirit opens
our hearts, that we may believe, and gives us assurance in all things of the
favor of God: How this assurance of being heard, is wrought in us.
therefore we must pray to him, that he would give us that assurance, and so
open our hearts, that we may believe that he does hear our prayers. But
because this is wrought in us by means, and our faith is grounded specially
and only upon the promises of God, and all assurance of being heard, arises
from thence; we must know, and believe, and meditate upon them, before we pray,
that so by them we may be assured, that he will hear us, according to the
undoubted truth of the same. And the more that we can do thus, the greater
assurance of being heard shall we have, when we pray unto God. And besides this
we must know, that the same assurance is confirmed and increased by our former
experience daily: so that when we have marked, how God has at other times and
in other things heard us, we may assure our selves from thence, that he will
do so now also. For as among men, when we have oftentimes made trial of a
friend in the time of our need, we go to them afterward, as any necessity
shall be upon us, with great confidence, and doubt not before we come to them,
but we shall speed, if they have it: so upon our former experience with the
Lord, we ought much more boldly to come unto him in times of need, who has not
only promised, and so is willing, but being almighty, is also able, and being
true and just in his promises, will help us. And according to experience of
former times, some do read this text that we have in hand (although I approve
of the other rather which I have followed) after this manner: Now know I that
the Lord has saved his anointed, and will hear him from his Sanctuary: and
so they confirm their hope by the time past, in that they have marked the
goodness of God toward their king in saving him before in other dangers, as
he was in many: and so doubt not, but that he will hear them for him now, and
still save him. But to return to that that we spoke of before, namely, How we
shall come to this assurance of being heard. First of all we are to consider of
the promises of God, First by meditating upon Gods promises.
upon which our faith must be grounded, and which must give us assured
knowledge of being heard: we may see how to this end the holy Patriarch Jacob
did meditate upon them, to strengthen his faith, and in his prayer did (as it
were) put God in mind of them, and comfort himself in hope of them, when he
prayed thus: O God of my father Abraham, Genesis 32 9.
and God of my father Izaack: Lord which saidest unto me, Return unto thy
country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good; I pray thee deliver me
from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, least he
will come and smite me, and the mother upon the children. For thou saidest, I
will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which
cannot be numbered for multitude. So that when his brother Esau came against him
with four hundred men, and he remembering his former inueterat malice, feared
that he would destroy them all, both young and old, mother and children, he
prays unto God for deliverance: and that he might do it with assurance of
being heard, he looks to Gods promises, who had said, that he would do him
good.

So must we do in like manner, I mean when we come to prayer, we must
thoroughly consider of Gods most gracious and merciful promises: which to that
end are so infinite in number, for the good both of our souls and bodies, and
for this life and the life to come, and for our selves and others, that I need
not name any. Our savior Christ speaks thus unto us in the Gospel, Matthew.
7.7.
Ask and it shall be given unto you: seek and you shall find, knock and it
shall be opened. And again thus the Lord speaks in his own person by the
Prophet: Psalm. 50.16.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me: and many such like we have in the word of God. Now these
promises we must remember are not made unto us for our own selves, as for our
own worthiness, but for Christ Jesus sake; Which are made unto us, and
fulfilled in Christ.
who has said, John 16.22.
That whatsoever we ask the father in his name he will grant it unto us. For
(as the Apostle says) All the promises of God in Christ are Yea, 2. Cor. 1.20.
and in him they are Amen, unto the glory of God: that is, in him, and for his
sake shall most certainly be performed. Therefore for the verifying and
fulfilling of them unto us, and for our assured hope of them in our prayers, we
must not stay in the consideration of our selves, to say, It is true in deed,
that God has promised to hear me; what cause is there in me that he should
do so? for in our selves we shall find nothing but unworthiness, and all
causes to the contrary: but we must look only to the merits and worthiness of
Christ Jesus, for whose sake they were first made, and for whose sake they
shall be all of them fulfilled. And thus we may perceive, that one cause for
our doubting and little assurance of being heard, is the ignorance or not
sufficient meditating upon the truth of Gods promises. Therefore when we come
to prayer, let us think of them, that by them we might know that God will
hear us; for he that is faithful has so promised.

We must meditate upon those promises specially, which do concern our present
estate.
And as we must thus generally meditate upon the promises of God: so because he
of his infinite goodness has made many promises unto us, according to every
need of ours; that we might be assured not only generally that God will hear
us, but particularly for that very thing that we stand in need of, and have
prayed for: we must specially give our selves to the meditation of such
promises, as do most nearly conceive that case of ours. And thus we have
already seen how Iaakob did, when he was returning from Laban to his fathers
house at the commandment of God, and by the way was in great danger (as he
thought) of Esau, he prays unto God, and though the Lord had made many other
promises unto him, yet at this time he specially thinks of that, that God had
said unto him concerning that matter: Genesis 32.9.
and so begins his prayer thus, Lord which saydest unto me, return unto thy
country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good; deliver me out of the
hand of my brother Esau: and then he returns unto the promise of God again,
in these words: For thou saydest, I will do thee good. And so must we do for
the obtaining of this assurance. As for example, if we pray for the
forgiveness of our sins, and the assurance of the same, let us seriously
think upon such promises, as God in his word has made to that end: Ezekiel.
18.21.
As at what time so ever a sinner repents him of his sin from the bottom
of his heart, I will put out all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says
the Lord, by his Prophet: and again what our savior Christ says in the
Gospel, Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you: where he
calls all without exception. So that if we find the burden of our sins
intolerable unto us (as they are in themselves) and we are weary of them, as
of an heavy burden able to press us down unto the bottom of hell, and there
to hold us for ever; and do unfeignedly repent us of them, and have a full
purpose to leave them: then praying to God for the forgiveness of them, we may
know assuredly that God will hear us: for here we have his promise for it. And
so must we do for any thing else that we need and pray for: as for this
visitation of the plague, As this state of ours in this visitation of the
plague.
if we would pray for our brethren that are under it, in some good assurance,
that God in his good time will of his unspeakable mercy and loving kindness
remove it, or mittigate it; let us meditate upon that, which God has promised
to such kind of prayers: as when the Apostle S. James says, Is any sick among
you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, Jam. 5.14.
and let them pray for him; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sin, it shall be
forgiven him: and thefore he wills them to acknowledge their sins one to
another, that they might be healed, for the prayer of a righteous man avails
much, if it be fervent. Where we see, what is promised to some few of the
Church, praying for them that are visited with sickness, (and that justly also
for their sins and for their offenses) that such prayers shall not be in
vain, but most available through Gods goodness, for the pardoning of their
sins, and for the remoouing of the punishment of the same; if so be that they
that pray be righteous and holy men, and pray fervently. Then from hence may we
be assured in the like case, that if an whole Church and Congregation of Gods
people, yea many Churches in diverse places, do pray fervently for them; and
they that are sick and under Gods hand will confess their sins unto him,
and repent them of them, and by this plague of God judge themselves for them;
that he will put an happy end to it in time, though most righteously deserved,
and pardon their sins, that have been the cause of it: that so we might say
before hand, Now I know, that God will hear us: as indeed by his grace at this
present, we do and may see most clearly, that by diminishing of it in the
chief cities and places of this Realm where it is, and that also by lessening
of it in so great measure, He has heard our prayers, and granted our
requests: That so hereafter by this blessed experience that we have in one
thing, we might be moved to come unto him in great assurance, not doubting but
that he will hear us then also. And thus always from time to time, Hebr. 4.16.
as the Apostle says, Come boldly into the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need: and therefore we must
take this blessing upon our brethren, as a fruit of our daily prayer, and mark
it well to that end.

Experience of former times increases our assurance of being heard in prayer.
And this is that that should be spoken of also, concerning that assurance that
we should have in prayer, of being heard, That by daily experience of Gods
goodness and merciful dealing with us, we shall daily grow therein: and
therefore that we might come unto it, it is requisite that we should greatly
acquaint our selves with prayer, and pray often, and mark the sequel, and
what follows after our prayers. For concerning this one point, it must needs
be a very good reason, when we do pray, to make us know that God will hear
us; when we know already by experience, that he has That he gives liberally,
and reprocheth no man: and after says, James 1.5.17.
that there is no variableness with him, nor shadow by turning: that is,
though the sun by turning from the East to the West, Reasons of the same.
makes great alterations, so that it is sometime light, and sometime dark;
and besides, the shadow is now here, and now there, and so is not always
alike: yet it is not so with God, but he is always like himself. Therefore as
he has given in former times, so will he do still, if we pray to him as we
have done: for he is no niggard, but gives liberally to all that ask, and
reprocheth no man with that that he has given: nei- is he any changeling, but
constant in all his ways. And besides Jesus Christ the mediator of the
promises, He is Hebr. 13.8. and 7.24.
and he at the right hand of God makes request for us continually, and is not
weary of his office, neither is his love diminished one whit toward us.
Therefore we may well build our hope for the time to come, upon our former
experience, as upon a sure rock that shall not be removed. And so we may
pray as David did, Psalm. 119 149.
O Lord quicken me according to thy custom: as if he had said, Thou have often
heretofore quickened and revived me by thy word and by thy spirit, therefore
do so now also in this great sorrow and deadness of mind; for I stand in as
much need of it as ever I did, and thou art as well able to do it, as thou
have been. Thus from the custom of Gods former dealing, he hops that he
will do so now. And indeed there is great reason of it: for if we have had
often and to do so and so for me, and that made me the bolder to come unto you
now: thus would they plead for themselves. So we then much more upon former
experience of our prayers heard, and of the relief that we have found at Gods
hand (seeing there is no change in him, nor in his promises) must learn to
know, that if there be no change in us, but we be the same that we have been,
and seek to him and serve him as we have done, he will hear us, and help us,
as he has done before.

That we might have this experience, we must use prayers not seldom, but often.
To this end it is requisite, that we pray often; for experience arises not of
one action, nor of some few, but of many; and the best experience is gotten by
the observation of many things in a long time: and therefore they that live
long and practice much, have the greatest and best experience. So that if we
will have experience of Gods goodness in hearing our prayers, that thereby we
might know that he will hear us still, we must pray often, and be well
acquainted with this holy ordinance of prayer. For as among men, it is not the
coming once or twice to a man, and that a long time one after another, yea
though he speedeth, that can give him any great encouragement to presume of his
help in the time of great need; but that he has been long acquainted with
him, and made often trial of him. So is it with God, it is not the praying now
and then to him, that can by experience give us any great assurance, that he
will hear us, and help us in time of our trouble; but that we have used it
often, and used it a long time, and have found, that we have never been sent
away empty. For the Lord sometimes hears the wicked, and now and then gives
them something that they ask; but as they pray seldom, so oftentimes they
ask and receive not, Iam. 4.3. Isai 1.15.
as the Apostle says, yea they cry, and the Lord hears them not: but as
they have stopped their ears at the word of God, so he stops his ears at
their prayers: so they can have no assurance by experience, though God have
given them something: Mich. 3.4. Zach. 7.13.
for a man may once or twice do for his enemy, and for him whom he never
means to gratify any more. Another cause then, why we have so little
knowledge in the time of our need, that God will hear us, is, that we have so
little acquainted our selves with prayer, and that we have not done as the
Apostle wills us, namely, Phil. 4.6.
in all things made our requests known unto God in supplication and prayer:
that is, we have not so often prayed unto him, as we have need, and so we have
not that experience that we might have had. Seeing then that this is a great
blessing of God, which is or should be desired of all, namely, to know when we
pray, that God will hear us; let us come often unto him in prayer: and that I
may use the words of S. Paul, In all places and upon all occasions lift up
pure hands unto God, that we may have often talk with God, and be (as it were)
well acquainted with him, and so by experience know, what account we may make
of his help.

And that our experience herein might be such as it ought, we must not only
pray often, as has been said before: but especially we must well see, and
diligently mark how God grants our requests, and always consider, what
has followed upon our prayers. And then we must mark what follows upon our
prayers.
And this is that that David says of himself: Psalm. 5.4.
Hear my voice in the morning, O Lord, for early in the morning I will direct
my prayer unto thee, and I will wait: where he says, That when he had prayed
unto God, he would tarry Gods leisure, and consider what followed upon his
prayers. For all good experience arises not so much of the often practice of a
thing, as of the wise and diligent observation of the event of it: insomuch
that some shall use a thing very often, and yet make little or no use of it at
all to themselves: as we see some never mark what meat or drink does hurt
them. But the skillful physician, that has often prescribed a medicine against
such a disease, and has marked in his patient, how it has wrought, and how he
has been cured by it, thereby gathers a certain knowledge, that this
medicine is good for the cure of such a disease: for (says he) I have not only
often given it, but have found, that many have been cured by it: and thus all
rules of that art, as of all other, arise of experience, that is, of marking
what was the effect of such a cause. So then, when a man has not only often
prayed unto God, but has also marked, how he has obtained his requests at the
hand of God: then, specially from the promises of God, and secondly from his
own experience of the truth of them, he gathers a certain knowledge, that
God will hear him: for he considers how according to that goodness that is
in him, and the truth of his promises, he has oftentimes heard him before.
Otherwise it may come to pass, that though the Lord has often heard us, For
want of this we have not that assurance from experience, that we might.
and that in many things, if we either through negligence have not regarded it,
or through carelessness have forgotten it, we can have little knowledge in the
time of our need, that he will hear us. And thus the Lord many times in
justice punishes the unthankfulness of men, who mark not his fatherly
dealing toward themselves, for their own comfort, and the praise of his name:
that though he has often helped them, and all the world has seen it, yet in
their greatest need they are in as much doubt of his goodness, and pray with
as great distrust, as though he had never done any thing for them before. As on
the other side he thus in mercy and favor plentifully rewards the
thankfulness of those that often pray and call upon him in the time of their
trouble, and also carefully mark, and diligently remember, what he has done
for them, to praise his holy name for the same, that by this good experience
they know, what, he will do for them for the time to come.

And thus it falls out, when we have any dealing with men: Thus is it, when
we have any dealing with men.
as when in any distress we shallbe in such case, that we know not whom to
seek to for help; and we complaining of it, one should say to us, Go to such
a man; and then we should say, nay, for I know not what he will do for me, he
never did any thing for me yet, and therefore I have no great cause to presume
of his help. Then the other shall say to us again, yea, that is not so: for I
remember my self how at such a time, in such a need, you had great succor and
comfort from him: then we being not able to deny it, should say, It is true
indeed, as you say, but my memory is so ill, that I had clean forgotten it.
Are we not here justly punished for our unthankfulness, to doubt of a man's
good will there, where there was no cause? So is it when by forgetting Gods
merciful dealing toward us, we doubt of his goodness in the greatest time of
our need, without any just cause. But otherwise he that well bears in mind
what benefits from time to time he receives of men, to be thankful unto
them for the same; he can in any distress presently tell what to do, and say,
to his own comfort, as namely, I will go to such a man, for I remember how
often he has done for me heretofore. So fares it with all them, that mark
what God has done for them. In this respect therefore it is requisite, that we
keep a register of all Gods benefits, We must therefore keep a register of
Gods benefits. Psalm. 103.1.
and say to our selves as David does, Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget
not all his benefits. Especially we must mark diligently, what things he has
done at our prayers: the same David also says of himself, This poor man
cried, Psalm. 34.6.
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all troubles. And as he in some
cases did make special Psalms, which bear the titile of remembrance, and
they were made specially that by them he might keep a thankful memory of
Gods benefits: Psalm. 38.
so ought we to do some thing to help our memory this way, especially when
we see how forgetful we are of them: that so upon long experience we might
say, I know that God will hear and help me. Therefore when we have prayed for
any common benefit, or for any deliverance, as fear of enemies, and such like,
when we have prayed in the Church here for any that have been sick, when for
others in other cases privately, when for our selves at home or any of ours; if
we had from time to time marked and remembered in all these, how God has
answered us graciously, we might now, when we meet to pray for the removing of
this visitation, have had greater hope of being heard than we have, and greater
assurance of Gods goodness toward us. But seeing we have been so
unprofitable in times past, to our own hinderance, let us make the best use of
the time present, that we can. And therefore now seeing in this mortality of
the plague, we see so great fruit of our prayers at the last, And namely how
God has lessened the plague at our prayers.
that as in other places it is greatly diminished, so in the chiefest city of
this land it is fallen from three thousand and four hundredth a week, to less
than two hundred (for the which Gods name be praised) let us profit by this
experience, to know what he will do for us at all times when we pray. And
thus much out of these words both for the assurance of faith in which we
should pray, and for the means whereby we may attain unto it.

The nineteenth Sermon upon the sixth verse.
Now know I, that the Lord will help his anointed, etc.
I Shall not need to call into your remembrance the doctrine of the last day,
gathered out of this verse, Now know I.
concerning the assurance of being heard, that we should pray in: which is so
necessary, that without it we cannot pray acceptably to God, comfortably to
our selves, nor profitably to others. I am now to proceed, and here to consider
of these words, where he says, Now I know: for seeing this faith (that God
will hear us) is so requisite in prayer, it may be demanded, Why he did not
begin with it at the first, and to say in the beginning, I know that God will
hear: but that he comes to it so slowly, and as it were at the last, to say,
I know. What? did he, the author of the Psalm, even David, did he not know it
until now? that he says, Now I know: did he not know it before this time?
Was all the former part of the prayer with doubting, or without knowledge of
this? Or would he have the people whom he taught thus to pray, and left this
form for them, not to have this knowledge, or not to labor for it, till they
come to this? Yes undoubtedly, both himself did know in the beginning, that
the Lord did and would hear him, else to what end did he pray? and he would
have them even at the first, and before they began or spoke one word, to
believe that God would hear them, otherwise they could not pray in faith, and
so neither please God therein, nor look for any thing at the hand of the Lord
for him. Why then does he himself say, and teach the^ also to say, not only,
We know, but Now I know that God will help? Surely to this end, to show, that
as he has faith in the goodness of God, that he would hear him indeed, so
he had it in measure, and it increased in him by degrees, By continuing in
prayer, our assurance of being heard, increases.
as it does in all other men. Therefore as he was directed to make this prayer
by the spirit of God, so when he came to this part of it, it did specially show
forth it self in the assurance of faith, which he had thereby, and so caused
him to break out into these words, Now know I: because that by continuance in
prayer he attained unto a greater measure of faith and assurance than he had at
the first. And this great affection of the mind in prayer, he was willing to
commend unto them, to that end, that they might both labor for it, and look
to come unto it every one in their measure; namely, that the longer and the
more earnestly they prayed for him, the greater assurance they should have by
the spirit of God, that the Lord did and would hear them. And therefore though
they did know at the first, that God would hear them according to his will, as
he had promised, which promises they were not ignorant of: yet by continuing
in prayer, or after their prayer, they might look to be further assured of it
from God by his holy spirit, that was in them.

For the Lord God uses thus to work by his spirit in those that be his, that
when their hearts are prepared aright to serve him, As in all the parts of Gods
service, the longer we continue in the^, the more does his spirit by them work
in us.
the longer that they continue under the means of their salvation, the more
effectual is the operation of his holy spirit in them thereby. As for example,
in the hearing of the word of God, they are more affected in the midst than
they were at the beginning, and many times most of all in the ending; if they
be diligent and attentive hearers, and not drowsy and careless, and labor to
stir up the spirit of God in themselves. So is it in praying also, when they
come to it with due preparation of the heart, the children of God do often
find, that though they had some good measure of faith in Gods promises, and
feeling of his love in the beginning, yet by continuance in prayer, the same
was greatly enlarged and increased in them: so that it was more at the midst,
than at the first; in so much, that then they could say with greater freedom
of the spirit, and assurance of faith, Now know I indeed, that the Lord will
help me, and does hear me from heaven: and in the end they have had more
assurance: and sometimes after they have done praying, most of all. Thus their
faith, knowledge, and assurance, that the Lord did hear them, it has grown by
degrees, and increased till it came to the full, when they have prayed
fervently. And hereupon it comes to pass, that we find in the Psalms, that
very often they break out into some sudden passion of joy, or glorying in the
Lord, and as it were boasting of the goodness of God toward them: as though
they had then even already obtained their desire: because they felt and found
that the Lord did give them some good assurance of it. As we see how (besides
that which they profess here) in the end of the Psalm, they utter these words
of great confidence, as though the victory were already gotten, which if it
had been, it had been in vain to pray for defense against enemies: they
speak, I say, thus confidently, They are brought down and fallen, but we are
risen, and stand upright.

And this is that which we may observe, and most clearly see, first of all in
the third Psalm: where he begins his prayer very uncomfortably, Thus David
beginning his prayer somewhat doubtfully; ends with great assurance. Psalm.
3.1.
and greatly complains of the multitude of his adversaries, that rebelliously
were risen up against him, saying, Lord how are mine adversaries increased? How
many rise against me. Many say to my soul, there is no help for him in God.
Afterward he confirms his faith in the goodness of God by the consideration
of his nature, that he is a defense and buckler to them that are unarmed and
without defense: and he gives glory to them that have ignominy cast upon them
without a cause, and he rayseth up them that are falling, Verse 3.
saying, But thou Lord art a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my
head, And then he gathers more strength of faith from former experience,
Verse 4.
saying, I did call unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of the
holy mountain: and to this he adds, Shelah, to show how greatly it did
affect him, and what comfort he had in this to remember, that God had heard his
prayer in former times: and then further adds for the strengthening of his
faith, that the Lord in other great danger had defended him, Verse 5.
saying, I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained
me. And thereupon infers this confident speech, Verse 6.
full of assurance: I will not be afraid for ten thousand of the people that
should beset me round about. Where he does glory by faith, that though his
enemies were never so many, and himself in never so great danger of them, he
would not be too much afraid of them, but was assured that the Lord would
defend him in the midst of them. And this assurance of Gods defense he
obtains now at the last, by continuing in prayer, and by those meditations
which he had in prayer of the goodness and mercy of God toward all his, and
now specially toward himself: which he has set down in the former verses,
and part of his prayer. So falls it out with others, that the spirit of God
in them, which is the spirit of prayer and of all assurance, as it stirs
them up to pray; and when they cannot tell of themselves what or how to pray,
as they ought, the same spirit helps their infirmities, Romans 8.26.
and stirs up in them sighs and groans, and desires of the heart, which are
acceptable, and which God allows of, because they are according to his will:
so the same also helps their infirmities in this point, that whereas they
began to pray in great weakness and much doubting because of their
temptations; by calling into their minds more freshly than before, the promises
of God made in his word, and the often performance of the same to others and to
themselves; it causes them to grow in faith, and does give the^ some greater
assurance of Gods favors, and of being graciously heard, than they had in the
beginning, and they know then more fully that he does hear them, and will
help them. And so the spirit of God in prayer helps the infirmities of the
rest of his servants. Hebr. 12.1.
And though this may seem strange to such as are not acquainted with prayer,
who use it very seldom or not at all, and make it but a matter of form and
custom: yet I doubt not, but that we have a great cloud of faithful
witnesses, who using prayer often of conscience, and in the feeling of their
wantes, and making it a daily exercise, and therein deal with the Lord in good
earnest, as those that would obtain some thing at his hand, and rest not in
the bare action of prayer, as in a work wrought, or a certain task performed
and done; who do and are able to subscribe most willingly unto the truth of
this by their own practice. So that as David making this prayer, when his
son Absalom with Achitophell and many others raised up a rebellon against
him, in which for the safeguard of his life he was compelled to fly out of
Jerusalem (as appears by the title of the Psalm) did by continuance in
fervent prayer, obtain this assurance, That the Lord would defend him, and
confound them all, and therefore he would not be afraid of them, if there were
ten thousand of them, and they all should beset him round about; that is, if he
were brought into great straits (as indeed he was:) and truly it came to pass
in the end, for Achitophell did hang himself, and Absalom was hanged by the
hair of the head. As, I say, David then had assurance of this before hand: so
also others of Gods servants in their dangers and troubles praying to God
fervently, (as he did) have in some good measure to their own comfort, and the
comfort of others that have prayed with them, obtaitained of God by his spirit
an assurance, that the Lord did hear them, and would be merciful unto them,
and they by faith have professed the same to others beforehand.

David again by continuing in fervent prayer, grows in assurance of being
heard.
And this growing and increasing in the assured hope, That the Lord will hear
us (whereof we now speak) David again sets down by his own experience in
the sixth Psalm, (as indeed I must needs confess, that he was a man of
wonderful great experience both of his own infirmity, and of Gods merciful
dealing toward him:) which Psalm was made when he was grievously sick and
like to die, and did not only feel the hand of God heavy upon himself this
way (as appears by his grievous complaints and outcries) but he was troubled
in his mind for his sin: and in this estate he prays unto God, To remove
from him this great token of his wrath and displeasure, that was upon him, and
to take away this grievous scourge that he was then afflicted with, and to give
him both health of body and quietness of mind: of both which at the last he
obtains so great assurance by faith, through the inward working of Gods
spirit, that he does openly glory of it against all his enemies, that rejoiced
at his fall. And for the understanding of this it is requisite (especially for
the simpler sort, to whose capacity I have especially framed my self)
requisite, I say, to set down in order the words of the whole Psalm; for
otherwise, neither the great confidence, and rejoicing of his faith, which in
the end with much striving he attained unto; nor the feruencie of his prayer,
which was a means whereby Gods spirit wrought it in him, can be so fully
perceived, or made plain unto you. Thus therefore he begins his prayer, O
Lord, Psalm. 6.1.
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath: have mercy
upon me O Lord, for I am needy: heal me, for my bones are vexed: My soul is
also sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou delay? Return, O Lord, deliver
my soul, save me for thy mercies sake: for in death there is no remembrance of
thee, in the grave who shall praise thee? I fainted in my mourning, I cause my
bed every night to swim, and water my couch with tears: Mine eyes is dimmed
for dispight, and sunk in because of all mine enemies. Here we see that in
these seven first verses he complains most grievously of his own estate, and
prays most fervently unto God for deliverance: and no man can say more either
to express the grief of his mind, or his fervent desire to have relief and
comfort. See then I pray you in the words following what a great alteration
there is made in him of the sudden, and what a wonderful great change he
finds in himself: when he says thus. Away from me all ye workers of
iniquity: Verse. 8.
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord has heard my
petition, the Lord will receive my prayers: All mine enemies shall be
confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned back, and put to shame
suddenly. Where he shows what gteat comfort the Lord gave him at the last in
this trouble of his, even that he should be delivered out of it, when his
enemies looked that he should perish and be swallowed up in it: and he
attaineth unto so great assurance of this, that he is not able to contain
himself, but again and again professes that the Lord had heard his prayers,
and the voice of his weeping. And not only that is to be marked, but
especially this, that he comes unto this assurance, not until the end of
many long and fervent prayers: and that in the beginning either he had it not
at al, or nothing in that measure, that there he professes it: for then no
doubt he would have done it sooner, and not so long have fed himself with such
grievous complaints and lamentable outcries, as there he does. And so may we
do: for God gives it by ordinary means.


So is it possible for us, in what trouble soever we shall be in, if we pray
unto God in all humility and sorrow for our sins, as he did, even with great
abundance of tears (for he says, That he watered his couch, and made his bed
to swim with them: by which hyperbolicall kind of speech he means, That he
wept very much, not only in the day, but even in the night also) and if we did
pray with that feruencie that he did, not fainting nor giving over, but
stretching out our affections and desires, according to our present need; it is
possible, I say, for us to attain by degrees unto that measure of persuasion
of Gods goodness toward us, that may suffice us. And though we come not to
that great measure that was in this holy man, because we pray not in that
feruencie and zeal, and tenderness of heart that he did, yet in some
acceptable measure, and more than we had in the beginning. For I am not of that
opinion, that this was inspired into him as he was a Prophet, who had many
things extraordinary; neither that any man can come to have any assurance or
full persuasion either of their salvation, or that God hears their prayers,
or of any other favor from him, without some revelation, and so it should be
thought presumption in a man to say he is assured of such things: but that God
gives this assurance, and increases it by ordinary means; and namely and
especially by prayer. For seeing prayer is very fitly compared unto wrestling
or striving (as we have seen heretofore) by which we labor with all the power
of our souls and bodies, A comparison to show the truth of it.
to obtain some thing of the Lord: as by bodily striving men seek to obtain
some masterie among men: (and thus the Apostle speaks of it to the Romans,
Romans 15.30.
Desiring them to strive with him by prayers to God for him:) as in striving, a
man's strength is not always greatest at the first, neither can himself or
others perceive so well, whether he shall overcome; but sometimes, yea most
usually, when after some pains taken his body is well heat, he increases in
strength of body and agilitie of lims: whereby it comes to pass, that he
finds that in himself, which gives him greater hope of prevailing against
his adversary, than he had before: So is it when we pray to God, and as it
were strive with him; that though we put all our strength unto it at the
first, that is, pray with all the desire of our hearts; yet when by continuance
in prayer, the spirit of God in us is well heat, as I may say, and the heat of
it increased, we shall find that both our desires are greatly increased, and
also our assurance from thence of being heard, is enlarged. So that in the
midst or ending of our prayers we shall perceive our minds more pacified and
quiet, and our selves more ready to submit our wills to the will of God, and to
rest in the hope of his defense and deliverance, than before. Whereof (if we
were asked) though we could give no great reason from outward things; for all
things are still with us, as they were before: yet we find it to be true by
experience, and must account it a fruit of our prayer, in that the Lord has
given us greater assurance than we had before, and so we are contented to wait
upon him.

The like may be showed in many other Psalms, Another example of this, in the
person of David.
(as indeed that one book, as it is full of godly prayers, so of notable
examples of this kind of the working of the spirit of God in his children and
servants) but for brevity sake I will content my self with one or two now. In
the seuenteeth Psalm he prays unto God to be preserved from his enemies,
either Saul, or some other, (for indeed he had many) and says thus, Hear the
right, Psalm. 17.1.
O Lord, (that is, my righteous cause) consider my cry, hearken unto my prayer
of lips unfeigned. Let my sentence come forth from thy presence, and let thine
eyes behold equity. Thou have proved and visited mine heart in the night, thou
have tried me and foundest nothing; for I was purposed, that my mouth should
not offend. Concerning the works of men, by the words of thy lips, I kept me
from the paths of the cruel man. Stay my steps in thy path, that my foot do
not slide. Then he breaks out into these words of comfort, Verse. 6.
I have called upon thee, surely thou will hear me: O God incline thine ear
to me, and hearken unto my words. Where after many prayers, and reasons to
move the Lord to hear him, as the goodness of his cause, the uprightness of
his mind, the feruencie of his prayer, and such like: he says, that he did
then assure himself, that God would hear him, and so does continue his prayer
unto him in that assurance of faith. But it is to be noted for this purpose
that we have in hand, and for which this is alleged, that though in the
beginning he prayed, and then again returns to his prayer unto the Lord,
that he would hear him, yet he puts this in between, (saying, Surely thou will hear me O God) because God gave him then to believe it more fully.
Which full persuasion if he had had before in that measure that he had then,
we may be assured, that he would sooner have professed it, to the glory of God,
and his own comfort.

A fourth example of it in David.
I will conclude this point, with that which is in the eight and thirty Psalm:
which Psalm was made, when he was in some great distress of sickness (as
some think) or some other at the least. And the whole Psalm is full of
grievous complaints as may appear to them that will but read it, when he
begins thus: O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, Psalm. 38.1.
neither chastise me in thy wrath: for thine arrows have light upon me, and
thine hand lies upon me: there is nothing found in my flesh, because of thine
anger, neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin, and so forth; for
the whole Psalm is too long to be set down, yet it is necessary for the^ to
read it over, who desire to see the truth of this that we speak to be in the
Prophet. He first complains of the heavy wrath of God that was upon him, and
of his sins, which he acknowledges to be the cause of his punishment: of the
infirmity and great weakness, that he found in himself, both of soul and
body: and of this also, that he was forsaken of his friends, and left desolat:
and of the malice of his wicked enemies, all which made him (as he says) to
pour out his whole desire before the Lord, so that his sighing was not hid
from him. Verse. 9.
And then at the last he comes to have some good assurance, that the Lord
would hear him, and does openly profess it in these words: On thee O Lord do
I wait, Verse. 15.
thou will hear me O Lord my God: and so from this assurance, he ends the
Psalm somewhat more comfortably than he began it, saying, Have thee to help
me, O my Lord, Verse. 22.
my salvation. Thus we see, how by continuing in fervent prayer, and striving
against all things within him and without him, that might discourage him, the
spirit of God did so increase in him, that he gat some small assurance at the
least, and more than he had before, that the Lord would hear him: and so
ends with a more peaceable and quiet mind than he began. And though I am not
ignorant, that some of the learned do read that fifteenth verse somewhat
otherwise; yet they agree with me in this point, for which it is brought, That
in the same he professes his faith, that the Lord would hear him.

All these examples do not only show us the truth of this doctrine, namely,
that the servants of God praying unto him in their several troubles (as this
people did here) have by little and little grown in a further assurance to
their own comfort and the glory of God, By this experience in another, we see
what assurance God may work in us, if we use the same means.
that he will hear them: but they show us the same by great experience, which
is the best tracts, and able to instruct the most simple: for we have heard
how David oftentimes professes it of himself; which shows us what we may
look for that the Lord should work in us also (for there is no respect of
persons with him) if we pray in that feeling of our wants, and that humility
under the cross, and that feruencie under hope, and that continuance by
patience, that he did. Therefore let us labor after it, even that we may find
the spirit of God so working in our hearts by prayer, that it may certainly and
comfortably witness to our spirits, that the Lord does hear us; and that the
same testimony of the spirit may increase in us, aswe increase in praying. And
it may come to pass, that as in the morning we see the Sun arise higher and
higher, whereby we have a greater feeling of the heat of it, as the day
increases: so we might see the son of righteousness so arising in our
hearts, Malach. 4.2.
dispersing all the mysts of ignorance and unbelief, that we may have the
comfortable feeling of the favor of God in our hearts increasing more and
more, to cheer them up with the light and heat of it, as it were, as we shall
continue longer in prayer. Let us labor after it, I say, because that few do
know what it does mean, because they do not so much as once seek and inquire
after it.

The best servants of God complain that they have no assurance that God
hears their prayer.
Now if any do seek this, and cannot find it, and so they still complain, as
many of the best servants of God have done, that he hears not their prayers,
neither have they any assurance of it: for when as in their troubles they pray
unto God, this grieueth them much, that they have no persuasion that God
hears and will help them: for if they had this, they could be contented to
wait upon him, and to tarry his leisure; but they pray, and pray, and can have
no assurance that he does hear them. And a reason of the same.
To satisfy all those, and to strengthen them in this weakness of theirs, we
must consider, That they that have had the greatest assurance at any time, that
the Lord did hear them, have had it but in time, and in measure, and not
always alike; but sometimes more, sometimes less, and sometimes not at all:
as the spirit of faith, or their own unbelief has prevailed in them. For in
these forenamed places we see, that in some of the Psalms he professes
greater assurance, than in other: and so is it with all men. Even as with the
eyes of our body we sometimes see a thing more clearly than at other times,
and our eyesight is not always alike: no more is our faith whereby we behold
Christ, and in him the favor of God, it is not always in the same
brightness. Besides, as the air is not always alike for our sight, but
sometimes more troublesome and souring, yea dark, which hinders us from the
sight of that that we look unto, when our eyes are at the best: so we have
sometimes in our mind greater and more violent temptations, than at other, as
it were thick mystes or rather dark clouds in the air to hinder our faith
from beholding the cheerful countenance of the Lord, as it were the light of
the Sun: which shines always alike, though we by reason of these cannot
always see it alike. So the Lords love is always one and the same, but we are
not always alike disposed in our selves to behold it in that brightness, that
it shines in it own nature. Therefore we must not be dismayed, if we have not
always this assurance in our prayer after the same manner: but see what is the
cause of it, and strive against that, that so we may come unto it in time, and
in that measure that the Lord shall bestow it upon us.

Secondly, we must consider, Another reason of it.
that this people does pray very fervently and often for this, That God would
hear and help their king; before they come to this assurance, as appears by
all the former words: when they say, The Lord hear thee, the name of God
defend thee, send thee help, and strengthen thee, let him remember thine
offerings, and turn thy burnt offerings into ashes, grant thee according to
thine heart, fulfill all thy purpose, etc. Where there are many short and
earnest petitions for the same thing: which doubling of their words and of
their requests in so great shortness, do sufficiently show, how fervently
they prayed. For we must not think, that they use vain babbling, heaping up
a multitude of words without any sense, feeling, or desire of the thing
answerable unto the same, as it is the manner of hypocrites and heathen to do,
who use repetitions, and think to be heard for their much babbling: Matthew. 6.7.
against whom our Savior Christ speaks in the Gospel. But this prayer being
first made by David, who had the spirit of God; and for the Church, which is
ruled by the same spirit; we may by their words very clearly discern and see
their spirit that they prayed with, namely, with great earnestness and
feeling: especially when this word Selah, which notes some great affection of
the mind, is added: and thus doing, they come to a greater assurance at the
last, I mean by this continuance in fervent prayer. So in all the other
Psalms of David, which we alleged before, we see that he prays not coldly,
or in a word: but very earnestly, often, and long before he professes this
assurance. Therefore if we will come unto it in our measure, we must labor to
have the feeling of our want, and to be troubled for it, and so pray earnestly:
we must come also in the faith of Gods goodness, and hope of being heard, by
considering the promises of his word, and the fulfilling of the same: we must
continue in prayer, and pray often for the same thing; so shall it come to
pass, that we shall not only believe beforehand generally, that God will
hear us; but more particularly in that very thing that we pray for, find some
assurance increased in us, that he will help us; and we must wait upon him
also to have a greater assurance of it wrought in us afterward. Therefore let
us do thus, and see whether the Lord in many things that we pray for, will not
give us that assurance, that he will help us some way or other; either by
mitigating the thing that is upon us, or delivering us clean from it, or
giving us patience under it, or increasing our strength to bear it, or turning
it unto our good: so that we shall see, the more we pray, the more quiet
shall we be in submitting our wills to the will of God, and assuring our selves,
that some way or other the Lord will hear us, and help us.

And furthermore concerning this particular, that they pray for, even for David
their king, they had this assurance that God would hear him, How we may be
assured that God will hear us for others.
and help him. And so I doubt not but that many faithful subjects and people
in this land having in like manner prayed for their kings, and queens, and
governors, God has given them assurance, that he has heard them for them:
and the more that any have done so, the greater assurance have they had. As
many praying for the life of our late Queen Elizabeth: God did not only
preserve her person from a number of treasons intended against her, but they
had by their prayers comfort over it for the time to come, that the Lord would
do so still. And so shall we now have for his most excellent majesty that now
is, though he be subject to many perils, as appears by the terrible murders
and treasons that have already broken out against his royal person, and whole
progeny: that if we use to pray often for him publicly and privately, and that
fervently with all our desires, and believe that he is the Lords anointed (that
is) that he is set over us by the Lord in his just title and inheritance; As
for the king.
that the Lord, who is the defender of all right, will not only preserve him
still, maugre their heads, as hitherto he has done, but will assure us of it
in some good measure; that we shall quietly submit our selves to his peaceable
and gracious government, and not greatly fear the malicious attempts of his
and our enemies. But as he is religious himself, and uses to pray for
himself, and puts his trust in God; so we praying often also and earnestly
for him, shall know more and more, that the Lord will hear him, and us for
him. And this is true not only of our governors, but of all men: so that if
we use to pray often for others, and if they have made known and commended
their estate unto us to that end; and we thereupon be fervent with the Lord for
them; And for them that are visited with the plague.
it will come to pass, that not only the Lord will hear us for them, but we
shall have good hope of it, and so we shall have comfort beforehand, that God
will do good unto them: and the oftener that we pray for any in any distress
of theirs, the more assurance shall we have, God in his good time will hear us
for them. And I doubt not but that in this time of sickness and mortality
many have found this to be true by experience, that by continual and fervent
prayer they have not only obtained this assurance for themselves, that the
Lord will help them, but for others. Let that experience move us for the time
to come, to pray still for those that are in this visitation, or in the fear
of it, that we may know at the last, that the Lord will hear us for them also,
and help them in his blessed time, by the mighty power of his right hand:
which we beseech him, that we may find at his merciful hand, for Jesus Christ's
sake our mediator and redeemer. Amen.

The twentieth Sermon upon the sixth verse.
I know, that the Lord will help his anointed, and will hear him from, etc.
Why the number is changed in these words of their prayer.
THis being the voice of a multitude, even of the whole Church, is set down
after this means, not (we) know, but (I) know, in the singular number, or
person of one; not only for this cause that we have already heard of, namely,
to teach them all that they should labor to pray in this faith, That God would
hear them all, and every one of them: but also to show, that as David the
author of this Psalm professes that he had this assurance in himself, so he
commending it unto them to use, doubted not, but that all of them praying
together, some of them at the least should have it also, and so might say in
their own persons, I know that God will help his anointed: and so should pray
in that faith, whereby he might verily believe, that God would hear him, and
so he might obtain help and assurance of it for all the rest: and by that
assurance that God should give him, he might comfort the rest. In so much that
though every man and woman then present, through the weakness of their faith
could not come unto this assurance, (which yet they should labor after, as
has been said before? yet some one or other among the^, more or fewer, might
have it in great measure: and so the Lord might assure them of it for the rest,
that God would hear them. And so this should be the benefit of the common
prayer of the Church, when many were met together, and that to every one that
joined with them, That though all of them could not come to that measure of
assurance in their prayers that they desired, that the Lord would hear them;
When many pray together, one may have assurance for all the rest, that God does
hear them.
yet some one or other should have it for them, and so when it was a common
benefit that they prayed for, they should not only obtain it together, (for
the Lord would hear them) but some should more specially know it beforehand,
to their own comfort, and the comfort of others. And this no doubt is a
singular great comfort in any trouble, that when many are together and in great
heaviness, by reason of some calamity or fear that is upon them: and none
among them is able to comfort themselves, much less are they able to comfort
others, that are feeble minded among them, though they desire to do it; and
though they seek to God for comfort, and pray for it most earnestly, yet they
cannot find it in themselves: at the last God shall so stir up the spirit of
some one or other among them, and shall so assure him, that God will be
merciful unto them, that he shall constantly and openly profess it unto them
to their comfort also; comfort I say, though not in themselves, yet from him.
For though he, even but one, has it properly in himself, yet he has it not
for himself alone, but for others that are with him, and in the same danger
and fear, who need to be comforted: and they shall fare the better by it. For
(as the Apostle says of himself, 2. Cor. 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of
mercy, and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction by that comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God) he says that that comfort which
God gave him in his affliction, was not for himself alone, but for the benefit
of others: so others also, that which this way God bestows upon them, they
have it, And so the feeble minded among them have been comforted.
not for themselves, but for others. And indeed all experience does show the
truth of this, that some that have been very faint hearted in themselves, yet
being in some common trouble with others, have been greatly comforted and
stayed by them from those extremities that they might have fallen into, in that
measure that the Lord has comforted some for all the rest: who if they had not
been present with them, the other could not have attained unto that comfort in
any measure, which they did. And this comfort is to be found of them, that have
it in themselves for others, by prayer and by walking in a good course, that so
the Lord may not forsake them in the midst of their trouble.

In this respect it is a great benefit to resort to the common prayers of the
Church.
And in this respect we see, that it is a great benefit, and that that shall
make much for our comfort, to resort to the common prayers of the Church, where
we shall have many good men and women pray with us for the common benefits
which concern us and them: that so if not to our selves, yet to some of them,
God may give assurance, that he will hear us: and so we may be comforted by
our mutual faith, ours and theirs, Romans 1.12.
as the Apostle speaks. And what a great mercy of God it is also privately in
any need of ours, to be directed to send for righteous and faithful men and
women to pray for us, according to the direction of S. James, who faith, Jam
5.14.
Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, And in our
need to have good me^ pray with us.
and let them pray for him; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him: and afterward adds, That the prayer of a righteous man
avails much, if it be fervent. Where he shows, what good we may receive by
the faith and fervent prayers of others; namely, that so it may come to pass,
that if not our selves, yet others praying for us, God might give them some
assurance for us, that he would hear us and help us both in soul and body;
in pardoning our sins upon our true repentance, and raising us from
sickness, which for our sins God had laid upon us: as here the Prophet does
say, And always, most of all in any danger to be in the company of the godly.
That some one of the company might have this assurance for the rest, and for
the king, that God would hear him. Moreover, from hence we may see generally,
what a blessed thing it is always to keep company with the godly, and those
that walk in his ways: for if any trouble do befall them, they may pray
together, and God may assure one or other for the rest, that he is among them,
and will be good unto them. And thus was it with the Apostle Paul and all his
company, when they were in that long and dangerous navigations toward Rome, in
which all of them were in fear of their lives, as it is set down at large in
the Acts of the Apostles: Act. 27.20.
when they were so tossed by the wind and by the sea, that they were compelled
to cast all things out of the ship, to ease her of her burden; and the weather
was so foul, that by the space of many days they saw neither Sun nor stars
to guide them or comfort them: so that all hope that they should be saved, was
taken from them: and their fear was so great and so continual, that for
fourteen days together they fasted, and could not take their ordinary food:
and there were in the ship at that time two hundred threescore and seventeen
souls, among whom was Paul a prisoner, and some other Christians with him. At
which time we may be assured, that he and the rest that feared God, prayed
earnestly unto him, that they might be saved: and God did not only hear them,
but gave unto Paul assurance thereof by a vision of an Angel that appeared
unto him in the night, and said unto him, That for his sake all should be
saved, only the ship should be lost; and this as he did believe, so he most
confidently avouches it unto them: and exhorts them earnestly to eat their
meat, Verse 36.
and to be comforted, and doubt not but the Lord would save them all. Then it
is said, that all of them began to pull up their hearts, and to be of good
courage, and also to take their meat. So that here we see, how in a common
calamity that was upon a multitude, God gave assurance of deliverance but unto
one, who could say, as he did, I know that God will help: but all the rest had
the benefit of it; for thereby, their hearts that so failed before that they
could not eat their meat, now began to be of good courage. Moses at the red
sea by prayer was assured for all the rest, that God would help them.


So was it with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt, and were
now in the wilderness, and Pharaoh and his host so pursued them, that he had
them at this disadvantage, that the great mountains were on both sides of
them, the terrible red sea was before them, to hinder all passage, and he and
his great army marched after them to destroy them, Exodus 14.10.
as it is set down in the book of Exodus: whereupon they were all sore afraid
when they saw them, and cried unto the Lord; but yet they had no assurance that
he did hear them, and would deliver them: but rather they looked to be
destroyed, and so through impatience and unbelief did murmr against Moses,
that he had brought them out of Egypt. Moses also he cries unto the Lord for
help, and he receives assurance of it for them all, that God would save them,
and destroy their enemies. For the Lord spoke unto him, and told him, how he
should divide the sea, and go through it, and so escape, and the Egyptians
should follow them and be drowned: and thereupon he speaks comfortably unto
them, Fear ye not, stand still, Verse 13.
and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you this day: for
the Aegiptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see them again:
the Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace: and so it came to
pass, as appears in the same chapter. Thus in this great multitude of many
thousands, when all were partakers of all common danger and fear, and so
prayed all together for one thing, God gave to one of them for the rest, even
to Moses for all the people, this assurance of faith, that he could and did
say, I know that God does hear us, and will help us; and the rest though they
could not attain unto it themselves, yet they were partakers of the fruit of
his prayers; not only in that they were delivered as well as himself, but
they had some assurance of it beforehand from him, otherwise they could not
have done as they did, so confidently to adventure through the sea. So may it
come to pass with us, if we be in any common danger with others, and have some
excellent men among us to pray with us, God may give them that assurance of
deliverance according to the greatness of their faith, which we in our
weakness cannot attain unto: and yet such is the fruit of the communion of
Saints, that we shall enjoy the benefit of it, and be comforted by it: whereas
if we were without them, we could not have it at all; as the Israelites could
not have had any comfort here in their distress, if they had been some few of
them, or many together, for the Lord revealed it only to Moses, though it were
for their sakes also.

Elias by prayer obtained assurance of rain for all the rest in his time.
And here again for this purpose we may very fitly remember the example of the
Prophet Eliah, how in the days of king Ahab, when there was such a great
drought in the land of Israel, by the space of three years and an half, that
there was neither water nor grass almost to be found in all the country
either for man or beast: at that time there was this Elijah and a godly widow
of Sarepta, with whom he did soiourne, and diverse others godly men and women,
For Obadiah one of the kings servants had hid from the persecution of Iezabell,
one hundred of the Lords Prophets: All these we may be assured at this time did
earnestly desire rain, and often prayed unto God for it: yet only the Prophet
Elijah obtained it by his prayer for himself and for the rest. And though
every one of the other might do somewhat in their measure to further it, yet
the Apostle ascribes this benefit only to his prayers, Iam. 5.18.
saying, Elias prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth
her fruit. So that here a multitude praying together for one thing, one
received it for all the other: and not only so, but he had an assurance of it
before it came, for the comfort of the rest, and the glory of God, which by
fervent prayer he obtained. For when he had prayed in the top of mount Carmel
seven times for rain, he knew assuredly at the last, that it was coming; and
therefore did not only tell Ahab, 1. King. 18.41.
that there was a sound of much rain, but afterward sent his servant unto
him, and bad him make ready his chariot apace, and go down quickly, least
the rain should stay him: and in the mean while the heaven was black with
clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. Thus we see what great benefit
all they in those days had by the prayer of Elias, praying with them, The like
may we attain unto in our measure.
and for them, both for the obtaining of rain, and for the assurance of it
beforehand. The like benefit may we have in measure by others that shall pray
with us in such cases, if they pray in the spirit, and faith, and continue as
he did. For the Apostle in speaking of him, least we should think that this
example of his did not appertain unto us one whit (for as he was a Prophet,
and a rare man, not one such more to be found in the world) says thus, Iam.
5.17.
Helias was a man subject to the like passions that we are, and he prayed, etc.
giving us to understand, that as he prevailed for others, so may we do also:
for he brings it in to encourage men to desire others to pray for them in the
time of their need. Therefore when many strive together of unequal strength
about one thing, as to remove a great stone, or some piece of timber; if there
be among them, young men, or women, and children, and sick folk, and such as
can do little or nothing, and but one strong man in their company like unto
the great giant Goliath, or unto Samson; though all of them may help some
thing, yet this one by his great strength shall do so much, that all that the
other do shall not be discerned, and so all shall be ascribed unto him, and he
alone shall be said to do it, because all of them could not have done it
without him, and they all did nothing in comparison of him. And besides he may
be of that great wisdom, and so know the measure of his strength, and what is
fit for such a purpose, that he may say whiles they are about it, or before
they begin, Now I know that the thing is overcome, or as good as done: when
others shall fear that they shall do no great matter, or are like never to
prevail: and so they shall not only obtain their purpose by his means, but
by his words be encouraged in the doing of it, yea comforted before they
begin. So is it when many of unequal faith pray together. Therefore as it is
well for them that shall have such strong men in their company, to labor with
them: so shall it be much more happy for those that shall have them that are
now weak in faith to pray for them.

The like may be said of that that befell the Jews in the days of king
Hezekiah, as it is set down in the second book of the Chronicles, 2. Chro.
32.1.
where first it is said, that Saneherib king of Ashur, when he came up against
Jerusalem with a great host, they were all afraid of his greatness: but at
last this good king gets by prayer more assurance of faith, then the rest,
and so bad his nobles and people not fear him: Verse 7. Hezekiah had assurance
of Gods help for the comfort of all his people.
saying, Be strong and courageous, fear not, neither be afraid for the king of
Asshur, neither for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with
us than be with him: with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our
God to help us, and to fight our battles: and then it is said that the people
were comforted by his words; insinuating that they were wavering, and doubtful
before. Now that he came to this assurance by prayer, there is no doubt, though
there be no mention of it in these words: for besides that the Lord does thus
vnusually give it, (as has been seen before) this good king in this
distress we may be assured did not neglect it: especially when afterward in
the same chapter there is mention made of his prayer. Thus the king for
himself and for the rest had this assured unto him, that he knew, that God
would help them, so was not only comforted himself, but comforted others in
this great fear. Afterward it fell out, that when the danger increased, and
his faith somewhat failed, he received this benefit of comfort in his fear
from another, even for the Prophet Isaijah: For it is said, And afterward the
Prophet had it for the comfort of the king. Verse 20.
that after this the king of Asshur sent his captain Rabsakeh, who with great
threatening and railing words sought to terrify the people, who to that end
cried out unto them upon the wall in the Jewish language. Then Hezekiah the
king, and Isaiah the Prophet prayed against this, and cried to heaven: but it
seems that the king for all this had yet no great assurance in himself, that
God would deliver him: but Isaiah that prayed with him had it for him and for
the rest, and did comfort him. For it is thus written of Hezehiah, that he went
into the house of the Lord to pray, and sent messengers to the Prophet, to
desire him, 2. King. 19.1.
that he would do so to: and so he did, and thereupon sent him this message,
(which assurance God gave him by prayer for the rest) That he should not fear
his words, Verse. 10.
for he would send a blast upon him, and he should hear a noise, and should
return into his own land, and there he should die by the sword, as it also
came to pass. And here though he was a Prophet to whom God showed many things
extraordinarily, yet he prepared him for that work of his spirit: and prayer
being one special means to make us fit to receive any grace of the spirit;
here it is said that he prayed, and had this assurance. And so here in this
distress many praying together, the Prophet Isaiah only for all the rest
says, Now know I, that the Lord will hear and help us.

But before this I should have placed the example of that good king Iehoshaphat
(which is set down also in the same book of the Chronicles) both because it
was before this in order of time, and especially because it is most fit for
this purpose. 2. Chron. 20 2. Iehoshaphat praying for help against his
enemies, one of the company had assurance of it for all the rest.
For in his days a great host of the Ammonites, and Moabites, and out of
mount Seir, came up against Jerusalem: which did so terrify him, and all the
rest of his people, that he set himself to fear the Lord, and proclaimed a
fast through all Judah, and they all gathered themselves together, to ask
counsel of the Lord, and they came up out of all cities of Judah to inquire of
the Lord: and Iehoshaphat was in this congregation in the house of the Lord,
and there in the midst of them made a fervent prayer unto God for help against
them: saying, O Lord God of our fathers, etc. Verse 14.
as it is set down at large there. And it is further added, that there was one
Iahaziel a Leuit, and upon him, after, or in the time of this prayer, came the
spirit of the Lord in the midst of the Congregation, and he said, Hearken ye
all Judah, and you inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Iehoshaphat, Thus
says the Lord unto you: fear not, neither be afraid of this great multitude,
for the battle is not yours, but Gods: to morrow go you down and meet with
them in such a place, ye shall not need to fight in this battle, stand still,
move not, and behold the salvation of the Lord toward you: and again very
confidently he bids them not fear, but go out against them, and the Lord
would be with them: and so it came to pass, as appears in the same chapter:
for the Lord laid ambushments against them, so that the children of Amon and
Moab rose against the inhabitants of mount Seir, Verse. 22.
to slay and destroy them; and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of
Seir, every one helped to destroy another. Here we see also in this common
danger and fear, when many prayed together, there was one man at the least, to
whom God gave this assurance, to the great comfort of all the rest, that he did
openly say, Now I know that the Lord will hear his anointed, and help him
from heaven by the mighty power of his right hand. And though others in that
company could not say so, yet God gave it to him for all the rest; who if he
had been wanting, the rest might still have languished in their fear, unless
God had raised up the spirit of some other. In this respect we ought to make of
the company and presence of the godly.
And so we see what a blessed thing it was to have such a faithful and
zealous man in their company, to pray for them. Therefore let us make much of
the company of the godly, especially let us be desirous to be partakers of
their prayers: that when as we be weak our selves, and discomforted in our
selves, yet we may be strengthened and vpheld by them. For as when one lies
very sick and like to die, and all about him are in fear of it, there may be
a skillful Physician, or some of great experience, who may see great tokens of
life in him more than all the rest, and so comfort them in hope of it, when
they are all discouraged: So when many are in trouble, and look for no way but
one, as we say, the Lord may so open the eyes of the mind of one, who by faith
after earnest prayer, may see into that help that God has promised in his
word, and comfort them with the hope of it. And for want of this, we are many
times more dismayed in trouble, than otherwise we might be. Therefore in all
affliction, if we desire comfort from God, let us desire those that are
faithful and godly to pray with us and for us.

It follows in the words of the text, His anointed, that is, David, and why
so called.
that The Lord will help his anointed. This is then further to be considered,
that David prays himself, and teaches the people also so to do, That God
would help his anointed: by which word he means himself, and they mean
David their king. Who is so called, because he was anointed with holy oil,
to be king, according to the custom of that time: by which as by an outward
visible ceremony, they that were made kings, were separated and put apart from
the rest of the people, and invested into that office and high calling. VVherby
also they were taught to labor for those gifts of the holy ghost, which were
needful for that function: and to believe, that if they did so, God would
bestow them upon them in that measure, that was most convenient for them. Now
that David was thus anointed to that office, it is most evident in his story:
where it is said, that when Saul by disobeying of Gods commandment, in not
killing the Amalekites, was cast off from the right of the kingdom, and Samuel
was willed to go tell him so: 1. Sam. 15. Chap. 16.1.
he still continued mourning for him, until the Lord did reprove him for it;
and bad him fill his horn with oil, and he would send him to Ishai the
Bethleemite, for he had provided a king among his sons: and he did so, and
caused all his sons to come before him from the eldest to the youngest, and
when David came, the Lord said unto him, Arise and anoint him, for this is he:
Verse. 8.
then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his
brethren: and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward,
even as it departed from Saul, being cast off of God, and an evil spirit was
sent of the Lord to vex him. Thus David was anointed, that is, made king. And
because this was not only over the people of God, but specially by the
commandment of God, therefore he is called his anointed, that is, one
appointed to be king over Gods people by the Lord himself: even as David does
oftentimes call Saul in respect of his first anointing and calling, The Lords
anointed. As when he had Saul in a cave, and his men persuaded him to kill
him, he said, The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my master, 1. Sam.
24.7.
The Lords anointed, to lay mine hands upon him, for he is the anointed of
the Lord: Chap 26.9.
and at another time he said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can lay his
hands on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? In this part of the prayer
then he does assure himself, that because he had not intruded himself into
that room, He confirms his faith in Gods defense by the lawfulness of his
calling.
but was lawfully called thereunto by the Lord, that therefore God would defend
him in the same against his enemies: and teaches them to pray in that faith
also, That seeing God had set him over them to be their king, and he was no
tyrant or usurper, that therefore God would preserve him in that place,
whereunto he had called him: and so from the lawfulness of his calling, he
does comfort himself and them, that God would hear them for him, and defend
him. And truly, there was great reason of that: for if an earthly king, when he
appoints any to be judges over his people, does also protect them in that
office by his laws, and by all his subjects: so that in their whole circuit
they have the Sheriff of the Shire, and all his men, with the rest of the
chief knights and gentlemen, and other inferior officers to attend upon them,
because they represent the kings person; and the Judge he comfort himself
in all his lawful affairs against all the desperate attempts of thieves,
witches, murderers, and all malefactors, that seek to hurt him, That the
king, who has called him to that place, will defend him in it, and not suffer
him to sustain any damage for the executing of his office: then the Lord, the
king of kings, appointing David in this place, and making him to be his
vicegerent upon earth over that people, much more would defend him in it
against his enemies. And as this was true, so he did believe it, and taught
them so to do, and to pray in that faith, that God would send help unto him,
because he was his anointed.

And this that David says here, So may al lawful princes.
is true not only of his own person, but of all other kings and princes that
are the Lords anointed; that is, who are come to their kingdoms lawfully,
either by free election, or lineall descent, and so are put in by God; it is
true I say, that the Lord will defend them in all their lawful attempts which
they take in hand by virtue of their office, so far as may make for his
glory and the good of his Church. And in that respect, all people that have
such set over them to reign, may with great freedom and comfort pray for
them, That the Lord would defend them in all dangers, even as he has set them
over them at the first. Therefore seeing the Lord has vouchsafed us this
mercy, to give us such a worthy king to reign over us, who is his anointed,
that is, one that comes to the crown not by usurpation, by murdering the
right heirs, as some have done; not by tyrannical invasion and conquest, but
by inheritance, lineally descending from his ancient progenitors, the noble
kings of this realm: therefore, I say, we may with great assurance pray to God
for him; In this respect we may with great hope pray for the life of our king.
Proverb. 28.2.
that as he has hitherto overthrown the plots of traitors in his own
country of Scotland, and in this kingdom also of England (both of them his
just inheritance) so it would please him to do still; and so he will do, if
our sins do not deserve the contrary: For many times because of the sins
of the people, a land often changes her princes, as the Wise Man says: and as
we see in the kingdom of Israel, falling unto idolatry, 1. King. 16.8.
that in the space of one year they had three or four kings successively to
reign over them. Therefore seeing it is our bounden duty to pray for him, 1.
Tim. 2.1.
according to the doctrine of the Apostle, who wills, That supplications, and
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; and namely,
for kings, and all that are in authority: let us be willing to do it the
rather, because he is the Lords anointed, that is, come to the crown by all
lawful and peaceable means, approved in the law of God, that so we may say
from thence, I know that the Lord will help his anointed. So that though we
could have no comfort from our selves, that we should be found worthy of such
a prince; yet seeing it has pleased the Lord in the riches of his mercy to
set him over us for the good of this land, we may hope, that he will have
respect unto his anointed, and not to suffer men to put down him, whom he
himself has set up. Even as we had great experience of this in the days of
our late Sovereign the Queen, how the Lord did miraculously preserve her out
of the hands of the Papists her enemies, when she was cast into prison, and as
she then said of her self (Tanquam eius) as a sheep, every hour ready to be
carried to the slaughter: and at the last brought her to the kingdom: so in
the same he did as wonderfully preserve her in many dangers and conspiracies,
because she was his anointed. David in many troubles prays in hope of Gods
defense, because he was his anointed.


And thus David does often comfort himself in his prayers, when he was in
great trouble, and in fear of the loss sometimes both of his kingdom and
life: and that both before he came to the crown, and after, he comfort
himself with this, That he was the Lords anointed, that is, that Samuel did
anoint him to be king, by the commandment of God; and that that was not
done unto him in vain, but that the Lord, who had called him unto it, would
both bring him to it in time, and defend him in it to the end. As when he was
kept from the public assemblies by Saul, and his great cruelty, who never
left seeking after his life, but hunted after him continually, 1. Sam. 26.20.
as a man would after a Partridge (as he says of himself) whereupon he was
driven sometimes to hide himself, and sometimes to fly out of the land, and
very seldom durst be seen openly, he prays thus, O Lord God of hosts hear
my prayer, Psalm. 84.8.
hearken O God of Iaakob: behold O God our shield, and look upon the face of
thine anointed: that is, not only and principally upon thy son Jesus
Christ, the Messiah, who is appointed to be king and savior of the Church, and
for his sake do it: but look upon me whom thou have appointed to be king, and
(as thou know) I have not thrust in my self, for then I might well think
that all this were justly come upon me. And thus may all lawful kings comfort
themselves in all their lawful proceedings, against all the malicious attempts
of their desperate enemies, That God will defend them, because of their calling
and place that they be in, and people that he has set them over; and say,
Look upon the face of thine anointed, that is, consider good Lord the place
that I am in. And so does David again in the second Psalm; where he does with
great admiration complain of the multitude and maliciousness of his enemies,
saying: Psalm. 2.1.
Why do the Heathen rage, and the people murmr in vain? the kings of the
earth band themselves, and the princes are assembled together against the Lord,
and against his Christ, or anointed, saying, Let us break their bands, and
cast their cords from us. Where because he was a figure of Christ, therefore
he speaks of himself under that name, calling himself the Lords Christ, or
the Lords anointed: as we see how afterward it was verified in the person of
Christ himself, Act. 4.27.
as the Apostles expound it in their prayer, and say, Doubtless against thine
holy son Jesus, whom thou had anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel gathered themselves together. But
afterward David comfort himself in the same Psalm with hope of Gods
defense, Psalm. 2.5.
because of his calling, and brings in the Lord speaking thus of him: Then he
shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure,
saying, Even I have set my king upon Sion mine holy mountain: as if he had
said, he is my king, and I have set him up, therefore I will defend him.
Whereas if he had set up himself, he could not have had this comfort. But I
see, that I cannot finish this doctrine at this present, but must leave it
imperfect until the next day.

The one and twentieth Sermon upon the sixth verse.
The Lord will help his anointed, and will hear him from his Sanctuary, by
the mighty help of his right hand.
Every man may comfort himself in the lawfulness of his calling.
COncerning the doctrine of faith in Gods providence and defense, that we ought
to have from the lawfulness of our callings, which out of these words we began
to entreat of the last day: it is further to be observed, that it is true not
only of kings and princes, of whom it is here directly spoken, but of all
inferior callings in the Church and commonwealth, That whosoever is in any
such place which is lawful, and is lawfully called thereunto, as having gifts
sit for it, and coming unto it by all ordinary good means, that God will
maintain them in the same, and they should be assured of it in themselves,
because they are the Lords anointed, that is, placed in those rooms by him.
And thus did all the Apostles and the Prophets also before them comfort
themselves in those callings of the Church, which were full of labor and
trouble, that they were persuaded, that the Lord had set them aworke, and they
did not come before they were sent: otherwise they might have fainted many
times under their great burdens. And namely, thus did the Prophet Jeremy
comfort himself before the Lord, And so did the Prophet Jeremie.
against the mocks and taunts of his enemies; who said, that destruction should
not come to Jerusalem (as he had prophesied) because it was still deferred;
Ierem. 17.15.
and so derided the threatenings of God in his mouth, saying, Where is the word
of the Lord? let it come now. But he answers them thus, first, That the Lord
had called him unto that office of being a Prophet, and that he had not thrust
in himself: and then, That he had faithfully executed the same, and therefore
prayed God to defend him, in the next words, Verse. 16.
But I have not thrust in my self a Pastor after thee, neither have I desired
the day of misery, thou know: that which came out of my lips, was right
before thee. Be not terrible unto me, etc. And God heard his prayer, for when
the city was destroyed, he was saved, and had liberty to go whether he
would: and during the siege, God kept him out of the hands of the princes, who
sought to kill him: and though he was once cast into a dungeon, yet he was
taken out of it again. And thus also, when God appeared unto Moses in the
wilderness in a bush, when he was keeping sheep, and sent him to deliver the
children of Israel out of their grievous bondage; he doing his message unto
Pharaoh, the king does not only not let them go, but oppresses them a great
deal more: whereupon the officers of the children of Israel meeting with Moses
and Aaron, Exodus 4.20.
as they came from the king, like men in a great passion brake out into bitter
and unseemly words against them; and prayed God to look upon them, and judge
them, for they had made their savor stink before Pharaoh, and before his
servants. And Moses the man of God.
VVhereupon Moses prays unto God, and somewhat comfort himself in this
trouble with hope of some good success from his calling, that he was the Lords
anointed, and that he had sent him to do that that he did. For it is said,
That he returned unto the Lord, Verse. 22.
and said, Lord, why have thou afflicted this people? Wherefore have thou sent
me? for since I came to Pharaoh, to speak in thy name, he has vexed this
people, and yet thou have not delivered thy people. Where the ground of his
prayer both for himself and for the people, is this, That the Lord had sent
him to do that that he did, and therefore he desires to see some better
success. And so may all faithful ministers of the word of God, who are
assured that they are called unto that office and place where they are, So may
all faithful ministers of Gods word.
called, I say, by God, and not by men only, and so do deliver the message of
God faithfully unto them out of his word: if all things fall not out with them
at the first, and they see not that success of their labors that they desire;
yea, if things seem to be a great deal worse than they were before they came,
and themselves are unjustly blamed for it, as Moses was here: they may with a
good conscience go unto God in their prayers, and seek redress, saying, That
he has sent them to do that they do: and therefore desire the Lord, that he
would assist them, and bless them with better success: and then they shall
see, that the Lord will not forsake them, but stand by them, and defend them in
their calling: as it is said here in this Psalm, I know that the Lord will
help his anointed. And as he then gave this answer unto Moses, That it
should appear, that he had not called him to that office in vain, but would
defend him in it, Exodus 6.1.
and give good success unto his labors. For in the next chapter it is thus
written, The Lord said unto Moses, Now thou shall see, what I will do unto
Pharaoh, for by a strong hand he shall let them go, and even be constrained
to drive them out of his land, that is, he shall feel the Lords hand so heavy
upon him, that he should not only be willing to let them go, (though he
obstinatly refused it) but should by force drive them out: as indeed
afterward he did, as appears in the rest of that story. Exodus 12.33.


And this assurance of our calling must not only a little comfort us at the
first, but in the whole course and ministry of the same, and in all things
that shall befall us in the execution of it: that we may with a good conscience
pray unto God, that as we have not intruded our selves, neither have had our
calling only from men, but from him, so he would hear us, and help us in all
things that we do according to the same. And as no doubt there is great
comfort in this, that a man is thus assured of his calling, and without this he
may often be dismayed: so in that respect it is requisite, It is requisite
therefore that every one should be fully persuaded of the lawfulness of his
calling.
that not only they, but all others in their several places should be
assured, that they have their callings of God, that so they may in faith pray
for his defense. For this cause we see how immediately from God the Prophets had
their callings, to whom God spoke, and appeared in visions, as to Moses, to
Ezekiel, and to Jeremy, and the rest; how the Judges were raised up
extraordinarily, that in their great attempts they might be assured, that God
had called them to that place: Judge. 6.37.
and especially how careful Gedeon was of it, by making trial twice in a
fleece of woll. And how Paul and all the rest of the Apostles were called
immediately by Christ: that when they should meet with so many incomberances as
they did, they might not doubt of their calling, and so of Gods protection. And
so again what order was set down by God, both for the succession of the
Priests and Leuits, and for their several offices and places: and what for the
succession of the kings: and what in the new Testament is for the choice of
ministers: and what in the scripture for magistrates: that so all might thereby
be assured, that they have their callings from God, when they are so qualited
for them, as he has required in his word: and when they came to them by such
lawful choice as he has appointed. That so every one doing that which God
requires of them in the same, they might as any trouble shall come upon them,
or any difficulty shall befall them, they might, I say, with comfort, and in
faith pray, that God would hear, and help them, they being his anointed; that
is, come to those places by his appointment. Even unto the meanest calling as
of being a servant.


And this as it is requisite in every calling or state of life that one is in,
even unto the meanest, to be persuaded, That they are placed in them by God; so
there is great comfort therein, whatsoever shall befall them in the same. As
the Apostle speaks of the calling of a servant, 1. Cor. 7.17.
and of being called unto the estate of marriage, and says of them, and of all
others generally, That as God has distributed to every man, and as the Lord
has called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches.
Where he warns every man generally to live with a contented mind in the
Lord, what state or condition of life so ever he be in: and therefore he tells
him, that it is that trade of life, which God has distributed unto them, and
which he has called them unto. So that a servant must be persuaded, Ephe. 6.6.
that God has called him to that place, and therefore as he must make
conscience of doing faithful service, not to the eye, as men pleasers, but as
the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good will
serving the Lord, and not men, as he writes to the Ephesians: So also from
this persuasion of his calling, he may pray unto God to defend him against all
wrongs, Verse. 8.
and to assist him in all things: even as Saint Paul in the same place bids
to that end know, That whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. So that servants being
persuaded of the lawfulness of their calling, and of their own fidelity in
the same, may pray to God to reward them for their good service, and to defend
them in a good cause against any abuses that their master shall offer unto
them. And so for the other estate of life, And of being called to the state of
marriage.
that he speaks of there: if any be called unto marriage, they must not only
be persuaded of the lawfulness of it, and that God has called them unto it,
but also that he has joined them together; this man to this woman, as Eve in
paradise was joined to Adam by the immediate hand of God: and so that they came
not together by fortune or chance, or by the will and consent of their friends,
or by their own choice only, but by God, and that their marriage was first made
in heaven, before it was solemnised upon earth: and therefore that they are in
that place that God has called them unto. Then may they with comfort pray for
all such gifts as are needful for those places; as in doing of their duties,
that the Lord would preserve them from all crosses that might befall them, and
assist them in them; and generally that he would hear their prayers, and send
them help from heaven: as the people do here.

And to conclude this point, In all actions of our life we ought to be
persuaded, that God has called us unto them.
we must all of us be persuaded in the whole course of our lives, that
whatso-we do, we have a calling to it from God; and so therein we are his
anointed, that is, appointed of God for it. Which we shall ordinarily know by
this, that the thing it self is good in it own nature, and agreeable to the
word of God, and commanded there: and then, that by virtue of our places that
we be in, God requires them of us, and that that time and place does also
require them: for all things are not required of all men alike, nor at all
times, and in all places. Then having this persuasion from the word of God,
though they be dangerous, and full of trouble, and such as might discourage us,
we may confidently pray unto God, to assist us, and defend us therein, and to
help us in all affliction that shall befall us for the same. And thus David
here being a king, was to defend his subjects, and therefore their enemies
coming against them to battle, he goes forth, and aduentureth himself to
the war: and thus prays unto God, and wills the people to pray for him in
this good action, whereunto he was lawfully called: and God did hear their
prayers, and gave them good success. In like manner, that famous and worthy
Queen Hester, after that Mordecai had sent unto her the copy of the kings
letter, that was sent abroad by posts for the rooting out of the Jews in one
day, and willed her to go in to the king, and make request for the life of her
people: at the first, she like a fearful woman drew back, and excused her
self, saying, All the kings servants, and all the people of the provinces
know, Hester. 4.11.
that whosoever, man or woman, Then may we have boldness in them though they
be never so dangerous,
that comes to the king into the inner court, which is not called, there is a
law of his, that he shall die, except to him, whom the king holds out the
golden rod, that he may live: now I have not been called to come to the king,
these thirty days. Then Mordecai sent her word again, that she must not
think to escape in the kings house more than all the Jews; but if she did
hold her peace at this time, deliverance should appear to the Jews out of
another place, but she and her fathers house should perish: and who knew,
whether she was come to the kingdom for such a time. Thus when he had
persuaded her by good reason, that God did require it at her hands, and that
she was raised up out of a mean place to such an high dignity by the Lord for
such a purpose, and that God would require it at her hands, if she failed in
it; she aduentureth her self, though it was very dangerous, with this
resolution, that seeing God had called her unto it, he would defend her in it:
but howsoever it should fall out, she would commit her self in this cause to
his blessed providence, contented to be ordered by his will; I will go in to
the king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish. But in
the mean season having this faith in this action, she prays to God, to
assist her, to guide her, to direct her, and to bless her; and wills all the
people to do so likewise: saying, Go, Verse. 16.
and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and
eat not, nor drink in three days, day nor night; I also and my maids will
fast likewise. And so they did, and God heard their prayer, and did not forsake
her in this thing, whereunto he had called her.

Thus in a matter of great moment, which was full also of great difficulty,
and wherein she did hazard her life; being persuaded, that God had called her
unto it, she prays for her self, and others also for her, that God would
help her, and hear her in heaven; and he did so. Thus did Iaakob comfort
himself in a dangerous voyage whereunto God had called him.
Which is written for our instruction and comfort, to show us, what we should
do; and in doing, what we may look for from God, in the like case. And from
hence also did Iaakob comfort himself in the like danger, and this was the
ground of his prayer; who in his retunrne from Laban, did hear that his
brother Esau came against him with four hundred men: then he remembering his
former threats was greatly afraid, and sore troubled; and after other things
that he did for the defense and safeguard of his company, he prays unto God
after this manner, O God of my father Abraham, Gen 32.9.
and God of my father Izaack: Lord which saydest unto me, return unto thy
country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good: I pray thee deliver me
from the hand of my brother, etc. Where we see, that (as it appears in the
former part of this story) as he did not undertake this journey to Laban at the
first of his own head, neither did voluntarily forsake his fathers house
without cause, like some roiotous children who cannot tell when they are well,
and as the prodigal son did; but went away with his fathers liking and
leave, and with his blessing: for Izaack blessed Iaakob, and said, Get thee to
Padan Aram, to the house of Bethuel, Genesis 28.1.
thy mothers father, and thence take thee a wife of the daughters of Laban thy
mothers brother, etc. So he returned from thence, Chap. 31.3.
not of his own private motion, but by the commandment of God, who said unto
him, Turn again into the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will
be with thee. And therefore when this great danger did befall him in the way,
he remembers that he had a calling from God to this voyage; and so prays
to God, that he that had called him, would defend him: and as he had
commanded him to go, and he did it at his commandment; so he would not
forsake him in it, or suffer him to perish in the mid way by the cruelty of
his brother Esau, saying, Lord, which saidest unto me, Return into thy
country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good, I pray thee deliver me
from the hand of my brother, etc. And so the Lord did not only hear his
prayer, and defend him, but assure him of it beforehand by a vision of an
Angel that wrestled with him all night, Chap. 32.24.
and could not prevail against him; and by the change of his name from Iaakob
to Israel, to teach him that, which was then said unto him: For God has
promised to defend us in all our lawful ways. Psalm. 91.10.
Because thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail with men. And
this is that, which is generally promised to all those, that in their callings
follow the ways of God, namely, that he will defend them in all dangers that
may befall them in the same, when as it is said, There shall none evil come
unto thee, neither shall any plague come near thy tabernacle: for he shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: they shall
bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone; thou
shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young lion and the dragon shall thou
tread under feet: that is, Gods Angels shall keep us in all those ways that
are most dangerous, when we keep our selves within the compass of our
callings. And thus much for these words. It follows in the text.

By the mighty help of his right hand. As in the former words he did
strengthen his own faith and the faith of the people, by the consideration of
his calling, that he was the anointed of the Lord: The mighty help of Gods
right hand.
so in these words he does the same by the meditation of the omnipotent power
of God, who was able to give great help above all power of man. For in a
figurative speech, by the right hand of God is meant the strength and power of
God: because that as man commonly has most strength in his right hand, so to
our capacity and understanding (though the Lord be a spirit, and has no
body, and so consequently no hand) yet the Scripture attributes unto him an
arm, an hand, and a right hand: as when it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 44.3.
They inherited not the land by their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou fauouredst them. And thus Moses with the rest of the
people, in their song of thanksgiving for the destruction of Pharaoh and his
host in the red sea, do speak of the power of God, Exodus 15.6.
Thy right hand, O Lord, is glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, has
bruised the enemy: that is, as men by the strength of their right hand do
bruise a thing in pieces; so the Lord by his great power had utterly destroyed
and brought to naught Pharaoh and his great host, which like enemies pursued
them even into the sea. They confirm their faith by the consideration of Gods
omnipotent power.
Now this great power of his they set before their eyes, to this end, that
though their enemies were many and mighty, yet the Lord was greater than all,
and stronger than they, and had power above them: and so, as they had prayed to
him for his defense, so they believe that he would hear them and help them
according to the same power of his. As Elisha said unto his servant, who when
he saw the chariots and horses, and great host, which the king of Aram had
sent to Dotham to take them, cried out for fear: 2. King. 6.15.
Alas master, how shall we do? Fear not said he, they that be with us, are
more than they that be with them: he means, that God was with them, whose
power to defend them, was greater than all the power of their adversaries to
hurt them. And that the power of God in all things is so infinite, that he is
always able to defend his servants against all the power of their enemies, be
it never so great, is most evident, both in the Scripture, and by daily
experence, so that there need not any great proof of it.

The great power of God in bringing hard things to pass.
For he is every where called God Almighty, and, All sufficient, and Lord of
hoasts, and Lord of lords, King of kings, maker of all things, and preserver of
them; in whom we and all things else live, move, and have our being, etc. And
in a matter that seemed impossible to Sarah, as that she should have a child
when she was so old, and all natural strength failed her, (for it ceased to be
with her after the manner of women) the Lord said to Abraham: Genesis 18.14.
Shall any thing be hard to the Lord? as if he had said, Nothing at all is hard
to him, but he by his power is able to overcome all difficulties, be they never
so many and so great. And to Moses also in the lik case, when he doubted how
the Israelites should have flesh enough in the wilderness according to their
own desire, Number. 11.23.
and as the Lord has promised, he said, Is the Lords hand shortened? Job. 9.19.
that is, is his power so weak, that he is not able to bring that to pass?
No. Therefore we may say of him, and of his power, as Job does: if we speak of
strength, Behold he is strong; and not only confess, as the angel did to the
virgin Marie, (when she inquired, how she being a virgin should bring forth a
child, and know no man) With God shall nothing be impossible: Luke 1.37. Chap.
18.27.
but with our Saujour Christ in the same Gospel, The things that are
impossible with men, are possible with God. And indeed the great power of God
against his adversaries, and for the defense of his servants, might be showed
by infinite examples in the Scriptures: as how Pharaoh and his great host was
drowned in the red sea, when his own people had a passage through it on dry
foot, (which we spoke of even now: Ioshu. 6.20.
) how he caused the walls of Jericho (when the Israelites laid siege to it) to
fall flat down without any battery, only at the sound of trumpets: how he
overthrew in the host of proud Saneherib one hundred fourscore and five
thousand, in one night: and by many such like things. But this is, or should be
well known unto us; for this is the first article of our faith, That we
believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth: that is, who by
his mighty power has made all things in heaven and in earth of nothing, and
therefore he can bring them all to naught again; and without him they can do
nothing, How by the consideration of it, we ought to strengthen our faith.
as he without them, and against them can do all things. Only we had need to
be put in mind to make that good use of it in the time of our trouble, that
David does here; namely, that thereby we labor to strengthen our faith, in the
defense of God: and that we believe, that as he does hear us, so he can and
will help us. And the more that any thing is against us to weaken our faith,
the more must we by the meditation of the mighty power of God, endeavor to
strengthen the same; knowing, that his power shall be made perfect, and more
clearly be seen in our weakness. 2. Cor. 12.9.


And thus did Abraham, the father of all the faithful, when the Lord had
promised unto him, that his wife Sarah should have a son, when they were both
old and stricken in years, and was past hope of any by the course of nature:
For the spirit of God bears witness of him, That above hope he believed
under hope, Romans 4.18.
that he should be the father of many nations, as it was said unto him. And he
did not by unbelief reason against this, by considering the deadness of his
own body, being almost an hundred year old, nor the deadness of Saraes
womb: but gave glory to God, That he that had promised, As the servants of
God have done.
was able to perform it. Thus he considered of the mighty help of Gods
right hand, and stayed his faith upon that: and so must we do in all things
that God has promised, Matthew. 9 29.
and then we shall find, That (as Christ says in the Gospel) it shall be
unto us according to our faith. But more fitly for this purpose may we
consider, what great use that good king Hezekiah made of the knowledge that he
had of Gods omnipotent power: even that it did maruellously strengthen his
faith in prayer against the mighty power of the great host of Saneherib
(which was come up against him) and against all the desperate and blasphemous
threats which he gave out against him: Jsai. 37.16.
as it is set down by the Prophet Isaiah, where he thus prays, O Lord of
hosts, thou are very God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth; thou have
made the heaven, and the earth. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear: open
thine eyes, O Lord, and see, and hear all the words of Saneherib, who has
sent to blaspheme the living God. Truth it is, O Lord, that the kings of Asshur
have destroyed all lands, and their country: and have cast the gods in the
fire, for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, even wood and stone:
therefore they destroyed them. Now therefore O Lord our God, save thou us out
of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou only art
the Lord. Thus the serious consideration of Gods great power did make him not
only not to be daunted by the power of his adversary, but caused him with
great hope of prevailing to pray earnestly unto God against it.

And unto this may be joined the example of that worthy king Asa, one of his
predecessors, who in like case, to uphold his faith against the fear of his
mighty and many enemies, did meditate upon the omnipotent power of Gods right
hand. 2. Chron. 14 9.
For when the king of Aethyopia came out against him with ten hundred thousand
men, besides chariots and horses, he went out also against him, and did meet
with him, and did set the battle in array, and then cried unto the Lord his
God, Considering Gods power, not so much in himself, as for their own defense.
that is, prayed earnestly and in faith, saying, Lord, it is nothing with thee
to help with many, or with no power: help us O Lord our God; for we rest in
thee, and in thy name are we come against this great multitude: O Lord thou art
our God, let not man prevail against thee. Where we see how he does not
consider of the power of God, as shut up in himself, but as that which was
ready to be showed in their defense against their enemies, as David does here.
And indeed therein consists true faith in the power of God, That we believe
that he is almighty to help us, and therefore that we pray to him
accordingly: as David teaches the people here to do; and to say, Now know I,
that the Lord will help his anointed, by the mighty power of his right hand.
And thus we perceive what use we should make of that which we read every
where in the Scriptures, of the great power of God, namely, that we might
depend upon him in all troubles, and pray unto him in faith, not doubting but
as he does hear us, so he will help us by his great power.

But let us examine our selves, I pray you, and we shall see how far we are
from this great measure of faith, that so we might labor to grow therein: for
how hardly, or not at all, do we come to this, Few in trouble do rest upon the
power of God, so weak is their faith.
To rest in the invisible power of God? Let a man be in trouble, and come and
tell him of the great power of God, and how he is able to help him, and so bid
him be of good comfort, and pray unto God, and depend upon him; and we shall
find, that he can be contented to do so, so far forth as he can see how
and which way God should help him. But for a man when he has no means at
all, or very few to do himself good by, then to say as Asa did, It is all one
with God to help with many or with no power: and so to pray as earnestly and
as confidently, as though he had all the means in the world: as it is said of
him, that he then cried unto the Lord his God, that is, prayed with great
feruencie. This, I say, is not to be found in every one that boasts of
faith. Nay (which is a great thing) when we shall see more to be against us
than with us, and more means to discourage us from the hope of that that we
desire, than to give us comfort in it; then to pass by them all, and not to
stand reasoning from them against our selves by unbelief; and not to say, I
cannot be helped, because I have these and these things against me: but to
break through them all, and to give this glory to God, as Abraham did, that
he that promised, Psalm. 50.15.
That if we call upon him in the time of our trouble, he will hear us and
deliver us, is able to perform it: and so to say, as David does here, I know,
that he will help me by the mighty strength of his right hand; is that
faith, which as it will uphold us in all troubles, so it is to be found in
very few. But let us remember for the helping of us this way, Hebr. 11.1.
That faith (as the Apostle says) is of things that are hoped for, and not
seen: and therefore as we believe God to be present every where, though we see
him not; so must we believe that God is able to help us, though we cannot see
how or which way; and so pray to him in all wants, and say, I know, that though
I am weak, and cannot help my self, yet he will help me by his mighty
power: and this the more we can do it in truth, though in great weakness,
the more shall we glorify God, and the more will he help us.

The great power of God in raising up them that are sick.
Therefore let them know, that are visited with sickness, either of the
pestilence or otherwise, that if they were brought so low that they were at
deaths door, God is able to recover them, and to raise them up again by his
great power, as Elihu says unto Job, when he was so full of sores in his
body, that he desired not life, neither had any hope of it: says he, Job.
33.19.
If a man be stricken with sorrow upon his head, and the grief of his bones is
sore; so that his life causes him to abhor bread, and his soul dainty
meat; his flesh fails, that it cannot be seen, and his bones, which were not
seen, clatter; so his soul draws to the grave, and his life to the buriers;
if there be a messenger of God with him, an interpreter of his word, who is as
one of a thousand, to declare unto man his righteousness: then will he have
mercy upon him, and say, Deliver him, that he go not down into the pit, for
I have received a reconciliation: then shall his flesh be as fresh as a
child's, and shall return, as in the days of his youth. Thus we see, that if
a man be ready to give up the ghost, and the bell be rong for him, and they
begin to prepare things for his burial, if the Lord do but speak the word, he
shall be restored to life and health. John. 11.39.
For Christ Jesus, who when he was upon the earth, by his word cured men and
women of long and incurable diseases, yea raised some from the dead, even
Lazarus, when he had been dead four days, and put into the grave: who shall
also raise up these bodies of ours out of corruption, Phil. 3.21.
and fashion them like to his own glorious body, according unto the working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. He I say, can much more by
the same power of his, renew our strength, when we are in great weakness, by
what means it pleases him, even by the smallest help in the world, or
without any at all. Confirmed by daily experience.
As we by daily experience see some to be restored to life and health both
from the pestilence (which is most deadly) and from other mortal diseases,
when in the judgment of men they were past all hope, and the Physicians had
given them over, That we might be confirmed by that which we see and hear, in
the faith of Gods promises toward us. Job. 33.28.
And this is that which Elihu says, God will deliver his soul from going into
the pit, and his life shall see the light: lo all these things will God work
twice or thrice with a man, that he may turn back his soul from the pit, to
be illuminate in the light of the living. Where he says, That God does not
only thus show his power now and then in raising up men from the brinke of
death, but he sometimes deals thus twice or thrice with the same man: so that
in their life time, and even in sickness, they have great experience diverse
times of the power of God, in their strange recoueries from dangers, yea deadly
and incurable sicknesses. And in relieuing men in their poverty.
And to conclude this point in a word, if by poverty or otherwise we be
brought to a low ebb, as the patient man Job was, yet ought we to believe,
that as the Lord turned his captivity, Chap. 42.10.
and gave him twice so much as he had before; so is he able to relieve us also
in our greatest need, and to make our estate better than it was before: and
therefore in such cases let us pray to him earnestly to help by the mighty
power of his right hand. Which that we might do the rather in faith, let us
consider, how the Apostle sets before our eyes the example of Job to this
end, and applies it unto us, Iam. 5.11.
saying: Behold we count them blessed, which endure: yea have heard of the
patience of Job, Which must make us in all difficulty to depend upon him.
and have known what end the Lord made: for the Lord is very pitiful and
merciful. As if he had said, God is able to restore you, as he did Job, and
to make as good an end with you, as he did with him; and therefore you ought by
this example of Gods dealing with him patiently to wait upon God, considering
his mighty power, and what great changes he is able to work in men. And thus
you see what we have to observe out of these words, where he speaks of the
power of God, and what out of the whole verse.

God grant, that these things and whatsoever else we hear out of his holy
word from time to time, may so fall into our hearts, as seed into good ground:
that we keeping the same in good and honest hearts, may bring forth the fruit
thereof in our lives and conuersations, an hundred, threescore, or thirty fold
at the least, to the praise of his blessed name, the comfort and salvation of
our own souls, the benefit and good example of all that do know us, and the
leaving of the wicked world without excuse, that will not follow us, through
Jesus Christ our only Lord and savior, Amen.

FINIS.

