A Godly Medytacyon composed by the faithful and constant servant of God I.
B. (...) lastly was burnte in (...) for the testimony of Jesus Christ, by
the tyranny of Antechriste in his fyl^^^ members.
Psalm lxxix. O Lord let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is
shed be openly showed upon the ungodly in our sight. O let the sorrowful,
lighting of the prisoners come before thee* and according to the greatness of
thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to dye. O Almightye and
everlasting Lord god the deer father of our savior Jesus Christ, which haste
made heaven, and earth, the sea and all that therein is, which art the only
ruler, governor, conseruor, and keeper of all things, together with thy deerly
beloved son Christ Jesus our lord, and with thy holy ghost the co^forter. O
holy, Righteous and wise. O strong, terrible, mighty and ferfull Lord god,
judge of all men, and governor of all the whole world O exorable, pacie^t, and
most gracious father, whose eyes ar upon the ways of all men, and are so
clean, they cannot a byede impitye, thou searchest the hearts and tryest the
very thaughtes, and raynes of all men, thou hate sin and abhorrest
iniquity: for syns sake thou haste grievously punisshed mankind thy most dear
creature as thou haste declared by the penalty of death laid upon all the
children of Adam, by the castyng out of Adam and his of spring forth of
Paradise, by the cursing of the earth, by the drowninge of the world, by the
burning up of Sodom and gomor, by the hardening the heart of Pharao, so that no
miracle could convert him, by the drowning of him, and his people with him in the
red sea, by the overthrowing of the Israhelytes in the wilderness, so that of
syx hundredth thousand, all only but two did enter into the land of promis, by
rejecting king Saul, by the great ponishmentes upon thy servant david, not
withstanding his hearty repentance by grievously aff^cting Salamon in him self,
and in his posterity: by the captivity of the ten tribes, and by the thraldom
of the Jews, wherein until this present day they continue a notable
spectacle, of they wrath to the world against and for sin, but of all
spectacles of thy anger against sin, ye greatest and most notable, is the
death and bloody passion of thy deerly beloved son Ihesus Christ. Great is
thine anger against syn when in heaven and earth nothing could befou^d which
might appease thy wrath, save the bloudsheading of thine only and most deerly
beloved son, in whom was and is al thy delight, great is the sore of sin that
needed such a salve, mighty was the mallady, that needed such a medicine. If
in Christ in whom was no sin, thy wrath was so ferce for our sin, that he
was constreyned to cry my god, my god why haste thou forsaken me, how great
and importable then is thine anger against us which are nothing but sinful.
They that are thy children through the contemplation of thine anger against
sin, set forth most evidently in the death of Christ, Do tremble and ar
affraide, lamenting them selves upon him (and heartily cryeng for mercy) Where
as the wicked, ar altogether careless and contemptuous, nothing lamenting their
iniquities or crying to the heartily for mercy and pardon, amongst whom we are
rather to be placed, then amongst thy children, for that we are so shameless
for our syn, and careless for thy wrath, which we may well say to be most
grievous against us, and evidently set forth in the taking away of our good
King and thy true religion, in thexiel of thy servants, prysonme^t of thy
people, mysery of thy children, and death of thy saints. Also by the placinge
over us in Authority thy enemies, by ye success thou geuest them in all they
take in hand, by the returninge again in to our country of Antechrist the
pope. All these as they do preach unto all the world (but specially unto us)
thy grievous wrath, so do they set before our eyes, our iniquities and sins,
which have deserved the same, for thou art Just and holy in all thy works
thy judgments ar righteous altogether, it is we, it is we that have sinned,
and procured these plages we have been unthankful wretches, and most carnal
gosspelers therefore to us parteyneth shame, and nothing else is due but
confusion. For we have don very wickedly, we have heaped sin upon sin, so
that the measure has over flowed, and Ascend^d up to heaven, and brought these
plages, which are but earnest for greater to ensue, and yet alas we are
altogether caerlesse, in manner, what shall we do? What shall we say? Who can
give us pen^e^t hearts? Who can open our lips, that our mouths might make
acceptable confession unto thee. Alas of our selves we cannot think any good,
much less wish it, and least of all do it, as for Angels or any other
creatures, they have nothing, but that which they have received, and they are
made to minister unto us so that where it passes the power of the master, she
minister must needs want, Alas then what shall we do? Thou art holy and we
unholy, thou art good, and we nothing but evil, thou art pure, we all
together impure, thou art light, and we most dark darkness, how then can
there be any conueniency or agreement betwixt us, O what now may we do?
Despair? no, for thou art god, and therefore good thou art merciful, and
therefore thou forgeuest sins, with thee is mercy and propiciation, and
therefore thou art worshipped, when Adam had sinned thou gave him mercy
before he desired it, and will thou deny us mercy which now desyer the
same, Adam excused his fault and accused yt, but we accuse our selves, and
excuse thee, and shall we be sent emptye away? Noye found favor when thy fury
a bou^dyd and shall we seking grace be frustrate? Abraham was pulled out of
ydolatrye when the world was drowned therein, and art thou his god only?
Israel in captivity in Egypt was gratiouslye visited and delivered and deer
God, the same good lord, shall we always be forgotten? How often in the
wilderness did thou defer, and spar thy plages, at the request of Moses
when the people them selves made no petition to thee. And seeing we not only
now make our petitio^s unto the through thy goodness, but also have a
mediator for us now far above Moses, even Ihesus Christ: should we I say
dear lord, depart ashamed? So soon as David said I have sinned, thou
did forth with answer to him that he should not dye, thou had taken
away his sins, And gracious god, even the self same god, shall not we which
now with David gladlye confess that we have sinned, shall we I say not hear,
by thy good sprite, that our sins be pardoned. O grant that with Manasses we
may find favor and mercy remember that thou have not spared thine own only
deresone Jesus Christ, but given him for us all to dye, for our sins, to rise
for our righteousness, to assend for our possession taking in heaven, and to
appear before thee for us for ever, a high priest after the order of
Melchisadech that through him we might have fre access to come to thy
throane, now rather of grace then of Justice, Remember that thou by him have
bidde^ ask and promised that we should receive, saying ask and ye shall have,
seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. O thou Dear god
and most meke and merciful father, we heartily beseech the to be merciful
unto us, for this thy Christis sake, for his Deaths sake, for thy promise
truethe, and mercyes sake, have mercy upon us, pardon and forgive us al our
Sins, iniquites, and trespacis, what so ever we committed against the, in
thought word or Deed, ever or at any time hitherto by any means, Der father
have mercy upon us though we be pore, yt our christ is Rich, though we be
Sinners yet he is righteous, though we be fools, yet is he wise, though we be
Inpure yet he is pure, and holy, for his sake therefore be merciful unto us,
Call to mind how thou haste promised that thou will power out of thy clean
waters, and wash us from our fylth, and clence us from our euilles, forget not
that thou have promised to take from us our stony hearts, and Do promis to
give us sauft hearts, new hearts and to put into the mids of us right
Sprites, Remember thy couenate namely how thou will be our god and we shall be
thy people, forgette not the parts of it, that is to put owte of thy memory
for ever all unrighteousness, and to write in our minds and hearts thy law and
testymonyes, Remember that thou do straightly charg us to have none other
gods but the, saying that thou art the lord our gad. O the^ declare the same
to us all, we hartelye now beseech the forgive us our sins, forget our
iniquitis, clence us from our filthiness, wash us from our wickedness, power out
thy holy sprite upon us, take from us our hard hearts, our stony hearts, our
impenite^t hearts, our distrustinge and doubtful hearts, our carnal our secure,
our idle, our beastlye hearts, our impure, malicious, arrogant, envious,
wrathful, impatient, covetous, hipocriticall and epicuriall hearts, and in
place thereof give us new hearts, saft hearts, faithful hearts, merciful
hearts, loving, obedient, chaest pure, holy, righteous, true simple, lowly,
and patient hearts, to fear thee, to love thee, trust in thee for ever, write
thy law in our hearts, grave it in our minds, we hertely beseech the give us
that sprite of prayer, make us diligent and happy in the works of our
vocation, take in to thy custody and governance for ever, our souls and
bodies, our lives, and all that ever we have, tempt us never further, the^
thou will make us able to bear, and what so ever thou know we have need of
in soul or body, deer god and gracious father, vouchsafe to give us that same
in thy good time and always, as thy children guide us, so that our life may
please the and our deaths praise the through Jesus Christ our lord, for whose
sake we heartily pray the to grant these things thus asked, and al other
things necessary for soul and body, not only to us, but to all others also,
for whom thou would that we should pray, specially for they children,
that be in thraldom, in exyel, in prison, misery, heaviness, pouertye, sycknes.
Be merciful to all the whole realm of England grant us al true repentance,
mitigation of our myserye, and if it be thy good will, thy holy word and
Religion amongst us once again, pardon our enemies, persecutors, and
slaunderers, and if it be thy pleasure, turn their hearts, be mercyful unto
our parents, Brethern and Sisters, friends, kinsfolks and famelis neighbors,
and such as by any means thou haste coupled and lincked us by love, or
otherwise, and unto us pore sinners here gathered together in thy holy name,
grant us thy blessing and holy sprite to sanctify us, and dwell in us, as thy
dear children to keep us, this day and for ever, from all evil to thy eternal
glory, and our everlasting comfort and the profet of thy church, which
mercyfullye, maynteyne thereshe and comfort, strengthening them that stand, so
that they never fall, liftinge up them that be fallen and keep us from falling,
from thy truth, through the merits of thy deerly beloved son Jesus Christ
our only savior, which lives and Reigns with the and the holy ghost, to
whom be all praise and honor both now and for ever. Amen.

When you awake out of your sleep pray thus.
OH most dear father of our Savior Jesus Christ, whom none does know but
of thy gift grant that to the manyfolde great benefytes of thy goodness given
to me, this which of all other is most, m^^ be added, that like as thou haste
awaked my body from sleep, so thou would throughlye awake yea deliver mi
soul from the sleep of sin and darkness of this world and that which now is
awaked out of sleep, thou would, after death restore to life for that is
but sleep to the which is death to us, Dear god I most heartily beseech, and
humbly pray thy goodness, to make my body such a companion, or rather a minister
of godlynes, to my soul, in this present life, that i^ the life to cum it may
part take with the same everlasting happiness by Jesus Christ our Lord. Awake
thou that sleep and arise from the deed, and Christ shall show light unto
thee. Ephesians. v.

Occasions to meditate.
HEre call to mind the great mirth and blissednes, of the everlasting
resurrection, Also remember to muse upon that most clear light and brighte
morenynge, and new clearenes of our bodies after the long darkness it has been in, all then shall be full of joy.

So soon as you behold the day light pray.
O Lord thou greatest and most true light, whence this light of the day and
sun does spring, O light which do lyghten, every manne that comes in
to this world, Oh light which know no night nor eueninge, but art always
a midday most clear and fair with out whom al is most dark darkness by who^
albe most sple^dent O thou wisdom of the eternal father of mercis, lighten my
mind that I may only se those things that please the, and may be blinded to
all other things.

Grant that I may walk in thy ways, and that nothing else may be light and
pleasant unto me. Lighten mine eyes, Oh lord, that I sleep not in death,
least mine enemies say I have prevailed against him.

Occasions to meditate.
Muse a little how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better then
of the body. Also that we care more for the soul to se well, then for the
body. Think that beasts have bodily eyes and therewith se, but men have eyes
of the mind and therewith should see.

When you arise pray.
OVre first father tombled down him self, from a most excelent high and
honorable estate into the miex of misery, and deep sea of shame and mischeffe,
but Oh Christ thou putting forth thine hand did raise him up, even so we
except we be lift up of the, shall lie still for ever. O good Christ our most
gracious redemer, grant yt as thou do mercifully, reise us now this my
body and burden, even so, I beseech the raise up my mind and heart to the
light of the true knowledge of the love of thee, that my conversation may be
in heaven where thou art. If thou be risen, with Christ think upon those
things that be above.

Occasions to meditate.
Think Sum thing how foul and filthye that Adams fall was by reason of
sin, and so of every one of us from the height of gods grace Again think
upon the great benefit of Christ, by whose help we do daily arise from our
fallynges.

When you Apparel yourselfe Pray.
O Christ cloeth me with thin own self, that I may be so far from making
provision for my flesh to fulfill the lusts of yt, that I may clean put of
all my carnal desiers, and crucefy the kingdom of ye flesh in me, Be thou unto
me a wede to warm me, from catching the cold of this world, if thou be a wai
from me (dear lord) al things will be unto me forthwith cold, weak deed. etc.
But if thou be with me al things will be warm lyuelye, fresh. etc. grant
therefore that as I compass this my body with this cote, so thou would cloth me
wholly (but spetiallye my soul) with thine own self. Put upon you as the
elect of god, bowelles of mercy, mekenes, love, peace. etc.

Occasions to meditate.
Call to mind a little how we are incorperate into christ, again how he does
cloth us norish us under his wings, ptettio^, and providence, preserve us. and

When you ar made ready, to begin the day wythall pray.
O God and mercyful father thou knoweste and haste taught us to know sumthyng,
that the weakness of man is much, and that without thy grace and virtue, he can
do nor think no good thing, Have mercy upon me, I humbly do beseech thee
which am thy most unworthy, and most weak child, O be gracious and
tender toward me, lighte^ me that I may with pleasure look upon good things
only, exhort me that I may covet them carefully lead me that I may follow and
at the length attain them, I distrusting my self altogether commend and
offer my self wholly soul, body, life etc. Into thy hands. Thy loving sprite
lead me forth unto the land of righteousness.

Cogitations mete to begin the day with.
Think first that a man consists of a soul and a body, and that the soul is
from heaven, heavenly, fyrme and immortal, but the body is of the earth,
earthly, frail and mortal. Again think that though by reason of sin
wherein you are conceued and borne, the parts of the soul that understands
and desires be so corrupt that without special grace to both parties, you
can neither know nor love any good thing in gods sight, much less do good
then, yet this not withstandinge think that you are regenerate by Christ's
Resurrection (whereof your baptism, requires faith and therefore have both
those parts sumthing reformed both to know and love, and therefore to do sum
good in ye sight of God through Christ) for whose sake our poor doenges are
accepted, for good, the evil and infirmity cleaving thereto not being imputed
through faith, think yt by faith which is gods sede (for they which believe are
borne of god, and made gods children) given to those that be ordened, to
eternal life, think (I say) by faith that you receive more and more, the
spirit of sanctification, through the use of gods word and sacraments, and
earnest prayer to illumine, and lighten our minds, understanding, judgment
and reason, and to bow, form, frame, and inflame your affections with love
and power, to that, that good is, and therefore use you the means a foresaid
accordingly. Think that by this sprite, you are through faith coupled to
Christ, as a lively member, and so to god, and as it were made one with him,
and by love which springs out of this faith, you are made one also with all
that be of god, and so you have fellowship with god and all good men yt ever
were or shall be in all ye good, that god and al his saints, have, or shall
have. Think as by faith and love through the spirit you are now entered into
this co^munyon (the blessedness whereof no tongue can express) so after this
life, you shall first in soul, and in the last day in bodi also, enjoy forever
ye same society most perfectly which now is but begone in you. Think then of
your negligence that does so little care for this your happy estate, think upon
your ingratitude to god for making you, redemyng you, calling you, and so
louenglye adoptynge you.

Think upon your folyshnes in fantasyeng so much earthelye and bodily
pleasures. Think upon your deafnes and blindenes, which hereth not god, nor
sees him, he calling you so diligently, by his works, words and
sacraments. Think upon your frowardnes which will not be led of god and his
spirit. Think upon your forgetfulness and in consideration of your high estate,
how your body is the temple of the holy ghost, your members, are the members
of Christ the whole world and all things are your own. 1. Cor. 6. Therefore
say unto your soul, O soul Arise follow god, contempne this world purpose
well and pursue it, long for thy Lords coming, be ready and watch yt he
com not upon thee unawares. And for so much as you must live to gods pleasure
se the vocation and state of your life whereto god has called you and pray god
for grace, knoledg, and habylitie to take ye most profitable things in hand,
well to begin, better to go on, and best of al to end the same, to gods glory
and profit of your brethren, and thynk that time lost, wherein you, speak or
do not, or (at the least) think not sum thing to gods glory, and your
bretherns commodytye.

When you go forth of the doers pray.
Now must I walk among the snares of death, streched out of Satan and of
his myscheuous mynysters, in the world, carryenge with me a friend to them
both, and a foe to my self, even this body of syn and sinful flesh. O
grau^de Capytayne Christ, lead me and guide me I beseech thee, defend me from
the plagues, and subtilties, whereof I am endaungered. Grant that I may take al
things that hap as I should do, only upon the set thou mine eyes, yt I may
so go on forwards in thy wai as by no things I be hi^dred, but rather
forthered and may refer all thnigs to the accordinglye, show me thy ways (O
Lord) and teach me thy paths. Consider how vainli ye most part of men be
occupied, how they do troble and comber the^ selves dyuersly, how they meddle
with many things thereby much alienating their minds from the knoledg and
cogytacyon of that which they should most esteem, and so becum a let and an
offense to others.

As in going abroad, you will se that your Apparel be semelye in the sight of
men, so see how semelye you Appear in the sygt of god.

When you are going any Journey Pray.
THy sour life is a pilgrimage from the lord we came, and to the lord we make
our journey, how be yt through thenyshe placys and paynefull, yea perrilous
ways which our cruel enemies, have and do prepare for us, now more the^
stark blind by reason of sin. O Christ, which art a most true lodes man
and guide, and thereto most expert, faithful and fre^dly do thou put out thine
hand open mine eyes make thy high wais known unto me, which wai thou did
first e^ter into, out of this corruptible life, and have fe^ced ye same for us
to immortalytye.

Thou art the way, lead us unto the father by thy self, that all we may be
one with him as thou and he together be one. Show me the way that I should
walk in for I lift up my soul unto thee. Psalm. 144.

Or Pray thus.
Merciful father you art wont to send to thy servants and me^ of simple hearts,
thyn angels to be their kepers, and as it were guides as elder brethren to
watch upon thy weak children, so did thou to young Tobias, to Jacob, to
Abraha^s servant, to Joshua. etc. O good god though we be much unlike unto the^
(so many ar our sins) yet for thyn own goodness sake se^d thin holy angels, to
pitch their tents about us, from satan and his slaves to hyde and deffende to
carry us in there hands that we come not into further danger the^ thou through
out wilt deliver us, for theyn own sake. His Angels or ministers for them
that be heirs of salvation, satan sleapeth not, but seekethe always to
destroy us. Hebr. i. Think something how we are strangers from our country from
our home, from our original, I mean from god. Again think upon your madness
that do lyngar and loyter so gladly in this our Iorneye, and pilgrimadge. Also
how folishe we are to fantazye things which we cannot carry with us, and to
contempe conscience which will always be acompanyon to us, to our joy if it be
good, but to our shame, and sorrow if it be evil and corrupt, finally how
unnatural we are yt so little desyer to be at our home, to be with our only
father, master, fellows and friends. etc.

When you ar about to receive your meat pray.
THis is a wonderful mystery of thy work, O maker and governor of the world,
that thou do sustain ye lives of me^ and beasts with this meats, suerlye
this power is neither in the bread nor food, but in thy will and word, by
which word all things do lyeue and have their beinges. Again, how great a
thing is it, that thou art able yearly to give sustinau^ce to so many
creatures, this is spoken of by thy prophet in thy praises. All things look up
to the and thou geuest the^ meat in due ceason, thou openest thyen hand and
fillest with thy blessing every living thing, these dowtles are wonderful works
of thine almightines, I therefore hertely pray the (O most liberal lord and
faithful father) yt as thou by meat through thy word do minister life to
these our bodies, eue^ so by ye same word with thy grace do thou quicken our
souls that both in soul and body we may pleas the til this our mortal
carcas shall put on immortality and we shall need no more any other food,
but the only which the^ wilt be al in all, taste and se how good the lord is,
bless the lord (O my soul) which tedeth and fills thy mouth with good
things. Think a little how great gods power is yt made us. Also think how
great his wisdom is to preserve us. But most of all think how many things ar
given to our use, how wonderful it is to give us life, but most of al to
propagate to immortalytye the life of the soul by his only beck. Last of
all think that god by his providence for thy body would have the to confirm
thy faith of gods providence for thy soul.

In the meal time pray.
O Most liberal dystributor of thy gifts, which geuest us all kind of good
things to use, thou being pure geuest pure things, grant to me thy grace,
that I myse use not these thy gracious gifts, given to our use and profits.
Let us not love them because thou doeste give us these things, but rather let
us love the, because thou geuest them, and for that they be necessary for us,
for a ceason till we come unto thee. Grant us to be conuersaunte amongst thy
gifts soberly, purely, temperatlye, holely, because thou art such a one, so
shall not we, turn that, to the poison of our souls, which thou haste given
for the medicine of our bodies, but using thy benefits thankfully, we shall
find them profitable, both to soul and body, think that the meats and
drinks set before you, ar given to you to use and not to abuse, think they are
given to profit and not to hurt you. Think that they are not given to you
alone, but unto others also by you in eatinge, and drinkinge, think that you,
do but feed the worms, remember the poor prisoners, sick. etc. as though you
were in their case think upon the food of your soul Christ body broken and
his blood shed. Desyer the meat yt lasts for ever. John^. vi. work for it,
Christ meat was to do his fathers will. John^ the fowrthe.

After your meat pray thus.
BY corporal meats thou do sustain our corporal daily life (ready
otherwise to perish) the which surely is a great work but yet this is much
greater more profitable, and more holy yt thy grace (O Jesus Christ) does keep
away from us ye death of ye soul, for this life we ought much to thank the,
and because thou do prolong it with thy good gifts, we most heartily praise
the, how be it this life is but the way to eternal life, which we beseech ye
for thy deaths sake yt thou will give us, and so shall we not only give the (as
we ca^) thanks in time for temporal things but also eternal thanks, for
eternal things. O grant to us these our desyers for thy mercies sake. Ame^.
Think now that god has given the this his blessing of meat etc. and thereto
time yt thou might, as repent, so seek his glory, and the commodytie of thy
brotherne, therefore go there aboutes but first pray for grace well to begin, and
again consider how thou have been partaker of other men's labors, as of the
husband man's, the millers, the bakars, the browers, the butchers, the cooks.
etc. Se therefore that thou be not adroen be, but rather such a one, as may
help ye hyeue, if god have thus fed thy body, which he leueth not but for thy
souls sake, how can it be the^ but that he will be much more ready to feed thy
soul. Therefore take a courrage to the, and go to him for grace accordinglye.

Cogytations for about the midday time.
AS ye body is now enuiro^ned on al sides with light, so See that thy mind may
be. As god geuethe the, thus plentifully this corporal light, so pray him
that he will give the, the spiritual light, think that as ye son is now most
clear so shall our bodies be in the day of judgment. As now the son is cum to
the highest, and therefore will be gyn to draw downwarde so is there nothing in
the world so parfect and glorious, which (when it is at the full) will not
decrease and so wear away.

When you cum home again. Pray.
There is nothing (O Lord) more like to thy holy nature, the^ a quiet mind,
thou have called us out of the troublesome disquietnes of the world into that
thy quiet rest and peace, which the world cannot, give, being such a peace
as passes all men's understanding. Howses ar ordained for us, yt we might get
us in to them from the injury of wether, from the crewelty of beasts from
dysquietnes of people, and from the toyls of ye world, O gracious father grant
that through thy great mercy my body may enter into this house, from outward
actions, but so that it may become buxom and obedient to the soul, and make no
resistau^ce there against. That in soul and body, I may have a godly quietness
and peace to praise the. Amen. Peace be to this house and to all that dwell in
the same. Think what a return and how merry a return it will be to come to our
eternal most quiet and most happy home, then will be all grefe gone away, what
so ever hear is pleasant and joyful, the same is nothing but a very shadow in
co^pariso^ etc.

At the son going down pray.
O How unhappy ar they O Lord on whom thy son goes down and gives no
light, I mean thy grace which is always clear as the midday, dark night unto
them is the midday, which depart from the, in the is never night but always
day light most clear. This corporal son has his courses, now up now down, but
thou (dear lord) if we do love the art alwais one, O that this block and
veil of syn were taken away from me, yt thear might be always clear day in my
mind. Think yt as we are not sorry when ye son goes down, by cause we know it
will rise again, eue^ so let us not sorrow for death, where through the soul and
body do pa^^e a sonder for they shall eftsoon return and cum together again.
So long as ye son is up, wild beasts keep their de^nes, Foxes their borows,
Owls their hoals etc. but when ye son is down then cum they abroad. So wicked
me^ and hypocrites keep their denns in the gospel but it being taken away
then swarm they out of their hoals like bees as this day does teach.

When ye candles be light pray.
Most thycke and dark clouds do Cover our minds, except thy light (O Lord)
do dyspell them. Thy son (O most wise worker) is as it were a fire brande to
the world, thy wisdom, whereby light comes both to soul and body is a
fire brand, to the spiritual world. After day when the night comes, thou
haste given for the remedy of darkness a ca^dle After syn for the remedy of
ignorance thou have given thy doctrine which thy dear son has brought unto
us, O thou which art the Author and master of all truethe make us to se, by
both the lights so that the dymnes of our minds be dryiuen clean away, lift
upon us thy myrthe in our hearts Thy word is a lantern to my feet and a
light unto my paths. Think that the knowledge and wisdom, that god has
given unto us by the ca^dles of this night, whereby we se those things in this
night, of our bodies which are expedient for us, makes us to wish much more
for this doctrine of God, and when we get yt, the more to esteem and
diligently embrace it yt as al would be horror without candeles, so is thear
nothing but mere co^fucion whear gods word takes not place.

When you make your self unready Pray.
THis our life and weak knit body by reason of sin, by a little and little,
will by dyssolued, and so shall be restored to the earth whence it was taken, then
will be an end of this vanyty, which by our folishnes we have wroughte to our
selves, O most meke father so do thou vnty unloose, and lose me for thou haste
knyt me together that I may perceive my selffe to be made unready and dissolved
and so may remember both of whom I was made and also whyether I go least I be
had unprepared unto thy trybunall and Judgment seat, Put of tholde man with
his lusts, and concupiscens Be content with Iosephe to put of thy prison
Apparel, that thou may put on new. Think yt we do willingly put of our
garments, which in ye morninge we shall put on again, and therefore in the,
after the night of the world, we shall receive on out bodies again let us not
unwillingly put them of, when god by death shall call.

When you enter in to your bed Pray.
THe day now endyd men give them selves to rest in the night and so this life
fyneshed we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life, then every
day, nothing more like death then sleep, nothing more like to our graeue
then our bed, O lord our keeper and defendor grant ye I now layeng me down to
rest, being unable to keep my self, may be preserved from ye crafts and
Assaults of ye wicked enemy, and and grant father, yt when I have run ye race
of this liffe thowe would of thy mercy call me unto ye that I may alwais live
and watch with the, now good god give me to take my rest in the and bring to
pass that thy gracious goodness may be (even in sleep) before mine eyes, that
sleaping I be not absent from the, but may have my dreams to draw me unto the
and so both soul and body, may be kept pure and holy for ever. I will lay
me down in peace and take my rest. Think yt as this troblesum day is now
past and night cu^ and so rest, bed, and plesaunt sleep which makes most
exelent princis, and most poor pesau^tes a like, eue^ so after ye tumultes,
troubles te^ptationes and tempests of this life they yt believe in Christ have
prepared for the^ an heaven and rest most pleasant and joyful. As you are not
a fraied to enter in to your bed, and to dispose your self to sleep, so be not
a fraide to dye but rather prepare your self to yt, think that now you are
nerer your end by one days journey, then you were in the morning

When you feel sleep to be coming pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ my watchman and keeper take me to thy care grant that
my body slepynge, my mind may watch in the, and be made merry by sum sight of
that celestial and heavenly life whearin thou art the king and prince
together with the father and the holy ghost. Thy Angels and holy souls, be
most hapie citesens. O purify my soul keep clean my body, that in both I may
please the, slepinge and wakinge for ever Amen.

A most frutfull Prayer for the dispersed Church of Christ very necessary to
be used of the godly in these days of affliction compiled by. R. P.
O Most omnipotent magnifice^t and glorious god and father of al consolation,
we here assembled do not presume to present and prostrate our selfs before thy
mercy seat in the respect of our own worthiness and rightousnes, which is all
together poluted and defiled: but in the merits, rightousnes and worthiness of
thy only son Jesus Christ, whom thou have given unto us as a most pure
and precious garment to cover our polution and fylthynes with all, to thend we
might appear holy and Justified in thy sight through him. Wherefore in the
obedience of thy commandementes and in the confidence of thy promyses contained
in thy holy word that thou shalt accept, and grant our prayers presented
unto the in the favor of thy only son our savior Jesus Christ. Either for
our selfs, or for the necessity of thy saynctes and congregation. We here
congregated together do with one mouth and mind most humblye beseech the not
only to pardon and forgive us all our sins necligences, Ignorances and
iniquites, which we from time to time incessantlye do commytte against thy
divine majesty in word, deed, and thought, such is the infirmity of our
corrupted nature: But also that it would please thee (O benyng father) to be
favorable and merciful unto thy poor afflicted church, and congregation
dispersed through out the whole world, which in these days of iniquity are
oppressed in iuried, dispiced, persecuted and afflicted for the testimonye of
thy word and for the obedience of thy laws.

And namely O Lord and father we humbly beseech the to extend thy mercy and
favorable countynance upon all those that are imprisoned or condemned for the
cause of thy Gospel: whom thou have chosen forth and made worthi to glorify
thy name. That either it may please the to give them such constancye as thou
have given to thy saints and matters in time paste, willinglye to shede their
blood for the testimony of thy word: Or else mightlye deliver them from the
tyranny of their enemies as thou delyuerest the condemned Daniell from the
Lions, and the persecuted Peter out prison, to thexeaultation of thy glory and
the rejoicing of thy church.

Further more most beneficial father we humbly beseech the to stretch forth
the mighty arm into the protection and defense of all those that are exiled
for the testimonye of thy veryte: and that because they would not bend their
backs and incline their necks under the youcke of Anthechrist, and be
poluted with the execrable Idolatries, and blasphemus superstitions of ye
ungodly. That it would please ye not only to feed them in strange co^treys,
but also to prepare a resting place for the^, as thou haste done from time to
time for thine elect in all age is whereas they may unity them selfs
together in the sincere mynistration of thy holy word and Sacraments to
their synguler edificatio^. And in deu time restore them home again into their
la^d, to celebrate thy praises, promote thy gospel, and edefye thy desolate
congregation.

Consequently O lord thou that have said that thou will not break the bruised
reide, nor quench the smokynge flax: Be merciful we beseech thee unto all
those that through fear and wecknes have denied the by dissimulation and
ypocresie. That it may please the to strenghten their wecke knees (thou that
art the strenght of the^ that standethe) and lift up their feible hands, that
their little smoke may increase into a great flame and their bruised reid into
a mighty oak, able to abide all the bolstringe blastes and stormye tempests of
aduersyte, to thend that the ungodly do no longer triu^phe over their faight,
which (as they think) they have utterly quenched and subdewed. Stir up thy
strenght in them O lord and behold them with that merciful eye, where with
thou beheldes Peter, that they risynge by repentance, may become the constant
confessors of thy word, and the sanctified members of thy church. To the end
that when as by thy providence thou purposeste to lay thy cross upon them,
they do no more seek unlawful means to avoid the same, but most willingly to
be contented with patience to take it up and follow the, in what sort so ever
it shall please the to lay the same upon their shoulders. Either by death,
imprisonment or exile. And that it will please thee, not to tempte the^ about
their powers, but give them grace utterly to dispayer of their own strenght,
and wholye to depend upon thy mercy.

On the other side O lord god, thou ryghtouse Judge, Let not the ungodly the
enemies of thy truth continually triumph over us, as they do at this day. Let
not thine heritage become a reproach and common lawghing stock unto the
impudente and wicked Papists, who by all possible means seek the utter
destruction of thy little stock in shedynge, the blood of thy saynctes for
the testimonye of thy word, seeking by most deuelysh and damnable practices
to subvert thy truth. Confound them O God and all their wicked counselles: and
in the same pyt they have dug for other, let them be taken, that it may be
universally known, that there is no counsel nor force that can prevail
against the lord our god. Break O lord the horns of those blouddy bulls of
basan. Pull down those high mountains that eleuate them selfs against thee.
And rote up the rotten race of the ungodly, to the^de that they being consumed
in the fire of thine indignation, thine exyled Church may in there own land
find place of habitation.

O Lord deliver our land which thou haste given us for a porcio^ to
poscesse in this life from the invasion and subdewynge of strangers. Truth it
is we cannot deny but yt our sins has iustlye deserved this great plage
now emynent and approchynge, eue^ to be given over into ye hands and subjection
of that proud and beastly nation, that neither know the, nor fere the: and to
serve them in a bodyly captyuyte, that have refused to serve the in a
spiritual liberty. Yet lord for as much as we are assuredlye persuaded by
thy holy word that thine anger does not last for ever toward those that
ernestly repent, but in the stead of vengance do show mercy. We most
penitently beseech the to remove this thy great indignation bente toward us,
and give not over our land, our Cytyes, Towns, and Castles our goods,
pocessions and riches, our wyfes, children and our own lywes into the
subjection of strangers. But rather O Lord expel them our land subuerte there
cou^selles, dissipate their deuyces and delyuere us from their tyranny, as
thou delyuerest. Samaria from that cruel Benadab, Jerusalem from that
blasphemus Senacherib, and Betulia from that proud Holifernus.

Give us O Lord such princes and rulers, such maiestrates and governors as
will auau^ce thy glory, erecte up thy gospel, supprese Idolatrye, banish all
papistrye, and execute justice and equite. Water again O lord thy vine of
england with the moisture of thy holy-word, lest it utterly peryshe and wither
away. Byld up again the decayed walls of thy rewyned Jerusalem thy
congregation in this land, lest ye ungodly do attribute our confusion not unto
our sins (as the truth is) but unto our profession in religion.

Remember (O Lord) that we are a persell of thy portion, thy flock, the
inheritors of thy kingdom, ye sheep of thy pasture, and the members of thy son
our savior Jesus Christ: deal with us therefore according to ye multitude of
thy mercies, that al nations, kindredes, and tou^ges, may selebrate thy praises
in the restoringe of thy rewyned church to perfection again, for it is thy
work (O lord) and not ma^s, and from the do we with patience attend the same,
and not from the fleshly arm of man, and therefore to the only is don all
dominion, power and thanks giving now in our days and evermore. Amen.

i. Timoth. ii. Pray in every place lifting up pure hands.
OH mighty king, and most high almighty god, ye father of our lord Jesus
christ, which mercifully do govern al things, which thou have made look
down upon ye faithful seade of Abraham, the children of thy chosen Jacob, Thy
chosen people I do mean, consecrate unto the by the anoyncting of thy holy
spirit, And appointed to thy kingdom by the eternal porpose, free merci, and
grease, but yet as strangers wandering in this vile vale of misery, brought
forth daily, by the worldly tyrants, like sheape to ye slaughter. O father of
al fleashe who by thy divine providence chau^gest times and ceasons, and most
wonderfully disposest kingdoms, thou have destroyed Pharo, with all his horse,
and Chariottes, puffid up with pride, agayenst thy people, leadinge forth
saffelye by the hands of thy mercy, thy belouede Israel, through the high
waves of ye raging waters Thou oh god the lord of all hosts, and armis, did
first drive away from the gates of thy people the blasphemous Senacherib,
slaing of his army, four score and five thousand by thy angil, in one night:
And after by his own sons before his own Idols, did kill the same
blasphemous Idolater, showyng openly to all heathen thy prouide^t pwre,
toward thy despised letel ones. Thou did trau^ce form and chau^g proud
Nabuchodonosar, ye enemy of thy people, into A brute beast, to eat grass, and
hay, to the horable terror of all worldly tirantes, And as thou art the
father of mercies and god of all consolacion, so of thy wonderful mercy did
thou preserve those thy three servants in Babilo^, which with bold courage gave
their bodies to the fire, because they would not worship any dead Idol, and
when they were cast into ye burning furnace, thou did give them cheerful
hearts, to rejoice, and singe psalms, and sauedest unhurt ye very hears of
their heads, turning the flame from the^, to devour their enemies Thou oh
lord god, by the might of thy right arm (which governs all) broughtest
Daniell thy prophet save into light and life, forth of the darcke den of the
devouring lions where by false accusations he was shout under the earth, of
those raging beasts to be devoured, but thou turnedst there cruelty upon his
accusares, repainge the wickede, upon their own pates. Yea lord which passes
al wonders, and is far above man's power to perceive therein thy workinge, thou
did cause the huge, and great dragon of the seas, ye horrible Leuiathan,
and Behemoth, the main whalefish, to swalow up and devour, thy servant Jonas,
to keep him iii. days and iii. nights in the dongeon of his bealy the dark
hellicke grave to a living man, Thou did cause that great monster, to carry
him to the place, yt thou had appointed, and there to cast him up save, and
able to do thy massage. Now also O heavenly father, beholdor of all things, to
whom only belongs vengeance, thou see and considrest how thy holy name by
the wicked wordlinges, and blasphemous Idoloters is dishonorid, thy sacrate
word, refused, forsaken and despised, thy holy sprite prouokede, and
offended, thy chosene temple polluted, and deffilede, Tarry not tooe long
therefore, but show thy power spedelye upon thy chosen household, which is so
grievously vexed, and so cruelly handled by thy open enemies, Avenge thy own
glory, and shorten these evil days, for thy electes sake. Let thy kingdom
come of all thy desired, and though our liuinges, has offended thy majesty,
as we do confess unfeignedly (O Lord) that we have all sinned, our kings,
princes, prestes prophets, and people, All we together, with our pare^tes
fathers and mothers, have most grievously, infinitely, passing all mesure, and
number with our hard flintishe hearts, our dissolute, and careless life,
without all shame and repentance for syn, offendid, transgressid, trespassid,
sinned, and committed most horrible wickedness, so yt we have worthily deserved,
the vttermoste of thy plages and terrible vengeance. Yet for thy own glory
(O merciful Lord) suffer not the enemy of thy son Christ, the romyshe
Antichrist, thus wretchedlye to delude, and draw from the our poor brethern,
for whom thy son once died, that by his cruelty, after so clear light,
they should be made captives to domme Idols, and deuelysh Inventions, of
popyshe ceremonies, thereunto pertaining. Suffer him not to seduce the simple
sort with his fond opinion, that his false gods, blind mumbling, feigned
religion or his folishe supersticion, does give him such conquestes, such
victories, such triumph, and so high hand over us. We know most certaynely
(O Lord) that it is not there arm and power, but our sins, and offenses, that
has delivered us to their fury, And has caused the to turn away from us. But
turn again, O Lord let us fall into thy hands otherways (seeing thy justice
must ponish us) let us fall into thy hands (as David did chewse) by darth,
famine, or pestilence, or what way thou likest, least these vain Idolaters do
rejoice, at the miserable destruction, of those men, whom they make
proselites, and from thy doctrine Apostates, But oh lord thy holy will be
fulfilled, this is thy righteous Judgment, to ponish us with the tyrannical
yoke of blindness, because we have cast away from us, the sweat yoke of the
holesom word of thy son our savior. Yet consider the horrible blasphemies of
thine and our enemies. They name a cake, there god, there Christ and altogether
they know nothing of thy power, they say in there hearts, there is no god, which
either can, or will deliver us: wherefore O heavenly father, the gouerner of all
things, the Auenger of the causes of the poor, the fatherles, the widow and
of the oppress^d, look down from heaven, with the face of thy fatherly mercies
and forgive us al former offenses, and for thy son Christ's sake have mercy
upon us, which by the force, and cruelty, of wicked, and blasphemous Idolaters
without causes aproued, are haled and pulled from our own houses, are
slau^dered slain and murdered, as rebels, and traitors, like persons
pernicious, pestiferous, sedicious, pestilent, and full of mortal poison, to
al men contagious where we do medell no farther, but against the helly powers
of darkness, against the spiritual craftines, in heavenly things, which
would deny the will of our god, and the power of our Christ unto us, we do
contend no farther, but only for our Christ crucified, and the only salvation
by his blessed passion, knowledging none other god none other Christ, or
savior, but only the, the everliving lord and our most merciful father, and
thy dear son our savior, who is in the same glory with the in the high
heavens, Therefore O Lord for thy glorious name sake, for Jesus Christ's sake,
by whom thou haste promised to grant al righteous requests, make the wicked
Idolaters to wonder and stand amassed, at thy almightye power, use thy wonted
strength, to the confusion of thine enemies, and to the healpe and deliverance
of thy persecuted people all thy saints do beseech the therefore, the young
infantes (which have somdeale tasted of thy sweet word) by whose mouths thou
have promised to make perfect thy praises whose Angels does always behold thy
face, who beside the loss of us there parents, Are in danger, to be
compellid, and driven (without thy great mercies to serve domme, and
insensible Idols) do cry and call to thee: there pitefull mothers, with
lamentable tears, lie prostrate before the throne of thy grace. Thou father of
the fatherles Judge of the widows, and auenger of all the oppressid, let it
apere (O Lord omnipotent) yt thou do hear, judge, aueng, and ponish all
wrongs offered to all thy little ones that do believe in the, Do this O Lord
for thy names sake, Arise up O Lord and thy enemies shall be scatered and
confounded, So be yt O Lord most merciful at thy time appointed.

An other godly prayer to be said at al times.
HOnor and praise be given to the o Lord god almighty most dear father of
heaven, for all thy marsys and louinge kindness showyd unto us, in that it
has pleysyd thy gracius goodness freely and of thine own accord to elect and
chose us to salvation before the beginning of the world, and even like
contenewall thanks be given to the for creatynge of us after thine own image,
for redeminge, us with ye precius bludde of thy dersonne when we ware utterly
lost, for sanctefieng us with thy holy sprit in ye reuelacio^ and knowledge of thy
holy word, for helping and Suckering us in all our needs and nescesites, for
sauinge us from all dangers of body and soul, for conforting us so fatherly
in all our tribulacio^ and persecucions, for sparing us so long and geuinge us
so large a time of repentans, these benifites O most merciful father, like as
we knowledge to have receuid the^ of thy only goodness, even so we beseech the
that for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake to grant us alwayse thy holy
sprit, whereby we may contenewally grow in tha^kefulnes toward ye, to be
led into all truth, and confortyd in all our aduersetes, O lord strenthen
our faith, kindell it more in faruentnes and love toward the and our
neyghbors for thy sake. Suffer us not dereste father to receive thy word any
more in vain, but grant us alwayse the assystans of thy grace and holy
sprit, that in heart word and deed, we may santefye and do worshype to thy
holy name. Help to amplefye and encresse thy kingdom, and what soever thou
sendeste we may be heartily well content with thy good pleasure and will, let
us not lack the thing (Oh father) with out the which we cannot serve the,
but bless thou so all the works of our hands that we may have sufficient and
not to be chargeabell but rather helpful unto others, be merciful (O Lord)
to our offenses, and seeing our det yt great which thou haste forgeuen us in
Jesus christ, make us to love the and our neyghbors so much the more. Be thou
our father our captain and defender in all te^ptacions hold thou us by thy
merciful hand, that we may be delivered from all inconveniences, and end our
lives in the santefyeng and honor of thy holy name, thorough Jesus Christ our
lord, and only savior. Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and out strechyd arm O Lord be still our defense, thy
mercy and louinge kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son our salvation, thy true
and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy sprite, our comfort and
co^solacion, unto the end, and in the end. Amen.

O Lord increse our faith.

Bradfords beads that he prayed on being in Prison for the testimoni, of Jesus
Christ leaui^g them as necessary to be vsid of the faithful.

Blesyd ar the dead that dye in the lord, even so says the Spiret, that they
rest from their labores, but their works follow them. Apo. xiiii.
Imprinted at London in Saint Martins parish in the vinetre, upon the three
Crane warfe, by wyllyam Coplande.

Anno. Do. M.D.LIX. the xv. day of March.


