THE IMPORTVNATE BEGGAR For things necessary, or necessity, without denial.

Or a Treatise, wherein is showed the lawfullnesse of praying absolutely for
necessary temporal things, without doubting or wavering, and that the Saints
of God may and ought, as absolutely depend upon God, for their daily bread, as
they may for the pardon of their sins, and that the cause is in themselves,
who do not obtain them.

Whereunto is annexed An Answer to Mr. NORRICE his 5 Arguments, which were
framed against it, together with an Answer to his Prosopopeia, wherein, as well
the insufficiency of those Arguments, as the deceitfullnesse of his
Collections, is plainly manifested By R. B.

Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: He shall never
suffer the Righteous to be moved, Psalm. 55.22.

Jesus said unto him, if thou can believe, all things are possible to him
that believes, Mark. 9.23.

Printed in the Year 1635.

TO The well-affected Reader.
WHEN I first conceaved and penned this Treatise (gentle Reader) concerning
praying for temporal blessings, it was far from my thoughts, that ever it
should come abroad to the public view of the world: it being (as it were) but
a Letter sent to Mr. Norrice in private, wherein (by his special entreaty) I
unfolded myself unto him, concerning the subject before specified, as also
what I conceived of his 5 Arguments intentively framed by him, to cross or
contradict what I before affirmed to him in private, concerning the point of
praying absolutely for temporal necessaryes. I say, I did not once imagine,
that this which I thus wrote to a friend in private, should ever have been
printed and made public. That which occasioneth me now (contrary to my former
thoughts) to commit it in a public manner to every man's eye and censure, is
Mr. Norrice his slanderous misconstructions and false reports of my writings,
which he caused long since (about 5 years) to fly up and down the Country:
And now (fearing belike they were forgotten) they are again renewed and revived
by him. For no sooner had I sent him in writing (according as he desired me)
what I conceived of the point above named, together with an answer to his 5
Arguments, but presently he gave out (and that in writing) that my writings
contained in them diverse errors and absurdities, if not blasphemies, as in my
answer to his Prosopopeia is fully manifested.

Those false reports and injurious slanders being (as I suppose) almost
forgotten, are again renewed by him, and now on foot as fresh as ever: by
reason whereof I undergo many heavy censures, which to me is exceeding
grievous, both in respect of the inward and outward man: for as the soul is
wounded, so a man's good name by such dealing is stained. Wherefore I could not
choose, but commit it to the view of all, choosing rather to commit my self and
writings, to the various censures of the multitude, then that the truth
(through my silence) should be smothered by the foggy mists of falsehood, and
the least occasion given for any one to think, that those scandalls, which are
falsely laid upon me, are but justly deserved blame.

I have no liberty to add too, or dimunish any thing from the first copy, but
as I wrote it to Mr. Norrice, and as he has it coppyed in his hands, so I am
compelled to publish it; and that for 2 reasons. First lest he should say and
affirm, that these are not the writings which he had from me, and so free
himself (at least as some may take it) from some (if not from all) of that
deserved blame, which is laid upon him, for abusing my writings. And secondly
that his slanderous collections and aspersions cast upon me, in respect of my
writings, may be plainly seen by them that read my writings, and compare them
with his speeches, together with his collections hereafter mentioned.

Now seeing there is a necessity laid upon me (as thou see courteous and
well-disposed Reader) to publish these my writings without correction, either
of matter or words, I would entreat thee to deal with me, as (I presume) thou
(being in the same case with me) would desire others to deal with thee,
even charitably to construe all things, and interpret them in the better part.
Look not so much (it being written to a friend in private) for curiously
composed sentences, and elegancie of phrase, as upon the truth of the matter,
and the comfort which the right embracing of the same, will bring unto thy
soul; for it will not only uphold thee as an ancre in the midst of the foming
waves of this worlds calamities, but also free thee from innumerable
inconveniences, which otherwise are like to befall thee.

If upon thy perusing my writings, thou find any such errors of matter as
are reported of me, and can manifest them unto me as my sin, I shall
willingly confess my failing, and give public satisfaction. I need say no
more for present, in regard I have given thee some advertisements in the
Epilogue or Conclusion of this ensuing Treatise: only I desire thee to take
due consideration, as well of those advertisements, as also of those other
truths, contained in these few sheets, and weigh them all in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and not (by reason of thy prejudicate opinion of the Author) to
deprive thy self of those privileges, which the right embracing of those
truths, hereafter manifested, will bring unto thee. Howsoever my hearts desire
and prayer to God is, that the truth may still flourish, notwithstanding the
many subtle delusions of the adversaries, who with their cunning arguments,
do like Iannes and Iambres, those Egyptian juglers, secretly resist the
truth: yea my desire is, that it may evidently and with speed appear, that the
Truth has devoured error, as the serpent of Moses did the Enchanters: Thus
(assuredly exspecting Gods accomplishment of my desire) I commit what I have
written to thy consideration, and thee to Gods protection, wishing thee to use
what I have written to thy comfort, praying the Lord withal, to make thy heart
stable and unblamable in holiness.

Thine in all good affection RICE BOY.

For praying absolutely for necessary temporal things, without doubting and
wavering, and that the Saints of God may and ought, as absolutely depend upon
the promises of God, for their daily bread, as they may for the pardon of their
sins, and that the cause is in themselves, who do not obtain them.
IT may be thought of many, that concerning prayer for outward things, we do
but (as the saying is) nodum in scirpo quaerere, even contend about trifles.
Indeed the matter of our contention (at the first sight) does not seem great,
but being rightly considered, it is of great consequence; It is for the faith,
for which we are commanded earnestly to contend. That which is the ground of
this controversy, is this word, If, which some do labor to join with, and
we labor to separate, and remoove it from the prayers of Gods faithful
servants. Here then is the sum of the whole matter. They affirm that for
outward necessary things, we ought to pray with an, If; but we affirm that,
If, in all such prayers must be laid aside. Wherefore it shall not be unmeete
(before we speak particularly of the matter in hand) to show how this word,
If, is taken in the Scriptures. This particle, If, then is taken in the
Scriptures either for a term of condition, or else for a term of doubt. It is
a term of condition Deuteronomy. 4.30.31. If thou turn to the Lord thy God, and
shall be obedient unto his voice: he will not forsake thee, neither destroy
thee, etc. This and all other such like places, may be turned participially,
thus: Thou turning to the Lord, and being obedient unto him, he will not
forsake thee, nor destroy thee. Secondly this particle, If, is not only a
term of condition, but also a term of doubt, and distrustfullnesse; and so it
is 2. Kings 7.19. If the Lord should make windows in heaven, might such things
be? As if he had said, I cannot believe that such a plenty of corn will be in
Samariah, notwithstanding the Lord does make windows in heaven. He doubted of
the truth of the Prophets word: Now to the thing in hand. In what sense then is
this word (If) used in prayer for necessary temporal blessings? as it is
conditional or doubtful? if conditional (as the truth is, the most would
have it) then our prayers for outward necessary blessings must be framed thus;
Oh Father, if the gift of things necessary for my present being shall stand
with thy will, then be pleased to bestow it upon me. In which petition this
word (If) is not only conditional, but also doubtful: We do not by this
saying refer it to the will of God; but in so praying we doubt whether it
does agree with the will of God, to bestow upon us things necessary for our
present being, which manner of praying does manifest both ignorance and
infidelity; we know not whether it be the will of God or not, to give us such
things as we ask, and then no marvaill, if we doubt whether we shall have them
yea or no. Therefore contrary to the common opinion we conclude, That the
particle (If) ought to be excluded from the prayers of Gods faithful servants,
yea from such prayers which they make for outward necessary blessings. This
does appear by our Saviors words Mat. 6. where he commands his Disciples
to pray for things necessary, for soul and body, without any If at all. I
think it be received of all without contradiction as a general truth, that
that prayer, which we call the Lords prayer, (and so call it because it is the
Lord Christ's own framing) is exemplar absolutissimum, such an absolute
pattern of prayer, as that, there is nothing in it superfluous, neither is
there any thing essential to prayer wanting. If then nothing therein is
superfluous, neither yet any thing essential to prayer wanting, then surely
this particle, If, ought to be excluded from all the petitions of the Lords
prayer, because we find that in the whole form it is wanting. You all
acknowledge that there is no need of any (If) in any of the petitions, but in
the fourth only, in which petition ye say that it is implied. If this be
granted, then it must needs be, first that somewhat essential to prayer in
Christ's form is wanting, and then secondly that Christ's form is not perfect
(which is contrary to your own tenent) for ye confess that the form is
perfect, and then it must needs be (if the form be not perfect) that there
wanted either skill or will in Christ to make such a form of prayer, which
could not be mended, which for any man to affirm, is no less then blasphemy.

Wherefore (for ought I see) so long as we keep our selves close to the word
of God, and frame our petitions according to his will revealed in the same,
there is no need of any (If) in any of our prayers, no not in such prayers
which we make unto God for temporal blessings. But more of this hereafter.
Now more fully to manifest, and more evidently to prove our tenent, concerning
absolute prayer for temporal necessary blessings, we will draw all the matter
(as is specified in our title aforementioned) into these three heads. First
that necessary temporal blessings, ought to be prayed for without doubting or
wavering. Or thus: Faith without doubting is as well required in such prayers,
which are made to God for necessary temporal things, as it is in those which
are made for spiritual blessings. Secondly, that the Saints of God may and
ought, as absolutely depend upon the promises of God, for their daily bread,
(.i.) for things necessary, as they may for the pardon of their sins. And
thirdly, that the cause is in themselves, who do not obtain them. These are
the branches, which (as I conceive) do naturally spring from the root of our
tenent, concerning absolute prayer for necessary temporal things, what fruit
do grow upon each of them, ye shall (by Gods assistance) plainly and briefly
see: And first of the first; namely, That necessary temporal things ought to
be prayed for, without doubting and wavering. That faith without wavering is
required in all prayers made unto God, as well for temporal as spiritual
things, I think it is not (I know it cannot be) denied of any. For faith in
prayer is not accidental, but essential, it is not contingent, but necessary,
it cannot be separated from prayer, sine subjecti interitu, without its
violation. Faith is that which makes prayer to be as a sweet smelling
sacrifice in Gods nostrills, but without it, it is displeasing: For whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. last. Whereupon Augustine affirms, that
our righteousness is discerned from unrighteousness, not by the law of works,
but of faith, without which faith, whatsoever seemed good works, are sins,
and turned into sins; neither can it be that such prayers will bring either
comfort to man, or glory to God, seeing they do not please him, whom to please
without faith (as the Apostle affirms Heb. 11.6.) is impossible. Whereupon
our Apostle Paul does expressly command us, to send faith with all our prayers,
as appears 1. Tim. 2.8. I will therefore (says he) that men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. And if any man should
think, the Apostles meaning in this place is restrained only to spiritual
things, our Savior himself shall give him satisfaction Luke 12.28.29. where he
does speak of temporalls, from whom our Apostle did fetch his text, where he
does reproove the Disciples for their infidelity, concerning outward things,
and he does draw reprooving arguments from the less to the greater; did the
Lord feed the fowls, and cloth the grass? how much more will he feed and
cloth you, oh ye of little faith? whereupon he adds this prohibition, Seek
not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful
mind. Hence it is that our Apostle James does lay down a rule how to pray,
But let him ask in faith nothing wavering, James 1.6. In which words are
condemned by the Apostle as a sin, all wavering and doubting prayers, which
he does prove in the ensuing words by three several things. The first is by
a similitude, he that wavereth and doubts in prayer, is like a wave in the
sea driven with the wind and tossed, and therefore they please not God.
Secondly he prooveth it by a reason drawn from the discommodity, which it
brings; It does hinder a man from the obtaining the thing he desires.
Thirdly he does condemn it by a general sentence, received as true of all
men: A wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways. Thus it is plain,
that wavering and doubting in prayer, is by the holy Ghost condemned as a
sin, and the contrary, namely, solid, certain, and undaunted confidence
required. And surely concerning the thing in hand, we may say with a Domesticke
writer, If faith be a virtue, then doubting is a vice: for certainly (as we
said before) it is unresistable, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Add unto
all this the definitions of prayer, as we find them recorded by our own
Divines. By some it is defined thus: To make prayer, is to put up request to
God, according to his word, from a contrite heart in the name of Christ, with
full assurance to be heard. This last clause (says the Author) is so necessary
in prayer, as that the want of it makes prayer no prayer; for (says he) how
can a man pray for any thing effectually, who doubts whether he shall
obtain it or no. Whereupon he concludes, that prayer must be made with
faith, whereby a man must have certain assurance to be heard. By others it is
defined thus: Prayer is an ardent affection, tending unto God, whereby we ask
and look for, only from God in Christ, things belonging to soul and body,
Secundum ipsius mandatum and promissiones, according to that which he has
commanded to ask, and promised to give. Again Calvine does define it thus:
Est enim quaedam hominum cum Deo communicatio, etc. It is a certain
communication, or talking of men with God, whereby they entering the heavenly
Sanctuary, they do speak or mention unto him (as it were face to face) his
promises, and that they believe, that whatsoever the word does warrant unto
them, non fuisse vanum, it cannot be in vain. All these definitions tend to
one and the same purpose, in them all the point is verified: That faith without
wavering is necessary required in all prayer, as well for temporal, as
spiritual blessings. And to what end (says Calvine) does our Savior so
often say to the diseased, according to thy faith be it unto thee? but to
manifest unto us, quod citra fidem nihil consequi nos posse, that without faith
we cannot, nor may not exspect to receive any thing at the hands of God. And
surely if our prayers are not grounded upon faith, it is but a vain thing once
to think that they will profit. Wherefore (good Christian Reader) I beseech
thee in the bowels of mercy in Christ Jesus, ponder well and consider this,
ground thy prayer upon faith, and thy faith upon Gods Word, ask what thou
do ask according to his revealed will, walk within thy limits, keep faith
and a good conscience, wrestle with God (as did Jacob Genesis 32.) and then fear
not to call thy self by the name of Israel; for as a Prince shall thou have
power with God, and with men, and shall prevail. Call not Gods power into
question, doubt not of his willingness to succor thee, neither stagger at any
of his promises, no not at those which he has made unto thee for thy daily
maintenance, for surely they are all faithful, thou may absolutely without
all doubt depend upon them, which is our second branch, and the reason of the
former.

That the Saints of God may and ought, as absolutely depend upon, the promises
of God, for their daily bread, (.i.) for things necessary, as they may for the
pardon of their sins, is also easily justifiable by the Scriptures. It is
indifferently acknowledged by our whole Church, that the promises of God,
concerning the pardon of sins, and life eternal, ought absolutely to be
depended upon God without any scruple. What? shall the promises, concerning the
soul, (which is the greater) be relied upon and believed? and shall the truth
of the promises, concerning the body, (which is the less) be suspected? If I
have told you earthly things (says Christ Ioh. 3.12.) and ye believe me not,
how shall ye believe if I tell you heavenly things? If we dare not give
credit to the less, how shall we believe the greater? for our faith has all
one ground. The ground of our depending upon God, for soul or body, is his
promises, which God in Christ absolutely made to all his servants, as the
Apostle prooveth 2. Cor. 1.10. All the promises (as well temporaries as
spiritualls) are in Christ Yea, and in him Amen. He is faithful in every one
of them, yea for the keeping of the least, he has laid his credit to pawn,
and if God fails in any of his promises, his credit must needs suffer. But our
Apostle has removed this doubt Heb. 10.23. Fidelis Dominus, the Lord is
faithful that promises. And upon this foundation (as I said before) is our
faith and confident depending upon God, grounded. He has promised to save me
Mal. 3.16. They shall be mine, says the Lord. He has promised never to
forsake me, nor to leave me, Iosuah 1.5. I will not leave thee, nor forsake
thee. He has promised to comfort me in distress, Psalm. 91.15. I will be with
him in trouble; He has promised to give me things necessary for my bodily
sustenance, Psalm. 37.19. In the days of famine they shall be satisfied, and
because he has made these promises, therefore I believe them. Finally he has
promised to hear any petition that I shall make unto him, according to his
will, and therefore I have this confidence in him, and will come boldly to the
throne of grace, for he is faithful that promises. Wherefore seeing the
promises, both of temporal and eternal favors, are equally absolute, and
seeing God is faithful in all his promises, as well in the one fort, as he is
in the other; it must needs be that the Saints (unto whom only the promises
belong) may and ought, as absolutely depend upon those, concerning this life,
as they may upon those, concerning the life to come. Now that the promises are
equally absolute (which indeed is the only thing to prove) it does plainly
appear by diverse places; first the Apostle St. Peter in the 2. Epistle chap.
1.3. does assure us, that the Lord and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness. Hence it is
that St. John in his first Epistle chap. 5. writing to all believers in
general ((...) etc. these things have I written to you that believe) he does
in the 14. verse include himself among the rest, and plainly declare unto all
men, that the manner of their praying was, not only to speak with the tongue,
but also with the heart to believe that God is faithful in that very promise,
contract or covenant, for the obtaining whereof they do at any time sue unto
him. For (says he) this is the confidence that we have in him, if we ask any
thing, (.i.) any thing for soul or body, according to his will, (.i.)
according to his will revealed in his word, he hears us. And if we know that
he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we have the petitions that we desired of
him. An admirable resolution of true believers; (this is the confidence we have
in him) they doubted not of his eternal, no nor yet of his temporal promises;
godliness (as they knew full well) having the promise of both, 1. Tim. 4.8. If
this will not persuade thee, (Oh thou of little faith) absolutely to depend
upon Gods providence and promises for temporal necessaryes; hear what our
Savior himself says John 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my word in you, ask
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you; as if he had said, you abiding in
me by faith, and keep your selves within the compass of my word, and then
ask what you will, it shall be done unto you. And least any man should think,
this clause (ask what you will) in this our Savior speech, ought to be
restraind only to spiritual things, Christ himself (who does best know his
own meaning) does expound himself Math. 6. For his Disciples being desirous
to be instructed how to pray, as appears Luke 11.1. Christ accordingly was
willing and did teach them, as appears both by St. Luke and also by St.
Matthew in the chapter before quoted, where he does expressly speak of
temporalls. Neither does he leave it as a thing indifferent, to depend or not
to depend upon his promises for temporal matters, but he does command us in
both places absolutely to pray, and depend upon him for bodyly necessaryes,
without distrusting his will? This does appear in his own commandment,
which he set forth upon the fourth petition in Math. 6.25. to the end of the
chapter, where he does plainly manifest unto us, that the faithful seekers
of his Kingdom, shall not want the comfortable blessings of the earth. His
words are very plain, ye find not in them any (If) at all, they are indeed an
absolute promise, Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you. Seek his Kingdom in the first
place, bread and clothing shall be given thee in the second place. And to the
end no man should doubt at any time of this temporal promise, our Savior
does use in the same chapter strong reasons to persuade us, which are drawn a
minori ad majus, and we may conceive it thus: If God (says Christ) thus
provide food for the fowls and birds, and does give the grass such
beautiefull clothing, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven:
How much more will he provide for you? But ye see by experience, that the Lord
does provide for the fowls, the birds, and the grass: therefore your faith
(which is the evidence of things not seen) should much more teach you, that
God (who is your loving father) will not fail you. And more deeply to imprint
in the hearts of his hearers the truth of this matter, he does sharply
reproove those that stagger at the truth of his speech, for he says unto them,
Learn this, oh ye of little faith.

No marvail then if Paul was so bold confidently to avouch this truth to the
Romans, seeing he took his text from our Saviors own mouth: He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. Especially seeing (as he again
taught the Corinthians 2. Cor. 1.27.) in him are the promises Yea, and in him
Amen. This was that which Solomon desired of the Lord 1. Kings 8.38. That if
all the people of Israel, or any man, did know the plague in his own heart,
when any plague was upon them, and spread forth his hands unto him, that he
would hear in heaven and help: which prayer of Solomon the Lord granted
chap. 9.3. Iehosaphat well remembered this promise 2. Chron. 20.9. and being in
distress, he put God in mind of it, and told him that they could not tell
what to do, but only look upon him, who had promised to save them. Now
Iehosaphat receiving this gracious answer from the Lord verse. 15. to the (...)
that the Lord did remember his promise, and would help them, he presently
verse 20. turned himself to the people, and exhorted them to believe this
promise: for Iehosaphat stood and said, Hear me, Oh Judah; and ye inhabitants
of Jerusalem, Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established: believe
his Prophets so shall ye prosper. Unto which do our Saviors words agree Mark.
9.23. All things are possible to him that believes. Where by all things, he
does not only understand things of the soul, but also whatsoever is
comfortable to the body. And this is plainly prooved in the same place; for the
father by faith received a temporal blessing for his child, for the dumb and
deaf spirit came out of him. verse. 26. A cloud of witnesses have their faith
extolled, for apprehending temporal favors, for they all judged him faithful
that promised, Heb. 11.11. And hence it was that David was confident for
temporal necessaries Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shephard, I shall not want.
Read that 11. of the Hebr. and there is a whole catalogue commended for their
faith, especially and in the first place for judging God faithful in temporal
promises. I dare not, then teach any otherwise, then that the promises, which
are made for temporal necessaries, are absolute, and that we ought absolutely,
without wavering, depend upon them, and judge him faithful that promises,
seeing I have my text given me by Moses from Levit. 26. and Deuter. 28. as also
by our Savior himself Math. 6. where he does allow and maintain the doctrine
of Moses, unto whose spirits our spirits must be subject.

Great reason then there is, why the Saints of God both may and ought
absolutely rely and depend upon the promises, as for eternal, so for
temporal necessaries. First it is commanded 1. Ioh. 3.23. This is his
commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.
And secondly he has made a way for us, that we may come freely to the throne
of grace, where we may stand, not trembling as enemies, but boldly as friends,
not doubtful as servants, but certain, as sons, of Gods favor toward us.
For by Christ we are made the sons of God, and heirs of the promises, who
has also given unto us such privilege, ut Deum blandissimo Patris nomine
invocare nobis liceat; that it is lawful for us to invocate God through him,
by that excellent comfortable name of a loving Father. Number ergo dubitabimus,
(says one) and shall we now doubt, that a loving Father, full of pity and
compassion, will deny his sons any thing, which he has command them to
ask, and promised to give? Oh no, this was to judge him unfaithful that
promises, and to make God a liar (as St. John says) he that believes not
God, has made him a liar, 1. John 5.10. Let this our judgment then (dearly
beloved) remain good by authority from Moses and the Prophets, from Christ and
his Apostles, namely, that the promises for temporal necessaries are absolute,
and may and ought absolutely be depended upon by his servants, without
wavering, and then I doubt not, but in the last place (this being granted)
thou will find and confess this also to be true: That the cause is in
themselves, who do not obtain them, which is our third and last head,
springing as a branch from the root of the former heads, and comes next to be
prooved.

The two former heads being granted to be true, which (if truth take place) it
cannot be otherwise, this also must of necessity follow. For absolute faith
being required in all prayer, the promises concerning life and godliness, upon
which faith is grounded, being of the same nature, it must needs follow in the
3 place, that whosoever does pray for these temporary things, the fault is in
themselves, if they do not obtain them. God is not, neither can he be said to
be wanting. But they are wanting. Now that, we may make this clearly appear,
we must search the Scriptures, and there enquire of God, how many things he
does require to be in all such prayers of his servants, which he has promised
to grace with a gracious answer, which is (indeed) a giving to him, or them his
poor petitioners, the very thing, or things petitioned.

The particular things required in prayer (as we find them recorded by the holy
Ghost in the Scriptures) are five. Whereof three are specified in one verse 1.
Timoth. 2.8. I will therefore (says the Apostle) that men pray every where
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting, the fourth is spoken of by
St. James 4.33. We must not ask any thing at the hands of God, for any
by-respect, to consume it on our lusts. The 5 and last thing required to be
observed in prayer, is declared by St. John 1. Epist. 5.14. we must ask what
we ask according to his will. The want of some or one of these doubtless, is
the cause why God does stop his ear at the cry of his servants, when they pray
unto him for things necessary, either concerning soul or body. Of these five
particulars we will speak something as they lie in order, that we may the
easier discern unto which of these (when we ask and miss) the fault is to be
imputed (for to the want of some, or one of these, it must needs be) and first
of the first. It is required that we lift up holy hands. To lift up holy hands
in this place, is all one as if he had said, lift up holy hearts. For manuum
elevatio mentem elevandam esse docet. So that the Apostles meaning in this
place does agree with that of the Heb. 10.22. where he does wish us to draw
near to God with a true heart, (.i.) with a sincere heart, ab hypocrisi
alieno, void of hypocrisy, called also of the Apostle in another place 1.
Timoth. 1.5. Cor purum, a pure heart, or a heart purely affected, and as the
Apostle speaks to the Heb. in the place before quoted, a heart purified from
an evil conscience, which is all one with that of Paul to Timothy, in the
place before recited, where he calls it a good conscience. So then the Apostle
does require every one of us, before we presume to make prayer unto God, to be
truly exercised in the works of humiliation and repentance. Every man must
know the plague of his own heart, 1. Kings 8.38..i. (as is specified in the
same chapter verse. 47.) He must bethink himself and repent, before he can
exspect that the Lord will give an ear to his prayer, nay this must be done
before he have any warrant to pray at all.

Now that the want of lifting up holy hands unto God in prayer, (.i.) the want
of a pure heart, a good conscience; or of humiliation and repentance (as we are
to understand the words) is one cause why God does stop his ears at the cry of
his servants, the Lord himself does plainly testify; for this purpose read
Isay. 1. where ye shall find that the Lord does complain of Isreal's
rebellion, and does even upbraide their whole service. To what purpose is the
multitudes of your sacrifices to me, says the Lord? Bring no more vain
oblations: Your new moons, and your appointed Feasts, my soul hates: They
are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And (says he verse. 15.) When
ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: Yea when you make
many prayers, I will not hear: Your hands are full of blood. Agreeing to
this, is that of the Prophet Zachary in his 7. chapter, where the people
enquired of the Lord, whether they should weep in the 5. month, and separate
themselves as they had these so many years? unto which question the Lord
answered, by reprooving them in the 5.6.7. verses, where he does tell them,
that when they did fast and weep those 70. years, they did it not unto him,
but for themselves, they should have heard the words which the Lord cried by
the former Prophets, which indeed they regarded not. Wherefore the Lord bids
the Prophet tell them what they should do, verse. 9.10. when they did pray unto
him, and fast, and wept unto him. They had indeed fasted and wept a long time,
even 70. years, but they prevayled not with God. And the Prophet gives the
reason verse. 12. They refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears that they should not hear, etc. and therefore just it was
with God, to deal with them as he did verse. 13. for he cried and they would
not hear, and therefore when they cried, he would not hear, as (in that
place) he with his own mouth does witness. Justly then may the Lord (when the
people transgress and rebel against him, and will not be humbled) hide and
cover himself (as the Prophet says Lament. 3.44.) with a cloud, that their
prayer shall not pass thorough, and not so much as once (as he speaks Levit.
26.81.) smell the savor of their sweet odours. If thou regard evil in thy
heart, the Lord will not hear thee. Thou may ly crying upon thy face with
Iosuah, but you shall have the same answer with him, Ios. 7.10. wherefore lie
thou upon thy face, Israel have sinned. Oh then do not so much as once imagine
with thy self, that ever God does deprive thee of any promised favor, or bring
upon thee any threatened punishment, which thy sin does not cause. The Prophet
Amos says chap. 3.6. that there is no evil in the city, (.i.) no evil of
punishment, but the Lord has done it; and Jeremy says, that every such evil
is an infliction for sin; Man suffers for his sin, Lament. 3.39. Which
two places (as it is collected to my hand) do evince thus much, that
whatsoever punishments do or have befallen us, whether plague, pestilence,
famine, or the sword, they all come from the Lord, and that for sin. Many
times (says the Psalmist) did he deliver them, but they provoked him with
their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity, Psalm. 106.43. And
again, Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted, Psalm. 106.17. And may we not well say, when God
does punish us with any plague, as Moses said to Aaron Numb. 16.46. There is
wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. Surely God never punishes
his servants, but to humble them, and if they will not be humbled with one
punishment, he will either continue the same, as he did to Israel, Judge. 6. or
else bring some new one upon them, as he did Amos the fourth. He will punish
them first in their goods, deprive them of outward comforts, and if that will
not serve to bring them to repentance, he will lay it upon their bodies, and
send the pestilence among them, after the manner of Egypt, and if they will not
be reformed for these things, he will (as he says Levit. 26.) punish them
seven times more for their sins, as it is often repeated in that chapter.
Hence it is that the Prophet does complain of the forlorn Jews, for that
they would not be humbled by punishments, Thou have smitten them, but they have
not sorrowed: Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, Ierem. 5.3. Yea many blows are given, but the people turn not to
him that smites, Isay. 9.13. This made the Lord himself to cry out Isay. 1.5.
Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more. What do all
these point out unto us, but that those punishments, which God lays upon his
people, are to humble them for their sins? and that their great impenitency
does even stand as a cloud between God and them, to keep their prayers from
him? What now must be done in this case? must we continue in sin? and lie as
it were senseless under Gods punishing hand? For answer, hark what God
himself says, Isay 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings, from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc.
Come now let us reason together, and by repentance (Amos 4.12.) prepare to
meet thy God, Oh Israel. This is the way, walk in it: Thou see impenitence,
and hardness of heart, is one thing, which does hinder both the course of Gods
blessing from thee, as also bring all punishments unto thee, which are
inflicted upon thee. Hear thou the sum of this whole matter, thou must know
the plague in thy own heart, or else Gods plague cannot be remooved from thee,
all thy cries will not moove him, unless in the first place thy hands be holy.

Thus much of the first thing required in prayer; It is a lifting up of holy
hands. The second follows: It must be without wrath, (...). (.i.) It must be
done without wrath, unto which charity is opposed. In these words, when he
says, pray without wrath, it is all one as if he had said, Pray in charity.
That charity is required, when we pray for temporal or eternal favors, the
words of the Apostle in this place, is sufficient to prove. But it is seconded
again 1. Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done in charity. If all things
then must be done in charity, then prayer ought not to be done without it. And
the Apostle does give the reason 1. Cor. 13.1.2. without this our prayers are
nothing, it is but as a sounding brass, and as a tinkling cymball. He that
loves not (says John 1. Epist. 4.8.) knows not God, for God is love. And
how then can it be, that any one can pray to him a right, of whose knowledge he
is ignorant? Charity (says the Apostle Coll. 3.14.) is the bond of
perfectness. If the bond be broken, by which the Saints are all linked
together, as one man, all things must needs be out of order. Evacuanda ergo est
men's, the soul must be emptied of this humor when we pray. Lift up holy hands,
sine ira, without wrath. Now that the want or failing in this duty of charity,
when we pray unto God, is another cause why God does stop his ears at the cry
of his servants, either when they pray for a promised favor, or for the
avoiding of any punishment, we need not stand long in prooving. Take only that
saying of the Prophet Zach. 7.10. and compare it with that of the Apostle 1.
Cor. 13.5. and the point is clearly justified. The Apostle does show us what
charity is, a part of whose nature in that verse is contained, It thinks not
evil. To think evil then, is against the laws of charity. Now the Prophet
affirms, that the thinking or imagining evil one against another in their
hearts, was one special thing, why God did not hearken to their prayers,
notwithstanding they containued, crying 70 Years. No marvail then, if in our
times many prayers be made to God invaine, which never receive an answer,
seeing they imagine so much evil in their hearts of their brethren. Nay it
breaks out now beyond imagination, their imaginations break out into practice.
Strange it is to consider, that Christians of all others, should be so
unnatural. Yet not so strange as true: for (as one says) the hand searches
the eye, the mouth biteth the hand: Thorns and briers embrace one another,
while (contrary to all nature) figtrees devour one another. Now if men shall
suck, even suck the blood one of another, concoct their moisture into malice,
imagine evil in their hearts one of another, and thus violate the laws of
charity; How can they exspect to receive any blessing, or remoove any punishing
hand of God from them, when they pray unto him? was the imagining of evil one
against another (the least breach, as some judge of the laws of charity) one
special thing, which as a cloud did stand between God and Isreal's prayers,
and shall not imaginations and practices, and all joined together, stand
between him and men now? Surely God is the same God, and there is still the
same effect of sin. It will still (not being repented of) stop the current
of Gods blessings from us, and pull down upon us tokens of his displeasure.
Which tokens of his anger (until it does bring forth the fruits of
humiliation) will stick as fast as Gehasies leprosy: It will not be remooved.
And thus of the second thing required in prayer.

The third follows. It must be without doubting. Doubting in this place is
opposed to faith, for indeed they are contrary, where faith is, doubting is
not, and where doubting is (codem instant^) faith cannot be, for faith admits
not of doubting. In these words, when he says, Pray without doubting, it is
all one as if he had said, Pray with faith. Doubt not at all when ye pray. The
word (...) here used by the Apostle, does properly signify, sine disceptatione,
and so Beza does translate it. So that the Apostles meaning (as it may be
gathered from the nature of the word) is this; he would have us, when we pray,
to be so far from doubting, as that we should not so much as question, or
dispute in any doubtful manner, or say as the Serpent did to the woman Genesis
3.1. Yea has God said. But when we urge God for his promises by prayer, he
would have us to do it (we see) (...), sine disceptatione, without disputing,
without doubting. Now further to prove that doubting ought to be excluded, and
that faith is required in all prayer, we need not any longer to insist upon it
in this place, but refer you to our former grounds, where it is fully
manifested. Now that the want of faith is another cause, why God does stop his
ears at our prayers, it is easily justifiable by the Scriptures. And indeed
the truth is, we may say of faith in prayer, as our Savior did of those great
commandments, upon this hangs all the rest. Where this is truly, there all
the other four things, required in prayer, must needs be. For unless a man
come to God with humiliation, and with love, unless he ask for the true ends,
and according to Gods revealed will, it is impossible to have faith: well he
may have a kind of swimming conceit, to have the thing petitioned, but faith
he cannot have. Where faith is, there are accompaning her all these attendants,
but where she is not, there her attendants will not prevail. Faith is the key
of the whole work. The want of this, spoils all. Now that the lack of faith,
a wavering, or doubting, is also a special cause, why the Saints do often go
away empty from the throne of grace, it is plainly made manifest in diverse
places. It is said of our Savior Mat. 13.58. (in whom there is neither want of
power or will) that he did not many mighty works there, because of their
unbelief. Calvine upon the place is of this opinion; for he repeatingly using
these words of Augustine, Faith is very aptly compared to certain vessels
with open mouth: but infidelity is like to a cover, with the which the
vessels are covered, that it cannot receive the liquor poured in by the Spirit
of God. Unto which comparison of Augustine Calvine does assent, as his own
words do witness, And truly (says he) it is so indeed. For the Lord,
seeing that his power is not received of us, does at the length take away the
same, and yet notwithstanding afterward we complain, that we want his help,
which our incredulity and hardness of heart, has repelled and driven away.
Unto this also does Gualter subscribe in one of his Homilies (upon these words,
And he could do there no mighty works, Mark. 6.) his words are these,
Admonemur igitur hoc exemplo, etc. we are taught by this example, how it comes
to pass, that we are at this day deprived of many blessings: Nimirum (says
he) quod paucissimos invenire licet vere credentes, etc. And hence it is that
he breaks out into this doleful complaint, Est autem haec gravis and
horribilis infidelitatis poena, quod Christi virtutem nobis infrugiferam, etc.
Oh what a grievous and horrible punishment of infidelity is this! It does cause
both the power and virtue of Christ to be unfruitful unto us, and make us
altogether unable and unworthy to partake of it. What do those words before
recited prove, but (according to the judgment also of those Divines) that the
want of faith, in apprehending the promises, does deprive us of many blessing,
as well concerning the body as the soul. This word (If) in prayer, is but a
little word, but yet it stands between God and us as a cloud; it does deprive
us of many favors. So long as this If, stood between Christ and the Father in
the 9. of Mark, and the 22. it kept him from the blessing, but being
afterward remooved, his request was granted, his child was dispossessed of a
dumb and deaf spirit at the same instant. Moses was deprived of a temporal
blessing, Numb. 20.12. and the cause is imputed to Titubatio fidei, to the
halting of his faith, and very justly to; for the Lord himself says, (in the
place before quoted) because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the
land, which I have given them. And the Psalmist says 106.32. That it went ill
with Moses, notwithstanding the people provoked his spirit, so that he spoke
unadvisedly with his lips. No marvaill then, if the want of faith does in
these last times deprive the Saints of God of many blessings, seeing Moses
himself for lack of this, came short of the promised Canaan. If men fear and
doubt with Peter Math. 14.30. no marvaill if they sink with Peter. And great
reason there is, that the same saying should be applied to such as doubt of
temporal promises, as Christ applied to Peter (verse. 31.) Oh thou of little
faith, wherefore do thou doubt? Now to prevent all prejudicate opinions,
concerning this which has been spoken: Note by the way, that when we affirm
that the lack of necessaries, is to be imputed to the lack of faith, in
apprehending the promises, we do not call that says of Gods servants into
question, which they have in Christ Jesus, for apprehending the pardon of their
sins, and his righteousness, whereby they are justified before God; for we
affirm, that a man may have faith to justify himself before God, and yet want
faith in apprehending a temporal promise. So then, we are to distinguish faith
into two sorts: The one is called justifying or eternal faith, and so called,
because the object it eyeth, is of an eternal nature, it apprehends eternal
promises. The other sort of faith is termed temporary faith, and so termed,
because the object it eyeth, is some temporal thing, this apprehends only
temporal promises. Both which sorts of faith is required in Gods servants: the
power of one, to keep his soul to eternal life. The other, to preserve and
provide necessaries for the body, while God shall give him life; for the just
shall live by faith. Now these two sorts of faith being diverse in respect of
their several object, each of them ought to be referred to his proper object.
Eternal, or justifying faith, to eternal promises: and temporary faith, to
temporal promises. So then, as you say (and that truly) whosoever comes
short of heaven, it is because he wants faith, in apprehending the eternal
promises. So we affirm (and that truly) that whosoever wants bread, it is
because he lacks faith, in apprehending the temporal promises. And these two
kinds of faith are both the gift of God, and enemies to doubtings: So doubtings
are fruits of our corrupt nature, and mere opposites to faith in any of the
promises, which does deprive us of many blessings. And so I pass from this
third thing required in prayer, it must be without doubting; unto the 4. set
down by James, that it must be desired for the true ends, not to consume it
upon our lusts. That we ought to aim at the true ends, which indeed is the
glory of God, when we pray for any thing, our Apostle does plainly prove 1.
Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. The glory of God ought to be the center of all our actions, as
well of prayer, as of any other action. And the truth is, this is the true rule
of prayer, to ask, not so much because we would receive, as we do because God
has commanded us, and we believe that God will give us the thing petitioned,
not for our prayers sake, but because he has promised. To ask in this manner,
is to ask for the true ends, that we may not consume it upon our lusts. To
ask, because God has commanded us, do show our obedience: To believe that we
shall have the thing we ask, because he has promised, does manifest Gods
faithfulness, and both makes for the advancement of his glory.

Now that the not-walking by this rule, does deprive us of the thing
petitioned, we need use no other place then that of James before quoted, James
4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your lusts. Men (as one says) often seek Bona, good things; Non been,
not in a good manner. If it were not only for some hope they had to receive
some benefit by Christ, many would (as the Prophet speaks Isay 53.3.) hide
their faces from him, they would despise him, and esteem him not. The
principal drift of their seeking to Christ, is their own ends. They seek him
for their own benefit, more to receive, then by their receiving, Gods name
might be gloryfied, by which means they do not to their comfort find; he
will not be found of such seekers. These seekers do altogether befoole
themselves in their search, because they altogether aim at their own ends.
Now if any of the petitions of the Saints of God be infected with this disease,
if they seek in their requests at any time, when they pray, Aliud pro illo,
aliud prae illo, something instead of his glory, something besides his glory,
some thing with his glory, some thing before his glory, and do not seek every
thing for his glory. No marvaill if they seek and miss, seeing they seek
amiss. And thus from that 4. I proceed to the last thing required in prayer:
we must pray, for what we do pray, according to his will. The will of God
(although in respect of himself is but simply one) in respect of us is twofold.
The one is secret, not revealed to Angels or to men; This is altogether
incommunicable, neither can these secrets be known to any, but the Trinity,
and for any to strive to dive into them, is too much curiosity. The other is
revealed, the knowledge whereof is left obtainable by man; for the great God of
heaven and earth, has been pleased to have been examined, ad perpetuam rei
memoriam, and has left his will (so much of his will as is necessary for man
to know) registered in his Word, which will must be the only directrixe of all
our requests, If we ask any thing (says St. John) according to his will,
according to his will revealed in his Word. That all our petitions, either
concerning soul or body, ought to be framed according to Gods will, I think
its not denied of any. But here lies the question; when are our petitions
agreeable with the will of God? Some affirm that the particle, If, does make
the petition accord with the will of God, but without ground from any part of
his word. And therefore we affirm, that, If, in prayer for temporal things,
does not make the petitions accord with the will of God, but it does altogether
make it disagree from the will of God, for our petitions are agreeable to the
will of God, when they are agreeable to his word. Now our petitions for outward
things, are agreeable to Gods will, not when we put in this word If, as to say,
If it be thy will to give us this or that; but they are agreeable to his will,
when the thing we desire God to bestow upon us, is both commanded and
promised. This is that which does make our petitions agreeable to his will. And
therefore when we are to pray, either for any favor, or for the remooving of
any affliction, we must consider with our selves, whether it be within the
compass of this rule, namely, whether God in his word does command us to ask
such a thing, which we desire to have, and whether he does promise upon our
calling, to bestow it upon us; and not rudely, and unadvisedly, nay ignorantly
upon all occasions, run to God only with an If. Hence it is, when the Saints
do come to the throne of grace, and solicit God in Jesus Christ, for any
favor, that the holy Ghost does put them upon that issue, Vbi libellus,
produce your evidence, where have I commanded you in the Scriptures to ask of
me such and such a blessing? where is your warrant? Where in my Scriptures have
I made any such contract, any such covenant, any such promise, to give you such
or such a thing, which ye desire of me? Now if the Saints so praying, are able
to produce their evidence, and say unto the Lord, Lo, here is our warrant,
thou have commanded us in thy word to ask this thing which we now desire, and
therefore in obedience to thy command, we have this boldness to come unto
thee; and lo, Oh Lord (pointing as it were with the finger to the place) here
is our evidence; in thy Scriptures thou have made a contract, a covenant, a
promise to give us the thing we now desire. If I say the Saints can thus answer
the Spirit, and produce their evidence, as afore-sayd, their petition is
lawful, and they may lawfully charge God with his promise, his contract, his
covenant. But then when the Spirit of God puts them to that issue, Vbi
libellus, produce your evidence for what ye ask, and they are not able to
produce any, either commandment, or promise, deducted from his Scriptures, he
may (as one says) justly plead, and answer such Petitioners, with a Non est
factum, I made no such promise. Wherefore when men pray unto God for such
things, as have no ground from his Word (notwithstanding they thrust in an If)
they shall be sent away empty, the Lord will plead to such petitioners, Non est
factum, I made no such promise. He delights not in such babbling. It is a
common evil among many men professing Religion, to pray for all things, but
scarsly believe any thing. They will pray for all things that can be imagined
with an If, but with an If, or without an If, they can believe but little; for
when the son of man comes (Luke 18.8.) shall he find faith on the earth? It
is we see then, Gods word, (the Scriptures) not any man's word (this If) which
makes our petitions agreeable to the will of God. And did not Christ labor so
to instruct his servants, that they should ask for nothing, but for such
things which are well-pleasing to God, Dum brevi and dilucida formula complexus
est, quaecunque nos a Deo petere convenit, when as he comprehends in such a
short and admiral form, what was meet to be desired?

Huic si accommodemus preces nostras (says Gualter) nunquam creabimus. Out of
which form of Christ (says one) excellent meditations might be gathered,
concerning the thing in hand. First Christ teaches us to pray for bread, (.i.)
for things necessary for our present being. He commands not to pray for great
things, for abundance, for superfluity. If we ask them, no marvaill if we use
an If. Secondly we are taught to pray for our daily bread, (.i.) for things
necessary for the present day we live in (and not to be troubled about to
morrow, Math. 6.34.) No marvaill then, if we thrust in an If, praying for bread
against the next day, as not content with our Omer of Manna for the present
day. By this ye may plainly see, (contrary to a false imagined imputation)
that we do not limite and confine Gods will to men's wills, and to what they
will desire: but we confine and limite (as Christ has taught us) man's will to
Gods will, and that his desire ought not to swell above its limits. We must
ask only what he has commanded, and exspect to receive only that which he
has promised. This is to ask according to his will, and to ask according to
his will, ye see, is to ground our prayers upon his commandments and promises,
revealed unto us in his word, his written verity; presuming upon nothing that
is not therein registered, and doubting of nothing that is therein warranted. He
that walks (as the Apostle speaks in an other case Gal. 6.16.) according to
this rule, peace be upon him, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. We have
now gone over every one of these 5 particulars, which God requires in prayer,
and we see the failing in some or one of them, will cause our prayers to
recoyle and turn again into our own bosoms.

But when they all meet together, they do send up our prayers unto heaven as
a sweet smelling savor, God will not, nay he can not deny us the thing we
desire of him, whether pertaining to this life or the life to come, because he
is faithful that promises. Wherefore if the thing we pray for (as says a
zealous and learned Doctor) be within the compass of these things which God has
promised to give, he can no more deny our request, then he can deny himself, if
(observing the things before specified) we continue in prayer. Call now to mind
our former grounds, and this also will unresistably follow. The fault is in
themselves, who do not obtain at the hands of God the very thing petioned.
They fail in one of these particulars; either they know not the plague in
their own hearts, or else they fail in the duty of charity (so that as Christ
speaks Mark. 11.25.) they forgive not when they pray, either they want faith,
which is as a hand to receive the blessing, or else the thing they require is
not within the compass of Gods commandment and promise, or else they ask it
for by-ends, and to consume it upon their lust: And then no marvaill (says
Gualter) si nec exaudimur a Deo, and insuper gravioribus malis involvimur. If
then thou do ask a gift, and miss, so that thou have just cause to be
ashamed of thy hope in that particular, impute not the fault unto God, and say
he was unwilling to give: but lay the fault where it is, accuse thy self and
say; I was unfitted to receive: either in wanting or failing in some or one of
those things before specified, required in prayer. The Devil it may be
contrary unto this course, will tell thee in thine care, that thou art clear
in the matter, he will labor (according to his old use) to lull thee a sleep
in security, and persuade thee that thou have performed thy duty, he will tell
thee, that thou have prayed as well as any, and that thou have repentance and
humiliation enough, and that thy love does abound, nay he will persuade thee,
that thou have faith also in the promise, and that for thy part thou do not
fail in any particular, required in prayer, notwithstanding thou do miss
of the thing thou prayest for. This he will seem also to make good by this
gloss: that which thou desire of God (although it be commanded to be asked,
and promised to be given) is not good for thee. But learn this (oh thou man of
God) that this is but the hissing of the Serpent, believe him not. For know
this for certain, that as humiliation, and love, and faith, etc. is the gift
of God: So the Lord never gives them to any, but withal he gives the thing
faithed. For if they affirm, they have humiliation, and love, and faith, and
yet have not the thing faithed, (.i.) they miss of the very thing mentioned,
which in their petition must be the thing faithed, they make God a deceiver,
because he never gives the one without the other; if he gives faith and
repentance, and the rest required in prayer, he will without all doubt give
the thing desired too. And therefore when we beg, and go without the thing
desired, it is (as we said before, it cannot justly be denied) because we fail
in some or one of those things required in prayer. But stay (say some) you
run on a pace, what? are none deprived of temporal blessings, but upon the
want of faith and repentance, or upon their failing in some or one of those
forenamed particulars? what then shall we think of many of Gods dear
children, who for the Gospel and truths sake, in case of persecution, are not
only deprived of things necessary for this life, but also of life it self;
what? shall we impute these their sufferings to their want of faith and
repentance, or to their failing in any other particular; what? may they also
pray absolutely to be delivred? and if they are not delivered, is the fault
theirs too? To remoove this doubt (which some think does contradict the point
in hand) we are to consider, that persecution for the testimony of faith, and
a good conscience, is the legacy and portion of the faithful, as appears
Math. 10. when our Savior does tell his Disciples, that they were sent forth
as sheep among wolves, and that they should be hated of all men for his names
sake, and that many would think, that they did God good service to kill them,
Ioh. 16.2. and therefore he tells them verse. 33. that in the world they should
have tribulation. Neither is this the portion only of the Apostles, but also
of every one that believes by their preaching, for all (says the Apostle 2.
Tim. 3.13.) that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Now
this portion of the Saints is not to be accounted (neither is it) a plague, or
a punishment upon them, but a blessing, as appears by our Saviors words
Math. 5.10.11. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake,
etc. which words St. Peter repeatingly uses 1. Epist. 3. and 4. chap. and the
14. verse. Hence it was (as I conceive, seeing to be persecuted for the truth
is such a blessed thing) that those tortured Saints (Heb. 11.35.) accepted not
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection: And this made St.
Paul Act. 21.13. willing and ready, not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. The promises being rightly
considered, it will follow that we have no warrant to pray at all against
persecution, that we shall not suffer, seeing it is our portion, yea and a
blessed portion too, neither would this petition (put case a man did pray) be
agreeable to Gods will (which was the last thing required in prayer,) because
he does not (for ought I find) command us to pray against persecution, and
promise us that we shall not suffer. All the prayers that they are to make in
this case, must be to desire the Lord, that he would give them strength and
patience manfully to persevere in the truth, and that he would make them
instruments of his glory. In a word then, when the Saints of God in case of
persecution for the Gospells sake, are taken, and by wicked hands deprived of
temporal necessaries, as of goods, livings, liberty, and life, and all, we
impute not these their sufferings to their want of faith and repentance, (it is
their portion, and they suffer it joyfully, Heb. 10.34.) Neither to their
failing in any other particular, (God never promised that they should not
suffer) but we say as Christ speaks Math. 10.18. They are brought before
Kings and Governors for Gods sake, for a testimony against them, and the
Gentiles. And indeed the sufferings and persecutions of the Saints, do
exceedingly redound to Gods glory, 1. Pet. 4.14. So in this case,
notwithstanding the Saints do suffer, the promise of God, concerning outward
things, is not nullified, but is still in force; and fast to the believer.
Neither does this hinder us from praying absolutely for temporal necessaries
in time of freedom, neither can it prove that the fault is not ours, if in
any other case we are deprived of them. For to be deprived of them for the
Gospels sake, is a blessing, and the portion of Gods people, but in any other
case it is a plague, and a punishment for sin. The first makes for the
advancement of Gods glory, the latter is to work in those, upon whom it is
laid, humiliation and repentance. So that now (the answer of this question
being rightly understood) we are come again clearly without rub to our
former ground. It is this, when we beg and go without a gift, the thing
desired; it is because we want faith and repentance, or fail in some, or one
of these particulars, required in prayer, for as much (says Cyprian upon the
Lords prayer) as all things are Gods, he that has God, can want nothing, if he
himself be not wanting unto God. What now (dearly beloved) does all this
doctrine tend unto, but to the humbling of us in our wants, as also to the
justifying of God in all his proceedings? First it does serve to the humbling
of us in our wants in that, by reason of our weakness and corruptions, we have
made our selves unworthy of many temporal blessings. Oh then whatsoever thou
art, whenever thou prayest unto God, and he will not be found of thee,
retire quickly to thine own heart, be jelous of him, (he is deceitful) and
say unto him, Oh wretch! thou have caused my loving Father to frown upon me,
and cover himself in a cloud, so that my prayers cannot pass thorough, either
thou regardest sin, and hidest corruption within thee, thou art stubborn,
and wilt not be mollified, or else thou art hardened too much against the face of
thy brethren, either thou doubtest and waverest at the promise of my loving
Father, and do even call his faithfulness into question, who has always
been faithful unto me, or else thou do aim too much at thy own end, asking
what thou desire (according to thy old custom) to consume it upon thy filthy
lusts. Say (I say) unto thy heart, Oh, hinc illae lachrymae, (be not beat off
it) here is the fountain of my grief, why my Father is angry with me. Let him
not shift thee off, with this or the like poor excuse. The Lord does not see
it good for thee; but rather tell him plainly thou know, the Lord does see
it good for thee, because he has both commanded thee to ask it of him, and
has also promised to give it, but thou, Oh false heart, with some or one of
those before specified, have made me unworthy of the thing which I have asked,
unsufficient to apprehend the promise, and to receive it. To bring the heart to
this examination, is an excellent means to work in him humiliation, and
certainly it will keep him in the better awe. This being thus performed in
the first place, it will also in the second place justify God in all his
proceedings, for when we ask a lawful petition of God, and go without it; If
then we acknowledge that the fault is our own, if we do not receive it, we
do thereby submit our selves to Gods justice, and acknowledge that whatsoever
the Lord has done unto us, in depriving of us of such or such a blessing, or
continuing upon us such or such a punishment, it is all but just: there can be
no aspertion of severity, no imputation of iniquity laid upon his Majesty. Yea
by this we acknowledge (nay our sins, our weaknesses, our infidelity, our
corruptions have taught us to yield) that all is just, and that there is not
the least mixture of wrong in his proceedings. In a word, by this we
acknowledge (as David says Psalm. 51.4.) that he is just in speaking, and
clear in judging. Such then as maintain the contrary doctrine, do teach men
to arrogate too much to themselves, and to give unto God too little. Come out
then, oh thou Conditional, from among the petitions of the Lords prayer, and
sit down yonder, thou wast never placed there by Christ's appointment, and
therefore we may boldly say of thee, as our Savior of the plant not planted by
his Father Math. 15.13. thou shall be rooted up. Thou have robbed God of his
glory, thou have deprived us of many blessings, and a long time lulled us
asleep in too much security, as also blinded us with too much ignorance. Stand
fast then (oh ye that have put your hands to the Lords plough) in that liberty,
wherewith Christ has made you free; hold fast the profession of your faith
without wavering: Let no man take your crown; and to use the words of St.
Peter 1. Epist. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called us into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, to him be glory, and dominion, for
ever and ever, Amen.

EPILOGVS.
THe manner of our proceeding (ye may dearly beloved see, who are contrary
minded) in prooving what we affirm, concerning prayer, is by a true rule; for
what we persuade any to observe, for that we bring a commandment, and for
what we encourage any to believe, we show a promise. This is not the rule of
Heresy, but of Verity. And therefore if any one shall but endeavor to
contradict this which has been said for absolute prayer, for temporalls, I
would entreat him to walk according to this rule. Trust not in a staff, which
is but as an Egyptian reed, think not with arguments to contradict
commandments, neither bring reasons against express promises. For when men
(as one neatly presses) present reasons of probability, of verisimilitude, of
pious credulity, not deduct out of the Scriptures (or by them oppose
commandments) they fall into that regular irregularity, and into that constant
levity, which Augustine justly makes the character and specification of an
Heretic, to seem to proceed upon reasons, and not deduce those reasons from
the Scriptures. Howsoever if reasons do seem to have some footing from the
Scriptures, if they contradict a commandment, or nullify a promise, know this,
that they seem only to have that, which they never had. For we believe, and
believe truly, that 1000 arguments and reasons are not able to contradict the
least of Gods commandments, or nullify one of his promises. If then ye will
rely upon arguments and upon reasons, to prove your assertion, we cannot
join with you, but we will join with you in that issue, Vbi libellus; where
is your evidence, where is your commandment from Gods Word, to prove that it
is our duty to pray as you say? And where is the Scripture to prove, that the
promises for temporal necessaries are conditional? If ye will not, either in
your disputation or writing, observe this rule, lay your hands upon your
mouths. For (if ye observe not this rule in what ye speak or write) we
believe and believe truly, that we are not bound to believe you. Take heed
(specially you that are sent to teach) how ye teach the contrary; for if ye
produce not a commandment to prove what (either in this matter or any other)
you teach men to observe, you declare unto all men that you come in a message,
but not of Christ's sending: For all those that come with commission from Christ
Jesus, teach men (Math. 28.20.) to observe that (and that only) which he has
commanded them. Wherefore before we conclude this our discourse (good Christian
brother, unto whose view these our lines shall come) I would in the name of
Christ Jesus entreat of thee these things: First that thou would peruse all
the promises with a single eye, without respect of persons. Let not the truth
of God fare the worse, or be disesteemed, because it does pass through the
mouth of his weakest and meanest servants. Inquire not what he is that
speaks, but what is spoken. Esteem the truth as it is, from whomsoever it
comes; buy it, but sell it not, for great is the truth and prevails. Say not
with thy self as Christ's countrymen said Mat. 13.55. Is not this the
Carpenters son? and are not his brethren and sisters with us? But rathet say
(if thou art instructed but by a woman) as that Prophetical Prince and
Princely Prophet David said to Abigall 1. Sam. 25.32. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have taught me
to know the counsel of the Lord. Be not in any wise offended at us, neither be
carried away with supposals. Imagine not evil in thy heart, for in so doing
thou will bring more evil upon thine own head, then thou art aware of.
Concerning our selves, we confess 1. Cor. 3.5. that we are but the Ministers
by whom ye believe, and that which we speak is no uncouth and novell opinion
(as some judge it) for we have delivered no more, but what we have received.
Moses taught it to the Israelits, Christ to his Apostles, his Apostles to their
hearers, and other Ministers to their Congregations, and we do but raise that
from the dead, which a long time has layen buried in the pit of oblivion.
Receive it then as an ancient truth, not as a novell opinion. The second thing
I would desire of thee, is, that thou would not exercise thy wits in carping
and quarrelling against phrases or passages, or against any of our quoted
Scripturs, against which thou think thou may except as not so pertinent to
the purpose; let not that overthrow the authority of all the rest, but rather I
would entreat thee (after due examination) thou finding some (nay if but one)
Scripture which is to that purpose, that that may be sufficient to persuade
thee of the truth of the point, we have now affirmed. For know that the
Scriptures are not delivered by tale, but by weight, one place is sufficient to
prove a doctrine. And lastly I beseech thee, consider well with thy self, that
the point we affirm, is for the faith, and the use of it is (as ye have heard)
to humble man in his wants, and to justify God in all his proceedings. Beware
therefore, do not rashly contend against it. Remember that old saying,
Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel. Turn over and read with good
consideration, the leaves of the sacred Bible, before thou publicly oppose it.
It may be some thing may lie hid (yea concerning the thing in question) under
those sacred leaves, which thou did never yet consider. First learn what
thou hold, then teach it. Follow (as in this matter, so in others) St. John's
counsel in his 1. Epist. 4.1. Try the spirits whether they are of God, and
being tried, then do as St. Paul exhorts 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. hold fast that
which is good, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. And by his
spirit direct us all in all truth, enabling us to walk in the truth,
preferring Gods glory before all things, that so we laying up for our selves a
good foundation, may enjoy the crown. I will add no more, but conclude with
that of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10.15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.

An Answer to Mr. Norrice his 5 Arguments, framed against praying absolutely
for temporal things: the Preface of which Arguments (as it is written with his
own hand) runs verbatim thus; delivered at Gayden the 29 Iunij, against
praying absolutely for temporal things, without any condition expressed or
employed, and that they want faith that do not obtain them, being granted to
be necessary for the present use.
BEfore we come to speak of these Arguments, it shall not be unmeete to speak
something of the Title or Preface. Concerning the Preface, we are to consider
in it these circumstances: First these Arguments (you say) were delivered. Now
they being delivered, and that publicly too, I make no question but it was
done with deliberation and consideration, for otherwise you will come within
the compass of the Prophets woe, Woe be to him, that performs the work of
the Lord negligently. Now if you spoke what you did speak upon deliberation
and consideration, if your Arguments prove unsound, unsufficient, and are
found to be as so many arrows shot against the truth, your fault will appear
to be the greater, and certainly you must bear your own blame, and be
content to acknowledge your fault, wherein you have offended.

Secondly you say again, it was delivered against praying absolutely for
temporal things, without any condition, etc. By which words you condemn as a
sin, absolute prayer for temporal necessaries. Now if it be a sin (as you
affirm, for if it be no sin, why do you reproove it?) to pray to God
absolutely for temporal necessaries, then it must needs be the breach of a
law, for (says St. John) sin is the transgression of the Law. 1. Epist. 3.4
Now if you cannot find a Law (for my part I find not any) against this kind
of praying, you went, but God never sent you to reproove it; for he sends his
messengers to reproove no more, but what his word does condemn as a sin. And
therefore herein (unless you prove the thing before specified) you must
confess your failing.

Thirdly you thrust in your Preface this word (employed) which word had you not
expressed, all your Arguments (as you your self shall confess) would not have
had so much as any colorable show against that thing, against which you framed
them. But of this word more hereafter.

Fourthly you profess also that you framed your Arguments against this
position: That they want faith (these things being prayed for) that do not
obtain them. Concerning which we thus answer, that (upon prayer made for
temporal necessaries) the want of them is not to be imputed to the want of
faith, if we understand faith according to the general definition, as it is
defined Heb. 11.1. which is as well the evidence of things eternal as
temporal, that is, as it apprehends both eternal and temporal promises,
promises both concerning life and godliness. I say not (I say) that those who
upon their prayer do not obtain temporal favors, do altogether want faith,
or have no faith; for I affirm that a man may have faith in apprehending the
eternal promises, for the pardon of sin, and life eternal, and yet want
faith in a temporal promise, for a temporal blessing, unto the want of which
faith in a temporal promise, or to the failing of some, or one of faithes
companions, I impute the want of these outward necessaries, as it does more
fully appear by that which we have said in defense of our tenent, concerning
absolute prayer, unto which for your better satisfaction, I refer you; and so
I pass from the Title or Preface to the Arguments, as I find them in order
written with your own hand.

Before we come to speak what we think of them, or to show wherein they are
failing; know this (or rather call it to remembrance) by the way, that for any
one to frame Arguments, to the intent to contradict commandments, or nullify
promises, is no better then publicly and openly to resist the truth. And
Augustine (as one says) makes this (and that justly) to be the character and
specification of an Heretic, to seem to proceed upon reasons or arguments,
which have no sound footing from the Scriptures, and such arguments have no
sound footing from the Scriptures, when they contradict a commandment, or
nullify a promise. It had been well, if these ensuing Arguments had been free
from oppugning those particulars. The Arguments as they lie in order, are these.

Mr. Norrice his first Argument.
THose promises that have employed conditions in them, cannot absolutely be
relied upon, or exspected, for our faith is grounded upon the promises.

But the promises of outward things (although but necessary) are so:

Therefore they are not absolutely to be relied upon or exspected.

This appears in 2. cases.
1. Of chastisement and correction, when the Lord will visit any of his people
for their sins, for then does he strippe them of their outward comforts in
part, and sometimes wholely unto death: the former appears in all the
corrections of the faithful, the latter in the example of the Jews Lam.
4.4.5. where the parents and children dyed for want of bread, and through
extreme famine. Yet they are not charged to want faith for this, neither is
faith so much required in those cases, as humiliation and repentance; and who
will bear any correction at all at the hand of God, if by his faith he may
presently remoove it from him? and how can that be a sign of unbeleefe, that
is a special testimony of Gods love, Rev. 3.9.

2. Of probation and trial, when God will prove and try the patience and
obedience of his servants; for in that case they that have been endued with
most faith and grace, have been brought to the greatest exigents and wants, as
in Heb. 11.37. they were destitute, afflicted and tormented, etc. 1. Cor.
11.27. Paul was pinched with hunger and thirst, with cold and nakedness, and
Luke 16. Lazarus was in extreme poverty and dyed, yet these were full of
faith, and of the spirit of God. Now who would endure these trials and
distresses, if by faith and prayer he may remoove them? or with what warrant
can he absolutely pray against them, seeing no promise that shall be spared,
yea how can patience have her perfect work without them, or faith her crown
and reward, promised on that condition: Therefore the promises of outward
things, have conditions employed to the people of God, and are not absolute
intended.

Answer to the first Argument.
THis Argument is to be answered negando, by denying your Minor proposition,
for sure I am it is altogether untrue, and contrary to sound doctrine. To make
this appear, we are to consider, that Gods will (so much of his will as is
necessary for us to know) is revealed in his Word, John 5.39.
his Scriptures, unto which our Savior refers the Jews for to enquire of
him, Search the SCriptures, they are they that testify of me. Now the
Scriptures, Gods written verities, are absolutely sufficient to instruct us in
all saving knowledge, as Paul affirms 2. Timoth. 3.15. Thou have known from
a child the holy Scriptures (speaking of Timothy) which are able to make thee
wise to salvation; Chap. 1.21.
or (as James says) to save thy soul through faith, which is in Jesus Christ.

Now whereas you affirm that the promises for temporalls are conditional,
notwithstanding in the whole Scriptures there is no condition expressed, what
is it else but to affirm that God has not revealed so much of his will in the
Scriptures, as is needful for us to know; and that the Scriptures are not
sufficient to make the man of God perfect? Your own words in this matter shall
be your judge, you say that this position of yours, namely, That the promises
for temporal things are conditional, is one of Gods truths (for you press
it upon men to believe it as a Truth from God) and yet you say, that God has
not expressed this Truth is his word, for you say it is employed. Now it being
employed and not expressed, it is no Scripture, for if it be not expressed, it
cannot be written, if it be not written, it is none of Gods will, because Gods
will (so much of his will, as we must know, or believe) is all written. To
which purpose says Christ in the place before quoted, Search (...) the
Scriptures.

So then to affirm the promises of God for temporal things, are conditional
(according to your own words) is a doctrine of man's own invention, and not of
God. And certainly to make the best of it, it is but as one of the Popes
unwritten verities. Unwritten you confess it is, for if any man should but
ask you where in the Scriptures does God say the promises are conditional,
you have nothing to answer (for ought I know) but this, The condition is
employed. To those that come in a pretended message from Christ, to beat down
the power of Satan, and have no better commission from Christ, then this, the
Devil may boldly say as he did Acts 19.15. Qui vos? Jesus I know, and Paul I
know, but who are ye? I would I had no worse enemy then you.

Wherefore I beseech you, beware how you maintain any thing for Gods truth,
which is not written (its a chief pillar of the Romish Church) least it be said
to you, as Paul speaks, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?

Now for those 2 cases which you allege for the prooving of your Minor
proposition (as it will appear) is not any thing at all to the purpose. For
your Minor proposition being denied, you labor to prove it by these cases
thus: First (you say) the Lord for the sins of his people does strippe them
of outward comforts, sometimes in part, sometimes wholely unto death; ergo the
promises of outward things have conditions employed in them, and are not
absolutely intended.

Alas what is this to the purpose? or what color is there in it to prove,
that the promises are conditional? for you know and must needs confess, that
the Lord Levit. 26. and Deuter. 28. made absolutely to his people Israel,
precious promises. In which promises there is no condition employed. It is true
indeed those promises were made upon condition of their obedience, as appears
in both chapters, If thou obey the Lord thy God, all these blessings shall come
unto thee: Which condition may be turned participially thus; Thou obeying the
commandments of the Lord thy God, etc. The condition in these his promises
lies on their part, If thou obey, that is, thou obeying his commandments;
Gods part is absolute, all these blessings shall come upon thee: Do what I
require of thee, and all these blessings (without all doubt) shall come upon
thee, But if thou will not obey my commandments, (.i.) thou disobeying my
commandments, all these curses shall come upon thee. As thy obedience shall
be rewarded with such and such blessings, so thy disobedience shall be punished
with such and such curses. The children of Israel found the word of God true in
these particulars, for so long as they kept the commandments of their God,
and walked humbly with him, which was the thing he required of them, he was as
a wall of brass unto them, and they wanted nothing of that which he promised
them, as the whole current of the old Testament does plentifully witness. But
when they brake his covenant, and did not observe that condition (obedience
being all the conditions too) which was made between God and them, he brought
upon them those plagues which he had threatened. For Israel (notwithstanding
they were a chosen people) were very rebellious and unthankful, as the Lord
complayneth of them Isay. 1. The Ox knows his owner, but my people does not
consider. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evill-doers: They have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger. Read that 105. Psalm, there is a whole catalogue of their
rebellious proceedings, and how the Lord dealt with them. And to the end the
Lord would have no imputation of severity laid upon his Majesty, for dealing
with them as he did, and that no man should once imagine, that he did fail in
his part in the least particular, but was faithful in all his promises, he
made it appear to all the world, that his proceedings with them were just; for
says he Deuteronomy. 39.22. to the end of the chapter, Their children and the nations
shall say, when they see the plagues of that Land, wherefore has the Lord done
this unto this Land? what means the heat of this great anger? Then men shall
say (verse. 25.) Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of
their fathers, which he made with them, when he brought them forth out of the
land of Egypt. Here is the Lords proceedings cleared by the confession of all
the nations, and the fault laid upon the people, as Ezechiell also witnesses
Ezech. 39.23. as also the Prophet Isay prooveth, Isay 59.2. to the end of that
chapter, Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
withholden good things from you. Now concerning that place Lament. 46. which
you produce, thinking to prove your position, I beseech you call to mind (I
know you know it) that the Lord had a long time before told them, that if they
would not hear and obey, he would bring upon them that plague of famine, which
the Prophet did there bewail. This appears Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. where
the Lord tells them, if they did not walk with him in obedience, that they
should be compelled to eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, for want of
other meat.

Now Israel rebelling against the Lord in breaking his commandments, (for she
plucketh away the shoulder, says Zachary chap. 7.11.) and forgetting the Lords
former kindnesses, that (as Hosea says chap. 2.8.) he had given unto them
corn and wine, and wool, and flax, he brought upon them this grievous plague,
as it is verse. 10. the pittyfull women (according as he had threatened) did eat
their own children for want of other meats. Neither does the church go about
to excuse her self, or lay the least aspersion upon God for this: for she does
ingeniously confess, that it was justly come upon her, as appears verse.
12.13. for (says she) the Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the
world would not have believed, that the enemy should have entered into the gates
of Jerusalem. Ah (says she) but our sins (contrary to all the worlds
judgment) the sins of our Priests and Prophets have caused it. Which words
she repeatingly uses from the Prophet Jeremy chap. 5.31. as if she had said,
Our Prophets prophecy falsely, and our Priests bear rule by their means, and
we love to have it so. Wherefore (says she again Lament. 1.18.) The Lord is
righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandments. What now was the
cause of this plague? your own words shall be the answer, The Lord did visit
them thus for their sins. What then? would the Lord have laid upon them that
plague had they not rebelled? Surely no. For had they not broken Gods covenant
and rebelled, they had remained in their own borders, and had plenty. And
therefore from the promises, and from your own words, we conclude, that the
cause why the Jews were punished with famine, was because they wanted both
humiliation for their sins, Zach. 7.7.
they hearkened not to the words which the Lord cried by the former Prophets.
The plague was still in their own hearts, as also because they wanted faith;
they could not believe that promise, 1. Kings 9.
which God made with them, contrary to your words, yet they are not charged to
want faith. They wanted humiliation for their sins See Deuteronomy. 32.20.
, which was the cause of their punishment, and then how is it possible to have
faith to apprehend that particular deliverance? For had they had faith in that
particular, they must needs have had repentance too: they both go together.

And whereas you say, Who will bear any correction, if by his faith he may
presently remoove it from him? Surely for my part I know not any, but would be
glad so to walk with God in uprightness, as that they might not procure his
displeasure, so far as to cause him to punish them. And I know not any, but
are grieved in heart so far to displease him, as that he must needs punish
them. And lastly whereas you say, how can that be a sign of unbeleefe, that is
a special testimony of Gods love? I answer, it is true, when a Saint of God
does revolte and run backward, and it may be ly sleeping in some sin a
pretty while, the Lord, and that out of his love, does stretch forth his hand
by laying some judgment upon him, which is as a warning-peale to stay him, and
to bring back his soul from the pit. To which purpose is that place Revel.
3.19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: What follows? be Zealous
therefore and repent. So then if God, and that out of his love, do afflict his
servants, going astray for their profit, that they might partake of his
holiness, what does this hinder but that they repenting and believing, may
have that judgment or punishment, remooved from them, seeing God upon their
humiliation and faith, does promise it, and is grieved for their misery, Judge.
10.16.

Concerning your second case of probation and trial, wherein you endeavor to
shut absolute prayer from the view of men, it is nothing at all against it, for
those in Heb. 11.37. suffered those things for the truth sake, neither did they
accept deliverance. And Paul also 2. Cor. 11.37. suffered those things for the
Gospels sake in time of persecution, as he testifies 2. Tim. 1.12. which kind
of sufferings, both of Paul and those in the Hebrew, are blessings, and the
portions of Gods servants, not to be prayed against, but rather rejoiced in,
unto the partaking of which afflictions, Paul exhorts Timothy in the chapter
before quoted.

SUch things as are ordinarily denied to the best and most faithful servants
of God, and accompany not their condition here, cannot be absolutely prayed
for, or exspected, neither will that procure them, for that were to cross his
providence.

But these outward matters are so as is rehearsed: Therefore, etc.

This appears by 2. testimonies.
1. Of St. James chap. 2.5. God has chosen the poor in this world, to be rich
in faith, and heirs of his Kingdom, rich in faith, and yet outwardly poor;
the abundance of faith therefore helps not their poverty.

2. Of our Savior Math. 25.35. I was hungry, and ye fed me not, thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink, naked, and ye clothed me not, etc. wherein it appears
that some of the members of Christ shall be poor and distressed, wanting
necessaries in all times to the end of the world, neither are these taxed for
want of faith at all, nor yet does the Lord fail of any of his promises to his
servants, much less by a continual course, therefore are they denied.

Answer to the second Argument.
TO this I answer, that the Minor proposition is also false, for whereas you
say, outward necessary things are ordinaryly denied to the best of Gods
servants, and that they accompany not their condition, it is no such matter.
First, outward necessaries (unless in case of their failing and disobedience,
or when they are deprived of them for the Gospels sake in case of persecution,
which is a blessed thing, and their portion, against which they have no warrant
to pray, as we have elsewhere declared) are not ordinaryly denied the Saints,
for David in all his observations never found it so, as his own words do
witness, I have been young, and now am old, Psalm. 37.35
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging bread; and
the Psalmist does give the reason, Those that wait upon the Lord, shall
inherit the earth.

Secondly that these outward necessaries do accompany the condition of the
Saints here, (contrary to your assertion) its plainly prooved. All was lost in
Adam, but restored again to those, (and to those only) who are renewed in
Christ Jesus, and to them of right it does belong by virtue of the promise; all
the rest are but usurpers. Wherefore says the Prophet, If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. Isay. 1.19.
Which promise is confirmed by our Savior, Math. 5.5.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Possess God in
Christ, and in Christ ye shall possess all things necessary, if thou thy self
be not wanting to God.

Concerning those 2 places which you allege for prooving your own tenent, and
for confuting of ours, they serve not to perform either. For whereas you say
repeatingly from St. James, That God has chosen the poor in this world, to be
rich in faith. We deny it not, neither does it make against us, for we affirm
that the Saints must not look after great matters, after riches and bravery,
but they having meat and raiment, let them be therewithal content. And if they
will not be content with this, but desire greater matters, no marvaill if they
pray conditionally, seeing God promised them no more. And how can this prove
the promises to be conditional? The Saints of God are many times poor; Ergo
the promises do imply a condition. How does this hang together? I leave it to
your own judgment.

We say not that poverty is to be prayed against, for so long as the barrel
of meal wastes not, and the cruse of oil fails not, it is as much as can be
desired; but if our meat wastes, and our oil fails, we impute the cause to
our failing: Faith and repentance may help that, although not poverty.
Concerning your second testimony, that our Savior Math. 25. I was hungry, and
ye fed me not, etc. whence you say, that it appears that some of the members
of Christ shall be poor and distressed, wanting necessaries in all times to
the end of the world. Put case this be granted, what is it to the purpose?
many of the Saints say you, shall want necessaries; Ergo the promises imply a
condition: Or what will you conclude? must we not therefore pray absolute? If
we should take this place literally, as you do, to serve your own turn, we
must needs conclude from the former verses, that all the Saints that either
were, are, or shall be, never wanted, but had some overplus to help others: for
our Savior witnesses (for he speaks to all the Saints in general) that they
were all feeders, all cloathers, all visiters of others. So then I understand
that of our Savior from verse the 34. to the 41. to declare the admirable
communion, help and comfort, which the Saints of all degrees do administer one
to another, which is an absolute proof that they are all the servants of God,
because they love one another. And concerning that which you urge from verse.
41. ad finem, I conceive it thus; Our Savior in those words does upbraid the
wicked, and tells them that he has nothing to do with them, and that they
shall miss of their aim; for (as if he had said) You denied me before men,
and now I deny you: You showed no kindness of me in my members, and now I
will show you none: You saw my members persecuted for the truth, and put in
prison, etc. but you did not (as your duty was) comfort, relieve and visit
them, but rather if I was but a little angry, you helped forward their
affliction: You love not these my sons, which were begotten, and your selves
must needs confess, you cannot love him that begets, out of your own
mouths I will condemn you, (what need we any more witness?) Abite
maledicti, etc. Judge righteous judgment, wherein does this prove the
temporal promises to be conditional? or confute absolute prayer for them?

Mr. Norrice his third Argument.
THat which never did put any certain difference between one and another, in
outward things, is not the absolute condition of those things, for that cannot
stand:

But faith and grace did never put any certain difference between one and
another in outward things; Ergo is not the condition, nor annexed to them.

This appears by 2. places.
1. Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike unto all, and there is one event to him
that fears God, and to him that fears him not, etc. and no man knows love
or hatred, by all that is before him, verse. 1. which would not be so, if there
were any certain bettering of the outward estate by faith and grace.

2. Math. 5.45. Your heavenly Father makes his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good: and sends rain on the just and unjust: so that the very same
dispensation in outward things, belongs to one as to another, and there is no
difference, which providence does interpret the promises concerning these
things.

Answer to the third Argument.
TO this Argument I must answer as to the former negando, by denying your
Minor, and that justly too; for Faith and Grace have put a certain difference
between one and another, and between their posterity too; as the Scriptures
do plentifully witness. He blesses the seed of the faithful in outward
things, for the integrity of their parents, and plagues the seed of the wicked
with outward punishments, for the sins of their fathers. To this purpose read
the second commandment, and compare that of the Proverbs with that of the
Psalmist, Chap. 20.7. Psalm. 34.16.
The just man walks in his integrity, his children are blessed after him.
But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from off the earth. See Proverbs 10.7. and compare that of
the Psalmist 102.28. with Psalm. 37.28.34. and with that of Job 21.19. and then
tell me (and tell me truly) whether faith and grace did never put any certain
difference between one and another in outward things? The wicked (it is true)
may flourish like a bay tree for a while, but wanting faith and grace, they are
quickly gone; a man may seek them, but shall not find them; but faith and
grace do establish the just. Peruse the 37. Psalm from the beginning to the
end, and it will plainly appear. And we see by experience, how mercifully the
Lord does deal with the posterity of those, who do walk in uprightness; and
how he does bring to nothing in a small time, the great revenues of those who
are profane and enemies to piety.

Concerning those 2 places which you produce to prove your position, you do
greatly mistake the meaning of the holy Ghost in them; for the meaning of the
holy Ghost in that of Eccl. 9.1.2. is quite contrary to your interpretation,
for your interpretation is according to the judgment of the world, which
judgment the holy Ghost does condemn, as appears verse. 3. for (says he)
this is an evil among all things that are done under the sun. Men of the
world judge it so; But what then? Because they say there is no difference
between the just and the unjust, concerning these things, must their sayings
therefore be true? Alas it is no such matter. For the Lord does sharply
reproove all those, who do say that faith and grace do put no certain
difference in this life, concerning outward things between one and another.
For he says that such words are stout words against him, as appears Mal.
3.13.14.15. verses, for says the Lord, Your words have been stout against me:
But the people said, What have we spoken so much against thee? Unto which
question the Lord made this answer, Ye have said it is in vain to serve God,
etc. and now we call the proud happy; Yea they that work wickedness are set
up, yea they that tempt God, are even delivered. For this purpose see Job 21.15.

To say that faith and grace do make no difference between one and another in
outward things, is we see to speak proudly toward God. David (we must
confess) was almost persuaded that his faith and grace had put no certain
difference between him, and the wicked, in outward things (for he said, I have
cleansed my heart in vain) until he went into the Sanctuary of God, but then
he found a difference, as is prooved verse. 37. yea and that a plain difference
too between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

The second place that you allege to prove your assertion, is in Math. 5.45.
Your heavenly Father makes his sun to shine, etc. whence you say that the
very same dispensation in outward things, belongs to one as to another. You
say it indeed, but you have not prooved it, neither can you prove it by the
Word of God. For (which indeed does put a special difference between one and
another) there is a special difference in the dispensation of outward things.
It is true, the Lord out of his abundant goodness, does give gifts and
blessings to all, to the just and unjust, but such blessings do not (as you
say) belong to all. They belong to the just only, because they are promised
only to them, even so many as are restored by Christ Jesus. God has given to
them Christ, and with him all other outward necessaries, and by virtue of his
promises, they may challenge them to be theirs. And the Lord gives it them by
promise. Now the Lord does give the wicked many blessings, but not by promise.
Neither can any wicked man gather any such promise out of the Word of God, as
that the least favor belongs unto him. And hence it is that it is generally
received for truth, that the wicked have all they have, not for their own, but
for the righteous sakes. For were it not for them, the wicked should all
suddenly perish. The Lord would in a moment, as Job says, cause them to vomit
it up, Job 20.15.
and cast it out of their bellyes. So that we see these outward things are
diversely dispensed upon the sons of God, and the Imps of the devil. The Lord
gives them to the Saints as he gave Abraham his son Isaac by promise, but
he gives them to the wicked, as he gave Abraham Ismaell, not by promise. The
manner of which dispensation does quite overthrow your tenent.

Mr. Norrice his fourth Argument.
THat which the Lord Jesus and his Apostles did pray for, or against
conditionally, is so to be done of us, for we are bid to follow their
examples, and to try our spirits and practices by theirs, and not theirs by
ours. But our Lord and his Apostles did so. Ergo.

This is prooved by two places.
1. Luke 22.42. Father if thou be willing, let this cup pass from me, yet not
my will, but thine be done: Here is the deprecation of an outward evil, not
absolutely, but with submission to the will of God.

2. Romans 1.10. Making request, if by any means I might have a prosperous
journey by the will of God to come to you. Here is an outward benefit, yea
somewhat more (seeing it was a service to the Church) desired with submission
to Gods will. And St. James lays down a rule for all to follow in such cases,
ye ought to say, if God will, James 4.15. What is it then to teach, that we
ought not to say, if the Lord will, but directly to cross the word of God.

Answer to the fourth Argument.
IN this Argument I deny your Major proposition, a doctrine more fit to be
spewed out, then to be taught in the Church of Christ, being (as was your first
proposition) a chief pillar of the Church of Rome. This we will make plainly
to appear. Whatsoever is man's duty to observe in Gods service, that must be
commanded by God, for nothing but a commandment from God, can make a man owe a
duty to God. This appears by that expres saying of the Preacher, where he
does clearly prove, Eccl. 12.13
that all man's duty unto God is contained in commandments (precepts being
the true ground of duties) for says he, fear God and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole of man, or the whole duty of man. This
is seconded by our Savior, when he was to leave his Disciples; for the
commission which Christ gave his Disciples runs thus, Go teach all nations,
etc. Mat. 28.20
teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Upon
which commission Calvine in his Harmony upon the Evangelists, speaks thus:
Christ sends forth his Apostles with this exception, that they thrust not to
men their own inventions, but that they do purelie and faithfully dispense
from hand to hand (as it were) that which he himself has commanded. And I
would to God, the Pope would submit the right, which he arrogateth to himself
to this rule, etc. But he infecteth the Church with his own trifles, etc. Now
if any man shall teach men to observe any thing as a duty, which God has not
commanded, it is beyond his commission; a created worship, a worship of his own
invention, which God never required.

Now whereas you make examples without the authority of any commandment, to
be the ground of a duty, what is it else but (as the Apostle says) to beguile
men of their reward in a voluntary humility, (.i.) in will worship, which is
Idolatry. Col. 2.18.
Now you say (for the confirmation of your Major) that we are bid to follow
their axamples. Quote that Scripture that bids or commands us to follow
their examples in praying conditionally for outward necessaries, and we will
lay our hands upon our mouths. Sure I am Christ did check this kind of
praying, but I find not where he does command it. Mark 22.9
These words repeated by you (we are bid to follow their examples) I think you
take them from St. Peter, leaving us an example (says he) that we should
follow his steps. 1. Pet. 2.21
He does not wish us to follow his steps in every thing that he did, (for
although every action of Christ and his Apostles is written for our
instruction, it follows not that therefore it is written for our imitation)
but patiently to suffer for well-doing, which was the thing handled in that
place by the Apostle, and in other places commanded: which commandment, not
any example, is the ground of the duty. We confess the spirits of the
Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, (.i.) our spirits and practices must
be subject to their doctrine: And for this we earnestly contend. You would make
their practices our rules, but we make their doctrine our rules, both for
doctrine and practices.

Concerning your Minor proposition, if we deny not, but grant that our Savior
and his Apostles did pray as you say, yet we deny that their examples in that
particular ought to be our rule. As for those two places, Luke 22.24 Romans 1.10.
you allege the one of our Savior, and that of Paul, it shall not be unmeete
to say some thing of them, to show your unadvisednesse, that you would from
these sayings fetch in an If, into the fourth petition of the Lords Prayer; for
that of our Savior Luke 22. Mark 14.36.
Father if thou be willing, let this cup pass from me. St. Mark has it thus
without any condition, Abba Father, all things are possible to thee, take away
this cup from me. Here he prays without an If, in St. Luke with an The Greek
word it, is taken sometimes for forasmuch as, and so it agrees with that of
Mark.
If. What does let but (according to your argument) that we may affirm, that
we must pray absolutely, as well as you say, we ought to pray conditionally for
temporal things? but we have a more firm foundation to build on, then upon
examples to ground duties, as we have declared. Concerning this prayer of
Christ, Calvine is of this opinion, that this prayer of Christ was not a
premeditated prayer ( sed vis and impetus, etc. but the force and violence of
grief, did extort from him those words, to the which he added by and by a
correction, Not as I will. As also another writer says of these words: It was
nothing then the complaint of a mind, toyling and distressed; (and nequaquam
just a precatio fuit, etsi oration vera fuit) and not a just form of praying,
although it might be true prayer. Christ knew full well that he must needs
dye, to work our redemption, for he came for that purpose, as he himself
does acknowledge. It was the apprehension of his Fathers anger, and the
horriblenesse of the punishment, due unto all our sins, that did even retain
for a time the whole humane mind, and extracted this pittyfull complaint from
him. But after the power of his Divinity, raised him up, he spoke after
another manner, as Matthew witnesses, for he introduces him, praying thus: Oh
Father, seeing this cup cannot pass from me, but I must drink it, thy will be
done. I beseech you now, consider well what warrant is there by these words of
Christ, to thrust an If into the fourth petition of the Lords prayer?
Especially seeing this of Christ is rather to be referred unto the sixth
petition, he fights against temptations. Now if you thrust an If into the
sixth, why then not also into the fifth? And then notwithstanding any gloss its
all Popery. That of Paul to the Romans does show the desire he had to come unto
them, to impart some spiritual gift, but he had no promise of God, that he
should come unto them, and therefore it is no marvaill, seeing he put in an
If. And when any one do desire any thing, which God has not promised, he
must needs put in an If, for sure it is, he can have no certain assurance; he
may well doubt of enjoying the things desired.

Now whereas you say, that St. James lays down a rule, etc. If you say St.
James lays down that rule for all to follow in praying for temporal
necessaries, you do grossly abuse the meaning of St. James; for he does not
there speak of prayer, but did sharply reproove all those, who did
peremptorily say, We will go to such a city, and continue there a year or
two, and get gain, Verse. 13.14 Verse. 15.
when as they had no promise to live one hour, as he speaks; whereupon he
infers this saying, for that ye ought to say, if the Lord will we shall
live to do this or that. No man knows whether he shall live one day (for
ought any one know the day of judgment may be before to morrow) and therefore
they may be justly reprooved and condemned for vain boasters, who say
(notwithstanding they have no promise to live a day) that they will go to any
place to buy and sell two or three years, and get gain. Now whether or no
this rule of St. James be a rule for us, to pray by for temporal necessaries,
let the wise and discreet judge. Lastly from these words of yours (what is it
then to teach that we ought not to say, If the Lord will, but directly to
cross the Word of God.) I can collect nothing but this: That you speak evil
of that which you understand not, and know not whereof you affirm, for you are
come from praying to saying. As if there was no difference between them?
Enough of that.

Mr. Norrice his fifth Argument.
IF the faith of miracles was limited, and bounded by the will of God, then all
other faith is so:

But the faith of miracles was confined to the will of God, and his pleasure.
Ergo.

This appears.
1. By Acts 19.12. where it is plain, that St. Paul had the faith of miracles,
and healed diseases.

2. Yet 2. Timoth. 4.20. he complaints that he left Trophimus at Miletum
sick. No doubt but he did desire his health, and prayed for it, but could not
obtain it, though it be promised that the prayer of faith shall heal the
sick, Iam. 5.15. because it is subject to Gods pleasure and will, which shows
the promises to be conditional.

Q. If any ask then how we shall pray in faith for any outward thing, if it be
uncertain whether we shall have them.

A. I answer, we believe that we shall have whatsoever is good for us, which
the Lord best knows, either the outward benefit, or grace to supply it, as 2. Corinthians. 12.9.

Obj. If any object, that we may pray absolutely for things necessary, as we
may to do the will of God, and that his name may be glorified by us, seeing
such things conduce thereunto.

Sol. I reply that the will of God is done, and his will glorified, as well by
our passive as by our active obedience, in suffering quietly his pleasure and
will, and has the like reward, Ioh. 21.19. James 1.12.

The contrary opinion then is a speaking of God and of his administration, that
which is not right, which kindles his wrath against his own servants, Job
42.7.

It is a limiting and confining of his works and providence, to men's wills and
desires; a praying against all his corrections, and trial utterly.

It is a condemning of the estate of the righteous, and a sadding of those that
ought to be comforted, a strayning of the promises beyond their intendement,
and the teaching of a presumptuous and unwarrantable kind of praying.

EDW. NORRICE.

Answer to the fifth Argument.
TO this argument I thus answer, that (if by the will of God you understand his
revealed will) we deny not but that faith is limited and bounded by the will
of God, revealed in the Scriptures, (.i.) faith is bounded by the promises of
God, which are the ground of faith. Neither does this in any measure contradict
our tenent, or prove what you affirm. But if by the will of God you
understand that will, whereof you are ignorant, as it seems you do, by that
which you have said, (.i.) if you bound faith with Gods secret, and not with
his revealed will only, I utterly deny your whole Argument; for both the faith
of miracles, and all other faith, Acts 19.12
have no other bound, or ground, but the revealed will of God; his promises.
And that faith of miracles, and healing diseases, which Paul had, was bounded
with, and grounded only upon the promises. For what the Apostle did in working
miracles and curing diseases, he had the authority of an absolute promise, as
it appears Ioh. 14.12. Verily, Verily, (says Christ) I say unto you, he
that believes on me, the works which I do shall he do, and greater works
then these shall he do, because I go to the Father. Now whereas you go
about to nullify this promise, and to prove from that of Paul to Timothy, 2.
Tim. 4.20.
that the promises are conditional, because (as you say) Paul had the gift of
healing, but could not cure Trophimus, that was sick, I answer that all you
say herein is as nothing; for (say you) Paul left Trophimus at Miletum sick.
Whence you also say, No doubt, but he desired his health, and prayed for it,
but could not obtain it. Vbi libellus, where is your evidence to prove this?
or who told you that Paul prayed for his health, and could not obtain it?
Where is this prooved in the Scriptures? Deuteronomy. 29.29
The secret things (says Moses) belong to the Lord our God: But those things
which are revealed unto us, and to our children for ever. This is not (for
ought I find) revealed, and therefore it is not for you to determine. You say
(and but say it) no doubt he prayed for him; another may say, no doubt he did
not pray for him; a third may say, no doubt he told Paul, that he had
finished his course, and would not have him to pray for his life; a fourth may
say, no doubt but he recovered afterward, and was healed. Now which of you
shall a man believe? or who shall decide the case, and tell us which of these
doubts is true? Truly (for my part) I know not how it can be rightly resolved,
unless you can call Paul or Trophimus from the dead again. Strange and
lamentable then it is, that you would go about to draw a conclusion, to
prove your assertion from that which is so uncertain, nay (which is more) by
suppositions, and such uncertain collections, to contradict commandments, and
to go about to nullify promises. And to speak truth, all your Arguments do
tend to this one end, namely, to contradict a commandment, or nullify
promises: And what is this else, but to contend against the truth? Review with a
single eye your own proceedings in these your arguments, and you may plainly
see, that they are bent against the truth; for the drift of them is to
establish a will worship, a duty which God never commanded: It is to pray
conditionally for temporal necessaries. For Vbi libellus, where is your
commandment to prove such a duty? as also they do oppose commandments, and
bend their forces to alter the nature of the promises. But they loose their
labor, for cedunt arma togae, away with Arguments (blunt weapons) when
commandments (sharp swords) come in place; for it may be said of them, as (in
another case) it was said of old, One commandment shall chase a thousand
arguments, and two put tenn thousand to flight. What now remains, but that
you confess your error (for its clear you have erred) and give them
satisfaction, which you have made to err by your Arguments. And as you have
taught men to observe, that which Christ never commanded, so now teach the
contrary, which is, what Christ has commanded. Neither is it (to use your own
words) any disgrace for any man to revoke an error, but his praise and glory,
and the testimony of an ingenious mind, and of the fear of God. Thus have I
now by Gods assistance (contrary to your conceit) said some thing to that which
you have said, and as you requested me set down, wherein your arguments are
faulty and failing.

I beseech you (seeing it was your own desire that I should send you word,
wherein they were faulty and failing) that you would not take any passage in
this my answer, in the worst part, or imagine, I speak any thing to vent
cholere, or to disparidge you: but rather receive it (as I write it in defense
of the truth) in love, and love shall cover all offenses. And in conclusion, I
pray you take notice: That it is your opinion, that is a speaking of God, and
of his administration, that which is not right, which kindles his wrath
against his own servants, it causes men to arrogate to themselves too much,
Job 42.7.
and to give to God too little. It is a perverting of the promises, beside
their intendement, and the teaching of an ignorant and unwarrantable kind of
praying.

An Answer to Mr. Norrice his PROSOPOPEIA.
A draught of Mr. Norrice his collections from certain passages and writings,
which he sent about the Country, affirming them to be the assertions of Rice
Boy, set down under his own hand, and in his own name, as in and by the
said draught here following it does and may appear.
FIRST PART.
A View of Mr. Boys assertions, set down under his own hand, and in his own
name, and some others, concerning the point of absolute praying for temporal
blessings in the particulars, without any condition, expressed or employed of
the will of God therein, or of our own everlasting good.

Answer to this first Part.
THat the Reader without all If, should both constantly believe and report,
that Mr. Norrice has related no more from my writings, but what he received,
he presents (as he says in the first place) to his view no more, but a view of
my assertions, set down under my own hand, and that concerning the point of
absolute praying for temporal blessings, etc. wherein Mr. Norrice does
cunningly play the Sophister, even slyly possess the Reader with a bad conceit
of my assertions, before ever he has heard or seen them; as appears, first
in that he uses the word blessings, indefinitely, whereas I use them
definitely of such blessings, as God has commanded us to ask, and promised
to give. And secondly (which is worst of all) in that he does use these words,
in the particulars without any condition, expressed of the will of God therein;
whereas they are words of his own addition and invention; for in all my
writings there is no such matter written. Whereby he would needs (as far as I
can gather) possess the Reader with these conceits: First, that I should teach
men to pray absolutely for all temporal blessings whatsoever: And not only
so, but that in the second place I should tie God to bestow upon us what we
please, without any relation to Gods revealed will, recorded in the Scriptures.
Whereas e contra (alas miserable it is to see how it is abused) the whole drift
of my writings is to persuade men to pray unto God for outward blessings,
according to his will revealed, or expressed in the Scriptures; which will of
God (as in my said writings it is plainly prooved, as we shall hereafter
clear) ought to be the only directrix of all our requests. I affirm in that
which I have written, that all our petitions ought to be framed according to
Gods will, expressed in his Word; and Mr. Norrice gives out, and that in
writing too, that these are my assertions set under my own hand, and in my
own name, concerning the point of absolute praying for outward blessings in
the particulars, without any condition expressed of the will of God therein.
Sir, you have made but a bad beginning, and (as it will appear anon) a worse
conclusion. But more of this hereafter. And thus from the Title or Preface I
pass to his collections. And thus they follow.

SECOND PART.
HE says, 1. That this opinion is newly raised from the dead (by him and his
Accomplices) and that it has a long time been buried in the pit of oblivion.

2. That to use the conditional If, (to stand with the will of God) in praying
for any temporal benefit, does argue both ignorance and infidelity.

3. And that we may be sure to obtain the very thing petitioned, if the fault
be not in our selves.

4. And therefore that we should not rudely, unadvisedly and ignorantly, upon
all occasions, run to God only with an If.

5. For our petitions are not then aggreeable to the will of God, when we say:
If it be thy will to give us this or that: neither does the Lord delight in
such bablings; but when we leave it out, and say: Lord thou have promised to
give the thing we now desire at thy hands.

6. Neither let thy heart put thee off with this poor excuse: The Lord does
not see it good for thee.

7. Come out then, oh thou conditional, from among the petitions of the Lords
prayer, and sit down yonder, for thou were never placed there by Christ, nor
art of his planting; thou have robbed God of his glory, and deprived us of many
blessings, and a long time luld us in too much ignorance and security, etc.

8. That to affirm the promises of God for temporal things, are conditional,
is a doctrine of man's invention, one of the Popes unwritten verityes.

9. For that all the promises made to the obedient, are absolute in Levit. 26.
and Deuter. 28. so that if they did what was required, it was absolute, and
certain they should have the blessings, and there was no other thing mentioned
or employed, and so for the disobedient on their parts, the evils and
punishments, threatened in these outward things.

10. Also that the Saints may and ought, as absolutely look for temporal
necessaries, and pray for them, as for the forgiveness and pardon of the their
sins, etc. (contrary to Psalm. 73.)

11. That the Martyrs Heb. 11.37. that are said not to accept deliverance, did
refuse it, because persecution is a blessing, and the portion of Gods people,
in which they are to rejoice, and therefore there is no warrant to pray against
persecution at all, for it is to pray against a blessing, etc. (so the Martyrs
persecuted themselves.)

12. That when Solomon says Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike to all, and
there is one event, etc. he speaks not as the truth is, but according to the
judgment, and censure of the world, that does so think and imagine, and
therefore in the third verse the holy Ghost does condemn it, saying, it is an
evil he saw under the sun; that is, that men say there is no difference
between good and bad in outward things, but all things come alike, etc.

13 That to teach men to follow the example of our Savior Christ and the
Apostles (even in this matter of prayer and submission to the will of God) is a
doctrine worthy to be spued out of the Church, and not fit to be taught
therein; for that we are to follow rules, and not the example of any, therefore
tho our Savior and St. Paul did (as we confess) pray conditionally for
outward matters, yet we are not to follow them, nor to make their doings our
rule, it being a chief pillar of the Church of Rome, this ground, etc.

14 That whereas St. James chap. 4.15. gives a charge to all that they ought to
say, not absolutely, but with condition, if the Lord will, I will do this or
that, is nothing to our purpose; for that is of saying, and this of praying.

15 That to say when Paul left Trophimus at Miletum sick, undoubtedly he
desired his health, and prayed for him, is an unwarrantable speech and
groundless collection; for who told you St. Paul prayed for his health, or
where is it revealed in Scripture? and therefore another may say, no doubt St.
Paul did not pray for his health, etc. for my part I cannot see how it should
be resolved, unles we call Paul or Trophimus from the dead again, etc.

16 That for any to teach men to pray conditionally for temporal benefits, and
with submission to the will of God expressed or employed, is to blaspheme the
truth, and to teach an ignorant and unfaithful kind of praying.

Concord. cum Originali.

The Answer to this second Part.
Mr. Norrice having laid down his Preface, in the next place be lays down
the particular assertions of his own collecting from my writing, but sitting
them (for the most part) to make good his conceits concerning them, that so
there might be some show of honesty in his proceedings. And therefore to make
good his reports, in the first place he sets down a preface, pretending it
to be the ground of my opinion, concerning praying for outward things. And to
make that seem apparent, he does in the next place by an idle Prosopopeia
feign me speaking to his purpose; for (says he) he says, that is Rice Boy
says these and these things. So that the Reader must necessarily understand,
that Mr. Norrice does bring me in speaking thus: I Rice Boy do say that this
opinion is newly raised from the dead, etc. Now what I have said, and what he
says (good Reader) thou shall plainly see. And that we may proceed orderly,
and omit nothing, I will speak particularly of each particular as they lie in
order.

1. The first thing collected in my writings is thus written: And that which
we speak is no uncouth and novell opinion (as some judge it) for we have
delivered no more, but what we have received: Moses taught it to the Israelits,
Christ to his Apostles, his Apostles to their Congregations, and we do but
raise that from the dead, which a long time has laien buried in the pit of
oblivion. Herein I gave you to understand, that what I held in prayer was no
novell opinion, but the same as Moses, Christ, the Apostles and other godly
Ministers before maintained; and that I and my Accomplices (so you say, tho by a
parenthesis of your own thrusting in) did but raise that from the dead, that
is, (you could not be ignorant of my meaning before) we did but speak of that
which you and your Accomplices kept, and still labor to keep buried in the pit
of oblivion. And I pray you what was that we thus spoke of? was it not this?
That all our prayers ought to be framed according to Gods will, expressed in
his Word, and that all such prayers (yea for outward necessaries) were to be
made absolutely to God, without doubting and wavering, etc. as in the title of
my said writings is expressed. This was that opinion whereof I was, and
continue still defendant. But you devulge about the country, that I and some
others have raised from the dead this opinion; namely, an opinion concerning
absolute praying for outward blessings without relation to the will of God,
revealed or expressed in his word. Have you done well in this? I appeal to
your self for judgment.

2. The second place in my writing is thus: Which manner of praying does
manifest both ignorance and infidelity: we know not whether it be the will of
God or not, to give us such things as we ask, and then no marvaill if we doubt
whether we shall obtain them yea or no. A little before having showed the
nature of the word If, I asked this question: In what sense is this word If,
used in prayer for outward things? as it is conditional or doubtful? (for so
is If taken) if conditional, then (said I) our prayers for outward necessary
blessings must be framed thus: Oh Father, if the gift of things necessary for
my present being shall stand with thy will, then be pleased to bestow it upon
me. In which petition this word If, is not only conditional, but also
doubtful: We do not by this saying refer it to the will of God, but in so
praying we doubt whether it does agree with the will of God, to bestow upon us
things necessary for our present being. By this I make it plain, how and in
what manner this word If, does manifest both ignorance and infidelity in
prayer. But this you leap over, and urge some of that which follows (mingling
it with some of your own) as a dangerous doctrine. And I pray you Sir, what
error is there, in saying, that If, as it is a note, not only of condition,
but also of doubt, does manifest both ignorance and infidelity, seeing when we
so pray, we thereby confess, that we know not whether it be the will of God
or not, to give us such things as we ask. And if we are ignorant of Gods
will, concerning the thing we ask, no marvaill if we doubt whether we shall
obtain it, yea or no. It had been well if you had presented to the Readers
view the full grounds of my writings; but it seems you feared to unfold too
much: for why else do you in so many particulars curtaile my sayings?

3. The third place is thus in my writings: Call now to mind our former
grounds, and this also will unresistably follow: The fault is in themselves,
who do not obtain at the hands of God the very thing petitioned. A little
before I laid down five things, which are necessarily required in prayer,
which I wish the Reader to call to mind. The five particulars (as you shall
find them written) are these: First when we pray we must come to God with holy
hands. Secondly without wrath. Thirdly without doubting. These 3 are recorded
by the Apostle 1. Timoth. 2.8. Fourthly we must ask for the true ends, not to
consume it on our lusts, Iam. 4.3. Fifthly we must ask what we do ask
according to his will, 1. Ioh. 5.14. These (especially) were the grounds which
I wished you to call to mind, and then (those grounds being rightly considered)
this also, I said, would follow: The fault is in themselves, who do not
obtain at the hands of God the very thing petitioned. They fail (as the words
immediately follow) in one of these particulars; either they know not the plague
in their own hearts, or else they fail in the duty of charity (so that as
Christ says Math. 11.25.) they forgive not when they pray, etc. Now what
danger is there in any thing, which I have here spoken? Do not the Scriptures
teach it? Make then your quarrel with the word, and not with me. But to bring
a darkness upon that which I have written, you have left out the ground upon
which this saying was spoken, as also those things following, which serve to
make it plain; and here you have so cunningly set down this collection, as
that the Reader can not conceave, but that I affirm, a man may pray for any
thing, and have it. And surely through your words and writings together, it is
generally blown about the country, that Boy affirms, we may pray for any
thing, and be sure to have it; as namely for better victuals, better clothes,
more means and great livings, etc. Alas, alas! could Mr. Norrice with a good
conscience draw from my writings any coulourable show for such rumors?
Especially seeing it was a special thing I persuaded men unto, even to frame
their petitions unto God, according to his will revealed in his word? That is,
(as I explaned my self) I would have them ask of God, what he had eommaunded,
and believe to receave that which he has promised. But what will not many men
do to cover their own failing?

4.5. The fourth and fifth places are in my writings thus: Now our petitions for
outward things are agreeable to Gods will, not when we put in this word If, as
to say, if it be thy will to give us this or that; but they are agreeable to
his will, when the thing we desire God to bestow upon us, is both commanded
and promised. This is that which does make our petitions agreeable to his will.
And therefore when we are to pray, either for any favor, or for the remooving
of any affliction, we must consider with our selves, whether it be within the
compass of this rule; namely, whether God in his word does command us to ask
such a thing which we desire to have, and whether he does promise upon our
calling, to bestow it upon us; and not rudely and unadvisedly, nay ignorantly,
upon all occasions run to God only with an If. Hence it is when the Saints
do come to the Throne of grace, and solicit God in Jesus Christ for any
favor, that the holy Ghost does put them upon that issue, Vbi libellus,
produce your evidence; where have I commanded you in the Scripture to ask of
me such or such a blessing? where is your warrant? Where in my Scriptures have
I made any such contract, any such covenant, any such promise to give you such
or such a thing, which ye desire of me? Now if the Saints so praying, are able
to produce their evidence, and say unto the Lord, Lo, here is our warrant;
thou have commanded us in thy word to ask this thing, which we now desire,
and therefore in obedience to thy command, we have this boldness to come
unto thee: And lo, Oh Lord, (pointing as it were with the finger to the place)
here is our evidence: In thy Scriptures thou have made a contract, a covenant,
a promise to give us the things we now desire. If I say, the Saints can thus
answer the Spirit, and produce their evidence, as aforesaid, their petition is
lawful, and they may lawfully charge God with his promise, his contract, his
covenant. But then when the spirit of God puts them to that issue, Vbi
libellus, produce your evidence for what ye ask, and they are not able to
produce any, either commandment, or promise, deducted from his Scriptures,
he may (as one says) justly plead and answer such petitioners with a Non est
factum, I made no such promise. Wherefore when men pray unto God for such
things, as have no ground from his word, (notwithstanding they thrust in an If)
they shall be sent away empty; the Lord will plead to such petitioners, Non est
factum, I made no such promise: He delights not in such babbling. In this
long speech (I could not but repeat it all) you may plainly see, Sir, had you
read it with a single eye, that which I have therein affirmed, is no more but
the truth. For first, a little before I demanded this question: When are our
petitions agreeable with the will of God? Which question is there thus
answered: Our petitions are agreeable to the will of God, when they are
agreeable to his word. Now (said I) our petitions are agreeable to Gods will,
not when we put in this word If, as to say, if it be thy will to give us this
or that; but they are agreeable to his will, when the thing we desire God to
bestow upon us, is both commanded and promised. Wherein can you find this
faulty, or failing? Which of those two do make our petitions agreeable to
Gods will? Is it this word If, or else Gods word think you? What? must we not
when we pray to God (as in my writings I have pressed it) carefully examine
and consider with our selves, whether that which we pray for, be within the
compass of this rule, namely, whether God in his word does command us to ask
such a thing which we desire to have, and whether he does promise upon our
calling to bestow it upon us? ought we not thus to do, and who can deny it?
Or is it sufficient upon all occasions to come to God only with an If? Is that
the prayer wherein he delights? What do you think then of this? put case,
an honest, learned and true hearted Minister, does for the present want means,
as also a place to exercise his calling, I presume you will say in this case,
pray he must. Well be it so. Now he frames his petition thus; Oh Lord, I
beseech thee, if it be thy will give me one of Mr. Norrice his places; one of
them at Tedbury, or else that at Horseleigh, whereby I may both exercise my
calling, and also ger my maintenance. What do you think of this petition? Is
it agreeable to Gods will, tho he here puts in this word If, and say, If it
be thy will give it me? Or does God delight in this kind of praying? I trow
you will answer, No; and conclude with me in these words, (tho now recorded by
you as an error) He does rudely and unadvisedly, nay ignorantly run to God,
tho If be in. And does not the word of God warrant this? Nay when men shall
pray to God for this, or any other thing, as have no ground from his word
(notwithstanding they do thrust in an If) shall they not be sent away empty?
Will not the Lord plead to such petitioners, Non est factum, I made no such
promise? Will he delight in such babbling? Are not these the things which I
spoke of in my writings, and who can justly except against them? Do not the
Scriptures teach so much? why then do you lash the Scriptures (as containing
dangerous positions) upon my back? why have you peeced up together certain
sentences, some of mine, and some of your own, and sent them to diverse as
dangerous assertions? Do you not by this means labor to cast a mist before
the Readers eyes, that so he can not clearly perceave my meaning? For in
these your last collections, you deal very strangly, in that you do so tie
them together with your own chains, as that the Reader cannot conceave, but
that they do follow one the other directly in my writings, as you have here
placed them: when as you put part of that, which is in the second place, first,
and this sentence (he delights not in such bablings) which is last, you have
put in the middle between another saying, leaving out the ground upon which it
is spoken, and all other words and passages, which I use to make it plain.
This is brave dealing is it not? Do you think to make good by this means,
what you have spoken? which is (as it is reported) this: That I do maintain
blasphemy; which you labor to prove by these words: The Lord delights not
in such bablings. I pray you, what is that which I say is babbling? Is it not
this? namely, to pray to God for such things (notwithstanding If, be thrust in)
as have no ground from the word? Is this blasphemy? Judge righteous judgment.
And henceforth (I pray you) keep your eyes in your head; it is the place (as
Solomon says Eccles. 2.14.) where a wise man's eyes are. Consider before hand
what the issue will be. It had been well, if you had observed this rule, before
you had presumed to put in practice such things as these.

6. The sixth place in my writings runs thus: Let him not (namely, thy heart)
shift thee off with this, or the like poor excuse: The Lord does not see it
good for thee; but rather tell him plainly thou know the Lord does see it
good for thee, because he has both commanded thee to ask it of him, and
has also promised to give it; but thou (Oh false heart) with some or one of
those before specified, have made me unworthy of the thing which I have asked,
unsufficient to apprehend the promise, and to receave it.

The ground of this speech is this: A little before I having showed that the
use of that point, which we affirmed, did serve to the humbling of us in our
wants, and that because of our weakness and corruptions, we have made our
selves unworthy of many temporal blessings: I added this exhortation; Oh then,
whosoever thou art, whenever thou prayest unto God, and he will not be found
of thee, retire quickly to thy own heart, and say unto him (as it is there more
fully expressed) thou have caused my loving Father to frown upon me, and
cover himself in a cloud, so that my prayers cannot pass through, either in
wanting or failing in some or one of those particulars, required in prayer.
Whereupon I inferred this saying; Let him not (namely thy heart) shift thee off
with this or the like poor excuse, etc. as it is before repeated. Now wherein I
pray you, is there any error or just cause to except against me, for saying,
that a Saint of God may say, that he does know the Lord does see those things
good for him, for the which he has both eommaunded him to ask, and promised
to give him? Are not those things good for Gods people, which God does command
them to ask, and promise to give them? How is it that you except against it?
Can you find any of Gods servants thus reasoning in the Scriptures, concerning
any particular thing which God has promised them? and does the Lord indeed
know whether this or that, which he has promised me, be good for me? Did
Abraham make any such question concerning those promises Genesis 17. namely,
whether it was good for him to be a father of many nations, and that his
posterity should possess Canaan? Or did Moses and the Israelits make any such
question? Nay is there any place in the Scripture, which does teach us that we
are to doubt, whether those things, which God has commanded us to ask, and
promised to give, are good for us? Nay contraryly did not the Saints rather
urge God for and with his promise? Note that example (omitting many others) of
Ichosaphat 2. Cron. 20, when he was compassed about by his enemies, he
proclaimed a fast, and did remember God of that promise (as appears verse. 9.)
which was made long before 1. King. 8.37. He made no question, but that it was
good for them to be delivered, seeing (they performing what God required) he
had promised the same. What heresy is in this think you? But now (Oh
lamentable to consider) that men should (at the least) think, there is little
else but heresy and blasphemy in my writings; you deal with them as unkindly,
as Hanun (2. Sam. 10.14.) dealt with David's servants; you have shaved off the
one half, and cut off many of my words in the middle, to the destroying of
their meaning, and deceaving of the reader. For you have here left out all the
expository words, so that the Reader cannot gather any other but that I
affirm, that whatsoever we desire of God, we are sure it is good for us,
notwithstanding it is neither commanded to be asked nor promised to be given.
And this is that which is generally rumoured about the Country. In this you
deal very corruptly. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see your folly, and
grant that I may never labor to grace my own proceedings by any unjust
scandalizing, and disgracing others.

7. The seventh place (yet in it you have left out some of my words) is
repeated not much amiss, and it will be easily cleared from being either
erroneous or dangerous. All the error or danger (as I conceive) you suppose
to be in this place, is in that I bid the conditional (If) to come out from
among the petitions of the Lords prayer, and content himself with some meaner
place, seeing he was never placed there by Christ's appointment. This if any
(as I think) you suppose to be dangerous. Now that this speech does contain
neither matter of danger or error, it shall plainly appear to all. That
prayer which we call the Lords prayer, and so call it (as in my writings is
specified) because it is the Lord Christ's own making, is declared by the
Evangelist Matthew to us (you dare not deny it) as he received it from Christ.
Now our Savior Christ in all that form of prayer (and indeed it is exemplar
absolutissimum such an absolute one, as that there is nothing essential to
prayer wanting, (as we have declared) neither is there any thing superfluous)
does not use this conditional If, and therefore there is no danger or error
in saying, that the conditional If was never placed in the Lords prayer by
Christ's appointment. For had If been essential to prayer, Christ could not
have left it out of his form of prayer, unless he had left us an imperfect
form, as wanting either will or skill to make such a form, which could not be
mended. And who dare to affirm Christ's form to be imperfect, or once go
about to add one particle to the further perfecting of it? And therefore why
may we not without blame ( If being thrust in by man at any time, and not
placed there by Christ) bid him come out from among the petitions of the Lords
prayer? And why may we not boldly say without controlment, as our Savior, to
the plant not planted by his Father, thou shall be rooted out; for does he not
rob God of his glory, in that he does go about to make man think, that
Christ's form of prayer, without him, is not so current? And does he not
deprive us of many blessings now, as well as he kept the Father in Mark. 9.22.
without the blessing, for indeed, how shall a man that doubts think (as St.
James says chap. 1.7.) to receive any thing of the Lord? And has he not luld
us asleep in security, when as by his meaning we have been persuaded to
think, all is well, notwithstanding many things have been amiss in us, which
has caused God to stop his ears at our cries, and hid himself in a cloud, so
that our prayers could not pass through? Speak now, and speak truly, what
error is there in this saying?

8. The eight place in my writing runs thus: So then to affirm the promises
of God for temporal things, are conditional (according to your own words) is
a doctrine of man's invention, and not of God; and certainly to make the best of
it, it is but as one of the Popes unwritten verities. This speech (you know) is
in my answer to your first argument, wherein I affirm no more, but what I have
ground, both from the Scriptures, as also from your own words, as in my said
answer is plainly prooved. Your argument runs thus: Those promises which
have conditions employed in them, cannot absolutely be relied upon, or expected,
for our faith is grounded upon the promises; but the promise for outward things
(although but necessary) are so. Ergo. In this argument I denied your Minor
proposition, being altogether untrue, and contrary to sound doctrine. This I
made plainly appear in that (as is there specified) the will of God (so much
of his will as is necessary for man to know) is revealed in the Scriptures,
which Scriptures, Gods written verities, are absolutely sufficient to instruct
us in all saving knowledge, which I prooved by that of the Apostle 2. Tim.
3.15. Now (said I) whereas you affirm, that the promises for temporals are
conditional, notwithstanding in the whole Scriptures there is no condition
expressed, what is it else but to affirm, that God has not revealed so much of
his will in the Scriptures, as is needful for us to know. And to make this
appear, I brought your own words to be your judge, as it does there thus
follow: You say that this position of yours (namely, that the promises for
temporal things are conditional) is one of Gods truths (for you press it
upon men to believe as a truth from God) and yet you say, that God has not
expressed this truth in his word; for you say, it is employed, etc. From which
premises I drew this conclusion: So then to affirm the promises of God for
temporal things, are conditional, is a doctrine of man's invention, and not of
God; and certainly to make the best of it, it is but as one of the Popes
unwritten verities. And thus much is made plain by your own words, as they
immediately follow. Unwritten you confess it is, for if any man should but ask
you, where in the Scriptures does God say the promises are conditional? you
have nothing to answer (for ought I know) but this, the condition is employed,
etc. Now whether or not I have in this speech affirmed any more, but what the
Scriptures, as also your own words do clear, let the unpartiall and honest
hearted judge.

9. The ninth place runs thus in my writing: For you know and must needs
confess, that the Lord Levit. 26. and Deuter. 28. made absolutely to his
people Israel precious promises. In which promises there is no condition
employed, etc. Now by this and that which follows, I made it plain, even to
the weakest capacity, that that of Lament the fowerth, which you alleged to
prove the promise to be conditional, is not any thing at all to the purpose.
For your Minor proposition being denied, you labor to prove it by that place
thus: The Lord for the sins of his people does strippe them of outward
comforts, some times in part, some times wholly unto death; (as you prooved
Lament. 4.15.) Ergo the promises of outward things have conditions employed in
them, and are not absolutely intended. This was your doctrine. And how does
this prove the promises to be conditional? Especially seeing the Lord (as in
my answer is manifested) upon condition of their obedience, did absolutely
promise to give them such and such blessings. If (says he) thou obey, (.i.)
thou obeying his commandments, all these blessings shall come upon thee; But
if thou disobey, (.i.) thou disobeying my commandments, all these curses shall
come upon thee, etc. Now while Israel walked with God in sincerity, they wanted
nothing of that which God promised them, as the current of the Scriptures do
prove: But they rebelling against him (for they plucked away the shoulder Zach.
7.11.) He brought upon them this plague of famine, which the Prophet Jeremy
does here bewail. The pittyfull women Lament. 4.10. (according as he had
threatened Lev. 26. and Deuteron. 28.) did eat their own children for want of
other meat. What now (as I there demanded the question) was the cause of this
plague of famine? Your own words there is the answer. The Lord did visit them
thus for their sins. So then by this it does appear, that in prooving your
argument, you have spoken against your self, in that you affirm the sin and
rebellion of the Jews was the cause why God did thus plague them. And is not
this the thing which I labor to defend (yet now by you opposed) namely, that
it is our (as it was their) ignorance, rebellion and infidelity which does
rob us of many blessings, and bring upon us many punishments. So that for
ought I see you are contrary to your self: Let all men now judge what danger
there is in that which I have written: Notwithstanding you labor to make men
think as bad of it, as possibly you can, in that you here in this place leave
out those Scriptures, which I use to make that plain, which I have said, as if
there was no warrant for what I speak: The Lord lay not this your injurious
dealing to your charge.

10. The tenth place in my writing is thus: The Saints of God may and ought, as
absolutely depend upon the promises of God, for their daily bread, (i.) for
things necessary, as they may for the pardon of their sins. This point is
confirmed thus: It is indifferently acknowledged by our whole Church, that the
promises of God, concerning the pardon of sins, and life eternal, ought
absolutely to be depended upon, without any scruple, etc. The ground of our
depending upon God for soul or body, is his promises, which God in Christ made
to all his servants, as the Apostle prooveth 2. Corinthians. 11.14. all the
promises (as well temporaries as spiritualls) are in Christ Yea, and in him
Amen. Now that God in his word has promised his servants things necessary for
the body as well as for the soul, I made it appear in diverse places. As that
of Peter 2. Epist. 1.3. Math. 6.25. to the end. Romans 8.32. and John 15.7. with
diverse other Scriptures and reasons, which are too long here to repeat, all
which you have left out, as if I had no ground for what I speak. And here (I
fear your study was to entangle) you have put down this position, consisting
partly of your own words, and partly of mine, without quoting that Scripture,
which I had used to prove it. As also you have thrust in this parenthesis of
your own (contrary to Psalm. 73.) why could you not (if you had meant plainly)
have quoted some or one of those Scriptures, which I cited to prove this
position, as well as you have cited this in a parenthesis, which is none of
mine, that so the Reader might have compared yours and mine together? But I
perceive your meaning.

11. The eleventh place runs thus in my writing: Hence it was (as I
conceive, seeing to be persecuted for the truth, is such a blessed thing) that
those tortured Saints, Heb. 11.35. accepted not deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection; and this made St. Paul Act. 21.13. willing and
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus. In my answer to your first argument it is thus written: Those in
Heb. 11.37. suffered those things for the truths sake; neither did they accept
deliverance. And Paul also 2. Cor. 11.37. suffered those things for the Gospels
sake in case of persecution, as he testifies 2. Tim. 1.12. which kind of
sufferings, both of Paul and those in the Hebrews, are blessings, and the
portions of Gods servants, not to be prayed against, but rather rejoiced in,
etc. There it is thus written briefly, because in the other place I did more
fully explane, and express my self, unto which I referred you, that so you
might understand what I meant in these short speeches, as in my said answer you
might have seen. Now wherein does this, which I have written, disagree from
the word of God? Yet (as it seems) you tax these for dangerous positions;
namely to say, first that to be persecuted for the truth, is a blessed thing.
And secondly that those tortured Saints Heb. 11. (seeing to be persecuted for
the truth, is such a blessed thing) accepted not deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection. And thirdly that we have no warrant to pray at
all against persecution, that we shall not suffer. Now the word of God
warranting the truth of all these positions, then there is no danger in them;
but the word of God does warrant them to be true as it is, and will be further
prooved.

First that to be persecuted for the truth, and for righteousness sake, is a
blessed thing, those Scriptures Math. 5.10.11. and 1. Pet. 3. and 4. chap. and
the 14. verse. quoted in my writings, do plainly prove, and it is further
manifested in diverse other places. So that what I affirm concerning
persecution, is no more but what the word of God does avouch to be true.

I say that persecution for righteousness sake is a blessing, or to be
persecuted for the truth, is a blessed thing, and thus much is verified Heb.
11.26. where it is said, that Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt. Moses we see (and it is recorded by the
holy Ghost for a fruit of faith) counted the reproach for Christ, or
persecution for righteousness sake, a blessing, a favor, or rich treasure of
great weight, Quae vel omnia Regum terronorum diademata facile exupera^. And
did not the Apostles also thus esteem it, when as they rejoiced Act. 5.41.
that they were counced worthy to suffer shame for his name? And did not Paul
glory in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14? Did Moses account the cross of
Christ such a rich favor, and did the Apostles rejoice that they were counted
worrhy to have a part in it? And may not I affirm, without heresy, that
persecution for the name of Christ, is a blessing, or a blessed thing?
Especially seeing in the first place (as we may further add) Gods name is
thereby glorified, as I before prooved from that of Peter 1. Epist. 4.14. And
secondly in that thereby the Gospel is furthered, and its faithful professors
imboldened to speak the word without fear, as it is to be seen Philip.
1.12.13.14. And thirdly seeing the reward of those that do suffer for Christ,
is so excellent, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And to speak truly,
this is a favor which God gives to his Saints for a sign: the persecuted,
and that in that they are persecuted for righteousness, are said to be
blessed, and thereby they are sure, the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs. So that
(as one neately observes) all our fiery tribulations fall under the nature and
definition of Sacraments, they are so many visible signs of invisible graces,
without this Sacrament, this fire of tribulation a man cannot be so sure of his
salvation, for all that will live godly, shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim.
3.12. which is indeed an evident token of a man's salvation, and that of God:
being given to him in the behalf of Christ, (Philip. 1, 28.29.) not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. By this I hope you see that to
say persecution, is a blessing, or to be persecuted for the truth, is a blessed
thing, is cleared from being dangerous. And I doubt not, but so will the second
also: for in saying that those tortured Saints accepted not deliverance, that
they might obtain a better resurrection, I say no more, but what the holy
Ghost expressly speaks. And whereas I affirm the consideration of the
blessedness of persecution, was a motive which did stir up to hold fast the
profession of their faith, and to be willing and ready to resist even to blood,
it is no more but what the Apostle here teaches. He tells us verse. 26. that
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of
Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of reward. Non temere men's in
judicando resolvit in alteram partem (as one says upon the place) s^d in
deliberando intuebatur in praemij largitionem. Was not the recompense of the
reward now a motive which moved Moses to make this choice, and to esteem the
reproach of Christ as he did? And had not these tortured Saints, not accepting
deliverance, a respect to the recompense of the reward too, think you? Was not
the joye that was set before them, a motive to persuade them patiently to
endure the cross, and to despise the shame? Yea do not the very words there
following prove so much? If this be true (and who can deny it?) wherein am I
to be blamed, for saying that, Hence it was (seeing to be persecuted for the
truth, is such a blessed thing) that the tortured Saints accepted not
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection?

Now in the third place, That we have no warrant to pray at all against
persecutions, that we shall not suffer; the Scriptures do plainly show, as
those Scriptures, which I have quoted in my writings, concerning this thing,
do plainly manifest. It is (as I have already said) the portion of Gods
people to suffer persecutions, and without drinking this potion of tribulations
here, there is no drinking of the full cup of pleasures in heaven. We must be
with Christ in the garden, and partake of his afflictions, or else we shall not
be with him in Paradise, and partake of his pleasures. If we suffer with
Christ (says the Apostle 2. Tim. 2.12.) we shall also reign with him. If we
are with Christ in his afflictions, we shall be with him also in his
eluctation, in his Triumph, else not.

Consider this (I pray you) and then tell me whether we have any warrant from
the word to pray at all against persecutions, the afflictions of the Gospel
that we shall not suffer; seeing without suffering with Christ, there is no
reigning with him. Paul (I find) exhorted Timothy (2. Epist. 1.8.) to the
partaking of the afflictions of the Gospel, but I find not any warrant, any
place, wherein God does command us to pray against persecution, or promise us
that we shall not suffer. If you or any one shall now ask, how we must pray
in time of persecution? The answer is thus already made in my said writings:
All the prayers that we are to make in this case, must be to desire the Lord,
that he would give us strength and patience manfully to persevere in the truth,
and that he would make us instruments of his glory.

Thus what I affirm in my writings, concerning persecution, and those tortured
Saints Heb. 11. is cleared by the Scriptures from being dangerous.

But now to your collection: In which writing (as before is specified) I use
the very phrase of the Scripture, which you have left out, and here you bring
me in to affirm, that the Martyrs Heb. 11. that are said not to accept
deliverance, did refuse it, or they might have been deluded if they would,
which words are not in all my writings, but they are of your own invention: So
that the Reader cannot conceive, but that I affirm, those Martyrs had
deliverance offered them, but they refused to enjoy their liberty together with
the freedom of their consciences. And to the end you might strengthen these
conceits, you have added this parenthesis of your own (so the Martyrs
persecuted themselves.) In which saying you do but labor to forestall the
judgment of the Reader, and possess him with a bad conceit of what I have
written before, indeed he does truly understand, or know what I have written,
that so you might the easier shape all to your own foot. Besides in this your
extraction, you have not placed those words which are mine, as I have written
them; but you have taken some from the answer to your first argument, and some
from your other writing: whereas you had done better, had you placed my words,
and mine only in their proper places. I leave it to your conscience what you
intended in doing the contrary. Mean time (I am sure) I undergo many scandalls
and foul reproaches, which by reason of you, and your proceedings are most
falsely laid upon me.

12. The twalefth place runs thus in my writing: Concerning those 2 places
which you produce to prove your position, you do greatly mistake the true
meaning of the holy Ghost in them: For the meaning of the holy Ghost in that of
Eccles. 9.1.2.3. is quite contrary to your interpretation. For your
interpretation is according to the judgment of the world, which judgment the
holy Ghost does condemn, as appears verse. 3. for says he, this is an evil
among all things that are done under the Sun, etc. Men of the world judge it
so but what then? because they say there is no difference between the just and
the unjust, concerning these things, must their saying therefore be true? Alas
it is no such matter, etc.

This (you know) is written in my answer to your third argument, wherein I give
you to understand, that you have greatly mistaken the true meaning of those 2
places, which you alleged to prove your position; and that the meaning of
the holy Ghost in that of Eccles. 9.1.2. is contrary to your interpretation.
Now what is your interpretation of those words? Is it not this? namely, that
there is no certain bettering of the outward state by faith and grace? For
after you had repeated the words of Eccles. 9.1.2. you say thus: Which could
not be so, if there were any certain bettering of the outward estate by faith
and grace. So that here you make the Wiseman to patronize your saying, and that
these words of yours (There is no certain bettering of the outward estate by
faith and grace) is the sum or meaning of the holy Ghost in them. Whereby it
does appear, that you make the meaning of the holy Ghost to be according to
the judgment of the world. For you make the holy Ghost to patronize this
speech, There is no certain bettering of the outward estate by faith and
grace, which saying is the saying or judgment of the world, and condemned by
the holy Ghost verse. 3. Now that the holy Ghost does condemn your judgment,
being (as I said before) but the judgment of the world, appears plainly, in
that is showed in this verse, that you offer violence to that text, in drawing
a conclusion, which has no sound footing from it, the meaning of it being (as
appears by this verse) contrary to your interpretation.

But here (notwithstanding that before specified) you give out in this
collection that I affirm; that when Solomon says Eccles. 9.2. all things come
alike to all, and there is one event, etc. he speaks not as the truth is,
but according to the judgment and censure of the world, etc. Is there any such
saying in my writings? or do I say that Solomon in that place speaks not as
the truth is? I remember indeed, that I have said (and so do still) that your
interpretation of that place, is not as the truth is, but according to the
judgment of the world; but you find not this in all my writings, that Solomon
in this place speaks not as the truth is. What is this better then a plain
falsifying of my writings, and a laying false imputations upon me? But let this
pass; and in conclusion I pray you take notise, that an argument framed
according to the true intent and meaning of the holy Ghost in that of Eccles.
9.1.2. will not in any measure contradict what I have affirmed, concerning
prayer for outward blessings.

13. The thyrteenth place is thus in my writings: In this argument I deny your
Major proposition, a doctrine more fit to be spued out, then taught in the
Church of Christ, being as was your first proposition, a chief pillar of the
Church of Rome. This we will make plainly to appear: Whatsoever is man's
duty to observe in Gods service, that must be commanded by God, for nothing
but a commandment from God can make a man owe a duty to God.

This is the ground of that conclusion, which is there prooved by that of
Eccles. 12.13. and that of our Savior Math. 28.20. whereupon I inferred this
speech: Now if any man shall teach men to observe any thing as a duty, which
God has not commanded, it is beyond his commission: A created worship, a
worship of his own invention, which God never required. What is the whole
drift of my speech, or what is the doctrine which I said was more fit to be
spued out, then taught in the Church of Christ? Was it not this? Namely, to
make examples, without any commandment, to be the ground of a duty, seeing
such service (as in my writings is prooved) is will worship, and will worship
is idolatry. And wherein (if you speak truly) can you find fault with any
thing, which I have there written? For is will worship, which is idolatry, fit
to be taught, or cast out of the Church of Christ? and is not that
will worship, or a created service, which is offered to God, without the
authority of any commandment? For who requires such a service at thy hands?
Nay if this doctrine was but reasonably pressed; Examples without the authority
of any commandment, are sufficient grounds of duetyes; or examples (tho
commanded) are equivalent with precepts in Gods worship, would it not look
more toward Rome then Sion? There is great difference between following the
examples of the Saints in things indifferent, as things indifferent, and
between making their examples without any commandment, to be the ground of a
duty. In the first we show our Christian liberty, it is not forbidden: In the
other we show voluntary humility, in creating such a service, which never came
into Gods heart to require of us. Had you well considered the drift of my
writings in this particular (all by-ends laid aside) you could not (me think)
have dealt with it so injuriously as you have; but it seems you are glad to
catch any advatage, where indeed there is none. For here you have in that
confused manner patcht together this collection, partly with my words, and
partly with your own, as that the reader cannot rightly conceive the drift or
ground of my writings, concerning this particular. I would you had presented to
the Readers view my writings, and mine only in its proper kind, then had you
been free from blame, and I from many scandalls.

14. For answer to this fourthteenth place, I refer you to that which I have
already written, from whence you gathered this collection, and there I doubt
not you will see a plain difference between Praying and Saying.

15. Concerning the fiftenth place. I refer you and the Reader to that which
I have already written in my answer to your fifth Argument, from whence you
drew this collection. The sum whereof is to show that this ground of yours,
is very weak to contradict a commandment, and nullify a promise, seeing it is
uncertain why there Paul prayed for Trophymus his health, and could not recover
him; for who knows whether Trophymus did dye, or recover of that sickness?
for my part (as I said before) I know not how this can be rightly resolved,
unless you can call either Paul or Trophymus from the dead again. And what
can you make of this? You labor indeed to make it seem as bad as may be, for
why else have you not set down the same words, which are written in your
Argument, and repeatingly used by me in my answer?

16. In this sixtenth place you deal very injuriously, in that you have set it
down for one of my Assertions, notwithstanding there is no ground for it in
all my writings. I remember indeed that in a letter I wrote this unto you:
Whereas you say (where I repeated your own words) that absolute prayer for
temporal necessaries (the tenent which we hold) is an uncouth and proud
conceit, without warrant, tending to evil, you do in that saying no less
then blaspheme the truth. And in the conclusion of my answer to your arguments,
I add this speech: It is (namely your opinion) a perverting of the promises,
besides their intendement, and the teaching of an ignorant and unwarrantable
kind of praying.

In these sayings I affirm, first that you do no better then blaspheme the
truth, in that you say this opinion, namely, That temperall necessary blessings
ought to be prayed for, without doubting and wavering, etc. (being the ground
of our tenent) is an uncouth and proud conceit, without warrant tending to
evil. And secondly, that your opinion contained in your Arguments, is a
perverting of the premises besides their intendement, and the teaching of an
ignorant and unwarrantable kind of praying.

Now if it does appear that these above named grounds, concerning praying for
outward necessaries, are warranted for truth by the Word of God, then you must
confess your rashness in censuring; for no one can say, that any part of Gods
truth is a proud conceit, tending to evil, and not blaspheme it. And
furthermore if it appear that the drift of your Arguments is to alter the
nature of the promises, contradict commandments, and to establish a
will worship, then it is an ignorant and unwarrantable kind of praying; for
ignorance is the mother of will worship, and to teach will worship, is to teach
but an ignorant kind of service.

Now whether the grounds of my writings (which you say is a proud conceit) are
agreeable to the truth or not; or whether your arguments do bend their forces
to alter the nature of the promises, contradict commandments, and so
establish any thing more but a will worship, a duty, which God never
commanded, let our writings witness.

But you here give out without any If, yet absolutely false, that I affirm,
That for any to teach men to pray with submission to the will of God expressed,
is to blaspheme the truth, etc. whereby you pretend, which you absolutely
affirm, That the ground and drift of my writings is to prove, that no man,
without blaspheming the truth, and teaching of an ignorant and unfaithful kind
of praying, can teach men to pray with submission to the will of God expressed.
And to the end you might fasten this false imputation on me, and my writings,
you have so framed this extraction, as that it does agree with the title or
preface of these your learned collections, which you say is the ground of my
writings. There you profess that the matter we stand for, is praying for
temporal blessings in the particulars, without any condition, expressed or
employed of the will of God therein; and here (to make both ends meet) you
bring me in to conclude; That for any to teach men to pray with submission to
the will of God expressed, is to blaspheme the truth, etc. As if this was the
principal thing I aimed at; to prove in that which I have written, namely,
that we must not pray for temporal things, with submission to the will of God
expressed in his word.

Alas Mr. Norrice, is this the thing which I hold, concerning praying for
outward blessings? or is there any such thing written in those papers, which I
sent unto you? Who that had his 5 wits about him, would once avouch it?
Especially seeing the principal thing I aimed at, and pressed in them, was to
persuade men to frame all their prayers according to Gods will, revealed or
expressed in his word. And can any petitions be made with more humble
submission to the will of God, then when they are made agreeable to his word,
wherein his will is revealed? This is the will of him that sent me (says
Christ) that ye keep my commandments. And again, this is the will of God,
that ye believe in Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. And do we not pray with
submission to the will of God, when our prayers are made agreeable to his word?
Nay how can a man pray to God for this or that, which he has commanded to
ask, and believe to receive that which he has promised to give, and yet such
petitions not made with submission, and aggreeable to his will. Unloose this
knot that can, for I cannot.

Mr. Norrice having first laid his foundation (namely the Title) pretending it
(tho falsely) to be mine: And secondly the particular Assertions of his calling
from my said writings, affirming that his said collections (but how true it is,
courteous Reader, thou may plainly see) do agree with my writings; whereunto
(with more boldness then welcome) he subscribed my name. He proceeds, and
in the third place lays down a certain distinction of faith of his
collecting, from whence he drew certain conclusions. And here thus it follows.

THIRD PART. Mr. Boy his distinction of faith, wherein the foundation of his
building is discovered.
We distinguish faith into 2 sorts; the one is called justifying or eternal
faith, because the object of it is eternal, to wit, the eternal promises.

The other is called temporary, because the object of it is temporal,
concerning temporal things, both which are required in Gods servants: the one
to keep the soul to eternal life; the other to preserve the corporal life
here, for the just shall live by faith. Totidem verbis.

By which it follows;

1. That all his quotations of Scripture, concerning faith in the promises, are
to no purpose, seeing they intend the justifying faith only; as that the just
shall live by faith, etc.

2. That we have no promises at all concerning outward things, for that there
are no promises made to a temporary faith, nor to temporaryes.

3. That none can have help in their greatest misery; for a temporary faith
does them fail, Math. 13.21.

4. That a justifying faith is not sufficient for matters of this life, and
temporalls, but there is need of another kind to be joined with it, for (so he
says) both these kinds are the gifts of God.

Sic debile fundamentum fallit opus.
EDW. NORRICE.

The Answer to this third Part.
FOr any one to speak and affirm any untruth, tho the matter it self be of no
great consequence, is neither laudable or approoved with God, or honest men.
Notwithstanding you have not only here affirmed an untruth, which is of no
great consequence, but also in a matter (at least as the Reader may convert it)
of some weight. For here you say that you have transcribed this distinction
(totidem verbis) just in so many words, as I have written it: when as you have
converted some of my words into your own, and in stead of this saying in my
writings (the other to preserve and provide necessaries for the body, while God
shall give him life, etc.) You have put down these words (the other to
preserve the corporal life here, etc.) In the altering of which sentence, I
know not your intentions; but this I am sure of, it does prove that to be
untrue which you here affirm, namely, that my distinction of faith is here
written, totidem verbis. I hope your pen does not run so in other matters, as
it has done in this; where it transcribes not truly six lines without sending
with it an untruth? But let this pass. I proceed to the distinction it self.

Though our Apostle says Ephesians. 4.5. there is one faith, that is, one faith
that justifyeth unto eternal salvation, yet he does not deny that there be no
more sorts in any sense. For besides that one faith, which for distinctions
sake, we call saving faith, which apprehends Christ unto eternal life, there
are (as the Scriptures do witness James 2.19. 1. Cor. 13.2.) other sorts of
faith in another sense.

Concerning the sorts of faith I rested there, in this distinction of eternal
and temporary faith, as fittest to the purpose where I used it. Which
distinction (seeing here you most unworthyly except against it) I aggresse to
clear.

To clear this distinction then from being erroneous or dangerous, I need say
no more, but what I have said already; but to give the well-disposed Reader
further satisfaction, it will not be unmeete to have it further amplified. A
little before I used this distinction, I desired you to note (as in my writings
does appear) that when I imputed the lack of outward necessaries, to the
lack of faith, I did not call the faith of Gods servants into question,
whereby they are justified before God, seeing a man (as I acknowledged) may
have faith to justify himself before God, and yet want faith in apprehending a
temporal promise. Whereupon I inferred this distinction of faith Eternal and
Temporary: Not calling it temporary for that it self indureth for a time, but
so calling it (as the words are) for the object it apprehends, which is some
temporary promise, or blessing, and the other Eternal, for the eternal
promise it apprehends. Which 2. sorts of faith (as the words immediately
follow) being diverse in respect of their several object, each of them ought to
be referred to his proper object. Eternal or justifying faith to eternal
promises; and Temporary faith to temporal promises. So then as you say (and
that truly) whosoever comes short of Heaven, it is because he wants faith
in apprehending the eternal promises: So we say (and that truly) that
whosoever wants bread, it is because he lacks faith in apprehending the
temporal promises. So far there. To this purpose I also spoke in my answer
to the preface of your Arguments. By which words it is plain, in what respect
I approove of this distinction, and call faith there Temporary: not in that it
lasts but for a time (as you falsely dream) but for the object it
apprehends, which is some Temporary promise and blessing; and the other I
called Eternal, in that it apprehends eternal promises, or blessings. So
then faith is distinguished into faith eternal and tempory, in respect it
apprehends several objects: Which 2. apprehensions if we understand faith
in that general sense, as it is defined Heb. 11.1. which is as well the
evidence of things eternal, as temporal, or as it apprehends both eternal
and temporal favors and promises. If I say we understand faith in so
general a sense, these 2. apprehensions are but several acts of one and the
same faith, else not.

By all which briefly it does appear, that your excepting against this
distinction, is but frivolous; and that the foundation of my building is
discovered to be so firm, as that all your Petrinell flashes can not shake it,
and that by your conclusions, or sequells, you do but labor (as it will
appear) to bring a darkness upon Goshen, which will not be, for I call faith
temporary, not because it lasts for a time, but because it apprehends
temporal promises and blessings, by which it does appear, that your
conclusions for the most part do not follow from any thing which I have
written, seeing you make tempory faith in that respect and sense, as it is said
to last, but for a time to be the ground of your conclusions. And therefore to
each of these conclusions, I returne-in this brief answer.

First my quotations of Scripture, concerning faith in the promises (contrary
to your saying) are to good purpose, and pertinent to the matter, seeing they
intend that faith, which the Saints of God ought to have, to apprehend
temporal promises and blessings.

2. Secondly that we have as good and firm promises for the things of this
life, as for that which is to come, notwithstanding there are no promises made,
either to a temporary faith in that respect, as you call it Temporary, namely,
as it is said to last but a while; nor to Temporaryes, that is, (as I conceive
your meaning) to those who are out of Christ Jesus. Thus much I knew before, as
also maintained against you, as appears in my answer to your third Argument.
For among other your assertions, this is one, namely, that the very same
dispensation in outward things, belongs to one as to another (to the evil and
the good) and there is no difference; which assertion I there opposed, and made
it appear to be a position, contrary to sound doctrine; and thus much you do
now in this place acknowledge, in that you say, There are no promises made to
Temporaries, that is, to wicked and ungodly persons. So that you have justly
brought that upon your self, which you unjustly intended against another. For
(by your own confession) you contradict your self: If that in your argument be
true, then this here must needs be false; if this be true, that cannot be
current. I pray you take notise of this, and the Lord give you an humble heart,
and willing mind to confess your failing.

3. To your third conclusion I thus answer: That notwithstanding temporary
faith (so called by you, because it lasts but a time) does fail, when
tribulation comes, Mat. 13.21. Yet it does not therefore follow from this
distinction, that more can have assurance of help in their greatest misery,
seeing in my distinction (yet not mine only) I termed that faith tempory, not
(as you feign would have me) because it lasts for a time, but because it
apprehends temporal promises, and blessings. Nay do not I labor to
persuade the Saints of God to believe that they may have assurance of help,
and deliverance in and out of temporal plagues and miscryes, if they are not
found to lack temporary faith, that is a firm and steadfast apprehension of
the temporal promises, which God in Christ Jesus (as the eternal promises)
have firmly made to all his servants?

4. To the fourth conclusion I answer, That if by faith here you understand
faith in so general a sense, as it is in that of Heb. 11.1. that is, as it
apprehends both temporail and eternal promises, it is sufficient, both for
the matters of this life, and that which is to come; for faith there generally
conceived, apprehends both things eternal and temporal, as before I have
showed: but if by faith here you mean that special one faith, which
justifies to eternal salvation, being an apprehension of a thing that is
eternal, and an Act of that faith, Heb. 11.1. You shot besides the mark.

Now whereas I use these words, These 2. kinds (or sorts) of faith are both
the gift of God, I therein speak but the truth, for as the former, namely,
Justifying, or Eternal faith, is (as one faith) a persuasion given of God, for
apprehending eternal life and his Adjuncts. So the second, namely, temporary
faith (so called as before I termed it) is a persuasion given of God, for
apprehending temporary life with the Adjuncts. So that now you see
(notwithstanding your great stir) this distinction being thus grounded upon
the word of God, remains unmooveable; and I doubt not the foundation being so
firm, but that the building will also stand, notwithstanding all the storms
and tempests that beat against it; For Sola veritas invicta opprimi, sed
deprimi non potest. And I am bound to say, that the maine doctrines, in my
writings (as by them may appear) are warranted for truth, by authority of
Scripture, and if need did require, it may be prooved warrantable by authority
of approoved writers, both at home and abroad, notwithstanding I must therefore
be slandered and derided.

EPILOGVS.
THe ground and foundation of all these horride reports, which are scatered
abroad of me (good Christian) concerning prayer for outward blessings, I here
present to thy view; is it not Mr. Norrice his collections from my writings,
which he affirms to be my Assertions, etc.? Whereunto I have here directly
answered; Judge righteous judgment; are those reports true, which thou have
heard reported of me? Have I affirmed under my own hand, and in my own name,
first, That to teach men to pray for temporal benefits, with submission to the
will of God expressed, is to blaspheme the truth? Secondly that we may pray
for any thing and have it? Thirdly that Gods will must be subject to our wills,
and to what we desire? Fourthly that whosoever wants outward necessaries,
have no faith, but are mere infidells, and the like fooleries? Have I either
taught these fopperies, or are they affirmed by me in any of my writings? Who
has ever heard or seen it? Where does he dwell, or what is his name? If these
reports be but flying speeches, and mere flanders, and thou can not produce
any to stand forth to justify against me, that I affirmed these particulars,
neither that any other to show it under my hand, then know (whosoever thou art,
that have received these accusations, and again report them) that thou have
gone beyond thy bounds, seeing one of Gods Canons runs thus: Receive not an
accusation against any one under 2 or 3 witnesses. And again; Judge nothing
before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5. Yea but (it may be) thou will say, that those
rumors, which thou received'st, and again reportedst, concerning me, came
from Mr. Norrice, and it is strange if he should speak or write any thing,
much more such foul things of any one, without sound and sufficient warrant.
Strange and lamentable it is indeed, yet how true it is, I leave it to thy
godly and judicious judgment, comparing my writings with his collections. And
if thou find (after due examination) all these (as he here affirms) to be
my assertions, and that under my own hand, then let me bear the blame for
ever; but if not, then know, that the reproach I hereby suffer, is very great,
and to me the more grievous, in regard it is brought upon me by such a one as
he; whom notwithstanding I desire, that he would yet once ingenuously
confess, wherein he has offended. In the mean time for my part, I can take
it as a glory to pass by offenses. Howsoever to finish all, give me leave to
add this memento by an apostrophe. Mr. Norrice you know that long since I made
you acquainted with the grounds I hold, concerning praying for temporal
blessings, whereunto at first you assented, but not long after you framed 5.
Arguments, intending thereby directly to contradict that which before you
assented unto; which Arguments you sent to me, and withal desired that if they
were faulty or failing, I would send you word wherein: As also set down in
writing my opinion, concerning prayer for outward blessings, which thing (at
length) I did, and sent you (as you desired me) in writing both an Answer to
your Arguments, as also the grounds concerning the point before specified,
wishing you to show what I had written to whom you would.

This being done (had you well done) you should have showed (had you showed
any) my writings, and mine only, that the Reader might have judged
accordingly. In stead of so doing, you drew certain collections, grounded upon
snaps and snips of my writings, wherein sometimes my words are corrupted,
sometimes cut off by the waste, to the destroying of their sense; sometimes
some clause of your own thrust in, as if it were mine, and sometimes doctrine
foysted in, for which you have no ground in my writings, but indeed denied and
opposed in them, as in this my answer it does and may appear. And yet for all
this, you are not ashamed to say (I wonder at it) that in this paper you have
presented to the Readers view no more, but a view of my Assertions, set down
under my own hand, and here you have laid your credit down to pawn, that
these collections of yours, do agree with that which I have written, as
appears by these words (Concordat cum originali) which you have subscribed
immediately after your collections; notwithstanding that collection immediately
going before (I will be bold to say it, and that without an If) is a doctrine
of your own invention, and none of mine, which yet you have here fathered upon
my writings.

O Tempora, O Mores! Let all men judge whether you have not grossly carried your
self in this matter, in that you have labored by your false collections, to
make me odious in Town and Country If you have thus abused my Assertions,
spread before your eyes, fair writing, what marvaill is it, though some
prejudicall Hear give credit to your speeches, and through your means abuse
to ears of many with many senseless fopperies? If you by this your dealing,
either out of malice or passion, have not only raised scandalls and foul
reproaches on me, but also to effect your own ends, gone about to pervert both
Priest and people, then know that God will find it out, and that without timely
repentance, publicly reproove them. God give you so to consider of it, as it
may never be laid to your souls charge.

FINIS.

