A book called the Treasure for traueilers, divided into five Books or
parts, contaynyng very necessary matters, for all sorts of Trauailers, either
by Sea or by Land, written by William Bourne.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1578.

VIRTUES IN ACTA


To the Right worshipful sir William Winter Knight, Master of the Queens
Majesty's Ordinance by Sea, Suruaior of her highness marine causes. etc.
William Bourne wishes increase of woorship unto the state of honor and true
felicity.
WHat great commodity and profit Right worthy and worshipful Knight, has
always redownded unto the common weal, and govern ours of the same, which in
martial affairs and warlike discipline, have chiefly delighted and taken
great pains and care in the same, and unto what excellent fame and renown it
has always brought and exalted unto high dignity, those that have taken upon
them, for their Prince and Countries prosperity great exploytes, rather
putting them selves in danger of their lives, then their Prince and Country
should be dishonored. Then I may say without any objection or doubt, that
your woorship is one: For I my self can witness, and of my own knowledge,
know, that no person in this Land has such great judgment and knowledge in
martial affairs by Sea, both touching the shipping, for that purpose, and also
the provision for the same, as your woorship has: and as for your courage,
valiantness, and wisdom, which is not unknown unto the world, whereas I
being most simple have written this base and rude volume, which I do call a
Treasure for Trauaylers, am so bold to dedicate it unto your worship, not for
that the Book is worthy to be preferred unto so worthy a person, but for my
bounden duetyes sake, to acknowledge my good will toward your worship, for
that I have most largelye tasted of your benevolence toward me, being as a
poor Gunner, serving under your worthiness, hoping that your woorship will
take this simple work in good part: the which work is divided into five
Books, the first is Geometry perspectiue, the second Book is appertainyng
unto Cosmographie, the third Book is Geometry general, the fourth Book is
Statick, and the fyfth and last Book is appertayning unto natural Philosophy,
as the contents of the matter do appear in the Tables of the Books, hoping
that your worship will take this simple thing, as a true token of my good will
toward you, although the thing it self be but rude and simple. And thus, I
cease to trouble your worship any longer, at this time, beseeching the living
God to prosper you in all your affairs, in perfect health, with all your
children and family, Amen.

By your worships at commandment, William Bourne.

The Preface to the Reader.
Considering with my self, gentle Reader, with how infinite pains and
labor, diverse heretofore, men of most excellent wits, and of passing
knowledge, have compiled their Books, and with what heed and circumspectnesse
they have examined and perused their trauayles, and with what fear and
warynesse they have published the same. and not without good cause why, for
thereby they have opened them selves, their name, and fame, to no small
dangers and harzardes: namely to the veiwe, judgment, and report of all
men. For which cause, now seeing I have taken upon me at this time a hard
enterprise, a burden too heavy for me to bear or sustain, who have at
length showed my self so hardly, as to publish this little Treatise, I being
altogether unlearned, and having no help of any other learned persons, being
of my self altogether destitute both of knowledge and learning.

Wherefore I desire thee, gentle Reader, to bear with my rudeness, and
consider that it is the good will which I bear unto my natyue Country, for to
profit the common wealth, as much as lies in me, although that it be not
learned like, yet I pray thee hold me excused, being altogether ignorant,
lacking the capac^^e both of knowledge and eperience (who having taken upon
me) to publyshe this to the scannyng and trying of so many touchestones, and
dangerous crimes, that I being so simple, should enterprise so far to take
upon me to open any Science.

But notwithstanding, I do see, that it is so needful a matter to be known
unto a number of persons, that do desire for to have instructions in those
causes that are contained in this simple volume, the which book I do call A
Treasure unto Trauaylers, and is divided intoo five Books.

The first book.
And the first book conteyneth the particular conclusions of the Skall
Quardrant or Astrolobe, and in the like manner the particular conclusion of the
Cross staff etc. Also the use of the Horizontall or flat Sphere, whereby to
draw or take the platte of any country. etc.

The second book.
The Second book does show unto you, if that you do know the Longitude and
the Latitude of any place truly, then how to know the distance in miles from
you, or any place assygned, and by what point of the Compass that it is from
you.

And because that London is the most famous and the most principal place here
in England, I have have named certain principal places here in Europe, and
also in Africa, and in Asia, and also in America, with some of the
principallest Islands in the world, both their Longitude and Latitude, and
their distance from the city of London, and by what point of the Compass that
it is from London, and also how much that the Moon does change rather or
later, then it does at the city of London, and what length their longest day
is of. etc.

The third book.
The third book is as touching the measuring of Superficials and sollid bodies,
and how to augment them, or diminish them, unto what proportion or bigness you
list, whether that it be the tonnage of any ship, or the bigness of any
kaske. etc.

The fourth book.
The fourth book is as touching the Art Statical, as to know the weight of any
ship swimmyng on the water, and such other like. etc.

The fyfth book.
The fifth or the last book is as touching the natural causes of sand and rocks
in the Sea, and diverse such other like causes, as it does appear in the table
of the contents, of the Books. etc. The which things, in my opinion, are very
necessary for all manner of persons, and especially unto such as be Trauaylers:
which causes me to give the book unto name, A Treasure unto Trauaylers. For
what thing can there be more better unto a Trauayler, either by Sea or by
Land, (Gold and Silver only excepted then to know the distances from place
to place, and to have capacity to know the height and the lownes of any thing,
and how to make a Plat or Card for any country. etc. which is declared in the
first book.

And also how necessary a thing it is for a Trauailer to know unto what quarter
of the world any place does bear from him, and what the distau^ce is
thither, Geometric perspectiue.
and what length the day is of, when he is the^e: as I have known a great
number of persons that have trauayled unto sundry places, and when they have
come home, they have had no judgment at all, as touching that place that they
have trauayled unto, for that they have not known unto what quarter of the
world the place is, that they have been at: neither in respect what the
distance is thither. And these matters are showed in the second book.

And also it is not hurtful, Cosmographia.
but necessary for a Trauayler to know how to measure al manner of
Superficalles, as land, pauementes, bourd, and Glass, and solid bodies, as
Timber and Stone, and the burden or tonnage of shyps, and the bigness of any
thing.

And furthermore it is necessary for a Trauailer in like manner, Geometric
general.
to have a way to get the true weight of any thing that swimmerh on the water,
and in like manner to know the weight of any thing that synketh into the water,
and what it waigheth in the water, to be lifted from the bottom unto the
superficial part of the water, as it is declared in the fourth book. And
furthermore, it is very necessary and convenient for Trauaylers either by Sea
or by land, Staticke.
to have knowledge in the natural causes of sundry things that are to be seen
in trauayling, as the cause of sands and banks, as well in rivers as in the
sea, Natural Philosophy.
and the cause of Marish ground and meddowes, and the cause of cliffes on the
sides of rivers, and on the sea coast, with such other like matters, as is
declared in the fifth and last Book.

And now it is possible, that some persons will marueyle, that I being so
simple, and not learned, should take upon me to be a medler in these causes,
for that they be matters that do appertain unto learned men. And it is
possible, that it will be dislyked of a number of people, as envy dwells
generally in the hearts of most men, for that is the property of many people,
to dislyke all things that are not done by them selves, using to read Books
to no other end, but to find faults in them.

Discouragement.
And yet it is possible, that they will do nothing the^ selves, which were a
cause of discouragyng unto any person that does write: yet notwithstanding it
shall not discourage me, for that I am utterly unlearned, and therefore it shall
not dislyke me, if any learned man does find any fault therein: for I being
simple and unlearned, it is no discredit for me, either to be taught, or to
have the faults showed unto me. For by that means I may refourme the faults,
either by them, or my self.

And furthermore, I do not intend to make any book to teach them that are
cunning and learned: But the only cause of my writing of this book is, to
instruct or teach them that are simple and unlearned: And therefore
notwithstanding, I shall the better like of it, Books are written to the intent
to teach the unlearned.
if any learned man should write or set out any book, as touching these
causes, to refourme this. And my opinion is this, if that any Book be set
forth unto the common people in the world, that then it is to the end, to
teach the symplest sort of people that are not instructed in learned causes.
But if that it be any high point in learned causes, then it is not for the
common sort of people, but to be in learned men's Libraries, and therefore as it
is not written by a learned man, so in like manner you must not look for fine
or eloquent schole terms, but even to take the substance of the matter rudely
as it is, and more to regard the necessarinesse of the matter, whether it may
do any good in the common wealth. etc.

And yet notwithstanding my opinion is this, that no person is to be disliked
of, that does his good will and endeavor, No person is to be disliked that does
his good will to do good.
to do good in the common wealth, howesoeuer that it proves. But those
persons are utterly to be dyslyked of, that do hurt willyngly in the common
wealth, as extortioners and usurers, and conuayers of Corn and Vitayles, and
other necessaries and commodityes that his country does lack or has need
of.

And al those persons are not to be thought well of, Persons that are to be
dislyked.
that do desire to live easily, abusing the good benefytes that God does
bless the earth with: as al licentious lyuers, as drunkardes, banketters,
whoores, and whooremaysters, and such as do use an excess in apparel, much
above their degree.

And also those people are to be abhorred of al men, who do annoy the earth,
that use quarrellyng and fyghtyng, robbyng and stealyng, caryng not how they
come by it, so that they may have it, with which this our country of England
flows at this day, (the more is the pytie) for what wickedness is there that
can be devised, but that it is used here in England amongst al degrees, which
must needs procure the wrath of God to light upon us. And there is as great
abuse amongst the Clergy, which should be as Lanternes to give us light, to
lead us unto virtue. Abuses of England.
But now in these days they be as Lanternes to lead us unto vice. So that al
degrees of people are given unto wickedness, although that we have the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, preached daily unto us, yet wickedness does abound, for what
sin or wickedness is there, but that it is suffered and used, as wichcraft
and sorcery, and magical Enchantment, and coungering, which is the greatest and
most abominable dishonouring of God, that may be.

For in their magical Enchantment and coungeryng, Magical Inchauntment is a
great dishonoring of God.
do they not observe hours in the making of Carecters, and set up pickturs of
the Roode, and Agnus Dei, and the Doom, and a number of such other pickturs,
painted, and gilded upon Virgin Parchment, as they call it. And then in like
manner their cirkles must be perfumed, and inbalmed with sweet odours, and they
must have a knave priest, made by the Popes law, to hallowe a certain
portion, with a number of such vain Ceremonies. And when that they have the
devil, whom they do serve, and do give him in some cases some thing for a
sacrifice, and when that they do give the devil a charge to tell them any
question that they would know, then are used a number of superstitious words,
as in the name of the virginity of the Virgin Mary, and the head of John
Baptist, and a number of vain Saints more, besides a number of such
detestable Ceremonies, to the great dishonouring of God. etc. And who is the
cause and the procurement of these most odious and detestable matters, but a
number of vain, and wicked people, yea some of the^ be of no small wealth nor
calling, that do procure these matters: For if that they have lost any thing,
the^ they must repair unto a Coniurer, to know where that is again. And
furthermore, there are some vain and foolish Gentlemen, which seek to live
pleasantly and idly, that must live by gaming and play, and he must have a
familiar in a Ryng, What manner of christian is he that desires to be familiar
with the devil.
or such other like place. But what manner of Christian do you think him to
be, that desires to be familiar with the devil? So that a great number of
people that are in the world, desire to live idly and pleasantly, caring not,
so that they have their pleasure here, although their soul go unto hell, and
there to be tormented in fire and Brimstone ever world without end. Wherefore
God turn the hearts of those that are the cause of wickedness, and especially
here in our native country, and Realm of England, for that we have a most
gracious and virtuous Queen reigning over us, and such a one as does always
study for the setting forth of the word of God and sacred Gospel of Jesus
Christ, The vertuousnesse of the Queens majesty is our preservation.
and does always study for peace and tra^quility. And considering the great
wickedness that is used in England, the wrath of God would have lighted upon us
long before this time, but only for the grace and vertuousnesse of the Queens
miaesty, that God has spared us for her sake. Therefore let us al pray unto
God for her long life and prosperity, that she may reign long over us. For
surely my opinion is this, except we do repent and turn from our wickedness,
the wrath of God will light upon us. For in these days every man is but for him
self, the elder sort of people are given generally al unto excessive and huge
covetousness, and the younger sort of people are given generally unto pride and
whooredome, and other vain toys, The abuses of al degrees.
as idleness and gamyng, so that in respect few or none have the fear of God
before their eyes. And if any persons do frame them selves to live virtuously,
according unto the law of God, then they shall be but derided both of the elder
sort, and also of the younger: for the covetous rich persons will say, he is a
fool, he can not make shift to live, he has too precise a conscience: and the
youngest, vain glorious proud fools, will say, He is a scriptured man, he
will not have us to be meery nor go clenly. Covetousness is called good
husbandry.
So that in these days, extortio^ and covetousness is called good husbandry:
and the one of them will commend the other, saying, He is a wise fellow, he will
live, how fraudule^tly soever he come by his goods. So what wickedness soever
that it be, Pride is clenlinesse, swearing lustiness, drunkenness, good
fellowshyppe.

Whoredom, friendship (...) a trick of youth.


the same shall be commended by them that use the like: as pride in these days
is called clenlinesse, and swearing lustines, saying, he is a lusty fellow,
and drunkenness, good fellowship, and whooredome a trick of youth or
freindship, so that the one sort of people do heap up the goods on the earth
vnsaciably, and the other sort of people, spend it away most vainly and
wantonly, so that the good gifts or benefytes of God, which are the riches of
the world, are abused on every side, and not used as they ought to be, that is
to say, to do good upon the earth with that, for it was created for the use of
man to a good end, to take his portion of it, and the rest to use unto some
good purposes at his discretion, for that God does send it him, unto that
end, and not to be heaped up, neither to throw it away wickedly, as a number
do: Therefore men do not rightly consider, wherefore they were borne upon the
face of the earth.

The first cause that man is borne for, is to serve God.
First he is borne to serve God, for that he has created him, and al mankind,
and has created him a reasonable creature, and has created al thing for his
use: as first the earth, with all his mynerals, as we do dig out of the
earth, Gold, Silver, and al other metals, and stones, to make us necessaryes
to serve man's use. And also the face of the earth, he has created to bring
forth Trees to make us Timber, and Grass to feed Cattle, to make us food
and meat: Corn to make us bread, with all his other benefytes, which man
receives from the face of the earth. The Sea with all other Ryuers, brings
forth Fish of innumerable sorts, to make us food and meat, yea the very Sea
is for man's use, too pass from Country unto Country.

The air in like manner, wherein are multitudes of feathered fowls, for man's
use, yea the very Heavens are for man's use, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
are created for the use of man. And also he has redeemed us from the Original
sin of Adam, by his precious bloodde sheeddyng. Wherefore we are first
borne too serve God.

The second cause that man is borne is to serve his country.
And secondly, we are borne to serve our Prince, and na^yue Country, that is
to say, to defend our Territoryes, that no other ferreine Nations do spoil
us of our labors, or our Prince of her dignity.

Thirdly man is borne to labor to live
And thyrdly, we are borne to provide for our household, and our family and to
see that they be trained up, to live in the fear of God, and to know their
duty to their magistrates, and to train them up unto some faculty, whereby
they may get them a living. etc.

Wherefore I would wish al those persons, that it has pleased God to bless
upon the face of the earth, with any worldly revenues, or substance and
living, to practice some thing, whereby they may do some good upon the face
of the earth. And in like manner to train up their children in the nurture and
fear of God. etc.

Especially the noble men and gentlemen, and they themselves not to desire to
live pleasantly and idely, The causes of al degrees.
but to practice some virtuous thing, as martial affairs, or such other like
causes, as their capacity will serve them. For there were two causes in the
beginning of all degrees of the temporaltie or layetie, whereof al Noble men and
Gentlemen had their original and beginning, and they are worthy to be had in
honor unto the worlds end, for their parentage, and the much the rather, if
that they do follow the rule of their noble and worthy progenitors.

The first cause was, for their noble acts and deeds in the defending of
their Country against their enemies. etc. The first cause.
So by that means, for their valiantness against their enemies, they were
extolled and advanced unto high dignity, every person according unto his
deserts, and had lyuings to maintain their state, and they to defend their
Territories whilst the common people did manure and till the ground.

And the second cause in degrees of nobilytie and gentlemen, The second cause.
was to them that made good and wholesome laws for the good government of
their commonweals. Therefore I would wish al noble me^ and gentlemen to follow
the noble race of their progenitors: and then they are the highlyer to be
esteemed. But otherwise, what a shame and discredit, if that they do rightly
consider of it, is it for them to be evil members in the common weal:
considering how worthyly their ancientrie did attain and come unto their
calling. Good members in a common weal.
Therefore I would wish every gentleman, to practice something, that he may do
good, either to defend the common weal, or else to profyt it some otherway, and
not to be idle and to seek to live easily, whereby the common weal may be the
better mayntayned, the Prince the better served, and our Country the better
furnished, with such persons, as are able to defend the Prince, Crown, and
dignytie, as well in their good counsel, and also in their acts and deeds. And
also in my opinion, they are very necessary members in the common weal in
diverse respects, that are Trauaylers into other Countries, and they are able
to profyt their own Country in diverse respects: for that he is able to give
judgment by his own Country of other, whether it be as touching the
government of the common weal, in the executing of their laws of the manner
of traffic, and in the usage and nature of the people, both in their Cities
and Towns, and in their Country, and what manner of commodities they have,
and of the situation of their Towns, and in their fortifycation, and also of
what strength and force other Princes and states are of, and of the order and
manner of vsyng them selves in martial affairs in the wars, and what their
Artillery is, and how they are weaponed and armed, and furnished in every
respect, which is very necessary to be known unto the nobility, for that
they may provide them selves, and their Country for their better safety, and
also they shall know what thing shall annoy their enemies most.

Then it is a plain case, that Trauailers into other Countreies do much
profit the common weal. For suppose this, that if we, or any Country did live
in that order, that we did travail into no place or Country, neither no
nation unto us, then in process of time we should beecome barbarous and
savage. Therefore the Trauaylers are much to be commended in diverse respects.
Wherefore I will show you my opinion, what manner of people are meetest to be
trauaylers. For a number of people have trauayled, and when they have come
home, they have had no judgment of their travail, but have been utterly
ignorant of such things as were most meetest of a Trauailer to be noted, and
partlye some of them were not capable in those causes, What manner of persons
are the meetest to be Trauailers.
and some of them many times, their heads are occupied with other vain and
foolish causes. etc. as this first: those people that are able to benefyt their
country by their travail, when they are come home, ought not to be to young:
for commonly a young man his head is occupied with every vain and light
cause, as with banketting, and play, and game, and daunsing, and dalying with
women, and gazing upon vain toys. etc. So that his head is occupied with no
other thing, but all pleasant matters.

Therefore he that is sent to be a Trauailer, What a Trauailer should consider
of.
to the end to profyt his Country, ought to be a man that has a stayed and a
modest head, and such a one as is capable, and has a good wit with him, and
learned. And if he be seen in the Mathematical Science, it is all the
better: For then he shall the sooner conceive any matter. And also he ought
not to be either to young nor to old, but between the age of.40. and 56. or
57. years. etc. And these be the principallest points, that a trauailer
should consider of. First, to consider what manner of Nation he is entered into,
whether they be politic or wise, or Civil people, or whether they be a rude
or barbarous nation: and so in his travailing to frame his usage accordingly as
near as he can, that the people may like well of him* for in so doing he
should understand the better of the state and commodity of the Country,
City, Town or place: and when that you do come into any City or Town, view
of what manner of ground it stands upon, and what it may be or is subject
unto, and in like manner how it is fortifyed and provided, and how it is
maintained, and whether it stands upon any haven or river, that has vent
unto the Sea, or any water, that has no vent or passage unto the Sea, but
through or by some other City or Town, before it comes unto the Sea. And
also under whom it is, and how it is governed, and what their Laws and
Ordinances be: And what notable Monuments of buildyngs there be: and any
other rare and notable thing that is not common: And also to learn what
nation, Country, City or Town that may most annoy them, and also what
Country, City or Town does most pleasure them, and what trade or
Marchaundize they are principallest maintained by, and what commodities are
most plentiest, and what commodities or things necessariest, are most scantest,
and what the nature of the soil or ground is thereabouts, that is to say, what
the ground is most aptest to bring forth, or most unapt, as touching Corn,
Trees, and such other like, whatsoever it be. And al^o what manner of Money and
coin is used, both in Silver and Gold, and other base Money in Copper, if
they have any. And also what the people has most pleasure in, and what they do
most abhor or hate, and whether the Country be a plain and champion
Country, or Hills and Mountains, or low marsh or marishe ground, and whether
it be full of Rivers or not, and also how the Princes or the other Governors
do leuey their Soldiers in the time of their wars, and how they do arm
them, and weapon them, and furnish them in every respect, and what duties or
customs, or tolles, or such like charges are paid, whether it be of them
selves, or upon strangers, or any other kind of goods or merchandise, and
what thing it is they make most store of, that they will not have pass out of
their Countries, with all such other lykenes, that for brevity I do omit.

And now such persons as have noted these causes at their return home, are
able to profyt much the common weal in diverse respects, and are persons of
great valor unto their Country, for that they are able to profyt the state,
and the common weal of their Country in diverse respects. For all those
persons are of great valor and price, and are as special Jewels unto their
Country, What persons are of valor in the common weal.
and in the common weal, that are politic, cunning, and valiant in mar^hall
affairs: for thereby their Country is defended and preserved from the
forrayne enemies: For look what Country is rich and welthye, then other
Princes are desirous thereof, for to have the spoils, and the benifyts of it:
wherefore by polycie and manlynesse they must be defended. Therefore men expert
in marshall affairs are very necessary in a common wealth.

And furthermore, all those persons, that are wise and sober, and discreet in
the good government of the common weal, such as do maintain virtue and
suppress vice, are persons of great valor to their Country, and also those
persons are able by their wisdom and knowledge to benefyt or profit their
Country, whether it be in the teaching of good arts and Sciences, or by any
other means, so that the common weal be the better mayntayned, are persons of
great valor, and are as Jewels unto their country, and their country is
beholding unto them. But contrariwise, all those persons that are not able to
profyt the common weal in any respect, and also desire to live pleasauntly and
wantonly, and have great livings and riches, and do no good therewith: all
those persons are more beholding unto their Country, then their Country is
unto them. But if they have great store of riches, and do covet to heap more,
caryng not how they do come by it, so they may have it: such persons are the
destruction, and are as Caterpillars to the common weal of their Country, for
that they do annoy and hurt the prosperity and the state of their Country, for
that they catch and heap up into their custody more then does suffice
themselves, by great quantities, whereas thowsandes do lack to serve their
turns, that are better members in the Common weal then they are. And all such
persons, the Common weal has a good turn when they are delivered of such a
one: For by that means is dispearsed that heap of store unto a number of
persons hands besides that which he would have heaped up more, if that he
had continued longer. So that some of the richest sort of people are not the
best members in the common weal, but the worste: and yet it behooves some
persons to be rich, and by their riches the common weal is the better
maintained, as thus.

The Prince of any Country being godly and virtuous, the Common Weal does
the better flourishe, and is continually kept the safer from the forrayne
enemies: and the Noble men, and Gentlemen, that are virtuous, and given to
practice the good government, and the preseruement of them selves, and the
state of their Country. So then their riches do good, and also if the
Marchaunte be rich, so that he do not hurt his own Country, but wins his
riches out of other foreign Countries, or any other good and virtuous Subject,
by his riches he may do good, if he do use that he has to the furtheraunce
of the common weal: So that it is necessary that there should be rich
persons in the common weal, for a number of causes, so that those rich persons
be virtuously bent, but otherwise they may do hurt. And thus gentle Reader, I
do make an end, desyring you that you will take this simple Book in good
part, and if there be any faults committed by me, either by ignorance or
negligence, I pray you let me gentlye understand thereof, for man cannot be
so precise, but that he may err. And thus I betake you unto almighty God,
the Creator of all things.

By yours, William Bourne.

A brief note, taken out of M. Dees Mathematical Preface that goes before
Euclides Elements now extant in our Inglish tongue, as touching what the
Mathematical Sciences are, that is to say, all those Arts that order number,
measure, or wayght, and time, without the which, in respect, we can do
nothing. For what can be done in any respect, but we must use number, which
is Arithmeticke? or what can be done, but we must use measure or wayght, which
is Geometry? or what can there be done, but that we must use time, which
does appertain unto Astronomy? for by number we know how many or few
there are: and by measure we know whether it be inches, feet, yardes, scores,
miles, leagues, pounds, ounces, galloes, quartes, or tons: and by time, we
know whether it be minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years. etc.
Whereof two are pryncipal, Arithmeticke and Geometry, whereof al these
compounded scientes are sprung of these two Simples.
Things done by hand Geometrical.
1 Mecometrie. Is the measuring of the length anything whatsoever.

2 Embadometrie. Is the measuring the contents of all flat things, as Land,
Boorde, Glass.

3 Stereometrie. Is the measuring of all solid bodies, as Timber, Stone, Kaske,
and such like.

Things measured that have distaunce from you.
4 Apomecometrie. Is how far any thing is from you, whether it be on land or
on water.

5 Hipsomettie. Is how high or deep any thing seen, is from the level,
whether it be on Land or water. etc.

6 Platometrie. How broad any thing is. etc.

7 Geodesie. Is the suruaying or measuring of lands, woods, or water, having
distaunce from you by instrument or otherwise.

8 Geographie. Is the description of Countries, or Kingdoms.

9 Cherographie or Typographie. Is the description of a part of a Country or
kingdom. etc.

10 Hydrographie. Is the description of the Seas, with the Islands and rocks,
and dangers and lines, and Courses. etc.

11 Stratarithmetrie. Is the view or measuring of a battle of men, to know the
number of them not coming near them. etc.

12 Perspectiue. Demonstrateth the manner and property of all radiations
direct, broken, and reflected.

13 Astronomy. Is the moving of the lights and Planets. etc.

14 Music. Teaches the diuersyty of sounds. etc.

15 Cosmographie. Is the description of the whole earth, and the Parallel of
the heavens answering thereunto etc.

16 Astrology. Is to give judgment by ye signs, lights and planets. etc.

17 Statick. Is an art that does order and deal with heuines and lightness.
etc.

18 Anthropographie. Is of things appertaynyng to the body of man, to show
them. etc.

19 Trochilike. Does appertain unto the turning of wheels, this art is
necessary for Clockmakers, and Crane makers, and Mylles, and al other sciences,
that do deal with wheels.

20 Helicosophie. Is an art to draw hylical or Spheral or winding lines, and
is very necessary for Skrewe makers, and diverse other things.

21 Pneumatithmie. This art is necessary for all them that do make Pumpes or
great Bellows, for yt it teaches al those things that go by wind and water.
etc.

22 Menadrie. Is an art, that teaches the making of al ingenes, as things to
pull to, or thrust fro, or lifting up, or pressing down. etc.

23 Hypogeiodie. Is that art that does appertain unto myners in the ground.
etc.

24 Hydrogogie. Is that art to bring water unto any place assigned. etc.

25 Horometrie, or Horologiographie. Is the making of Dyals of al sorts. etc.

26 Zographie. Is the art of a cunning Painter. etc.

27 Althalmasat. The art of Grauing.

28 Archetectur. Is a cunning Mason or Carpenter. etc.

29 Navigations. Is sailing on the Sea. etc.

30 Thauruaturaike. Is that which does make strange works, as those that made
the brazen head seem to speak, the brazen Serpent to hiss, the Dove of wood
to fly, the Eagle made by art to fly. etc.

31 Archemastrie. This art teaches to bring to actual experience sensible al
worthy conclusions, by all the arts Mathematical, etc.

FINIS.
To the Reader of the first book,
The first book of the treasure for travelers, containing the particular
conclusion of the Scall for to know the hieght of any Tower, Steeple, or Hill,
or Wall, and the dystance unto them, and the particular conclusions of the
Cross staff, and to know the things before rehearsed after the playnest order
of teaching, and also there is the conclusion of the horizontal or flat Sphere
how to take the plat of any country, after the playnest order, with such other
like, very necessary for all sorts of trauelers either by sea or by Land,
written by Willyam Bourne.

To the Reader of the first part.
GEntle Reader, there is contained in this first book, the particular
conclusions of the Skal, as touching the knowing o^ heigthes, both by right
shadow, and contrary shadow: and also how to know any distance by the
Skalle. And although that M. Thomas Dygges has set out a book called
Pantometria, which is extant in print, as touching the conclusions of the
Skall, which is very learnedly done. Yet notwithstanding I do not think it
hurtful to show it particularly and plainly, whereby they may do it in most
causes, without Arithmetike. For the Skall being put but into.12. parts, it
may be counted by the head, without Arithmetike: but if the Skal be put into
many parts, then it must of force require the aid of Arithmetike. And also
there is the particular conclusions of the Cross staff, as to take the
wideness between any two marks, and the length of any wall, and the distance
unto any place, with other necessary matters to be done with the plain
Cross staff. etc. And also there is the Conclusion of the horizontal or flat
Sphere, how to take the plat of any Country, after the playnest order of
teaching, that is to say, by the point, and parts of points of the Compass:
For it is al one matter, whether that the Instrument be divided into degrees,
or parts of points: and that same may be done by plain lines of opposition,
without any Instrument or circle, which I do omyt at this time to speak of.
And although gentle readers, that it seems not unto you, to be learned like
done, yet notwithstanding it is possible, that there is some thing that is not
common in those books that are extant, that may do you pleasure. For the
learned sorts of books (it may be) are not most necessary to be common, and
yet it would do well, that the common sort of people should have some
instructions.

FOr that it is sufficiently declared in diverse books now extant in our
English tongue, wherefore I do think it superfluous for to show what a
Prick is, or what a line is, or what a Plat or Superficial is, or what Angles
be, and what a sholded body is, as it is sufficiently declared in all these
books: as in Euclides Elements, and in M. Thomas Dygges book called
Pantometay, and also in M. Leonarde Dygges book called Tectonicon. etc. A
Circle. A Center. A Circumference. A Diametre
A Circle is that which is drawn round with a pair of Compasses, a Center
is the myddle prick, Circumference is the compass, Diameter is the breadth of
a Circle. etc.

And furthermore, for that in this first part there is the conclusions of the
Scall, and the Cross staff, showing by them how for to know the distance
unto any place assigned: Therefore it is very necessary for to know the
parts of measure, as it is not unknown unto all men, what a foot is, and
that.12. inches makes a foot, so.3. foot is a yard, and.5. A Foot. A
Yard. A pase Geometrical.
foot is a pase Geometrical: but some persons have been of that opinion,
that.3. foot is a pase, which is a yard, but it is but a simple step, A
simple stop of yard.
and few men are able to endure to pase a yard any long time together: but
any person may endure to step two foot and a half, all a day long
together. Therefore a pase Geometrical, is two reasonable steps, and that is
five foot: and so any man may endure all a day together, A raze is two stepp^s.
and twelve pases makes a score, 12. pases is a score, that is, 20. yardes. A
mile is a 1000. pases, that is.5000. foot, or 1666. yardes, and 3. A Rod
is.16. foot.2. of land measure, and 18. foot is a Rod of wood measure.6.
foot is a fadome, and.833 fadome is a mile.
and that is twentye yardes, and that makes.60. foot: and a mile
conteyneth.1000. Geometrical pases, and that is.5000. foot, and that makes
1666. yardes.. and that is.2. foot, and that conteyneth 83. score.. and that
is.20. foot. etc. and a Rod is.16. foot and a half, of land measure,
and.18. foot is a Rod of wood measure, according to our English account:
and.303. Rod and.1/33. that is half a foot, is a mile of land measure,
and.277. Rod, and.7/9. that is.14. foot of wood measure, is a mile, and a
fadome is.6. foot, and that is.2. yardes: and.10. fadome is a score, and a
mile conteyneth.833. fadome, and.. part, that is 2. foot. etc.

And thus much have I said as touching our English account, as concerning
the measuryng of the length, or the distances unto any place assigned. etc.

The first Chapter of the first book conteynyng the making of the Quadrant
with the Skall, whereby you may know the height or lowenesse of any thing.
etc.
Now begins the first part of this book, called A Treasure for Trauaylers,
showing the conclusions of the Skall, whereby you may know the height of any
Tower, Steeple, or Wall, or the height of a Hill, and the distances unto any
mark assigned by the Conclusions of the Skall. And also in this first part
there is the Conclusions of the Cross staff: showing how to know the length
of the Corten of a wall, and the distance thereof, or any Town more playner
then is showed in M. Leonarde Dygges book called Tectonicon. And also there is
the making and the use of an Instrument, that may be called an Horizontal
Sphere, to draw the plat of any Country set out upon the face of the whole
earth: and how to know how to place the longitude and the latitude of any
Town, with other necessary things. etc. very necessary and profitable for all trauailers and seruit^urs, either by sea, or by land, as Gonners and
Captains, and leaders of men.

And now shall follow the making of a Quadrant, The ma^^ng of the Quadrant,
with the Skal
with the Skal divided but into.xii-partes, although some will have it divided
into.60. parts, and some into 48. parts, and some into more parts, and some
into less parts, according unto the fantasy of sundry Authors. But I do
think it b^^^ to be divided into.12. parts: for that diverse people are
desirous to know the use of the Skall, that are not seen in Arithmetike, and
yet the use of the Skal is very necessary and profitable for them to know, and
the Skal divided but into.12. parts, any reasonable man may have the use
thereof. But if it be divided into.48. or.60. parts, then it does require
Arithmetike, which is not in many persons: Wherefore I do think the Skall that
is divided into.12. parts, to be most necessary and profitable for all sorts
of people. And although that M. Thomas Dygges in his book called Pantometria,
has written thereof generally, yet I do think it very necessary, to write
of it particularly. etc

And now for the marking of the Quadrant, do this: first take a piece of well
seasoned wood, that is bard, and fine grayned, as Box, or such other like, or
else you may make it in metal, as in Brass, or Latten. etc. and then being well
playned or polished, and the larger, the better.

For in a small Instrument you may commit an error, sooner then in a large:
then be sure that one of the corners have a square or right angle, and then
there set the one of the feet of your compases, and with the other foot of
the compases make a quarter of a circle, for that it is called a Quadrant, it
is the.4. part of a Circle, and no.4. cornered thing. And that being done,
then divide the edge thereof into.9. equal parts: and every one of those parts
divide into.10. equal parts: so that then there will be in all.90. equal parts:
and every one of those divisions or parts, are called a degree. and a degree is
no other thing but a whole circle divided into.360. equal parts, and then at
every.10. or.5. degrees you may make them, as thus.5. and.10. and.15. and.20.
or else as this.10. The use of the degrees.
and.20.30. and so forth unto.90. for that the quadrants is divided into ^90.
equal parts, and the use of these divisions or parts called degrees, is to
know the heyght of the sun, or any star above the horizon, whereby they may
know the altitude or height of the pole of the world above the horizon, as I
do more at large declare in my book that is extant in prynt called The
Regiment for the sea. etc. and also the degrees are very necessary for gunners,
to know what ground that any piece of exdena^ce does cast or co^uey the shot at
the mont of every degree, as I do more at large declare in my book called the
Art of shooting in great ordenance. etc. And now furthermore, for the making of
the Scal upon the Quadrant, do this, at the right angle or corner make a square
in such sort, that the other corner right against it does stand just upon.45.
degrees, and look that it be a right or square angule in like manner, and so
from that to the two sides there will be.4. square or right angule, and then
divide two of those sides, that is to say, the two sides that is from the
corner where that the Plummet shall hang toward the parts of the degrees,
divide each of them into.12. equal parts, and then mark.12. at.45. degrees,
and then make two sightes upon one of the sides of the Quadrant: and those
divisions, or parts of that, or next unto the two sightes, are the parts of
right shadow, and then the other divisions are the parts of contrary shadow.
And here does follow the demonstration of the Quadrant, with the Seal. etc.



The use of the Skal is very necessary and profitable in diverse respects, as
to know the height of Hills and Steeples, The use of the Skal.
or Towns, or Walls, and by the laying of the Skal flat, to know the
distance unto any thing, as unto Ships ridyng at the ancore in the sea, or in
any haven, or harborow. etc. But in my opinion, the Seal of the backside of the
Astrolobe, is the better: for with the Quadrant you can not serve the sights
with your eye, and see how the Plummet does hang, and all at once: but you
may set the Alydeday or Rule with the two sightes, upon what part you list, and
so stand fast, until you have observed it. etc. Now follows the form of the
backeside of the Astrolobe. etc.
But you must be sure that your Astrolobe hang vpryght as you may prove it by
a perpendiculer or plu^me line from the turret of your Astrolobe.E. down by
the line to F. then if your Plumme line be just with the line. E. and.F. then
it hangs vpryght: if that it do not agree, then it hangs not vpryght.

The second Chapter is of vpryght shadow, that is to say, to know the heyghte
of al things taken within the length of the thing.
Now follow the conclusions of the Scall, both of the Quadrant, and also of
the Astrolobe, but the Astrolobe is the better. And first, for line of leuel
called of Gonners the point blanke, turn the other side C. right with the line
of leuel G. and H. then put your thombe through the ridge D. then hold up your
hand that you may look through both the sight A. and B. the^ al things that
you se through is leuel with the sight of your eye, neither higher nor lower.
Now if that you will know, the height of any Town or upright wall, do thus
turn the Athelida C. to the corner of the Scall, and set it upon the part 12.
What to observe in taking of height with the Skall.
then go forwards or backwards, till that you do see the top of the wall
through the two sightes A. and B. then measure how many foot it is from the
middle of your foot to the hard wall, so many foot the wall is high. and as
much as it is from your eye, down to your feet, and that you must add to in
all your heightes, and look that the ground be level, and be sure that you
stand upright, and wink with the one eye. Now furthermore being an upright
wall, set the Athelida C. upon the part one, of upright shadow: Upright shadow
at on station.
then doing as before is rehearsed, than mete the ground to the wall.12 times
the measure shall be the height of the wall, then the Athelida upon the part 2.
then six times the measure to the wall, shall be the height of the wall the
Athelida upon the part 3. then 4. times the measure shall be the height of the
wall. then upon the part 4. then 3. times the height shall be the measure of
the height of the wall, the Athelida upon the part 6. the^ mete to the wall
double, the mesure shall be the height of the wall. Always provided, that you ad
to the measure the length of your body, from your eye to your feet, now shall
you have a way to get the height of a steeple or wall that has a ditch: but
then you must have two standings: and still for upright shadow, set your
Athelida upon the part 12. then looking through the sights, holding it upon your
thombe as before is rehearsed, then with the middle of your foot set a mark,
then turn the Athelida to the part 6. of upright shadow, and there make an
other mark, then mete how many feet it is, betwixt the 2. standings, then
double that measure shall be the height of the steeple or wall, the first
standing upon the part 12. then turn the Athelida to the part 8. of right
shadow, then measure the ground 3. times: that distaunce shall be the height
of the steeple or wall, the first upon the part 12. and the second upon the part
9. then 4. times the measure shall be the height of the steeple, the first
standing upon the part 12. the next on the part 10. then the measure between
the two sta^dings shall be the 6. part of the height, the first standing on the
part 12. the next on the part 11. the mesure between the standings shall be
the 12. part of the height. yet furthermore for upright shadow, first set the
Athelida upon the part 9. of right shadow, then doing as before is said, set
a mark with the middle of your feet: then turn the Athelida to the part 3.
of right shadow, and there set a mark, then measure those two standings, and
then double that mesure that shall be the height of the Steeple or wall, or the
first standing upon the part 8. and the next upon the part 4. the^ doing as
before is said, 3. times the mesure shall be the height of the steeple or wall,
and the first standing upon the part 10. and the next upon the part 6. of
upright shadow, then doing as before is said measuring the distances 3. times,
that measure shall be the height of the steeple or wall. Or the first standing
upon the part 7. and the next upon the part 6. of upright shadow, then doing as
before is rehearsed mesuring the distaunce 12. times, that measure shall be the
height of the wall. Or the first standing upon the part 7. and the next upon the
part 5. the^ measure the distaunce 6. times: that measure shall be the height
of the wall. Thus much have I said for upright shadow, and upright shadow is
this, all things whose height is taken within the compass of the length of any
thing mesured, as for ensample this, by the figure following. By a Tower or
Steeple being 65. Ensample.
foot high of all those questions of upright shadow before rehearsed the first
was the Athelida upon the part 12. and to the wall the measure of the ground
was 60. foot, and the^ from mine eye to the ground was 5. foot: so that 60.
foot and 5. foot, make, 65. foot. So I conclude the whole height of the Tower
to be 65. foot. The next is the Athelida upon the part 1. and the ground to
the wall 5. foot, so 12. times 5. is 60. then the next was upon the part 2.
and the measure 10 foot, and six times 10 is 60. the next upon the part 3.
and the measure to the wall 15. foot, then 4 times 15. is 60. the next was
upon the part 4. and to the wall 20. foot, and three times 20. is 60. the last
upon the part 6. and to the wall 30. foot, and 2. times 30. is 60.

Ensamples of two fashions or standinges.
Now all the other have two stations or standinges, therefore you do not
measure to the wall, but the measure between the 2. standyngs, the first
standing upon the part 12. the next upon the part 6 and the measure between
the 2. standyngs is 30. foot, then 2. times 30. is 60. then between the part
12. and the part 8. was 20. foot, and 3. times 20. is 60. then between the
part 12. and the part 9. was 15. foot. and 4. times 15. is 60. then between
the part 12. and the part 10. was 10. foot. and 6. times 10. is 60. then
between the part 12. and the part 11. was 5. foot. and 12. times.5. is 60.
And now furthermore where you could not go so far back as the part 12. the
one standing upon the part 9. and the other upon the part 3. the measure of
ground was 30. foot. then 2. times 30. is 60. the one standing upon the part
8. and the other upon the part 4. the measure was 20. foot. and 3 times 20. is
60, then the one upon the part 10. and the next upon the part 6. the measure
was 20 foot. and 3. times 20. is 60. then the first standing upon the part 7.
and the next upon the part 6. the ground between the 2. standings was 5.
foot. and 12. times 5. is 60. the one standing upon the part 7. and the other
upon the part 5. the measure between the 2. standinges was 10. foot. then 6.
times 10. is 60 So you may se that every way the whole height to be 65. foot.
adding unto it as before is said the length of your body being 5. foot, thus
much have I said of upright shadow, and now follows contrary shadow.

The 3. Chapter shows how to know the height of any thing with the Scall by
contrary shadow (that is to say) without the length of any thing so taken.
NOw follows contrary shadow, and contrary shadow is this, that when soever
any height is taken without the height or length of any thing, as follows:
first, doing as before is said, in all points, putting his thumb through the ring
of the Astrolobe, set the Athelida unto the part 12. then with the middle of
your foot, make a mark, the^ turn the Athelida to the part 6. of contrary
shadow: the^ go bakwards til you may se the top of the steple or tower through
both the sights of your Astrolobe, being sure that it is hanging plu^be
upright. The^ at the middle of your foot there make another mark, then measure
how many foot there is between your.2. sta^dings, so many foot is the height
of the Steeple or Tower. The^ in like manner at the first standing, the
Athelida upon the part.6. then turn the Athelida to the part.4. of contrary
shadow. The^ meeting the ground between the.2. standings, it shall be the
height of the Steeple or Tower. Then in like manner the Athelida at the one
standing upon the part.4. and the other upon the part.3. and then measuring the
ground between the.2. standinges, shall be the height of the Steeple or Tower,
then at the one standing the Athelida at the part.3. and the other standing the
Athelida upon the part.2. then measuring the ground between the.2. standings,
half that measure shall be the height of the Tower, Steeple, or Wall.

Furthermore the one standing the Athelida on the part.2. and the next
standing, the Althelida upon the part one: then measure how many pases or
foot was between the two sta^dings: the.6. part of that measure shall be the
height of the steple or tower, but you must be sure that the ground be plain
and leuel, or else it may err. Now for your better ensample, by this figure
here under made, by a Steeple that is from the top down to the ground.120.
Ensample o^ contrary shadow.
foot hyth from the foot to the top of the shafte or spear, and now by
the height is known the distaunce, as you shall know by all the questions
before rehearsed. First the Athelida at the first standing was on the part.12.
and at the next standing, at the part.6. and the measure between the.2.
standings was.120. foot. Now I do conclude that the heyght of the said
Steeple is.120. foot from the ground to the top, and the distaunce to the
said Steeple is.240. foot, that is.48. pases: and the height of the
Steeple.24. pase. Then from the part.6. to the part.4. in like manner once the
height of the Steeple, and the distaunce to the Steeple, is.3. times the
height, that is.360. foot to the Steeple, that is.72. pase: then from the
part.4. to the part.3. is once the height of the Steeple: and the distance to
the Steeple is.4. times the height, that is.480. foot to the Steeple, that
is.96. pase. Then from the part.3. to the part.2. is twice the height of the
Steeple, and the distaunce to the Steeple is.720. foot, that is in pase.144.
pase. Then from the part.2. to the part.1. the distance of ground is between
the.2. standings.720. foot, that is.6. times the height of the Steeple: and
the whole distance to the Steeple is.12. times the whole height of the wall,
that is.1440. foot. The su^me of the whole distaunce from the part one, to the
Steeple, and that same in pase is.288. which makes.24. score: and at the
part.2. the distaunce of scores is.12. then at the part.3. it is to the
Steeple.8. score, at the part.4. it is to the Steeple.6. score: at the part.6.
it is to the Steeple.4. score, then at the part.12. it is the just height of
the Steeple, being.120. foot, that is.2. score, adding as before is said, so
much to the height of the Steeple, as from your eye to your feet, which you
shall do in this sort. And specially if the distaunce be far from the
Steeple at every station, if you will work exactly, when you have taken the
height, ^urne your Astrolobe (the Athelida standing as before) not removing
your foot from that standing, then looking through the sightes, turning your
face directly from the Steeple, then whereas your eye does rest, there set a
mark: then there is no doubts but that you shall take the true height and
distaunce, dooyng this at every standing, your ground being plain and level.

The fourth Chapter shows how for to take the part of any height as the
length of a wyndow or such like.
NOw furthermore to take the part of a height, you may in like manner, doing as
before is rehearsed in all points, and also you may with the Scal of the
Astrolobe take the length of a pinnacle or a window or windows, the one above
the other, you may take the measure between them as thus. Set your Athelida to
the part.12. then go backewardes or forwards, till that your sightes do
agree with that thing that you would take measure of, letting your Athelida
stand still at the part.12. Then in like manner take the other end of that
thing whose length you do mean to take, then take your sight agreeing with
the other end of the pinnacle, then measure the ground between the.2.
standings: that shall be the length of the pinnacle, window, or cross, as by
this figure it may more plainly appear, as for ensample this. First I did set
the Athelida upon the part.12. and doing as before is said: and took the
vpperside of the window, and at my foot made a mark, Ens^mple in the taking
of the point of a height.
then I went nearer the Steeple, and took the lower end of the window as you
may see at the letter. A. then I measured the ground between the.2. standings,
and found it 20. foot, so I do conclude the window to be.20. foot long.
The^ in like manner I took the Pinnacle, dooyng as before is rehearsed, first at
the top, and then at the foot, the Athelida standing still on the part.12.
and found the measure between the.2. standings.15. foot, the just length of
the pinnacle, as by the.2. lines B* it does appear, then between the.2.
crosses, dooyng as before is said, and found the distaunce between the.2.
standings.10. foot; the length between the.2. standings as by the.2. lines C,
it does appear, and so do by all other small parts.

The fifth Chapter sh^weth how to know the distance of many things that is
from you, and also whether any other tower be higher or lower then the tower
that you be upon.
YEt furthermore by the Scal of the Astrolobe, you may know when you be on the
top of a Tower, or top of a Castle, how far many things be from you,
and in like manner the height of an other Tower that shall stand near unto
you. And also how much that one Tower is higher then another, with diverse
profitable things more, as this: First if you know not the height of the Tower
that you be on, then take a line, hanging a Plomet of lead or some other such
thing, then let it down over the wall to the ground. The^ by the length of the
line you shall know the height of the Tower or wall that you be upon, then when
you know the true height of the wall or Tower, then take your Astrolobe,
hanging it upon your thombe by the ring, as before is declared, then looking
through the sightes in order, as before is rehearsed. So shall you find the
distaunce, as this: first, at the part.12. How to know distance by the shadow.
look what the height of the wall is from the ground, so far it is to the
mark that you do see through the sightes of the Athelida, turning your
astrolobe that the sightes may go downewardes, then the Athelida on the
part.6. of contrary shadow, the thing that you shall see through the syghtes
shall be.2. times the height of the Tower or wall: then on the part.4. of
contrary shadow, that thing that you do see through the sightes shallbe 3.
times the height of the Tower of Castle, then on the part.3. i^ shall be.4. times
the height of the wall to that thing that you shall see through the sightes.
Then on the part.2. that thing that you shall see through the sightes, shall be.6.
times the whole height of the Tower or Wall. Then the Athelida on the part one,
that thing that you shall see through the syghtes, the distance will be 12.
times the whole height of the Tower or Castle, or wall, as for an ensample by
this figure following. By a Tower being found to be.60. foot high, at the
part 12. the shadow to run downewardes, it is.60. foot of, An ensample.
at the part.6. the sightes did show you that thing that was 120. foot of,
that is.2. score, at the part.4, 180. foot of, that is.3. score, at the
part.3. the sightes show you.240. foot of, that is 4. score, at the part.2.
all things seem from the top of the Tower through the syghtes, as.360.
foot of, that is, 6. score of. Then at the part one, all things seen
through the sightes from the top of the Tower shall be.12. times so far
from the wall, as the wall or Tower is in heyghte, that is.720. foot from the
Wall, and that makes.12. score. Now if that there were another Tower or Wall
near unto you, you may know how many foot that it is higher then that
which you be on, as thus. First dooyng as before is declared, you shall know
how many foot that the Tower is high, thus by this before rehearsed, you shall
know how far that the other is from you. Then set your Athelida to the line
of Level, so shall you see whether that the other Tower be higher then that
which you be on, then to know how much that the other Tower is higher then
that you be on, do this: First look how many parts that there is from the
foot or base of that Tower that you would know how much that the one is
higher then the other, to the right line called the line of Level, then turn
the Athelida till that you do see the top agree with the.2. sightes, holdyng
the Astrolobe by the ryng upon your thombe, as before is rehearsed, as this:
The foot of the next Tower seen through the sightes at the part.12. To know
how much the one Tower is higher or lower than another.
then you shall deuyde that height of the Tower that you be on, into.12.
parts. Then look how many feet that there comes unto a part, then turn
your Athelida till that you may see the top of the next Tower, and look
how many that comes unto, add so many foot of the measure of your own
Tower, to the other Tower. Then at the part.10. if you do see the foot of
the next Tower, divide the heyght of the Tower that you be on, into.10.
parts, then look how many parts, that the other Tower is higher then yours,
add so many foot more to the heyght of the other Tower as the parts of
feet does answer of your own Tower, then in like manner, if you see the
foot of the Tower at the part.6. divide the heyght of your own Tower into.6.
equal parts: then look how many parts that the other Tower is higher then
yours that you be on, add so many foot to the heyght as those parts does
come unto: and if you do see the foot of the other Tower, at the part.3.
then divide the heyght of that Tower that you be on into.3. equal parts.
Then look how many parts that the other Tower is higher then your Tower,
add so many foot as those parts does come unto the other Tower, as this
for an ensample, by a Tower that is 60. foot high. Then I took my Astrolobe
and turned the Athelida to the part.4. Then I did see the base or foot of the
other Tower, then that Tower that I was on, the top being.60. foot high, I
did divide it into.4. equal parts, and that did answer to.15. foot a part:
for this I am assured of, that when I did set the Athelida to the line of
Level, that it was just the heyght of my Tower, that place which I did see
upon the other Castle. Then I did turn the Athelida still about, Ensamples.
seeking where I might see the top of the Castle: then at the part one and
a half, I might see it iustlye with both the sightes, then did I add.15.
foot and a half.15. that is.7. and a half, and those.2. sums make.22.
foot and a half, and then put.22. foot and a half, to.60. foot, makes.82.
foot, and.. the whole heyght of the other Tower or Castle. Yet for more
playnenesse, lie another Tower of.50. foot high which I was upon, I took my
Astrolobe, and did as before is said, and I saw the base or foot of the other
Tower at the part.10. then I did deui^e the heyght of the Tower that I was on,
into.10. equal parts, being.50. foot high, and every one of those parts
came to.5. foot. Then I did take the Astrolobe and turned the Athelida, till
that I could see the very top of the other Tower through both the sightes:
and then at the part.4. I saw that it was true. Then I did add.4. of those
parts, which was, 5. foot, to a part, and that came to.20. foot. So that
the one Tower was higher then the other by.20. foot: so I did add.20. foot
to.50. foot, which makes.70. foot. So I do conclude the whole heyght of the
higher Tower to be.70. foot just. Yet another emsample of.2. Towers: first,
that Tower that I was on to be.40. foot high, and I saw the base or foot
of the other Tower at the part.2. of contrary shadow. Then I did divide that
Tower that I was on, into.2. equal parts, and that did answer to.20. foot
a part. Then I turned my Astrolobe, and removed the Athelida to the part
one. Then I saw the top of the other Tower through the.2. syghtes. Then did
I add one of these parts being.20. foot, to the heyght of the other Tower,
which makes in all.60. foot high, the true height of the other Tower, as by
these.2. figures you may perceive. Now furthermore in like manner, if you be on
the higher Tower, To know how much any Tower is lower then that you be on.
you may know how much the lower Tower is shorter then the other. As this:
first, knowing the height of your Tower that you be ^n: then take the foot,
or base of the shorter Tower with your Astrolobe (as before is said,) then
look how many parts it comes unto, divide the height of your Tower that you
be ^n, as you did before: then turn the Athelida, till that you may see the
top of the shorter Tower, then look at what part you may see the top of the
shorter Tower: take so much away from the height of your own Tower, as the
parts do come unto: then that which shall remain, shall be the height of
the shorter Tower, as for ensample thus: By a Tower that you were on, being 63.
foot hye, Ensampl^*
and you saw the foot of the other Tower, through the sights at the part 9. of
contrary shadow, then divide the whole height of your Tower that you be on,
into 9. equal parts, and every one of these parts comes to 7. foot. Then
turn the Athelida, till you may see the top of the shorter Tower agree with
both the sightes, then at the part 2. you did see them, the one of those parts
being 7. then 2. times 7. makes 14. So that the lower Tower is 14. foot
shorter then the other. Then pull 14. out of 63. foot, there remains but 49.
foot, so you may see the whole height of the lower Tower to be 49. foot, and
thus do by all other Towers, Castles, Steeples, or Walls.

The 6. Chapter shows how for to know the height of a Hill, and also the
distaunce unto the top of any Hill with the Scall.
NOw furthermore, by the Scall of the Astrolobe, you may take the height of any
Hill, and also of the distaunce unto the top of the Hill, by the Line
Hypothenasall, as though there were a Line made fast to the top of the Hill, as
hereafter follows. First that Hill that you do require to know the height of
it, or to know the number of the pace, or feet, that is above the ground that
you be on: then seek a plain ground near about the hill, there where you
may see the top of the hill, then doing thus. First turn your Athelida, till
that you may see the top of the hill through both the sights, your Astrolobe
hanging upright, the Ring being upon your thumb, then look at what part that
the Athelida stands on, then accordingly as you did see before, by the taking
of the height of Steeples, Towers, or Walls, meating the ground between the 2.
standinges, to be the height of the hill, as you may know by this ensample.

To know the height of a hill.
First I seeking out my ground meet for my purpose, to be as plain as I can
find it, first, at the part 6. I set the Athelida, and so did I see the top of
the hill, for nearer I could not see it: then I did turn the Athelida too the
part 4. and then where I saw it agree with the sightes of the Astrolobe, there
I began for to mete how many pace, that it was between the part 6. and the
part 4. the measure of ground was 100. pace: so I did conclude that the height
of the hill was 100 pace hye, that is 500, foot. and then I must needs say,
that from the part 4. to the Center or top of the hyl, if there were a
perpendiculer line let down as low through the middle of the hill till that it
were level with the sight of mine eye, then it were to the end of the
perpendiculer Line 300. pace just. Then for to know the just distaunce to the
top of the hill, by a right Line, as though there were a Line stretched from
the top of the hill to mine eye, which is the Line hypothenusall: Then must I
be perfect in the second part of Arithmetyke, To know the length of the
Hipothenusall Line by the extracting of the root.
(that is to say) the extraction of roots, and there will I do thus: I must
multiply the whole distance in it self, which is 300. times 300 pace, and of
that multiplycation comes 90000. Then in like manner I multiply the height in
it self, which is 100. times 100. and of that multiplication comes 10000:
then I do add both those numbers together, and that makes in number 100000.
then this being done, I do extract the square root of both these numbers
added together (that is to say) 100000, and then there will stand in the
quantytie Line.316. and will remain 144. which is 18/79. Therefore I do
conclude that the Line should be stretched from the top of the hill down
tyo the sightes of mine eye which is the Line Hypothenusal, to be 316 pace,
and one foot and better, the just length of the hypothenusall Line, as by this
Ensample it does more plainly appear.



So by this Hill you may see that the height of the Hill was above the ground,
that it was taken upon 100. pace: that is 500. foot, and that makes 8. score,
and 20. foot: and the distaunce to the Center, or perpendiculer, or plumbe Line
imagined into the Hill to be 300. pace, and that is 1500. foot, which makes 25
score, and the Hipothenusall Line, from the top of the Hill to the standing, at
the part 4. is 316. pace, and near 2. foot, which is in feet 1582. and in
scores, 26. and 22. foot, as the figure before made does represent. And thus
do by all other hills, whether that it be a part of a Hill or a whole Hill,
all is one matter.

The 7. Chapter shows you by the Skall of the Astrolobe, to know the true
wydenesse of any water, or how far that any ship is of from you, or to take
any great distance by laying the Astrolobe flat before you with the Scall
vpwardes.
YEt furthermore, by the Scall of the Astrolobe you may know the wideness of
Waters, and the distaunce from place too place all alonge the water side, and
also how far that any Ship does ride from the shore side, and also how
far the Ship is from you: whereby you may make a perfect shot, very
profitable for Gonners to have the use of, as hereafter follows. To know
the wideness of waters.
First, take your Astrolobe, and set the same upon some steadye thing,
layinge that flat with the Scall vpwardes: Then turn the Astrolobe till that
the Line of level does stand as the shore side, as those that you should
set the Athelida with the line of Leuel, to look al alongest the waters side:
then shall the plumbe line of the Astrolobe stand directly cross the water,
then al things seen right with that line to be right over the water: then
your Astrolobe lying still, turn the Athelida to the part 12. then look what
mark or bank that you see hard to the waters side, through the sight of the
Athelida, mark it: then take your Astrolobe going directly by the waters side,
till you come directly right against the mark taken upon the other side of the
water, setting your Astrolobe as before is rehearsed. Then if the perpendiculer
line do directly point to the mark before taken, then the measure between the
two standinges, shall be the true breadth of the water.

Furthermore, the Astrolobe standing as before is rehearsed, setting the
Athelida upon the part.6. of the right shadow, then double that measure
between the.2. standinges, that shall be the breadth of the water, then the
Athelida upon the part.4. of right shadow, the Astrolobe set as before is
rehearsed, then the measure between the.2. standinges, shall be the.3. part of
the breadth of the water, and so forth to the part.3. to the mark right over
the water, shall be the one quarter of the breadth of the water, then.4. times
the whole measure shall be the breadth of the water: for to take the breadth of
waters with the Skal of the Astrolobe, is no other thing in the doing of it,
but as you do take the height of Walls or Towers in all points, saving that
in the taking of heigthes, you do hang your Astrolobe by the Ryng upon your
Thumb: and for to take the breadth of waters, you must lay your Astrolobe
steedy before you, and the line of Leuel to stand al along the waters side, as
circumspectly as you may or can: then you must make your measure al alongest by
the waters side, as by this ensample following, of a water that is measured, and
is.36. score over it.



An ensample.
First I take my Astrolobe, and come to the waters side, and lay my Astrolobe
upon some steedye thing, and lay the line of Leuel all alongest by the waters
side, then the thwart line of the Astrolobe poynted just thwart or cross the
waters side, near to the Church end: then I turned the Athelida to the
part.12. so I saw a polled tree through the sightes: Then I took up my
Astrolobe, and began to go, measuring the ground by pase, two steps to a
pase, and that made.5. foot, which is a Geometrical pase: and.12. of those
pases make a score: And then I came right against the tree, prouyng it with my
Astrolobe, and found that the measure was from my first standing, till I came
right against it, 432. pases, and that makes.36. score. So I did conclude the
breadth of the water to be.36. score, from bank to bank.

Then furthermore I turned the Athelida to the part.6. and then I saw a
polled tree at the house end: then I went measuring the ground, and found
that the ground was.216. pases, and then I was right against the mark, and
that was.18. score: then two times.18. is.36. Then I turned the Athelida to the
part.4. of right shadow, and measured the ground, till I came right against
the mark taken through the sightes of the Athelida, and found the measure
between the first standing, and the next, one hundred forty and four pases,
that is, twelve score: then three times twelve score, is thirty six score.
Then the Athelida standing upon the part.3. I measured the ground between
the two standinges, and found it to be.80. pases, that is.9. score, and the
fourth part of the breadth of the water, for four times 9. is.36. Then the
Athelida upon the part.2. Always provided that you do as before is
rehearsed, measuryng the ground till you come directly against the mark
taken, shall be three score and twelve pases, that is, six score: then six
times six, is.36. For upon the part.2. the ground between both the
standinges, is but the sixth part of the wydenesse of the water. Then at the
part one, the ground between the two standinges, shall be but the twelfth part
of the breadth of the water, that is.36. pases, and that makes three score:
then.12. times three, is.36.

Now furthermore, if you will know the length of any of the Hypothenusal or
slope lines, then extracting the root, To know the length of the slope line,
by the extract of the Root.
the length of that line shall appear: so that with the Skal of the Astrolobe,
you may know any distaunce, being sure that you do make a square Angle, by
laying the Astrolobe flat before you, even according unto the Conclusions,
when that you do hang the Astrolobe.

And also you may take a greater distaunce, and also a larger station, whereby
you may work more exactly, by laying it, then by hangyng of it. For that
there is seeldome any ground, but that it is higher or lower in one place, then
it is in another, and that may breed a notable error, if it be not well
considered of. But if you do lay the Skall flat before you, considering well
the conclusions, you may commyt no great error, being sure, that in your
remouyng, you do make a square Angle, and then measure the distance of ground
truly, for thence are many fold notable conclusions to be done with the
Skal, as by this you may know how far of that any Ship does ride at an
ancore in the Sea, or in any Baye, or River: you may know certainly how
far she is from you, so that she be not moveable: And also you being
besieged in a Town, may know how far any thing is from you: And also if
you be without any Town, you may know by the S^al of the Quadrant or
Astrolobe, how far any Tower, Balwarke, or Steeple is of from you. etc.

The eight Chapter shows unto you, if that you do know the dystance, then
you may know whether that it be higher ground or lower ground then the place
that you are upon, and how much, both By the parts of the Scal, and by the
degrees: and also you may know whether that one ship be higher then an other
etc.
And furthermore, you knowing the dystance unto any place assygned, then you
may know the height of any Hyl or Steple or Tower, or the deepenesse of any
valley by the parts of the Scal, as this: The dystance being known, if that it
be higher or lower by one of the parts and the Scall to be divided 12. To know
how much any place is higher or lower then the places it you are on, whether
that it be on Tower, Steeple, ^l, Clyffe, of valley. etc.
parts: then the thing is higher or lower by the.12. parts of the distance,
and if it be higher or lower by two of those parts, then the thing is higher
or lower then the place that you do stand upon by the sixth part of the
distance. And if the thing be higher or lower by.3. of those parts, then the
thing so taken, shall he higher or lower by the.4. part of the dystance: and
if that it be higher or lower by the.4. part, then the thing shall be higher or
lower by the third part of the distance: and if that the thing be higher or
lower by the.6. part of the Scal, then the Hyl or valley shall be higher or
lower by half the distance. etc. As for an insample this: I laying the Skall
flat, took a mark upon the top of a Hill, or in the botome of a valley: and so
workyng as is declared in the Chapter going before, and found the dystance to
be.24. score from me, and then I desire to know how much that the Hyl was
higher ground, or the valey lower ground, then the place that I stood upon.
And then I took the Astrolobe and hung it upon my thombe, and so I saw that
the Hill was higher by the one part. Therefore I did conclude that it was.2.
score higher, that is.120. foot higher ground then the place that I stood upon,
for that the dystance is.24. score: and the.12. An ensample.
part of 24. is.2. Wherefore if that it were a valley, then it were.120. foot
lower then the ground that I stood upon. etc. And then if that it were higher
or lower by the.2. part of the Skall, then it should be higher or lower then
the place that you stood upon, by the.6. part of the distance, that is.4.
score, and that makes.240. foot. And furthermore, if that it were higher or
lower by.3. of the parts of the scall: then the ground should be higher or
lower by a quarter of the distance, that is.6. score: and that contains 360.
foot. And furthermore, if that it were higher or lower by.4. of the parts of
the Scal, then it should be higher or lower by the third part of the distance,
that is.8. score: and that contains.480. foot, etc. And this I do take to be
sufficient for an ensample. And now furthermore, if that the dystaunce were
very far, and also the Scal divided but into.12. parts, yet you might know
the height of a Hill, or the deepnesse of a valey, To know how much any place
is higher, or lower by degrees.

An ensample of shyps on the water.


by the degrees of your Astrolobe, or Quadra^t, as this: the distance being
known unto any mark upon a Hill, or in any valley, if that it were one degree
higher or lower then the place that you do stand upon, then the thing should
be higher or lower ground by the.60. part of the distance. If.2. degrees, then
it should be higher or lower by the.30. part of the dystance: if.3. degres,
higher or lower, then the ground should be higher or lower by the.20. part of
the distance: if.4. degres, then the ground should be higher or lower by
the.15. parts of the dystance: if.5. degrees, then the ground should be higher
or lower by the.12. part of the distance: and thus far the degrees will serve
exactly yenough, but not unto many more degrees, for that they be the divisor of
a circle. But unto.5. or.6. degrees they will serve the the turn very well. And
now for your better understanding, I will make an ensample unto.5. degrees
according unto the dystance before rehearsed, An ensample.
that is, at, 24. score from you, the ground being higher or lower by one
degree, the thing is higher or lower by the.60. part of the dystance, that
is.24. foot, whether that it be any mark upon a Hill or valley, or the height
of any Tower or Steeple. etc. If that it be.2. degrees higher or lower, then
the mark shall be higher or lower then the ground that you do stand upon, by
the.30. part of the distaunce: and the distaunce being.28. score, the Mark
shall be higher or lower by.48. foot.

And Furthermore, if that the mark be higher or lower by. 3. degrees, then
the thing shall be higher or lower then the ground that you do stand upon,
by the.20. part of the distance: that is.72. foot. And Furthermore, if that
the mark be higher or lower by.4. degrees, then the thing shall be higher or
lower by the.5. part of the dystance, that is.96. foot. And further more, if
the thing be higher or lower by.5. degrees, then the thing so taken, shall be
higher or lower then the ground that you stand upon by the.12. part of the
distance: that is.120. foot. etc.

And furthermore, by this means or order, you may know the distance unto any
ship upon the sea, or Ryding in any Haven or Harborowe you knowing the hight
of any Tower or Clyffe, or any Hill upon the sea Cost, how many foot that is
higher then the water: and you may know it either by the parts of the Skall,
or else by the degrees, as for an ensample, the Tower or Hill, or Clyffe to
be.60. foot higher then the superficial of the water, and the.60. foot is
one score.

An ensample of shyps on the water.
And if you do se the shipe at one degree lower then the horizon then it shall
be.60. score unto the ship: and if at.2. degrees, then it shallbe.30. score
unto the ship, if at.3. degrees, then it shall be.20. score unto the ship, if
at.4 degrees, then it shall be.15 score unto the ship: if.5. degrees then it
shall be.12. score unto the ship: if.6. degrees, then it shall be.10. score
unto the ship: but if the ship be nearer, the degrees will serve no turn,
but will be erroneous. Wherefore you must use the parts of the Scall, as.5.
degrees and the part one is all of like dystance: for the hight of the Tower,
Clyffe, or hill being.60. foot in hight above the ship, that is just one
score: at.5. degrees, the dystance unto the ship is.12. score. And also at
the part one, the distance is.12. score in like manner etc. and at the part.2.
the dystance unto the ship is.6. score: and at the part.3. the dystance unto
the ship shall be.4. score: and at the part.6. but.2. score: and at the
part.12. the dystance from the foot of the Clyffe or Tower, unto the ship,
shall be but one score, that is just the heyght of the Tower or Clyffe. etc.

Furthermore you may know, if that you be on the sea, whither that one ship
be higher or lower of board, To know whether my ship be higher or lower of
board, then another, and whether the one does ouertop the other, and how.
then the other ship, and how much: and also whither the one ship does
ouertoppe the other ship, you may know how much: so that she be not above
a mile from you, as this, by the line of the horizon lack, what place so ever
that you do see just with the horizon, is equal in height with your eye,
neither higher nor lower, whither that you be one the Sea, or upon the land:
and then you being in a ship on the Sea, and you do desire for too know
whither that the other ship be higher or lower of board then that ship that
you are in, then look Upon the other shpppe, at what place that the horizon
quoteth: and if you do see the horizon over the other ship, then your ship
is higher of board then the other ship: and if that you would know how
much, then go too a lower place in your own ship, until such time that
you do see the Horizon just with that part that you do desire to know the
height of, and then standing still, look what part of your own ship that the
Horizon quoateth, that part of the ship is just equal with the other ship,
neither higher nor lower: then to know whether that the other ships top of
her Mast be higher or lower then your ships, then go up, or send one to the
top, and if that the other ships top be higher then the Horizon, then the other
ships top is higher by so much as you do see above the Horizon: but if that
you do see the Horizon over the top of the other ship, then your ship is the
higher: and then to know how much, come down lower, until you do bring the
other ships top unto the Horizon, then at the just height of your eye, is the
true height of the other ships top, neither higher nor lower: and then look
how much it is higher then your eye unto the top, so much your top is higher
then the other ships top. etc.

And also you being on the land, you may know whether one ship be higher of
boorde then the other, and also whether the one ship does ouertop the other
ship, as this, by the quoting of the Horizon upon both the ships, as this, If
you be either in a Tower, or any high house, near the sea coast, or else at the
foot of any hyl either.

Then if that you desire for to know which of the ships be the higher of
board, or else the higher topped, then ascend or descend, until that you do
see the horizon just with the higher part of the ship, and then look upon the
other ship, and then if that the other ship be higher then the Horizon, then
that ship is so much higher of board from the quotyng of the Horizon upwards,
and then if that you would know how many foot, then ascend upwards until that
you do see the upper part of the ship just with the horizon, then look how
many foot and inches that you were higher then you were before, and so many
foot the Ship is higher then the other ship just. To know how much one house,
ship, tower, or hyl is higher then the other.
And by this order you may know how much one ship is higher topped then the
other.

And by this order you may know whether one Tower is higher then another, or
one house higher then an other: And also whether that one hyl be higher then
another. etc.

And furthermore, by this means you do know whether that one ship does
ouertop the other: then you may know how many foot it is from the top of any
ship, unto the water, by the height of your own ships top, and the height
being known, then you may know the distance unto any ship sailing on the sea,
so that she be not too far of, by the parts of the Skal, and also by the
degrees, as before is rehearsed, going so low as you can in your own ship,
and then to consider how much that you are above the water, etc. And thus I
do end the conclusion of the Scal, and now does follow the conclusion of
the Cross staff.

The nienth Chapter shows the making of the Cross staff, that in some cases
is better then the Skall of the Astrolobe, or Quadrant. etc.
Now furthermore as concerning the making of a Cross staff, that serves the
Town in diverse respects, much better then the Skal of the backeside of the
Astrolobe, and specially for to take the length of the Cortane of the wall of a
Town, or the distance between two Towns, or any two marks standing directly
against them, very profitable for all seruitours, or other, for to have the use
of. And now follows the making of a Cross staff, as much as shall serve
landmens turns. First take a piece of good, fine, and well seasoned wood, and
let it be well playned, and very straight, of ^^ue foot long, and then let it
be divided into.60. equal parts or inches, and then you may grave in it.1.2.3.
and.4* and so till you do come to the end at.60. And be sure that you make
every ynche or part note, the one to be bygger or lesser then the other. Then
if you will, you may make at the end of every.12. inches, a roundell or circle,
and at the end of every.6. inches, half a circle: The ma^ing of the Cross
staff.
then at every.3. inches, some mark or cross, and then your long staff is
finished. The^ in like manner you shall make an other short staff, called a
Transuastorie, of two foot long, and in the very myddle of it you shall make a
square hole, such a one as shall go close to the longer staff without any
swaruing, and then shall you make.2. wings or plates of brass, one for the one
end, and the other for the other end, then shall you make a chase or rygall on
the one side of the Saffe, that the wings may be rem^ued at your discretion:
and then at.6. inches from both the ends you shall make a mark: And then there
will be.12. inches between the 2. marks. Then in like manner, you shall
make.2. other marks 9. inches from both the ends, and there will be.6.
inches beetwene the.2. marks.

And then in like manner, you shall divide the rest of the middle of the
Transuastorie into inches equal parts, and then it is finished, saving that in
the middle of the Transuastory you shall put a little piece of brass into the
hole or socket that the longer Staff does go through, and then you shall make
a little vice or worm, to the end that you may make the Transuastory to stand
fast at your descretion: as these.2. figures do represent both the staff and
the Transuastorie, and the vppermoste, the longest staff



The tenth Chapter shows how for to use the Cross staff, for to know the
length of any Wall, or the distance between any two marks, and also the
distance from you, unto any Wall or Mark.
Now when so ever you list for to take the length of any cortaine of a Wall,
or the widenes between two marks, or any other thing what soever it be, then
shall you take the longer staff, set out with equal parts, and put the
Transuastorie upon it, through the hole in the myddle of the Transuastorie:
and then if you would know the wydenesse between any two Marks, or the
length of the cortaine of any Wall, How to use the Cross staff to take the
widnes and the distance of any thing.
and the distaunce unto them: then shall you do thus: First, set the end of
the longer Staff, hard vnde^ one of your eyes, wynkyng with the other eye.

Than your Transuastorie standing at.24. inches from the end of your long
Staff, which is the whole length of your Transuastorie: Then go forewardes
or backewardes, standing upright with your body, and head, and both your
feet together: then go forwards or backewardes, lookyng toward your Mark,
till both the ends of your Transuastorye do agree with your two Marks justly.
If it be a Wall, measure the ground just to the myddle of the Wall, and that
shall be the true length of the Wall.

But if there be a Ditche between you and the Wall, then remove your
Transuastorie at the second standing, his whole length further forewardes,
that is, two foot: and then go backwardes, till that you may see again, both
the ends of the wall agree with the two ends of the Transuastorie. Then
measure the ground between the two standinges, and that shall be the just
length of the wall. And then the distaunce unto the wall, shall be twice the length
of the wall. Then if that the distaunce be further then the Transitory will
take, and the wall too short: then remove the Plattes or wings of the
Transitory, to the marks, six inches from both the ends of the Transitory:
and then the two Plattes or ryngs will be but twelve inches asunder.

Then take the wydenesse between the two marks, or the two ends of any wall
justly with the outsydes of the two Plattes or Ringes: then with the myddle of
your foot, there make a mark: then remove your Transitory forewardes or
backewardes, the length that the Plattes or Ringes be asunder, as you have
ground: and then go forewardes and backewardes, till that your two Plattes or
Ringes do agree again with both the ends of the wall: and then there make an
other mark at your feet. Then measuring the gr^unde between the two
standinges, it shall be the length of the wall.

And then for to know the distaunce unto the wall, you shall do thus: Look
how many times that the Transitory is from the end next toward you, and
especially the distance between the two Plattes or ringes: so many times the
length of the wall, shall be the distaunce unto the mark: as for ensample thus,
By the wall of a Cortaine of a town between two Turrettes, and my desire is to
know the length of the Cortaine of the wall: and then I having the Transitory
upon the long Staff, I could not come so near the town as I would. Then I
removed the Plates or wings of the Transitory, to the division of six
inches from both ends, that was, twelve inches asunder: then I going
forewarde, till that I did see both the Turrettes with the two Plates or wings
of the Transitory: and then at my feet I made a mark, and then in like
manner I removed my Transitory twelve inches forewarde, and then I went
backewardes, till that the two ends of the wall did agree again with the two
Plates or wings of the Transitory, and there is made an other Mark.

Then I measured the ground between the two standings, and found it ten
score: then I did conclude, that the length of the Cortayne of the wall, was
ten score from the one tower to the other. And now I knowing the length of
the wall, I may easily know the distaunce unto the wall, as thus: Now I do
look how many times twelve inches that the Transitory was from the end
next unto me, and it was four and a half: that is, 54. inches.

And now, because that the Plates or wings of the Transitory were twelve
inches asunder, and.54. makes four times and a half twelve, and the length
of the wall, ten score. Therefore I do conclude, the distaunce unto the wall,
from the place of the last standing, to be four times and a half ten
score: that is, forty and five score: as by the ensample of the figure
following it is declared.



Now furthermore, if the distaunce be further, then the two Plates or wings
may be removed nyene inches from the two ends, that is, but six inches
asunder: Then in like manner if that be too wide, you may remove the two plates
or wings ten inches from both the ends, and that is but four inches asunder.
Then in like manner, if that the distaunce be very far of, and the length
of the wall be short, then may you remove the Plates or wings of the
Transuastorie, eleven inches from both the ends: that is, but two inches
asunder: And then, dooyng as before is rehearsed, to take two standynges, that
shall be the mydenesse between any two marks.

Provided always, that you remove the Transuastorie at the second standing,
either forewardes or backewardes, so many inches, as the two Plates or wings
be asunder, justly, and no more, and then you shall know the distaunce unto
any Mark or wall.

When you do know the length of the wall, (and that is known, as before is
said, by the measure between the two standinges) then look how many inches
that the Transuastorie is from the end of the long Staff next to your eye:
then look how many inches that the Plates or wings of the Transuastorie are
asunder, so many times the length of the wall shall be the distance unto the wall.

As for ensample thus: By the Cortaine of the wall before named, being ten score
long, and the Transuastorie to be set at.48. An other ensample.
inches from the end. First, the two wings stood at the very utter end of
the Transuastorie, that is.24. inches asunder: then the measure unto the wall,
shall be twice ten score, and that makes.20. score, because there is twice.24.
in.48. Then in like manner the Plates or wings were set.12. inches asunder, and
the Tra^suastorie.48. inches from the end. Then there is four times.12.
in.48. then you may conclude, that that is four times ten score unto the wall
of the town, that makes.40. score. Then in like manner the Plates or wings
being set but six inches asunder, then there is eight times six in.48. which
makes eight times ten score: that is.80. score. Furthermore, if that the
wings were but four inches asunder, the Transitory being.48. inches from the
end, there is.12. times four in.48. So the distance unto the wall is.12.
times.10. score. that is.120. score. Then furthermore, the wings standing
but.2. inches a sunder, but then it is an hard matter for to take it perfect:
then there is.24. times.2. in.48. so that makes.24. times.10 score: which
makes.240. score. Now furthermore, in like manner if that it fa^ not right just
measure, then if that there be but half the measure between the wings, then
for that, take half the length of the wall, and add it unto the rest of the
measure: and if that it be three quarters, then three quarters of the measure,
and for a quarter, one quarter. etc.

The eleventh Chapter shows you how for to take the length of a wall, when
that you have not ground large yenough for your two stations or standynges.
Now furthermore, if that you have not ground for to go forewardes or
backewardes, so much as that the quantity of the wydenes of the Cortaine, or
the distance between any two marks shall come unto, there is a remedy for
that, as this: Look at what length you have set the distance between the two
Plates or wyngs: then remove the Tranceuastory of the long staff, but half
the length between the two Plates or wyngs, at the second standing, and then
the ground between the two standings shall be but half the length of the wall,
or distance between your two marks: then double the measure that shall be the
length of the wall: then having not so much ground, remove the Transitory but
the third part of the measure between the two wings of the Transitory, and
then the ground between the two standings, shall be but the third part of the
length of the wall, and three times that measure, shall be the whole length of
the Cortaine of the wall.

Then having not so much ground, then remove the Transitorye but one quarter of
the measure of 2. plates or wings, and then the measure between the 2.
standynges shall be but one quarter of the length of the Wall: and then 4.
times that measure shall be the whole length. The^ in like manner you may remove
the Transatory but the 6. part of the measure and there Transitory the between
the 2. standyngs shall be but the 6. part of the length of the Wall: and so
forth to the 12. part or more, as you have Ground or room.

But here is one thing by the way, never take a short station between the 2.
marks, as long as you may have a large: for that a little error often times
multyplyed, becomes a great and myraculous error in the end, yea an
intolerable fault. Ensample.
And now for your better Ensample of all those questions before rehearsed of the
length of a Brickwall 12. score long, first I took my cross Staff, and
sought out my grownde right against the middle of the Wall: and because I
could not come so near as I would, I removed the 2. plattes or wings 6.
inches from the 2. ends of the transatorye that was 12. inches asunder, and
set the transatorye 36. inches from me: and then there where the 2. Plates or
Wings did agree with the two ends of the Wall, there at my feet I made a
mark: then I had not ground enough neither for to go forwards nor
backwardes: therefore I removed my Transitory but 6. inches forwards, that is
at 42. inches, and then I went backwardes till that the 2. plattes or wings
did agree again with the end of the Wall, and there I made another mark.
Then I measured the ground between the 2. standynges, and found it but 6.
score: then that being half the length of the Wall, 2. times 6. score makes
12. score.

Then I having not so much ground, removed the Transitory the third part but
4. inches forward, that is, at 40. inches. Then measurynge the ground
between the 2. Standynges, was 4. score: then three times 4. score makes 12.
score: then having not so much ground, remove the Transitory but one quarter
forwards, that is 3. inches forwards, that makes 39. inches: and then the
ground between your two standynges shall be but three score: and four times
three score makes twelve score. Then in like case if that you have not so much
ground, you may remove the Transuastorye but the sixth part of the measure
between the two Plates or Wings, that is two inches forwards, and that
makes.38. inches: and then the measure beetweene the two standynges is but two
score: and six times two score makes twelve score, and so forth to the
twelfe part of the measure between the two Plates or Wings of the
Transuastorye, as by this Example.



The 12. Chapter shows you how to know the distaunce unto any two marks, or
to the two ends of any wall by the extracting of the square root.
Now furthermore, whenever you have taken the wydenesse between any two
marks, then you do know the just wideness, but not the true distaunce,
except it were a Wall, you do know the true distaunce unto the middle, but not
to the end. To know the distaunce unto any two marks by the extracting of the
square root.


Now therefore whenever you would know the distaunce unto the ends of any
Wall, or unto a Church, and a Tree, or whatsoever that you have taken the
wydenesse between them, then how far so ever that they be asunder, divide
the measure into 2. equal parts. Then take the Line of the distaunce unto the
middle of the mark, and first multiplye the distaunce in it self: then in
like manner multyplye the half wideness in it self: then part both the
numbers of the multiplycation, and add them both together: then extract the
root of both the numbers, and it shall be the distaunce of both the ends of
the Wall, or any other 2. marks, as now for example thus: by a Church and a
Bulwark. And my desire is to know the wydenesse between them, and first I
take my cross Staff and set the Tranceuastorye 24. inches from the end: and
the 2. plats or wings stood at the hard end: and then I took my first
standing, as before is declared, holding the long Staff hard under the side
of mine eye, and then I seeing the Bulwark and the church agreeing with the 2.
ends of the tra^cevastory, there at my first standing I made a mark, and then
I removed the Tranceuastory 24. inches forwards, and that makes 48. inches,
and there where the two marks did agree again at the 2. ends of the
Tranceuastorye going backwardes, there I made an other mark, and then I
measured the ground beetweene the 2. standyngs, and found it 24. score.

Then I did conclude the wydenesse between the Church and the bulwark,
was.24. score: then it must needs be said, that the distaunce to the myddle
way between the Bulwark and the Church at the first standing to be.24.
score: because that the Transitory was once his whole length from the end
next unto me, and then at the second standing the distaunce must needs be
48. score, because that the Transitory was twice his whole length from the
end next unto me, being.24. inches. And now for to know the distaunce unto
either the Bulwark or the Church, then shall you do this: and for the
nearest standing, when that the Transitory was once his whole length from the
end, and the distaunce unto the myddle.24. score, then I did multiplye.24.
times.24. and that makes.576. And then from the myddle between the Bulwark
and the Church, was.12. score to the bulwark, and.12. score to the Church.
And then.12. score multiply squarely, that is to say, 12 times.12. and that
makes.144* Then add both your numbers together, that is to say, 576.
and.144. and that makes.720. Then extract the root of the number, and then
there will stand in the quantity line.26. and.44. will remain over. So that
you may conclude, that from the nearest standing, to the Bulwark or to the
Church, it is.26. score, and 11/13. part of a score, that is more near.51.
foot: and now from the furthest standing, and the distaunce unto the
myddle.48. score. Now multiply.48. times.48. and that makes.2304. Then
multiply.12. times.12. for the half wydenesse, that is.144. and that added
unto.2304. makes.2448. so extracting the root, there will stand in the
quantity line.49. and then will remain over.4. which makes.47/98. part,
that is, near half a score, being.29. foot. So I do conclude, that from the
further standing to either the Church or Bulwark, it is.49. score, and near
29. foot.



The thirtienth Chapter shows how to know the distance unto any mark with
the cross staff, without the extracting of the root, and also how to take
the height of any thing with the cross staff.
Now furthermore for your more ease, whenever that you would know how
far it were to any mark or place by the help of two marks, To know the
distance unto any mark with ye Cross staff without the extracting of the
root.
with not knowing the length of the slope line, then shall you do thus: First,
stand right against the mark that you do desire to know the distance unto,
then seek out your mark, and be sure that the other mark make a square Angle
unto that mark that you desire for to know the just distance unto: then
remove one of the plates or wyngs of the Transuastorie to the very myddle of
the Transuastorye: then when soever you list to know the distance, first at
your first standing, then make a mark: then for your next standing, remove the
Transuastorye, but so much as the dystaunce is between the.2. plates or
wings, being sure that you take the mark that you do desire the distance
unto, with that plate or wyng of the myddle of the Transuastorye: then (as
before is declared) look how many inches that the.2. plates or wings be the
one from the other, so many times the measure that the distance is between
the.2. marks, shall be the dystance unto that thing that you have taken with
the middle of the Transuastorie. And so forth in all points as before is
rehearsed: as for ensample thus, by a tower that I do require the distance
unto, An ensample.
and then I standing with my face right against the tower, then I sought a tree
that stood right beside the tower, that made a perfect square Angle to the
tower and unto me: then because that the dystance was somewhat far of, and
the tree somewhat near unto the tower, therefore I set one of the plates or
wings.6. inches from the end, and the other wing right with the middle of the
Transuastorie. Then I set the end of the long staff hard under one of mine
eyes, and took the measure true between the tree and the tower, with the
plates or wings of the Transuastorie, the Transuastorie standing.48. inches fom
the end. And then I removed the Transuastorie.6. inches forwards, because
that the.2. plates or wings were but.6. inches asunder, and that made.54.
inches: and then I went backwardes and made my second standing, and then I
measured the ground between the.2. standings, and found the ground.4.
score, then I knew that the tree was.4. score from the tower.

And then I looked how many inches that the Transitory was from the end,
and found it.54: then in like manner I looked how many times.6. there was
in.54. and found.9. times.6. Then I must needs conclude, the distance unto
the Tower to be.9. times.4. score, that is, 36. score: as by ensample of these
figures following.



The whole distaunce unto the Tower is.36. score. Now furthermore, you may
take the height of any wall, or Tower, or Steeple, or any other thing, so that
you set one of your plates or wings with the very middle of your Transitory,
As touching the taking of heightes with the crossestaffe.
and with the myddle plate be sure to take the foot or base of the Tower,
Steeple, Wall, or tree: or else you may commit error. And by the staff you
may know the wydenesse of waters, with diverse other most necessary things,
as this: When that you be in a town, for to know the distaunce of any place
whose length or wydenesse that you do know, as by the length of a pyke, or
the wydenesse or distaunce between.2. Bushes or.2. stones, or any other thing,
being sure that you take your sight true upon your marks holding your hands
steedie till you may see your.2. marks, end with your 2. plates or.2. ends
of your Transitory, setting the end of your long staff close to the utter
part of your eye, winking with your other eye, standing upright with your
neck and head: and this dooyng, you shall not fail of the truth. For if that
you err, the fault shall be in your self, for that you have not taken it
truly. Therefore that is very good to have a rest to lay your long staff on,
and for to take a hey ^u^, you mu^t turn the Transuastorie one end vpwardes,
and the other end downewardes, and then you must hold the end of the long
staff close to the corner of your eye.

The fourteenth Chapter shows unto you, how that you shall know the
di^taunce of any ship from you, and you being in another ship, and both the
ships under sail, and going by the Cross staff. etc.
ANd furthermore, by the Cross staff you may know the distaunce unto any
ship sailing on the Sea, very exactly, you being in another ship sailing
after them, or before them, or beside them: although that diverse men are not of
that opinion, for that both the marks are moveable, whereby they cannot get
any certain station or standing, as this is declared in the eight Chapter
going before, how to know whether that one ship does over top the other,
by the sending of one up unto the top of the ship, to look how the Horizon
cutteth upon the top of the other ship: and by that he does know whether
that the other ship does ouertoppe or vndertoppe the ship that he is in:
and then you knowing how many foot that your own ships top is in height
from the top down unto the water, then you may know by that how many foot
the other ships top is in height in like manner from the water very exactly.
As touching the knowing the height of any ships top.
But if that you do not know the just height of your own ships top unto
the water, then you may know it thus, by send^^g one up unto the top, with a
lead or a Plomet made fast unto a line, and so let down unto the superficial
part of the water: and then measuring the line, you may see the height of the
ships top that you are in, down unto the water: and then by the height of
your own ships top, you may justly know the true heyght of the other.
etc. And now to know the distaunce unto the other ship with the Cross
staff, you must do this: How to know the d^stance unto any ship.
take your Cross staff, and remove the two plates or wings of the
Transuastorie unto the myddle of the staff, and set them at a known distaunce
between the two wings or plates, as at an ynche or half an ynche a sunder at
your discretion, and that being done, then set the long staff hard unto the
corner of your eye, wynking with your other eye, and then removing the
Transuastorie forwards or backwardes vnt^ll that you may see and serve it
truly, the top of the ship just with the upper plate, and the lower part
^f the ship hard unto the water with the edge of the lower winge or plate:
and that done, then look how many times the wydenesse between the two
plates that the transuastorie is from the end next unto your eye, so many times
the height of the top down unto the water as that comes unto, shall be
the true distaunce between the two ships: which you shall work in this
manner: First, the number of feet that the other ship is from the top unto
the water being known, then look how many times the distaunce of the two
wings or plates be a sunder, then look how many times that quantity the
Transuastorie is from the end next unto your eye, then do thus multiply the
number of feet from the top unto the water, by the number of the distance
between the two plates or wings from the end next your eye: and then look
what that number comes unto, and then divide that by.60. and so many scores
the two ships be a sunder justly. An ensample.
As for an ensample thus: by a ship that was found by the order before
rehearsed, to be.65. foot from the top of the top Matte unto the water,
and the two wings or plates were set just an ynche asunder. And then in the
obseruyng the Transuastorie was remouyng forwards and backwardes until that he
dye see the top of the Maste, and the lower part of the ship hard unto
the two plates or wings: and that done, then he looke^ how many inches the
Transuastorie was from the end next unto his eye, and found it.54. inches
just. Wherefore he multiplied.65. by.54. for that.65. foot was the height of
the top unto the water, and the plates or wings were just one ynche
asunder, and the Transuastorie.54. inches from the e^^e^ and of that
multiplication there comes 3510. Wherefore divide that.3510. by.60. and that
will show unto you the number of scores, and that.3510. divided by.60. there
will stand in the quantiue line.58. and.30. remains over. So that you may
conclude, the distaunce between the two ships to be just 58. score and.. and
by this order you may know the true distance between any two ships. etc. And
yet for your better understanding, I will give a second ensample more easier to
be understood, Another ensample.
by a ship that was just.60. foot from the top unto the water, that being
a just score and no more, the two wings or plates being just one ynche a
sunder, and the ship being observed and was found to be where as the two
plates did agree with the top and the lower part, that the Transuastorie
was.40. inches from the end. Therefore they may conclude that the distaunce
between the two ships was just.40. score, for that the top of the maste
unto the water was just one score: that is.60. foot, and the two plates or
wings just one ynche a sunder, and the Transuasitorie.40. inches from the
end. etc. And also by this order you may know the distaunce of any ship
from the land. etc. And thus I do end the conclusions of the Cross staff.
etc.

The fifteenth Chapter shows unto you, how you shall make an instrument
whereby you may describe a Region or Country, which you may call an Horizontall
Sphere: and also how to take the plat of any ground. etc.
Now furthermore, I think it convenient to show unto you the making of an
instrument, whereby you may describe a whole Country at sundry stations or
standings: which is very meet and necessary for all men that do service to
their Country, and principally for Generalles and Captains, and especially
for all them that take ^harge t^^ ^ee leaders of men. The instrument is much
like ^o the backside of an Astrolobe, but that it has no Scal, and yo^ shall
make it in this manner. First, take a piece of well seasoned bordes end of a
foot square, The making of an instrument to describe a Country.
and the^ make it round: or else you may make it in metal, the larger the
better, making it perf^t round. And then divide the circumference or edge
into.360. degrees or equal parts: and then in like manner divide it into.32.
equal parts, and name them as you do the.32. points of a sea man's Compass,
and then make a hole in the center of the instrument, and the^ make an Athelida
with.2. sightes, such a one as an Astrolobe has in all points, and there make
it fast with a pin to the middle hole of the instrument, and then in one of
the sides either to the North or South point, place a needle, such a one as a
Dyall has, and this instrument is finished. As by this figure following is
represented. Now follows the use of this instrument, which is, for to describe
a Region or Country, and for to know the distaunces from one place to an
other: very meet for Cherography or Topography, to make a Card or Map for
any Country, or to know the dystaunce from one Town to an other, and also to
know toward what part the Town or Village does bear from the one to the
other, by the help of two stations or standings, made upon some high ground,
as some Hill or some high Tower, where that you may see all the cost of the
Country round about you, as thus: First, take the instrument and go up
unto some high Hill or Tower, where that you may see all the Country round
about you, and then draw into a piece of paper a Circle with a pair of
Compasses, and then draw a Meridian Line, and then divide the Circle into 32.
equal parts as the instrument is, and then lay the instrument upon some
stool or thing flat before you, and then set it with the needle due North and
South, and so let the instrument stand without any remouinge: then turn the
Athelida or Rule with the two sightes, to such Towns or Villages or hills, or
Churches, as are within the Argle of sight, and look through both the sightes
of the Athelida, and see what Town or mark that you do see.

Then resort to your Paper, and look upon the instrument at what point and
degree the Athelida is standing on, then upon the point and degree of the
Circle write the name of the town, or Village, or Hill, then turn the
Athelida to the next mark: and so forth, till you have taken all the towns
and Villages round about the Country or Coasts that be within the Angle of
sight, and write the names of all those towns at the point and degree that
the Athelida does stand upon, at the time of the taking of them with the 2.
sights.

And furthermore, write in the paper the 4. principal winds, as east, weste,
north, and southe. Even as the coaste of the country does stand: and then
draw right lines from the Center of the Circle too the Circumference, to the
place where the names of the towns were written, and so passinge right to the
edge of the Paper.

And thus do by every town written on the edge of the Circle, and then that
station is finished. And then furthermore, look to what place that you do
mean for to go unto for to make your second station, being one of those
that you have observed before. For the first observation is to no purpose: so
that you must of force have 2. And then upon that Line that the name of the
town or Hill that you do mean to go unto, set one of the feet of the
compasses, and with the other foot of the compasses make an other circle in
like manner: then draw an other Meridian Line, and be sure that both the
Meridian Lines do agree the one with the other, and so divide that circle into
32. equal parts, as the other was in all points: and then go up unto some
high place that was the mark before, and then lay your instrument before you
again, setting it by the needle due South and North, and so let the instrument
stand.

The second observation.
And then turning the Athelida to such towns as were taken before, looking
through both the sights were where the Athelida does stand, and write the names
of those towns again upon the edge of that circle at the point and degree
that the Athelida does stand upon: and do thus till that you have taken all
the towns that were observed at the first standings: and then draw right
lines from the Center of that Circle, by the edge of the Circle, to the names
of those Towns that were written, and so the lines for to run right to the
sides of the Paper. Then look where that the lines do cross, there make a
mark: for there stands the Town or place that you have observed.

And now in like manner, if you list, you may know the distaunce from one Town
to an other, as thus: first, you must measure the distance between any one town
to another: and that ground being measured, To know the distaunce unto any
place.
you must make a Scal or tronke of mesure on the side of the paper, and then
measure the distaunce between those 2. Towns in the paper: then according to
that proportion of measure make your miles in the Scall or tronke of the Card
or Map: and that being done, you may know the distaunce with a pair of
Compasses between any one Town or Towns to the other, by the Scall of the
Card: and then this being done, you may make that fair in an other thing
without lines, and bewtyfye that at your pleasure, as for example thus, by the
parts or country about Grauesende.

First, I took the Instrument, and then in like manner I made a Circle in a
sheet of paper: then I drew a Meridian line, An Ensample.
that is to say, a line from the South to the North: and I divided the Circle
into 52. equal parts, and then I wrote the 4. principal winds in the four
sides of the paper: that is to say, the East, West, North, and South: and then
I went up to a Hill that stands beside Grauesende, called Ruggon Hill, and
there beside the Myll I made my first standinge: and then I observed al those
Towns and places following: First Clyffe Church, and that I took Northeast and
by East, and the sixth part of a point to the Eastwarde: the next was West
Tilbrye Church, North, and. of a point to the Eastwardes, and then I took the
Bulwark of West Tilbrye, North, and. of a point to the Westwardes: and then I
took Brauesende Church steeple, North and by West, and. parts of a point to
the Westwarde: and then I took little Thurrock, Norwest and by North, and the
6. part of a point to the Westwarde: then I took Grayes Thurrock Northwest,
and the 6. part of a point to the Westwarde: and then I took Saint Clements
Church, West, Northwest, and. to the Northwardes: then I took North fleet
Church, West and ^/4;. parts of a point to the Northwards: then I took
Swankam Church, due West: then in like manner I took the Vinyard Mill, West,
Northwest, and. part of a point to the Westwardes: then I took Mappam Church
Southwest, and. part of a point to the Westwardes: then I took Cobbam Church,
Southea^t, and by South, and. part of a point to the Southwardes: then I
took Shorn Myll, East, and by South, and. parts of a point to the
Southwarde: Then I took Chaulke Church, East, and. of a point to the
Southwardes: and so I make an end of that standing.

And now I chose out for my second standing, West Tillary church, and I did
draw a Line from the Center of the Circle to the Circumference of the Circle,
to the title of Tilberye Church being North, and. of a point to the
Eastwarde. the Line passing right to the edge of the paper. And then I took a
pair of compasses, and set the one foot of the compasses upon that Line, and
with the other foot I made a Circle: and then I made an other Meridian line by
the other in the other Circle, so that the one did agree with the other: and
then I divided the Circle into 32. equal parts, and then I went over the
water to West Tilbery Church, and then I laid my instrument before me, and set
it due North and South, and there I observed all the towns and places before
named: as Cliffe, East and 1/^. part to the North: Shorn Myll, and Chaulk
Church, South East and by South, and. parts to the Southward. Cobbam Church,
South and by East, and. part to the Southwards.

Ruggon Hill, the Mill South, ^. to the Westwards. Mepham Church, South and by
West, and. to the Westwarde. Tilberye Bulwark and Grauesend, South, Southwest,
and. to the Southwardes. North Fleet Church: Southwest, and. to the South.
Swanskam Church, Southwest, and. to the Westwarde. Saint Clements church,
west, and by South, and. part to the West. Grayes thurrock, West, and. parts
to the South. Little Thurock, West, and. parts to the Southwarde. The Vineyarde
Mill, West, and. part to the Southwarde. And so I make an end. And then I drew
lines from the Center of the Circle to the Circumference, to the title of the
names of the Towns, and so I passed by the right lines to the furthest parts
of the paper, first upon the one Circle, then upon the other, till that I had
drawn so many Lines as that there were Towns in both Circles: and there where
that the Lines did cross the one the other, I made a mark: For there stands
the Town, as by this Ensample it does appear.



The.16. chapter shows you how for to make a Trouke or skalle of measure in a
map or Card, whereby you may know the distance in miles that it is from one
town to an other.
Now this being done, you may know the distance from any one town to an other.
For as many towns as you have observed, and if you list you may go from place
to place, till that you have observed and taken all the Towns in a whole
region or country, as thus: first measure the distance in miles from any one
town to another, then that distance being known, make a Tronke or Skall of
measure with a pare of compasses, according to the distance taken with the
compasses between those.2. How to make a tronck or Skal of measure to know the
distance from any one town unto another.
towns in the paper. Then that being truly divided into miles and half miles,
and quarters of miles, then you may know the distance from one town to an
other through all a whole region or country, by the replying it with a pair
of compasses, as you may perceive by the rule or Skall made upon the other
side of the paper: and the roundles with the pricks in the middle, be miles:
and the pricks measured between them, is one quarter of a mile: as ensample,
for the making of a Tronke or Skall. First, I measured the distaunce between
Northfleete Church and Grauesend Church, and found the measure upon the right
line a mile and half a quarter: and then I made a Tronke of Skall in the card,
as thus: then I took a pair of compasses, and measured the distance from the
crossing of the.2. lines of the.2. circles of the Title of Grauesende, and the
Title of Northefleete: and then I finding the measure to be a mile and.. parts
of a mile, I did rebate the.8. part of a mile: and then that which did remain
was just a mile: and then according to that proportion of measure, I made a
Skall or Tronke of measure on the side of the.2. Circles, and divided it
into.4. equal parts, and every one of these parts to be one quarter of a
mile, as by the demonstration before made, it does appear. Now whenever that
you do desire for to know the distance from any one town to an other, An
ensample how to reply a pair of compasses to know the distance unto any town
assygned in any card or Map.
then take your compasses, and open the compasses to the wideness between
the.2. towns, that the one foot might stand upon the one Town and the other
upon the other. Then set your compasses to the Skall or Tronke of measure:
there shall you see the distance of miles open with half miles and quarters of
miles: as for ensample this, by certain places before named, which is (Clyffe
Church, and the vinyarde mylle,) and the third to be Grauesende. And the
vinearde mill, and Clyffe church, the one bears from the other by a right
line East and west. Clyffe Church a quarter and half a point to the North of
the East, and the vinyard mill a quarter of a point to the South, of the west,
and the distance between them by a right line, over the water and the land.8.
miles and.. parts of a mile: and Clyffe Church bears from Grauesende, East,
Northeast, and to the North: and the distance over the water and the land by a
right line, 4. miles and. part of a mile. Then the vinyarde mill bare from
Grauesende, West and by North, and part of a point to the North: and the
distance to the mill from Grauesend.4. mile and.. parts of a mile: as by this
ensample it does appear. And now you knowing the distance unto any place
assygned, you may know the height of any hill, or the deepnesse of any valley,
by the order declared in the Chapter there by the Scall, or else by the degrees.
etc.

The vinyard myll.


The.17. Chapter shows unto you how you may make a card or map for any
country, placing in it the true Longitude and the true Latitude: And also how
for to know the true longitude and the true latitude.
NOw furthermore, if that you list, you may make a card, and beautify it at
your pleasure, and make it fairer, and you may draw the longitude and the
latitude of every place, as thus: first, you may take the distance of every
Town and Village, and Hill, or any other notable mark whatsoever it be, and
then make a mark for the name of such a Town, according to the observation
that you have observed before: both the distance, and toward what cost of the
country the Town does declyne, according to the crossing of the.2. lines,
placing in it the principal ryuers or waters: and then in the very middle of the
map or card make a Meridian line, to the intent for to rule all the rest of
the work. And then in the margent of the card, from the South to the North, How
to make a card or pl^^ Tipograph^e and to place the longitude and the latitude
in it.
upon both of the edges of the map or card, place the latitude of the
country, (that is to say) at how many degrees that the pole Artick is lyfted
above your Horizon, as you may know it by your Astrolobe, by the altitude of
the same upon the Merydian line, knowing what declination, the Sun has upon
that day of the month that you take the height of the Sun. How to take the
latitude of any place.
And then if that the Sun has North declination, you must substract or pull
away the Suns declination with degrees and minutes: and if South declination,
you must add or put to the Suns declination with degrees and minutes: and
then that which shall remain shall be the altitude of the Equinoctial. Then
pull that su^me out of.90. degrees, with degrees and minutes: the remaynder
shall be the height of the North pole Artick above the Horizon.

And furthermore, you may know the latitude of any Town or Country by the
stars of the South, or stars of the North, knowing there just declination
from the Equinoctial, doing by them as you do by the Suns declination in
all points. And then if that they be Northern Stars, you mu^t know the
distaunce from the pole, and then if that the star be above the pole then you
must pull that su^me away with degrees and minutes. And if the stars at the
time of your taking of them, be under the North pole, then put to that which is
the distance of the star from the pole, unto the height of the star: and
that in like manner shall show unto you the true height of the North pole
Artick above the Horizon. And then in the margin of the map of the East side
and of the weast side, you may write the latitude directly, in that East and
west line of that place which you have observed the latitude of the North pole:
and then that being truly known, you may know the true latitude of all the
towns in a whole country or Region, knowing the distance to every town or
place, as thus. Every.60. miles going directly South and North, does answer
unto one degree.

And then further, if that you would place the longitude, and that you cannot
get without a globe, or else a Card Cosmographye, or else you must follow
some author who has written thereof, and because you cannot get the longitude
with no instrument, for that the whole frame of the firmament with all the
lights thereof be carried round about in 24. hours, so that there remains no
mark nor light that stands still, but only the two poles of the world:
therefore I will show unto you how that you may get the longitude with a globe
or Card Cosmographye, so that it be truly placed in it.

How to know the longitude.
First you must measure the longitude from the Meridian of the Canarie Islands,
or other wise called the fortunate Islands, and so take the number of degrees
from that place unto any other that has that same Meridian that your Town or
place has: and that shall be the number of the degrees for your place.

And then you having one place true, you may find the just longitude in a
whole region or country.

But there is one special thing to be noted, and that is this: The degrees of
longitude be not so many miles in length as the degrees of latitude. For as
those places that be to the south parts of this side or under the Equinoctial
be as long as the degrees of latitude, so that to any of the 2. poles shorter
and shorter, as I have declared in the.16. Chapter of my book called the
Regement for the Sea, as by this Ensample it does appear, by the Realm of
England.



Now whenever that you do desire to know the longitude and the latitude of
any town or place in a card, after that the Map or Card is drawn, then
do this: First, by the ensample before made, hold a line or a string, How to
know the longitude and the latitude in a Card or Map.
the Map lying flat and plain upon a table before you. And first for the
latitude, hold the line East and West right over the town and place, then by
the ensample before made, you do see the latitudes be upon the East side, and
upon the West side: then by the line you shall know how many degrees and parts
of degrees, the Pole is raised above the Horizon. And then in like manner for
to know the longitude of any town in a Map or Card, then hold the line due
South and North right over the town or place whose longitude you do desire
for to know: and for to hold it due South and North, which is called your
Meridian line, you must do this: For that the degrees be shorter to the North
parts, then they be to the Southe side or parts of the Map or Card,
therefore you must seek the number of degrees both at the South side and at
the North side all at one time: holding the line proportionable right over the
town: that is to say, half degree for half degree, and quarter for quarter,
and so forth to the least part of a degree.

The eighteenth Chapter shows unto you how you may place all the principal
rivers or waters truly in any Card or Map.
NOw furthermore, as it is sufficiently declared before, how for to describe or
draw a Map or Card, for a whole region or Country, and also how to find the
distaunce from one Town to an other: therefore for that it is one of the
special matters, in like manner to draw or describe the principal ryuers or
waters within a Region or Country into a Map or Card: therefore after that
you have observed all the notable Towns and places worthy of memory, then if
you can take a Boat and so go all the whole length of the water or river in
the very middle between both the lands, and then with a Maryners Compass you
may see how that the river does trent or turn: then you having the
observation about you, then you may know how long that the water does trent by
that point, or wind by the marks of the land, How to place the rivers or
waters in a Card or Map
which you have before observed: and then so often as the water does turn or
Compass about, you shall see by your Sea man's Compass, and how much: and
still you shall know the length by the mark upon the shore.

And then you must draw a crooked line into the Paper that you have noted those
Towns and places, in the Region where that the pryncipall places be, according
to the crossing of the 2. lines, in every place the crooked Line to be made
according to the trentinge of the River or Water, and every treminge to be
according unto that point or Wind that the Compass did show to you: and this
being done, you may know the wydenesse of the Water by the observation before
taken, and then you may draw your Plates, and so bewtifye it at your pleasure,
taking the crooked Line from the very middle of the Water.

A Table of the Contents of the first part of this Book called a treasure for
Trauailers.
FIrst to the Reader of this first part.

The first Chapter of the first part containing the making of the Quadrant
with the Skall, whereby you may know the height or lowness of any thing.

The Second Chapter is of upright shadow, that is to say, to know the
heighte of all things taken within the length of the thing.

The Third Chapter shows how for too know the heighte of any thing with
the Skall by contrary shadow, that is to say, without the length of any
thing so taken.

The Fourth Chapter shows how to take the part of any height, as the length
of a window or such like.

The fyfth Chapter shows how for to know the distaunce of many things
that is from you, and also whether any other Tower be higher or lower then the
Tower that you be upon.

The Sixte Chapter shows how for to know the height of a Hill, and also the
distaunce unto the top of any hill with the Skall.

The Seuenthe Chapter shows you by the Skall of the Astrolobe to know the
true wydenesse of any Water, or how far that any Ship is of from you, or
to take any great distaunce by layinge the Astrolobe flat before you with
the Skall vpwardes.

The Eight Chapter shows unto you if that you do know the distaunce, then
you may know whether it be higher ground or lower then the place that you
are upon, and how much, both by the parts of the Skall, and by the degrees,
and also you may know whether that one Ship be higher then another.

The ninth Chapter shows the making of a Crossestaffe that in some cases is
better then the Skall of the Astrolobe or Quadrant.

The tenth Chapter shows how for to use the crossestaffe, for to know the
length of any wall or the distaunce between any 2. marks, and also the
distance from you unto any wall or mark.

The eleventh Chapter shows you how for to take the length of a wall when
that you have not ground large yenough for your.2. stations or standings.

The twelfe Chapter shows you how for to know the distaunce unto any 2.
marks, or to the 2. ends of any wall, by the extracting of the square root.

The thirteenth Chapter shows how for to know the distaunce unto any mark
with the Crossestaffe, without the extracting of the root, and also how for
to take the height of any thing with the Crossestaffe.

The fourteenth Chapter shows unto you how that you shall know the distaunce
of any ship from you, and you being in another ship, and both the ships
under sail and going, by the cross staff.

The fifteenth Chapter shows unto you, how that you shall make an instrument
whereby that you you may describe a region or country which you may call a
Horizontall, and also how for to take the plat of any ground.

The sixteenth Chapter shows you how to make a Trounke or Skall of measure
in a Map or Card, whereby you may know the distaunce in miles that it is
from one town to another.

The seventeenth Chapter shows unto you how you may make a Card or map
for any country, placing in it the true longitude, and the true latitude, and
also how for to know the true longitude, and the true latitude.

The eyghteenth Chapter shows unto you, how you may place all the principal
rivers or waters truly in any Card or Map.

Finis.
The Argument of the second Book, of the Treasure for Trauailers.
The second book of the Treasure for Trauaylers, showing how by the longitude
and latitude of any City, Town or place, for to know the distance in miles
unto them, and also by what point or wind of the compass they be from you.
And also there is showed in this book, how diverse notable Cities, Towns or
places, do bear from the City of London, both in Europe, Africa, Asia and
America, with sundry principal Islands in the sea, both by what distance they
be in miles from London, and what wind or point of the compass they are from
London, and also their longest day, and the diversity aspect, that is to say,
how much the Moon shall change rather or later, then it does at the City of
London: being very necessary for all sorts of traualers either by Sea or by
Land: Written by william Bourne.

To the courteous Reader.
FRiendely Reader, there is contained in this second Book, how by the
longitude and the Latitude, to know the distance unto what quarter of the
world that any place assigned is from you: that is to say how many miles,
(according unto our english accoumpt) and by what point of the Compass any
City or Town, or any other notable Place is from you wheresoever you be,
upon the face of the whole Earth.

And for that the City of LONDON is the most notable, and the famousest place
here in ENGLAND, therefore I have thought it good, to assign the City of
London to be the place appointed, how far sundry notable Cities and Towns,
and other places worthy of memory are from the city of London, both their
distance in miles, and unto what quarter of the world they do bear from the
City of London, according to their longitude and latirude, accordingly as
sundry authors have set down their longitude and latitude: and also there is
contained in this second Book, the diversity aspecte, that is to say, how
much that the Moon shall change rather or later, then it does at London,
according unto the Longitude of the places that are mentioned in this second
Book: and also the length of the longest Summer day at the places named in
this second Book, according unto the latitudes of the places set down in
this second Book. And for that there is no person that has travailed
generally through the face of the whole earth, therefore they must needs of
force follow such authors, as have written thereof, whether they be true or
not: and therefore you must needs take the^ as they be, for otherwise I know
not how it is possible for to do it, but only to follow the best and most
Learned authors that have written in those causes. And yet the learned men that
have been before time, must of force follow those that have given unto them the
notes of the longitude and the Latitudes of any places that they have not been
at them selves, whether they be true or not. And there be a number of persons,
who if they do find but a small fault in any Book, then by that means they
will go about to discredit the whole matter, often repeatinge the matter, if
they do find any error in it: as who should say, what a cunning man he is,
although in all the rest of the whole book, he is not able to say any thing
thereunto. And it may be possible, that he may have no judgment in the rest
of the causes how necessary so ever the rest of the substance of the matter is.

Wherefore (gentle Readers) if you do find any fault in this Book, then
gently give me warning thereof: and if you do amend the faults therein
contained, then I shall be the more beholding unto you etc. For as touching
the longitude and the latitude of places, men must credit those that have been
there, for the truth of the matter: and yet every man that has been at any
place, cannot do it, for the.100. person that has travailed unto places, is
not able to take the true latitude, but much less the longitude of any place.
And furthermore, as touching the true distaunce unto any place assigned, that
cannot be by any one point of the Compass, as is declared in this Book. etc.
And thus (gentle Readers) I betake you unto the almightye God for evermore.

The second book of the treasure for Trauaylers.
The first Chapter of the Second book, showing you how for to know the
distance unto any Town upon the face of the earth, and what is to be
considered in the doing thereof. etc.
Now begins the second book, showing by longitude and by latitude the
dystance unto any Town, or City, or place upon the face of the earth, keeping
one point or wind over the Sea and LAND, although that it be not the very
nearest way, for the very nearest way over the Sea and Land can not be by one
point of the Compass, except it be upon the Meridian line, that is, due South
or due North from you: or being under the Equinoctial, to be due East or West.
But if it be in any other place from under the Equinoctial, although it be due
East or West, The nearest way over the Sea and Land is not by any one point of
the compass.
both the places to be under one Parallel: yet in the going due East and West,
is not the nearest way over the Sea and Land, but the next way over the Sea and
Land is, by diverse wyndes or points of the compass: and the further from the
Equinoctial to either of the two poles, the greater changing of the points of
the compass. For the next way over the Sea and the Land, unto any place, is to
go by the great circle which is equal unto the Equinoctial or the Meridian
circle, which will not be according unto any one point of the compass, but
unto diverse: as for proof thereof you shall have this for an ensample thus: An
ensample.
that in the latitude of.60. degrees that there were two Towns or places in
that parallel, the one being opposite or right against the other, that is.180.
degrees, and a degree in that parallel does contain.30. miles. And now to go
just East or West in that parallel, to come unto the place assigned, it is.5400
miles: as for proof thereof, multiply.180. times.30. but that is not the next
way unto the place assygned: but the next way is to go by the Merydian line,
that is to say, to go due North, until you do come right under the pole, and
then to go by that Merydian, due South, till you have that latitude again:
and then it is but.3600. miles, as you may know by plain multiplycation, as
it is from the latitude of.90. degrees, unto the pole, to go due North.30.
degrees, and from the pole, Southward again, other.30. degrees, that is in
all.60. degrees: and then to multyply.60. times.60. it shows the true
dystance, which is but.3600. miles. And to go by the parallel line, that is
due East or West, then it is.5400. miles, that is half so much more, as by
plain proof you may know. But if the two places be both underneath one
parallel, and be shorter the^ 180. degrees asu^der, the^ it requires to go by
diverse points of the compass, and not by the Meridian, The greatest compass
of the earth, 21600 miles
according unto the passing of the great circle, which does contain in
circumference 21600. miles, which is the greatest compass of the earth, and
not according unto more paralels then one, which is the Equinoctial, nether unto
no one point of the compass: for any point of the Compass will bring you unto
the poles of the world, or very near, except those that be pararel, which
is East or West, All the points of the compass will bring you unto the pole of
the world except the East or West.
as all right lines draw being extended, exceptynge lines parallel, will
Cross the other in the end: so all the points of the Compass do wind
until they do come unto the poles or very near the poles of the world, as
they be all Hilicall or Spherall lines.

Wherefore there is no one point or wind, that can be prescribed to be the
next way by that point unto any place assygned, but only the Meridyan line or
lines: and to go East and West, then to be under the Equinoctial, for the
next way else is by sundry points of the compass etc.

Wherefore I omit to say any more thereof, but only to show unto you, how
for to know the dystance unto any Town or place situated upon the lace of the
whole earth, by any one assygned point of the compass, then for to know the
true distaunce over the Sea and the land. And I do show it this way, You
cannot pass the nearest way for it is through the frosen zones.
for two causes, the first is this, for that it is not possible to pass the
next way, by the means of the frozen Zone. Wherefore it is supposed, that it is
not nauigable in those Seas, neither passageable by land in those Countries:
and the second cause is this, as before is declared, in the going the next
way, it does require to go by sundry points of the compass, which would
be but a confused matter, for the most part of those persons that do desire to
know the distaunce unto any place assigned, neither shall he know so readily
which way it stands, or bears from him.

A confused matter to say a place does stand by diverse points of the compass.
And furthermore, in the knowing the distaunce unto any place assigned, and by
what point of the compass it bears, this is to be considered, that the
Longitude does begin at the Meridian of the Cannary Island, and so to follow
unto the Eastwardes, and so ending at.360. again at the Cannary Islands, as I
do show in my book called the Regiment for the Sea.

The second Chapter shows unto you, how you may know the distaunce unto any
Town situate upon the face of the whole earth, so that you do^ know the true
Longitude and the true Latitude of them.
NOw furthermore, if that you do know the Longitude and the Latitude of any
town or towns, situate upon the earth, you may know the distaunce unto them,
as before is declared, as thus: If that the town be just East or West from
you, that is to say, that your town or place is under the Parallel that the
other town is, To know the distance of any town from you, if that both the
places are in one Parallel.
that is to say, that the Pole artike of that town or place is so many
degrees above the Horizon as your town is, both in degrees and minutes: then
shall you seek how many degrees of Longitude, the other town does differ
from yours: then you shall seek how many miles that one degree shall answer
unto it, in that parallel, and then you shall multiply the one by the other,
that is to say, the degrees by the miles: and that sum which comes of that
multiplication, shall be the distance between the two towns: as for ensample,
thus: by the City of London and Answerpe in Brabant, which differs but.4. An
ensampl^.
minutes in Latitude: for at London, the Pole is raised.51. degrees and.32.
minutes, and at the City of Antwerpe, the Pole is raised.51. degrees.28.
minutes, therefore we be both under one parallel. Now the Longitude of London is
from the Cannarie Islands.19. degrees, and.54. minutes, and Antwerpes Longitude
is.26. degrees and.36. minutes, so that Antwerpe stands East from London.6.
degrees.42. minutes. Now must I know how many miles a degree contains in that
parallel, (and of that I do make mention in my book called The Regiment for
the Sea, in the.16. Chapter) and that I do find to be.37. miles to one
degree. The^ I multiply.6. times.37. because that it is.6. degrees and.37.
miles to one degree: and of that multiplication there comes.222. Then there
is.42. minutes more, and that.42. minutes contains near.26. miles: so that
the whole sum of miles from London to Antwerpe, by a right East line over the
Sea, and the land, is.248. miles. Now furthermore, if that town or place have
that Longitude that your town has, and has another Latitude, To know the
distance if that both the places are in one Merydian.
that is to say, that it does stand due South or North from you, having all
one Meridian line, then must you look how many degrees the other town is
Southe or North from your town: and then you knowing that, you may know the
distaunce to any Town or place that stands underneath your Meridian,
allowyng.60. miles for every degree of Latitude, as for ensample thus: by the
City of London, and Roane in Normandy, An ensample.
which has in manner all one Longitude, as the City of London has.19.
degrees.54. minutes of Longitude, as before is declared: so has the Town of
Roane.20. degrees.3. minutes, which differs 6. miles to the Eastwardes of the
Meridian of the City of London, and as it is before rehearsed, that the
latitude of London is.51. degrees and.32. minutes, the Latitude of Roane is 49.
degrees and.10. minutes: so that Roane stands.2. degrees and.22. minutes to
the Southwardes of the City of London.

And then multiply.2. times.60 which makes.120. and then there is.22. minutes
more, then that comes to.22. miles, so that.120. miles, and.22. miles, makes
in all.142. miles, the distance between the City of London and Roane, ^uer the
sea and land, by a right line between them. Now furthermore, if so be that any
town or country has an other longitude and an other latitude, then yours
has, then to knew the distance between the^, you must work thus: First,
look what latitude that your town has, and then look the latitude of the
other town that you would know the distance unto, How to know the distance,
if that both the places does differ both in longitude and in latitude, that is
to say, yt is neither under your parallel nor Meridian.
then that being known, you must seek the longitude of the other town how
much it does differ from yours: then look how many miles of the latitude
will answer to one degree: then that number being multiplied, the number of
degrees by the miles, and that shows how many miles that it is from the
Meridian of your town to the Meridian of the other town. Then the other town
has an other latitude then yours has, and if the town be to the Northwardes
of your town, then the degrees of that parallel, shall be shorter then the
degrees of your parallel, and if the latitude of the town be to the South
parts of your town, then shall the degrees of the parallel be longer then the
degrees of the parallel of your town. Then in like manner as you have
multiplied the number of miles by the degrees of your town, so in like manner
you shall seek how many miles will annsweare unto one degree in that
parallel: Then multiplye the degrees by the miles, and it will show unto you
the distaunce of miles from the other town too the Meridian of your town:
then the distance of the Southermost town, from the Meridian, is more miles
then the other town is.

Therefore you shall add or pull both your numbers together, and then take
half that for your East and West line, then shall you multyply the number of
miles in it self, and keep it in memory: then you knowing the number of
miles of Latitude, that the one Town does differ from the other, then in like
manner you shall multyply that number in it self, then the multiplycation of
both the numbers you shall add together, then you shall by extraction of
Roots, seek the square Root ^ that being known, shall be the just distaunce
by that point or right Line over the Sea and the Land, from the one Town to
the other: as for ensample thus:

By the City of London, An Ensample by Jerusalem and the City of London.
and the City of Jerusalem now being destroyed, which was sometime the most
famous City on earth, and the Latitude of London, as before is declared, being
51. degrees 32. minutes, and every degree of our parallel is 37. miles: and the
Latitude of Jerusalem is 31. degrees, and 22. minutes, then for every degree
in that parallel, shall be 51. miles. Then I knowing the Longtitude of the
City of London for to be 19. degrees and 54. minutes, then I do seek the
Langtitude of Jerusalem, and I find it for to be 65. degrees, and 45.
mynutes. Then I do pull away 19 degrees 54. minutes, out of 65. degrees 45.
minutes, and then remains 45. degrees 51. mynutes, and so many degrees and
minutes is Jerusalem East from the City of London. Then first I do multiply
the miles in a degree of our parallel, as this: being 45. degrees and 37.
miles to one degree. Therefore I do multiply the one by the other, that is 45.
times 37. and of that multiplycation comes 1665. then 51. minutes more, and
that comes near unto 32. miles: then put 32. unto 1665. that makes 1697.
and so many miles it is from the City of London unto the Meridian line of
Jerusalem.

And now you must multiplye the number of degrees into miles for the latitude
of Jerusalem, which is 51. miles to one degree in that parallel, and the
degrees be in number 45. degrees 51. minutes: Therefore I do multyplye 45. by
51. and of that multyplycation there comes 2295. Then there is 51. minutes
more, and that comes near unto 44. miles: and put 44. unto 2295. and that
makes 2339. and so many miles it is between Jerusalem and the Meridian line
of the City of London. Then this being done, I do add both the numbers
together, that is to say, the number of miles in the parallel of London between
both the Meridians, the one being.1697. and the other for to be 2339. then
adding both these numbers together, makes 4036. then take half that number
for your true East and West line, which will be 2018. miles: then I do seek
the diversity beeweene the 2. paralels as thus.

The pole artick of London is raised 51. degrees and 32. mynutes, and the pole
artick of Jerusalem is raised 31. degrees and 22. minutes. Then I do
substract 31. degrees 22. mynutes, out of 51. degrees 32. minutes, the
remainder is 20. degrees 10. minutes: then I do multiplye the number of
degrees by miles, 60. miles to one degree, because that they be degrees of
Latitude, thus.20. times 60. and of that multiplication comes.1200. and then
there is 10. mynutes more, and those 10. minutes comes to 10. miles: so that
the whole sum of miles from the parallel of London to the parallel of
Jerusalem, is 1210. miles. And now for to find the true distance over the Sea
and the land by a point or line: you must do thus by the exctactions of
roots. First, you must multiplye the Longitude and the number of miles in it
self, as it is before rehearsed: the half of the miles of the distaunce
between the 2. Meridians of both the Latitudes added together, that is to
say, as before is rehearsed.2018. times 2018. and of that there comes
4072324. Then multiplye the distaunce between the 2. paralels in it self,
that is to say, 1210. times 1210. and of that multyplycation there
comes.1264100. Then I must add or put both these numbers together, and these
2. numbers being both together, From Hierus^lem unto London 2352. miles. and 25
26.
are 5536424. This being done, you must extract the square root of this
number, and the square root of 5536424. makes 2352. And 4520/4704. part, and
that does contain in miles from Jerusalem to London by a right line over the
Sea and the Land 2352 miles, and near 25/26. parts of a mile, the just
distaunce between Jerusalem and the City of London. A second Ensample by
Venice and London.
So that the longitudes and the latituds be true.

Yet furthermore, for your better Ensample, by the City of Venice, as the
longitude of London is 19. degrees and 54. minutes, the longitude of Venice is
35. degrees 30. minutes. Therefore substract or draw 19 degrees 54. minutes out
of 35. degrees.30. minutes, the residue shall be 15. degrees, 36. minutes. Then
Venice is 15. degrees.36. minutes, to the Eastwarde of London, then the
latitude of London being 51. degrees and 32. minutes, the latitude of Venice is
44. degrees and 45. minutes. Then take 44. degrees 45. minutes out of 51.
degrees 32. minutes, the remnaunt shall be 6. degrees 47. minutes. So that
Venice is 6. degrees 47. minutes to the South part of London. Then you shall
multiply the number of degrees of longitude into miles, and first for the
parallel of London, as before is declared.37. miles to one degree: and the
degrees of longitude being.15. degrees.36. mynutes, you shall multiplye 15.
times 37. and that comes to 555. Then there is 36. minutes more, and that
comes to 22. miles more. Then put.22. unto.555. and that makes.577. miles,
the distaunce between London, and the Meridian of Venice. Then you must seek
how many miles will answer to one degree in the parallel of Venice, that comes
to 43. miles to a degree. Then multiply the degres of longitude by the number
of miles in that parallel, that is 15. times 43. and that comes to 645 then
the 36 minutes more comes unto near 26. miles.

Then put.26. unto.645. and that makes.671. so that it is.671. miles from
Venice unto the Meridian of London. Then put both these numbers together, that
is to say, the distaunce between the Meridian of London and the Meridian of
Venice, in the parallel of London, and the parallel of Venice, the one being
577. miles, and the other 671. miles: and those 2. numbers being both together,
makes 1246.

Then take half that number for your East and West line, and that comes unto
623. And now I do conclude, that Venice is East from London 623. miles. Then
you must multiplye the degrees of latitude into miles 60. miles to one degree,
and the Latitude of Venice being 6. degrees to the South part of London:
therefore I multiply.6. times.60. and that comes unto.360, then there is 47.
minutes more, and that makes.47. miles: then put 47. unto 360. then it will be
407.

This being done, multiplye the miles of longitude in it self, as 623. times
623. and that comes unto 388129. Then multyplye the latitude in it self,
that is to say, 407. times 407. and that comes unto 165649. then add or put
both these numbers together, that is to say, 388129. and 165649. and that
makes 553778. And now you must seek the square root of both these numbers
added together by extracting of roots, and that will be 744 and ^2/744. part,
and that it is near. part of a mile. So I do conclude that the distaunce from
Venice to London, by a right line over the Sea and Land, is 744. miles, and.
part of a mile: so that the longitude and the latitude be truly taken.

And thus may you do by all other Towns and places situate upon the face of
the whole earth, whether that the distaunce be much or little: so that you may
know the true longitude and the true latitude, and so resort to the true
length of the Parallel as before is declared.

The third Chapter shows how for to know unto what quarter of the World any
place does stand from you, that is to say, by what point of the Compass,
you knowinge the true Longitude and the true Latitude etc.
ANd furthermore, you knowinge the true longitude and the true latitude of any
Town upon the face of the whole earth, then you may know unto what quarter of
the world it does bear or stand from you: that is to say, by what point of
the Compass, as this: If athat any two places have both one longitude, that is
to say, one Meridyan line, and has an other latitude, that is to say, that the
North pole is raised more degrees then yours is, then it is North from you: if
few degrees, then that bears South from you.

And also if that it has your longitude, and have the South pole, North or
South.
above the Horizon, then in like manner the place is due South from you etc.
And furthermore, if any two places have all one latitude, and has another
longitude, being both in one parallel, and if that it have more degrees in
longitude, then your town has, then that City, town or place, is unto the
Eastwardes of you. If fewer degrees in longitude, then your Town has, East or
West.
then it is West, from your City, Town, or place, as in the Chapter going
before is declared. If that it be more degrees in longitude then your City,
Town, or place has, by.180. degrees, then that place is West from you,
although both the places have one latitude, that is to say, in one parallel.
And then to know how many miles, you must first note the degrees of longitude
that it has from the Meridian of the Canary Island: Note.
and then rebate that out of.360. and then add or put unto that number of the
longitude of your own place: and so multiply the number of miles in that
parallel, and that shall show unto you the number of miles, that the City,
Town, or place is unto the Westwarde of your place, and the reason thereof is
this, for that the circumference of the earth is to go from the East unto the
West, is.360. degrees: and half that number is.180. degrees. And then if that
it be more degrees then it is Westwardes from you, 360. degrees is the Compass
of the earth.
and if that it be but just 180. degrees, then it is opposyte or right against
your place that is neither East nor West, nor no point of the compass else, if
that both the places were under the Equinoctial, or else if that the one have
the North pole, and the other have the South pole, both of one altitude, or
heyght above the Horizon. For then the one should be Antipodies the one unto
the other, that is to say, What Antipedies are, that go foot unto foot*
the one to go foot unto the foot of the other, the one of the one side of
earth, and the other on the other side of the whole earth, and to have the
whole thicknes of the earth between them. etc. And furthermore for to know by
what other point or wind of the Compass that any place does bears, then that
is thus known: the two towns or places to differ both in longitude and in
latitude, then as in the Chapter going before is declared, it is known, by
this order following. If that it have fewer degrees in longitude then your
place has, and fewer degrees in latitude in like manner, then it is according
unto the degrees, and especially unto the number of miles, as thus: If the
place be short in longitude, and also in latitude, and both in like quantity,
that is to say, in the just number of miles, that it be no more miles from the
Meridyan of the two places then that it is from the parallel of the two places,
In the Southwest quarter.
then that place is Southwest from you just. And furthermore, if that the
distaunce in miles between the two paralelles be.5. times the distance between
the two Meridians, then that place is South and by West. And furthermore if the
distance in miles, between the two paralelles of any place assigned, be two
times and a half so many miles, that is to say,. part of the distance between
the two Meridians, the^ that place is Southwest from your places. And if that
the distance between the two Meridians be.3. quarters of the numbers of miles
between the two paralelles, then that place is Southwest and by South from your
place. And if that the distance between the two paralels, be but.3. quarters of
the number of miles between the two Meridia^s, the^ that place is Southwest and
by West from your place. etc. And furthermore, if that the number of miles
between the two paralelles be but.. parts of the number of miles between the
two Meridians, than that place is West Southwest from your place. And
furthermore, if the distance between the two paralels of any place assigned, be
but the.5. part of the number of miles between the two Meridians, that is to
say, that the number of miles be.5. times that number of miles between the two
paralelles, the^ that place is West and by South from your place. etc.

And furthermore, if that any Cities, towns, or places, be more degrees in
longitude the^ your Cities towns or place is, and fewer degrees in latitude,
the^ al those places shall be in the Southeast corner, as all the other before
rehearsed, were in the Southwest corner, In the Southeast quartes.
as thus: The degrees multiplied into miles, both the longitude and the
latitude, as in the chapter going before is rehearsed, then if that the number
of miles of the distance between the two parallels be equal unto the number of
miles between the two Meridians, the^ that place shall be just Southeast from
your place. And furthermore, if that the distance of miles between the two
Meridia^s, be but the.5. part of the number of miles between the two
paralelles, then that place is South and by East from your city, town, or
place. etc. And if to.5. parts, that is to say, that the number of miles
between the two paralelles is more then the number of miles between the two
Meridians, by double and half so much more, the^ that place is South,
Southeast from your place. etc. And furthermore, if that the number of miles
between the two Meridians be but.3. quarters of the number of miles between the
two paralelles, the^ that place is Southeast and by South from your place. etc.
But if that the number of miles between the two paralelles be but.3. quarters
of the number of miles between the two Meridians, the^ that place is Southeast
and by East from your place. etc. And if that the number of miles between the
two paralelles be but.. parts of the number of miles between the two Meridia^s,
the^ that place is east, Southeast from your City, town, or place: etc. If
but.. part of the number of miles between the two Meridians, then that place is
East and by South from your place. etc. And furthermore, if that any place be
more degrees in longitude, and also in latitude, then your place is, then those
Cities towns or places are in the Northeast quarter. In the Northeast quarter.
And (as before is rehearsed) if that the numbers of miles, be equal both
between the two paralelles, and the two Meridians, the^ that place is
Northeast from you. And also if that the number of miles between the two
Meridians be but the.5. part of the number of miles between the two paralelles,
then that place is North and by East: if. parts, then North Northeast: if. then
Northeast and by North. etc. And if the number of miles between the two
Meridians be more then the number of miles between the two paralelles, that is
to say, the number of miles to be but.. part, then that place is East and by
North: if.. parts, then East Northeast: if.. then Northeast and by East from
your place. etc. And furthermore, if any place has more degrees in latitude
and fewer degrees in longitude then your place, then those places be in the
Northwest quarter. In the Northwest quarter,
And (as before is rehearsed) if the number of miles be equal both between
the Merydians and the parallelles, then that is but Northwest: and if the
number of miles be less between the Meridians, then it is between the
paralelles, then (as before is said) if it be but.. part, then it is North
and by West: if.. parts, North Northwest. If.^/4. parts, Northwest and by
North. But if it be not so many miles between the two paralelles, as it is
between the two Meridians, if.. parts, that place is West and by North: if..
parts, West Northwest: if. An ensample by Rome and London.
then Northwest and by West from your place. etc. And for your better
instruction, you shall have ensample by the City of London and Rome: and as
before is declared, in the Chapter going before, that the latitude of London
is.51. degrees.32. minutes, and the longitude.19. degrees.54. minutes, and the
latitude of Rome 42 degrees just, and the longitude.36. degrees.40 minutes. And
(as in the Chapter going before is showed) in the knowing of the distaunce is
to rebate the less from the more: wherefore ^ebate the longitude of London out
to of the longitude of Rome, as thus: Rome being.36. degrees 40 minutes, in
longitude: so London is.19. degrees.54. minutes. So that there is.16.
degrees.46. minutes, between the Meridians of Rome and London. etc. And the
latitude of London being.51. degrees.32. minutes; the latitude of Rome is.42.
degrees just. Wherefore rebate.42. degrees just, from.51. degrees.32. minutes:
then.9. degrees.32. minutes remains: so that there is just.9. degrees.32.
minutes between the two paralelles. And now to know by what point of the
Compass, do this: Rome is to the East wards of London.16. degrees.46. mi.
for that it is more degrees in longitude. Wherefore you most seek how many
miles that it is, first in your parallel, and here at London.37. miles does
answer unto one degree: therefore multiply.16. times.37. and that comes
unto.592. and then there is.46. minutes more, and that comes unto.28. miles,
and better. Then put.28. unto.592. and that makes.620. so that you may
conclude that it is.620. miles from London unto the Meridian of Rome in the
parallel of London. And now the latitude of Rome is.42. degrees, and then.44.
miles makes a degree in that parallel. Wherefore multiply.16. times.44. and
that makes.704. and then there is.46. minutes more, and that makes.33. miles
and better. Wherefore add.33. unto.704. and there it will be.737. so that you
may conclude that it is from Rome unto the Meridian of London.737. miles.
Wherefore add or put both these two numbers together, that is to say, 620.
and.737. and that makes.1357. And now take half this number, and that will
show unto you how many miles that Rome is to the Eastwardes of London, and
that is.678. miles and a half: and now there is.9. degrees.32. minutes
between the two paralelles, and 60 miles make a degree. Therefore multiply.9.
times.60. and that makes.540. and then take.32. miles more for the.32.
minutes, and.32* put unto.540. makes.572. so that Rome is.572. miles unto the
Southwardes of London, and now for that Rome is more degrees in longitude then
London, and fewer degrees in latitude then London, therefore then Rome must
needs be in the Southeast quarter: and to know just by what point, then look
what both the numbers be, as thus: Rome is unto the Eastwards of London 678.
miles and. and unto the Southwardes of London.572 miles, then vewing the two
numbers.572. is more then. of 678. Therefore you may conclude, that Rome does
stand from London, Southeast and by East, and somewhat declinyng or leaning
more unto the Southwardes: and if that the numbers had been equal, then it had
been due Southeast. etc. And to know how many miles by that point of the
Compass, that is showed in the Chapter going before, and by this order you
shall kn^w by what point of the Compass that any place does bear from you.
etc.

The fourth Chapter shows the Longitude and the Latitude, and by what point
of the Compass, that sundry places within England and Scotland, and Ireland,
and also of certain Islands, near unto them, does bear from the City of
London, and what distaunce of miles that they are from London, by the point of
the Compass over the water and over the land. And also there is showed how
much that the Moon shall change, rather or later then it does at London,
and also it does show the length of the longest Summers day, for as many
places as be named.
Now furthermore, in so much as I have showed unto you how by the longitude
and by the latitude, you may know by what point of the Compass that any
place assygned bears from you, and also at any place assygned for to know
the distance by that point of the compass, that is to say, how many miles
that it is from you: so in like manner I think it good for to show the
longitude and the latitude of sundry principal places upon the face of the
whole earth, according unto diverse Authors that have written thereof, and also
for that the City of London is the principal and most famous place here in
England, London is the principallest and the most famous place of England.
I will declare or show unto you, by what point of the Compass that any of
those places do bear or declyne unto, from the City of London, and also how
many miles by that point over the Sea and London by that right line or point of
the compass. And also I do think it good for to show unto you the
diversity aspect of all those places by the City of London, The diversity
aspect at London.
that is to say, how much that the Moon shall change rather or later then
that it shall do at the City of London, whereby may be known the time of
any Eclipse either of the Moon or Sun, and also the aspectes of the Moon
with the other planets, you knowing at what hour or time that it will happen
or be at London.

And also I do think it good for to show unto you the length of the longest
Summer day in all those places that shall be named according unto the longitude
and latitude, The length of the day.
and then the length of the shortest Winter day is soon known: and the day
is meant to be, from the Sun rising unto the Sun setting. For the latitude
of places does alter the length of the day, and the longitude does alter the
times of the Eclipses either of the Sun or of the Moon, with all the other
aspectes, that the Moon has with the Sun or any other of the Planets. etc.

And now shall follow the longitude and latitude and the other things before
rehearsed, of certain places, and first for England, and Scotland, and
Ireland, with some Islands belonging thereunto.

And for that London is the assigned place the longitude thereof from the
Canarie Island being 19 degrees 54. minutes, London the assigned place.
and the latitude or elevation of the Pole being 51. degrees 32 minutes: S
Michaelmount in Cornwall.
and first this S. Michaels muount in Cornwall has longitude.14. degrees.20.
minutes, and latitude 30. degrees 40. minutes, and is West and by South from
the City of London.210. miles, and the Moon shall change rather then at
London by.25. minutes, and the longest Summer day is.16. hours.20. minutes
long. etc.

Doner in Kent, the longitude.21. degrees.15. minutes, Doner in Kent.
the Latitude.51. degrees.20. minutes, and is East and by South from the City
of London.49. miles, and the Moon shall change later then at London.5.
minutes, and the longest day in Summer is.16. hours.25. minutes. etc.

Barwick, the Northermost part of England, Barwick.
standing upon the edge of Scotland, the longitude.20. degrees.24. minutes, the
latitude.55. degrees.58. minutes, and is North and a little declining unto the
Eastwardes.267. miles, and the Moon shall change l^t^r then it does at
London.2. minutes: and the longest Summer day is.17. hours.24. minutes long.
etc.

The City of York has longitude.20. degrees, The city of York.
and latitude 54. degrees.2. minutes, and is in manner due North from the City
of London.150. miles, and the Moon changes later then at London.7/5. part of
a minute, and the longest Summer day is near 17. hours long. etc.

Carlell in Cumberland, the longitude.17. degrees.48. minutes, Carlell.
the latitude.55. degrees.2. minutes, and is North, Northwest, 224. miles from
the City of London, and the Moon changes rather then it does at London.9.
minutes, and the longest day in Summer is.17. hours long. etc.

Edenborowe in Scotland.
Edenborowe in Scotland, the longitude is.19. degrees.50. minutes, and the
latitude is.57. degrees just, and is due North from the City of London.328.
miles, and the Moon changes near about that time that it does at London,
and the length of the longest Summer day is.17. hours.40. minutes long.

Catnes point.
Catnes point the Northermost part of Scotland, the longitude.20. degrees the
latitude 62. degrees, and is in manner due North from the City of London.628.
miles, and the Moon changes near about that time that it does at London,
and the longest Summer day is 19 hours.25. minutes.

The Southwest part of Ireland.
The Southwest part of Irelande has longitude.6. degrees, and latitude 52
degrees, and is West and somewhat unto the Northward from the City of
London.518. miles, and the Moon changes rather then at London.55. minutes,
and the longest Summer day is.16. hours.30. minutes.

The Northpart of Irelande.
The Northermostpart of Ireland has longitude 13. degrees, and latitude.58.
degrees 10. minutes, and is* Northwest and by North, and to the Northwardes
462. miles, and the Moon changes rather then at London.27. minutes, and the
longest Summer day is.17. hours.55. minutes.

The city of Deuelinge.
The City of Deuelyng in Irelande, has longitude.12. degrees.40. minutes, and
latitude 54. degrees.40. minutes, and is Northwest and by West.296. miles, and
the Moon changes rather then at London.29. minutes, and the longest Summer
day is.17. hours.15. minutes long.

Saint Patrikes porcatorye.
Saint Patrickes Porcatorie has longitude.8. degrees.42. minutes, and
latitude.56. degrees.50 minutes, and is Northwest and by West.415. miles, and
the Moon does change rather then at London.45. minutes, and the longest
Summer day is 17. hours and.4. minutes long.

The I Will of Man.
The I Will of Man has longitude.15. degrees, and Latitude 56. degrees.4. minutes,
and is North Northwest, and somewhat declyning unto the West.358. miles, and
the Moon changes rather then at London by.20. minutes, and the longest Summer
day is, 17. hours 30. minutes.

The Islands called Sylley, has longitude.12. degrees.24. The Islands called
Silley.
minutes, and the Latitude 50. degrees 54. minutes, and is West and by South
from the City of London.278. miles, and the Moon changes rather then at
London.30. minutes, and the longest Summer day is 16. hours long 20. minutes.
etc.

The fifth Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
before rehearsed of certain of the principallest places in Europe, as in
Spain and Portugal, and France, and Italy and Germany. etc.
ANd now shall follow the longitude and the latitude with the other things
before rehearsed, of Europa, as Portugal, Spain and France, and Italy, and
Germany. etc.

And first Lyshborne in Portugal: Lyshborne in Portugal.
and that has longitude 5. degrees, and latitude 38. degrees 50. minutes, and
is South Southwest 985. miles, and the Moon shall change. rather then at the
City of London near an hour, and the longest Summer day is 14. hours 45.
minutes.

Cape Saint Vincent in Portugal, the longitude.4. degrees 58. Cape Saint
Vincent.
minutes, the latitude 35. degrees 36. minutes, and is South Southwest.1092.
miles from the City of London, and the Moon changes rather then at London,
one hour: and the longest Su^mer day is.14. hours.30. minutes. etc.

Cape Saint Mary, the longitude is 5. degrees.10. minutes, Cape Saint Mary.
the latitude.36. degrees.45. minutes, and is South Southwest 1089. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London.58. minutes, and the
longest Summer day is.14. hours 30. minutes. etc.

Cape Finester in Galeza, the longitude 4. degrees 50. minutes, Cape Finester.
the latitude.43. degrees.10. minutes, and is Southwest and by South.788.
miles, and the Moon changes rather then at London one hour, and the longest
Summers day is.15. hours 20. minutes.

Bayone.
Bayone in Galeza, the longitude is 5. degrees 40. minutes, the Latitude.42.
degrees.40. minutes, and is Southwest and by South 800. miles from the City of
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 57. minutes.

S. James.
Saint James of Compostella, the longitude 7. degrees, the latitude 42. degrees
15. minutes, and is Southwest and by South 810. miles, and the Moon changes
rather then at London.56. minutes, and the longest Summers day is 15. hours 4.
minutes. etc.

Bylbow.
Bylbow in Bysley, the longitude.11. degres.45. minutes, the latitude.43.
degrees.35. minutes, and is South Southwest.578. miles, and the Moon changes
rather then it does at London.33. mynutes, and the longest Summer day is.15.
hours.30. minutes long.

S. Sebastins in Byskey.
S. Sebastians in Byskey, the longitude is 15. degrees, the latitude.43.
degrees, 30 minutes, and is South and by West.572. miles from the City of
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 18. minutes, and the
longest Summer day is 15. Hours 30. minutes.

Tolledo in Castle.
Tolledo in Castle, the longitude 10. degrees.49. minutes, the latitude 37.
degrees, and is South and by West 934. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London 36. minutes, and the longest Summer day is 14.
hours.36. minutes etc.

The City of Ciuell.
The City of Ciuell in Andelazia, the longitude 7. degrees, the latitude 38.
degrees.5. minutes, and is South and by west.950. miles, and the Moon
changes rather then at London 52. minutes, and the longest Summer day is 14.
hours 40 minutes.

Gibaraltarre.
Gibaraltarre, the longitude.7. degrees.30 minutes, the latitude 36. degrees 4.
minutes, and is South and by West 1066. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London 49. minutes, and the longest Summer day is 14.
hours.25. minutes.

Granmaliga, has longitude 8. degrees.50. minutes, Granmaliga
the latitude 37. degrees 30. minutes, and is South and by West 960. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at LONDON.35. mynutes, and the
longest Summer day is.14. hours.4. mynutes.

The City of Granado has longitude.9. degrees.5. minutes, Granado.
and latitude.38. degrees.20. minutes, and is South and by West.911. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 45. minutes, and the
longest Summer day is 14. hours 43. minutes.

Burdeux in France, the longitude.17. degrees.54. minutes, Burdeux in France.
the Latitude 45. degrees.45. minutes, and is South and somewhat to the West
36. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather then at London.8. minutes,
and the longest Summer day is.15. hours 25. minutes.

Paris in France, the longitude is 23. degrees.30. minutes, Paris in France.
the latitude is 48. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southeast,.215. miles,
and the moon changes later then at London.13. minutes, and the longest
Summer day is.15. hours.57. mynutes.

Roane in Normandye, the longitude 20. degrees 30. minutes, Roane.
the latitude.49. degrees.10. minutes, and is South and a little to the East
142. miles, and the Moon changes later a little then at London, and the
longest Summer day is.16. hours 4. mynutes. etc.

Calyce in France, the longitude.22. degrees.15. minutes, Calice.
the latitude.51. degrees.15. minutes, and is East and by South 86. miles from
the City of London, and the moon changes later then at London 9. minutes,
and the longest Summer day is 16. hours 25. minutes.

Brydges in Flaunders, has longitude.24. degrees.30. Bridge^ in Flaunders.
mynutes, the latitude.51. degrees 20. mynutes, and is East.162. miles, and the
Moon changes later then at LONDON 16. mynutes, and the longest day is.16.
hours.16. minutes. etc.

Gaunt.
Gaunt in Flaunders, the longitude.25. degrees.30. minutes, the latitude 51.
degrees 15. minutes, and is East 209 miles, the moon changes later then at
London 20 minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours 13. minutes. etc.

Midleborow.
Midleborow in Walkerlande, one of the Islands of Zelande, the longitude 25.
degrees 26. minutes, the latitude 51. degrees 48. minutes, and is East 205.
miles, and the moon changes later then at London 20. minutes, and the
longest day is 16. hours 30 minutes, etc.

Antwerpe in Braband.
Antwerpe in Braband, the longitude is.26. degrees 36. mynutes, and the latitude
51. degrees 28. minutes, and is East, and somewhat bending unto the South 248.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 24. minutes,
and the longest Summers day is 16. hours 28. minutes. etc.

Amsterdam in Holland.
Amsterdam in Holland, the longitude 27. degrees 5. minutes, the latitude.52.
degrees.20. minutes, and is East and by North 266. miles from London, and the
Moon changes later then at London 28. minutes, and the Longest day is.16.
hours.40. minutes. etc.

Luck.
Luck, the longitude 29. degrees.30 minutes, the latitude 50. degrees, and is
East 333. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 30.
minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours etc.

Gulder.
The city of Gulder in Gulderlande, the longitude 27. degrees 48. minutes, the
latitude 51. degrees.42. minutes, and is East 296. miles, the Moon changes
later then at London.28. minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours 30.
minutes. etc.

Cleue.
Cleue in Cleueland, the longitude is.28. degrees.6. minutes, the latitude is
52. degrees, and is East 303 miles from London, and the Moon changes later
then at London.32. minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours 30. minutes. etc.

Collyne.
Colline has longitude 29. degrees 45. minutes, the latitude 52. degrees, and
is East and by North 360. miles, and the Moon changes later then at London
39. minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours 34. minutes. etc.

The City of Mentz in high Germanye, the longitude.31. degrees 15. minutes, the
latitude 50. degrees, and is East 420. miles, The City of Mentz.
and the moon changes later then at London.45. minutes, the longest day is
16. hours 25. minutes. etc.

The City of Spiers, the longitude 31. degrees 30. minutes, Spiers.
he latitude 49. degrees.15. minutes, and is East and by South 430. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then it does at London.46. minutes, and
the Longest day is.16. hours 2. minutes. etc.

The city of Strawsborow, the longitude 30. degrees 15. Strawsbrow.
mynutes, the latitude.48. degrees.45. minutes, and is East and by south, and
to the south.432. miles from London, the Moon changes later then at
London.41. minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours.0. minutes. etc.

Franckforde, the longitude.31. degrees.40. minutes, Francford^.
the latitude.50. degrees, 10. minutes, and is east and to the south a
little,.448. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 47.
minutes, and the longest day is 16. hours 15. mynutes. cand.

The City of Prage, the longitude.38. degrees 20. minutes, Prage.
the latitude.50. degrees, 6. minutes, and is East and a little to the south
700. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 1. hour
14. minutes, and the longest day is.16. hours.15. minutes. etc.

The Town of Hambrough, the longitude 34. degrees, Hambrough.
the latitude is 54. degrees, 30. minutes, and is East Northeast and to
North.538. miles from London, and the Moon shall change later then at
London.56. minutes, and the longest day is.18. hours just, etc.

Elson More in Denmark, the longitude.32. degrees.30. Elson in Denmark.
minutes, the Latitude.58. degrees 20 minutes, and is Northeast 577. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then at London.50. minutes, and the
longest day is 18. hours 0. minutes. etc.

The North Cape, which is the Northermost part of all Norwaye, has
longitude.39. degrees.30. minutes, and latitude.71. degrees 20. minutes, and is
North Northeast 1308. miles, and the Moon changes later then at London 1.
hour 15. minutes, and the Sun sets not in the time of.78. days and
nights, that is 10. Weeks, when our days be at the longest: and in like
manner the Sun will not rise in the time of.78. days and nyghtes in Winter
in like manner. etc.

Iseland.
Iselande under the King of Denmark, an Island, the myddle of it has longitude
7. degrees, the latitude 65. degrees.30. minutes, and is North Northwest, 930.
miles from LONDON, and the Moon Changes rather then at London.52. minutes,
and the longest day is 21. hours 44. minutes. etc.

The City of Rome.
The City of Rome in Italye, the longitude is 36. degrees 40. minutes, the
latitude 42. degrees, and is Southeast and by East, 887. miles, and the Moon
changes later then at London.1. hour.7. mynutes, and the longest day is.15.
hours.4. minutes.

Florance.
The City of Florance, the longitude is 34. degrees 15. minutes, the latitude
24. degrees.45. minutes, and stands from London Southeast a ly^le unto the
Eastwardes 802. miles, and the Moon changes later.57. minutes, and the
longest day is.15. hours 10. minutes.

Pisa.
Pisa, the longitude.33 degrees, the latitude is 42. degrees 15 minutes, and is
Southeast 741. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London
53. mynutes and the longest day is 15. hours 6. minutes.

^^nice.
The City of Venice, the longitude is.35. degrees.30. minutes, the Latitude.44.
degrees.45. minutes, and is East Southeast and too the Southwardes, 744. miles
from LONDON, and the Moon changes later then at London 1. hour 3. minutes,
and the longest day is 15. hours 20. minutes.

Millayne.
The City of Myllayne, the longitude is.31. degrees.45. minutes, the latitude
44. degrees 15. mynutes, and is Southeast and somewhat to the Eastwarde 645.
miles from London, and the moon changes later then at London.48. minutes,
and the longest day is 15. hours 22. minutes.

The City of Naples, the longitude is 38. degrees, The City of Naples.
50. mynutes, the latitude is 39. degrees.55. minutes, and is Southeast and by
East 1051. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 1.
hour 16. minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours 50. minutes.

The City of Philippos in the kingdom of Macedonia, the longitude 50. degrees
45. minutes, the latitude is.41. degrees, Philippos in the kingdom of Macedonia.
45 minutes, and is East Southeast 1395. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later then at London 2. hours 3. minutes, and the longest day is.15.
hours.10. minutes. etc.

Constantinople that is now the Turks, the longitude is 56. degrees, the
latitude is.43. degrees.5. minutes, Constantinople that is the seat of the
Turk^.
and is east Southeast 1547. miles from London, and the Moon changes later
then at London 2. hours 24. minutes, and the longest day is 15. hours 15.
mynutes. etc.

Athens, that has been sometime a famous City, but now destroyed the
longitude 52. degrees 43 mynutes, the latitude.37. Athens.
degrees, 15. minutes, and is Southeast and by East.1624. miles from London,
the Moon changes later then at London 2. hours 11. minutes, and the longest
day is 14. hours.40. minutes. etc.

Danswicke, latelye under the King of Polonia, has longitude.46. degrees, and
latitude.54. degrees.55. minutes, Danswick.
and is East Northeast 961. miles from LONDON, and the moon changes later
then at London 1. hour.44. mynutes, and the longest day is seventeen hours
five minutes. etc.

The kingdom of Swethen, The kingdom of Swethen.
the mydle thereof has longitude 42. degrees, and Latitude.64. degrees, and is
Northeast from London 1040. miles, and the Moon chanugeth later then at London.

.1. hour.28. minutes, and the longest day is.20. hours.30. minutes etc.

The City of Muscouia in Rosey.
The City of Muscouia in Rosey, has longitude 69. degrees, the latitude 57.
degrees, and is East and by North 1747. miles from the City of London, and the
Moon changes later then at London, 3. hours.16. minutes, and the longest
day is 17. hours.40. minutes. etc.

And thus I end the description of the Cities and Towns of Europe.

The Sixth Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
before rehearsed, of certain of the principallest places of Africa, and of
certain Islands nearer thereunto.
AND now shall follow the longitude and the latitude, and the thing^s before
rehearsed, of some of the Cities and Towns, and Islands of Afryca.

Morocus in Barbary.
And first, the City of Morocus in Barbary, the longitude 5. degrees 5.
minutes, the latitude 30. degrees 4. minutes, and is South Southwest and
somewhat in the Westwardes 1449. miles from London, and the moon changes
rather then at London.59. minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours.

S. Cruce rode.
S. Cruce Rode, the longitude 2. degrees, the latitude.30. degrees, and is South
Southwest and to the Westwards 1440 miles from London, and the moon changes
rather then at London.1. hour, and the longest Summer day is.14. hours. etc.

Fesse.
The City of Fesse, the longitude.10. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees, and is
South Southwest 1365. miles from London, and the moon changes rather then at
London 39. minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours.

Tangie is a hold that the King of Portugal keeps in Barbary, and has
longitude 6. degrees 30. minutes, Tangie.
and latitude.35. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southwest.1113. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London.53. minutes, and the
longest Summer day is.14. hours.25. minutes.

Abilles, a Hill commonly called Cappe Hill, Abilles.
right against Iuberaltare, and is one of Hercules pyllers, the longitude.7.
degrees, the latitude.35. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southwest.1116.
miles from London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 52. minutes,
and the longest day is.14. hours.25. minutes.

Argeyll, the longitude.18. degrees, the latitude.37. degrees, Argeyll.
and is South.872. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London, and the longest day is hours minutes. etc.

Alexandria in Egypt, the longitude.60. degrees, 30. minutes, Alexandria in
Egypt.
the latitude.31. degrees, and is Southeast and by East.2169. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then at London.2. hours 42. minutes, and
the longest day is.14. hours. etc.

The mouth of Nilus that emptieth himself in Mari Mediterraneo, the
longitude.62. degrees, The mouth of Nilus.
the latitude.31. degrees 30.. minutes, Southeast and by East.2200. miles from
London, the Moon changes later then at London 2. hours 48. minutes, and the
longest day is, 14. hours 8. minutes. etc.

The North end of the Red Sea next unto the middle earth Sea, the longitude
64. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees, The North end of the Red Sea.
and is Southeast and by East.2345. miles from London, and the Moon changes
later.2. hours.56. minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours.0. minutes. etc.

Cape Deuaca in Ginney, the longitude 2. degrees.20. Cape Deua^^ in Ginney.
minutes, the latitude.14 degrees.50. minutes, and is South Southwest.2426.
miles from London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 1. hour 10.
minutes, and the longest day is but 12. hours 50. minutes.

The Castle Demine.
The Castle Demine, a hold that the King of Portugal does keep in Ginney, the
longitude 24. degrees, the latitude.2. degrees 30. minutes, and is South, a
little to the Eastwardes 2940. miles from London, and the Moon changes later
then at London, 16. minutes, and the longest day is.12. hours 20. minutes.

The mouth of the River of Bynney.
The Mouth of the River of Bynney, the longitude.32. degrees, the latitude.5.
degrees, and is South and by East, and to the Eastwardes 2885. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then at London 48. minutes, and the
longest day is.12. hours.20. minutes.

Cappe boon Sperance.
Cappe boon Sperance, the Southermost part of all Ethiopia, has longitude.52.
degrees, and latitude.35. degrees, 10. minutes, and is of the South pole called
the pole Antartike beyond the Equinoctial, and is South and by East, and to
the Eastwardes 5382. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London.2. hours 8. minutes, and their longest Summer day is in our Winter,
and is 14. hours long 20. minutes. etc.

Goia.
Goia, a City in Ethiopia, the longitude is.60. degrees, 50. minutes, the
latitude has the South Pole elevated 19. degrees 50. minutes, and is South
Southeast.4685. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London.2. hours 3. minutes, and the longest days are in our Winter, and that
is 13. hours 15. minutes.

Garma.
Garma, another City in Ethiopia, and has longitude.57. degrees, and the South
Pole is 24. degrees above the Horizon, and is South Southeast.4528. miles from
London, the Moon chau^geth later then at London by 2. hours 28. minutes, and
their longest day is as before is said, contrary unto ours, being 13. hours
30. minutes long. etc.

The great Island of S, Laurence.
The great Island of Saint Laurence, on the East side of Ethiopia beyond Cape
boon Sperance, has longitude 85. degrees 30. minutes, and the South Pole is
elevated 20. degrees in the myddle of the Island, and is Southeast and by South
5249. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London 4.
hours.20. minutes, and the longest day is.13. hours.15. minutes in our
Winter. etc.

The Island of Saint Thomas, has longitude 30. The Island of S. Thomas.
degrees.30. minutes, and no latitude: for that the myddle thereof is right
under the Equinoctial, and is Southe and somewhat to the East wards.3696.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London.42. minutes,
and the day is continually always.12. hours long, neither more nor less,
what declination soever that the Sun has. etc.

The Islands of Cape Deuarde, has Longitude 356. The Islands of Cappe Deuade.
degrees, the latitude.16. degrees among the myddle of them, and is South
Southwest.2465. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather then at
London 1. hour.36. minutes, and the longest Summer day is but 13. hours 0.
minutes. etc.

The Islands called the Canaries, The Canary Islands.
and the byggest Island called the Grand Canarie, has no longitude, for that
it is the assygned place to begin the Longitude: the latitude 28. degrees 30.
minutes, and is Southe Southwest.1914. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London 1. hour 20. minutes, and the longest day
is.13. hours 24. minutes, and is derectlye under the Tropicke of Cancer. etc.

The byggest Island of the Madera, has longitude 358. The Madera Islands.
degrees 40. minutes, for that it is more Westerly then the Grand Canarie,
where that the Longitude begins by one degree and 20. minutes, the Latitude
is.29. degrees and.30. minutes, and is Southwest and by South.1625. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London 1. hour 25. minutes, and
the longest day is.13. hours.54. minutes. etc.

And thus I do end the description of the Cities, Towns, and Islands of Africa.

The seventh Chapter shows the Longitude, and the Latitude, and the other
things before rehearsed of certain of the principallest places of Asia and in
the East India. etc.
ANd now shall follow the longitude and the latitude, and all the other things
before rehearsed, of certain of the Cities and Towns and other places of Asia
as follows.

Claudiopoles.
And first of Claudiopolis in the country of Pontus and Bethania, where S. Luke
wrate the Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, the longitude.59. degrees.30.
minutes, the latitude.42. degrees 45. minutes, and is East Southeast 1697.
miles from London, and the moon changes later then at London 2. hours 38.
minutes, and the longest day is 15. hours 8. minutes. etc.

Nicea.
Nicea where Nicea Counsel was, the longitude 58. degrees, the latitude 42.
degrees 15. minutes, and is East Southeast 1668. miles from London, and the
moon changes later then at London 2. hours 32. minutes, and the longest day
is 15. hours 6. minutes. etc.

Troy.
Troy that was destroyed, the longitude 55. degrees 50. minutes, the latitude
41. degrees, and is East Southeast.1605. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later then at London 2. hours 24. minutes, and the longest day
is.15. hours.0. minutes. etc,

Ephesus.
Ephesus where Saint John wrate the Gospel, the longitude 57. degrees 40.
minutes, the latitude 37. degrees 40. minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the
South parts 1808. miles from London, and the moon changes later then at
London 2. hours 30. minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 40. minutes.
etc.

Tralus.
Tralus, the longitude is 58. degrees 40. minutes, the latitude 38. degrees.50.
minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the South parts 1797. miles from
London, and the moon changes later then at London 2. hours 34. mnutes, and
the longest day is 14. hours 44. minutes. etc.

Philadelphia.
Philadelphia in Bothlydias, the longitude 59. degrees, the latitude 38. degrees
50. minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the Southwardes 1816. miles from
London, and the moon changes later then at London 2. hours 36. minutes, and
the longest day is 14. hours 44. minutes. etc.

Olimpus a City in Lycia, the longitude 61. degrees 30. Olimpus.
minutes, the latitude 36. degrees 10. minutes, and is East Southeast a little
to the South 1993. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London 2. hours 46. minutes, and the longest day is 14 hours 30. minutes. etc.

Pompeiopolis a City of Galatia, and builded by Pompey, Pompeiopolis.
the longitude.62. degrees, the latitude 42. degrees, and is East, Southeast
1814. miles from London, and the Moon changes later 2. hours 48. minutes,
and the longest day is 15. hours 10. minutes. etc.

Olbia in Pamphllia, the longitude.62 degrees, Olbia.
the latitude 36. degrees.55. minutes, and is East Southeast.1989. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then at London 2. hours 48. minutes, and
the longest day is.14. hours.36. minutes. etc.

Pargamus in the Country of Doris, the longitude.57. Pargamus
degrees.35. minutes, the Latitude.39. degrees.45. minutes, and is East
Southeast.1709.. miles from London and the Moon changes later.2. hours.30.
minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours 54. minutes. etc.

Cesaria in Capadocia, the longitude.66. degrees.30. Cesaria.
minutes, the latitude.39. degrees.30. minutes: and is East Southeast.2064.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London.3. hours.6.
minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours.50. minutes. etc.

Nicopolis in Armenia the less, the longitude.69. Nicopolis.
degrees 20. minutes, the latitude.41. degrees.40. minutes, and is East
Southeast.2129. miles from London, and the Moon changes later.3. hours.18.
minutes, and the longest day is.15. hours.3. minutes. etc.

Antiochia in Cilicia, the longitude.64. degrees 40. minutes, Antiochia.
the latitude.36. degrees 50. minutes. and is East Southeast.2078. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later then at London 2. hours 58. minutes, and
the longest day is 14 hours 33. minutes. etc.

Geldia.
Geldia in Albania part of great Tartarie, the longitude 83. degrees, the
latitude.46. degrees 30. minutes, and is East and to the Southwardes 2458.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later 4. hours 12. minutes, and the
longest day is.15. hours 40. minutes. etc.

Bola.
Bola in Armenia the greater, the longitude 76. degrees 10. minutes, the
latitude 44.. degrees, and is East and by South 2294. miles from London, and
the Moon changes later then at London 3. hours 45. minutes, and the longest
day is 15. hours 20. minutes. etc.

Alexandria in Siria.
Alexandria in Siria, the longitude 69. degrees 30. mynutes, the latitude 36.
degrees 10. minutes, and is East Southeast 2277. miles from London, and the
Moon changes later then at London 3. hours 18. minutes, and the longest day
is 14. hours 30. minutes. etc.

Tripolis in Phenicia.
Tripolis in Phenicia, the longitude 67. degrees 30. minutes, the latitude 34.
degrees 20. minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the Southwardes 2314. miles
from London, and the Moon changes later 3. hours 10. minutes, and the
longest day is 14. hours, 20. minutes. etc.

Barut.
Barut, and is the Port of Damascus, the longitude 76. degrees, the latitude
33. degrees 20. minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the Southwardes 2321.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later 3. hours 8. minutes, and the
longest day is 14. hours 15. minutes. etc.

Antiochia.
Antiochia the Mount Taurus, the country of S. Luke, the longitude 69. degrees,
the latitude 35. degrees 30. minutes, and is East Southeast 2319. miles from
London, and the Moon chau^geth later then at London 3. hours 16. minutes, and
the longest day is 14. hours 26. minutes. etc.

Damascus.
Damascus, ^ere Caine sleine his brother Abel, the longitude 69. degrees, the
latitude 33. degrees, and is East Southeast and to the Southwardes 2404. miles
from London, and the Moon changes later 3. hours 16. minutes, and the
longest day is 14. hours 15. minutes. etc.

Port Iassa or Ioppa, the longitude 65. degrees 45. minutes, Port Iassa.
the latitude.31. degrees 55. minutes, and is Southeast, and by East and to the
Eastwardes 2338. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London 3. hours.2. mynutes, and the longest day is 14. hours.6. minutes. etc.

The dead Seas or lake of Sodom, the longitude 66. The Lake of Sodom.
degrees 50. mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees 10. mynutes, and is Southeast
and by East and to the Eastwardes.2404. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later 3. hours 8. minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours 4.
minutes. etc.

Bethsaida in Galilea, the longitude 57. degrees 5. Bethsaida.
mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees 15. mynutes, and is Southeast and by
East.2039. miles from London, and the Moon changes later 2. hours 29.
minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 6. mynutes. etc.

Nicopolis in Samaria, the longitude 66. degrees 50. Nicopolis.
mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees.50. mi. and is Southeast, and by East and to
the Eastwardes.2382. miles from London, and the Moon changes later 3. hours
8. mynutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 10. minutes. etc.

Jerusalem in Judea, Jerusalem
sometime the famous City on the earth, but now destroyed by Titus, in the
time of Vaspatian the Emperor of Rome, the longitude 65. degrees 45. minutes,
the latitude 31. degrees 22. mynutes, and is Southeast, and by East, and to the
Eastwardes 2352. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 3. hours
3. minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 8. minutes. etc.

Charan in Mesopotamia, where as Abraham dwelled, Charan in Mesopotamia
the longitude 73. degrees 45. mynutes, the latitude 36. degrees, 10. mynutes,
and is East Southeast.2466. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by
3. hours 36. minutes, and the longest day.14. hours 30. minutes.

Babylon.
Babylon where the Town of Babel was, the longitude is 79. degrees, the
latitude.35. degrees, and is East Southeast, 2724. miles from London, and the
Moon changes later by 3. hours.56. mynutes, and the longest day is 14.
hours.25. minutes. etc.

Erupa in Arabia.
Erupa in Arabia, the longitude.72. degrees 30. mynutes, the latitude 30.
degrees 15. mynutes, and is East Southeast and to the Southwardes.2641. miles
from London, and the Moon changes later by 3. hours 30. minutes, and the
longest day is 13. hours 56, minutes. etc.

The Red Sea.
The Red Sea, the place which Moses and the Children of Israel went through,
the longitude 63. degrees 30. mynutes. the latitude 29, degrees 50. mynutes,
and is Southeast and by East 2336. miles from London, and the Moon changes
later 2. hours 54. minutes, and the longest day is 13. hours 56. mynutes. etc.

Mount Synai or Mount Oreb.
Mount Synai or mount Oreb, where that Moses receyue^ the ten Commandments,
the longitude 64. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees, and is Southeast, and by
East 2344. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London, by
2. hours 58. mynutes, and the longest day is 13. hours 58. minutes. etc.

Michia.
Michia in Arabia, where is the Sepulcher of the false Prophet Mahomet, the
longitude 72. degrees 15. minutes, the latitude 23. degrees, and is Southeast,
and by East, and to the East wards 2954. miles from London, and the moon
changes later by 3. hours 29. minutes, and the longest day is 13. hours 25.
minutes. etc.

The City of Niniuie.
The City of Niniuie in Assiria where as Jonas the Prophet was sent, the
longitude 78. degrees, the latitude 36. dedegrees, and is East Southeast.2635.
miles from London, and the moon changes later by 3. hours 52. minutes and
the longest day.14. houre^ 30. minutes.

Asia.
Asia a City in Susana, the longitude.80. degrees 10. minutes, the latitude 31.
degrees 40. minutes, and is East Southest 2923. miles from London, and the
moon changes later by 4. hours 1. minute, and the longest day is 14.
hours 8. minutes.

Arima in Persia, the longitude 87. degrees, 45. minutes, Arima.
the latitude 33. degrees 50. minutes, and is East Southeast.3108. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by.4. hours.31. minutes, and the longest
day is 4. hours.15. minutes. etc.

Alca in Media, the longitude is 86. degrees 15. minutes, the Latitude.41.
degrees, and is East and South 2791. miles from London, and the Moon changes
later by 4 hours 25. minutes, and the longest day is 15. hours.

The Caspian Sea, the longitude of the middle thereof is.90. The Caspian Sea.
degrees, the latitude of the middle thereof is.45. degrees, 30. minutes, and is
East and to the Southwards.2788. miles from the City of London, and the Moon
changes later then at London by 4. hours 40. minutes, and their longest day
is.15. Hours 30. minutes.

Arges in Carmania, the longitude.96. degrees.30. minutes, Arges.
the latitude.23. degrees.30. minutes, and is East Southeast 3917. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by.5. hours 6. mynutes, and the longest
day is.13. hours.25. minutes, etc.

The City of Hecatompilon in Parthia, which has.100. Hecatompilon.
gates, the longitude 93. degrees.20. minutes, the latitude 37. degrees, 50.
minutes, and is East and by South 3714. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later then at London.5. hours.6. minutes, and the longest day
is.14. hours.38. minutes. etc.

Harcan in Hircania, the longitude.7. degrees 30 minutes, Harcan.
the latitude.40. degrees.30. minutes, and is ^ast and by South 3332. miles
from London, and the Moon changes later then at London by 5. hours.14.
minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours.50. minutes.

Sena in Margiana, the longitude.102. degrees.30. minutes, Sena.
the latitude.42. degrees.20. minutes, and is near East and by South.3430.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 5. hours 30. minutes, and
the Longest day is.15. hours 8. minutes.

Chomara.
Chomara in Bactriana, the longitude.106. degrees, the latitude 40. degrees, and
is East and by South 3635. miles from London, and the moon changes later by
5. hours, 45. mynutes, and the longest day is 14. hours.50. minutes.

Prepsa.
Prepsa in Sogdiana, the longitude 130. degrees, the latitude.45. degrees, and
is East and to the Southwardes, 4389. miles from London, and the moon
changes later by 7. hours 20. minutes, and the longest day is.15. hours
30. mynutes etc.

Aspabora.
Aspabora in Scithia within the mount Emaus, the longitude 102. degrees, the
latitude 44. degrees, and is East and by south, 3311 miles from London, and the
moon changes later by 5. hours 28. minutes, and the longest day is 15.
hours 20. mynutes.

Issedon.
Issedon in Seythia, without the mount Emaus in ^hatay, and under the Great
Chane Emperor of Tartaria, the longitude 150. degrees, the latitude 48.
degrees.30. minutes, and is East and a little to the Southwardes 5008. miles
from London, and the moon changes later by 8. hours 40 minutes, and the
longest day is.15. hours 56. minutes.

Isadon.
Isadon in Serica, the longitude 162. degrees, the latitude 45 degrees, and is
East and too the Southwardes 5622. miles from the City of London, and in this
Country of Serica, breed the Sylk Worms, and the Moon changes later then
at London.9. hours 28. minutes, and the longest day is.15. hours 30. minutes
etc.

Alexandria maria^
Alexandria Maria, the longitude 110. degrees, the latitude.36. degrees, and is
East and by South 3937. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 6.
hours just, and the longest day is 14 hours 30. minutes.

Asta in Drangiana, the longitude.107. degrees.30. minutes, Asta.
the latitude 30. degrees, 40. minutes, and is East Southeast, 4087. miles from
London, and the moon changes later by.5. hours.50. minutes, the longest
day is.14. hours just etc.

Cuni in Gegrosia, the longitude.110. degrees, Cuni.
the latitude 23 degrees 50. minutes, and is East Southeast.4461. miles from
London, and the moon changes later by 6. hours, the longest day is 13.
hours 30. mynutes.

Bardaxima in India within the river of Ganges, Bardaxima.
the longitude.113. degrees, 40. minutes, he latitude.20. degrees 40. minutes,
and is East Southeast 4735 miles from London, and the moon chau^geth later by
6. hours 15. minutes, and the longest day is 13. hours 15. minutes.

Calicute the most famous City of merchandise in all India, Calicute.
the longitude.112. degrees, the latitude.5. degrees, and is Southeast and by
East and to the Eastwards.5224. miles from London, and the moon changes
later by.6. hours.8. minutes, and the longest day is but.12. hours.20.
minutes. etc.

Polibotra in Persia, the longitude 143. degrees, Polibotra.
the latitude 27. degrees, and is East and by South and too the Southwardes
5710, miles from London, and the Moon changes later by.8. hours 12.
minutes, and the longest day is 13. hours.45. mynutes.

Pentapolis in India without Ganges, the longitude.150. Pentapolis.
degrees, the latitude.18. degrees, and is East Southeast 6337. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by 8. hours.40. minutes, the longest
day is.13. hours.10. minutes. etc.

Thagora.
Thagora in India without Ganges, the longitude 168.. degrees, the latitude 6.
degrees, and is East South East 7680. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later by 9. hours 52. minutes, and the longest day is 12.
hours.20. mynutes,

Ciamfa.
West Ciamfa in Chatay, the longitude.188. degrees, the latitude.37. degrees.15.
minutes, and is East and by South 7205. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later then at London.11. hours.43. minutes, and the longest day
is.14. hours 36. minutes.

Quinsay.
Quinsay, the greatest City in the whole World, in Chatay, and underneath the
Great Chain Lord of the East and South Indians, the longitude.192. degrees,
the latitude.37. degrees 40. minutes, and is East and by South.7272. miles from
London, and the moon changes later by 11. hours.28. minutes, and the
longest day is.14. hours.38. minutes etc.

G^iten.
G^iten in the East India, in the Province of China, the longitude.183. degrees,
and is near unto the South Sea, the latitude 25. degrees 15. minutes, and is
East and by South 7312. miles from London, and the moon chau^geth (...) then
at London by 11. hours 12. minutes, and the longest day is 13. hours 35.
minutes.

Ciamfa.
East Ciamfa, the longitude.97. degrees, the latitude.32. degrees 5. minutes,
and is East and by South, 7787. miles from London, and the moon changes
later then at London by.11. hours 48. minutes, and the longest day is 14.
hours 10. mynutes.

Tangury.
Tangury in Mugi, the longitude.178. degrees, 15. minutes, the latitude 31.
degrees, and is East and to the Southwards, 6980. miles from London, and the
moon changes later by.10. hours.28. minutes, and the longest day is 14.
hours 5. minutes.

Thebet.
The Province of Thebet, in which the great Chain Lord of the East and South
Indians has his Court, and all the Kings of India are under him, the
longitude is 168. degrees, the latitude.3. degrees.20. minutes, and is East
Southeast 7670. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 9. hours
44. minutes, and the longest day is but 12. hours 10. minutes.

Cyamba, in this place they use Coral in the steed of money, Ciamba
and have great plenty of most sorts of Spices, the longitude 199. degrees 10
minutes, the latitude.25. degrees.30. minutes, and is East and by South 7980.
miles from London, and the Moon changes later by.11. hours.48. minutes, and
the longest day is 13. hours.36. minutes.

Barnia in the South India, the longitude.202. degrees.40. Barnia.
minutes, the latitude.11. degrees.40. minutes, and is West and by South 8824.
miles from London, and the Moon changes rather by.11. hours 52. mynutes,
and the longest day is 12. hours.

Nar in Moaber, the Inhabitants do worship Oxen, Nar.
the longitude 196. degrees, the latitude has the south pole 20. degrees, 10.
minutes, and is Southeast and a little to the Eastwardes 8512. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by 11. hours.44. minutes, and the
longest day is in our Winter, and is 13. hours.15. minutes. etc.

Malaqua, the longitude is 189. degrees, Malaqua.
the Latitude of the South pole is 15. degrees.30. minutes, and is Southeast
and by East 8781. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather by 11.
hours 16. minutes, and the longest day is 12. hours 56. minutes.

In the Kingdom of Lace there is a City called Lace, Lace.
the longitude is.166. degrees 30. minutes, the latitude is 21. degrees, 40.
minutes, and is East and by South.7047. miles from the City of London, and the
Moon changes later then at London by 9. hours 44. minutes, and the longest
day is.13. hours 24. minutes.

The eight Chapter shows the Longitude, and the Latitude, and the other
things before rehearsed, of certain of the principallest places of America or
the west Indies, that has been found within these 100. years, and not known
unto the old writers.
ANd now shall follow the longitude, and the latitude, and all the other things
before rehearsed of certain Cities, The Streighte of Magellenos the
southermost part of all America.
and other notable places of America. And first the Streightes of Magellenos
the Southermost part of all America, the Longitude.305. degrees, the Latitude
is the Pole Antartick, or South Pole.25. degrees.30. mynutes, and is South
Southwest, and too the Westwardes, and beyond the Equinoctial 7224. miles
from London, and the moon changes rather then at London by.5. hours.0.
minutes, and the longest Summer day with them is our shortest Winter day, for
that the pole Antartick or south pole is above the Horizon, and is.16.
hours.36. minutes. etc.

The great River of Platte.
The great river of Plate, the longitude 327. degrees, the latitude is the South
pole 35. degrees, and is South Southwest 5685. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London by.3. hours 32. minutes, and their longest
summer day is in our winter. and is 14. hours.30. mynuts long.

Cappe Crusos the Eastermost part of America.
Cappe Crusos the Eastermost part of all America, and is commonly called the
cost of Brasell, the longitude 345. degrees, the latitude 5. degrees of the
south pole, and is South Southwest 3792 miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London 2. hours 20. mi. the lo^gest day is about.12.
hours.30. minutes.

Cappe de Planco.
Cappe de planco, the longitude.306. degrees, the latitude 5. degrees, and is
southwest and by West 4547. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather 4.
hours.56. minutes, and the longest day is about 12. hours 20. minutes etc.

Cappe Saint Marthae.
Cappe S. Marthae, the lo^gitude.284. degrees, the latitude 12. degrees, and is
west southwest and to the southwards 5103. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather by 60. hours 24. minutes, and the longest day is 12 hours
45. minutes.

Carthagena, the longitude.282. degrees, the latitude 10. Carthagena
degrees.15. minutes, and is West Southwest and to the South 5316. miles from
London, and the moon changes rather by.6. hours, 32. mynutes, and the
longest day is 12. hours.38. minutes.

Number de Deus, the longitude 276. degrees, the latitude 7. degrees, and is
West Southwest 5685. miles from London, Number de Deus.
and the moon changes rather by 6. hours 56. minutes, and the longest day
is.12. hours 25. mynutes etc.

The great and famous City of Mexico, the principallest place in all America,
the longitude.238. degrees, the latitude.21. The City of Mexico.
degrees 30. minutes, and is West and by south, 6844. miles from London, and
the moon changes rather then at London by 9. hours 28. minutes, and the
longest day is 13. hours 20. mynutes.

The river of Palm in Floryda, the longitude 260. degrees, The river of Palm
in Floryda.
the latitude 39. degrees.20. minutes, and is West and to the Southwardes 5034.
miles from London, and the moon changes rather then at London by 8.
hours.0. minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 45. minutes.

The Cape of Cerra Floryda, the longitude.272. degrees, The Cape of terra
Florida.
the latitude 31. degrees, and is West and by Southe.4935. miles from London,
and the moon changes rather by 7. hours.12. minutes, and the longest day
is.14. hours.6 minutes. etc.

Perru in America, the longitude.290 degrees, Perru.
the latitude has the South pole 5. degrees, and is Southwest and by
West.5528. miles from London, and the moon changes rather then at London 6.
hours 0. minutes, and their longest day is but.12. hours.20. mynutes.

Pannama, a Town or City upon the Sea Coaste of Mare de Sur or South sea,
the longitude.276. degrees, The port of Pannama.
the latitude.20. degrees 40. minutes, and is Southwest and by West, and to the
Westwardes 5794 miles from London, and the Moon changes rather by 6. hours
56. minutes, and the longest day is 12. hours 15. minutes.

Tumbes.
Tumbes, a Port in the Province of Peru, upon the cost of the South Sea, the
longitude 276. degrees, the latitud 12. degrees of the Antartick pole, and is
Southwest and by West 6045. miles from London, and the moon chau^geth rather
by 6 hours 56 minutes, and the longest day is but.12. hours 15. minutes in
our Winter.

Baculaius. or new found Land.
Baculaius is on the Northeast end of America, commonly called the new found
Land, the longitude of the middle of them is 320. degrees, the latitude of the
middle thereof is.54. degrees, and is West and to the North parts.2200. miles
from London, and the moon changes rather by 3. hours.59. minutes, and the
longest day is 16. hours 58. minutes.

The land of Labrador.
The Land of Labrador, the longitude of the Eastermost Cape is 320 degrees, the
latitude thereof 63. degrees, and the moon changes rather by 3. hours 95.
minutes, and is West Northwest and to the Northwardes.2768. miles from London,
and the longest day is 20. hours 0. minutes long.

And thus I do end the description of the may^e, or firm land of America.
etc.

The ninth Chapter shows the Longitude and the Latitude, and the other
things before hearsed of certain of the most principalle Islands of Europe,
within the middle earth Sea, and also of the most principalle Islands of Asia
and America.
ANd now shall follow the longitude and the latitude, and the other things
before rehearsed, of Certain of the most notablest Islands of all Asia and
America, and also of Europe: and first of certain of the most principal
Islands in the middle earth Sea.

The Island of Cicilia.
And first, the Island of Cicilia, being the principallest Island in all that
Seas, the middle thereof has longitude 37. degrees, the latitude 36. degrees,
and is Southeast and by South 1178. miles from London, and the Moon changes
later by 1. hour.8. minutes, and their longest day is 14. hours.30. minutes.
etc.

The Island of Corsica, the myddle thereof has longitude 31. The Island of
Corsica.
degrees, the latitude 40. degrees, and is Southeast and by South. 829. miles
from London, and the moon changes later by.44. minutes, and their longest day
is 14. hours 50. minutes. etc.

The Island of Sardinia, the myddle has longitude 31. The Island of Sardinia.
degrees, the latitude 38. degrees, and is South Southeast, and to the
Eastwardes.932. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 44.
minutes, and their longest day is.14. hours 40. minutes long. etc.

The Island of Maiorica, the myddle has longitude.17. The Island of Maiorica.
degrees, the latitude 38. degrees 30. mynutes, and is South and a little to
the Westwardes.792. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather by 12.
minutes, and the longest day is 14. hours 43. minutes. etc.

The Island of Minorica, the longitude.20 degrees,, The Island of Minorica.
the latitude 39. degrees, and is due South.752. miles from London, and the
Moon changes at that time that it does at London, and the longest day
is.14. hours.45. minutes. etc.

The Island of Candie, the longitude.55. degrees, The Island of Candy.
the latitude 35. degrees.20. minutes, and is Southeast and by East, and to the
Eastwardes 1791.. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at
London by 2. hours.20. minutes, and the longest day is.14. hours.25. minutes.
etc.

The Islands of Nigropant, the longitude.54. degrees, The Islands of Nigropant.
the latitude 38. degrees, and is East South and to the Southwardes 1643. miles
from London, and the Moon changes later by 2. hours.16. minutes, and the
longest day is.14. hours.40. minutes. etc.

The Islands called Ciclades, The Ila^ds called Cyclades.
the myddle of them has longitude.56. degrees 10. minutes, the latitude.37.
degrees.20. minutes, and is East Southeast, and to the Southwardes 1545. miles
from London, and the longest day is 14. hours.35. minutes, and the Moon
changes later 2. hours 24. minutes.. etc.

The Island of Ciprus, the longitude.65. degrees 30. The Island of Ciprus.
minutes, the latitude.35. degrees 10. minutes, and is East Southeast. 2190
miles from London, and the Moon changes later by 3. hours 2. mynutes, and
the longest day is.14. hours 20. minutes. etc.

The Island of Scoyra.
The Island of Scoyra, the longitude 86. degrees, the latitude 12. degrees, and
is Southeast and by East.3958. miles from London, and the Moon changes later
by 4. hours 24. minutes, and the longest day is 12. hours 45. minutes. etc.

The Island of Ormosa.
Ormosa is an Island in the narrow Persicke Seas, and has longitude 99.
degrees, the latitude.19. degrees, and is East Southeast 4070. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by 5. hours 4. minutes, and the longest
day is.13. hours 12. minutes. etc.

The great Island of Tabrobannu.
The great Island called Tabrobannu lying in the East Orean, the longitude 151.
degrees, the myddle thereof has no latitude for that it is directly under the
Equinoctial, and is East Southeast 7065. miles from London, and the Moon
changes later then at London 8. hours 44. minutes, and the day is
continual 12. hours in length. etc.

The Island of great Iaua.
The Island of the greater Iaua, the longitude 179. degrees, the latitude has
the South pole Antarticke 7. degrees 30. minutes, and is East Southeast, and a
little to the South.8486. miles from London, and the Moon changes later by
10. hours 36. minutes, and the longest day is but 12. hours 20. minutes. etc.

The Island of the lesser Iaua.
The Island of the lesser Iaua, has longitude 188. degrees, and no lattitude
for that it is under the Equinoctial, and is East Southeast 8715. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by 11. hours 12. minutes, and the day
is always 12. hours long. etc.

The Island of Berno.
The Island of Berno, has Longitude 178. degrees, the latitude is of the South
pole, and is.2. degrees.30. minutes, and is East Southeast.8320. miles from
London, and the Moon changes later by 10. hours 32. minutes, and the
longest day is 12. hours 8. minutes. etc.

The Islands of Molucke.
The Islands of Molucke that lie in the Southe Sea called Mare de Sur, the
longitude 193. degrees, the latitude 9. degrees, and is East Southeast and a
little to the Eastwards 8688. miles from London, and the Moon changes later
then at London by 11. hours 32. minutes, and the longest day is but 12. hours
35. minutes. etc.

The Island of Gelilo the greatest Island of all the Maiucke, The Island of
Gelilo.
and has longitude 204. degrees, the myddle thereof has no latitude for that
it is directly under the Equinoctial, and is West, Southwest 9078. miles from
London, and the Moon changes rather then at London, for that it is unto the
westwardes, and is because that it is more to the Eastwardes of London, then
180 degrees which is more then half the Circumference of the two paralelles,
that is to say, the parallel of London, and the parallel of the Island being
the Equinoctial, Gelilo is near^ Antipode^ unto London.
and if that it had the Southe Pole elevated 51. degrees and a half, then it
had been near Antipodes unto the City of London, and the Moon changes
rather 11. hours.44. mynutes, and the longest day is but 12. hours long. etc.

The Island of Iapan near the coast of China, The Island of Iapan.
the longitude 198. degrees, the latitude 32. degrees, and is East and by South
7919. miles from London, and the Moon changes later then at London by 11.
hours 52. minutes, and the longest Summer day is.14. hours 10. minutes. etc.

The Island of Stipango, the longitude 200. degrees 30. The Island of Stipango.
mynutes, the latitude 50. degrees, and is West from the City of London, for
that it is more then.180. degrees unto the Eastwardes, therefore the shortest
way is unto the Westwardes, and is 6668. miles from London, and the Moon
changes rather then at London by 11. hours 58. minutes, and the longest day
is 16. hours 4. mynutes. etc.

Cuba, The Island of Cuba.
one of the byggest Islands in the West Indies in the great Bay of America, and
the myddle thereof has Longitude.275. degrees, the latitude.23. degree.30.
minutes, the very myddle of the Island that is directly under the Tropicke of
Cancer, and is West Southwest.5114. miles from London, and the Moon changes
rather 5. hours 0. mynutes, and the longest day is.13. hours 26. minutes.
etc.

The Island called Hispaniola.
The great Island called Hispanyola near Cuba, the myddle thereof has
longitude 285. degrees, and the latitude is 20. degrees in the myddle thereof,
and is West Southwest, and somewhat to the Southe.4805. miles from London, and
the Moon changes rather by.6. hours.20. minutes, and the longest day is
13. hours 15. minutes.

Saint John's Island.
Saint John's Island, the Longitude of the myddle thereof is 293. degrees.30.
mynutes, the latitude of the myddle is 18. degrees, and is West Southwest.4536.
miles from London, and the Moon changes rather 5. hours.46. mynutes, and
the longest day is 13. hours 8. minutes. etc.

The Island of Iamica.
The Island of Iamica, the Longitude is 276. degrees, the Latitude.16. degrees,
and is West Southwest.5332. miles from London, and the Moon changes rather
6. hours 56. minutes, and the longest day is.13. hours.0. minutes etc.

The Islands of the Surres.
The Islands called the Surres in our West Occean Sea, the myddle amongst them,
has longitude 344. degrees, and the Latitude amongst the myddle of them
is.39. degrees, and is Southwest and by West 1674. miles from London, and the
Moon changes rather 3. hours 24. minutes, and the longest day is.14.
hours.45. minutes. etc.

And thus I do end the description of the principallest Islands of Asia,
Europa, and America. etc.

The tenth Chapter is as touching certain things in the knowing of the
distaunce unto any place assigned by Longitude and by Latitude. etc.
AND furthermore, insomuche as the shortest distaunce unto any place assigned,
cannot be by any one point of the Compass, as is before declared in the first
Chapter of this second book, wherefore if that you do desire for to know
the distaunce over the Sea and Land, the next way, and the shortest
distaunce, If that you do desire to know the shortest distance unto any place,
then you must do it with a Globe.
then you must prepare a Globe terrestrial, and that the longitude, and the
latitude of the Towns and Cities, and other notable places, to be truly
placed on the Globe: and then take a pair of Compasses, and then look those
two places in the Globe, that you do desire for to know the true distaunce
unto, and then open your Compasses, and set the one foot on the one place, and
the other on the other place assigned, justly: and that done, then your
Compasses standing styffe and not removed, set them unto the Equinoctial
circle on the Globe, and that done, then look how many degrees that it is
justly between the two feet of the Compasses, How to know the true distance
unto any place by the Globe.
and that being known, then multiply the number of degrees by 60. and that
shall show unto you the true number of miles, between any two places
assigned, and this being done precisely, taking the true number of degrees,
and the parts thereof, you shall not fail of the truth, so that the Longitude
and Latitude of the places be truly set upon the Globe: and then 60. miles
does answer unto one degree both under the Equinoctial, and the Meridians.
The whole compass of the earth is 28600 miles, no place can be no further
distance from you th^^ 10800. miles.
And in every great Circle on the Globe of the Earth, whose whole circumference
or compass is 21600. miles, so that no two places assigned, cannot be further
distaunce asunder then 10800. miles, and then the one must be opposite, or right
against the other, being Antipodes, going feet unto the feet of the other,
and then as before is declared, it is neither East nor West, nor no point of
the Compass else, for which way soever that you do go by any right line,
the distaunce is all one, but if that any two places be not directlye
Antipodes the one unto the other, then that is nearer one way, then that it is
another way: and yet it shall not be by any one point of the Compass, but by
diverse points of the Compass, as before is rehearsed, except that the two
places be both under one Meridian, or else under the Equinoctial. etc.

A Table of the Contents of the chapters of the second part of this Book
called a treasure for Trauailers.
FIrst to the Reader of this second part.

The first Chapter of the second part shows you how for to know the
distance unto any town upon the face of the earth, and what is to be
considered in the dooynge thereof.

The Second Chapter shows unto you, how you may know the distaunce unto any
Town situate upon the face of the whole earth, so that you do know the true
longitude and the true latitude of them.

The Third Chapter shows how too know unto what quarter of the world that
any place does stand from you, that is to say, by what point of the
Compass, you knowing the true longitude and the true latitude.

The Fourth Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude, and by what point
of the compass that sundry places within England and Scotland and Irelande,
and also of certain Islands near, unto them does bear from the City of
London, and what distaunce of miles they are from London, by the point of the
Compass over the water and the land: and also there is showed how much the
moon shall change rather or later then it does at London, and also it does
show the length of the longest Summer day, for as many places as are named.

The fyfth Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
before rehearsed, of certain of the principallest places in Europe, as in
Spain and Portugal, and France, and Italy, and Germany.

The Sixte Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
before rehearsed, of certain of the principallest places in Africa, and of
certain Islands near thereunto.

The Seuenthe Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other
things before rehearsed of certain of the principallest places of Asia, and in
the East India.

The Eight Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
before specifyed, of certain of the princpallest places of America or the West
Indies, that has been found within these hundred years, and not known unto
the old Writers.

The ninth Chapter shows the longitude and the latitude and the other things
be fore rehearsed, of certain of of the most principal Islands of Europe,
within the middle earth Sea, and also the most principal Islands of Asia and
America.

The tenthe Chapter is as touching certain things in the knowing of the
distaunce unto any place assigned by longitude and by latitude.

Finis.
The Argument of the third Book, of the treasure for Trauailers.
The third Book of the Treasure for Trauailers, containing some matters for
the measuring of superfycialles, as Land, Board, Pauement, or Glass, and also
some matters as touching Solled bodies, as Timber, Stone, or such otherlyke:
and also how to alter the Tonnage, burden, or bygnesse of ships, and to
keep that moulde and proportion with other necessary things belonging
thereunto. etc. Being very necessary for all sorts of people that travail
either by Sea or Land, written by William Bourne.

To the Reader of this third Book.
GEntle Reader, although Master Leonard Dygges in his Book called Tictonicon,
and also Master Thomas Dygges his Son in another Book, called Pantometry,
has showed how for to measure al Superfycialles, as Land, Board, Glass,
Pauement or any such other like, and also how to measure al manner of Solled
bodies, as Timber, Stone, and such other like, yet notwithstanding I have
written in this third Book, a little brief note as touching those causes, and
also how to build ships for to make them of what tonnage or burden that you
list, and to keep any form in the mould or proportion that you list, whereby
that any Mechanical workmen by following the order in the Book prescribed,
may make any ship the one like the other, and to make them of what bygnesse
or smalnesse he list, and to keep that form and fashion in an points, both
in the moulde that is under the water, and also in the fashion aloft, above the
water. And also there is contained in this third part, how for to know the
bygnesse of Ropes, whether that it be as byg again, or three times so bygge
more or less, at your discretion, which in my opinion is very necessary to be
known, both unto Naupegers or ship Carpenters, and also unto all sorts of
Sea men: and also there is other necessary matters contained in this third
Book.

The third Book of the treasure for Trauaylers.
The first Chapter of the third Book, shows you how for to cast the
contents of land by Arithmeticke, and also by the husbands rule which is by
the account of money. etc.
Now begins the third Book, for that it is necessary for to know how to
measure all manner of plat forms and bodies, both their superficial
contents, and also there masey contents. Therefore as briefly as I may I will
show unto you: yet there has famous and wise men written thereof in our
English tongue as M. Leonard Dygges, and M. Thomas Dygges, his son, and
other notable men seen in the Mathematical Sciences. Therefore I do intend
to treat the less thereof, and especially of those things that those have
written of, I will not meddle withal at this time, for that they have
sufficiently declared it, as this: for to know the contents of Land, to be
measured in Triangles, being sure for to make a square angle and so forth, as
M. Dygges does declare in his Tictonicon, and for to cast the contents
thereof, you shall do this: To know the co^tentes of account of any piece of
ground by Arithmetike.
When you have found a length and a breadth of any piece of ground, whose
contents in Acres you do desire for to know, you shall do it by Arithmetike,
as thus. You shall multiply the length with the breadth, then that number that
comes of that multiplication, you shall divide by.160. and that shall show
unto you the true numbers of Acres, then if there be any half rods or
quarters of roodes, if that they be in breadth, you shall add then to the
length, and if that they be in length, you shall account them in the breadth,
and so forth. Now I do know that every man has not Arithmetike, therefore
you shall make your account by this means, for to know the true contents of
the measure of any piece of Land, when you do know the length and the breadth
thereof, as thus: by the account of money, every mark for to conteyne one
Acre, To know how many acres there is in any piece of ground by the account of
money.
as thus, by the account of money, every noble of money to conteyne half an
Acre, and every 3. shillinges and 4. pence, to conteyne a roode or a quarter of
an Acre, and every groate or 4. pence to conteyne a days work, and every
penny to conteyne a pearche, or as some term it a roode, and for to cast the
contents of Land, do this, as by ensample of a piece of Land that is 30.
pearches long, and 24. pearches broad, the 24. pence is 2. shillinges, then
being.30. roodes long, that is 2. times.30. shillinges, that makes in money 3.
pound, and 3. pound is.4. mark, and a noble, so that the piece of Land that
is.30. roodes long, and 24. broad, does conteyne 4. Acres and a half. Yet
furthermore for your better understanding, where there is half pearches and
quarter of pearches, both in the length and in the breadth, then you shall do
thus, by a piece of Land that is 53. roodes long, and a half, and of breadth
42. and a quarter, then 42. pence makes 3. shillinges and 6. pence: lay down
3. times 53. shillinges, and that will be.7. pound and.19. shillinges, and
then there is 6. pence more, in the breadth: and 53. half shillings makes 26.
shillinges and 6. pence, then lay that to the other sum, and then it makes
9. pound 5. shillings and 6. pence, then there is in the length half a roode
more, therefore you must account it in the breadth, and 42. half pence makes
21. pence. Then lay that to the su^me, then there is in the same breadth a
quarter of a roode more, and that you must reckon in the length: and 53.
farthinges makes 13. pence farthing, then lay the same to the rest, and it
will make in money 9. pound 8. shillinges and 4. pence ob. and that aunsweres
to, in measure.14. Acres and 5. dares work, and about half a pearche, for
that you may know that.9. pound is 13. marks and a noble, and there is 8.
shillinges, and that is more then a noble by 4. grotes. Then put that noble to
the other noble, then that makes 14. marks, then the 4. grotes, put to the
other 4. pence, makes 5. grotes, and so that piece of land which is 53.
roodes long and a half, and 42. roodes broad and a quarter, shall be in
measure 14. Acres 5. days work, near half a perch. And by this account of
money, you may know the contents of any piece of land, better then you may
know by any manner of table or tables, and this serves both for the learned,
and the unlearned, and is generally called the husbandmans rule, for that he
may as soon learn this or sooner, then he shall understand the tables of
measures, and that serves but for a quantity of measure, and this serves
generally for all manner of measures, be it never so bygge or small, being sure
for to cast the money right.

The second Chapter shows how to measure board and Glass, and to cast the
contents thereof, with other necesary things belonging thereunto.
NOw furthermore in like manner, for the measuring of board or Glass or any
such other like, for that it is sufficientlye declared in tables, in Master
Digges his Tictonicon: yet notwithstanding thus you may know the contents
without any tables, as thus.

Look at what length your boorde is, multiplye the number of feet into inches
12. inches to the foot, then that being done, multyplye the breadth with the
length, that is to say, the number of inches of the length, with the number of
inches of the breadth, divide that number by 144. and that shall show unto you
the number of feet: then if that there remain any thing, every 72. inches
makes half a foot, and then every 36. shall make. part of a foot, and for
that every man has not Arethmetick for to cast it by, yet this is a ready way
that many Carpenters do use, and is exact ynouth, as thus.

If that the Board be more then a foot broad, then they do look how many
foot long the Board is: then ^hey account that that there is so many foot of
Board as the length of the board is, and then for the odd inches and parts,
they mete in the bredthe how much it is, and then with the rule, as often times
as there is foot long in the Board they do measure or set it down, and then
they do measure how many foot long it comes unto, and then they do say
that it is so many foot of board more then the length of the board is: and
that is true without any fail, as for ensample thus, by a board of 10. foot
long, and 14. inches and a half broad. Now for that the Board is 10. foot
long, then at twelve inches broad, there is 10. foot of board, and then
there is two inches and an half more in the breadth, and for that with the
ynche rule that is laid down 10. times, for that the board is 10. foot
long, and that being measured how long it reaches, it will be 25. inches
long, that is.2. foot and 1. ynche, the^ that 2. foot put unto the 10.
foot, it makes.12. foot, so that you may conclude that a board of 10. foot
long, and.14. inches and. broad, that there is 12. foot and 1.12. part of a
foot of a board, without any fail, and thus you may do, how broad or narrow
so ever that any board or Planck is.

A note of measure.
And furthermore, at one ynche broad, then 12. foot long makes a foot of
board, at 2. inches broad, 6. foot long to a foot: at 3. inches broad 4.
foot long to a foot, at 4. inches broad 3. foot long to a foot, then at 5.
inches broad 2. foot and 5. inches long to a foot of board: at 6. inches broad
2. foot long to a foot of board, at 7. inches broad 1. foot and 8. inches
and a half to 1. foot of board, at 8. inches broad, one foot and 6. inches
long to one foot of board: at 9. inches broad 16. inches long to one foot of
board: at 10. inches broad 14. inches long and. to one foot of board, at 11.
inches broad 13. inches long and 1.11. part of an ynche to 1. foot of board:
at 12. inches broad 12. inches long to one foot of board, at 13. inches broad
11. inches long and 1.13 part to one foot of board, at 14. inches broad 10.
inches and 2/7. parts of an ynche long to one foot of board: at 15. inches
broad 9. inches and 9.15. parts of an ynche long to one foot of board: at 16.
inches broad 9. inches long to one foot of board, at.17. inches broad 8.
inches and 1.2. long, to one foot of board, at.18. inches broad 8. inches
long to one foot of board, and for that there is no common bords sawne above
18. inches broad, therefore I leave of to proceed any further, and if it
chance for to be brother the^ any of the measure before named: then you shall
take one of these measures before, that is half the breadth, and then you shall
take half the length for the true contents of the measure, and so forth at
your discretion.

And furthermore, You may know by Arithmetic how many inches in length will
make a foot of board whatsoever the bredthe is.
you may know how many inches long will make one foot of board whenever you
do know the breadth, as this. First look how many inches that the board is
broad, then divide the breadth out of 144. and that shall show unto you the true
contents of inches, of length in one foot of board, with parts of inches
adding the remainder unto the breadth. And furthermore in like manner, for to
know the contents how many feet there does contain in any great quantytie,
as Pauement or Glass, or Chamber flowers, then multiplye the length with the
breadth, By Arithmetic you may know how many foot there is in any great
quantyty.
and that shows unto you the true contents of the number of feet. Thus much
have I said for the measuring of all manner of plate forms, for that the
common people fall into such a number of errors for lack of Geometry and
Arithmetic, as thus. Some will hold opinion that if any Square or Circle be as
much in measure more, they will say that it is but as big again, where that
it must needs of force be 4. times so big, as for ensample by a Pauement that
is but 12. foot square every way, and an other Pauement (in like manner) 24.
foot square every way, now that Pauement being 12. foot square, contains
144. foot, and the other being 24. foot square every way, contains.576.
foot, that is 4. times so big as the other that is but 12. inches square, as
by this Ensample it does appear. the one of these squares to be 12. foot
square, and the other 24. foot square: for if that you would have a square the
one to be as big again as the other, then if that it be a square root as
these 2. figures before made: Then look how many foot it is from corner to
corner, right against it, passinge by the Center of the square, the length of
that Line from corner to corner, shall make an other square upon the four
sides as big again as the other from corner to corner: as for ensample thus.

By the square before made of 12. foot square every way, and the slope Line
from corner to corner, is 17. foot, lackinge 1.33. part of a foot, which is
16. foot and 32.33. part of a foot. For as the square root of 12. is 144.
so the square root of.17. is 289. swhich is more by one foot, then the double
of 144. as by the enample before made it does appear. And for your better
ensample, behold this Figure with the square root of.12. is cut from the
one corner to the other corner, and the length of that line from the one corner
to the other is 17. foot lacking 1.33. part of a foot, and yet for the more
plainnes, you shall have this ensample by the square before made of.12. foot
every way, and so being cut from corner to corner, it is 17. foot lacking
1.33. part: and when you have done, you shall put the 2. parts so cut a
sunder, together, laying the side 12. unto 12. and then it will make a Tryangle
as big as the square: then adding so much more unto it, will make a square
root just as big again, as by this ensample it does appear.



Now furthermore, the square root of.17. lacking one 33. part, will be
corner to corner 24. foot, and it is a square root just as big again, as
that of sixteen foot and a 23. part of 33.

And now furthermore for Circles or long squares, all is one matter, as for an
ensample thus by a Circle of 12. foot broad, and the Compass shall be 37.
foot and 8. inches and better, for this is general for ever look how many
times 7. is in the Diameter, so many times 22. shall be the circumference. Or
now contrariwise: Look how many times 22. you have in the Circumference so
many times 7. shall be the Diameter.

Now to the purpose: An ensample in Circles.
a Circle as much more in breadth or in Compass, shall make a Circle four
times so big in measure as the other, and for to measure a Circle truly, do
thus. First, knowing the Circumference and the Diameter, multiply^ the one by
the other, that is to say, the compass with the breadth, and then take the
fourth part of the measure, for the true contents of the Circle, or else take
half the Compass, and half the breadth: then multiply the one by the other,
that being done, it shows the just contents of the Circle, as for ensample
thus.

By the Circle of 12. foot broad, and the Compass 37. and 9. inches, and
half 12. is 6. and half 37. foot and eight inches is 18. foot and 10.
inches, and it being multiplied together, makes 113. foot, the true contents
of that Circle before named. And now there is an other Circle that is 24. foot
broad, and that comes unto in Compass 75. foot and 4. inches. And then
take half the Compass which is 37. foot and 8. inches and half the breadth,
and that is.12. foot, and then multyplye the half Compass with the half
breadth, and that makes.452. as by the ensample of these 2. Circles it does
appear.



Now furthermore, if that you would have an other Circle to be just as big
again, or else in like manner the other being known, I would have a Circle
half so big, then bring your circle into a square root, not reckoning the
compassed part, and the length of the square shall make the Diameter of a
Circle just half so big, and that being doubled, it will make a Circle just
as big again as the other Circle, as by this ensample of a Circle of 24.
foot broad, and the roundnes being cut a way, Ensamples of Circles.
it will make a square root of 17. foot square, lackinge 1.33. part of a
foot: and then you may know what a Circle of 17. foot of Diameter lacking
1.33. part of a foot, will make an other Circle half so big as a Circle
of.24. foot of breadth, and as big again as a Circle of 12. foot broad: and
so forth in all points whether that they be Circles or squares, as by the
ensample of a long square of 12. foot long and 6. foot broad, and there is
an other square of 24. foot long and 12. foot broad.

Now the square of 12. foot long and 6. foot broad, An ensample of long
square^
contains but 72. foot, and the other of 24. foot long and 12 foot broad,
contains in feet.288. which is four times so big as the long square 12.
foot long and 6. foot broad.

And for to make an other square as big again as that of 12. one way and 6.
an other way, that long square shall be 17. foot long, lacking 1.33. parts
of a foot, and of bredthe 8. foot and 16.33. part of a foot: as by these 3.
figures it does appear: the one 12. foot long and 6. foot broad, and the
second.24. foot long and 12. foot broad, and the third 16. foot and 32.33.
long, and 8. foot and.16.33. broad. And the length of the ship lines from
corner to corner of that which is 10. foot long and 6. foot broad, is 13.
foot and 11.26. part of a foot: and that of 24. foot long and 12. foot
broad, shall be 26. foot and 11.13. part of a foot, the length of the
Hipothenusal line from the one corner to the other corner, and also the long
square of seventeen foot long lacks 1.33. part and near 8. inches and
1.2. broad, the slope Line from corner to corner, shall be nineteen foot
long lackinge 1.36. part of a foot, which is 18. foot and 35.36. part of a
foot: and as it has been often declared in this work, how too know the
length of the slope Lines from the one corner to the other corner, being sure
for to make a square Angle.

And then by extracting of the root, as before is declared, you may know the
length of the Hipothenusall or slope Lines, as by this ensample: if that your
square do level, then you must be sure to make it square to your ground
line, as by this ensample is does appear, by these 2. figures, and the pricked
lines do make the leuelles a just square Angle, both the sharp Angle, and the
broad Angle, as you may see by these.2. figures before made. And furthermore,
for to know the proportion, how much the one is bygger then the other of any
superficial, whether that it be circles or square roots, if that you do know
the contents of the one, and would know how much that the other is bygger or
lesser, then you knowing the contents of it already, then multiply them both
squarely, that done, How to know the quantytie or proportion of any Circle or
square what the one is biger then the other.
then if that you do know the contents of the lesser, and would seek the
contents of the bygger, then multiplye the bygger number by the contents of
the lesser, and look what that comes unto, then divide that same by the
number of the lesser, and that will show you justly, what proportion that the
bygger is in quantity more then the lesser. Now contrariwise if that you do
know the contents of the bygger: and to know the contents of the lesser,
then multiply the contents of the bygger, with the number of the lesser, and
then divide that same by the number of the bygger, and that will show unto you
the proportion of the lesser, and by this order you may know the proportion
of any Triangles or long square, or what form soever that it has, as it is
more plainelye hereafter showed in the 8. Chapter by the proportion of ropes.

The third Chapter does show how for to measure Timber, and to bring it to
a square, as well without Arithmetike as otherwise, and also how for to know
the true contents of any piece of Timber.
NOw furthermore, for the measuring of all manner of bodies, as Timber or
stone, or any such other like, Master Dygges in his Book named Tectonicon,
has made Tables of the squares of it: yet notwithstanding I will show unto
you, how that you shall know how many inches long will make a foot of any
portion of measure, as thus: first knowing the breadth and the thickenesse, and
you would know how many inches long will make a foot, then look how many
inches that the breadth of the Timber is the brother way, and then in like
manner look how many inches that it is in th^cke^^sse the narrowest way,
then multiply the broader side, with the narrow side, then that number that
comes of that multiplication, How to know (...) many inches long in Timber
will make a foot what square s^^nes that it has by Arithmetike.
you must divide that sum out of.1728. then that su^me that stands before
the quanti^ie line, shall be the number of inches in length of one foot of
Timber or stone: and then if there remains any thing, then if that number
which was the deuider if that it be half the number, then it is half an ynche
more: if a quarter of the number, then one quarter of an ynche: and if.3.
quarters of the sum, then 3.4. parts, and so forth to any part or parts
of the remainder. And then according to that, the proportion shall be so many
parts of an ynche, as the remaynder does show, and thus you may know how
many inches long will make one foot of Timber or Stone, without any squaring
of the Timber. And as Master Dygges in his Book called Tectonicon, has made
Tables of the squares, that you may do by extractions of the root, as before
is declared in this work. And now for because that every person that
destreth for to know how for to measure Timber, or any other thing, have not
all manner of Arithmetyke, therefore you shall have a Table of the squares of
Timber, The length of a foot of Timber according unto the square.
how many feet and inches will make one foot long of Timber from one ynche
square, and so from ynche to ynche, till that you come to.36 inches square, as
by this ensample it does appear, and the uppermost row of this table is the
number of inches of the squarenesse. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
18 1 4 36 16 9 5 4 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 11 3 9 5 2 0 10 8 7 6 5 5
1 3 7 1 1 3 13 11 3 15 1 The second, how many foot long will make one foot
of Timber, the third is ynch, the 4. is parts of an ynche, to be added 19 20
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 3 5 7 9 5 0 3 1 3 3 1 7 3 11 9 1 7 5 unto the number of feet, or inches,
as by these 2. Tables it does appear. And now for the measuring of Timber or
Stone, look what that it comes unto in square number, then these tables
before made do show unto you, how many inches and parts of inches will make
a foot long of that squares: and for because that every piece of Timber that
is to be measured, is not equallye square, I will show unto you how that you
may square it without extracting of the root, for that I know every person
has not that kind of Arithmetike.

And furthermore, for to make Tables thereof, it were but superfluous, for that
Master Dygges in his Tectonicon, has made Tables exact yenough for that
purpose.

And furthermore this I am assured of, that the reason how for to square their
timber, may be as soon beaten into the common peoples heads, and sooner, then
they will by instructions learn to understand the tables of squares. And now
to instruct them how for to square their timber whenever that the Timber is
brother one way, then that it is another way, then do thus. First look how
many inches that the Timber is the brother way, and then look how many inches
that it is the narrow way, then when that you have done, How to square
Timber without ^rithmetike or tables.
reckon how many inches that it is, more then the perfyte square, then take
that number of inches and put it into 2. equal parts: then that being done,
you shall lack a certain quantity for to fulfill one of the corners, and
that quantity you shall rebate upon the.2. sides, concluding thus, that it is
thus many inches square, lacking so much as the quantity in the corner did
show unto you, upon the 2. sides. And for your better instructions I will
give unto you certain ensamples, An ensample.
as thus, for the first ensample is by a piece of Timber of 13. inches one way,
and 11. inches another way, and now you do see that the brother side is.2.
inches more then the narrow side: then divide the.2. inches into 2. equal
parts, and that is one ynche to a part, and then you do see that it is.12.
inches one way, and.12. inches the other way, saving that it lacks one ynche
at one of the corners, and that one ynche will rebate upon the 2. sides of 12.
which is 24. inches, a.1.24. part of an ynche, as by this figure it is
declared. And now I do conclude that this piece of timber 13. inches one way,
and 11. inches another way, does make in square Timber 11. inches and 23.24.
parts of an ynche, which is.12. inches, lacking 1.24. The second ensample.
part of an ynch. And now to the second ensample by a piece of Timber, that is
12. inches one way, and 20. the other way. Now you do see that the brother
side is 8. inches more then the narrow side: therefore I do divide the 8.
inches into 2. equal parts, and that is 4. inches to a part, and then lay 4.
inches more to 12. inches, upon the 2. sides, that makes 16. inches square,
then their lacks.4. inches square at one of the corners, then multiply 4.
times 4. and that is 16. and then the piece of Timber being added unto the 2.
sides 4. inches unto 12. it makes 16. and 2. times 16. and that makes 32.
then that 16. inches that lacks in the corner being rebated from 32. will
rebate half an ynche, for.16. whole inches will make.32. half inches.
Therefore I do conclude that the piece of Timber that is 20. inches one way
and 12. inches the other way, will make in square Timber 15. inches, and. the
true square thereof. The third ensample.
Now furthermore to the third ensample by such a piece of Timber that is.23.
inches one way, and but.7. inches the other way, then the broader square, is
more then the narrower by 1^ ^nches: then as before is declared, divide 16. into
3. equal par^^^, and it will be 8. to every part, and then put 8. inches in
breadth upon the two sides unto 7. it will make 15. so that it would make a
square 15. inches every way, saving that it lacks a great match in one of
the corners, then multiplying 8. times 8. it makes 64 then you must rebate 64.
inches out of the 2. sides of 15. inches, and 2. tunes 15. is 30. inches, and
the^ the square is but 14. inches: then 2 times 24. is 28. and when there is 30
pulled out of 64. then is there but 34. left: the^ rebate 28. inches more from
the 2. sides, then the square is but.13. inches square, and then.30. and.28.
being taken out of 64. then there rests but.6. and then at the.2. corners, as
first at 30. and then at 28. you shall rebate one ynche at each of the corners,
one and 2. times one is 2 then put that 2. unto the 6 and it makes 8. and then
the square Timber is but 13. inches, and.2. times 13. is but.26. and yet there
is.8. inches to be rebated of from.26. and it comes unto 4.13. part of one
ynche, and so much the timber is less then.13. inches square: therefore you
may conclude that the piece of Timber.23. inches one way, and but 7. inches the
other way, shall make in square Timber 12. inches, and 9.13. part of one ynche
just, and this is true, and thus may you square any piece of Timber,
whatsoever that it be, without any tables or extractyng of the root. And thus
I make an end of the ensamples, thynking this sufficient yenough for
instructions: and for to measure round Timber, or Timber that has many square
sides, Master Digges has sufficienly declared in his Tectonicon, saving that
for the measuring of round Timber, you must allow as I have declared in this
Book: that is to say, every Diameter of.7. inches, has the circumference 22.
inches: and then to measure round Timber, take half the circumference, called
the compass, and half the Diameter, called the breadth, or thyckenesse: then
squaring that, it shall show unto you the true square of that Timber, without
any fail.

The fourth Chapter shows how for too measure all manner of bodies, as
Timber, or stone, cubes, or globes: and to know what proportion of measure or
weight the one has unto the other.
Now furthermore, for the measuring of al manner of bodies, that lacks part
of their form, and other that be more then their form, and other that be
mixed bodies, being in one place more then their form, and in an other place
lacks part of their form, in the measuryng of them, you shall do thus. And
as it is declared before, in the measuring of Timber or Stone, or any such
other like, if so be that it be equally square or partilye square, all is one
matter, or round, or many squares, Master Dygges has sufficiently declared
thereof, as touching the measuring of it, How to measure any thing that lacks
part of hi^ form.
for that it is a body properly of it self. The^ furthermore, there be bodies
that lack part of their form, as thus, there is is a piece of Timber either
round or square, that may be hollow in the core or middle, or else it may be
hollow like a Trough or with hollow natches into it, as by these ensamples it
does appear, and the black does sygnifye the hollow: and for to measure
them truly, do thus.



First measure the Massy bodies contents, and so cast it in that form, then
measure the hollow or concaue place, as though it were Timber. Then cast the
contents thereof, and pull that su^^e away from the whole contents, and that
which does remain, shall be the true conte^tes of that piece of timber, or
stone, and so forth. How to measure any thing that is more then his form.
And now for superfluous bodies as Timber or stone, or any other thing, which
is more the^ their proper form, as by these ensa^ples it does appear. Then
shall you first measure the principal body by it self: that being done,
then measure the superfluous part or parts, by themselves, then add or put
all those numbers together, and that will show unto you the just contents of
that body.

How to measure mixed bodies.
And now furthermore for the measuring of mixed bodies, as a mixed body is
that which is hollow in one place or places, and more then a body in another
place or places, as these figures does show. And for the measuring of these
bodies as before is declared, first measuring the principal body, and then
next measuring the superfluous part or parts, and put all those together,
and then measure the hollow part or parts, as before is declared, then cast
the contents of the hollow Timber or metal by it self, then pull that
sum out of the other sums, and then that which does remain, shall be the
true measure of the body that you have measured, and so forth.

And now furthermore, for the measuring of all bodies, as Cubes or Globes, as
for ensample thus, for the measuring of Globes or Cubes, as a shot or a
Bullet being a perfyte Globe, that all bodies as Cubes or Globes, or any other
form either round or square, if that it be as much more in measure every way.
As I do know the opinion of some people, Error in the common people as by
ensample
that will say that is but as bygge again, where it must needs of force be
8. times so big, as for Ensample thus.

By a piece of Timber or of Stone, being a foot square every way like unto a
Dye. And there is an other cube of Timber or Stone of two foot square every
way like a Dye in form. Now that cube of one foot square, is but one foot of
Timber or Stone: and the other cube of two foot square every way like unto a
Dye, is eight foot of Timber or Stone, as these two fygures do represent.



Now you do see this to be true: and if that the measure of any thing being
as much more in length, bredthe and thickness, that it is 8. times so big,
whether that it be cubes or Globes, long Timber or Raske, or what soever it
be.

And furthermore, as it is before rehearsed, if that you have a piece of Timber,
Ensample of large Timber.
if that it be in squarenesse as long more and as thyck or broad more, that it
is 8. times as big, whether that it be round or square all is one matter,
as for ensample thus. By a piece of Timber of 10. foot long, and.12. inches
square, that piece of timber shall be 10. foot of timber: and if that you have
an other piece of timber, that is 24. inches square and.20. foot long, that
piece of timber shall be 80. foot of timber, as by these 2. figures it is showed.



And furthermore, if that you would have an other piece of timber just as
big again, as that of 10. foot long, and one foot square, being just
10. foot of Timber, and to be of that proportion in length and in squarenesse,
that is declared hereafter in the 7. chapter.

And furthermore whether that it be in Cubes or Globes, and if that you do
know the contents of the one, and would know how much the one is bigger then
the other: then shall you do it thus. You must tryple the proportion of the
sides of the cubes or Globes, and then multiply them together, To know the
proportion of Cubes or Globes, the one by the other.
as you do in fractions: then look what that number comes unto. Then if
that you do know the contents of the lesser, and would know the conte^tes of
the bigger, then multyplye the contents of the lesser cube or Globe, with the
number of the bigger: and look what that number comes unto: then divide that
su^me with the number of the lesser cube or Globe, and that number that
stands in the quantitye Line, shall be the contents of the bigger cube or
Globe, as for Ensample thus (...), by a Bullet of Iron of.5. inches in height,
or Diameter, and suppose it to weigh 16. pound. And you have an other Globe or
Bullet of that stuff of 9. inches in Diameter, how many pound shall that way?
you shall know it thus.

triple the proportion of them both, and set the^ down thus.555.999: Then
multiply thus.5. times 5. is.25. and then.5. times.25. makes 125.

An ensample of Globes.
And now to the bigger Globe, 9. times 9. is 81. and then.9. times 81. makes
729, and now the lesser Bullet wayinge.16. pound therefore multyplye.729.
by.16. and that will make.11664. and now divide this number by 125. and then
there will stand in the quantytie Line 93. then there remains over 39. so as
you may conclude, that the bigger Bullet does way 93. pound, and.39.125.
which is near 5. ounces, the true wayght of the bygger Globe. And now
contrarywyse, you knowing the contents or weight of the bigger cube or Globe:
then you must multyplye the contents by the number of the lesser, and then
divide it again by the number of the bigger.

And for more playnnesse, by the Bullet before rehearsed of.5. inches high, The
second ensample.
to way 16. pound. Now I have a lesser that is but 4. inches in his Diameter,
what shall it way: you shall know it thus 444.555. first multyply 4. times 4.
and that is 16. and then 4. times 16. is 64. Then multiply 64. by the weight of
the bigger Bullet, and that is 16. times 64. and that makes 1024. and then
divide the number by 125. and then there will stand in the quantytie Line 8.
and 24. will remain over. So that ye may conclude, that the lesser Globe or
Bullet does weighe 8 pound and 3. ounces. And so by this order you may know
the proportion of all manner of other bodies, what form so ever that it has:
by multiplyinge the length, breadth and thickness, and then doing as before is
rehearsed, the contents shall appear.

The fyfth Chapter shows how for to measure Globes, and to know the contents
in inches or feet.
ANd furthermore, for the measuring of Globes by proportion, how much that the
one is bigger then the other, it is no otherwise then the proportion of any
other body, as by ensample of the measuring of cubes, as before it is declared.
For this is general for ever in the measuringe of all solled bodies, as Timber
and Stone, or Raske, or any other thing what so ever that it be, if that the
proportion of measure be as 1. unto 2. the body contents as 8. unto one, that
is to say, that if a shot or Globe of Iron of.2. inches heyght do weigh one
pound, then shall a shot or Globe of Iron of 4. inches height, weigh 8.
pound, and so forth as before is rehearsed. And also this is a very good way
to know the contents of a Bullet or Globe, a cube of.4. inches, will go very
near to make a Globe of.5. inches in Diameter: and for Ensample of this matter
before rehearsed, they do use for to measure Globes or Bullets in this sort,
to know their contents. First thus. The measuring of Globes.
The Circumference bring known, as 7. unto 22. the Diameter is found.

Then multyply the half Circumference with the half Diameter, and that being
done, look what number that comes unto. Then multyply that by the Diameter
again, and look what that number ryseth unto: then take. parts of that
number, and that shall be the contents of the Globe or Bullet, Ensample thus.

By a Globe of 12. inches high in the Diameter. Now to know the Circumference:
then multiplye 12. by 22. and that comes unto 264. and then divide 264. by 7.
and that shall show unto you the Circumference: so that comes unto.37.
and.5.7. the true compass of the Circle. Then take the half of both the
Circumference, and the half Diameter, that is to say, half 37. and.5.7. and
that makes 18. and 6.7. pa^tes and half 12. and that is.6. Then multiply
18.6.7. times.6. and that comes unto.113. and then multiply that number by
the whole Diameter again, and that comes unto 1356. and that is like unto
the end of a pyller: Then for that take. parts of the number, and that will
be.905. the true contents of the number of inches in that Globe, and by this
order you may measure the contents of all Globes how big or small soever they
be. But now if you would know the contents of the superficial, that is to say,
what number of inches would cover the Globe or Bullet: then you must do thus:
multiply the Circumference with the Diameter, and that number shall be the
contents of the ^^n^yden^ the Globe or Bullet. etc.

And furthermore, ^o know the true contents of a Globe, how many inches it
does contain, this is the easyest may that may be devised.

Take the true Diameter of the Globe, and multiplye it cubitly, and then
multiply thathy 11. and then divide that by.21. and tha^ shall show unto you
the true contents of the number of inches in that Globe, as for ensample thus:
by the Globe before rehearsed of 12. inches in Diameter or height, and 12.
times 12 is.144. and then 12. times 144, makes 1728. and then that multyplyed
by 11. 19008
and then it makes 19991. and then that being divided by.21. and then there
will stand in the quantytye line 905. and 3. will remain over: So that you
may conclude that the Globe of 12. inches in height or Diameter, does contain
905. inches and 1. of.7. part of an ynche.

To measure the plain of a Circle.
And furthermore, to know the contents of a plain Circle how many inches or
feet that it does contain: then multyplye it by the Diameter squarely, and
then multiply it again by.11. and then divide that number by 14. and that shall
show unto you the true: contents of the platform of that Circle. Ensample by
a plain Circle of 12. foot broad or over, and to know how many feet that
it does contain: Then multyplye 12. times 12. and that makes 144. and then
multyply 144. by 11. and that makes.1584. and then divide 1584. by 14. and
then there will stand in the quantytie line 113. and 2. will remain over: so
that you may conclude, that the contents of that Circle that is 12. foot
broad, that the platform of that Circle does contain 113. foot, and 1/7.
part of a foot.

The syxt Chapter shows how for to build Shyps by proportion, that is to
say, if that you have one Ship for an ensample, if you would have an other as
big again, more or less: this Chapter does show unto you how you may do
it, keepinge that moulde and proportion in all points, that is to say, by
extractinge of the cubike root.
AND furthermore, I do think it convenient, for that I do know that many
that are Naupegers or Ship carpenters, have not the exact knowledge in these
causes, that is to say, that when they have builded any Ship or Boat, and
the tonnage then known unto them, Of the bending of Sh^ps.
if that you would have an other Ship or Boat of that mould and of that
proportion in all points, to be double that tonnage or burden that the other
is: I do know that there is but few Naupegers or Ship carpenters that can do
it: for that they d^ look for the ^^st part of them the extractions of
C^thicke roots for otherwise it is not possible for it to be done: for no man
may keep just proportion in all points without the extracting of Cubes, they
may well keep the tonnage or but then, but not the proportion and moulde in
all points. For according as it is before declared, by the measuringe of Cubes
or Globes or any massy bodies, if that they should double the measure, then it
were 8. times so big.

Therefore whenever that you have builded any ship or Boat, or any other
craft, whatsoever it be, How to alter the bigness of a ship and ^e^ to keep
the proportion mould, and fashion.
then if that you would have an other of that self some moulde in all points,
and would have the other as big again, or twice or thrice so big again,
or half so big again, or any other quantity more or less, then shall you do
thus.

First for the length of the Reele, you shall multiply it cubitely, and then in
like manner every beam: the mydshippe beam and all the rest of the Beams, to
multiply them cubitelye, and also the rackinge of the Ship both the Stem and
the Stern post, to multiply the^ cubitely, and also the principal tymbers
that does moulde the Ship, to multiplye them cubitely, and also the depth that
the Ship is in hold, to multyplye it cubitely, and so consequentlye every
place or places with the Ship that does lead any work, to multyply it
cubitely.

Then that being done, if that you would have the other Ship or Boat as big
again, then double that number that you have before multiplied: Then
extractinge the Cubite root thereof, then according unto the number make your
Reele, your timbers, your Beams, and so consequently all the rest of your
things, according unto the Cubite root so extracted, and that being done,
you shall make her of that moulde and proportion, and of double burden,
without any fail, otherwise it is not to be done.

And furthermore, if that you would have one thrice so big, then 3. foulde
your number, and so forth: then if that you would have her but half so
great, then take half the number so multyplyed, and the Cubite root so
extracted, shall make a Ship or Boat, but half the burden: and thus you may
make a Ship or Boat of what proportion so ever you lyst^, and also to be of
that self same moulde that the other was.

Provided also, for the squarenesse of your Beams, and your Tymbers, and also
the thyckenesse of the Planke, that you do observe this order before
mentioned, or else in otherwise doing, you man put more Timber or less Timber,
then the proportion of the burden does come unto, and so by that means you
may commy^te error. As for Ensample thus briefly.

By a ship that was.44. foot long by the Reele, and.20. foot broad upon
the mydshippe beam, and did rack it with the stem forwards 13. foot, and
the Stern post did rack 7. An ensample of the altering of the burden of a
ship, and to keep the moulde and proportion.
foot offwardes, and the ship was 9. foot deep in hold. Now this ship
was.100. tonnes, my desire is to have a ship of that self same moulde, in
all points, to be of just double burden, that is.200. tu^nes. Then first
multiply the length of the keele cubitely, and that is 44. foot: therefore
multiplye.44 times.44. and that makes 1936. and then again by 44. that
makes.85184. so it is multiplied cubietly. Now double the number, and that
makes 170368. and now extract the cubite root, and that will be 55. foot
and.3993.9075. part, which makes in inches.5. and.. parts of an ynche, so
that you may conclude, that the ship must be.55. foot, and.5. inches, and
near.32. quarters in length by the keele. And now for the breadth of the
beam, and that is 20. foot, and.20. times.20. is.400. and that multiplied
by.20. makes.8000. and this double is.16000. then extract the cubite root,
and that is.25. and.375.1875. and that makes in inches 2. and.. parts of an
ynche, so that you may conclude that the ship must be.25. foot and.2. inches,
and near a half ynche upon the beam, for the breadth of the ship. And now
for the racking of the Stem, that is.13. times.13. and that comes to.169. and
now cubitely, and that makes 2197. Now this number double, makes.4394. Now
extracting the cubite root it will be.16. and.298.768. and that comes unto.4
inches and 4/7. parts: so that you may conclude, that the ship must rack
forwards with the Stem.16. foot, and.4. inches and near. parts. And now for
the stern post, and that is.7. foot, therefore.7. times.7. is.49. and that
multiplied again by 7. and that makes.343. then it being double.686. then
extract the cubite root, and that is.8. and 174.1.92. and that comes
unto.10. inches, and.7.8. part, so that you may conclude that the ship must
rack with the stern post 8. foot and.10. inches, and.7.8. parts of an
ynche. And now for the depth in the whole, that being 9. foot, 9. times.9.
is.81. and that multiplied cubitely, makes 729. and that being doubled, then
it is.1458. and then the cubite ^oote being extracted, is.11. foot and 127. of
363. part, and that comes unto in inches.4. and 4. of 5. parts, so that you
may conclude that the ship must be in deepenesse in hold, 11. foot and 4.
inches, and 4. of 5. parts of an ynche just. And now the ship of 100.
tonnes, did draw 12. foot, when that she was Laden. Wherefore you must keep
a proportion, in all the parts of the work, as is before declared unto you:
then shall the ship of 200. tonnes, draw or go into the water by this
aforesaid means, 15. foot, and one ynche and a half: and by this means
which is the extracting of the cubicke root, you may make a ship or boat or
any other craft, of what burden soever you ^yst^* and to keep that ^^ulde
and proportion that the other was made of, in all points. And by this means
and order, you may know the quantity of any manner of Caske, and to make it by
proportion how bygge or little soever you will have it.

The seventh Chapter does show in like manner the making of ships by
proportion, saving that the cubike root is extracted already with an easy way
how to make them, of what tonnage or burden, you list, and of that moulde
and proportion in all points.
ANd now for that I do know the most part of men cannot extract the cubike
root, for that kind of Arithmeticke is very hard, and not easy too be
learned, therefore I mean to make a little easy note* for that they shall not
altogether leese their time, in readyng of this, but that they shall have some
help for the doubling of cubes, although it be nothing in the respect of them
that have the use of the second part of Arithmeticks, as the extracting of
roots and cubes, and cubike numbers. etc.

F^rst thus: if so be that you have a cube or globe, and would have an other
as bygge again, or but one quarter more, Of Cubes.
then put the side of the cube, that you have for ensample, into 4. equal
parts, and if that you would have that one quarter bygger, then make the
bigger cube of 4. of those parts and 1. of 3. To make a cube a quarter bigger.
part, and then have you your desire. And if that you would have it half so
bygge more, still putting the side of that Cube that you have for ensample,
into 4. equal parts, then make the side of the other cube of 4. of those
parts, and 2. 3. parts more, and that shall make an other cube as bygge, and
half so bygge again, as the other.

And furthermore, To double a Cube or globe.
if that you would have a Cube to be two times the bigness of the Cube that
you have for ensample, that is double measure, then put your Cube into 4.
equal parts, and make the other Cube of 5. of those parts, and 1 of 25.
parts more, and that shall make a Cubbes big again: To make a Cube 3. times
so big.
and to have a Cube three times so bygge, then make the Cube of 5. of those
parts, and 8. of 9. parts more, and that shall make a Cube.3. times so big.

And furthermore, for to have a Cube 4. times so bygge, then make the Cube of
6. of those parts and 5. of 14. parts. And furthermore, to make a Cube 5.
times so bygge, then make the Cube of 6. of those parts and 6. of 7. parts
more: If a Cube or Globe be double measure, the^ that is 8. times ^o big.
then to make a cube 6. times so big, then make the cube of 7. of those parts
and 1. of 6. part more, and if you would have a cube 7. times so bygge, the^
make that cube of 7. of those parts, 13. of 18. parts more: the^ if you would
have a cube.8. times so big, then double the measure, and that is just 8.
times so bygge without any fail, as before it is declared, the one being 4. and
the other being.8. then your measure is doubled. Now this short note or
remembrance, you may according unto the Chapter going before, you having a
ship or boat that you would have an other of that moulde and proportion in
all points, and would have her as bygge again, more or less, you may do^ it
by this ^o^e before written: as thus: if you would have her as byg again, Then
put the length of the Keele of the ship that you would have an other made
by, and to keep that moulde and proportion in all points, into.4. equal
parts, and then make the bygger of 5. of those parts, and.1.25. how large or
short soever that it be, and do this also by every beam and every principal
Timber: and every other thing that leads any work, and you shall not fail
of the truth, for so much as this does show, which is nothing in the
comparison of them that can extract the cubite root, it makes not matter how
bygge or small soever the proportion is. And this note is but till the root is
increased to.8. times his bygnesse, and so much as this does show, you shall
find it reasonable exact enough.

And yet furthermore, this is an easier way to build any ship or boat by
proportion. An easy way to make ships by proportion.
And first this: if you do mean to be one quarter bygger, that is to say, if
that you would have a ship of 4. score tonnes, and (...) have an other.100.
tonnes: then for every 12. foot or inches, that the ship that you have for
an ensample, is, in length, breadth, and deepenesse, and so consequently every
part that leads any work, make the bygger of 13. foot or inches, and you
shall have your desire.

And f^rther, if that you would have her half so big more, that is to say,
your ship that you have for ensample, being.80. tonnes, and to have the other
120. tonnes, then for every 6. foot or inches, make the other of 7. foot or
inches. And furthermore if that you would have her full as bygge again: then
shall that be for every 50. inches, make the bygger 63. inches, and then that
Ship shall be of.160. tons, that is, double burden. And then to be three
times so bygge, then for every.36. inches, make the bygger of.53. inches. And
then if that the lesser ship be.80. tonnes, the bygger shall be 240. tonnes:
and if that you would be 4. times so bygge: then for every 56. inches, make
the bygger of 89. inches, and then have you your desire, the one being 80.
tonnes, the other shall be 320. tonnes.

And further, if that you would have be 5. times so big, then for every 7.
foot or inches make the bigger of 12. foot or inches, and then the one being
80. tonnes, the other shall be 400. tonnes, and if that you would have the
bygger to be.6. times so bygge, then for every.24. inches make the bygger
of.43. inches, and then the one being.80. tons, the other shall be 480. tons,
and then to be.7. times so big, for every.72. inches, make the bigger.139.
inches: and then the bigger ship shall be, 7. times so big: the lesser
being.80. tons, the bygger shall be.560. tons: and then as before is declared,
if that the measure be double, then the bigger is.8. times so bygge: that
is.640. tonnes.

The eight Chapter shows how much that one rope is bigger then an other:
and if that you have a rope of any syse, then you may know how to have
another of what syse you list: and also if that you do know the weight of one
rope: you may know the weight of any rope by proportion.
YEt furthermore, I do think it convenient for diverse considerations, for
that I do do know that there is but very few Sea men, that has the use of the
extracting of the square root: and without that they cannot know how for to
fit a ship with ropes, but that they must of force, many times put too bygge
or too small a rope in diverse places, not meet for that rome, How to a^^e^ the
bigness of ropes and how to double the syse
until they do see it by common experience, and afterward amend it.
Wherefore I will make a little brief note, for the doubling of ropes by
proportion. And first by a rope of.3. inches compass: and to have another as
big again, some will hold an opinion, that it must be.6. inches compass, but
then it is 4. times so big: therefore to have it as big again, it must be
in compass.4. inches, and 1. of 4. parts, and then to have a rope of.3. times
so big as the rope of.3. inches compass, then that rope must be of 5.
inches, and.1. of 5. part, in co^pas: then to be 4. times so big, then that
must be double measure: that is 6. inches compass. Then too have a rope.5.
times so bygge: then that must be in compass.6. inches and.3. of.4. part of
an ynche: then to be 6. times so big, then it must be in compass.7. inches
and.5. of 14. part: and then.7. times so big to be in compass.8. inches,
lacking 1. of.16. part* then to be 8. times so big, to be in compass.8.
inches.1. of 2. part: then.9. times so big, to be in compass, just 9.
inches: then being 10. times so big: then it must be in compass.9. inches,
and 9. of 20. part: then 11. times so bygge, to be in copmasse.9. inches, and
9. of 11. parts: and then to be 12. times so big, to be in compass 10.
inches 2. of 5. parts: then.13. times so big, to be in compass.10. inches:
and 17. of 20. part: then to be 14. times so big, as the rope of.3. inches
compass: therefore that must be 11. inches, and 5. of 22. parts in compass:
then to be 15. times so big, then to be in compass 11. inches, and 7. of 11.
parts: then 16. times so big, in compass just 12. inches. And then to be 17.
times so big, the^ to be in compass.12. inches, and 3. of 8. parts: the^ to be
18. times so big, then it will be in compass 12. inches, 9. of 12. part: and 19.
times so big, then it will be in compass 13. inches, and 1. of 13. Then being.20.
times so big, the^ it will be in compass 13. inches 11. of 26. part: and then to
be.21. times so big, it must be in compass.13. inches 10. of 13. parts. Then
to be 22. times so big: then it will be in compass 14. inches and.1. of.14.
parts: then to be.23. times so big, it wylbe in compass 14. inches, and 11.
of 28. part: then too be.24. times so bygge, it will be in compass 14. inches,
and.10. of 14. parts: then 25. times so bygge, too be in compass just 15.
inches: and then too be 26. times so bygge: then it will be in compass 15.
inches, and 3. of 10. parts and then to be 27. times so bygge, it will be in
compass 15. inches, 3. of 5. parts: and then too be 28. times so big, that
wylbee in compass 15. inches, and 9. of 10. parts: then 29. times so bygge
too be in compass 16. inches, and 5. of 32. parts. Then too be 30. times so
bygge to be in compass 16. inches, and 7. of 16. part: and then to be 31.
times so bygge, to be in compass 16. inches, and 23. of 32. part: then to be
32. times so bygge, must be in compass 17 inches, lacking 1. of 34. part: and
then to be 33. times so big, that will be in compass 17. inches, and 4. of 17.
part: and then to be 34. times so big, it will be in compass 17. inches, and
1. of 2. part: and then to be 35 times so big, that will be in compass 17.
inches, and 13. of.17. part: and then to be 36. times so bygge, it will be in
compass just. 18. inches. And then to be 37. times so big, then too be in
compass 18. inches, and 1. of 4 part: then 38. times so big, to be in compass
18. inches, and 1. of 2. part, and then to be 39. times so bygge, it wylbe in
compass 18. inches, and 3. of 4. part: then to be 40. times so big, it will be
in compass 19. inches, lacking 1. of 38. part. And now by this little note, you
may know how big or small that one rope is by another, so that the ropes be
all of one kind of stuff, and also of like hardenes in the woorekmanshippe,
or laying.

And yet furthermore, I do think it convenient, for to compare one rope by
another, of the bigger sort: Of doubling of the bigness of of ropes.
for that which goes before, they be all compared but unto one rope of 3.
inches compass. And first by a rope of 6. inches compass: and to have another as
big again, that must be in compass 8. inches, and 1. of 2. part: and to have
a rope 3. times so big as that of.6. inches compass, that must be in compass
10. inches, and 2. of 5 parts: and then to be 4. times so bygge, as before is
declared, that must be double measure 12. inches compass. And you have another,
of 7. inches compass, and would have another as bygge again, it must be in
compass, 9 inches, and 17. of 18 parts: and to have another 3. times so bygge,
must be in compass.12. inches, and 1. of 8. part: and 4 times so bygge, is 14.
inches compass: then you having a rope or cable of 8. inches co^pas, and would
have another, as bygge again, then that must be in compass.11. inches, and 7.
of 22. parts: and to be 3. times so big, that must be in compass 13. inches,
and 23. of 26. parts: and 4. times so big, double measure, that is 16. inches.

And then you having a rope or cable of 9. inches compass, and too have an
other cable as bygge again, must be in compass 12. inches, 3. of 4. parts: and
then to be 3. times so bygge, must be in compass.15. inches, and 3. of 5.
parts: and then to be.4. times so big, that is double measure.18. inches.
Now you having a cable of.10. inches, and would have another, as bygge
again, that must be in compass.14. inches, and.1. of 7. part: and to be.3.
times so bygge, must be in compass.17. inches, and.11. of.34. parts: and to
be.4. times so bygge, to be.20. inches. Now you having a cable of.11. inches,
and to have another as bygge again, that must be.15. inches, and.17. of 30.
parts: and to be 3. times so big, must be in compass.19. inches, and 1.
of.19. part. Then to be 4. times so bygge, to be double measure, that is, 22.
inches. Then you having a cable of.12. inches compass. And to have another as
bygge again, that must be in compass 17. inches, lacking.1. of 33. parts: and
to be.3. times so bygge, must be.20. inches, and.4. of 5. parts: and to be.4.
times so bygge double measure, that is, 24 inches in compass, and then
furthermore, if that you have a cable of.13. inches, and would have another as
bygge again, then that must be in compass.18. inches, and 7. of 18. parts,
and to be.3. times so big, must be in compass 22. inches, 23. of.44.
parts: and then you having a cable of.14. inches, and would have another as
bygge again, then shall that be in compass.19. inches, and 31. of.38. parts.
The^ you having a cable of.15. inches compass, and to have an other, as big
again, then shall that cable be in compass.21. inches, and 3. of 14. parts.
Now I do think this sufficient yenough, for to know the proportion of ropes,
the one by the other, and also by this little note they may fit any ship
with a maste, dooyng, even as you do by the proportion of ropes, in all
points: for if that you should double the measure of any maste, that Mast
shall be.4. times the bigness of the other, so that by the order of the
proportion of ropes or cables, they may know the proportion of the mastes
without any fail.

And furthermore, I do think it convenient to show unto you, how to double
any rope or Mast: and that you shall do thus: How to double any rope or mast,
by extractio^ of the square root.
Take the Compass of that rope that you have for ensample, and that being
known: then multiplye that number in it self: then that being done, look
what quantitye you would have the other bigger: then increase that number unto
that bigness, then extract the square root thereof, and that rope shall be in
compass your desired purpose. As for ensample thus, by a rope of 5 inches
compass, and I would have an other rope as big again, and you must do that in
this manner. First multyplye that rope in it self number, that is to say, 5.
times 5. and that makes 25: then double that number, and then that is double
50. and then the square root of.50. is 7. and 1. of 14. so that you may
conclude that the rope of 7. inches compass, and 1. of 14. part, is as big
again as that rope of.5. inches compass: and by this order you may double
any rope as often as you list.

And now furthermore, in like manner, Ensample
if that you do know the weight of the fadome of one rope, you may easily
know the wayght of a fadome of an other rope, how big or small soever that
it be, as thus: double the proportion of the 2. ropes, and multiply them as you
do in fractions: suppose it as thus. I have a cable of 13. inches compass,
and that waigheth 16. pound every fadome: Now what shall a fadome of that
cable, waigh^ both of one kind of that stuff, that is 16. inches compass?
First multiplye.10. times 10. and that is 100. and then multyplye.16. times
16. and that makes 256. and then multiplye the number of the bigger rope by
the weight of the lesser, that is to say.256. times 16. and that makes 4096.
and now divide this number by the number of the lesser rope, and that is 100.
and then there will stand in the quantytie Line 40. and 96. will remain over:
so that you may see the cable of 16. inches compass, that a fado^e thereof does
weigh near 41. pound, and by this order you may know the weight of any rope
or cable, and if that you would know the weight of a lesser rope; you knowing
the weight of his bigger, then multyply as before is said, and then shall you
multiplye the weight of the bigger with the number of the lesser, and then
deuid^ that su^me by the number of the bigger, and so shall you know how many
pound that a fadome of the lesser rope waieth. As for Ensample thus, by the
cable before mentioned, of 10. inches compass, and a fadome did weigh.16. pound,
what shall a fadome of a rope of 8. inches in compass weigh: Now as before is
declared.10. times.10. is.100. and.8. times.8. is 64. therefore multiplye 64.
by 16. and that makes 1024. and then divide that by 100. and then there will
stand in the quantitye Line 10. and 24. will remain over: so that you may
conclude that the rope of 8, inches, that every fadome does way 10. pound and
near a quarter, and this is true without any fail, and by this order you may
know the weight of all manner of ropes. etc.

The ninthe Chapter is as touching the mould of Ships, to have good qualities.
ANd furthermore, in as much as I have showed how for ^o double or alter the
tonnage or the burden of Ships too what bigness you list at your
discretion, and also to keep that moulde and proportion in all points:
therefore I do think it necessary and convenient to say somewhat in this
point, that is to say, what manner of form or fashion that the mould of a Ship
should be, that should go or fail well, and to have good qualyties in the
Sea. And although that it is possible that some will think that I do meddle
with those matters that I have no skyl in for that I am neither Naupager or
ship carpe^ter, neither usual Sea man: therefore it is posible tha^ I may be
dislyked, for that I do meddle in this matter or causes. Yet not with standing
you that do read this, use not to condemn any thing before that you have
perused it well: and so wayinge it in a pair of indifferent balances, that
affection does not lead you, it is possible that it is not altogether untrue,
but that there is some matter in it that is good to be considered of in the
buildinge or the making of ships: and those matters that you do know by
experience to be untrue, the^ you need not make any account thereof. etc.

And first thus, Of Ships that sail well with the wiend.
as concerning the making of the moulde of any ships, this is to be noted, that
those ships that are of easy draft, that is to say, not to go to deep in the
Sea or water, and will bear a good sail, and does stere well, that is to say,
that it will feel the Ruther as soon as the Helm or Tyller is put to or fro,
and those ships do go or sail well beeringe or before the wind, that is to
say, the wind to be large or to come right after them, all those ships do
sail well and close by the wind, that is to say, the Bowline to be haled
hard or close, and the ship to stand or come as near the wind as may be:
those Ships must draw a reasonable draft of water: and also to be a
reasonable good length, and these ships will go well a head the sea, Of Ships
that sail well by the Bowlyne to be hard pulled or also to sail well a head
the Sea.
that is to say, the Ship to stand close by the wind in such places as the
grating of the tide does cause the sea to come against the head or bows of the
Ship. Then those ships that have a reasonable length and well brested or bowed,
and not the buttockes or stern of the ship to be to big or to full quartered
behind, but to be reasonable lancke at the Stern, those ships do go or
sail well a head the Sea, so that they will bear a good sail, Of ships that
ride well or ill at ancor.
and not over held, that is to say, not to go to much on the one side, but
if that any ship be too fat buttocked or broad behind at the stern, and the
bows or breast of the ship before be to slender or narrow, those Ships will
never go or sail well a hedde the sea, but will fall or beat into the sea,
that it will let or hinder the way or going of the Ship. And also those
Ships will ride very ill at rode or ancor in the Sea, for that the broadnesse
of the buttockes of the Ship does so thruste down the head of the Ship
into the Sea, and especially if that the bows of the Ship he to narrow or
slender, that the Sea shall fly into the ship or quite over her, as well at an
ancor or sailing, or going a hedde the sea: which is a very ill property in a
ship in a number of causes. And all those ships that does draw or go a good
deepenes into the water; as before is said, do sail well by the wind, and
also will ly a hold well in the sea, that is to say, the ship having no sail
abroad, will not seele in roll so much, neither in like manner it will not go so
much unto lewards, that is to say, that the wind nor the sea shall not drive it
so fast back again, as it will do a Ship that does draw or go but a little
way into the Water: and also those Ships that do draw but a little water,
be very ill in two causes, if that they do lie a hold in the sea, that is to
say, to have no sail abroad, for they will seel or roll in such sort that
it will put al in danger, besides the driuinge to lewardes with the sea and
wind. Therefore these Ships must have always sails abroad, if they be loose
at the sea, and also those kind of Shyps will ride ill at an ancker, at such
time as the tide does go unto the wyndewardes, for lying thwart, it will seel
or roll so much. But the wind and tide to be al one, that the Ships head to
be right upon the Sea, and as before is said, the Ship well bowed, and the
Stern not to full quartered, then it will ride very well at an anchor at that
time. etc.

Of Ships that ^ere well and do hear a good Sail.
And now furthermore, as touching the building or making of Ships for to stere
well, and also to bear a good sail, which is two of the best qualyties that
is or may be in a Ship: and except that it be a very chance those Ships do
always sail very well, if that the moulde of them be any thing well ordered in
the form thereof. etc. And although that the moulde of a Ship be never so
finely made, and if it do not stere well, then it can never sail well. And
also if the mould of the Ship be never so well made, and if it will bear no
sail but over heeld, that is to say, to lay down the side in the water, then
it can never go well, how fine so ever the moulde is, for it is ill shapen to
go, when all the one side is down in the water, and the other side all out of
the water, and then it cannot abide the force of the wind to drive it: whereas
the Ship that is able to bear a good sail, must needs go well, for that the
force of the wind must needs draw it, for that it is able to bear sail, and
then the wind must needs force it to go. etc. And first thus, as touching
the cause that any Ship does stere well, is this: that the quick water of the
way of the Ship does come unto the Ruther being put either the one way or the
other way, that must needs, cause the Ship to cast or turn accordingly and
the faster that the ship goes, the nimbler or quicker the ship steereth or
turne^h.

Therefore when soever that they do build or make any Ships, then it is
good for to let them make the moulde of a Ship to have a sufficient tucke
or run, which tucke or run must be in length the third part of the
length of the Reele, and in height, by the stearne post, three quarters of that
depth that the Ship goes into the Water, A thing to be noted.
and so to grow narrower and narrower forwards: for it is the sufficientnesse
of the tucke or run that makes a Ship to stere well. For if that be not
well made, then it requires to have the brother Ruther, and that is evil in
two respects: the one is this: the Helm being put over, and if that the
Ship will not feel the Ruther quicklye, then the Ruther lies cross the
Stearne of the Ship: and the Ruther being broad, then it must needs hinder
or let the going or way of the Ship very much: Whereas a Ship that
has but a narrow Ruther, and yet is yare or quick of sterrage, then the
Ruther cannot hinder the going or way of the Ship: etc.

And also it is evil in an other respect to have a broad Ruther, and that is
this: for a Ship being at Sea in foul weather, a broad Ruther the Sea does
beat it one way and an other way, by the means of the laboring of the Ship
to and fro, that it is apt to break the tyller or the head of the Ruther and
Ruther Irons: and besides that, it is uneasy for the Ship in like manner.
etc.

And thus I do omit the rest of the proportion of the moulde of the Ship
unto the discretion of the Naupeger or Ship Carpenter, as touching the fore
way and the flowringe of the Ship, and the leadyng of all the rest of the
work etc. The cause that a Ship does bear a good sail.
And furthermore, as touching this point to cause a Ship to have a stiff
side to bear a good sail, then this must be considered in the buildinge or
making thereof: and first thus: that commonly those Ships that have a
sufficient breadth according unto their biggnesse and length, will bear a
reasonable good sail, for that the breadth does bear it up.

But commonly those be not the best, and fynest Sailors, neither are they of
the best qualities, in diverse respects. Yet notwithstanding, in my opinion,
this is the principallest point to observe in the building of ships, to have
them to bear a good sail, and that is this, for to lay the breadth of the
Ship above the water, a foot, or a foot and a half, more or less,
according unto the bigness of the ship, and to hang well of, that is to say,
to be 4. or 6. inches on a side brother then it is just at the edge of the
water, and to be more or less, according unto the bigness of the Ship: and
then vpwardes the work may be housed inwardes, that is too say, narrower and
narrower vpwardes, which will do well, both for the ease of the Ship in the
Sea, and less charge of Timber bathe in wayght, and otherwise: and in so
doing, the Ship will bear a good Sail, what length so ever it have, how
fine so ever the mould is, so that it have quarters proportionally unto it.
etc.

And the cause thereof is this: the breadth of the Ship being above the water
in such sort, as if the Ship come unto heelding, that the same brother place
does come into the water: then the Nadry or Reele of the ship, does grow
the further of, by the means of the hanging ofwardes of the side or work of
the Ship.

And for that the ballast or the lading of the Ship, the waightiest part
lies downewardes toward the Reele, therefore it makes the ship the lother
to held a tosyde, for that the side hangs outwardes, and then the water does
supporte it up, for that the bigger or brother part is out of the water, as the
reason thereof more playnelye shall appear in the fourth Book of the
property of Water in weight, called Statick, wherein you shall see the reason
thereof more manifestly etc. Whereas those Ships that have an upright side,
must needs held much the sooner, for that the Water does not supporte the
side, not until it do held very much.

Wherefore thus much I have said as touching the moulde of Ships, as
concerning their qualyties, as thus: Note
a Ship that has Tucke or Run enough, will steare well: a Ship that does
hang well of on the nail above the water, will bear a good sail: a Ship
that does draw a reasonable good drafte of Water, and well wayed forwards,
will sail well by the wind: and being well bowed and not to fat buttocked,
will go well a head the sea, and also ride well at rode, and also will hold
well at the Sea loose. and floty Ships that s^eere well and will bear a good
sail, will sail well, the ^ynde being large. etc. And thus I do end this
third Book. etc.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters of the third book, called a
rteasure for Trauailers.
The first Chapter of the third Book, shows you how to cast the contents
of land by Arithmeticke, and also by the husband man's rule, which is by the
accounte of money. etc.

The second Chapter shows how to measure board and Glass, and too cast the
contents thereof, with other necessary things belonging thereunto.

The third Chapter does show how for too measure Timber, and to bring it
too a square, as well without Artihmetike as otherwise, and also how for too
know the true contents of any piece of Timber.

The fourth Chapter shows how for to measure all manner of bodies, as
Timber, or stone, Cubes, or Globes: and too know what proportion of measure or
weight the one has unto the other.

The fyfthe Chapter shows how for to measure Globes, and to know their
contents in inches or feet.

The syxt Chapter shows how for too build Ships by proportion, that is to
say, if that you have one Ship for an ensample, if you would have an other
as big again, more or less this Chapter does show unto you how you may
do it, keeping that moulde and proportion in all points, that is too say, by
extractynge of the Cubicke root.

The seventh Chapter does show in like manner the making of ships by
proportion, saving that the Cubike root is extracted already: with an easy
way how to make them of what tonnage or burden you list. and of that moulde
and proportion in all points.

The eight Chapter shows how much that one rope is bigger then another: and
if that you have a rope of any syse, that you may know how for to have
another, of what syse that you list, and also if that you do know the weight
of one rope, you may know the weight of any rope by proportion. etc.

The nynth Chapter is, as touching the moulde of Ships, to have good
qualities.

FINIS.
The fourth Book of the treasure for trauaylers.
Wherein is touched the art of Staticke or weight, showing unto you how you
may know the weight of any Ship that swymmeth upon the water, with all her
ladyng, and all the rest of her furniture. And also how you may know the weight
of any metal that is sunk in the water, to know what it wayeth in the water,
and also how you may measure any strange form, such as Geometry cannot give
you any order for the measuring thereof, and also how for too lift or way any
thing sin^^e into the water, with other necessary matters belonging thereunto,
very necessary for all land men, and seam^n. etc.

Written by William Bourne.

To the Reader of this fourth Book.
GEntle Readers, it is possible that you will maruayle, that I should take
upon me too deal in these causes, that is to say, to teach any new Art,
and Science, that has not been as hytheretoo, written in any language or
tongue, the which Art or Science, called Staticke, does show the heaviness
or lightness of any thing.

Wherefore there is contained in this fourth Book, how too know the weight
of any thing swimming in the water, as the weight of any ship, with all her
lodyng, and all her furniture: as Ordinance, Ankers, Cabels, Mastes, Sails,
with all other Implementes in them, and also it does show the weight of any
thing sunk into the water, what it wayeth, to be lifted from the bottom, till
the appearing of it above the superficies of the water: with diverse other
necessary matters that are contained in this fourth Book, and not before this
time mentioned by any other, but only by that famous and learned man Master
John Dee, who has made mention thereof in his Mathematical preface, wherein I
have had my principal instructions, as touching that Art or Science.

Wherefore Gentle Reader, bear with my rudeness, that I being utterly
unlearned, should enterprise too take upon me too be so bold, too give the
first attempt, to imploye that Art or Science unto any purpose: for I do know
the nature of most people, is to dislyke al things that are not done by them
selves, whether it be good or evil: and as I have known many times by
experience, that those persons that have learned any thing at any man's hand,
when he does understand it, then he will not be known where he learned it,
but that he knew that before or ever he showed it unto him, which is a manifest
robbery of any man, to learn any thing at any man's hand, and then afterward
to deny it, and to say, that he knew it before he told it him: as I do know
a number of persons, that when they are ignorant in matters, then they will use
diligence till they have atteyned it, and then when they have a little
instructions to serve their turns, then they will seem too be very cunnyng,
and that they never learned any thing at any man's hand, which is a great
point of ingratitude, too offer that person that he has learned of, such a
great injury: but yet notwithstanding the earth is greatly infected, with such
manner of persons.

The fourth book, of the treasure for trauailers.
The first Chapter of the fourth Book, shows you by the proportion of a Ship
swimming in the water, for to know the true weight of any Ship, with all her
tackle, ordinance, and lading. etc.
FOR that I have said somewhat heretofore as touching the making of Ships by
proportion and otherwise: Therefore I do think it necessary and convenient to
treat partly of this, as touching the nature and qualytie of water, for the
sinkinge or swimming of things in it, and according unto the simple opinion of
the common people, Of things that do swymme.
who think that things in the water do swim or syncke, for that it is Wood,
Iron, or Stone: but the only cause of things that do swim, is this, that
it is lyghter then the proportion in quantity, then the water is. For this is
general for ever: Look how much of any Timber or any other thing that is
hid, or in lownes even with the water, as just of weight as of so much water,
as the true quantity of that part that is from the edge of the water
downewardes into the water neither heavier nor lighter, and then that part
that is above the water does show justly what diuersytie of weight is between
the water and the wood, or any other stuff that is put into the water. For
any thing swimming in the water, the half being above the water, and the other
half underneath the water, that thing that swimmeth in that form, is just
half the weight of so much water: and if in the swimming.3. quarters be buried
in the water, that thing is just 3. quarters of the weight of so much water,
and so forth, to any other proportion, and then adding so much in wait, to
make it of the just weight of the water: then that thing being in the water,
shall swim even with the edge of the water neither higher nor lower. But if
it be any thing heavier then the proportion of so much water, then it sinketh
unto the bottom: and then look how much in weight it is heuier the^ the
proportion of so much water: so much it waieth in the water the lighter, Of
things that synke.
as the weight of the water comes unto. For if any thing in the water, be
double the weight of the water, proportion for proportion, then shall that thing
weigh just half the quantytie of that weight, til it be lyfted from the bottom
unto the very edge of the water, and then if that the thing do weigh but
half the weight more then the quantity of so much water: then shall that
thing in the water to be waighed, weigh but one third part of his weight that
it would weigh, if that it were out of the water, and so forth to any other
weight or waightes, having proportion in bigness, according to the quantity
of the water, whether it be Brass, Stone, or Iron, or any other stuff what
soever it be. And also things that do swim, as wood, or any other stuff.
Wherefore this is to be noted by the way, the perfect weight of any ship with
all her ladyng, Ordinance, Mastes, Sails, and Tackle, with all other
implementes in her, may be easyly known by her only swimming, as thus:

Look what quantity of the Ship is buried in the water, that is to say, from
the edge of the water downwards: then if there were a vessel or great thing
made of the proportion of the moulde of a Ship, as much as is buried in the
water, if that were filled with that water that the ship were in, the water
should be of just equal weight, that the Ship were of, with all her tackle
and implements in her. And now this being true, as it is most certain, then
the weight of the water being known, any vessel or body is to be measured by
Geometrycall means. etc.

And furthermore, here is one special thing to be noted, and that is this, Al
water is not of like weight.
all waters are not of like weight, for the finest water is lightest: therefore
if that any Ship be in the lightest water, then does she swim the deeper,
according unto the weight of the Ship, and the weight of the water, quantity
for quantity, and in like manner any Ship being in the heavier water, then
shall not the Ship swim so deep, for that the water of his own force, will
lift the Ship out of the water, until there be that just quantity and
proportion, according unto the just wayght of the water and weight of the
Ship: for this is seen daily by common experyence, amongst Sea men and
maryners, that if you do lade any Ship in a fresh water or river very deep,
Salt water is the heauiest water.
then when she is in the Sea, and specially in the Occient Sea, that the
Ship shall be lifted up higher by.3. or.4. inches out of the water wards: And
then when the Ship is come again into a fresh water river, then she shall be
as low laden as she was before. Wherefore in the buildyng of Ships, the one of
the principal poynt^s is this, the flowring and quarteryng of them: for there
may.2. ships be made both of one length, and of one breadth, and of one
deepenesse in the water, and yet the one may be ^eare as big again as the
other, for if that the one be full quartered, and a broad flat flower, (as
the Hulks be commonly) it must needs be of a greater burden, then a sharp
Ship that has neither flower nor quarters, as commonly the Spanish building
is: for the water cannot bear it before it be deep yenough into the water:
therefore these kinds of Shyps draw very much water and be but of small
burden, for a sharp Ship must have very much ballast, or else she will
bear no sail: and especially if they be very high builded or larged above
the water. etc.

The second Chapter shows how for to measure the proportion of the mould of
any Ship, whereby is known the weight of any Ship with all her ladynge and
furniture.
FOR to know how to measure the proportion of the moulde of a Ship whereby
may be known her weight, with all her ladinge, it is somewhat tedious, and
asks long work, and must be precisely handeled, for that it keeps no
form long together: therefore it must be measured in many parts.

How to measure the mould of a Ship.
And for to measure the moulde of a Ship, the Ship must be brought a
ground, and then begin at the broadest place of the Ship in this manner:
First measure the breadthe of the Ship from outsyde unto outsyde, at that
very place of the upper edge that the Ship does swim in deepenesse into
the water: then that being known, measure the true deepenesse that the Ship
does swim into the water, at that place of the broadest part of the Ship:
then that being known, take the true contents of half the breadth of the
Ship, and then with a rod or pole lay the end of the rod or pole that is
just the length of half the breadth of the Ship, unto just the half Keele
in breadth at that place before spoken of, and then with an other rod or pole
of the just length that the Shppe does swim in deepenesse into the water,
lay the end of that rod or pole at that place that the upper edge of the
water does touch: and then let both the other ends of the two rods or poles
touch just together, and so will they make a square Angle: and then measuring or
trying between the Ship and the 2. rods or poles as you do in the
measuringe of superficial or plat forms, so shall you know the contents of
that part that is within the insyde of the Ship, by subtractynge or taking
away of that measure between the two rods or poles with the outsyde of the
Ship, for that you must consider that it is a square enclosed from the middle
of the insyde of the Ship, unto the deepenesse that the Ship does swim in
the water, and unto the two rods or poles, and has four square or right
Angles or corners: and then if that you do multyply it according unto the
breadth of the ship and the deepenesse that the Ship does go into the water,
as you would do if that it were a plat form: then pulling away the contents
of that same being doubled that the measure is between the Ship side, and
the two rods or poles, then that which does remain shall be the true
contents of that part which is within the insyde of the Ship as though it
were a plat form: and then look how many foot long it runs in that
form and proportion in breadth and roundenesse of the side: then according
unto the length multytiply the one by the other, that is to say, the contents
of the measure before taken of the insyde of the Ship, and the length that
the moulde does keep in one proportion, and then cast the conte^ts thereof. And
that being done, do as before is rehearsed, according unto the breadth of the
Ship in an other place: then according unto the deepenes that the Ship does
swim in the water, and then doing with the two rods or poles as before is
rehearsed, and so trying between the Shyps side, and the two rods or poles,
and casting the contents in all points as before is rehearsed: and thus you
must do in as many places and as often times as the proportion of the moulde
does alter: and then addyng them altogether, you must see how many foot that
the Shypp does contain, if it were all one whole piece of Timber, and not
hollow within.

And now this being done exactly as it may be done with precise diligence, you
knowing the true contents how many foot the soaled body of the moulde of the
Ship does contain as much as is buried into the water, you may know
iustlye the whole weight of that ship that you have so mesured, with all her
ladyng, ordinance, tackle, anchor, and cables, with all other implementes in her,
as thus: Take of that water that the ship swimmeth in, and make a cube of
metal or wood of just.12. inches square, and deep: for that 12. inches
square every way, makes a foot, and then weigh the water justly how many
pounds and part of a pound the water does contain in weight, and that shall
show you justly how many pound and parts of a pound every foot square of
the moulde of the Ship does weigh justly, and then if that you do multiply
the contents of the number of feet, that the moulde is, and the weight that
one foot of the water does weigh in pounds and parts, then according unto
that number, the Ship with all her ladyng, does weigh justly without any
fail: so that you have measured the moulde of the Ship truly, and also
waighed justly the contents of one foot of the water: and then by that number
you may say justly, it contains so many Tons in weight, as thus: by
diuidyng the number of the weight of the Ship by.2240. for that a Tun
conteyneth 20. hundredth weight, and every.100. weight, to contain 112. pounds.

And furthermore, you may measure the moulde of a Ship in this manner, with such
a thing as the Ship Carpenters do take the moulde of a Ship, and that they
do call a moulde, or lynck ginne, and that is made of many pieces, of a foot
long, or there about, and it is clenched together with roffe and clenche, that
the joining will be put to and fro at your pleasure, and will stand stiff as
you do leave it.

And now with this instrument, you may work more easily then before is
rehearsed: for to know the contents or quantity of the moulde of any Ship in
this manner: Take at every place the half of the true breadth of the ship, and
then in like manner the true deepenesse that the ship does go into the water,
at every place that you do measure the Ship at, for that all ships do draw
more water at the Stern, then they do at the head: and then you may put three
pinnes of wood into the ground, the one pin to be at the middle of the ship,
and the other to be for the outsyde of the ship, and the third to be for the
middle of the Keele of the Ship, and to set them truly in distaunce, according
unto the half breadth of the ship, and the other unto the true deepnesse
that tht ship does go into the water, and so shall that pin for the middle
of the Ship, make a square Angle unto the pin, for the side and the keele of
the ship, and then with the instrument lay that unto the side of the ship,
and put it in and out as the ship does round from the place of the upper edge
of the water unto the Keele, and then laying that moulde of the Ship unto the
two pinnes, that is to say, to that pin for the side, and the pin for the
Keele of the Ship: and then measuryng that in closer, as you do a platform,
the truth of the contents shall appear, and then doubling that number, it will
show you the conte^ts of the whole breadth of the Ship, and then to multiply so
much in length, as does keep one proportion: And thus doing as often times as
the proportion of the moulde does alter, and then addyng al your numbers
together, and casting the contents in all points, as before is rehearsed, the
truth of the solid body of the moulde of the Ship shall appear, and so taking
the true weight of one foot of that water, as before is expressed in all
points. And thus I do make an end of the measuryng of the moulde of Ships,
for that there wants or lacks nothing, but to show how to measure plat
forms, and as for those matters, there are diverse books extant, sufficient
enough for that purpose, as Master Leonarde Digges in his book called
Tectonicon, and Master Thomas Digges his book called Pantometria, with other.

The third Chapter shows you an easyer way then before rehearsed, by the
Art Saticall, to know the true weight of any Ship, with all her lading, and
all the rest of her furniture.
AND furthermore, for that it is somewhat tedious and asks long work,
beesydes diverse other incombraunces that must be used to measure the true
proportion of the moulde of a Ship, I will show unto you a more pleasaunter
and easyer way (by the Art Scaticall) both very true and exact, for to know
the true wayghte of any Ship, with all her ladynge, Mastes, Sails, Ancors,
Cables, and Ordinance, with all other implementes in her.

And any Noble manne, or Gentleman may do it at home in his Chamber, that has
any knowledge in the Mathematical Sciences, as thus:

An easyer way to know the weight of a Ship.
First cause the Carpenter that does build the Ship, or otherwise, if that
you desire to know it by any other Ship that is builded already, if that
Ship have any occasion for to come a ground: then get some cunninge
Carpenter to take the true moulde of that Ship, as though that he should
build an other of that moulde and proportion in all points, as much as is
buried into the water, when the Ship is load unto her lode mark, and that
being exactly done, then cause him for to make the true moulde and proportion,
then cause the Carpenter for to cut out of a piece of Timber the true
proportion of the moulde of the Ship in all points, as thus.

For every foot long, make the moulde in Timber in length, an ynche: and for
the breadth in like manner, for every foot make the other an ynche, and also
for every foot in deepenesse, that the Ship swymmeth into the water, make the
moulde in Timber one ynche, and so consequently every part and place both of
the roune, and way, and floor, with the quarters of the Ship, to cut the
moulde for every foot, and part of a foot, an ynch, with those parts, even
as the work or moulde of the Ship does run, in all points: and that
being exactly done, then let there be made in some kind of metal, as Lead
or Tynne, the true proportion of the moulde, hollow, and thight, that it may
hold water, as the moulde in wood will show or lead them how to do it
very truly: and then that being done, then cause an other square vessel too
be made of metal in Cubicke wise, such a one as you may measure the hollow
thereof as easilye as you may measure a square piece of Timber, and if that
there were lines or pricks at every ynche in deepenesse, it were all the
better.

And then this being done, then fill that vessel, that is made for the
moulde of the Ship, with that water that the Ship does swymme in, and that
being exactly filled, then put that water into the other vessel, and look
that there be none of the water shed, then you may know iustlye how many
inches square that the water is, by measuring the water with an ynche rule: and
that being known, then you do know how many foot that the solled body of
the moulde of the Ship does conteyne. And then waying instlye one foot
square every way of that water, and then you knowing how many pounds, and
parts of a pound, that one foot square of water does way, then multiplye
the number of feet of the Ship, with that you have found before, by pouring
the water into the square vessel: and then for every ynche, the Ship is a
foot, and so by that number multiplied by the number of the wayght of the
pounds, and parts of pounds, the true wayght of the Ship shall appear: and if
you do commit any error, the fault shall be in not waying, and measuring of
it truly.

The ensample of the knowing the weight of a ship.
And for your better understanding hereof, you shall have an ensample of that
matter before rehearsed, by a ship of.100. tonnes, and the length of the moulde
of the Ship, to be 50. foot long, and the broadest place of the moulde to
be.20. foot broad, and the deepenesse that the Ship goes into the water,
to be.12. foot: and I first caused the Carpenter to take the true moulde of
the Ship, and also to catte the moulde in wood, according unto the length,
breadth, and deepenesse, that is to say, for the.50. foot long, to be 50.
inches, and for the 20. foot broad, to be 20. inches: and for the 12. foot
deep, to be 12. inches, with all the other proportion of the moulde of the
Ship, to be one ynch for a foot: And that done, there was caused too be made
a moulde in Lead, agreeable in all points, to the moulde of the shp, as Lead,
will mark easily yenough: and then there was made the other vessel in Lead of
12. inches square, and.48. inches deep, and then the moulde for the Ship was
filled with water, and that being justly, and equally filled, the water was put
into the square vessel, and then the deepnes of the water was exactly
measured, and was found to be 42. inches in deepnes, and the^ for that the
vessel was 12. inches square, 12. times 12. is 144. and so many inches there is
at 1. ynche deep: and then for that it is.42. inches in deepenesse,
multiply.144. by.42. and that makes.6048. so that you may conclude, that the
moulde of the Ship, as much as is under the water, if that it were not hollow
within, that it would conteyne.6048. foot of Timber. And now suppose that
the water was of our water, here at Grauesende, and that is not of the lightest
sort, neither of the heauiest sort, and a foot square of that water wayeth.55.
pound, most commonly, although that it may waygh sometime less, and sometimes
more, it wayeth less, after much rain, and neape Tides: it wayeth more in
spring Tides at a full Sea, upon some cause of winds, but it alters no great
matter within a pound under or over. Wherefore multiply 6048. by.55. and that
makes.332640. so then you may conclude, that the ship waigheth.332640.
pound: And then as is declared in the Chapter going before, for to know how
many tonnes that the ship does waygh, divide that by.2240. and then there will
stand in the quantity line.148. and there will remain over.11209. so that you
may conclude, that the whole ship with all her ladyng, and al other furniture,
and implementes in her, does waygh.148. tonnes, and a half of a tonne. And by
this order, you may know the true wayght of any ship, how graat or small
soever that it be, or Boat, or any other thing that swymmeth.

And furthermore, you may know by this Art Statical, Another way to know the
weight of a ship, with all her furniture.
the true weight of any ship, without puttyng of water into the square
vessel, although that you do not know the contents, how many foot square
that there is in the Ship, as thus: the moulde of the Ship being taken, as
before is declared, and the proportion of the moulde, made in metal hollow,
as before is rehearsed.

And furthermore, you may make the moulde lesser then before is rehearsed, that
is to say, you may make the proportion of the moulde, for every foot that the
Ship is in length, breadth, and deepenesse, you may make it but half an
ynche, or but a quarter of an ynche, at your descretion: and then fylling that
with water, and then wayghyng the water truly, look how many times the
length of that moulde that is filled with water, is in the length of the
Ship, multiply the wayght of the water with that number Cubickely, and that
shall show unto you the true wayght of the Ship, with all her ladyng. As for
ensample by that ship, before rehearsed, that was.50. foot long, and, 20.
foot broad, and.12. foot in deepenesse.

And now I caused the moulde too be made for every foot, A ensample.
but a quarter of an ynche, so that for the.50. foot long, the mould was
made.12. inches, and a half: and for.20. foot broad, but 5. inches: and
for.12. foot deep, but.3. inches: and that being filled with water, the water
being wayghed, did conteyne in wayght 3. pound, and 2. of.73. parts of a
pound, and that is scante half an ounce, and the true contents of the wayght
of the water: and then for that you do see that the proportion of the length
of the moulde, is but twelve inches, and one of 2. part: that is, but the.48.
part of the length of the Ship: therefore multiply it in this manner 48. times
48. and that makes 2304. and then to multiply it by 48. again, and then it
makes 110592. wherefore now multiply.110592. by the wayght of the water, that
is too say 110592. times 3. and 2. of 73. parts: and that makes 334620. so
that you may conclude, that the Ship wayeth 334640. pounds.

And now to know how many tu^nes that the Ship does way, as before is
declared by deuyding that number by 2240. and so further, as before is
rehearsed. And furthermore, you may cause in the proportion of the mould of
Lead or Tynne, to be certain Parallel lines, to be made but a quarter of an
ynche asunder, as many as you list, and then you may know by those lines what
wayght that the Ship is of, when that she is not laden. And also if that you
list, you may know how many tons more in weight, will load the Ship, as
often times as you do know how many foot or inches the Ship does lack
of her load mark.

And yet furthermore, you may know, how for too know the wayght of any
Ship with all her loadyng, although that you have not made the hollow moulde
of the Ship, as thus: by that moulde that the Ship Carpenter has made,
Another ensample how to know the weight of any ship.
the wood being not so heavy as the water, then make certain holes in the
moulde metal, then at those holes, put in Lead, until such time as the moulde
is heavier then the water, and then stop the holes again, that no water may
go into them, and cut of that part that there is more then the moulde of
the Ship: and that done, then in some small thing or vessel put in water
unto some certain mark, and then put into that water, the moulde for that
Ship which you do desire for too know the weight of, and be sure that the
water does cover all the moulde: and then take out all that water very
precyselye, that is fed by that means of the moulde for the Ship, until such
time that the water be just in that heyght that it was before, that the
moulde was put in: and then waying that water truly, you dooyng as before is
rehearsed* to multiplye the length of the moulde of the Ship according as
before is declared, Cubickely, and then the wayght of that water that is hyghed
more then it was before that the moulde was put into the water, and the wayght
of that water being perfectly known too be multiplied by that Cubicke number,
shall show justly the true wayght of the Ship, as before is declared in all
points.

And by all these rules or order, you may know the just wayght of any thing
that sooymmeth in the water, saving that you must have consyderation, that any
moulde made of wood, when it is dry, does receive or drink up water, and
when it is wette, it swelled the bigger with the water.

The fourth Chapter shows by the Art Statical, the wayght of any metal or
stone, how much, or what wayght that it does wayghe in the water, to be
lyfted or waighed from the bottom, unto the brimme of the water.
Now for that I have said somewhat for too know the wayght of things
sooymmyng on the water, I think it convenient too treat partly by the Art
Statical, to know the weight of any thing that synketh into the water: and to
know truclye how much that it waygheth more then the wayght of the water,
proportion for proportion, whereby you may know what it waygheth justly, being
sunk into the water: and also you may know by this means, how for to
measure such things, whose form, whether that it be metal or stone, that
for the strangeness of the for me is not to be measured, as branches of
metal, or pillars that be inbowed or hollow in one place, and boyleth out in
another, or any such other strange form, which is to de done by that means,
that Archimedes found the deceit of the Kings crown of gold. And first for
to know the true wayght of any Metal that is suncke in the water, whether
that it be brass, iron, or stone, you knowing the wayght thereof before that it
was suncke: then make a cube, or any other square, of that kind of Metal that
you would know what it waygheth in the water, and waygh that Metal truly,
and that being known how many pounds, and parts that it waygheth, then take
of that water, that the Metal is sunken into: and then if you do make a
Cube, or any other square hollow, in form like unto the massy Cube or square,
neither bigger nor lesser, then that you have made in Metal, and waighed. And
then fyl that hollow cube with the water, and then waygh the water truly, and
that done, look what that water waygheth, pull that sum truly away from
the weight of the massy Cube or square, and that which does remain, shall be
the true weight that the massy Cube does waygh in the water: and so by that
Cube you may know the weight of the greater portion that is sunk, as thus:
The wayght of the sunken metal being known, look how many times the wayght
of the small Cube is in the greater quantity, that is sunk, so many times
multiplye the weight of the water in the hollow Cube, and that done, subtract
or take away so much in wayght from the sunken Metal, and that which does
remain, shall be the true wayght of the sunken Metal in the water to be
wayghed, till that it does begin to appear above the water: Or otherwise, you
may do it in this manner, by the small Cube, before rehearsed, being iusty
wayghed, and the wayght known unto you, take of that sort of water that the
Metal is sunk into, and put it into some vessel, fytte for your purpose:
and that done, then mark the edge of the water justly upon both the sides,
then put your massy Cube into the water, that it be covered with water, and
then take out, as much of the water as is risen above the marked places, and
then waygh that water truly.

And now the true weight of the water being known unto you, then as before is
rehearsed, subtract or take away the wayght of the water from the weight of
the cube in metal, and then that which does remain, shall be the true wayght
of the Cube in Metal, when it is sunk to the bottom of the water, and then
by the small is known, the wayght of the greater portion, as before is
declared, by knowing how many times, that the greater quantitye is more then
the lesser, and then multiplying the wayght of the water so many times as the
quantitye does show, and then subtracting or pullyng away that wayght, then
that which does remain, shall be the true wayght of the Metal in the water,
as for ensample thus:

By a piece of ordinance of brass, that is sunk, that is to be wayged out of
the water, and the wayght is known to be.7000. weight, for that it is a double
Cannon, that is sunk, and I do desire for to know the true wayght, what it
does waygh in the water.

Wherefore I do take another piece of that sort of Metal, that waygheth.100.
wayght, it makes no matter, what form that it has, so that it be of that
sort, or of that kind of Metal, for whereas I spoke of a Cube before, that
was to no other end, but to make the thing the more playner, as hereafter it
shall more plainly appear: and then take of that water, that the piece of
ordinance was sunk into, for that al waters are not of one wayght, and then
put that water intoo some convenient vessel, meet for your purpose, and then
mark the water very precisely, round about, even at the very edge of the the
water, and then put the piece of metal into the water, and then having some
convenient vessel already wayghed, and then take out, without any sheddyng of
the water, all that water that is above the place marked before, neither more,
nor less, nor higher, nor lower, and that being done truly, then take the
weight of the water, and by supposition, it is found to be.14. pound just,
and the brass, that is put into the water, being one hundredth weight, that
is.112. pound.

Therefore I do conclude, that the wayght of the water, is but the.8. part of
the wayght of the Brass or metal, so that I do conclude, that the piece of
Brass or metal does waygh in the water.7. of.8. parts of his own proper
wayght, that is, but.98. pound.

And now for to know the wayght of the sunken Rannon, do thus: Look how
many hundred wayght that you have in.7000 wayght, and that is.70. hundred
wayght. Wherefore multiply.14. by.70. and that comes unto.980. pounds, which
makes 800 wayght, and 3. of.4. part: And this sum being pulled away from
7000. weight, which is.7840. pounds, then there remains.6860. pounds, and
that is.6100. and.28. pounds in weight: and every.100. weight, to contain.112.
pound. Al thing in the water, is lighter then his own proper wa^ght by the
quantity of the water in weight that it occupies, and out of the water, it
waigheth his own proper weight.
And now by this order you may know the true weight of any sunken metal,
what it waygheth in the water, to be waighed from the ground, unto the
appearing of any part thereof above the superficial of the water: and then
too be wayghed above, out of the water, then it has his own natural wayght,
what kind of metal soever it be, as Silver, and Gold, Copper, Lead Tin,
Iron, Steel, or Stone, or whatsoever it be that synketh into the water, you
may know the true wayght of it, in the water, by the order before rehearsed,
by puttyng into that kind of water, any piece or lompe, what form soever it
has, it makes no matter, so that it be of that sort of Metal or stone,
being truly and exactlye wayghed, and then to take out so much of that water,
as by the means of that metal or stone is hyghed more then it was before the
puttyng in of the metal or stone: And that water truly waighed, and the
wayght thereof known unto you, then rebate that weight from the wayght of the
metal or stone truly, and then that which does remain, shall be the true
weight of the metal or stone, being sanke into the water. And by that means
you may know the true wayght of any great quantitye that is sunk into the
water, by knowing how many times the great quantitye is more then the lesser,
and then to multiply the weight of the water, so many times as the weight of
the greater is more then the lesser, and then that which does remain, shall
be the true weight of the greater quantity of metal, or stone, that is sonke
into the water.

The fyfth Chapter shows how to know the true measure in the inches or
feet, of any strange form, such as Geometry can give no ordering for the
measuring thereof, as to measure a branch in metal, or a pillar that is
enbowed and full of hollownes in diverse places, and boyles out in diverse places:
and also how to know the diversity of the weight of metal, or the diuersytie
between the weight of Stone and metal.
AND furthermore, by this means you know the true measure in inches or feet,
of any strange form, what shape soever it has, such shapes that no Art by
any capacity are not to be measured, whether it be in metal, stone, wood, or
in wax, or gommes, or what soever it be, or a Crown, or Crowns, or a
branche, or branches, or a pyller, or pyllers, or things that be inbowed in
one place, and boyles out in an other, or a Cup, or bowl, or a Pot or
Pottes that keep not in thickness one quantity, but it is thicker in one
place then in an other, as there be diverse other forms not beer spoken of,
that no man by Art is able to measure them, for that they keep in no place
one proportion.

Wherefore I do think it convenient, to treat partly hereof, and to know the
true contents of any form what soever it be, in inches or feet, then do
thus: Cause to be made some hollow Cube or Square, in such form that you may
measure it with an ynche rule with ease, and to know the true contents thereof,
or any part thereof at your pleasure, within the hollow part, and then you
having of diverse sorts of these hollow cubes or squares, some that do
contain more, and some that do conteyne less, as near as shall require: and
then take some convenient vessel mete for your purpose, and put water into it,
and that done, then take that thing which you do require too know the true
contents of the number of inches or feet, and the^ before you do put that
into the water, mark the side of that thing or vessel round about by the
very edge of the water very precisely, that you do not commit error by that
means: and that being truly done, the^ put that metal or thing into the
water, that it be covered: and that done, take out as much of the water as is
risen by the means of the thing of metal put into the water, until the water
do stand just at the mark that it was before: and then put that water into
the hollow cube or square, without any of the water shed or spylled by, for
that may cause some error: and then with an ynche rule measure the true
deepenes of the water in the cube or square, and so shall you know justly, how
many inches or feet of metal there is, by the multiplying of the length,
breadth, and deepenes of the water: As for ensample thus: by a branche, or
ca^dlestick (to hang in a house) of Latin or Brass, my desire is to know, how
many inches of metal there is contained in it: and then I did first put in
water into a tub or vessel, that I had appointed for that purpose, and then I
marked the water in the tubbe or vessel round about at the very edge of the
water: and then I put the brauach or candlestick into the water, and that
sunk unto the bottom, and then I took out all that water that was did by the
means of the branch or candlestick of Latin, and then I did put that water
into a little cube of 6. inches square every way, like unto a dee, and did it
precisely and shed none of the water, neither took I out any more or less of
the water, but in I unto the mark upon the tub or vessel side, and then I
measured the true deepenes of the water in the little cube, and found it to be
5. inches, and. parts of an ynche, that is to say, that it was 5. inches and a
half and half a quarter and the^ I did multiply it in this manner, for that cube
was 6. inches square.6. times.6. and that was.36. and then that being
multiplied again, by.5. and. parts: and that makes.202. and.. part so that I
did conclude, that the branch or candlestick in lattine or brass, was.202.
inches and a half in metal, and so by this means you may know the true
contents of any form, whatsoever it be: It is also very good, to try the
parts of a globe, or globes, or you may double any cube what soever it be, you
may do it very exactly, by this order, having this consideration, that you do
mark the water truly, and shed or spil none of the water, and that you do
measure the water truly, the deepenesse, and that must be done with some fine
styffe wire, for if that you do put in any big rule, then that will swell, or
high the water somewhat, according unto the bigness of the rule or thing.
Wherefore it is very good for to have the cube or square to be marked with
inches, and parts of inches, within the insyde round about with parallel
liens at every ynche end, and also it is not good to have your square vessel
too broad, for the narower that it is, the more certain: and also you may not
shifte your water into to many things, and especially if it be wood, for that
same water will hang upon it, and also wood will receive, or drynk water. And
al these may be causes that may hinder the exact truth: and also this order of
measuring is very good, to know if any thing be made in gold, for that it is a
very heavy metal, and no other metal so heavy as it is, if there were made
any vessel in gold, and any deceit in it, then putting that vessel into
water, then mark how high the water does rise, than take out of that water
the vessel again, then take that weight of gold, and put it into the water,
and if the vessel did raise the water higher then the gold, then there is
deceit in the vessel, but if the water be at both the times of one like
height, then there is no deceit in it, as this was the very way, that
Archimedes found the deceit of the Crown of gold, and also this art or order
of mesuring does not altogether show the contents of inches or feet, but also
you may know the diversity of weight of every several sorts of metal, how
much the ^ne sort is heavier then the other, as thus: you having of 2 sorts of
metal, the water being first marked, and then waighing the metal before you
do put it into the water, the^ mark the water how hie it ryseth, and then mark
it there again, and then take that metal out of the water, and then put in of
the other metal so much in quantity, till that it raise the water, unto that
just height that it was before: and it makes no matter, although it be of many
pieces, so that it be al of one sort of metal, and then take out the metal,
and weigh it justly, and so shall you see certainly how much in weight it does
differ quantity for quantity, or otherwise: you may know the diversity of
the weight of metals, by wayghing two sorts of metal, and let them be both
of one weight just, and then the water being marked, put in the one sort of
metal first, and then take out that water, as much as is risen by the means
of the metal unto the first marked place, and put that into the hollow Cube,
as before is rehearsed, and then cast the contents how many inches it
contains justly: and that done, then take that metal out of the water, and
put in the water that is in the hollow Cube or square, again, into the
vessel, that the water may stand at the first appointed mark justly again:
and then put in the other sort of metal, that is of the just weight the other
was before, and then take all that water out, and put it into the Cube, and if
that the water in the Cube be fewer number of inches then it was before, then
that metal is heavier then the first metal, as the proportion of the number
of inches will show you justly: and if there be more water at the later time
then there was at the first time, then that metal is lighter then the first
metal, and the number of inches will show you the true quantity, by
multiplying them, as before is rehearsed.

And if the water at both the times be of one height, or measure in the little
cube, then both the metals are of one weight. And by this means, or Art
Statical, you may know the diversity between the weight of Stone and metal,
or the diversity of weight of one kind of Stone and an other, for that all
sorts of Stone, is not of one kind of weight, as all sorts of metals are
not of one weight. And also by this Art Staticall, you may know the diuersytie
of the weight of wood and stone, or any other kind of metal, although the
one sort does swim, and the other sort sinketh, and that you must do in
this manner.

All those kind of woods that do swim, and if their form be such, that
you may measure them, then the matter is of no opportunity, to know the
contents thereof, for that it requires no other thing, but to measure the
contents in inches, and to weigh them how many pound they do both contain:
and if the form in wood be such, that you cannot easily measure it, by such
order as before is declared, you may know the contents of the wood, by putting
it down into the water by some slight, although it would swim, to synke it,
you waighing it before it comes into the water, to know how many pound it
contains. And as touching all these matters before rehearsed, it is a very
easy matter to know how many inches, and parts of an ynche, will make a
pound weight of any kind or sorts of metal, or water, or wood, as thus:

You knowing how many inches, that any stuff does contain, whether it be
Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron, stone, wood, or water: the weight
being known^, then divide the contents of the number of inches, by the number
of pounds, and that will show you the true contents, how many inches and
parts of an ynch, will make a pound weight,

The syxt Chapter shows by Art Staticall to know the weight of any Ship,
that is sunk into the Sea, or any other river, too know how many tun will
weigh her up again.
AND furthermore, insomuch as I have declared heretofore, how to know the true
weight of any kind of metal, that is sunk into the Water* now I think it
convenient, too show unto you, how too give a near guess, or an estimation, if
any Ship by any misfortune should be sunk, either in the Sea, or in a haven,
or river, to know how many tons would weigh her up again, that is to say, to
know how many tun in weight she does weigh in the water, being sunk, which
is to be done in this manner: first they must know what kind of goods the
Ship is laden withal, that is sunk, and to set down a remembrance or note of
every sort, and how much of every sort of the said goods, and also to set
down a remembrance or note of the conte^ts of the weight of her ordinance, and
ankors: also if it be such goods as do require knitlege or ballast, you must
know how many tuns there may be thereof, and also what kind of ballast it is,
whether it be sand, or stones, or earth: and al these being known, then
according as the kind of goods is, then try how many tons every sort of
that goods may weigh in the water, as thus: if it be Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron,
Steel, or stone, or such other like, that do not penetrate, or do not
drink, or suck in any lyquor, or water: and the weight thereof known, then for all those matters, by the rules before rehearsed, do show unto you the truth of
the matter. Then if the lading, or part of the lading, be Wax, Pytche, or
Tar, or Honey, or such like, Gummes, or what soever it be that is heavier then
the water, the consideration of the rule Staticall before rehearsed, will show
unto you the truth of the matter, accordingly as is bfore rehearsed in all
points, and if the ladyng or any part thereof be such things as do penetrate,
or do receive or drink in lyquor or water, upon that matter there may grow
some error. But to take away some part of that error, you shall have this
remedy or help, and that is this.

If it be Wool, or Woollen cloth, or Cotton, Sylke, Flax, Hemp, or Lynnen
cloth, or any such other like, then shall you make your proof in this manner,
as before is rehearsed in the Chapters going before, and that is thus: Fill
some vessel with that kind of water, that the Ship is sunck into, and then
mark the edge of the water, and that being done, if there be any great
quantity of that kind of goods or marchaundize, then take of that sort
dry, as the goods were before it was laden, whether it be Wool, or woollen
Cloth, or Cotton. etc. And then that being dry, weigh it, and then open it
loosely, that the water may drink into it, and that being soked, by
imagination as the goods is or may be, then take out so much of the water as
is risen by that means of the wool or woollen cloth, or what soever it be,
and then the weight of the water being known, pull the weight of the water
from the weight of such things as you have made proof thereof, and that
weight which does remain, shall be the weight that the said goods does
waygh in the Water. And furthermore, if the ladyng of the Ship be such, Some
kind of goods is of that nature that it wayeth no weight in the water.
as does requrie kintlege or ballast, if it be wines, or oils, and such other
like, for that kind of goods is of no weight in the water, for it is rather
lighter then the water: then you must make account of the Kintledge or Ballast,
and if it be stones, then the order or Art Staticall does show you what it may
contain in wayght very well, by making your proof as before is rehearsed. Some
sort of goods must have kintledge or ballast.
But if the Ballast be earth or Sand, then put the Sand or earth into the
water, and then let the earth or sand settle unto the bottom: and that being
done, you shall see the water will be clear aloft: and then take out of the
water, until the water be of that height that it was before, and the^ weigh the
water, and the^ pulling the true weight of the water from the weight of the
earth or sand, then that weight which does remain, shall be that weight that
so much earth or sa^d shall weigh in the water. And the^ doing as before is
rehearsed, by the weight of a little, by the proportion of the weight of a
greater, is known what it does weigh in the water. And furthermore, there is
some kind of goods, although it be heavier then the water, yet in remaining
long in the water, it will consume, and that is sugar or salt. etc. But most
kind of goods, the longer it remains in the water, the heuier it is, for
that the water soketh into it thoroughly. And also any ship being long sunk,
there grows diverse, accide^ts to make it the heuier, that is, by the means
there will settle both sand and owes into her, and also the dry timber that is a
loft in a ship, will beco^ heuier by the soking of the water: for this is to be
noted, that a ship would not sink unto the bottom, but by the means of the
ballast or such other like heavy goods: and therefore for the very hold of
the Ship, as much as is Timber, a very small allowaunce will serve for the
wayght of it in the water. For although it besoked, yet it is but little more
then the weight of the water, for the Tackle or ropes will weigh more in the
water, then the hold of the Ship will, for they be much the heavier, for the
pitch and tar that is upon them. Wherefore, you must take a note, what number
of Cables, and other ropes may be in her, and their weight being known, then
make your proof, as before is rehearsed, by the Art Staticall. But if that
any part of the loding be oil, or Wine, or Tallow, or such other like, it is
not heavier then the water: all such kind of goods is of no wayght in the
water, but will rather help then hinder. And also if any part of the ladyng
be of Timber, as Mastes, or Sparres, Deals. or Waynscot, or such other like,
all such kind of goods will rather help it to swim, then hinder any thing.
And now this being done, and you knowing what kind of goods there is in the
Ship, and how much of every sort, and your proof being made by this Art
Staticall, and you knowing the weight of every particular thing, what it does
contain in the water, as well the weight of the Ordinance, Cables, Ankers,
Ropes, and the Ballast. etc. And then addyng all your numbers together, then
shall you see very near what all the whole wayght of the Ship with her ladyng
does waygh in the water, and that being known, then you do know what number
of Tons will waygh the Ship up again, and that being known, then the matter
is the more easyer to know how to make provision for to weigh her up again.

The seventh Chapter shows how to waygh a Ship that is sunk, where it
does ebb and flow. etc.
Now you knowing the wayght of any Ship that is sunk, if you would waygh
her up again, then when you do make your provision for to waygh her, take as
many Ships, Hoyes, or Lyghters, as will bear that number of tons, that the
sunk Ship does weigh in the water, and in every.40. or 50. tons, take.10.
tons more, for that it is better to have too much, then any thing too little:
And look that you have good Ropes that are able to bear so much in wayght, as
the sunken Ship does waygh in the water, and the^ when you have made your
Cables, hawseres, and ropes fast upon the sunken Ship, you must take such
order in the making fast of your Cables, or Ropes, that every Ship Hoye, or
Lyter may waygh or lift up the wayght of her proper burden, for else you may be
deceived, for that I have seen by experience, that the Ship which has been
sunk in the water, has not wayghed.40. tons, and the Hoyes or Lyters would
carrye more then.60. tons, and yet they were not able to waygh the said Ship,
but were driven to let go their fastes or Cables, and ropes again, or else they
should have been sunk, and that was but for lack of knowledge in that matter,
for the Ships, Hoyes, or Lyters will waygh or lift most from the bottom,
when they have no lading, and yet notwithstanding they will waygh or lift the
lesser, if they do use that matter as I have seen, for that they do make
fast their Cables and ropes some unto the side of the Ships, Hoyes, or
Lyters, and some unto the head, and so forth.

And now the Ships, Hoyes, or Lyters, are not able to waygh or lift, not one
quarter of their proper burden, and they lift or weigh much the les, for that
they have no lading within: for if they do make fast their Cables or Ropes
unto the side, then it will not lift the.10. part of their proper burden, for
that the side will soon go down. And if they do make fast their Cables and
Ropes unto the head, (for there it will waygh or lift most) yet it will not
waygh or lift one third part of their burden, for having no lodyng, the
head will soon go down into the water. Wherefore whenever they do mean
for to waygh any Ship that is sunk: How to use the lighters to make them lift
or waygh their own proper burden.
then they must prepare long, strong, and great Timber, or strong Mastes, and
let them be laid cross the Ships, Hoyes, or Lyters, over both the sides,
and to match.2. and.2. together of equal burden, as near as you can, and let
the long Timber or Mastes lie cross both the Shyps, Hoyes, or Lyghters, and
over both the sides, and then bring your Cables or ropes that are fast unto the
sunk Ship, over the long Timber or masts, and then make the ropes fast within
the Ships, or Lyghters: and this done, then the ships, Hoyes, or Lyghters
will weigh or lift, their own proper burden, otherwise they will not. And then
it stands you in hand to get such Timber that will not break for that
burden, for if the Timber does break, it will put al in hassard of synking
again. Also it is very good to weigh a ship with kaske, and every hogeshead,
pype, or butte, will waygh or lift as much in weight, as it would waygh, if
it were full of that water, excepting the proper wayght of the vessel or kaske,
so that the Kaske be made thight, that no water may come into it. And then when
you do mean for to waygh or lift up any Ship, that is sunk, your Ropes,
or Cables being fast unto the sunken Ship, then you having al your things in a
readiness, your Ships, Hoyes, or Lyghters, and the great Timber or Mastes
laid cross over both the sides of them, and two and two of them, and also
your kaske, then make fast your ropes and Cables unto the Ships or Lighters,
at a low water, the flood being in hand. Provided always, that you bring the
ropes or cables over the Timber, you must make your ropes fast at a low water,
the flood being in hand.
that lies cross the Hoyes or Lyghters, and also then to make fast the Kaske
unto your ropes or Cables. And then as the flood ryseth, so shall the sunken
Ship rise from the bottom: and then as the water does rise or high, so go
toward the land, or shore, till it be a full Sea, and then the sunken Ship
will rest upon the ground again. And then at the next low water: they
shortenyng or making fast their cables or ropes again, then the next full Sea,
they may bring the sunken Ship, nearer unto the land or shore. And thus
they may bring the sunken Ship unto the land or shore, until such time as
the sunken Ship shall be laid upon dry ground at a low water. For you may
know in how many Tides that you may waygh her, and lay her upon dry
ground, at a low water, as thus: Sound, How to know in how many Tides you
may weigh a ship.
or look how many fadome, the sunken Ship lies in at a low water, and
then look how many fadome the water hygheth, or flows till it be a full
Sea, and then consider how deep that your Shyps, Hoyes, or Lyghters, will go
into the water, before they are able to lift the sunken Ship from the
bottom: and then consider how much, or how many fadome or feet, the water
will rise afterward: and so shall you see in how many Tides that you shall
bring her to be dry at a low water. As for ensample thus: Suppose that any
Ship or Hoye is sunk at eight fadome at a low water, and the water does
rise or high two fadome and a half from the low water unto a full sea: An
ensample of the w^^ght of a Ship.
and then the Hoyes or Lyters will not be able to lift or waygh the sunken
Ship from the bottom, not until they be laden down two foot, and better.
So that you may conclude, that the water will not rise or high little more then
two fadome, after that the sunken Ship is lyfted or wayghed from the bottom:
and then going unto the Land or Shore, till that it was a full Sea.

And then the sunken Ship did rest upon the ground again at.6. fadome, at
a low water, and then at the next low water the Cables and Ropes were made
fast again, and when it was flowed two foot and better, the sunk Ship was
lyfted from the ground again.

And then going unto the land or shore, till it was a full Sea, then the
sunken Ship did rest at.4. fadome at a low water: and then at the next low
water, the Cables and ropes being made fast again, when it was flowed.2.
foot, and better, the sunk Ship was lifted from the bottom, and so going
in unto the land or shore til it was a full Sea: then the sunk Ship did
rest again, at.2. fadome at a low water: and then the Cables or ropes, being
shortened, and made fast again, then going unto the land or shore, until that
it was a full Sea, and then restyng, the sunk Ship shall be dry at a low
water: so that you may conclude, that the Ship that was sunk at.8. fadome
at a low water: and the water rise or did flow.2. fadome and a half, from
the low water unto the full Sea, and the Hoyes and Lyters would waygh or lift
the sunk Ship from the bottom, by that time they were title more then.2.
foot buried or settled into the water, and then in four Tides the sunk Ship
wylbe laid upon dry ground, at a low water.

And by this order you may know in how many Tides that any Shyppemaye he
wayghed, and laid on dry ground at a low water, you knowing how deep that
the Ship lies at a low water, and how much it does flow in any place
where it does ebb or flow.

The eight Chapter shows how to waygh a Ship, where it does not ebb and
flow.
ANd furthermore, if that any Ship or any other vessel be sunk in such
places, where that it does neither ebb, nor flow, that is too say, where
the water does not high and low, there is some matter, and asks great
charges, and labor for to waygh or lift any great wayghte from the bottom:
yet this way it is to be done, the wayght of the sunken Ship or vessel
being known, what that it does waygh in the water, as before is rehearsed.

Then the number of tons being known, As touching the waighing of shyps,
whereas it does not ebb and flow.
prepare so many Ships, Hoyes, or Lyghters, as will carrye six or eight
times the wayght, that it does waygh in the water, and then let them be near
half laden every one of them, with some handsome ballast that is wayghty, and
good to be removed too and fro.

And then when you have made your Ropes, and Cables fast unto the sunken Ship
or vessel, then bring your Hoyes, and Lyghters unto the sunk Vessel, and let
all that Ballast be thrown into one end of all the Hoyes and Lyghters, and
then make fast your Ropes and Cables unto that end that has the ladyng or
ballast: Then your ropes and Cables being made fast, throw or carrye all the
ballast or ladyng unto the other end, and then it will waygh or lift the
sunken Ship from the bottom.

Wherefore you must have double so many as is able too lift or waygh it:
Not^th^ point.
for when that all the ladyng is thrown unto the other end: then whylest that
the one has lyfted or wayghed it, the other Hoyes or Lyghters must make fast
their Ropes and Cables unto the laden ends again. And thus they must do as
often times as the lading is thrown unto the further end, they must have as
many Lyghters as are able too lift or waygh it, whyllest that the other
Lyghters do hang or turn the laden end, and to be made fast unto the Ropes,
and Cables again.

And thus in time, they shall waygh or lift the sunken thyp or vessel, unto
the drymme of the water, and then they may carrye the sunken vessel unto the
land or shore. And by this order or means, they may waygh any Ship or
vessel up unto the brymme of the water, in such places whereas it does
neither ebb nor flow.

The nyenth Chapter shows how to bring in any ship over a should or bar,
and to make the Ship bear Sail, when all the ballast is out: and also if
need require, how to lift the Ship higher out of the waterwardes, to the
intent to bring her in. etc.
ANd now, insomuch that I have showed how to waygh any Ship that is sunk, as
well in such places whereas it does not ebb and flow, and also ebb and flow.
In like manner, I do think it convenient too show unto you, how for to bring
a Ship in over a bar or Should, whereas there is not sufficientnesse of
deepth of water to come into any haven or River, and if that all the ballast is
out, and if there is not sufficientnesse of deepth of water: Then how to lift
her higher out of the waterwards, until the ship is sufficiently out of the
water, to bring her in over the should or bar. etc.

And first thus, if that any Ship be come intoo any Haven or harborowe, and
by the means of a should or bar, that she has not deepth of water yenough,
and yet the Ship is but in her ballast: Then do thus: Prepare two great
Hoyes or Lyghters, and also strong haulsers or Cables, and then bring the one
of the Hoyes or Lyghters, on the one side, and the other, on the other side,
and that done, then make fast the head, and the stern of both the Hoyes or
Lyghters, with strong Ropes or Haulsers, and make them fast, as high in the
Ship, as you can conuenientlye, and then heave all the ballast out of the
Ship into the two Hoyes, or Lighters: And that done, the Ropes and Haulsers
being fast unto the head and stern of the Lyghters or Hoyes, and unto the
Ship, the Ship cannot overthrow, although all the Takle, and Mastes are
standing: for look when the ship would shield, then it cannot do it, except
that it should lift the furdest Lyghter or Hoye out of the water, which is not
possible for to do, as long as the Ropes, or Cables do hold: and then if
that it do offer to hold the other way, then that lighter that is on the
other side, will not suffer it, as long as the ropes or fastes do hold:
Wherefore the ship may bear sail, although all the ballast were out, etc.

But if that there be not sufficientnesse of deepth of water upon the should
or bar, to bring the Ship in over it, when all the ballast is out: yet
notwithstanding you may make such provision, that you may lift her higher up
out of the water, until such time as the Ship may be able to come in, as
thus: you having provided two such Lyghters, meet for the purpose, as before
is declared, then prepare long and strong great Timber or Mastes, that may be
of such sufficient length, that will reach the breadth of the Ship, and the
breadth of both the Lyghters all at once.

And then the Lyghters being made fast, as before is rehearsed, and all the
ballast heued or thrown out of the Ship into the two Lyghters, then the
Lyghters being laden with the ballast, then make holles through both the sides
of the Ship in sundry places, and then put the long and strong great Timber
through both the sides of the Ship, that it may be ouerthwarte cross over
both the sides of the Lyghters, and in such sort, that the Ship may rest or
hang upon the long and strong great Timber or Mastes, and rest or lie upon
the two sides of both the Lyghters. And then having out all the ballast out of
both the Lyghters, the two Lyghters will heave up out of the waterwardes, as
much in wayghte as their own proper Tonnage or burden comes unto, etc.
And by this means you may lift any Ship out of the water, unto what
proportion you list: and also you knowing the wayght of the Ship, as you may
know it, as it does appear in the second and third Chapters going before:
Then accordyngly you may make your provision of the two Lyghters, to lift such
sufficient quantitye of the Ship that shall be able to serve your turn, and
also if that it should happen, so that the Ship should be a ground upon
the should or bar, and yet the place that the Ship is a ground on, does
neither ebb nor flow, yet notwithstanding you have this remedy to help it,
then lade both the Lyghters again, and let the Ship rest upon the ground, and
then you may boulster ^t up by some provision between the two Lyghters sides,
and the long Timber or Mastes, until that it be sufficient to serve your
turn: and then discharging the Lyghters, they shall lift up the Ship higher
again: And by this means you may bring in any ship, higher again over any
should or bar, so that the water be sufficient deep, that the Lyghters being
laden, may pass in over the bar or should. etc.

The tenth Chapter does show unto you, how for to come unto the Keel of any
Ship, without the grounding of her, whereby you may collect any ship, and make
her thight unto the Keel, which is called carriyng of them. etc.
AND for that our Country of England, is environed round about with the Sea,
so that no other Nation, or Country can come unto us, neither we unto them,
but only by sea, Scotland only excepted: Therefore it stands us most
principally in hand too be most skillful in shipping, for that it is our
most principal force, and for that it is a very necessary matter for to know
how to cauke a Ship, or to stop a leake, and to make her thight down unto
the Keel of the Ship, in such places whereas it does not ebb and flow water
in, for to ground any ship, then they must use such means as those do that
are in the leua^t sea, that is, the sea called Mare Mediterraneum, as the
Genewayes and Vemsians and Rogosones, with a number of other, that have
shipping in that Sea, that I do omyt, and that have great ships, and yet never
do ground them, but only do bring them over on the one side, which is called
carriyng of them, and many people that have heard thereof, have thought that
they have wound them over by force: and some have judged one way, and some an
other way, but few or none of them have judged the truth of the matter,
although that diverse Englishmen have been there, and have seen the thing done:
yet as far as ever I could perceive at their hands, they could never
understand the truth of the matter, and the cause thereof was, that they were
never in the Ship where she was a karrenyng, and yet for to karren a ship, it
is a great deal more ease for the Ship, then it is to be grounded in diverse
respects, and also they shall have more time and leisure both to search the
Ship, and caulke her, and to mark her thight, then they shall have in the
grounding of a Ship, and also they shall the better perceive where any leake
is in the karrenyng of them, then in the grounding of them.

And as touching the karrenyng of a Ship, this is too be done, first thus,
Cauke the sides of the Ship thight above the water, and especially that side
that you do mean to bring her over on, and also caulke the deck and ports,
and the sperkettes thight, and that done, then prepare laborers ynowe, and
bring the Ship reasonable light, that she may have little more ballast, then
she may bear her self well. And that done, her ordinance, and every loose
thing taken out of the Ship, then let the laborers heave the ballast over,
unto that side that you do mean to bring her over upon, and so heauing the
ballast over, the Ship will go over unto what proportion you list, and by
that means you may come unto the Keel of any ship, and mark her thight at
your pleasure, But diverse people have made argument and said, that the ship
will not rise upright again, and some have said, that lying a to^e side, it
would overthrow, and other would think that the ballast would slyp, but the
truth is this: as soon as ever the ballast is thrown or heaued backwards
again, the ship will begin to rise, and so in the end become to be upright
again.

Wherefore it is a strange matter, to see the strange opinion of some people
in the world that seems to be wise, and for that generally the most part of
men have thought that in the karrening of Ships, that they have been wound
down with caxslienes, and gearres, and tackles by great force, and therefore
they have made fast the ballast by some provision, and also have made raftes of
masts, to the end that they might lay the side of the Ship upon them, to help
to bear up the ship. And see the simple opinion of them that should be
wise, to think that the same should do any good, for Mastes being massy, and
not hollow, are but little lighter then water, so that.20. tons weight of
them, will not support up two tons, therefore that can do no great good at
al. And what a vain folly is it for them to make fast the ballast, that it
should not slyppe, for.20. tons of ballast, being made fast at the bottom of
the Ship, must require the force of 20. tuns to wind it down over: and then
the ballast, for that it is made fast, and the Ship wound down by force,
the Ship is forced down with more then forty Tons, for that the Ballast
does hang over one way toward the Keelwardes, and the Ship is wound
down the contrary way on the one side, which must of force be in such sort,
as a thing that lies in a colepresse, and does charge the Ship with a double
weight or burden, to preasse it into the waterwardes: and then what can the
quantity of the supporting of any thing that cannot lift a tun or two tun
weight thereof, do them any pleasure, besides the great cumber that they shall
have in those causes, to get such a number of Mastes, and also to make them
fast, or to frappe them together: and also in deed the ballast would slyppe,
the Ship being wound down by force, for when that the ship has her
Ballast into the end, to make her to swym upright, and then to be wound down
by force, then the ballast does hang toward the Keele, and the ship being
wound down to the side, then it must needs slyppe, as before is said,
except that it be made fast, for that the Ballast does hang over one way, and
the Ship is wound down the other way, and then it is not possible to come
unto the keele, so well as they shall do, when the Ballast is but thrown or
heaued over unto the one side, for that it has then no more then his own
proper wayght, where as otherwise the Ship is charged with double wayght, for
if she should have but forte tons of Ballast, the Ship is charged with
more then eyghtie tons in wayght, and also it is very hurtful and uneasy for
the ship. etc.

And furthermore, as before is declared in this fourth book, called Staticke,
that no kind of thing does enter no further into the water, then the quantity
or body or any thing that waigheth so much in weight, as the proportion in
bygnesse of so much water. Therefore any thing that is in the water, how light
soever it is, can enter no further into the water, then the proportion of such
a magnitude of water. For if the thing be not the.xx. part of the weight of the
water, then the one of twenty part of the body does enter into the water: and
19. of.20. parts shall be above the superficies of the water, etc.

And furthermore, for that the water is an Element ponderous or heavy, and yet
thynne: therefore it is the nature and quality of water, to support or bear
up a thing that is lighter then it self: and yet it does give any thing place
or leave to turn it self in the water, so that it shall swymme with the
heauyest part downewarde, as by experience is seen of any thing that is put
into the water, as thus: Take a Raske, as a Pype or Hogshead, or a Barrel, and
put it into the water, the thing being thyght, the tenth part of the bygnesse
or magnitude does not go into the water, for that it is so light. And yet
notwithstanding, if any one part of the kaske be heauyer then the other, that
same part will turn downwards. And if you do turn it vpwardes, as soon as
ever you do let it go, it presently turns of it self downewardes again.
So that experience does show this to be true, that the heauyest part of any
thing that is in the water, does always turn, and seeks downewardes.
Therefore we may perfectly conclude thus of any ship, if the ballast be cast or
heaued over unto the side of any ship, that the ship does turn over
accordyngly, always to have the heauyest part downewardes.

Wherefore, contrary unto the vain opinions of a number of persons that should
be wise, that if the ballast be thrown over unto the side, that the ship shall
swymme upon the side, and yet the ballast shall never slyppe, for that always
the ship does turn of itself, to bring it unto the leuel, except it be let
by some cause, which is, either by making it fast, or else by some other
accidental matter, or else it will follow accordyngly. etc. And some people have
been of that opinion, that no Ship does swim upright, but that there is as
much weight or more below in the water, as is above the water: but that is
untrue, as before it does appear, by the ensample of a Raske or Barrel. For
you do see that it will swymme, and the hea^yest part will turn downwards:
and if that it be not one quarter of a pound heavier on the one side, then it
is on the other, that part will turn downewardes: and yet for all that, that
part that is in the water, will not waygh the.10. part of that which is above
the water.

Therefore you may conclude, that if the ballast do lie all upon the one side
of the Ship, the Ship shall swim upon that side, and the Keel shall come out
of the water. And if that the ship side be ^hight, there is no more danger in
her swimming on the one side, than if she were upright in the water. And also
the Ship does not swim so deep into the water, lying on the one side, as she
does swim when she is upright, for that the Ship is more lancker, or
slenderer, or sharper: that is to say, not so full and round, by the means of
her Tuck and Run, and the Foreway, as the side is round and full. Therefore
it cannot go so deep into the water, for as before is said, that nothing can
go no further into the water then the proportion of so much water in weight.
Wherefore the side being round and full, it is the more boyenter a great deal,
etc. And also it is very good to bring a Ship in over a bar or should, for
lying upon the side, it does draw much less water, then when it does swim
upright etc. But notwithstanding it is not so good for to Karrene the Queens
majesty's Ships, as it is the Merchants Ships, for two special caves, and
the first is this: the Queens highness Ships have always as much ballast
in them, as they do usually go to the Sea withal, to be fast to bear a
sail, which is no small quantity in her bigger sort of Ships: and then
what a charge is it to take the greatest part of the ballast out of them, and
too take it in again, for they must take more then.3. quarters of the Ballast
out, when they do Karren them: whereas the Merchants Ships do deliver all
the ballast out when they do lade their ships: therefore the Merchants shall not
occupy the 20. part of the charges that the Queens Ships must. And the
second cause is this, that in the Queens Ships, the ballast is always
fyrme and hard, by the means that it is seeldome or never styrred, and also
the Cook room is made up with brick upon the ballast, and also there is set
up in the Cook room with Brycke work the furnases, to boil their beef, and
other provision, that is made for the dressing of men's vittailes, as Quens and
hatches etc. which were no small charge to remove and make up again, whereas in
the grounding of them all, these two great charges are saved, that Merchants
shyps in their karrening shall not need to be at. etc. And thus I end the
fourth Book.

A Table of the Contents of the Chapters of the fourth book called a Treasure
for Trauailers.
The first Chapter of the fourth Book, shows you by the proportion of a
Ship swimming in the water, for to know the true weight of any Ship, with all her tackle, ordinance, furniture, and lading, etc.

The second Chapter shows how for to measure the proportion of the mould of
any Ship, whereby is known the weight of any Ship, with all her ladynge and
furniture.

The third Chapter shows you an easyer way, then before rehearsed, by the
Art Statical, to know the true weight of any Ship, with all her lading, and
all the rest of her furniture.

The fourth Chapter shows by the Art Statical, the wayght of any metal or
stone, how much, or what wayght that it does waygh in the water, to be
lyfted or waighed from the bottom, unto the brimme of the water.

The fyfth Chapter shows how too know the true measure in inches or feet,
of any strange form, such as Geometry can give no order for the measuring
thereof, as to measure a branch in metal, or a pillar that is enbowed and
full of hollownesse in diverse places, and boyles out in some places: and also
how to know the diversity of the weight of metal, or the diversity between
the weight of Stone, and metal.

The syxt Chapter shows by the Art Statical, to know the weight of any ship,
that is sunk into the Sea, or any river, too know how many tun will weigh
her up again.

The seventh Chapter shows how to weigh a Ship that is sunk, where it does
ebb and flow, etc.

The eight Chapter shows how to weigh a Ship, where it does not ebb and
flow, etc.

The nynth Chapter shows how to bring in any ship over a should or bar,
and to make the Ship bear Sail, when all the ballast is out: and also if need
should require, how to lift the ship higher out of the waterwards to the
intent to bring her in, etc.

The tenth Chapter does show unto you, how for to come unto the Keele of
any Ship, without the groundyng of her, whereby you may collect any Ship,
and make her thight unto the Keele, which is called carenning of them. etc.

FINIS.
The fyfth Book of the treasure for Trauaylers.
Wherein is showed the cause of diverse things that are to be seen on the Sea,
and the Sea Coasts, and the cause of Rocks and sands in the Sea, and the
cause of the ebbyng and flowyng of the water, and the cause of currantes in the
Sea, with such other like matters. etc.

Being very necessary for all sorts of Trauaylers, either by Sea, or by land,
to know. etc.

Written by William Bourne.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, it is possible that some will think that I have taken upon me
to meddle with those causes, that are past my capacity, for that this fyfth and
last book is as concerning the natural causes of Sands in the Sea and rivers,
and the cause of marish ground, and Cliffes by the sea Coasts, and rocks in
the Sea, and also the cause that the sea does ebb and flow, and the cause
that the water in the Sea is salt, and the cause of Earth quakes, with other
matters. And for that my opinion does differ from some of the ancient writers
in natural Philosophy, it is possible that it may be utterly dislyked of and
condemned to be no truth. But yet notwithstanding they may give such credit
unto it, as the sequel of the reasons shall support unto them, for that they
be but my simple opinions: wherefore they may believe them as they lift.
Therefore gentle Readers, I desire you to bear with me, for that I am so bold
to show my simple opinion unto the world, for it is possible, that some people
may malice me, for that I am so bold to deal in these causes, consydering
what a great number of so excellent learned men there are in England, both
in the Vniuersyties, and in diverse other places in this Land.

The fifth Book of the treasure for trauailers.
The first Chapter of the fyfth Book shows the natural causes, how Sands
and Banks are ingendered or made, both in the Sea and Rivers.
NOw begins the fifth Book which is concerning the natural causes of
sundry things that are to be seen in traueilyng upon the face of the earth.
And although there be nothing that happens, but the providence of almightye
God, does bring it to pass: yet notwithstanding it has a natural cause why
it is so, although it seems supernatural or impossible for that God does
work all things by a means, and yet does come to pass by some natural
cause.

And first of the natural cause of Sands and Banks in the Sea and ryuers, my
opinion is this: that whereas a great number of Sands and Banks are many times
seen at the mouths and entrance of many great rivers both into the Sea, and
also up into the river, that it happneth by this means, by the shalownesse of
those seas, and the great indraft of the River. And then by the means of the
soil of the Country in the rivers, being a good distaunce from the sea, and
especially after any great rain, does bring down the soil, for all the
land water does always run down toward the sea, where as it does ebb
and flow, and sometime the water ouerfloweth the banks, and then the swiftnes
of the running of the water does fret away the banks, and sometime it
happens in the winter after a great frost. And such other like causes,
sometime from sandye ground, and sometime from clay ground, and sometime
stony ground: and other good moulde does fall into the River, and so is myxed
and tumbled too and fro with the water, and is always carried toward the sea
by the violence of the stream, for that always, where it does not ebb and
flow, the stream runs toward the sea: and whereas it does ebb and flow,
there the ebb does run both swifter and longer then the floods do, and so
by that means, it is always carried toward the sea, and also any thing is
apter to roll, or run down the hill, rather then against the hill. And thus
the soil of the country being tumbled too and fro in the water, is washed and
soked in such sort, that the water is made thycke therewith, and the fat or
clammye substance, become owes, but the greety or sandy, or grauelly substance
does always keep toward the bottom, for that it is more po^derous or
heavier then the fatty or clammy substance, and then this grauelly or sandye
substance, being driven down toward the sea, by the violence of the stream,
going by the bottom, then where it does find any place to stay at by the
way, there it rests, and so grows more and more, and so becomes a sand,
and then the Tide, by the means of ebbing and flowyng, does make or scour
out a chanel, or pasadge between one sand or bancke, and another. And always
this happens, whereas the Sea is but shalowe, and the River or haven has a
great indraught, that is to say, to run a great distance into the land,
whereby there is much soil brought down by the means before rehearsed. And
then the Sea being but shallowe, it has no great descent to run down the
hill. And then by the means of the floods, and the bellows of the Sea, does
cause it to be stayed, although that sometime it happens, that one sand or
bancke does decrease, and wear away, and another does increase and wax
bigger, and many times the channels do alter, sometimes deeper, and sometimes
shallower: and sometimes whereas a chanel was, becomes a sand, and sometime
whereas a sand was, is become a chanel, as experience has many times showed,
which happens many times by some storms or great wyndes, sometimes from one
quarter of the world, and sometime from another quarter. And by that means the
greatness of the bellows of the Sea, does beat, or wash away the sand
from one place, and so does rest upon another place: and then the Tide or
stream does scour or frette a new Channel, between one sand and another.
etc. As we may see by experience in diverse places, as the mould of the River
of Thames, and Humber, and the River of Roane, and such other like places,
which I do omit at this time.

The second Chapter shows the natural cause of Marish ground, and other
plain meadows or ground by the sides of Ryuers. etc.
AND furthermore, as touching the natural cause of Maryshes or Marish ground,
and other plain and level ground, that is by the sides of great Ryuers. etc.
and in such other like places: mine opinion is this, as in the Chapter before
is expressed, by the bringing down of the soil of the country, which is
ground or earth, of al kind of sorts, which is fallen into the water, and
brought down by the stream.

And as before is rehearsed, the grauelly or sandye substance does drive with
the stream, Of the soil of the Country.
by the bottom, but the fatty or clammy substance is mingled with the water:
for although you should take any earth or substance, and wash it and tumble
it in water never so much: yet notwithstanding it cannot be consumed all away,
but if you do let it stand still, then it will settle it self unto the
bottom, and you shall find the substance again. So although the earth is
mingled with water, by the means of the fretting of the stream and the Tide,
and also the soussyngs of the bellows in great winds, tossyng it to and fro in
stormy weather, yet notwithstanding in fair and calm weather, in such places,
whersas there does not run a great Tide or stream, then that earthye
substance does settle it self again on such places as are defended by some
Naase or point, and in some Bay or place, that the grating of the Tide or
stream does not greatly trouble it, and is then called Owes, or as the common
people that be not near dwellers unto such Ryuers, do call it Dirt, Mire, or
Mud. And then in such places where it does ebb or stowe, being settled, now a
little and then a little, the wind and the Sun do somethyng harden it, until
at the last, How Marish groude is engendered.
through the settling now some and then some, and still dried with the wind
and the Sun, that it is as high as the common foul Seas: and then it will
begin to bear some green thing, and so it will become Marishe ground in
time, and so is ouerflowed in the spring tides, but in the Neape Tides, it is
bare at a full Sea. And then many times it happens, that those that are the
dwellers there aboutes, or else the Lords of those soyles, do Inn that same
ground, and make the walls for the defense thereof. And in process of time,
it becomes maine land, and by this means comes all your plain and
leuelled grounds near unto Rivers sides: And this kind of ground must
needs be very fertyle and rich, so that it be not ouerflowed with salt
water, for that all the stonye and sandy substance is washed out thereof, and it
must needs be plain and level, for that it is braught to be level with the
water at a full Sea. etc.

And furthermore, it happens diverse times, Marish ground is fertyle, if the
salt water come not at it,
as in the Chapter before is rehearsed, by great wyndes and storms in sundry
ages of the world, that the Channel^ do alter by the washyng or fretting away
of some point or firm land or Naase, and then that which has been many
years before, main ground, may be fretted away, and be overflowed again.

And the substance of the ground may be landed in some other place, as by
experience in many places has been seen, so that, that place that has
been before meayne ground, has become Sea and water, How land has been sea,
and sea has been land.
and that place that has been before sea and water, has become dry land.
And these things have happened in pracesse of time, by the means of the
changing of the channels, which do alter the setting of the Tides in Ryuers
and Havens, whose principal cause has happened, as before is rehearsed, by
frettyng away some Naase or point, and then some Naase or point has turned
the Tide some other way, and so worn or fretted a new channel: so that
whereas the Tide or stream has run most swiftest, has become an eady, and
so in process of time, ground in like manner. etc.

The third Chapter shows the natural causes of the high clyffes by the Sea
coasts. etc.
AND furthermore, as touching the natural causes of clyffes that are by the
Sea coasts, as we may see some of hard stone, and some of Chaulke, and of a
monstrous height, and some of Claye, and other of earth. etc.

My opinion is this, as the age of the world is of no small time, so in
process of time the often sufferynges of the bellows of the Seas have beaten
away the feet of those hills, that are by the sea coasts.

And so undermining it, although it were of hard stone, yet the wayght of that
which was undermined hanging over, in rayny wether, or after great frost, must
needs fall down into the Sea. Of Cliffes by Sea Coast.
And then that sail or substance that fell down, in process of time was
beaten or washed away again, by the often soussing of the bellows of the sea,
in the time of great wyndes and storms. And then the stuff so fallen down,
being washed and consumed away, the sea does begin to undermine it again, by
little and little, till at the length by the means before rehearsed, there
falls down an other portion of the said substance, or stuff from the
hill, so that in the end, they become such monsterous Cliffes, as we may see
by experience, are on the sea coasts in a number of places: And thus they do
were away by little and little, until that an other place is become aforelande,
without that land, that is to say, an other Naase or head land to stand
further out into the sea, then that does, and then that Clyffe will stay
without falling down any more, of the substance or stuff of long time, by
the means of some beache, or shingle, or sand, or stones that shall be
brought thither, by the cossing to and fro of the bellows of the sea, and that
shall lie there, and defend the foot of the sand cliffe, as by experience we
may see in a number of places by the sea coasts, and then does we are away an
other Cliffe, in some other place of the sea coasts: for it happens many
times, in sundry ages, that at one time, one place does were away, and an
other does increase again: and in an other age again, that which did
increase, shall wear away, and the other shall stay, or perhaps increase again,
by the means there is some head land, or Naase without that, which does
break away the fretting or gratyng of the tide: For many times it happens
upon the sea Coasts, through some great and huge storm, that makes a breach
by the monstrousness of the great bellows, that teareth away some great
quantity of ground, from some one place in short time, and the bellows of the
sea shall drive or bring it, or land it in some other place, yea even in a
short space, as experyence has many times showed it, and as it many times
happens, that in one age of the world, that the great huge winds or stormed
do happen sometime in one quarter of the World, and at an other time, in an
other quarter.

In four years the great storms are in one quarter of the world, and an other
year in an other quarter.
For as we may see, that in some years, the most great winds and storms do
blow in the East quarter of the world, and in other years, in the West
quarter of the world, and in other years, in the South quarter of the world,
and in other years, in the North quarter of the world. etc. By which means
it fretteth at one time away the substance or stuff from one place, and then
the bellows of the sea do drive or force it to land in an other place: and
so it continues for a certain time, until such time that the great winds or
storms do blow in a contrary quarter of the world: and then the stuff or
subtaunce is beaten by the bellows of the Sea, and driven and forced from that
place, and so is landed in an other place: And it is possible to be forced or
landed at the place that it first came from, although it may be 20. or 40.
miles distance asunder. And thus those that are near dwellers unto the sea
coasts, do see the great and mighty works of God, wrought by his greatness
and almighty power, the great or huge bellows or waves or knots of the sea, in
great winds and storms or tempests, For even those things that show or seem
impossible, he brings to pass, as by experience has been seen at sundry
times. etc.

The fourth Chapter shows the natural cause, why that the beache, and the
great bolder stones, on the sea coasts, are become round and smooth, without
any edges or corners.
NOw furthermore, as touching the natural causes, why that the Beache, and the
great bolder stones in the sea, and the other small shingle are all smooth and
round, without corners or sharp edges, and yet they be of all kinds and
luites of stones, The shingle beach or the bolder stone is of the substance of
the nature of the Cliffes nere unto them
as Marble stone, and Flynt, and other hard stone. etc. For they be of those
substance and natures, as the Cliffes that are near unto those parts, as in
the Chapter going before is declared, by vnderminyng of the hills or banks,
with the bellows of the Sea, the substance falls down into the Sea, what
soever manner of stuff it be, according unto the mineralles of those grounds
or hills that falls into the Sea, whether it be hard stone, or Marble stone,
or Flynt, or what stuff else soever it be, according unto the veins of the
mineralles in the ground, that so by that means before rehearsed, do fall
into the sea. Then when it is forced or brought to land upon any place of the
Sea coast, it is all smooth, without any corners or sharp edges. The cause
thereof comes to pass by this means, for when it does first fall out of the
Cliffe into the sea, then it has the fashion and form as those have that are
dug forth of the ground: The cause or reason that the beach and the great
bolder stone is round without any sharp edges.
but after it is fallen into the sea, and has had any continuance there, and
so tossed to and fro by the waves and bellows of the sea, a great number of
them together, the one does so fret and rub or grind against the other, that
it must needs rub or fret away all the sharp edges of those stones, how hard
soever the stone is, for the soussing of the bellows of the sea does never
forget it self to stand still, neither is ever weary, nor desires rest, but is
always laboring and tossing that is in it to and fro, according unto the
bigness of the wind. etc. as by experience upon the sea coast may be seen,
the great and mighty force of the bellows, in the soussings and forcing of the
Beach a shore in the time of any great winds or storms, amongst the Beache
and shingle: The force of the Sea.
for you shall hear the soussing of the bellows of the sea amongst the
Beache, as though it weee the pouring down of a thousand Carte load at once:

So that you may hear it two or three miles from the place where as it is, yea
and sometimes after a Storm, you may see Stones that waygh a pound wayght,
thrown from the full sea mark, into the landewardes two or three rods, by the
very means of the soussing of the bellows or waves of the sea, as those that
do occupy the sea coasts, do see by experience. etc.

The fyfth Chapter shows the natural cause of the Rocks in the Sea. etc.
AND yet furthermore, as concerning the natural causes of Rocks and pinacles
that do stand in the sea very strangelye unto such as do behold and see
the same in sundry places in the sea, and some on the sea Coasts, and some in
Havens, and harborows that are adjoining unto the sea. And this is general for
ever, that look whereas there is any great store of rocks, it is a token of a
deep sea, it is a token of a shallow Sea, that has many sands. And the cause
of rocks in the sea, in mine opinion is this, as it is known unto all persons,
that the age of the world is of no small time: so that I am of that opinion,
that the Rocks that are now standing in the sea, have been parcel of the
maynelande, or at the least, some Islands standing in the sea of long time
ago, although there be no mention made of any such Islands standing in the
seas, in those days. The cause thereof might be this: for that they that were
of long time ago, made no accoumpt of any small Islands, that were toward
our West Occian. For these west parts, in those days were scant peopled, as
Ireland, and England, and Scotland, and Brytayne, the west part of France.
For it is no long time ago, that Irelande has been thoroughly well peopled,
although it be a long time ago, since the first entrance of Brute, yet it
was long since the Incarnation of Christ, before that this Country became
thoroughly peopled, as it does appear both by the Chronicles, and other
ancient hystories.

And also in those days, Navigations not much used in the West Occian.
Navigations was not so much used in these our West Occian Seas, for the Sea was
little used in these our parts, except it were by small Botes, to go a
fishing, and to transport people from place to place, as we do see by
experience. Yet in these days, those that do inhabit, and dwell upon the
Coast of Afryca, to the West Occian, do occupye no shypping unto the Sea,
except small Cannoses, to go on fishing, and such other like, as al Barbary
and Ginny, which were countries well people before these Northwest parts were
peopled as it does appear by Histories.

And furthermore, in the old time, those people that were the dwellers in
these Northwest parts, were very simple and ignorant, as touching the drawing
of Plats and Cards, whether they were Cards Geography, or Hidrographie. etc.
Although that Pitholomias made Tables, as touching the description of the
Countries, yet he did not manyfestly or plainly show the Islands in the sea,
not to this west Occian, as they be now well known. And furthermore, it is
but a very short time ago since that English men did much occupy the sea,
to travail on long voiages, neither did few or none know or understand the
use of their Sea plats, called Cards Hydrography, for within these three score
or four score years, it has been thought a great long voyage, for to go
into Spayre, and then when they did go into Spain, Now Englishmen are as
suff^tient to travail a long voyage, as any other nation.
they went al along by the coast of France, and so to the coast of Byskey.
etc.

But thanks be unto God, now in these days, Englishmen are as sufficient to
travail in long voiages, as any other nations be. But now to return to our
former matter, as concerning the causes of Rocks in the sea, and as I have
said before, that the Rocks have been parcel of the main land, or else some
Island long agone, and by the often soussing of the bellows or waves of the
Sea, that never stands still, the other substance or stuff is beaten and
consumed away, through the great deepenesse of the sea: the other substance or
stuff is tumbled to the bottom, and is no more seen. And as the mynerals in
the ground be of diverse kinds of substaunces, as some earth, and some sand,
and some stones: to conclude, of a hundred several sorts, so that all those
loose substaunces, that would be mollysted with the water, are beaten and
washed away, so that there does remain nothing but the hard mine of stone:
and so he does stand in the sea, as a pynacle or Rock, The cause of Rocks in
the Sea.
as by experience is seen in a number of places to the west Occian, as the
West part of England, and the West part of Brittayne on the Coast of France,
and such other like places, whereas there be innumerable companyes of Rocks,
some being of a great height above the water, other some do show themselves just
with the water, and other some are sunken Rocks being rounded with the water,
some deeper then other some, which would not be known, but only by the
breaking of the sea over them. etc.

And this is my opinion as concerning Rocks in the sea, that have been of long
time agone parcel of the main land, though they be now Rocks in the sea.
Then it may be said, that the land is much lesser then it has been before
time, and so it is. And yet it is but a trifle in respect of any great
quantytie or bigness, as it may be compared unto the ragged edges of a piece of
cloth, and yet the ragged edges thereof being pared away, the thing has not
much changed his fashion or form, neither in respect is become little the
worse. etc.

The syxt Chapter shows the natural cause of the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, and the ebbyng and the flowing of the Havens and Ryuers.
AND furthermore, as concerning the ebbing and flowing of the sea and other
rivers, we do see by common experience, that the Moon does always govern
the same. Wherefore it may be supposed, that the waters do seek and repair,
The waters are drawn by the power of the Moon.
or most specially are drawn by the power of the Moon, that when the Moon
is in the midst of the sky, that is to say, upon the Meridian, then the waters
are deepest or thickest, and also in like manner, in the opposite part, or else
it would ebb and flow but once in.24. hours and 4/^. parts, according unto
the daily motion of the Moon, which we do se by experience, that it does ebb
and flow but once in 12. hours and. part of an hour, and then by this reason
it should flow or be a full sea in all places at a South Moon, and a North
Moon: and so as the Moon passes unto the Westwardes to be a full sea in those
parts, and so to go with the diurnall or daily motion of the heavens, which
we see by experience is contrary, for we do see by daily experyence, that upon
the Coast of Spain, and all those parts that are upon the West Occian Seas,
that the Moon in the Southwest does make a full sea, which is 3. hours after
the Moon is upon the Meridian: and yet notwithstanding it would be a full
sea always where as the Moon is upon their Meridian, and so to follow the
daily motion of the moon, as the moon is carried with primu^ Mobile: so that
it were not let by this great accide^ce that this West Occian Sea, is shot in
between the firm land of Ameryca, on the West part, and the main land of
Afryca, and Europe, on the East side, by which means the waters cannot follow
to be a full Sea, according unto the Moons course, as she does go in her
daily motion, according unto the Moons coming unto the Meridian.

Wherefore it is to be supposed, that if there were no such accidence in the
Sea, to be let by the land, that then it would follow orderly, that the waters
in the Sea would go round, according unto the Moons course in.24. hours,
and so the streme or current, to go from the East into the West, and so round
about. etc.

But now we see that the waters, in the ebbing and flowyng, are let by this
great impediment: for Ameryca does enclose the West part, The Moon does
govern the ebbing and flowing of the water, in two great and notable causes.
and Europe and Afryca the East part, and yet we do see by experience, that
the Moon does govern the ebbyng and the flowyng of the waters of the Sea in
two great and notable respects. The one is this, as it is daily seen in
every place, whereas it does ebb and flow, that the Moon in one quarter of
the Sky does make a full sea for ever, in that place, or haven, or harborow.
And the other great effect of the Moon is this: as it is always seen, that
at the full of the Moon, and also at the change of the Moon, how that the
waters are quickened, and do raise or lift them selves much higher then they
do at any other times, and also does descend much lower, where by it makes
the tide or streme to run much the swifter, as it is seen by daily
experience, in such places whereas it does ebb and flow, at which times it is
called in the time of the full Moon, and the change of the Moon, spring
tides, or spring stremes: and in the quarters of the Moon, it is called Nepe
tides, or Nepe stremes, for that the waters do not lift them selves, or flow
so high as they do at any other time, neither do they descend, or ebb so
low, as they do at any other times of the Moon, and by that means the streme
does not run so swift as it does at other times, for as in spring tides it
does flow or lift it self higher, and descend or ebb lower, then of
custom.

So in neape Tides it does lift or flow less in height, and also ebb or
descend less in deepenesse, then it does of custom, as it is seen daily by
common experience. etc.

But yet furthermore, The var^etie of being a full sea in one River.
as touching the ebbyng and flowing of the water, both in the Sea, and also in
Havens and Ryuers, and although that it does keep an order or method in any
one assigned place, yet is there great varietye in places hard by: yea in one
River, it shall be a full Sea in one part of the River, and in that River, and
at that instant, a low water, as the proof thereof may be manyfestly seen
here in the River of Thames, as it is not unknown, that the Moon in the South
does make a full Sea on the lands end, at the entrance of the River of
Thames, and the Moon in the Southwest, does make a full Sea at London, and
then it is half ebbed on the lands end: But in Rychmonde above London, there
the Moon in the West, does make a full Sea, and then on the lands end, there
it is a low water, as it is manifestly to be seen. etc.

And furthermore, as touching the ebbyng and flowyng vpppon the Coast of the
Occient Sea, for that it flows generally a Southwest Moon, so mine opinion
is this, A full sea and a low water act at one instant in the River of Thames.
by the means of the shuttyng or inclosyng of the Sea between America, and
Europe, and Africa, that it comes to pass thus, for the water cannot follow
the course of the Moon, for after that the Moon is past the Meridian in the
Bay of America, commonly called the Bay of Mexico, that then the waters can no
longer follow the course of the Moon, for that it is letten by the main
land. And then when the Moon does come round about, unto the Southeast,
then the powers of the Moon do tracte or draw the waters unto the Eastwardes,
by which means the waters having a great course or swaye unto the Eastwardes,
are drawn so vehementlye by the powers of the Moon, until such time, as the
Moon does come unto the Meridian, that it cannot sodaynely reuerse, although
the Moon be paste the Meridian to the Westwarde, as we may see many times
by common experience, that any thing forced to move violentlye, is not
presently stayed, but that it must have a time in the staying, as the force of
the dryfte does decay, which must be by little and little. etc. And so by that
means the Moon is in the Southwest before the waters wylbe descended: and for
proof thereof, if that you do put water in any broad or long vessel, and
stir the water in such sort, The cause of the ebbing and flowing in Havens,
and Rivers.
that it may swaye from one end unto the other, and after that it has begun
to sway from end unto end, it will be a long time before it will stand still:
for you cannot make it to stay upon the sudden, but it will sway too and
fro, until that it does stay it self by little and little. etc.

And furthermore, as touching the ebbyng and flowyng in the other inferior
Seas, and Havens, and Ryuers, that happens by this means, as it is a full
Sea in all the places upon the West part toward the Occian Sea, so that
when it door find the water of our inferior Sea, lower then that which does
come out of the Occian Sea, then it runs in until that it comes to be
leuel. For the property of water is always to run unto the lower parts,
and so by that means, and also the sway that it has, it runs and flows
into al Havens, and Harbors, and Rivers, as long as it fyndeth any place lower
or inferior in hight unto it self. And then as soon as it fyndeth the water
behind it, lower then it is before it, then it stays, and begins to run
back again, for as is said before, the property of waters is always to
run to the lower parts: and by this means it flows into al ryuers,
Havens, and Crickes upon the Sea coast, and in some place it does higher
flow more water vpryght, The c^^^ that the water does rise and flow higher in
one place then it does in another
and does ebb more water in like manner down right, then that it does in
some other places, and that happens by this means, and if any place have a
wide entrance, and then afterward is shut up into a narow room, having some
distance to reuerse back again, then the water does rise and flow very
high, for that the water comes in with a great sway, and will not upon the
sudden reuerse back again, as by ensample it may be seen in Seuern, that
comes up to Bristow and as before is said by the River of Thames, that it is
not a full Sea in all places at one instant. For when that it is entered in at
the mouth, and has taken his sway withal, then it runs in by the means
that the water is lower within, then it is with out at the Sea, for that it is
a quarter flood, and more at the Sea, before that the flood enters into the
River, and so flows vpwardes, for it must have a time, before that it can
high so much water at the mouth or entrance to be higher then it is within up
into the River: for it is three parts flood upon the lands end, before that it
be any flood at London, for that the distance is a great way in, and the River
very crooked and narrow, and many points, and Naases that do let and stay the
Tide, but afterward, when it is in, and has taken his sway, then it cannot
so soon reuerse back, until that the water is well descended or ebbed
behind it too the Seawardes, as it does manifestly appear by experience. And
by this order it flows into all Havens and Ryuers, according unto the
indraught.

The seventh Chapter shows the cause of Currantes or streams, that runs
in the Sea, in such places, where it does not ebb, and flow, and of
Currantes or streams in the Sea, there are three several sorts, as in the
Chapter it does appear. etc.
AND furthermore, as touching the Currantes, or the stream in many places in
the Sea, whereas it does not ebb and flow, as that is perceived in many
places, as by experience is seen and known in the Sea. And to let you
understand what those Currantes or Strames be, that it is a continual
runnyng of the water in the Sea always one way, and not reuersyng or coming
back wards to and fro, as it does in such places where it does ebb and
flow, but that the water always in those Seas or parts does ^unne continually
one way, 3. sorts of Curra^tes.
or else at the least a long time, according unto the natural cause of that
current. And of these currantes I do find three several sorts, that do
come of three several causes, and the cause of every one of them is contrary
unto the nature of the other.

And first concerning the natural cause of the principallest Currantes, as by
experience of them is seen in diverse places, by those that have trauayled into
those parts by the Sea, as thus: The current runs forceably, and
continually from the East unto the West, The principal and chief Current of
the sea.
at the Cappe bone speraunce, the Southermost Cappe of Africa, or Ethiopia, and
so reboundeth upon the Coast of America, which is drawn by the powers of the
Moon by ber daily motion, as in the Chapter next before is rehearsed, as it
does appear by the ensample of ebbyng and flowing, and so rebounding upon
the Coast of America, by that impediment, that it cannot get passage that way,
according unto the daily motion, then it is forced to seek other passages, so
that part thereof does seek, and does go through the strayghtes of
Magelen^s into the South Sea, and there the current does go continually from
the East, into the West. But that straight or passage being insufficient, for
that it is so narrow, the current is forced to seek some other way.
Wherefore partly it does divide it self, and so does run up unto the
Coaste of Brasyll, toward the Equinoctial by Cappe Crucis, and Saint
D^myngs, The reuersing back of the current.
and so into the great Bay of Amerrica or Bay of Mexico, and so reuerseth back
again, and so through the Cannel or Channel of Bayhaina, between the Cappe of
Terra Florriday, and the great Island of Coba, going from the West into the
East, which is the cause that those that do go into the West Indies, do first
go to the Cannaries, and so to the Westwardes, to the intent to have the
current to the Westwardes, into the Bay of Mexico, and then when they do
return home, then they do go by the North part of the Bay of Mexico through
the chanel of Baphamea, for that the current does reuerse back from the West
into the East, so that they have the current or stream to help them back home
again. etc. And the^ in like manner, partlye the current that comes about
Cape bone sperance, being beaten by the main land of America, as is said
before, part runs or goes through the straight of Magalenus, and partly
through the great Golfe or Bay of Mexico, as before is rehearsed, and part
does reuerse or go back alongest the coast of the South land that lies on
the South side of the straightes of Magalenus, where the South pole or pole
Anterticke is raised more the^.50. degrees, and so goes back from the West
into the East, alongest the South Coast, until it does come into the East
Occian sea again. etc.

And this is the principallest current, The second sort of currants or
streams.
as those that do occupy those parts by sea, do know, and these currantes
are well known to run continually always one way. etc. The second sort of
currantes or streams, is this, as it is seen in diverse places, that they
shall have a current or stream, where it does not ebb and flow, that always
does go unto the windewards. But that never happens but in the time of great
wind, and the cause thereof is this, that the sea being wrought or troubled
with great storms of wynd, does raise great bellows or waves, or great
knottes in the sea, and that runs rollyng with the wind, and does cause
the water too be vnleuell or uneven, as it is the nature of water to seek to
the lower parts till that it does come unto his leuel: The cause that it does
not ebb and flow in some seas.
so by that means as the wind bears the water in the sea, with great waves
or bellows, so the current in the water does go against the wynd, to come
unto his leuel again: as the experience thereof is seen in diverse places,
where it does not ebb and flow, as in the myddle earth sea, or leuant seas,
and within the Sound, that is to say, within Elson Nore that has narrow
enterances, and yet is great seas within, which does take away the effect of
ebbing and flowing, for that the straight is not sufficient to let in water
ye^^ugh, for to cause it too ebb and flow. And this effect in like manner is
many times seen, sometime on the coast of Barbary, and in such other like
places, where it does not ebb and flow. etc. The third sort of streams or
currantes.
The third sort of currants or streams that runs in the Sea, where it
does not ebb and flow, as by experience is seen in diverse places, is caused
by the sailyng into the Sea of some great and mighty River, that the land
water coming forceably down the River, and so emptyeth or runs into the
Sea, does cause a current to go in the sea, against the mouth of the River,
as it is seen in the middle earth Sea, against the mouth of Nilus, and also it
is many times seen in the North parts, at the spryng of the year, when the
Snow and the Ise is melted or consumed into water. And then against the
mouths of such Ryuers, as do emptye them into those seas, does cause a great
current to run a great distance from the land, in such places as this effect
happens in those seas. etc.

The eight Chapter shows the cause that the waters of the Sea are salt, etc.
AND furthermore, as touching the natural cause that the water of the Sea is
salt, whereas the opinion of some Authors is, as Aristotle, and other, that it
is made salt by the powers of the Sun, by the drawing of the fine substance
of the water, up into the air, the Sea is made salt by that means. Then if
that were the whole cause, the^ the water of the Sea should be most saltest
under, or near the Equinoctial. For that the Sun has a greater force by
the means of the direction of the shadow of the Sun, whereby the Sun
should draw or distill it more faster, then it does in any of the other
Clymates.

Yet notwithstanding, it is seen by experience, that the water of the Sea is
as salt in the Latitude of.60. degrees, The sea is salt very far to ye
Fro^th parts.
in the Occian Sea, as it is under the Equinoctial. And as some have said, it
is as salt in Iselande, and at the North Cappe, which is within the Polle or
Cyrcle, near five degrees. And there the Sun cannot have any great power,
for that the Sun has but a very glaunsyng shadow in June. And in the Winter
part of the year, the Sun will not appear or rise unto them, in the space
of ten Weeks.

And furthermore, if the water of the sea were made salt only by the powers
of the Sun, then those seas must needs become fresh, by another great
cause, and that is this: For in the Spring of the year, in the meltyng of the
Snow and the Ise, there falls such abundance of fresh water, that it would
make it fresh, and yet the water is very salt, insomuch that in diverse places
in the North part, they do make salt of the sea water, although that it is
not made by the heat or powers of the Sun, as it is made in Spain and in
France, for that they do make it in Scotland with the heat of the fire,
Salt is made of the sea water in Scotland and in Rosey.
and so as some have said, it is made in Rosey, not far from Saint Nicolas.
And furthermore, as it may be proved, the water is not made salt by the power
of the Sun, for that the head of the great River Nylus that comes from the
Mountains of the Moon, and has Latitude beyond the Equinoctial twelve
degrees: And so in sundry places, stands in sundry great pooles, Fresh water
in seas or pooles under the Equinoctial.
not far from the Equinoctial, and so passes from under the Equinoctial,
unto the Northwards, and does empty it self in the middle earth sea: and yet
that water is fresh, and not salt. So that it is manifest that the powers of
the Sun, are not altogether the cause that the water of the sea is salt.
Wherefore in mine opinion, the water of the sea is become salt by the Minerals
or substance of the nature of the ground, which is salt properly of it self,
and so mollified or soked, that it turns unto water, having any moisture or
lyquor to come unto it.

As for an ensample, that in sundry places, it is known that there is Salt
found and dygged out of the ground, and is perfect Salt, and occupied for Salt,
after they have made it clean, and beat it small. And as it has been credybly
reported unto me, there is a hill or Mountain in Barbary in Africa, Salt mines.
that Salt is dug out thereof, and is a great distance from the sea. And the
like is reported to be in the kingdom of Hungary, here in Europ, that there is
salt dug out thereof, and is sold and bought into diverse places, as into
Polonia, and into some places of Germanye.

The sea made salt, by the substance of the ground.
Then it is a plain case, that there be such wynes or mineralles in the
ground, which makes the thing to be most manifest, that the Sea is made Salt
by the mineralles or substance of salt in the ground.

And yet for further proof thereof, here in England, at the Wyches in
Chesseshyre, there is in sundry places, a water or Bryne that they do make
Salt of, and is a good distance from any Sea. And some have made argument, that
it may come from the Sea, through the Veins or Coues in the ground, which is
most contrary, by this means: for if that it come from the Sea, through the
ground, then it could not be salter then the water of the Sea, for that at
the Wyches, is much salter then the Sea water. For if that it come from the
Sea, then it must be somewhat fresher then the Sea water, by the means of the
scouring it self through the earth, and by meeting of some fresh waters, as
the earth is not without fresh water. etc.

And furthermore, as concerning the saying of the Philosopher Plato, in his
Dialogues of Tymeus, and Crecia, and also is written by Marcellius Ficius, that
in the old time, there was an Island in the Sea, over against Africa, bygger
then Africa and Asia, which Island was called Atlantyda, and that the Kings of
this Island did govern a great part of Africa and Europa, and as Marcellius
Ficius, and Plato say, by the means of a great earthqake, and a great rain,
this Island sunk, and the people thereof were drowned: and after the sinkyng
of this great Island, the Sea Atlanticus was so full of mudde by the means of
the sinckng thereof, that the sea Atlanticus could not be sailed with ships in
a great time after. Now if this be true, Of the great Island called Atlantica
that sunk.
that there was any such Island, that did so sincke, and that the Sea was so
full of mudde, then after that the mudde is settled unto the bottom, as it will
do in process of time, then the sea must needs be a very shallow sea, for
such a great mass of earthy substance being sunck with water, must needs make
a very shallow Sea: and yet it is seen and known almost generallye unto all
me^, that it is a deep sea, yea no man can tell of what depth, for that they
cannot find any ground: for that sea is greatly occupied with Ships, and
that Island lay ^ast from Spain and Barbary, which is most occupied with
Ships, of any sea: for all the great trade of shipping is now in these days
used out of Europe. And then what place can be greater occupied, then into our
west Occian sea, called in old time, the sea Atlanticus, as it is the whole
trade from England, France, and the low Country, and Denmark, and such
like places of Europe, into Spain, and Portugal, and Barbary, and into the
myddle earth Sea, and into Ginny, and into the Carnarie Islands, the Madera
Islands, and the Islands called the Syrtes, and to the West Indyes: so that it
is the greatest occupied sea with shipping in the whole world: so that the same
sea is not unknown, but that it is a great deep sea: therefore it is to be
supposed, that the fundamental nature or stubstaunce, or ground thereof was of
Salt, and so soked or moyllfied with the water, that the superficies thereof
might be sunck under the water, and so in process of time to soke the mineral
of the Salt, that the stony and earthye substance is now settled down so low,
that it seems unto the simple people, that it has no bottom: for otherwise
such a huge mass of earthy substance could not be so lost, as it does
appear by that great Island called Atlantida, that Maccellius Ficius, Plato,
and Proclus, with other Authors, does make mention of. etc.

The nienth Chapter is as touching the cause of Earthquakes.
AND furthermore, as touching Earthquakes, and the synking both of the main
Land, and also of Islands in the Sea, and also of the drying up of Waters, as
great Pooles and Rivers, and also of the casting up of Ground both in the sea,
as well as upon the main Land, although it be the providence of almyghtye
God, to bring it so to pass, for the punishment of the people, When god does
plague the earth, he does punish both good and bad.
that are upon the face of the Earth: and as well the godly do perish, as
the wicked, when these things happen, which are the scourge of the wrath of
God, for that he will have his divine glory known: yet he does nothing but
that it is done by a mean, and has a natural cause of the coming of it so
to pass, although the thing it self be supernatural.

And furthermore, although I am simple and utterly unlearned, neither to the
judgment of the people to have any great experyence in these causes, yet
notwithstanding being as one more bold then wise, to show mine opynion unto
the World, and also it is possible that in some points my opynion does not
agree with some of the ancient Writers, that have written of sundry things in
their Books of natural Philosophye. Yet notwithstanding I am so bold to
show my opinion, although it be possible that it may dyffer from the truth.
Wherefore they may use such credit unto the matter, as the reasons in these
matters shall support unto them, for if that by reason my opinyon be not to be
lyked, then they may the less regard it. etc.

And this first, as concerning the sincking of ground as experience has
showed, that it has happened in sundry places, and in sundry ages of the
world, my opinion is this, as in the Chapter before is showed, that in those
places that it has happened, that the substance of the ground in that place
is Salt underneath, The cause of the sinking ^ the ground.
and so being soked or mollyfyed with water, in process of time, it is turned
unto water, and then the earthy substance that is a loofe upon it being
ponderous and heavy, and not supported or borne up with any hard thing, then
it must needs settell it self down and sincke into the water: and so by that
means the water stands above the superfycies thereof, as it is showed in the
Chapter going before, by the sincking of the great Island called Atlantyda, etc.

And furthermore, as concerning some kind of earthquakes, that happens in
such sort that it renteth and lyfteth and shakes the ground, and possible
lyfteth the ground higher then that it was before, and so remains and
stands still afterward, with out any settling afterward. etc.

My opinion is this, by the means before rehearsed, Of Earthquakes.
that there may be some veins in the ground that may be of the substance of
salt, as before is rehearsed, and yet may be enclosed with other mines round
about it, as we may see by experience, how often that the veins of the ground
may alter, and in a small circuit, as in some place may be hard stone, and in
another place chalk, and in another place, claye, or sand, or the our of
diverse kinds of mettalles, with a number of sundry sorts of substances that I
do emyt. etc. Now this mine or substance of salt being enclosed round about
with other substances or stuff, as before is said, Water cannot d^part from
any place, until the air, or some other substance does occupy the round
and the springes of water in the ground coming unto it, both soke it and
molifyeth it, that it is turned unto water: and then being water it is apt to
run in the veins of the ground, and yet it can not depart to go from that
place, until that it does draw air thither. And look as the air does find
^ent through the powers in the ground, and does repair unto that place, so the
water does decrease and runs in the veins of the ground unto other places:
and thus in process of time the substance of salt being turned unto water,
shall be diminished or gone and the room thereof filled full of air, and yet the
ground aloft shall stand fyrme and fast, for that it is borne up or supported
by rocky or stony substance. etc.

Now it is possible, that some will make argument, and say, how should air
come thither, for that it is so low in the ground, and that there is no place
open unto the air, whereby it may come thither? But they do not consider this,
that no place can be vacant, but that it is furnished with somewhat, either
with earthy substance, or water, or air, or Fire, and every one of the^ is
finer in substance then the other, as the earthy substance is gross and
hard, so the watery substance is thinner, and yet ponderous and heavy: so that
there can be no place hollow or concaue in the earth, but it is filled with
water or air. For the water by his ponderousnes does descend and seek to the
lower parts. And then look where as the water is not sufficient to fill the
hollow place, then air does repair thither to fulfill the rest, taking his
place next above him, as we may see by experyence, that if we do dygge in the
ground, we shall meet with Sprynges of water: as by the ensample of the
digging of Wels in the ground, that when they have dygged so low, and have
found but a small spryng, then letting it stand a certain time, thither will
repair a great quantity of Water afterward. And then this being true, that
the water does find passage through the veins in the ground, then it is a
plain case, that air must the rather find passage, for that it is an Element
more thinner and subtyller then water, and will soke through any small thing
sooner. For the nature of air is to descend very deep into the earth, if it
be not filled with other substaunces. So in like manner water, although it be
ponderous and heavy, will ascend vpwardes, if the air cannot come thither by
the means of the closeness or thightnesse of the thing that the water is
enclosed aloft or over it, and also the water will not descend or fall down
sodaynlye, although the air be under it being enclosed in it, that the water
by his ^underousnesse or weight, does cause the air to seek through the
water, which will be a long time, except the water and the air be be styred
by some accidental cause.

And now to return to the cause of Earthquakes, The cause of Earthquakes.
my simple opinion is this. The air being enclosed in the bowels of the earth,
which has happened by the means before rehearsed, or by diverse other means,
which I am not able to rehearse, that the air may be enclosed in the ground
or earth, and then when it shall please almighty God to bring it so to pass,
for God is the worker of all things, either by one mean or another, that the
waters may arise and increase in the ground, and especially after any great
and continual rain, and the water being ponderous and heavy, does seek into
the earth, expelling or thrusting out the air that is near the superficial
part of the earth, and so by his ponderousness setleth it self lower and
lower, and then the great and continual rain does lode the superficial face
of the earth with water, and does cause the earth to swel and shut it self
close aloft on the upper part of the earth, and that water in the earth, by
setlyng it self lower and lower, and the earth by his closeness will not
suffer the air to depart out of the earth, so that there is no room in the
earth to hold or contain both the Air and the water, but that the air in
the earth is forced to rent the earth to have room sufficient. And also at
that time the earth is more apter to separate it self, then it is at any other
time, for that the earth is soked and made soft by the great moisture that is
in it.

And by this means, in such places whereas this cause does happen that the
ground does quake and tremble, Of the shaking of the earth.
and the buildings that are near thereabout, until such time as the air does
find passage to get out of the ground, and if that it cannot find passage,
then it does split and rent the ground, casting al things that are over it,
or in the way of the air, that breaks so out of the ground over it, and
possible to turn the buildings underneath the earth or ground to the great
and maruaylous destruction both of the people and buildinges where this
happens. etc.

And by this means those places, that have been Land, may become Water,
being near unto the Sea or any great River.

And in like manner whereas there have been any Pooles or Ryuers may be dried
up, as clean as though there had never been any Poole, or River, or water
there, by this means: for after that the air in the earth has rent the earth
to seek passage out, then this thing happening there or near unto the water,
may run or descend into that place whereas the air was before, and also in the
turning up or splitting of the ground, there may be some hills or cliffes
standing up much higher then the ground was before. And so by this means the
places that have been dry land, may become sea and water, and in like manner
that place that has been water, may become dry land. etc.

And furthermore, in like manner there may by this means before rehearsed, be
Islands cast up in the sea, by the means of the air breaking out of the
earth. etc. for that is the property of air, to run and to seek into all
places, that is not occupied or furnished with some of the elementall
substances, so that rather then any hollow or concaue place in the earth shall
be vacant, air will seek thither, if it were in the very Center of the
earth. For as is said before, if water be able to seek passage through the
veins in the earth, then much rather the air shall do it, for that it is
much thinner, and subtiller then water, although that air will give place unto
water, by his ponderousnes or weight. etc.

The tenth Chapter shows the reason, how America, and all the Islands and
new found Countries, and Lands, became peopled, and of what posterity they be
come of. etc.
AND furthermore, as touching the vain arguments and opinions of some
people, as touching the discovering of a number of Lands and Islands, that
have not been found nor known but within little more then.100. years, as all
America, and a number of Countries, and great and small Islands more, and none
of them of any quantity or bigness, for that they are peopled: and for that
they are peopled, I have hard some vain and foolish arguments thereof, why
there should be people there, for that these Countries or places were never
known before, except there were any more Adams then one, or any more ^oyes
the^ one. So we may see by experience, how apt a number of people are to fall
into errors, vsyng most vain and contentious arguments in those matters that
are past their capacity, which is a great offense before God, and also to the
eui^l Ensample unto the world, unto such as do hear of the same. For it is no
small error for us to fall into, for to think that there was an^more Adams in
the world then one, for that it is utterly against all the Canonycall
Scriptures: and also it is as great an error to say that there were saved any
more people after the deluge or flood, more then N^y and his famyly, that was
in the Arc with him, as it is manyfestly declared in Genesis. etc. Wherefore I
think it not hurtful to show my opinion as concerning how all America became
peopled, with all the other new found lands and Islands, lying in the sea,
wheresoever they be. etc.

First thus my opinyon is, that America is part of the great Island called
Atlantida, as it is further declared in the eight Chapter going before, How all
the new found Countries became peopled, as all America, and all other Islands.
that the Kings of the Island did govern a great part of Europe and Africa,
and according unto some Authors, that the Kings of that Island were the sons
of Neptunus, then that does sygnifye that there was a trade or occupying of
Shipping between these known parts and that great Island, and then when that
great Island did synke, as before is declared, the Sea Atlanticus was so full
of mudde, All the great Island called Atlant^da, did not synk, but part remained.
that it could not be sailed in long time afterward. And by the Ensample
of America, that all the Island did not synke, but the Westermost part did
remain still. Although this happened long before the coming of Christ, and
as before is declared, the great store of mud and fylth that did remain in the
Sea, was the only cause that did let the Traffic and passage between us in
these known parts, and them that were unknown unto us in all this long time
of this mud remaining in the Sea: so long time, that those men that were the
Sea men in those days, were of long time dead before the Sea was clear of the
mudde. And also those sea men, Old sea men being gone, the other did never
attempt to seek any thing
as it is to be gathered, that were in the Island, did perish by the means of
the sinking of the East side of that great Island. Wherefore it is to be
gathered, that those that were in these parts, did never attempt to seek any
Land that ways to the Westwardes, neither those that were remaining upon that
part of the Island that did not synke, did never attempt to seek any Land
unto the Eastwardes.

And in like manner, they could not so conveniently do it, for that they had
no Shipping to go unto the Sea, but small Boats called Cannouses, which be
occupied to no other purpose or use, but only to go on fyshing, or else to
transport themselves from Island unto Island, near unto the main. etc. And
yet it is possible that some people might pass out of these parts by shipping
although they never made any return again, but might tarry there, and
inhabit in those parts.

And now insomuch that it is known, that they had boats, and did transport
them selves from place unto place, and from Island unto Island, before the
fynding of the main land of America. So it is not to be meruayled at, why all the Islands in the sea, that are of any quantity, have people in them,
considering that they had in all those parts, the use of Boats from the
beginning after Noy, The Indians had Boats asoone as we here in these parts.
or what time we had Boats. etc. And now furthermore, as touching the great
and fyrme land that lies to the Southe^wards beyond the Equinoctial about.50.
degrees, and is extended unto the South parts, no man in these parts does
know, and it is peopled too, and the people thereof may come out of America,
for there is nothing to let them, but a narrow ^^a, called the straight of
Magalenus, and they having the use of Boats, how easily is it to be passed?
So that there can be no I^and, lying in the sea, near unto America, that is of
any bygnesse, but that it is peopled, whether it be to the Eastwardes toward
us, or to the West parts in the South Sea, or the East Ocean Sea. etc.

And furthermore, as it does appear in the Scriptures, that Noy had three
sons, that is to say, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet, and that Sem, the eldest son of
Noye, did inhabit the parts of Africa, and Cham or Ham, the second son of
Noy, did inhabit the parts of Asia: and Iaphet the youngest son of Noy, did
inhabit Europe, and the Islands in the sea, as the great. Island Atlantida,
now called America, and that the Kings of that great Island, were the sons
of Neptunus, and the people, the posterity of Iaphet, the youngest son of
Noy. etc.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters of the fyfth and last book called a
Treasure for Trauaylers.
To the reader of the fifth and last book.

The first Chapter of the fifth book, shows the natural causes how sands
and banks be engendered or made, hoth in the se^ and rivers. etc.

The second Chapter shows the natural causes of Marish ground, and other
plain meddows or ground by the sides of ryuers, etc.

The third Chapter shows the natural cause of the high cliffes by the sea
coasts. etc.

The fourth Chapter shows the natural cause, why the Beach, and the great
bolder stones on the sea coasts is become round and smooth, without any edges
or corners. etc.

The fyfth chapter shows the natural causes of the rocks in the sea, etc.

The sixth Chapter shows the natural cause of the ebbing and flowing of the
sea, and the ebbyng and flowing of havens and rivers. etc.

The seventh chapter shows the cause of currantes and streams that run in
the sea, in such places where it does not ebb and flow: and of currantes or
streams in the sea, there are three several sorts, in the chapter it does
appear etc.

The eight chapter shows the natural cause that the water in the Sea is salt.
etc.

The ninth chapter is as touching the cause of earthquakes.

The tenth chapter shows the reason how America, and all the Islands, and
new found lands and countries, became peopled, and of what posteriritie that
they be come of. etc.

FINIS
Faults escaped in printing.
The first Book
fol. pa ly^e. faults. Correction. 3 1 20 set the situate 3 2 8 marking making
3 2 24 make mark 4 1 9 of that, or that are 5 1 11 for line for the line 5 1
12 other side ^thelida. 5 1 13 ridge ring 5 1 last the height 0 5 1 last
measure of the that measure 7 1 12 and the and at the 8 2 13 standinges places
9 1 20 as is 10 2 8 lie by 12 1 11 there then 12 1 20 the line should the line
ye should 13 1 1 there though 14 2 3 thence there 14 2 23 12 into 12. 15 2 12
28 24 15 2 19 5 15 16 1 23 lack look 17 1 1 do mays 17 2 4 staff
transuastorie 18 2 many transytorie transuastorie 18 2 many ringes wings 19 1
many transytorie transuastorie 20 1 32 that their 22 2 16 part put 27 2 22 by
too 28 1 7 52 32 29 2 10 and half of 29 2 22 the chapter the.8. Chapter The
second Book.
fo. pa. line. faults. Correction. 1 1 22 unto and unto 3 1 8 90 60 7 1 13
Southwest South Southwest 9 1 10 32. put put 10 1 11 30. degr. 49. 50.
degrees.12. 9 2 20 ^ondon land 11 1 2 54 16 12 1 13 36 360 13 1 30 Eison More
^^on Nore 15 1 7 Cappe hill Ape hill 15 1 13 18 25 15 1 15 London London.10.
mi. 15 1 the longest day the day.14. hours.35. mi. 15 15 1 minutes southeast
minutes, and is Southeast 24 under the tropic of Cancer 16 1 25 0 19 1 11 East
and South East and by south 19 1 30 7 98 19 2 30 Maria in Aria 21 2 11 25 52 22
1 33 20 4 22 2 2 12 4 The third Book
fo. pa line faults Correction. 3 1 28.29 that that that 3 2 12 of a board of
board 5 1 2 be corner be from corner 5 1 3 22 32 7 1 4 leuel beuel 7 1 11 leuel
beuel 14 2 9 with the within the 15 1 12 30 3. quarters 15 1 19 racking raking
15 1 32 whole hold 16 2 15 would have have 19 1 22 13. inches 10. inches The
fourth Book.
fol. pa. lin. faults Correction 3 24 as is 4 1 last targed karged 5 1 27 man
may 7 1 30 with which 7 1 53 multiply by multiply that by 8 2 23 in the mould
of metal in the mould of wood. 2 31 8 2 5 led raised or highed 11 1 1 near
as needs 12 2 18 30. 36. 12 2 32 weight the weight that the 12 1 23 one kind
of one kind 14 2 6 by the proportion o^ the by proportion, the 17 1 19 hang
change 18 1 22 h^e^ hee^d 18 1 3 to hold to heeld 19 1 18 collect calke 19 1 ^
in, yenough 19 1 24 carrying carenyng 19 2 30 cartienes Cap^tynes The fyfth Book
fol. pa. lin. faults. Correction 5 2 6 mould mouth 6 1 2 so assynges
suff^ng^s 8 1 8 suites sorts 8 2 5 su^f^^nges suff^nges 8 2 22 sea, it sea, as
it 9 1 3 Ireland England 9 2 4 sou^^inges suffinges 9 2 19 rounded covered 11 1
15 in at 13 1 6 beaten le^ten 15 1 12 wast West 6 2 3 meayne main 11 1 30
tra^t attract 11 26 higher high or

Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1578.


