THE ANATOMY OF CONSCIENCE. OR A THREEFOLD REVELAtion of those three most
secret Books: 1. The Book of Gods Prescience. 2. The Book of Man's
Conscience. 3. The Book of Life.


In a Sermon preached at the general Assizes holden at Derby, in Lent last.
1623.

By Immanuel Bourne Master of Arts and Parson of Ashouer in the County of Derby.

Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men.

LONDON, Printed by G. E. and M. F. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop near S. Austins Gate, at the Sign of the Pyde Bull. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great Seal; And one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy COUNCIL: The true Honor of a good Conscience in the Church
Militant, and the reward of true Honor in the Church Triumphant.
SO many are the Bills of Complaint (Right Honorable) of those who are daily
petitioners unto your Lordship, for your grave and Conscionable Judgment in
matters of Equity, that there needs no further testimony to persuade the
Consciences of all those, who mourn for the iniquities of the Times: That
either Conscience is fled already from Earth to Heaven, (as it was long since
complained of Justice) or else the most of men are even now plotting to banish
her out of the world; exercising themselves (contrary to the practice of S.
Paul) to have always their Consciences not void, but full of offenses both
toward God and toward men. But praised be the Lord of mercy, who has showed
kindness toward his Servants; and placed your Honor as the Lord-protector of
Conscience, in these perilous times of her persecution. Amongst diverse others
whose hearts-desire is bent, to manifest their thankfulness to God for his
Grace already showed; and to pray for a daily increase of happiness unto your
Lordship: I am emboldened to send this Anatomy of Conscience, to be revived
with the warmth of your Honorable favor in this cold and frozen Age of the
world. It was at first preached before the Honorable and worthy Justices of
Assise for the County of Derby; Sir Henry Hobart, Sir Edward Bromely.
the memory of whose free Approbation (with the rest of that worthy Auditory,)
has since emboldened me to cast an eye over it once again; and that I might
satisfy the desire of some few, to publish it for the benefit of many. And now
if it please your Lordship to vouchsafe unto it a shadow of Protection; I shall
not cease to pray (in private, as I do in public,) That the Lord will so
guard you with his glorious Angels; and guide you by the direction of his
gracious Spirit; That all your Counsels, and Actions, may tend to the Glory of
his holy Name, the Relief and Comfort of the oppressed, the good and benefit
of this Church and Commonwealth. And thus commending you to the safe Tuition
of the great Lord Keeper of Israel, I rest,

London, July 14. 1623. Your Honors most humble and dutiful Chaplain IMMANVEL
BOVRNE.

THE ANATOMY OF CONSCIENCE.
REVELATION 20.12. And the Books were opened, and another book was opened,
which is the Book of Life.
Preface. SAint Basil the great (who was Magni nominis in Ecclesia, of great
account in the Church of God) expounding those words of the Prophet Esaias, 1.17.
Discite benefacere, Learn to do well; he gives this excellent admonition,
worthy to be followed of every Christian, Habete in oculis terribilem judicii
diem tanquam Pedagogum, Have always before your eyes that terrible day of
Judgment as a Pedagogue or Schoolmaster, not only to instruct, but by an
awful respect to keep you in well doing. And if that great and general
Assizes (when we must all appear before the tribunal Seat of Christ) be a
meditation fitting for every Christian, and that at all times, and in all our
actions; (as S. Basil intimates) then certainly it must needs be verbum in
tempore, a word not unfitting for the time and season, to speak of judgment,
and the preparation to judgment, at a time of judgment; to speak of that
general, in this particular; in this present, of that for to come. And rather,
because there is an Analogy, a resemblance, a similitude between them: For
the Spirit of God (to declare that love of God to man) describing in sacred
Scriptures the things of God oftentimes descends to man's capacity; and as in
other so in this portion of Scripture: For being to show John the day of
Judgment, and the manner of Christ's preparation, he takes a similitude from
earthly Judges, whose place of judgment is commonly a Throne or Seat made more
conspicuous then the rest, set forth in state convenient for so high an Action;
upon which the Judge ascends, being clothed with Roabes and ornaments of
justice, (wisely ordained by antiquity) as emblems of that gravity, sincerity,
and majesty of a Judge, the very sight of whom, is and should be both a joy
and comfort to the innocent; and a fear and terror to the nocent: the Judge
being set with his Assistants, and in a readiness, next are the Prisoners
brought unto the Bar: and then the books are opened, examination taken, and
evidence given; and last of all, the sentence is pronounced to acquit the
innocent, and condemn the guilty. This is the form of temporal judgment. And
in a manner not much unlike to this, (if you cast your eyes upon this vision)
you may find the proceedings shall be in that last and general Assizes.

The division of the Vision. John beheld a Throne, most white and pure (in
which no spot of foul injustice could be seen) and him that sat thereon (even
Christ, that righteous Judge, both God and man) from whose maiesticke face The
earth and heaven did fly away, as the Spirit speaks in the first part of the
Vision.

The dead both small and great; all people from all quarters, none excepted;
and these all Did stand before God, as ready to receive their trial. So it
follows in the immediate words before my Text.

The Books were opened, and another book was opened which is the Book of
life.

And the Dead were judged of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their works.

When I first cast mine eyes upon this Vision, I saw it was not unfitting for
this time: But is too much to be comprehended within a regular hour (as S.
Bernard calls it) and therefore resolved only on the words of my Text.

And the Books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the Book
of life.

This is the preparation unto the Sentence, and indeed the

The Books were opened.

Explication. Almighty God in Scripture is said to have Books, not properly,
but per (...), by that usual metaphor in which the Scripture speaks to men's
capacity, that men might understand the will of God: so in the former, and so
in this part of the Vision; for God needs not books to register men's names or
actions, he is infinite in knowledge, and of endless memory: known unto God
are all his works (and so all both words and works of men) from the
foundation of the world. Acts 15.18.

But thus the Vision was to show by this the matter that shall then be put in
execution: the books shall then be ^pened, that is, every man and every work
shall then be tried, and as evidence is given and actions found, so shall the
sentence he pronounced.

Division of the Text. There are diverse kinds of Books in Scripture mentioned,
some given to God and some to man: I only cast my eyes upon my Text. And to
let pass variety of opinions, and judgments of Divines about these books, I
find, as most accord, these books are three. Perkinsius in symbol. Seb. Mey^r
in Apocalyp. Inchino de nouissim.


Liber praescientiae, the Book of Gods eternal prescience or foreknowledge.

Liber conscientiae, the book of every man's particular conscience. Both these
are understood, and not expressed: but of these, Divines expound those former
words, The books were opened.

Liber vitae, the book of life: and this is named in the words that follow:
And another book was opened, which is the Book of life.

The Book of Gods prescience opened. Of these in order, by assistance of Gods
gracious Spirit, your Christian patience, and the times permission. And first
of the first of these most secret Books, The book of Gods eternal
prescience, and foreknowledge. This shall be opened at that great Assizes: For
as the Lord is a God of knowledge, 1. Sam. 2.3. knowing every word in our
tongues, as David speaks Psalm. 139.6. having all things written beforehand in
his Book: ver. 16. And discerning the hearts of the Children of men: Prou.
15.11. So will he manifest this knowledge at that day of judgment, Mat. 10.26.
There is nothing hid that shall not be revealed, there is nothing secret shall
not be brought to light. Luc. 12.2. God will bring every work unto judgment
with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. 2 Cor. 5.10.
Eccles 12.14. Judge nothing before the time (says S. Paul) until the Lord
come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels o^ the heart. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Aderit dies illa, in qua omnia
facta hominis quasi in quadam tabula picta demonstrabuntur; S. Hieronym.
Epistol. ad Occanum. Basil Tract. de virginitat.
(as S. Hierom speaks) That day shall come, in which all the deeds of men
shall be made plain, as it were in painted tables. Yea, not only the
actions, but the way and means which every one has used in committing
wickedness, as S. Basil testifies: to whom S. Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. hom.
5. in epist. ad Roman. Simil. 1.
and diverse other of the ancient Fathers agree. But how shall this be, may
some man demand? I answer. Even as in every house or chamber the air is full
of sands or moats, which cannot be discerned until the Sun beams make the
air seem light, and then these Atomi, these moats are seen in great
abundance: Even so those secret sins which now lie hidden within the chambers
of men's hearts, when as the Sun of righteousness shall lighten every corner,
shall then be manifest unto the eyes of all. elements shall melt with fervent
heat, and Christ the Judge of all dissolve the Snow, that is, unmask the
fowlest face of Diabolical hypocrisy; then shall the ugly countenance of
sin be shown, and those polluted souls (which like deformed bodies, covered
with gay apparel) have walked in silken roabes of seeming righteousness,
stand naked unto all beholders, abhorred of God, and men, and Angels, for their
black impieties.

Use. Tremble then ye Hypocrites, who make the world believe ye are holy,
just, and good, while horrid wickedness is gilded over with colors of
deceit, who think to cozen God with fair pretenses, as ye can do men. But
ye are deceived, God knows your secrets now, and then shall make them
manifest unto the world. Then is a time of trial, when the silver shall be
severed from the dross, and the wheat winnowed from the chafe, for his fan
is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat
into his Garner, but burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. Mat. 3.12.
Jerusalem shall then be searched, and that with lantern and candlelight.
Zephan. 1. that is, Zephan. 1.12. Bern Sermon 55. in Cantic.
the Saints themselves shall be enquired into (as S. Bernard interprets it.)
And Quid tutum in Babylone, si Jerusalem manet scrutinium? (says the same
Father) What shall become of Babylon, the profane and wicked world; if
Jerusalem, the holy City, shall be scanned? Quid facient tabulae, quando
tremunt columnae? (as speaks S. Gregory) What shall the slender Tables do,
when the Pillars of the house do quake and tremble? If the green tree be
cursed for bearing only leaves without good fruit, Mat. 21.19.
what shall be done unto the dry, which brings not forth so much as leaves
of good profession, having neither show nor substance of devotion in them?
Certainly confusion, shame, and infamy shall be their portion, hellish horror
shall take hold upon them, when God shall open the Book of his prescience, and
make them a gazing stock to Angels, men, and Devils.

Application. Wherefore if any such be present, let my counsel be acceptable
unto you, break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, Daniel 4.12.
if so be there may be a healing of your tranquillity; if not, you have heard
already what shall then betide you, when the Books are opened.

Use 2. But as for you ye Sons of righteousness, whose hearts are upright
toward your God, lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Luc.
21.28. Blessed are ye for your iniquities are forgiven, and sins are
covered. Psalm. 32.1.2. The Lord will blot out your transgressions and remember
your sins no more. Esaias 43.25. But for your righteousness that shall be had
in everlasting memory, your works of piety, and works of pity shall not be
forgotten. Mat. 6.4.
Mat. 25.36. Though other men unjustly censure you, it is God that sees in
secret, and will reward you openly: your zeal for truth and righteousness are
in his presence: Act. 10.4.
your prayers and almsdeeds are gone to heaven before you: your sighs, and
sobs, and tears in secret, he puts into his bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
and all these things are noted in his Book.

Rejoice therefore in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, for it is for
your good that the Books are opened. And thus you have seen the first book,
the book of Gods eternal prescience and foreknowledge.

2 The Book of Conscience opened. The second follows, and this is Liber
Conscientiae, The Book of every man's particular Conscience, for this also
shall be opened at that last day of reckoning (as the Master of the Sentences
affirms in his fourth book and forty three Distinction:) Conscientia dicitur
cum alio scientiae (says Aquinas) Conscience is said to be knowledge with
another: Aquinas prim. part. Sum qu. 79. a^tic. ^3.
and well it may, because God and conscience bear witness together. Or,
Conscience is Cordis s^ientia, the science or knowledge heart, because the heart
knows both it self and other things. Hugo de anima li^. 2 cap. 12.
When it knows other things, it is called science; and when it knows it
self, it is called conscience, (as Hugo, de anima observes) Therefore the
Scripture calls Conscience the Heart, 1 Ioh. 3.20. and rightly it may in this
respect, because Conscience reflects upon the Heart, being enlightened by
understanding; and hence it is, Concludens scientia, a concluding science (as
the Schoolmen speak) arguing out of principles, from whence it either
acquitteth or condemns us in all our actions. I cannot stand to show you at
large the diverse opinions of the Schools, and other Divines concerning this
Book of Conscience. I will as briefly as I can give you a touch of some few,
that you may the better conceive what Conscience is. Ori^en lib. 2. in Romans
Origin he thought that Conscience was every man's particular Angel, a good
conscience a good Angel, and a bad conscience an evil Angel: but this
conceit was weak without proof or approbation. Some think this Spark of
Conscience, to be Habitus animae, Relicta rationis sci^^^lia. Aquinas 1. par.
Sum. qu. 79. artic. 12. and 13.
A habit of the Soul: to which Aquinas bends in the first part of his
Sums, Question the seventy nine, Article the twelfth: But in the thirteenth
Article he concludes, that it properly is rather Actus animae, An act of the
Soul, reflecting upon it self, Res mixta, Durandus and other Schoolmen.

Some later Divines do think it to be an office or function of the Soul, set
as an Arbitrator, not only to examine, Humes. Perkins.
but to give evidence and judge of particular actions between God mind; and
that, by which reason or judgment; and that whereby the things apprehended
memory; Even so, that function or office of the soul, whereby a man (upon and
Conscience, as the Conscience knows it self.

And thus is Conscience an excellent part of the Image of God in man: for as
God looking into himself from all eternity, sees himself, and begets his
Son, the express image of his Father; even so the Soul of man which is
divine, looking upon it self, sees and beholds it self, with the state and
condition thereof.

Quest. But how can this be, may some man demand?

Answ. I answer. Even as in a looking-glass a man sees his own face by
reflection, and discerns the beauty or deformity of that, and the eye sees
it self, which else it cannot: So, in Conscience, which is the eye and glass
of the Soul, the Soul beholds her self, and sees her own beauty or
deformity, together with the print or stamp of every action which it has
committed, either good or evil, giving evidence to God and to her self, and
judging either for us or against us, as the deed requires.

The seat of Conscience. Some have placed this Conscience in the Will or Heart
of man, some in the Memory, some in the Understanding, which has a twofold
operation, the first Theoricall, and thus the understanding only contemplates
and considers of truth and falsehood, but goes no further. The second
Practical, and so it considers every particular circumstance, and searches
whether it be good or evil, and under the later of these Conscience is
comprehended: not that conscience is a part of a part, only circumscribed in
the understanding as a part of that: for though the understanding be the
Throne and Palace of Conscience, where it exercises the principal offices,
yet as the soul is Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part corporis: whole in
the whole, and whole in every part of the body; (though chiefly in the head or
heart) so the Conscience is whole in the whole soul, keeping a Court in the
whole; and yet exercising (not every part, for the soul is indivisible in
respect of parts, but) every faculty and power of it.

understanding it is a Judge discerning the actions, and giving sentence to
acquire or condemn, according to that Rule or Law with which it is enlightened.

memory it is a Register, to witness what is done, or what is not done. In the
Will and Affections, an executioner

The manner of working in the Conscience. The manner of working is by a kind
of practical syllogism; The Mayor is that Law seated in the understanding:
The Minor brought by the memory; I remember I have done or not done according
to that Law of God: The conclusion follows by a second act of the
understanding; therefore I am guilty or not guilty, and showed in the heart or
will, by fear or joy, or such kind of affections.

Adams fall, but left in man, to make him void of all excuse, then is the
stroke or force of Conscience not so powerful, making answer only to that
knowledge with which it is enlightened: But if, besides this light of nature,
our understandings are informed with the knowledge of God, and of his Will (as
God in sacred Scriptures has revealed himself unto his Church,) then is the
force of Conscience much more powerful, affecting the soul with joy or
grief, with peace or trouble, according to the information of the
understanding, and application to the will and heart of man.

Memory gives evidence of all our Actions, and of the circumstance and manner
how they have been done, either openly or in secret, of which the
Understanding taking knowledge, by a second Act it lays them to

4 A description of Conscience. Upon which there is presently a reflection and
application to the Will; by which the Heart, as by a Divine power, is stricken
and moved with affections, according to the nature of that Knowledge, Act, and
Application, by mean whereof, it is touched and affected. For knowledge must
go before the feeling or stroke of Conscience, thy heart can never feel that
to be good, or evil, which thy mind knows not to be so: and according to
the measure, nature, and quality of thy knowledge, such will be the testimony
and feeling of thy Conscience: a knowledge which is light, or doubting, or
uncertain, makes a light and easy stroke, affecting the Heart but little,
either with joy or grief, with fear or boldness, or the like; But on the
contrary part, if the knowledge be holy, sound, and good, grounded on the word
of truth rightly understood, then will it make a heavy stroke upon the
Conscience, if the deed be evil; as it does a heavenly joy and peace unto the
soul if that thy actions be good and answerable to the Word and Law of God.
And thus is Conscience not only Lux intellectus, the light of the
understanding (as Saint Basil intimates) but (if it be rightly informed and
followed) Norma vitae, the rule and guide of all our life, as St. Chrysostom
observes. And now by what has been spoken you have seen a glympse of
Conscience (though not a perfect sight) and may remember it with this or the
like description. Conscience is not barely an Act or habit of the soul, or
will, or understanding, (for it produces acts, and acts may cease to be, as
habits may be lost; but Conscience can never cease to be, nor can it be lost,
though it may lose the use (for a time) as a man may lose the use of Reason in
the time of Drunkenness) It is therefore rather an office, or faculty, or power
of the soul, created in man by God, and set within him both as a witness and
a Judge, yea a comforter to the godly, and a tormenter too unto the wicked.
Conscience is no Forraigner or strange Inhabitant, but an In-dweller, remaining
with us, yea within us, which after sin, torments; and after righteousness,
comforts the soul of man. Conscience is the Recorder, the principal
secretary to register all our thoughts, our words and actions. It is like a
Chrystall-glasse, wherein the soul beholds herself, and sees what she has
done, and what she has left undone. It is Priuata Lex, a private Law to judge
within herself, from which there is no appeal, but unto God: For when the
Civil Law, and Common Law have done, then this begins. It is the Lord Keeper,
the Chancellor, the Vice-Deus, the Vnder-God, who keeps a Chancery in the
soul of man, and without all partiality, being rightly informed of every
circumstance, gives just and righteous judgment of the cause.

The power of Conscience. Great is the power and strength of Conscience. It is
under God indeed, and subjects a man to God; because God can bind the
Conscience: but it is above all men that are in the world, for though Kings are
bound in Chains, Psalm. 82.6.
and Nobles in linkes of Iron, yet Conscience can no man bind; they may bind
thy body and cast that into prison: but thy conscience they cannot bind; it is
above their strength and beyond their power, they are not able to do it; And
yet Conscience is able to bind all, not only inferior persons, but Kings, and
Nobles, and Judges of the earth. It is above all, and that in respect of a
fourefold Office.

The Offices of Conscience. Testimony of Conscience, for a man's conscience is
as a thousand witnesses to acquire or condemn before God or men, and the voice
of conscience is far more sure then the report of many others: Seneca lib. de
Mor.
for as Seneca well observes, Falli sape poterit fama, conscientia nunquam: the
report of others may oftentimes deceive thee, but (for thine own actions) thy
conscience never, that will give true evidence, with or against thee, for what
thou have done, or left undone.

Examination or Trial of Conscience, and in this she exceeds all outward
Trials. For men in trials often err because the Truth is hidden from them,
and cannot easily be found: but conscience in trial of our actions knows the
truth: she is an eyewitness, one of which is better then a thousand; and
she proceeds from grounds and principles within, known to herself, and
therefore quick-sighted conscience soon perceiues which way the balance
draws, the thoughts mean while accusing or excusing for the fact, (as Saint
Paul expresses it,) Romans 2.15.

Trial being made, she proceeds unto her third office; And this is the
Judgment of Conscience, in which she is also excellent, for she has the keys
of binding and loosing, of absoluing or condemning. If she bind, it is faster
then with fetters of brass; if she loose, she sets as much at liberty, as
the Angel did Peter from his Chains: Act. 12.7.
and if it concern a matter of fact, her sentence being past, upon evidence
given and trial made, there is no recall, she admits no writ of Error,
oftentimes abused to make the suit immortal and more costly then the cause is
worth; but this is no deed of Conscience: Ambros. sermon. 50.
And Saint Ambrose gives the reason, Sine excusatione est, qui Conscientiae
suae iudicio condemnatur: He is without all excuse, who is condemned of his
own Conscience; he who is judged by another, may sometimes hope for pardon,
but he who is judged by himself, of whom should he require it? of none but
God who is above the Conscience. And therefore by true faith and true
repentance he must fly from himself to Christ, before he can have peace.

Execution is not delayed, which is her last Office: and this she performs in
her own person; for sentence is no sooner given, but presently she affects the
innocent with peace and joy unspeakable: and the guilty with fear and torture
that cannot be expressed. This just reward is not deferred till aftertimes, but
begins in present, both to the one and to the other. The godly have their
Heaven begun on earth, Philip. 4.7.
enjoying that same Peace of Conscience which passes all understanding. And
the wicked enter into Hell before they dye, Mark 9.44. Esaias 66.24.
having that worm of Conscience their companion, which shall live for ever to
torment them, Chrysostom. Hom. 16. ad popu. Antioch.
so Saint Chrysostom. As he that lives in wickedness is punished before he
go to Hell, (being stinged in Conscience) so he that lives in righteousness,
before he go to Heaven enjoys a joy unspeakable.

Prevention of objection. And thus you see what Conscience is, and what her
actions are, by which she is discerned from other faculties of the soul, and
acts or actions of the mind and will of man; Perkins.
as intelligence, opinion, science, faith, prudence, or the like. Intelligence
simply conceiues a thing to be, or not to be: Opinion judges it to be
probable or contingent: Science knows it to be certain or evident: Faith is
a persuasion whereby we believe things that are not, or assent to the truth of
things that are: Prudence discerns what is fit to be done, and what to be
left undone. But Conscience goes further then all these, for it not only
gives evidence and examines, but determines or gives sentence of things done,
by saying unto us, this was done, this was not done; this may be done, this
may not be done; this was well done, this was ill done: and in execution,
either rewarding or punishing us for what we have done, or left undone, either
good or evil. Thus is Conscience of a divine nature, being placed in the
midst, as an Ambassador between God and man, and given by God unto him for a
perpetual companion: It is like thy shadow, Nec fugere, nec fugare pot^ris,
thou can neither fly from it, not make it fly from thee: Ague fits are
shaken off, this never, Ruth 1.16.
but like Ruth to Naomie, it will follow thee whither soever thou go: the
body shall leave the soul, and the soul shall leave the body for a time, but
the Conscience shall never leave the soul, but whither soever the soul goes,
thither shall the Conscience repair; and in what state thy Conscience is when
thou departest out of this life, in the self same it shall meet thee in that
day of judgment, and shall remain with thee, either a comfort or a torment to
thy soul for ever. It is true (that in this life) Conscience sometimes is not
felt, but as it were benumbed or senseless; and then unto the godly man (who
mourns because he cannot feel that joy of conscience which his soul desires)
it is like our Savior fast asleep in the bottom of the ship, while his
Disciples were tossed with the waves. Mat. 8.24.
And to the wicked (who could wish it were dead) indeed, it is like the muzzled
Mastife tied in chains, which can neither bark nor bite, and therefore lets
the thief commit his wickedness with pleasure. But when this Conscience is
awakened, or the chains thereof untied, then to the godly it is like Christ
^^mselfe, the sovereign comfort of the soul. But to the wicked, like the
Mastiffe set at liberty; or like a Fiend of Hell to rend and tear his soul
in peece^.

Conscience in this world is often as a book shut up, or fountain sealed; but
at the day of judgment it shall be opened, and then both good and bad shall
feel the power of it. The Books were opened (says the Text) And it is S.
Chrysostomes observation, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50.
Conscientia est codex, in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur, The Conscience
is a book, in which our daily sins are written; and so is our righteousness
also, our good actions as well as our evil; and both these shall be brought to
light when the books shall be opened. Aug. lib. 20. de Ciuit. dei. cap. 15.
So S. Augustine, virtute diuina fiet, etc. By the divine power it shall be
brought to pass, that to every one, their works either good or evil shall
be called in memory, and with a wonderful celerity by the eye of the mind
they shall be seen, that the Conscience may either excuse or accuse; and as
that bears witness, so shall the owner of it be either saved or condemned.

Use. Oh then beloved! How should this opening of the Book of Conscience at
that last general Assizes, move every Christian in the mean time, to labor
earnestly for the avoiding of a bad, and obtaining of a good Conscience.

1 An evil conscience in respect of faith. Conscience is either de fide, or de
moribus; it concerns either the faith, or life, the knowledge or practice of
a man: a good conscience in both is to be sought after, and a bad in both to be
avoided. If we look upon Conscience in the first respect, we shall find
some Consciences to be evil, led aside to error, and oftentimes to heresy,
by wrong information, being deceived by Satan's subtilties, or drawn away by
false teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. and 13, 14.
of whom S. Paul gives warning, 2 Timothy 3.6. and S. Peter seconds him in his
second Epistle and second Chapter. And it is a wonder to see what misery these
deceived souls do willingly endure, rather then offend their consciences in
any thing (though blinded by a false intelligenc^) witness the Idolatrous
Gentiles, and superstitious Jews (of whose madness the Scripture gives a
testimony) and many Christians also, whose weak and tender souls are much
afflicted for want of growth in spiritual understanding, and sound judgment in
knowledge of the truth; (and therefore both to be pitied and prayed for) so
strong are the bands of ignorance (worse then Egyptian darkness) and so
powerful is Conscience (once awakened) to keep a man in obedience to that rule
and law, Exodus 10.22.
with which it is enlightened, and of the truth of which it is persuaded; yea,
to the shadow of that truth, with which sometimes (in stead of substance) it is
deceived.

To prevent this erroneous Conscience; to keep our selves from it, and ^t from
us, it is heavenly counsel which is given by good S. John, that blessed
Divine. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are
of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 1 Ioh. 4.1.
(and now especially they are too common in our land) Search the Scriptures
therefore, for in them is certainly eternal life: John 5.39. and try these
Teachers by the law and testimony, the will of God revealed in his word: if
they speak not according to this rule, it is because there is no light in
them. Isaiah 8.20. And that thou may be sure to speed the better in this
search for truth; Malach. 2.7.
to satisfy thy Conscience in a time of doubting, advise with those who are
truly learned and religious, and pray for the assistance of Gods gracious
Spirit, that it will pleas^ him to lighten thy eyes that thou sleep not in
death, and to direct them aright to inform thy conscience: and pray for others
also (and I will pray with thee) that this good Spirit may lighten those that
s(...) darkness, Luc. 1.79,
and in the shadow of death, and guide their feet into the way of peace. And
being thus guided by him who cannot err, thou shall be sure of a good
Conscience, which is also to be found as it has relation to faith. 2 A good
Consci. in relation to Faith. And this is a Conscience rightly informed by the
good Spirit, in the law and word of truth, the blessed guide to life eternal;
the black clouds of Ignorance being banished, and the understanding
enlightened with the glorious beams of saving knowledge, from whence there
springs a heavenly joy and solace to the soul: for though the Christian
knows here but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and sees but darkly as in a glass, his knowledge being but ignorance and
darkness it self, in comparison of that blessed light, with the brightness
whereof our minds shall shine in heaven. Yet has the life of Grace an
excellent difference from the state of Nature; 1 Cor. 1.14. 2 Cor. 4.4.
the natural man is blind, and cannot see the things of God, and therefore
walks in fear or desperate madness, not knowing whither he goes, sinning
against his natural, or following the checks of an erroneous Conscience to his
own destruction. Romans 1.21.28. 1 Cor. 2 15.
But the spiritual man discerns all (yea sees the secret) things of God,
being directed by that sacred guide of truth, in the light of which he walks
on boldly, with joy of heart and heavenly steadfastness, through the dark and
gloomy wilderness of this world (which is full of clouds and mists of error)
to that blessed Canaan of perpetual happiness, where is the light and glory
of that truth which can never be extinguished.

Thus I have briefly showed the difference between the good and evil
Conscience, in respect of faith and knowledge; the one rightly informed and
directed to the light of Saints; the other led aside by error to eternal
darkness.

Of Conscience, as it has relation to life and practice. But my intent is now
to speak especially of Conscience, as it concerns the good or evil life of
man. And this is either good or evil, according to the good or evil actions
which a man commits. For Conscience at first was good before the fall of our
first Parents, but after that, they soon did feels, and that by woeful
experience, the happiness of a good, and misery of an evil conscience:
therefore They hid themselves from God and were afraid, because their
Conscience told them they were naked. Genesis 3.10, 11. And this evil of
Conscience they left to their posterity, as heirs of their corruption. And as
Conscience is evil by corrupted nature, Romans 2.15.
naturally accusing man of inbred wickedness: so grows it worse and worse by
actual transgression. And hence it comes to pass, that as there are diverse
kinds of sins committed in the world; so are there diverse kinds of evil
consciences amongst the sons of men, but all of them to be detested, and
their society estranged from us.

Conscientia mortua, a dead and cauterized Conscience; A Conscience seared with
a hot iron, as S. Paul speaks. 1 Timothy 4.2. These Consciences are full of sin,
yet feel it not, they are asleep and cannot see it; Their minds are blind,
Job 12.25. Exodus 9.35. 1. Sam. 8.6. Luc. 18.2. Ierem. 3.3.
like Jobs wanderers: their will perverse, like Pharaohs: they are left of God,
as Saul: they are careless, like the unjust Judge, Not fearing God, nor
reuerencing man: They have harlots foreheads, as the Lord complains against
the Jews; and their state is miserable, because it is hard and difficult to
return; for, Can the Blacke-moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye do good which are accustomed to do evil. Jeremiah 13.23.

This Conscience is as bad as may be, and yet it is common amongst profane
ones in the world, which makes them sin with greediness, running post-hast to
drunkenness, to whordome and profaneness; breaking of Gods Sabbaths without
Conscience; for why? This Book of Conscience now is closed: but they shall one
day feel the terror of it, when as the Book of Conscience shall be opened.

Conscience, and that's as contrary unto this, as is the Pole Ant-articke to the
Articke, the South unto the North; and this is Conscientia desperata, a
desperate Conscience, too sensible both of the sting of sin, and wrath of God
against it; this was in Saul, Achitophel, and Judas: 1. Sam. 31.4. 2. Sam.
17.23. Mat. 27.5.
it is the execution of Conscience upon the wicked in this life (for here in
part to some the book is opened, therefore their Hell begins;) but at the
day of Judgment they shall feel the sting and worm of Conscience in more
fearful manner, because the book of Conscience then shall be at large
unfolded.

Conscientia spatiosa, a large and spacious Conscience, for it can hold a
volume of impiety; especially a Delilah or Agag shall be welcome; Judges 16.4.
1. Sam. 15.9.
a beloved vice, or princely sin it makes no Conscience of. This is like
Cheuerill or Kids leather, because 'twill stretch, and is so far from
straining at a Gnat, that it with ease will swallow down a Cammell. And this
Conscience is no Farraigner but a free Denizon, it dwells amongst us, (more
is the pity) you shall meet it as you travel in many countries.

Clergy, it is entertained of such, who make no conscience with what
corruption they obtain the Cure of souls so they may get it; and then they
care as little for to feed them; except it be with meat that is worse then
poison, their own bad example, by which they bring themselves and others to
destruction. Luc. 11.35. Mat. 5.13, 14.
A woeful thing when that the light is darkened, and the salt has lost his
savor; when as the Preachers life should lead to heaven, it leads men to
perdition.

Lawyers it is entertained of such, who make no conscience to excite and stir
up men to needless suites; Luc. 11.46.
encouraging to war when peace is better, entertaining Causes with their
arms wide open, and receiving fees with both hands; with one, to speak; with
the other, to hold their peace: And when they have got a man to be their
prisoner, they feed him then with bread and water of affliction, until his
purse be empty, or his state consumed, what time they send him home amongst
his neighbors to end the controversy with two honest men in stead of twelve.

Gentry, where it is entertained of such who make no conscience of most vile
oppressions, grinding the faces of the poor, and racking their Tenants at so
high a rate, that though themselves, their wives and children are their
Landlords slaves, yet can they not be kept from beggary. And as little
Conscience do they make of Sacrilege (a sin as common and worse then the
former) whiles they are not content to rob the Church of all her ancient
rights, but in profane and wicked manner, by symoniacall compacts, sell both
themselves, their Priests and people to the Devil; and this they think is no
sin, it is so ordinary (because their Conscience is now asleep) but they shall
one day find it so, when as the book of Conscience shall be opened.

Jurors, and that at time of Assise and Sessions, you may easily find this
Conscience to be in those who make no conscience of an oath, but contrary to
their oath will give their verdict, not as truth and conscience would direct
them, but as malice or affection leads them. But woe to such, for their
conscience one day shall be both a witness and a Judge against them, when
once the Book of Conscience shall be opened.

Common sort, especially inferior Officers, who should be even the life of Law,
in bringing wickedness before the Judge, and after sentence given, in seeing
Justice executed. But they have Consciences as wide as hell; either for fear
of greatness, or for love of baseness, smothering vile enormities, which not
being killed in time, have filled the land with sins that cry for vengeance:
And this, though men be sworn, yet do they suffer, because their book of
Conscience is not opened. And thus you see the large and spacious Conscience,
and the several sorts of men by whom it is entertained.

Conscientia superstitiosa, a superstitious Conscience, most commonly amongst
our ignorant Papists, blinded with shadows, circumstances, ceremonies;
deceived with shows, and selfe-conceited opinions of Antiquity, universality,
infallibility of judgment, succession of government, and the like; being wedded
to will worship, Isay. Coloss. 2.18.
and sporting themselves in the prison of ignorance, until it pleases God to
bring them (as he does many of them before they die) out of darkness in^o
light, and from the power of condemning error, unto the saving Truth of God.

Conscientia scrupulosa, a scrupulous or dubious Conscience, 1 A dubious
Conscience in matters of substance. which if it be in Substance in the
tenderhearted Christian, assaulted with the violence of Satan's sleights, or
ouer-burdened with the sight and sense of selfe-corruption, or terrified with
too much contemplation of Gods fearful judgments due to sin (for the guilt
of which the Conscience is accused) and affected with too little of Application
of Christ's precious merits, and those gracious promises of pardon and freedom
from Gods direful vengeance, upon The causes of doubting in a tender
Conscience. true repentance, and faith in Christ. If this be the cause of
fear and scruple in this kind of Conscience, which sometimes brings the weak
and feeble Christian to the mouth of Hell, and pits-brinke of despair: Then
though in the end it turns unto the good of Gods Elect, to move them to a
trial of their states; to search and prove their hearts and consciences, to
find out what is amiss, and what is the cause of this their security, in which
before they were lulled asleep, being idle and neglecting to Conscience; Or
their want of faith in Christ, and firm affiance on Gods true and
neuer-failing promises; trust too much unto themselves, seeking for peace and
comfort more in the measure of their own righteousness, then in the free
imputed righteousness of Christ: Or ignorance, and erroneous judgment of a
Christians state, here in the Church that's militant, and those many combats we
must undergo, before we pass from all our enemies, or get within the gates of
Paradise (for any one of these may bring a Christian from the rock of
stedfastnes, to a world of doubts and fears:) Though in the end (I say) these
fears and scruples may procure this good unto the soul, to see it self and
find the cause of this distress; yet is this sickness dangerous, and the cure
is difficult: And therefore here the weak and tender conscience had need to
pray, and seek a wise, a holy, and a good Physician, who like Christ, may
pour in wine and oil, the Law and Gospel tempered together with piety and
discretion; Luc. 10.34.
and applied with a soft and gentle hand, until the Conscience being rightly
informed, may see the cause, and labor to remove it, that so a settled
steadfastness may be obtained.

A dubious conscience in respect of circumstance. And how this may be, I shall
show the means (God willing) Conscience as it is good: to which I rather refer
this Conscience (though it be sick, and weak, and doubtful) because it may be
in the best and dearest saints of God.

But if this Doubting be in Circumstance, as it is often in the selfe-conceited
Separatists, who are over nice and curious, in tything Minte, Annis and Cummin:
in standing upon shadows, ceremonies, and things indifferent. But too
careless otherwise, letting the greater matters of the Law alone, (as our
Savior sometimes told the Pharisees (in this respect) their predecessors. Mat.
23.23.
) Then though their desire be good to do nothing contrary or against their
conscience: yet were it far better, to seek and labor that their Conscience
may be rightly instructed; that being obedient unto government, they offend
not those are weak; nor make a rent and Schism, in the seamelesse Coat (or
Church) of Christ. John 19.23.


Many more there are of evil consciences, but I leave them all, and desire we
may all leave these, because they all are evil, and at last, if not prevented,
will bring their entertainers unto ruin, when once the book of Conscience
shall be opened. For as Saint Bernard speaks, Bern. lib. de Conscient.
there is no punishment greater then an evil Conscience: and he gives the
reason, because of all our sins, Conscience is the witness, the Judge, the
torment, the prison; it is Conscience which punishes, Conscience which
condemns.

The like has Saint Basil, Saint Gregory, Saint Hierom, Basil. Orat. 23. de
Iudicio. Greg. lib. 13. moral. cap. 13. Hierom. in Isay lib. 16. Chrysostom. hom.
52. in Genesis
and diverse other of the Fathers. Great is the terror of an evil Conscience;
it was Conscience (says Saint Chrysostom) that moved Abimelech to send away
Isaac, Genesis 26. It was Conscience that affrighted Joseph's brethren in Egypt,
Genesis 42.21. It was Conscience that changed the countenance of King Belshazzar,
while his thoughts did trouble him so that the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Daniel, 5.6. It was Conscience
that made Foelix tremble while Paul did reason of righteousness, temperance
and Judgment to come. Acts 24.25. Though by the grace of God in Faith and true
Repentance, a man may fly from the evil of conscience, yet conscience and the
sentence of her Court cannot be escaped. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de verbis Isaiae.
Vidi Dom.
And S. Chrysostom gives the reason. Hoc enim tribunal non pecunia
corrumpitur, non adulationibus acquiescit, etc. This tribunal of Conscience is
not corrupted with money, nor will it cease from sentence with fair speeches;
it is Divine, and will perform that for which God has made it. And this
especially shall be seen when that the Book of Conscience shall be opened.
Let this suffice to persuade every Christian by flying evil to avoid an evil
conscience. A word or two which may move us to seek for a good conscience,
that joy may be unto us when the books are opened.

The excellency of a good Conscience. A good Conscience is a continual feast
(as the wise man speaks) Prou. 15.15. It is rich and beautiful like the
Temple of Solomon; It is a field of blessedness, a Paradise of pleasure, the
joy of Angels, the treasure of a King, the Arc of the Covenant, the Palace of
God, and the Habitation of the blessed Spirit, as Hugo de Anima describes it,
lib. 2. cap. 9. It is as the Apple of the Eye, the tree of life, and the Bed of
the Soul, wherein a Christian desires to rest, that he may pass from that
sweet and quiet rest of Conscience in this world, to that rest eternal in the
world to come. Paes. in Jacob.
It is related of Augustus Caesar, that when a Roman died, who while he lived
was infinitely in debt, (yet lived in pleasure) that of all his housholdstuffe
which at his death was to be sold, Caesar did only wish to buy his Bed, for
that (says he) must needs be of an excellent virtue, which could make the
owner sleep, who ought so much. And if that Bed was judged worth so much; then
certainly this Bed of Conscience, which can give such quiet rest, amongst a
world of troubles, must needs be prized at a higher rate, and therefore more
to be desired. For what greater happiness can there be unto a Christian in
this life, then to enjoy a good, a peaceable, and a quiet Conscience,
especially if ever he have felt a wounded Conscience, or been affrighted once
with doubts, and fears, and terrors (like a man that's tossed in a raging and
tempestuous Sea;) then is there nothing comparable unto this peace of
Conscience, nor any knows how good, how excellent it is, but they that have
it. And yet a quiet Conscience is not always good, nor peace so profitable
unto the soul.

1 Some peace of Conscience not good. For first, the Conscience that is blind
and ignorant, may be at peace and quiet, because it neither sees the filth of
sin, nor knows the Law of God; nor understands what virtue is commanded, or
what vice forbidden: or if it do, it is but as men see stars in a dark and
cloudy night, only the great ones; not considering the strictness of
obedience which God requires unto his Law: therefore it feels not sin, nor
is it troubled for iniquity, because it knows it not, but walks on boldly
to destruction.

Conscience that's secure and careless, so ouer-busied with the entizing
pleasures or profits of this world; or lulled asleep in that bewitching cradle
of sins dark impurity, that such a man can find no leisure, no not to
dream of Heaven; or if he do, he soon forgets his dream, and falls
toward Hell before he be aware.

Conscience dead, or feared, made senseless with the custom of iniquity; it is
without life, and therefore feels no war, (whiles the Devil that strong
man armed, keeps the Palace,) but is at peace, Luke 11.21.
until the Trumpet sound unto the Battle, and Gods mighty power awaken it
from this benu^med Lethargy, unto the fearful sight of sin, and then it is
like a roaring Lion to devour its owner. This is a peace that's full of
bitterness in the end: and therefore to be taken heed of, as a thing most
dangerous to the Soul.

Quest. But what is the difference may some man say, between this evil peace of
an evil conscience, and that which is to be desired; that happy comfort of a
good and quiet Conscience?

Answ. I answer. The good and quiet Conscience rightly informed, agrees in
this with that which is blind, or dead, or careless, that both are quiet and
peaceable; but there is a difference in their peace and quietness.

The difference between true and false peace of Conscience. For first, the
Conscience that is dead, or blind, or careless, is quiet and at peace, because
it sees not sin, nor does it feel it; or if it does, yet it is so lulled
asleep with dead security, that it considers not what good or hurt it brings
unto the soul: and therefore (for that time) it is insensible of any trouble,
and a kind of peace or truce is taken, in which it lives secure. But a good
Conscience is quiet and at peace, because it feels sin to be forgiven, and
upon faith and true repentance beholds God the Father pacified, and well
pleased in his Son.



Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
But a Conscience pacified with the hope of pardon and assurance of Gods
favor, begets a joy of soul which is unutterable, cherishing the heart with
divine and heavenly mirth, even in the midst of many dangers. Saint Ambrose
he observes an evil conscience is a Bed, Ambros. lib. de interpellat. c. 3.
that when a man should sleep, it gives him torments, fears and terrors in
stead of quietness.

Bern. in Vigil. Natiuit. sermon. 3. Foelix conscientia in qua luctamen timoris
and laetitiae reperitur. etc. Etsi ^imet a Iudice, sperat a Saluatore, etc.
Quia non timor sempiternus, sed laetitia sempiterna. 1. Sam. 24 4, 5.
A Conscience that is good, procures the contrary: not that a Conscience good is
always free from sense of trouble; for (as Saint Bernard says) happy is that
Conscience in which is found the combat of fear, and joy; fear when it
looks on God as a just Judge punishing for sin, and joy when it beholded
him as a loving Father pardoning sin to his Children, in Christ, and for the
merits of his death and Passion. And the tender conscience which is dear in
sight of God, is like a Spider that sits within the Center of her web, and
if a fly but touch the out-most thread, she feels it instantly. Just so the
child of God is touched in Conscience for the smallest sin, like David but
for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment. This is a Filial Fear, which is
and ought to be in all the Sons of God, and it is the means for to preserve a
good and quiet Conscience.

Quest. But how may this good conscience be obtained? what must we do to get
it? that so we may take care to keep it.

Answ. I answer. A good and quiet conscience is a special gift of God, to him
therefore we must pray from whom comes every good and perfect gift: Iam. 1.17.
and use the means which is the readiest to procure it.

But before I show what this means is, Christ Jesus the foundation of true
peace of Conscience. 2. These. 3.16.
observe this by the way. There is now but one foundation upon which this peace
is builded: and without which there can be no true peace unto the soul. Adam
before his fall, had a good and peaceable conscience, because he was free from
sin, remaining in his perfection. Romans 4.25.
But now only Christ Jesus and the merits of his death and resurrection, is
the means of peace: God the Father being well pleased with us in him; Mat.
17.6.
and Christ purchasing and procuring our peace by the blood of his Cross:
Coloss. 1.20. And this if we apply rightly unto our selves by a true and
lively faith, we are justified, and being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, Romans 5.1.

There is nothing that can make a good and peaceable conscience, but the virtue
of his blood: Genesis 8.9.
the soul like Noah's Dove can find no rest but in this Arc. Though our
conscience condemn us not, yet is God greater then our conscience, 1. John
3.20.
and can easily find a cause of war against us, if he look not upon us in
his Son. It is this blood of sprinkling that speaks better things then did
the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. It is this blood of Christ, who through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, that can purge our
consciences from dead works to serve the living God. Heb. 9.14. It is this
only that begets a good and quiet conscience, Romans 8.1. Romans 6.4.6. Philip.
2.12. 2. Pet. 1.10.
taking away sins guilt from us: and crucifying sins power in us, that we
may walk in newness of life; working out our salvation with fear and
trembling: and laboring to make our calling and election sure. If thy
conscience sting thee, Numb. 21.9.
Christ is the brazen Serpent that can cure thee. If the Law of thy conscience,
like Mount Sinai affright thee with terrors, Exodus 10.23.
(worse then Egyptian darkness,) in Christ is the Gospel of light that can
enlighten thine understanding, and lighten thy heart with joy and gladness. If
the red Sea of thy troubled conscience hinder thy passage to escape thy enemies
that follow thee, and to come to the happiness before thee; Christ is the way,
the truth, John 14.6.
and the life, by whom thou may pass boldly through the midst of dangers,
to the Canaan of peace and freedom. This is the good Physician who can cure
all diseases, and therefore easily procure peace unto a troubled Conscience.

The means to get and keep this peace of Conscience. 1 Timothy 1.19."
First therefore to get and keep this blessed peace of Conscience, it is not
to keep merry company, to drive away melancholy, (as some imagine) but to
keep thy most holy faith, and preserve the memory and application of this
blood of Jesus, as a rich treasure in thy soul: It is an Antidote to expel
all the poison of Satan's temptations, or thy own corruptions; there is no
sin thou have committed can be more powerful to plead against thee, Orizen
^^ulla species peceati tanta est qua non sit superior Jesus. 1 John 1.7.
then (upon faith and repentance) the merits of this blood is to plead for
thee, before the throne of Gods Justice; nor any thing more effectual to
cleanse thee from all thy sins; and therefore being rightly applied to free
thee from conscience of iniquity, and settle in thee a most sweet and blessed
peace.

A direction to peace. Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 46. 1. Emundes conscientiam ab
omni inquinamen^o, etc. 2 Circundare tibi flores, etc. 1. Means to procure
peace. 2 Cor. 13.5. 1. Hinderance of peace.
And to direct thee further, follow Saint Bernards counsel: first cleanse thy
Conscience from all kind of pollution, from whatsoever has or may offend thy
conscience, or procure the trouble of it; and next, gather those sweet flowers
of spiritual graces of faith and good works, of all heavenly virtues to deck
thy soul that it may be a pleasant temple for the good Spirit to dwell it.
This is the way for to enjoy a good and quiet conscience.

Gal. 6.15.16.
from which thou can not be free, until the thorn be taken forth, and the
corruption drawn away: even so whiles that any sin, though never so small,
lies cankering in thy heart, it will wound thy Conscience with fears and
doubts; and if it be not removed in time, procure a senslesnesse, (like a
Gangrene) to kill both soul and body.

and first make search into thy Conscience, lest any secret thief Delilah) to
rob thee of thy strength, Judge. 16.16.17
and by treason at unawares to deliver thee over to thy enemies: and next, be
sure to keep a careful watch over all

Word, the Sacraments, the meditation of Gods gracious promises, and prayer
unto that good Spirit, who makes all these effectual to the soul: David,
Ezekia, Job, and Paul, that blessed Saint, Psalm. 88.14.15. Isay 38.13.14. Job
10.17.18.
We are troubled on every side, (says he) yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, (or full of doubts) but yet despair not, 2 Cor. 4.8.

Mat. 11.28.



Fly evil then, the evil of sin, the least sin in thought, in word, or
deed, (as Hell it self) especially known and presumptuous sins, those
sins which are against the Conscience, resist and pray against, as David did;
Psalm. 19.13.
and kill the seeds of sin, fly the occasions, quench the fire betime, lest
it grow too big for thee; Psalm. 137.9.
dash Babylons children against the stones while they be young. Thus shall thou
more easily conquer iniquity and get or keep a quiet conscience.

2 Means to get peace of Conscience. But this is not all that's necessary to
procure thy peace of Conscience. Thou must not only eschew evil, but do good,
to get and to preserve this good and quiet conscience.

1 Do good. In the law of God Vice is not only forbidden, but Virtue
commanded, and obedience in both respects required, and that Universal
Obedience: thou must with David have an eye to all Gods Commandments: Psalm.
119.
thou must hide them in thy heart, that thou may not sin against God, thou
must not take care of the first Table only, Psalm. 119.
and neglect the Second: nor of the Second only, and neglect the First. God and
thy neighbor are both objects of thy love and obedience: Luc. 10.27.
(though in a different respect) and toward both thou may not forget thy
duty, (if thou desire to keep a good and a quiet Conscience.) One sin, yea
the lest sin against any precept, is enough to condemn thee; for he that
fails but in one point is guilty of all, James 2.10. and as if thou have heard
but of one thief, hidden secretly in thy bedchamber, it is sufficient to
keep thee from sleep: so one sin of omission or commission is able to
hinder thee of this peace.

2 Do good sincerely. Secondly, thy obedience must be sincere and upright,
thou must do every duty uprightly (though thou can not do it perfectly) God
requires the heart: Psalm. 119.7. Prou. 23.26. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
and the affections of thy heart and whole heart must be given unto him. Gods
pure eyes cannot endure to behold any impiety, neither shall any evil dwell
with him; and much less can he endure hypocrisy, that our works should be
done in show only, and not in substance and sincerity before him. It is only
the sincere and upright man that can enjoy a good conscience.

3 Do good constantly. Thirdly, as God expects sincerity, so he looks for
constancy and perseverance in well doing, Revel. 2.10.
he that will receive the Crown of life, he must be faithful unto the Death.
It is not sufficient to serve God in youth, and neglect him in age; nor to
worship God on the Sabbath, and Satan all the week after; not to be holy
amongst those which are holy, and profane when thou come into wicked
company: This Wethercocke Religion cannot stand with the peace of a good
Conscience, they are like fire and water, light and darkness, one must of
necessity expel the other. Prou. 4.23.
Be not idle therefore or secure, but watch diligently over thy self, and
Conscience, and exercise thy self (as Saint Paul did) that thou may have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God, Acts 24.26.
and toward man. Thus may thou get this blessed peace of conscience, this
assurance or Reconciliation between God and thee: and being once obtained, it
can never finally be lost: Romans 11.29.
though the sense of it may be lost for a time; the grace of faith and
holiness, and assurance, or the feeling of grace being hid in thee, as the Sun
under the clouds, Similitude. the fire covered with ashes, the trees in the
winter, a man in a trance, or the like, The true way of a Christian to the new
Jerusalem. The means of recovering the sense of true peace.
(as at large I have showed, in another Treatise, to which I refer thee.) And
being lost for a time, thou may again recover it; and the sooner, and with
more joy, if thou use the good means, those holy duties which are helpful to
a Christian for this spiritual exercise.

David did;) Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit
from me, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy
free Spirit: Psalm. 51.11.12.



means, to the Word and Sacraments, using them religiously, with prayer,
fasting, meditation, and practice in thy life and conversation.

in thy spiritual desertion, when thou want the feeling of this blessed
peace, and joy of conscience.

confession of thy sins before God, and renewing of thy repentance, 1 Ioh.
1.18.9, Prou. 28.13.
more seriously asking pardon and forgiveness; and in all humility desiring
reconciliation in Christ. Thus have the Saints of God; and thus (with the
blessing of God) may thou recover this peace.

A request to the conscionable Reader. And here, for this last point, let me
beg one request at thy hands; it is but a little one, say me not nay: I desire
it for the love of God, 2 Cor. 13.5.
and good of thine own conscience: Once a week at least (if not once a day)
shake off that dead security, in which the world lies buried, and spend one
hour in examination of thy self, in opening the book of thy conscience, in
confessing thy self to God, and humbling thy soul before him: Mat. 5.4.
go into thy closet, and shut the door after thee, and weep in secret for
thy own sins, and for the sins of others, David prays God not to remember)
but spread them all before the Lord, Psalm. 25.6.
and aggrauate them by the several circumstances, that thou may see how
far thou have erred from the law of God, which is a glass to show thee thy
sins: yea, judge thy self for them, that thou may hells thou have
deserved, if God should enter into judgment Ezeck. 16.4, 5, 6
defiled with the pollution of natural and actual transgressions, when none
eve pitied thee, nor had compassion on thee; yet Christ beholding thy misery,
took pity on thy estate, and spared not his own life, but shed his precious
blood to the death; yea, endured the wrath of his Father, and suffered
unutterable torments to procure thy peace: Luc. 22.44.
his Agony was a witness to testify the terror of his Soul; his sweat like
drops of blood trickling down to the ground; Mat. 27.29.
his blessed head crowned with thorns; his holy cheeks buffeted with fists;
his back whipped with scourges; his hands and feet nailed to the Cross, and
his side pierced with a spear, that the dearest blood of his most precious
heart gushed out amain: yea, his Passion so intolerable that he cried out in
the bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat.
27.46.


Lamb suffer to purchase thy peace. And if this will not move thee, Isaiah
5.4, 5, 6.
add thy own unthankfulness, the abusing of those many and good graces,
both spiritual and temporal which God has given thee; the often crucifying
of Christ again by thy sins, and grieuing the good Spirit, by whom thou art
sealed to the day of redemption. And if thy heart be not more hard then
Adamants, certainly these meditations may break it in pieces. But if all this
does not humble thee, then as before, thou ought fasting and prayer, so
leave not off fasting and praying, and crying unto God, Joel 2.12, 13.
till thy heart melt with sorrow, and thy eyes gush out with rivers of waters.
This ought thou to do for thine own sins, and for the sins of the
Time: And thus shall thou be marked in the time of vengeance with the mark of
Gods favor: Ezekiel 9.4.
and when the wicked shall perish in the common destruction, thou shall have
peace.

And to draw toward a conclusion of this; let nothing hinder thee from this
examination, and humiliation of thy soul: But be sure to put it in practice,
whosoever thou art; or how great soever thy calling or occasions be: for the
greater thou art, the more need have thou of familiar acquaintance with God,
of often conference with him in this kind, for thy good, because God is
greater then all. Neglect it not therefore, whether thou be old or young, high
or low, Magistrate, or Minister, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, man or woman,
of what state, or calling, or condition soever thou be: especially forget it
not then when thou art to draw near unto God, in receiving of the holy and
blessed Sacrament, the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, for the
worthy partaking whereof, 1 Cor. 11.28, 29
thou ought to prepare thy self as thou would do if thou were that
hour to die, and to pass either to heaven or hell, to eternal joy, or
eternal woe. Be sure at that time therefore to put in practice this
examination and humiliation of thy soul, that upon thy confession and
contrition thou may have absolution at the hand of God, or of his Minister,
(if thou find it needful to procure thy peace.) Pass it not over slightly,
but press it to the full, till the good Spirit make thee to cry Abba father
with confidence in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.15, 16.
and witness to thy spirit, that thou art the child of God; for by this the
league of peace between thy God and conscience shall be renewed and preserved.
And Conscience thus made quiet, is as a Castle of defense, or wall of brass
unto the Saints. 1 Cor. 1.12.
This made S. Paul speak boldly, and in midst of miseries rejoice in this
the testimony of his conscience. Augustinus lib. cont. Secundin. Manichaeum
Sentiasde Augustino quicquid libet, sola in oculis dei conscientia non accuset.
This was a comfort unto good S. Augustine, accused by Secundinus, that he had
forsaken Paganism and followed Christ for hope of temporal preferment; I care
not (says the Father) what other men do say, because my conscience clears
me.

Lastly, this moved the holy Martyrs, most willingly to undergo such cruel
deaths, and hellish torments, and all for Christ; because their Conscience was
to them a heaven of joy, even in a hell of grief, of sorrow. This is the
benefit of a blessed Conscience, which the Saints shall then receive at full
when as the Book of Conscience shall be opened.

Rules of Counsel to get and preserve a good Conscience. A word of Counsel
before I end this Book. To get and keep a good and quiet Conscience, take
these rules with you for a guide to all the rest. Since that your Conscience is
it be lawful which you intend to do or no: and if your conscience doubt, then
stay your heart, your tongue, your hand; nor think, nor speak, nor do before
your Conscience be resolved. For as S. Paul affirms, that what is not of faith
is sin; Romans 14.23. In Roman.
so Origin, Fulgentius, Augustine, Chrysostom, Aquinas, with the Schools, and
all the Current of our late Divines conclude that case of Conscience. Do
nothing doubting therefore; but if your conscience once be quiet, then be you
sure to obey the check of Conscience, sin not against it, for he that sins
against his conscience, loses the sweet society of a good, and gets the
trembling company of an evil conscience.

The close of this Book. Be always guided therefore by a well informed
conscience, directed by the Law and Word of God; thus shall you still enjoy
that blessed peace, even when the Book of Conscience shall be opened.

The third Book. The Book of Life. And thus you have heard the second Book,
the Book of Conscience. A word in brief of the third and last.

And this is Liber vitae, the Book of Life: Of this Book you may read in
diverse places of the holy Scripture. Moses speaks of it to God. Exodus 32.32.
David rehearses it: Psalm. 69.28. So does the Prophet Isaiah. Chapter 4.3. and
in Daniel it is remembered. Dan. 12.1. Rejoice (says our Savior) because your
names are written in heaven; Luc. 10.20. S. Paul calls it the Book of life,
in which the names of the Saints are written, Phil. 4.3. So does S. John,
Revel. 3.5. And so it is named in my Text; And another Book was opened, which
is the Book of life.

Explication. By this Book some understand Christ himself, Foelix
Bidembachius prompt. exequ. Class. 9. Them. 31.
in whom we were chosen before the foundation of the world, God having
predestined us unto the adoption of children by Christ unto himself, as S.
Paul speaks, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. And into whom (being wild Olives by nature) we
are ingrafted by grace; and stand by faith, Romans 11.17. and 19 verses. And in
whom the Saints Elect do and shall abide, as the branches in the Vine. Ioh.
15.5. Christ dwelling in them and they in him. 1 Ioh. 3.24. And in whom they
shall be found at the day of judgment: for, At that day ye shall know, says
Christ, that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you. Ioh. 14.20. And
being found in Christ when the Books are opened, they shall certainly be
saved: for that of S. Paul is now and shall be always true; There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.

Perkinsus expositione symboli. Zanchius de libro vitae.
Others understand this Book not of Christ himself, but of that Decree, and
mind or purpose of God, in which he has set down all those, whom in and by
Christ, according to the counsel of his own will he has ordained to life
eternal. The Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19. that is, whom he has
chosen to life and happiness.

Arbor vitae, the Tree of life; and Liber exemplaris, a living exemplary Book;
the characters of whose most upright steps we should learn to imitate in all
our actions; and who in The Book of life. Or of that other Book, the book of
Gods decree, which is truly and properly the Book of Life. It is true of
both, that both these shall be opened at that day of Assizes; that which now
is secret shall then be showed to all; it shall then be known whose names
are written in Christ; or whom God has decreed to life eternal. All these
Books shall be opened; the Book of Gods prescience, the Book of man's
Conscience, and the Book of life. And according to these Books, examination
shall be taken of the prisoners, and evidence given unto the Judge; and as
this is given so shall the sentence be declared.

characters of faith and righteousness, which may agree to those are written
in the Book of Life: For as in time of Grace, there is no man truly gives his
name to Christ, or relisheth aright his Gospel, but they whose names are
written in the Book of Life: So in that time of judgment there is none shall
be found written in that Book of Life, but those who in the time of mercy have
had within their hearts and consciences imprinted, as in a Book, Heb. 11.6.
Heb. 12 14.
those golden letters both of faith and holiness at lest in such a measure as
God in Christ has promised to accept, For as of old in the return from the
captivity of Babylon, those Jews, who could not find the writing of their
Genealogy, and show their Fathers house, were put from all their Offices as
unclean, and might not be in number of the Priests: Nehemiah 7.64. So in that
General return from the Captivity of Babylon, the Babylon of this world,
Brightmannus in Apocalypse.
those only shall have places in the Church Tryumphant, and live as Kings and
Priests with Christ, who can bring forth this written Book, (the Book of
Faith and Holiness in their hearts and consciences) as a true Copy or
Counterpane of that Book of Life, and prove themselves by Faith and Holiness
to be the Sons of God. For as God has elected us to Happiness in the
Kingdom of glory, which is the end at which we aim, and which we endeavor to
obtain; so has he chosen us to Faith and Holiness (which are the means to
bring unto that end,) as Saint Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 1.4.

Book of Conscience is not fair and white like to the Saints, made glorious
with the engraven form of righteousness (imputed and inhaerent:) But foul
and black, in which they daily write enormous crimes, and every moment spot
their Souls with foul impieties. So that there is no agreement with their
Book of Conscience, and the Book of Life, and therefore (without true
repentance while the Sun does shine, and day of Grace does last) in stead of
Life, and Heaven of joy, a Death, and Hell of woe, shall be their portion.

O then beloved, Application. Origin, Hom. 5. in Leuit.
if (as Origin observes) when a cause is to be pleaded before an earthly
Judge, which concerns a Title of Land, upon the least fear or doubt, a man
will be so careful and watch so diligently, that all things may be in
readiness: his witness prepared, his Counsel informed, that the best of his
cause may be opened, and (if it be possible) the Judge beforehand possessed,
that the right is on his side, though it be (as often it proves to be) on the
contrary.

How much more careful should every Christian be, to prepare himself, that
he may be in a readiness before that tribunal Seat of Christ, when his
title to heaven it self shall be called in question; and except his evidence
be good, and assurance firm in the law of faith, he shall lose not a Cottage,
but a Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven, (that light and life of glory) and be
cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Mat.
25.30.

It deeply concerns every Christian therefore to have a care of this in all
their actions, especially those men unto whose care and conscience is committed
the execution of Justice and Judgment. Because such are public persons, and at
that day of Assizes when the Judgment Seat is set, and the Books are opened:
Daniel 7.10. They shall give account unto God both for their own souls, and
the souls of others (of all those whom God at any time has delivered to their
charge) for look what good has followed by their care and faithfulness in
their several places; they shall not lose their reward: the reward of glory
shall be given them. And look what evil shall ensue, by their negligence or
unfaithful dealing, they shall not lose their reward; the reward of shame and
confusion shall be their portion: For the books shall opened, and God will
render to every one (...) according to their works.

A particular Exhortation and Application to the Auditory. Eusebius. lib. 10. c.
1. Bellarm. descriptor.
One word therefore of Exhortation to you my Auditors in particular, who (by
Gods providence) at this time are appointed for the execution of Justice, and I
have done.

It was decreed in that first general Council holden at Nice, about the year
of our Lord three hundred and thirty, in which, that wicked Heresy of Arius,
was condemned by the consent of three hundred and eighteen Fathers, (as
Ecclesiastical Histories relate) That to prevent the dangers which delay might
bring to the Church, there should be twice every year a Provincial Synod, or
Council, of the Bishops, in which they should examine all cases of
Controversy, and end them to procure peace of the Church; the first of these
Councels was held, Ante dies Quadragesimae, before the time of Lent, and the
Second Circa tempus Autumni about the time of Autumn (as it is expressed in
the first Canon of that Nicen Council.)

And the like commendable custom has long since been instituted in this
Kingdom for temporal government in the time of King Henry the second, that
wise and learned Prince, (as some writers affirm) since whom Itinerary Judges,
Boterus.
(like Samuel that pattern of Justice) have had both their Circuit and Center.
For as Samuel went from year to year in Circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and
Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places; and returned to Ramah (that
Center of Justice) where he judged Israel again, and built an Altar unto the
Lord, (as you may read) 1. Samuel. 7.17.

Westminster the Center of Justice. So is it also with us, (blessed be God for
it) under our Royal Moses, (whose peace and prosperity God long continue
amongst us, and let our hearts answer, Amen, Amen.) we have our learned and
religious Samuels, our just and righteous Judges, which (for our unspeakable
benefit) come home unto us, into every Shire and corner of the Land; executing
Justice and Judgment, for the maintenance of virtue, and punishment of vice.
And in that Common place of Justice, whither they return as to their Center,
at Terms appointed sitting on Thrones of Justice, and weighing each man's Cause
with an equal balance, both in Law and Conscience, that the oppressed may be
delivered, and wrong dealers punished. These (like Conscience) are Demigods on
earth: (I say ye are Gods, says the Psalmist) to whom is appointed from God
and our gracious King, this high and honorable office, Psalm.
for the glory of God, and good of the Kingdom. And for whom, as S. Paul
exhorts, Supplications, and prayers, and intercessions, and giving of thanks
is to be made, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness
and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

To speak in particular therefore to you my honorable Lords, I must say as S.
Bernard sometimes said to his Auditors, Non est mea humilitatis dictare vobis:
It is not for my humility to dictate unto you, or tell you what you should do:
I know you are wise, you are learned, you are religious, the book of your
Conscience is already opened: and therefore mercy and judgment, law and
conscience, will be your guide in all things. And for this I will pray, that
casting your eyes upon this vision, and viewing every part of it at your
leasures, August. lib. de fide ad monach. In Christi Judicio sine acceptatione
personaru^, sine ambitu potestatum, aequaliter iudicabuntur Domini and serui,
diuites and pauperes. Plutarch. in vitis illustr. comparatione Numa and
Lycurgi. Magister Sent. lib. 2. distinct. 26. Aquinas prim. secund. qu. 109.
art. 9.
you may take the example of Christ to be your pattern; that avoiding those
dangerous flatterers, (friends in show, but enemies in substance) that is, love
or hatred, fear or covetousness (by which judgment is often perverted) you
may be endued with Justice and Fortitude, (like Numa and Lycurgus, those two
famous Governors) and being armed with virtue as with an invincible shield,
keep the Castle of a good Conscience inviolable. Thus shall ye find that peace
of Conscience (that most happy companion of a righteous man) even when the
book of Conscience shall be opened.

S. Augustine in his Enchiridon, Chapter the thirty two, the Master of the
Sentences, Aquinas, and the School men upon them, observe a twofold grace of
God necessary for a Christian: the first is Gratia praeueniens, a preventing
grace, to prepare our wills and hearts to works of piety. The second is Gratia
subsequens, a subsequent grace, to assist and help us forward in well doing.
And in like manner there is a twofold Justice necessary for the well governing
of a Commonwealth; the first is Iustitia praeueniens, a preventing Justice, to
encourage to virtue, and by timely punishments to keep from greater
mischiefs: The second is Iustitia puniens, punishing justice, to cut down
vice with extremity, when the wound is grown incurable. Psalm. 201.1.
The first is mercy, the second judgment: The first has place in criminal,
the second in capital offenses. Of the first many a one may say, and that
truly; Periissem nisi periissem, I had perished, unless I had perished; if I
had not been punished for idleness, drunkenness, or profaneness, I had
been punished for theft, or murder, or worse impieties. And of the second many
a one has said (and that as truly) Si periissem, non periissem; If I had been
punished by my parents or governors, or magistrates, for lesser faults, I had
not now been punished with this shameful death, for so foul and horrible a
wickedness: (this you may often hear if you be present at the execution of
such Malefactors.) So that as many a man does suffer death for his own
offenses; so is many a man hanged, for the negligence of his Parents, or
Masters, or Governors, who should by timely punishments have prevented such
danger. Thanks be to God we have many worthy Judges in this Kingdom, who are
careful, and zealous for the execution both of the one and other Justice. But
the care of them is not sufficient, without the help and assistance of others:
For though they be Gods, yet are they not Omniscient, they cannot see all
offenses, nor know all offenders. There be many sins which cry for
Vengeance, and yet the cry of them is either stopped before it comes to their
Ears, or else the sins themselves (like painted Harlots) are so gilded over
with colors of deceit, that their ugly countenances cannot be seen, and by
this means they escape unpunished. I must now therefore turn my speech unto
you who are Assistants and Helpers in the Execution of Justice.

And for such who are of a Higher Order appointed as Judges in private Sessions
for punishment of lesser offenses, and to bind over the rest to the
Examination and Trial of this Greater Assizes: I may speak it with Joy, for
the Honor and credit of this Country, (In which I am yet but a stranger) I
know some, and I have heard of many Honorable, Worshipful, Learned, and
Religious Justices; whose care and Conscience is daily published in their
several Circuits by their several actions. (And I pray God ye may go on in
sincerity of soul and Conscience; knowing for certain, ye shall not lose
your reward, when the Books shall be opened, and that day of Refreshing shall
come. Acts 3.19.
)

Last of all, for Inferior Officers, who are either to inform the Court by
their Presentiments according to Oath and Articles given in charge, or else to
prosecute and see Justice executed, when information and sentence is given: I
doubt not but amongst these also there are many honest, religious and
conscionable men, who will do their best both for preventing and punishing
Justice. But if all be such, what means then this bleating of the Sheep,
and lowing of the Oxen, and voice of King Agag, which still sound in our ears?
(as Samuel told Saul, 1. Sam. 15.14.) whence is there so many impieties that
still lurk in Corners oftentimes daring to Outface the Law, and in spite of
reprehension continue amongst us?

Similitude. This shows plain, that as there is Iustitia the free course of
Justice, amongst such who are friends of Conscience and Equity: so there is
Iustitiam, a stay and stop of the Current of Justice amongst those who for
fear, or affection, or corruption, Wiliel(...) Linwood de purgatione Canonica.
spare to punish impiety. There is a rule in the Canon Law, that if a man be
Defamed, apud bonos, and graves, amongst good, and grave men (being presented
to the Ordinary) he may be enjoined his purgation, Cum Sexta manu honestorum
virorum: with six of his honest Neighbors, and if he fail in this, be put to
his Penance. It it much to be feared that if some inferior Officers were put
to this Trial, they would fail in purgation, and for their Perjury have
Penance enjoined them. And happy were they if this might wash out the blots of
their Consciences; yea seven years penance (as was long since decreed in the
Ancient Canons, Canon. Fabian.
for such kind of Offenders.) But woe be to that soul whose Conscience is
spotted with that soul impurity. The stay of Justice is like the stay of a
current, or running stream, it will on a sudden ouerflow the banks; and if it
have not passage, spoil a whole Country. It were far better that one rotten
member should be cut off from the body, then the whole body perish: and much
more profitable that one corrupt Officer should be severely punished, then that
Execution, which is the Life of Law, should be put to death. I have heard of a
complaint in some Countries remote, that when the Churchwardens have presented
offenders, they have been called to the Court, and paying their Fees, the
Chancellors, or Officials, or their Deputies, or Surrogates, have presently
dismissed them, and so the business ended; no reformation, no penance
enjoined, no satisfaction to the Congregation.

And the Constables and inferior Officers have complained as much of Temporal
proceedings. But I hope there is no such complaint can justly be taken up in
these parts of the world. Omnia venalia Romae, Al things are vendible at Rome:
but for Bribery and Perjury, let them not be heard of in our Land; for both are
abominable, and Perjury above all is a crying wickedness.

I have read of an excellent law amongst the Turks, that, If any man did
swear, his tongue should be shaued and washed in vinegar. If all false
swearers amongst Christians had received this punishment, we should not hear
a complaint of so many knaves of the post, who are not ashamed to say one to
another, Lend my friend an oath this Assizes, and I will lend thy friend an
oath the next. A fearful saying; for while they lend an oath to their friend,
they forfeit their souls to the Devil.

A watchword to the Iurymen Take heed of this all you who are called to give in
evidence, or who are empannelled on any Jury, either for trial of rights, or of
life and death, which is most dangerous; let not fear nor favor draw you from
justice, but stand out boldly with courage in a rightful cause. Sin not
against your Conscience; for though the Papists may tell you, M. Parsons
Reckon. cap. 4. Sect. 11. Page 265. and page 64. Bulla ^ii Quin. confirmed by
Greg. 13 against Qu. Elizabeth.
that Aequiuocation is lawful; or the Jesuits preach, that the Pope can
absolve from an Oath; (yea, the Oath of Allegiance, that a Subject may take
arms against his Prince, or by treason murder a Magistrate who is not of
their Religion) yet Christ Jesus taught no such doctrine, nor his Apostles, nor
the ancient Fathers of the Church; nor does the Church of England approve it.
Deceive not your selves therefore, but inform your consciences aright, and
give evidence thereafter.

Conclusion. And to conclude all; Zech. 5.2, 3, 4.
Read at your leasures that fifth Chapter of the Prophecy of Zechary, the
second, third, and fourth Verses: And think on that fearful curse which
shall remain in the house of the false swearer, and consume it with the timber
and stones thereof. And remember this vision (a part of which is my Text) that
as certainly as there is now a particular Assizes, wherein you are now to give
evidence or verdict, and to assist in the judgment of others; so the time shall
come, when there shall be a general Assizes, wherein Christ Jesus, that
Prince of righteousness, shall be the Judge; wherein you your selves shall be
the Prisoners (for none are excepted;) wherein the Books shall be opened; the
Book of Gods prescience, the Book of every man's particular Conscience, and
the Book of Life. And the Dead both small and great, yea both dead and living;
every man, and every woman that are, or have been, or shall be hereafter in
the world, they shall all stand before God, and be judged of those things
which are written in the Books according to their works. In the fear of God
therefore labor earnestly to get and preserve a good Conscience in all your
actions, and pray with feruency for the assistance of Gods gracious Spirit; and
my prayer shall be the same for you all, which S. Paul's once was for his
Christian Thessalonians; That the very God of peace will sanctify you
throughout; 1 These. 5.23.
and I pray God, that your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved
blameless unto that coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father
and the blessed Spirit be ascribed all honor, and power, and glory; all
might, and majesty, and dominion, now and for ever. AMEN.

Blessed are all they who remember that last, great, and general Assizes, when
those Books shall be opened; and endeavor to get and preserve a good, a
pure, and a peaceable Conscience in all their thoughts, words, and works.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the sweet
and comfortable fellowship of God the Holy Spirit be with us, bless, preserve
and keep us, and every one of his Saints and Servants, both in bodies, in
souls, in estates and good names, from all dangers, and from all our enemies,
both spiritual and temporal, the rest of this day, and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.
Gloria Trin-uni Deo.

