The Art of shooting in great Ordnaunce.

Containing very necessary matters for all sorts of Seruitoures either by Sea
or by Land.

Written by William Bourne.

CANTABO IEHOVAE QVIA BENEFECIT MIHI.


Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke.

1587.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Lord, Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick, Baron of Lisle,
of the most noble order of the Garter Knight, General of the Queens Majesty's
Ordnaunce within her highness Realm and Dominions, and one of her Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel, William Bourne wishes long life, increase of
Honor, with all happy success.
RIght worthy and Noble Earl, whereas I before this time have written sundry
simple Treatises, whereof two of the^ are extant in print, the one called the
Regiment of the Sea, and the other the Treasure for Travelers, and now also
this barbarous and rude thing, called the Art of shooting in great Ordnaunce,
and as it is most commonly seen, that every person does most commonly commend
that thing wherein he is most expert, and therefore some there are that do
most extol Divinity, and great reason it is that it should be so, for that it
teaches us both to know God and to instruct others: also othersome do most
prefer Philosophy: othersome the Law, with such like as they are most
delighted in. Also other there are, that do not only extol them, but will
make arguments, and dispute whether of them are most commendable and most
worthy to be preferred above the other. There are also, that after long
disputation, do not only assign every Science his several laud and praise,
but also discourse whether of them are most necessary for a common wealth. And
I am of that opinion, and that no man can deny, but that the Art of shooting
in great Ordnaunce is necessary to be advanced for the defense and
mainteynance of a Kingdom, and country, and the common wealth thereof.
Wherefore (Right honorable) being as one extraordinarily bold, I present the
same unto you, for that I know your Lordshippe can truly descerne and judge
in these causes, as one whose wisdom is not unknown, hoping that your Honor
will take this simple work, as my good will, rather than the valor of the
thing, or the finenesse of the penning of the matter. And thus I cease to
trouble your Honorable Lordship any longer at this time, desiring you to
accept this simple Book at the hands of a poor Gunner, as a true token of
my good will toward your Honor: desiring God to prosper your Honor in all
your doings in perfect health.

By your Honors humbly at commandment William Bourne.

The Preface to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, it is possible that you would marvel that I should write this
book called the Art of shooting in great Ordnance for two great causes: the
one is this, first for that I have not seen (to most peoples judgment,) so
great experience in these affairs, whereby you may think that I have not
knowledge sufficient to be a teacher in these matters. And the second cause is
this: for that my order of teaching is contrary unto all that have taken upon
them to be teachers, or instructers in these matters or affairs before time.
Therefore for to show unto you the cause that has moved me to write this rude
volu^e, is this, for that we English men have not been counted but of late
days to become good Gunners, and the principal point that has caused English
men to be counted good Gunners, has been, for that they are hardy or without
fear about their ordnance: but for the knowledge in it, other nations and
countries have tasted better thereof, as the Italians, French and Spaniardes,
for that English men have had but little instructions but that they have
learned of the Doutchmen or Flemings in the time of King Henry the eight. And
the chiefest cause that English men are thought to be good Gunners, is this:
for that they are handsome about their Ordnance in ships, on the Sea, etc. And
furthermore, I do think it good to show unto you three great causes besides
diverse other small causes, that the thing that has let or hindered English
men to become cunning in the shooting of great Ordinance, although diverse
proves have been made at sundry times, and Ordnance has been had into the
field, both in master Bromefields time when that he was Liefetena^t of the
Ordnance, and at diverse times since, and yet those proves that have been made
then were no proofs, but to cause those Gunners that did see the experience of
those profes, to commit a further error as touching the shooting in great
Ordnance, and the reason thereof is this: the first and principal cause is, that
they did make their proof with a Quadrant, and so it ought to be, that is to
say, the fourth part of a Circle divided into 90. equal parts, which some
simple Gunners will call a Triangle, but there is no instrument so called, but
only a Quadrant: and the original of the making thereof is the fourth part of
a Circle divided into 90. equal parts, what form so ever that it has. And
now the principal use of the quadrant, is to know what any piece will cast at
the mount of every Degree, and so from degree unto degree, unto the best of
the Rander. And the cause that has made the Gunners to commit error by the
mounting of the pieces by the degree of the Quadrant, has been this, although
that it be true that such a piece will cast the shot so many scores at the
mount of so many degrees, and yet when that they have made proof thereof, they
have found it mere false, and yet the thing most true, although sometime the
shot has flien a great deal further, and sometime much shorter, which causes
were no other thing but the highness or the lownes of the ground, for that there
is seldom any ground that you shall find level, but it will be higher or
lower then the ground that the piece stands upon, as I do more at large
declare in the thirtenth chapter of the book, and yet in the time of service
there is no using of the Quadrant but in some cases, and then take a great
large one, for in a small you may soon commit error. And furthermore I do
know diverse that will have instruments, and yet be utterly void of the uses
of them, for it is the reason of the person in the doing of any thing, and not
the instruments, for in the doing of any thing, if the person does not
consider of all things with him and against him, he or they be apt to commit
error, etc. The second great cause is this, in the using to give level with a
rule set out in inche parts: but unto this they cannot order it, nor give it
no Method to know what any piece will do at any number of inches advantage, for
the pieces do differ in casting, according unto their lengths, as I do
further show in the book. Wherefore the use of the inche rule according as
they do use it, is to no other purpose, but only to seek out what numbers of
inches will reach the mark, and that being known, then to keep the length of
the mark with that piece. And the necessariest thing that this kind of giving
of level in the time of service (as being in a Castle, Forte, or Town, or
such like, the Gunner having charge of any piece,) is to beat al those marks
that be apt to do any service at, and to know how many inches will reach any
mark, etc. but to become a cunning Gunner, he shall never be, although he
should shoot 100. shottes every day through a year, for that he never does
know by that means the distance of any mark, but in every piece he must make
a new proof, if that the piece be removed or changed from that place.
Wherefore I have made a table, showing how many inches, and what part of an
inch will make a degree, and so unto ten degrees whereby you may make a Method
to hit the length of the mark in any piece at the first shot, as it does
appear in the eight chapter of the book, if so be that there were a true and
exact table of proportion, of the casting of the piece at the mount of every
degree, but I have not had so great proof but that I may be deceived, for I
have no other proof but at my own charges, and my ability is able to do
nothing to make any proof in those causes. The third great cause is this, I do
know few Gunners, yea none at all in respect, that has any capacity, to know
the distance unto any mark assigned if that the mark be such that they can
not come unto it directly by land, and yet there be very true and exact ways
to know the distance unto any mark assigned, howsoever the thing is, if that
it may be seen by Geometry perspectiue: and the lack thereof amongst Gunners
is the principallest point that does deceive the^, so that these three things
do utterly deceive most men: the first is this, the height or lownes of the
ground: the second the length of the piece: and the third not knowing the
distance unto the mark: for their reason in these causes that they do
suppose, can do nothing, that is to say, to find the distance unto any mark
assigned, by looking upon the ground, and that never can show unto them the
distance unto the mark but yet must be known either by the Scale or cross
staff, or else it must be known by the lines of Position, which is showed in
a book of mine that is extant in Print, called the Treasure for Trauelers, and
also in a book set forth by master Thomas Digges called Pantometria, where in
those two books you shall find means and ways both how to find the true
distance unto the mark, and also how much that the mark is hier ground or
lower ground, then the place that you are upon, and also the length of the line
Hipothenusall, whether it be up the hill or down the hill, which is very
necessary and profitable for all them that will use to shoot in great
Ordnance, for to know, as all Gunners, Captains, and Leaders of men, etc. And
now friendly Reader, it is possible that some people will dislike of me, for
that I have written this book: some of them for that they do think that they
have better knowledge in those matters then I, and other some perhaps may be
offended, for that they would not have the thing known but amongst themselves,
and othersome possible will be offended with me that are Gunners, that are
altogether without any knowledge in those causes, that would not have their
ignorance known. So by these means I am assured that I shall purchase a great
number of enemies, as I do know that I have already caused sundry people to
envy me, as some Sea men do mislike of me for writing of my book called the
Regiment for the Sea, and othersome of late are offended with me for the
writing and setting forth of my book called the Treasure for Trauelers, but
notwithstanding, I do see that it is needful to be known unto a number of
them that be Gunners, waying and considering with my self what a number there
be, that will take upon them to be Gunners, yea and that master Gunners, that
are not sufficient nor capable in those causes, but are in respect altogether
ignorant, standing upon no other thing but their antiquity, that they have
served as Gunners so long time. Wherefore I do think it very necessary for
them to have some good instructions: but as far as I can see, every man
makes courtesy to do the common wealth of our Realm of England any good
therein, and as far as I can perceive that no people may better pleasure the
common wealth in the time of service, either by Sea or Land, then may good
Gunners against the face of our enemies: for the Realm of England has a great
number of enemies: for as we have seen by daily experience, that the Queens
progenitors aforetime were never long without wars, yet we have a most
gracious and loving Prince reigning over us, which does alw aies study for
peace and tranquillity: God grant of his mercy that she may live long and
reign over us. Amen. Yet nothwithstanding, it is good for us to study in the
time of peace, how to defend our selves in the time of wars and troubles, as
generally we provide in harvest for to live in the winter. And for that cause
have I written this little treatise, not to the intent to teach the^ that be
cunning, but to give instructions unto the^ that be of the simplest sort, etc.
Wherefore (Gentle Reader) bear with my rudenes, for that I am so bold to be the
first English man that put forth any book as touching these causes, and it is
possible that there be a number would look that I should have given them
place, for that they are more worthy and skilfuller in these causes, thinking
that I am to simple, for they do not consider how that God does give his
gifts, as we see daily he gives unto one man riches, and another man
poverty, and one man to be a ruler, and an other to be inferior, one man wise
and prudent, and an other ignorant, one man beautiful, and an other deformed,
one man of a tall stature, and an other of a low stature, one man strong and
lusty, and an other weak and lame: although that they be of one
consanguinitie, linitie or kindred, such is the marvelous works of God.
Wherefore men are not to be measured by else, but vy virtue, for God is not
partial in his gifts, for he has shed his most precious blood for the
redemption of all mankind, so that before him all are one, for we are all his
creatures and the sheep of his pasture, and the works of his hands, so he is
our God, and we are his people, so that we keep his holy will and
commandments, but flesh and blood is so frail, that we can do no good of
our selves, for God works the will and deed in all his creatures, for by his
holy spirit he does give sundry gifts and al for the profit both of our souls
and bodies, as Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, to one is given through the
spirit the utterance of wisdom, to an other the utterance of knowledge, by
that same spirit to an other faith, by that same spirit to another the gift
of healing, by that same spirit to another professing, to an other judgment to
discern spirits, to another diverse tongues, to an other the interpretations of
tongues, and al those does the spirit of God work and distribute unto every
man according unto his most holy will and pleasure. Then what a vain
generation of people be we to strive against the will and pleasure of God, as
who should say that God is bound to be ruled by the will and pleasure of man.
But what special gift soever God does give unto man, let them give him thanks
therefore, and look that they do not abuse the same gift, for if that they
do, it will be a snare to take them in, and so be an example unto the whole
world. For as soon as our heart is lifted up with vanities, then enters the
Devil, and he causes a man to fall and decline from God, thinking with our
selves, that the gift that God has given unto us comes of our selves. For as
some do think that have riches, that they have it by their own industry, and
some doing diverse other things, think that it comes of themselves, with
diverse other special gifts that god gives unto man, therefore whenever God
does give any special gift to any person, then let him give him thanks
therefore, using it to the lawd, praise, glory, and honor of God, and to the
profit of his neighbor, and the common wealth of his Native country, for
great is the wickedness of the people upon the face of the earth, as considering
this in these our days, that the Bishop of Rome with all his adherents, does
daily practice how and by what means to bring this our noble realm of England
to utter confusion, therefore it is very meet and necessary for us to devise
how to prevent them, and then there is no doubt if that we do our good will
and endeavor, but the living God will deliver us from the hands and snares of
such wicked Antichrists, that do seek the blood of the Christian servants of
God. Wherefore it is very meet for us that be faithful Christians and true
subjects to our prince and Country, to arm our selves first with faith,
secondly with manly courage, and thirdly with armor for our back, for let us be
assured without Gods mighty providence unto the contrary, that as soon as
they have us at any advantage, that then let us look for no other matter, but
that they will give the attempt, for such is the wickedness of the malicious
Papists, yea eue^ some of them are those that should or ought to be good
subjects unto their Prince and native country. Wherefore I beseech the living
God to confound such wicked Impes that should seek the destruction of their
Prince, and especially a virtuous, merciful, and a godly Prince, and secondly
the destruction of their native Realm and country, yea even the nurce to them
and their forefathers that has yielded unto them all kind of food and
necessaries. What greater wickedness can there be in men? and they themselves
are bound by the laws of God and also by the laws of nature, to defend their
Prince and Country: for we nor they have no just quarrel to fight by the laws
of God, but only to defend our Prince and country and the liberties thereof.
Therefore it is meet for us to call unto God for mercy and grace, and then
there is no doubt but that he will deliver us, and turn all their wicked
devises unto their own destruction, even as the^ that make a pit for other
and fall into it themselves. Wherefore it is meet for all them that are Noble
men and Magistrates, and such as are in authority, to cherish and maintain al
those that are good and virtuous subjects and good members in the common
wealth, and contrariwise, it is very necessary and convenient to punish all
wicked doers, and such as do annoy and hurt the common wealth, having no
regard, neither for love nor favor, nor hatred or malice, neither for bribes
nor friends, but to reward every man according unto their deserts: for as it
is sin to suffer vice unpunished, so in like manner it is as evil to see
Virtue not revvarded, cherished nor mainteyned.

Considerations to be had in shooting of Ordinance.
Ten principal things are to be considered in the shooting of Ordnance, to
keep the length of the mark, or to make a perfect shot at any mark assigned,
according unto the distance of the mark, and knowing what such a piece will do
at such an advantage in mounting.

1. The goodness or badnesse of the powder.

THe good powder drives the shot further than the mark, the badde powder
shoots short of the mark: therefore you must use discretion in lading of the
piece, according unto the powder.

2. The lading of the piece.

IF you do give the piece more than her duty, you do ouershoote the mark:
if you do give her less than her duty, you shoot short of the mark: you must
therefore give the piece her duty and no more.

3. The wind, and especially to be mounted at much advantage.

THe wind with you, causes you to ouershoote ye mark, according unto the
hardness. The wind against you, makes you shoot short of the mark
according unto the hardness. The wind one the side, the piece casts beside
the mark: therefore you must weather the mark, according unto the hardness
of the wind, and the distance unto the mark.

4. Of the shot.

THe shot too big or too high, it puts the piece in danger: for you
must drive the wodde and shoot home unto the powder in the pecce, for if the
shot do rest any thing short, it will break the piece (or else it is a
chance) in the vacant place between the powder and the shot. The shot too
low or small, it will be too short of the mark, and also it will not do his
execution according unto the piece and the powder, and it may chance to swerve
in the deliverance out of piece, the therefore the shot must be fit for the
piece

5. Of the wadde or the powder rammed in too hard or too loose.

THe powder rammed in too hard, and the wadde also, and especially the powder
being badde, or else not dry, it will be long before the piece go off, and also
half the force of the powder will be decayed, before the shot be delivered,
for that it blows out of the tutchhole, and also the piece will tremble
before she go off, and that may cause the shot to flee awrye from the
mark, for that the piece is removed from her level: and also it will heat
the piece, and make the piece dangerous to shoot in presently afterward.

The powder too loose, and not well put up with the rammer head, and also the
wadde too slack in like manner, will make the shot to come short of the
mark by the means of the looseness: you must therefore put up the powder
with the rammer head somewhat close, and the wadde to go close in, and drive it
home unto the powder, but beat it not in too hard.

6. Of the standing of the piece.

THe piece standing so that it may or does recoyle unto the lower ground, that
is to say, that the ground be lower at the tail of the piece, than it is
where the wheels stand, it ouershooteth the mark, for that in the deliverance
of the shot, the breech goes downwards, and the mouth vpwardes, and the
piece is apt to recoyle down the hill: and if that the ground be higher
behind the piece then it is before the piece, then it may happen to shoot
short: but that is but a chance, for that is not so apt to recoyle against a
hill, as it will do down the hill.

And if it does happen so, that the one wheel does recoyle faster than the
other wheel, then the piece will shoot awrye from the mark, or if any thing
do let or stay the wheel, it may shoot awrye, for the deliverance of the
shot causes the recoyle of the piece, which is nothing else, but the
suddayne thrusting or the putting out of the air which is in the mouth of the
piece.

7. Of shooting toward a hill or valley with a Quadrant.

IF you shoot toward a hill, you shoot short in the giving level with a
Quadrant. If you shoot toward a valley, you do ouershoot ye mark, as in the
thirteenth Chapter you shall se the reason thereof. If upon a level ground,
you shall keep the length of the mark by the degrees of the Quadrante,
otherwise not.

8. If you give level with an ynche rule, you shall shoot at no certaynetie,
but in such a piece as you do know well, for that it does vary according unto
the length of the piece: as for example this, if you have three Culuerings, the
one is the ordinary length, that is, twelve foot long: the other is more then
the ordinary length by two foot, that is, fourteen foot long: and the
third is shorter than the ordinary length by two foot, that is, but ten
foot long: now if you do shoot at any mark, and do know the distance
unto the mark, and also do know, that a Culuering mounted at so many inches
vantage, will reach the mark, and admit that it will reach the mark at
twelve inches va^tage, now in the shorter piece, it ouershooteth the mark,
and in the longer piece it shoots short of the mark, and in that piece that
has the ordinary length, you shall keep the length of the mark: and the
cause thereof is this: In ye piece that is but ten foot long, the twelve
inches vantage comes near unto six degrees with the Quadrante in the
mounting: and in the piece of twelve foot long, the twelve inches comes not
to five degrees in the mounting with the Quadrant, and in the piece of
fourteen foot long, it comes but unto four degrees in the mounting with
the Quadra^t, as in the eight Chapter you may plainly see.

9. It is to be considered what dispart your pecce must have, if you do give
level with an ynche rule at any advantage, and also, if you do shoot at any
mark within the right line or point plancke, as in the fourth Chapter it is
showed.

10. You must consider whether the piece be truly bored, as it is declared
how you shall know it in the second Chapter: and how to shoot with a piece
that is not truly bored, you shall see by the eleventh Chapter.

The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.
CHAPTER. I
How to know the goodness or badnesse of Powder.

FIrst concerning Powder, for that it is the chiefest matter as touching the
shooting in Ordinance. According to some Authors, the first device of the
making thereof began in Germany, by a Monk named Bertholdus Schwartus, near
about the year of our Lord. 1380. and since that time it has bine put in
practice from time to time, and from age to age, both by the learned
Mathematicians, and also by the best Machanisianes, besides a number of other
common people, as well by them that have bine seruetours, in martial affairs,
as all other, so that of the making of the peter, and also of the powder, has
bin made great proof unto the uttermost, as touching the force of powder, so
that it is not unknown now in these days, what quantity of every several
sorts of receiptes does make the strongest sorts of powder, besides the
perfit-refining of the salt peter, and also ye thorough working of the
receiptes in the making of the powder, so that it is now come to pass in these
days, that the making of the powder, and also the making of the saltpeter, is
become (in respect) a common thing amongst a number of people, as it is made
commonly in many parts in Germany by the Boures or husbandmen, and also by
the women: wherefore it were but superfluous to say any thing therein,
considering how well the making thereof is known unto a number of people, and
therefore the principallest thing in the shooting of Ordinance, is to know
the goodness or the badnesse of the powder, and that is known after the
common order, that is, by three kind of means, first by the tasting of the
tongue, knowing by the sharpness thereof, whether that there be sufficient of
the master or peter or not: and secondly it is known by the color, for the
good powder has somewhat a bluish color, and if it be Sarpentine powder,
then the powder will be as fine as sand, and as soft as flower, and that
signifies, that it is well wrought, and otherwise it will be harshe in your
hand, and clammish, and look with a darkish black color, and that
signifies that it is well wrought, and the master not refyned: and the third
and principal is known by the burning, for if it be very good powder, then
in the burning, the fire will be gone in ye twinkling of an eye at a very
suddayne, and will give a snap or suddayne puff, and nothing remaining
afterward, but a white moke on that place whereas it was burned: but badde
powder in the burning fireth not so quickly, but fireth as does a fire work,
very slowly, making some hissing, and after the burning, there will remain
certain burreles or knottes that will consume unto moisture, and be darkishe,
and that sygnifieth that the peter or master was not well refyned, neither the
powder well wrought: And after the burning of some kind of powder, there will
remain certain white burrles, or knottes (as before is rehearsed) that will
remain hard, and not consume after the burning, and that sygnifyeth, that the
powder does lack of the master or peter. And also here is one principal
thing to be noted, that when powder is dry, then the force of it in
respect, is as it were double, or a quarter stronger, than when it is moist
and darkishe, whether the powder be good or badde. And also that powder that
is very good and well made, yet may happen to become moist, as many times
by carriage too and fro in rayny weather, and also by laying it in some moist
places, the caske being not very close and tyght, that the powder may grow
dankishe.

And also those kind of pouders that the peter or master is not well refyned,
but left full of salt, although that the powder be never so dry when it is
laid up, yet it will give again in rayny and heather, and become moist, how
dry soever the place be that it is laid up in. Wherefore there are a number
of things to be considered in powder, as touching the shooting in great
Ordinance, in a number of causes: for men of reason may know by the burning,
color, tastyng, and the handling of powder, which is good, and which is
badde: but to say justly how much the one sort of powder is stronger or weaker
than another sort of powder is, that is hard to know, although he be the
maker of the powder, and has wayed out perticularly the receiptes of the
powder: and the means thereof comes to pass, as this, by the working
thereof, and by the means of the drying thereof, and by the moisting or giving
of it again, and especially if the powder have bin long made: so that it is a
hard matter if a man have of sundry sorts of powder, to say justly that thus
much in weyghte of this sort of powder, will do as much, that is to say, to
be equal in force, as so much in weyghte of that sort of powder, until that
it be put in proof in the shooting it in Ordinance. And thus I do cease to
write any more at this time of Powder.

CHAPTER. II.
To know whether any piece of Ordinance be truly bored, by the help of
certain instruments.

TO know whether that any piece of Ordinance be truly bored, there be diverse
ways Geometrically for it to be done, but some of them be too tedious,
therefore for an easy way, they must make this kind of instrument of two
pieces of small timber, or two right staves, that must be as long as the hollow
or concauitie of the piece, which must be made in this form, and the (...)
must be made so fast at ye one end, that it be not wider asunder at the one
end, than it is at the other end, and so made fast, that they swerve not either
wider or narrower: and then putting one of the ^^aues into the mouth of the
piece, and so measuring or trying the piece round about with the staff that
is without the piece, with an ynche rule, you shall know whether that the core
or hollownesse of the piece do (...) right in the middle of the mettle, and if
it do not, you shall see how much the mettell is thicker on the one side,
than it is on the other. And also it is very good for you when you do mean to
try the piece, to prepare rammer head that is made fit for the piece, and to
put it upon the staff that you do put into the piece, and to be made fast
unto the side of the staff, and side of the rammer head, in such sort, that it
may keep the staff close unto the side of the piece, which it will do the
better, if the rammer head be to low, and then to have a piece of a Sheep
skin made fast, or nailed unto the contrary side of the rammer head, and so
it will keep the long staff close unto the side of the piece, as by these two
figures following you may perceive.



And furthermore, they may make this kind of instrument following, of iron, or
any other stuff meet for the purpose, for to gripe the piece in every place
at your pleasure.



This instrumente must be double the length of the hollow or concauitie of
the piece, and then you must put one of the right ones into the mouth of the
piece, and then griping the instrument together, then that part that is
without the piece, and that shall show you how many inches and parts of an
ynche the metal is of thicknes, without any fail: and then trying the piece
round about in every place, the truth of the thicknes of the metal shall
appear.

CHAPTER. III.
How much Powder will serve any piece of Ordnaunce, by the weight of the
piece, and weight of the shot: and at the end of this Chapter, there is a Table
that does declare the weight of Iron shot.

TO know how much powder will serve any piece of Ordnaunce, there be two
special points to be observed, that is to say, the weight of the shot of
iron, and the weight of the metal of the piece: and this is a general rule,
the piece having a reasonable length, that is to say, that according unto the
accustomable manner, according unto the names of the piece or pieces, all those
pieces that have two hundred weight of metal, or vpwardes unto one pound
weight of shot, must have as much Sarpentine powder as the shot waieth. And
all those pieces that have three hundred weight in metal, unto one pound
weight of shot, do require as much Sarpentine powder as the shot wayeth,
and one ninth part more. And all those pieces ye have under two hundred weight
of metal, and more tha^ one hundred and a half, may have as much Sarpentine
powder as the shot weieth, lacking one ninth part. And all those pieces that
have one hundred and a half of metal or there about, unto one pound weight
of the shot, must lack 2/9 parts of powder that the shot waieth. And all
those pieces that have but little more than one hundred, and under one hundred
and a half, must lack 3/9 parts of ye weight of the powder that the shot
waieth, yt is but parts. Therefore for the making of Ladels for any piece or
pieces of Ordnaunce, this thing must be noted. First, take the compass of the
shot for the piece yt you do make the Ladel for, and then divide, or put the
compass of the shot into. 5. equal parts, and the^ cut the plate of the
Ladel in breadth of three of those five parts, and put the other parts away,
and then bend the plate for the breadth of the Ladell, according unto the
compass of the shot, so that it may go easily into the mouth of the piece:
for parts is for to hold the powder, to the intent to put it into the piece,
and the parts be put away, to be open to turn the powder into the piece. And
now furthermore, for the lenght of the plate of the ladell, here is one thing
to be noted, that every nine balls or shot being laid close together, and the
plate being bent, and cut off that breeadth before rehearsed, and the plate in
length to be cut off, that number of inches that the nine shottes does reach,
and that plate being equally filled with Sarpentine powder, will hold the just
weyghte in powder that the shot weyeth. Therefore for the length of the plate
of the Ladell, thus you must use it as follows. For to make a Ladell for a
double Canon, and the piece weying generally more or less. 7000. or. 8000. and
the shot weying within little more or less. 64. pound, that is, but little
more than one hundred of metal, unto one pound weight of the shot, therefore
this piece may lack part of the weight in powder that the shot weyeth:
therefore they must cut the plate of the Ladell but. 3. times the length of the
shot, in inches and parts of inches, and this Ladel twice equally filled,
shall be the duty of the piece. Then for to make a Ladel for a Demi Canon, as
the piece in metal weyeth generally more or less. 5000 or. 5700. and the
shot weyeth more or less. 34. pound, which is about an hundred and a half
of metal, unto one pound weighte of the shot, therefore you must cut the
plate of the Ladell three shots or balls and a half high, or. 4. shots or
balls high. In inches and parts of inches, according unto the fortifying of
the piece with the metal, and the Ladell twice equally filled, to be the
duty of the piece. And for to make a ladell for a double Culuering, those
pieces being double fortified with metal, and the piece waying generally more
or less four thousand, or four thousand eight hundred, and the shot
waying more or less 17. pounds, that is, about three hundred weight of
metal, unto one pound weight of shot. Therefore you must cut the plate of
the ladell in length about the height of five shot or balls, in inches and
parts: this ladell being twice equally filled, shall be the duty of the
piece. And in like manner the demi Culuering, and Falco^s, and Falckonets, be
double fortifyed with metal: therefore you must make their ladell in length
five shottes or balls, in inches or parts, and that ladell twice equally
filled, shall be the duty of the piece. And furthermore, some Sakars and
Minions have but two hundred weigth of metal unto one pound weight of the
shot: therefore you must cut the plate of the ladell in length but of four
shottes or balls and a half high: and that ladell twice equally filled, shall
be the duty of the piece. And furthermore, now of late years, they have
devised a more stronger sort of powder, and not without good cause why, for
the base powder is not so good, if that it should come unto service, as corn
powder, or any other powder is, that has receipt enough, and well wrought: for
the base powder does heat and streyne the piece more than the good powder
does: for if it be rammed in hard, the^ because it is not so quick in ye
fiering, it lies and blows in the breech of the piece, before it can take
fire, so by that means it heateth and streineth the piece, and half of the
force of the powder is gone, before ye shot be delivered: and then they must
use batement for to save the piece. Now whereas they shoot good powder, or
cornepouder, they take much less powder, and it sends the shot quicker
away, and it does not heat the piece so fast: for this we do see by common
experience, that a little heat by long continuance, does heat more than a great
heat by little continuance. And furthermore, in the shooting of good powder,
they shall not show themselves so often unto their enemies. And especially, the
powder would be put in cartredges, for in mine opinion, it is a great deal
better, for to charge a peace in time of service with a Cartredge, than with a
Ladell, for diverse considerations, as I do more at large declarein the sixth
Chapter. And furthermore, for to charge a piece with cornepouder, or any other
good powder, for the most part, thereof two pound will go as far as three
pound of Serpe^tine powder. As for example: that double Culuering that
requires eyghtee^e pound of Serpentine powder, twelve pound of reasonable
corn powder will serve, according to the goodness of the making of the powder.
And furthermore, upon good considerations, for diverse causes, and especially
for the Queens Navy, they have devised to make their Ordnaunce shorter than
the accustomed manner, and so by that means they are lighter than the pieces
before time made, and yet as serviceable as the longer in some points, shooting
that weight in powder, and ye shot that the heavier does, in all points as
the other: for that metal that is taken from the length of the piece, hurts
not the fortifiyng of the piece. And as for the making of the Cartredges for
any piece, it is easy enough to be done: for the compass of the shot, and
the length of the Ladel, shall ^ule that matter well enough. Now shall follow
a rule to know the weyghte of the iron shot, by the height of the shot.

A Table to know the weight of iron shot.
A Shot of 2. inches high, does wey. 1. lb. 1. ounce.. A shot of. 2. inches
high, does wey. 1. lb. 9. ounces.. A shot of. 2. inches d. high, does wey. 2.
lb. 2. ounces. A shot. 2. inches. 3. quar. high, does wey. 2. lb. 14. ounces. A
shot. 3. inches high, does wey. 3. lb. 12. ounces. A shot. 3. inches a quar.
high, does wey. 4. lb. 12. ounces. A shot. 3. inches d. high, does wey. 6. lb.
lack. 1. ounce. A shot. 3. inches. 3. quar. high, does wey. 7. lb. 5. ounces.
A shot. 4. inches high, does wey. 8. lb. 15. ounces. A shot. 4. inches a qua
high, does wey. 10. lb. 10. ounces. A shot. 4. inches d. high, does wey. 12.
lb. 10. ounces. A shot. 4. inches. 3. qua* high, does wey. 14. lb. 14. ounces.
A shot. 5. inches high, does wey. 17. lb. 5. ounces. A shot. 5. inches a quar.
high, does wey. 20 lb. 1. ounce, A shot. 5. inches d. high, does wey. 23. lb.
2. ounces. A shot. 5. inches. 3. quar. high, does wey. 26. lb. 6. ounces. A
shot. 6. inches high, does wey. 30. pound. A shot. 6. inches a quarter high,
does wey. 34. pound. A shot. 6. inches d high, does wey. 38. pound. A shot. 6.
inches three quar. high, does wey. 42. pound. A shot. 7. inches high, does wey.
48. pound. A shot. 7. inches a quarter high, does wey. 53. pound. A shot. 7.
inches d. high, does wey. 58. pound. A shot. 7. inches three quarters high,
does wey. 64. lb. A shot. 8. inches high, does wey. 71. pound. A shot. 8.
inches a quarter high, does wey. 78. pound. A shot. 9. inches high, does wey.
101. pound. A shot. 10. inches high, does wey 138. pound. A shot. 11. inches
high, does wey. 184. pound. A shot. 12 inches high, does wey. 240. pound. A
shot. 13. inches high, does wey. 305. pound. A shot. 14. inches high, does wey.
380. pound.


CHAPTER. IIII.
To dispart any piece of Ordnaunce truly.

OF all things belonging unto a Gunner, the chiefest is, to bring the metal
of his piece even, for else he shall never shoot just to his mark, which
Gunners call disparting of their pieces: and there be many ways to do it. Now
to disparte your piece, do this, take a string, such a one as will not stretch,
then gird your piece about her tail or great end, in the very biggest place
of the piece, then measure the line justly how many inches the piece was in the
compass, and then look how many. 22. inches there be in the compass, take
so many. 7. inches for the Dyametre, highte, or thicknes of the circle, for in all circles being perfect round, as timber, stone, or any other metal, look
how many. 22. inches there be in the circumference or compass, so many times.
7. there is in the Diametre or height, then the height or thicknes of ye breech
of ye piece being known, look how many inches and parts of an ynche it
comes unto, then lay that unto the mouth of the piece, and look how much
of that does remain over, then take half of that for your dispart. But some
do use to gird them (as before is said) and do put that into three equal
parts, but that is not the exact way, although it does go somewhat near
the matter. Some also will take a priming iron, and put it into the tutchhole,
and then lay it unto the mouth of the piece, and look what it comes unto
more than the measure, they will take that for their dispart: but that may
deceive them, as it is generally false. Wherefore this is a very good way, to
take your rule of two foot long, and then lay that cross the tail of the
piece then take a plummet of lead upon a line or a string. First hold the
plumbe line on the one side close to the piece, that the line touch the piece
without any bending, then on the other side, as circumspectly as you can, that
the plummet line touch the side of the piece, without any bending, and then
lay that measure to the mouth of the piece, and look what the ouermeasure
comes unto, take half of that for your true dispart. Now for your better
instructions by this figure.



First I lay my rule of two foot long upon the tail of the piece cross A and
B and then I hold my plummet of lead first upon the said A as you may see,
and then hold my hand upon the other sid B close to the side of the piece, the^
I do look how many inches the tail of the piece was from A and B, and I find
it nineteen inches and a half: then I lay my rule unto the mouth of the piece
C and D, and find that the mouth of the piece is fifteen inches, so there
remains four inches and a half: then I divide the four inches and a half
into two equal parts, and that is two inches and which I take for my dispart:
then with my plu^met of lead, I go unto the mouth of the piece, and making a
parpendicular line, and so I find the uppermost part of the piece: then I take
a straw, setting that perfitely upright, according to the dispart, two inches
and a quarter above the mouth of the yeece, and make it fast with a little
wax, at the letter C, then bringing ye tail of the piece to the top of the
straw which is my disparte, leuel with my mark, there is no doubt, but I
shall make a perfect shot, so that it be as far as within the cast of the
right line: for the disparting of your piece, is but to bring the mouth of your
piece before, to be as high as the tail behind. For this you must consider,
that he that can by art lay the hollow of the piece right against the mark,
must needs hit it, so that it be not farther than the piece does cast upon
the right line, for he that shall give level to a piece without disparting,
shall shoot a great deal over the mark, because that the side of the piece
is contrary unto the core or hollownesse of the same: for the metal of the
tail of the piece, is a great deal thicker than the mouth. And furthermore,
this is a very good way to disparte all manner of pieces of Ordnaunce: take
your Calapar compasses, and so take the height of the tail of the piece, then
measure it with your rule and look what it is more at the tail, than it is at
the mouth, take half that for your disparte, and doing (as before is said)
there is no truer way, so that your Calapar compasses be large enough to reach
it. Now in like case, you may disparte your piece with your Quadrant, and also
with a square, but to teach tedious ways as long as a man may teach easily,
it were but superfluous, and the easy ways as good or better than the other.

Now, as concerning chambred pieces, for the disparting of them, there can be
no perfect writing, for it must be considered and handled, according unto the
form of the Chamber, and fashion of the hall of the piece, whether it be
Sling, Foller, Portepeece, or Baces: but any reasonable man, (when he does see
the piece and the Chamber) may easily know what he must do, as touching those
matters.

CHAPTER. 5.
How to give level with any piece of Ordnaunce, to make a shot, as the most
sorts of Gunners use to do, although there be no Art in it

FOr the making of a shot, that is to say, to give level unto any mark
assigned, with a piece of Ordnaunce, without the right line, according unto the
accustomable manner that Gunners use, for that they do not know the distance
unto the mark, and therefore do but give a guess what advantage will reach
the mark, and if that it be with an ynch rule, then thus they do.

First by their judgments they do give that so many inches advantage as they
suppose will reach the mark, and then by the first lighting or falling of the
shot, he does see whether it be short or gone over the mark, and if it be
short, then at the next shooting he will give the piece more advantage by the
ynch rule: and if it be over, then he will give the piece less advantage
with the ynche rule: and so by diverse times shooting off the piece at a mark,
they will find how many inches and parts will keep the length of the mark.
And if they do not shoot with an ynche rule, then they will give the piece
the advantage by some assigned place beyond the mark that they do shoot
at: and if the shot do light shorter, then they will give the piece more
advantage at the next shot: and if the shot be farther then the mark, then
they will give the piece less advantage at the next shot. And so by often
shooting at the mark, they will hitte the length of the same, and then knowing
at what mark the piece must be mounted unto right over the mark, then they
always mount the piece unto that advantage, and they shall always keep the
length of the mark, with that piece at that mark, the piece to be laden
always equally with Powder.

But by this order of shooting, he shall never become cunning, although he
shoot a thousand shootes, for that there is no method or order in the doing
thereof, but only with that piece at the mark: for if you do shoot with
another piece at that mark, although the piece does shoot that shot, and
that weighte in Powder, the piece may shoot under or over by the means of
the length of the same, or the bigness or smalnesse of the breech, and the
mouth of the piece in metal. And to bring that piece unto any other place,
they must do as at the first, to prove what will reach the mark: and
therefore this kind of shooting is to no purpose, but only in a Town or
Castle, in the time of service, for him that has the charge of Ordnaunce, to
prove what the piece will do at every mark, as touching the keeping of the
length of the mark, whereby they may the better shoot at their enemies when
they do serve, otherwise it will be to no great purpose: for as often as you
do alter or change your piece, or take that piece away to serve in an other
place, so often you are to seek, and to prove the thing new again, whether
you do use to shoot with the ynch rule, or by the degrees in the Quadrant:
for if you do shoot with the ynch rule, then the length of the piece will
alter it as is showed in the 8. chapter following. And if you shoot by the
degrees in ye Quadrant, then the highness or lowness of the ground shall
cause them to err, as I do show in the thirteenth Chapter. Wherefore, if I
were worthy to give counsel, I could show them how to use the matter, that
they might atteyne to know the length of the mark at the first shot, but I
never saw it so handled, whereby they should atteine it: for all the proofs
that have been made as yet by Englishmen, are no proof, but altogether to
cause them that did see the proof, to commit further error, as touching the
distance unto the mark, or hitting the length of the mark.

CHAPTER. 6.
What a degree is etc.

FUrthermore, whereas this book is nam^ The Art of shooting in great Ordnaunce,
so in like manner I think it convenient, to show you what the word Art
means or signifies, which is, the describing of a way or method, how to
atteyne to the certayntie of any matter. Which as hitherunto I have not seen
any such book, although it has been very near two hundred years since the
first invention of Ordnaunce: and except there be any better book in some
men's hands, such as I have not seen, as it is like enough that there may be,
there is no Art in any of them: yet I have seen a number of books that have
been written concerning Ordnance, but surely they that wrote the^, were not
seen in any part of ye Mathematical science, neither good Machanisians, but
(in respect) utterly void of any science: (in comparison) no good order
described in the shooting of Ordnaunce, to know what distance, the shot is
delivered from the piece: neither have they known what instruments have
meaned. And although they have named degrees in their books, yet it appears
unto me that they have not knowledge what a degree signifies, for that they
have named a Quadrant, a Triangle and other food and foolish by names.
Wherefore they that have written those books that the Gu^ners have amongst
them, were utterly unlearned in any manner of science, which were in the
beginning, in the time of King Henry ye eight, made by Flemmings: for in the
wars in those days the King sent over into Flaunders, and those parts
thereabout, to have Gunners to serve him in the wars, and the Gunners have no
other books, but such as were written by them: wherefore I do think it good
to show unto you what a degree is.

A degree is a part or division of a whole circle into 360. equal parts, as
the the ancient fathers aforetime have taught, and especially in Astronomy.
And it is very profitable for Gunners to know the use of them. The Quadrant
that they do occupy, is the fourth part of a circle, divided into 90. equal
parts, according unto ye fourth part of the Heavens, for the zeneth or prick
in the Heavens (over the Crown of your head, down to the Horizon) is divided
into 90. equal parts, according unto the Quadrant. As for example: If there
were a perpendicular line let down out of the Heavens unto the earth, then
should the earth be a right line, and make a square angle unto the furthest
part of the Horizon that you can see, and so pass unto the Heavens, as does
the Quadrant: and then the best of the Rander is 45. of these deuisions, called
degrees (as some men's opinion has been) and that is half 90. and the said. 45.
degrees be the best of the Rander in some cases, and that is with the wind,
but otherwise, it is not, as it is further declared in the 5. Chapter. And for
better example, I have placed this figure.



CHAPTER. 7.
How to make a shot upon the right line, and also to know how much ground
any piece of Ordnaunce does drive or convey the shot at the mount of every
degree of the Rander.

FUrthermore, any piece of Ordnaunce being truly disparted, as is declared in
the fourth Chapter, they may know at al times how for to shoot just unto the
mark, especially within point blank, and point blanke, is the direct fleeing of
the shot, without any descending from the mouth of the piece unto the mark, ye
mouth of the piece to stand directly with the Horizon, so that it be upon a
plain and level ground, as far as ye piece may cast, hytting any thing that
stands directly as high as the mouth of the piece, laying the hollow or
concauitie of the piece against the thing that you do shoot at etc. And to
shoot at any mark upon the right line, you shall do it by this means:
your piece being truly disparted, and the dispart set upon the mouth of the
piece, bring the middle of the tail of the piece to the top of your
disparte upon the mouth of the piece, and the mark that you do shoot at,
all three upon one right line, by the sight of one of your eyes, and then
foreseeing that the piece stands upon a level ground, and the one wheel
to be as nimble as the other, this done, there is no doubt but you may
shoot as near the mark with a Cannon as with a Hargabus, or Caliuer. This is
most certain. Therefore it is very necessary to know how far any piece will
convey the shot upon the right line, and that is somewhat hard to do, for there
is seldom any ground, but is higher in one place than in another, and then if
the piece should be laid close unto the ground, it would graze before that it
were at the end of the right line, and then if the piece be in her carriage,
the shot will not graze before that it were descended, as much as the height
of the carriage. And for to set up any thing certain at the end of the right
line, it were too tedious, therefore in my opinion, this is one of the best
ways, in the finding what distance any piece conuayeth or drives the shot
upon the right line or any degree of the Rander, as thus: Repair unto a very
level ground, as a plain marrish, that is just water level, and then to
find the right line or point blanke, raise a butte or bank in that plain
ground, and then set up a mark the just height of the piece that lies in
the carriage, and take a quadrant, with a rule fast thereunto, and put the rule
into the mouth of the piece, and coin the breech of the piece up and down,
until the plummet hang at the corner of the Quadrant, and then shall the
Concauitie of the piece, lie right with the Horyzon, neither higher nor lower:
then shoot off the piece against the butte: if the shot be under the mark,
it is more then the right line, then you must bring the piece nearer unto the
butte, bank or mark: but if it be the just height of the mark, then remove
the piece farther off from the mark, and so remoouing the piece for wards and
backwardes, you shall find the true right line of the piece. By this order, you
may try the true right line of all manner of pieces of Ordnaunce. And whereas
the opinion of diverse Gunners is, the one contrary unto the other, some
holding an opinion, that the longer piece does ouershoote the shorter, and some
that the short does ouershoote the longer: the troth is, that the longer piece
does shoot further than the shorter, although that in the mounting of a long
piece and a short with an ynche rule, the short piece does ouershoote the
longer, although both shoot one shot, and one sort and weight of powder,
as you may perceive in the next Chapter following, and also in the beginning
of the Book in the eight consideration. etc. Furthermore, to know what any
piece of Ordnaunce will do at the mount of every degree, and what distance of
ground the shot does fly, do this, the ground being plain and level (as
before is rehearsed) place the piece in this manner: you must make a hole in
the ground, to the intent to make a platteforme, to set the piece upon, in
such order, that the tronchions of the piece being in her carriage, be just in
height level with the ground, neither higher nor lower: then take your
Quadrant, and the rule fastened thereto, and put the rule into the mouth of the
piece, and so mount the piece unto one degree, shooting off the same, and
seeing the first grase, measure the distance of ground, and note or mark
that: then in like manner mount the piece unto two degrees, and so unto three
degrees, and so forth from degree to degree, until the piece be mounted unto
the best compass of the Rander. Thus shall you know what any piece will do at
the mount of every degree. etc. But if you should make your proof upon
such ground as is not level, then your proof should be erroneous, for that
the Quadrant shows by the degree, how much it is higher than the Horizon,
for if the shot do not find ground in his descending, equal with the
height of the piece, the shot flees further than it should do. And also if
the ground be higher than the place that the piece does stand upon, then the
shot will be stayde the sooner, by the means of the height of the ground, as I
do more at large declare in the. 13. Chapter following. And for your better
instruction of the mounting of the piece, I have made this figure following.



First take the Quadrant, and put the rule of the Quadrante E into the mouth
of the piece C, and then putting up or down the tail of the piece A, till the
plummet G fall upon the corner of the Quadrant at D, then look whatsoever you
see right with the upper side of the Quadrante H, shall be level with the
mouth of the piece, and that is called the point blancke, for that upon a
level ground without any hills, as upon the sea, that all things
stands so level, shall be right with the Horizon, that is to say, at the
parting of the earth and the Sky, by the sight of your eye: and then
puttyng down the tail of the piece A, the plummet line G will hang at what
degree you please toward the myddle line of the Quadrant E, then the mouth of
the piece B and C will go vpwardes. etc. Now shall follow (according unto
the proof that I have made, but yet not to my contentation, neither in respect
to no purpose) the argument of the proportion of the mountyng of every degree
unto the best of the Randare, according unto the proof that I have made. Look
how much ground the piece conueyeth the shot from the right line, unto
the mountyng of five degrees, that is as much ground as the right line, and
two nynth parts more, and from the mountyng of five degrees unto ten degrees
the shot is conveyed as much ground as the right line, and 1/9 part more,
and from the mountyng of ten degrees unto fifteen degrees, the shot is
conveyed as much ground as the right line just. And from the mounting of
fifteen degrees unto the mountyng of twentye degrees, the shot is conveyed
half as much ground as the right line just: and from the mountyng of any
piece from twentye degrees unto the best of the Randare, the shot is conveyed
in all about parts of the right line, and that is in a fair calm day, and
then two and forty degrees is the best of the Randare, and with the wind
five and forty is the best of the Randare, and against the wind, as the wind
is in bigness, that is, one and fortye, or fortye, or nine and thirty, or
eight and thirty, or seven and thirtye, or six and thirtye degrees, the
wind being altogyther the ruler thereof. Therefore it is but a folly to make
accoumpte thereof, neither is there any service above the mountyng of any piece
of Ordnaunce, above. 20. degrees, except it be a mortar piece, and the shot
is conveyed off ground from the mouth of the piece unto the lightyng or
falling of the shot, to the best compass of the Rander, about five times
and a half as much ground as the right line, being (as before is declared)
within a little under or over, according as the wind blows more or less,
against the wind, or with the wind, and so forth. But here is one principal
thing to be considered, and that is this, that you do always charge the piece
with just one weighte, and one sort and kind of powder, for otherwise, in the
doyinge thereof, you may commit error, as before is declared in the first
Chapter. As touching the knowing the goodness of Powder, for that it chances
many times that they have not always one sort of Powder, neither always of one
man's making but of sundry men's making, and so by that means, some Powder is
better than some is: therefore it is a hard matter for to know certainly, yt
thus much in weight of this powder, is equal unto the force of so much in
weighte of that sort of Powder: wherefore in mine opinion, that engine or
little box that is devised to prove the force of the Powder is very
necessary to be used, for by it you may justly know which sort of Powder is
stronger or weaker in force than the other, by waying alike some small
quantity of each sort, and so putting the powder into the engine or box,
and burning it, first the one sort, and then the other sort, and look
which sort of Powder does blow, or lift the lidde of the box highest, that
is the stronger sort of powder, and you shall know by how much, by the
teeth or notches that do stay the lidde of the engine or box, and so by that
engine or box, you may fit the force of the powder, that is to say, if that
you do occupye so much powder with any piece of Ordnaunce. And for that you
would keep that length of the mark at such an advantage in mounting, if you
have no more of that sort of powder, but that the powder that you have is
either stronger or weaker, then do thus: wey out some small quantity, as the
weight of a grote or sixepence, more or less at your discretion, as the
engine or box is, and first burn that sort of powder in the box that you
do know the force of it already, and then look unto what teeth or notch that
the lidde of the engine or box is lifted up unto, and then wey out of the
other sort of powder the like weighte, and so burn that in the box or
engine, and if it does blow or lift the lydde higher than it was before,
then it is a stronger forte of powder, if not so high, then it is a weaker
sort of powder: and by the number of notches, you shall know how much.
Therefore, if it be a starger sort of Powder than that you have occupied
already, then weye out a lesser weyghte of the same, and burn that in the
box or engine, and so doing, both by the weying and burning of it in the
engine or box, until that it lift or blow the lidde of the engine, unto the
just heygth that it was with the first sort of Powder: but if the first
sort of Powder did blow or lift the lydde higher than the other, then wey out
more in weyghte than the first, and so by the weying and burning of it in the
engine, until the lydde be lyfted unto the just heygth that it was before, so
by that means you shall know justly how much weyghte of one sort of
Powder shall be equal with the force of that sort of Powder, and so by this
means, although you change the sorts of your Powder never so often, yet you
may so fit the piece by the weyghte of your Powder, that the piece of
Ordnaunce shall keep one length at the mark. Having this consideration, both
in the lading and the wadding, to be in such order, that is to say, to keep a
method in the doing thereof, neither to put in the powder too hard, neither
too loose, neither the wadde to go in too loose, neither to be too much too
hard, but reasonable. And as touching the fashion and the making of the engine
or box, I do omit that in this book, for that I do show it in my Book,
called The Inventions or devices, in the. 54. Device.

CHAPTER. 8.
How for to mount any piece of Ordnaunce by the degree with an Inch rule, with
a Table, showing what part of an ynche rule will make one degree, and so unto
ten degrees.

FOr the making of a perfect shot at any degree of the Randare, and to have a
good length at yt mark, the distance of ground being known, first it
behooves him for to know the force of his Powder, which is showed in the
Chapter going before, and to have his Powder put in Cartredges, either of
Paper or Canuas, and the Powder waied, that the one Cartredge be not heauyer
than the other, according unto the piece, and the goodness of the Powder: for
there can be no certaynetie when yt the piece is laden or charged, sometime
with more Powder, and sometime with less: and especially in the time of
service, I do see, that there is no worse lading or charging of Ordnaunce, than
with a Ladell, whether that it be by Sea or by land, for by the lading with a
Ladell, it must be twice filled, and then at every time that the Powder is
put into the piece, it must be put up with the Rammer head, so that they
must either turn the other end of the Ladell, or else if that the Rammer
head be upon the spondge staff, then he must change the staves, which is
a great cumber to do in a narrow room. And also in the chargyng of a piece
with a Ladell, he cannot fill it so equally, but that the Ladell shall have
sometime more Powder, and sometime less Powder, by a good qua^titye, and
especially if that he does it hastily as in the time of service it always
requires haste, and that may cause him that gives level, to shoot under or
over the mark, or too short, or too far, although yt he has found what
advantage will reach the mark.

And also it is unprofitable and dangerous to lade or charge a piece with a
Ladell, for that the Powder is apt to be shed or spylled being hastyly
done, and then it is apt to be fiered, considering what a dangerous point
it is for the burning and spoiling of men.

Wherefore if your Powder be in Cartredges, and also weyed, the piece is more
sooner and easilyer laden or charged, and he shall keep the length of the
mark the better, and also you may keep the Powder the closer and better, and
not so apt to be shed or pqylled, for when that the Cartredges be filled,
then they may be set vprighte in some Tubbe or Barrel, and then they may
take out one by one as need shall require, and so cover the Barrel close
again, that it may be without danger.

And now for the gyuyng of level with any piece of Ordnaunce, and the mark
more than the piece can reach upon the right line, and the distance known
unto the mark, and also you knowing what ground the piece will convey the shot
upon the right line, then by the order in the Chapter going before, you may
know how ma^y degrees will reach ye mark. And for that it is somewhat tedious
and difficulte to mou^te any piece of Ordnaunce with a Quadrante, except it be
upon a plain and level ground, that the piece stands no more, but the
just heygth, or the lowness of the mark, which happens very seldom.
Therefore I do think it very good to show you how to mount any piece of
Ordnaunce by the degree, with an ynch rule, according to the length of the
piece, and to know how many inches, and parts of an ynche will make or give
one degree unto ten degrees. Hereafter is a Table, the length of the piece
stands in the margente toward the left hand, and ye square right
against, that is the mount of one degree, and the uppermost number in every
square, is the inches, and the undermost numbers is the odd parts of an
ynche, and the Table begins at the length of the piece five foot and a
half, and so increases by the half foot, till the piece be full fifteen
foot long.

This Table does show what part of an ynch rule will make one degree, and so
unto ten degrees.
Degrees. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Foot 5. long. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 Inches.
3/22 3/11 9/22 6/11 15/22 9/11 21/22 1/11 5/22 4/11 Parts. Foot. 6. long. 1 2
3 5 6 7 8 10 11 12 Inches. Parts. Foot. 6. long. 1 2 4 5 6 8 9 10 12 13
Inches. 4/11 8/11 ^/11 5/11 9/11 2/11 6/11 10/11 3/11 7/11 Parts. Foot. 7.
long. 1 2 4 5 7 8 10 11 13 14 Inches. 5/11 10/11 4/11 9/11 3/11 8/11 2/11 7/11
1/11 6/11 Parts. Foot. 7. long. 1 3 4 6 7 9 10 12 13 15 Inches. 6/11 1/11
7/11 2/11 8/11 3/11 9/11 4/11 10/11 5/11 Parts. Foot. 8. long. 1 3 5 6 8 10
11 13 15 16 Inches. 15/22 4/11 1/22 8/11 9/22 1/11 17/22 5/11 3/22 9/11 Parts.
Foot. 8. long. 1 3 5 7 8 10 12 14 15 17 Inches. 17/22 6/11 7/22 1/11 19/22
7/11 9/22 2/11 21/22 8/11 Parts. Foot. 9. long. 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Inches. 10/11 9/11 8/11 7/11 6/11 5/11 4/11 3/11 2/11 1/11 Parts. Foot. 9.
long. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 Inches. Foot 10. long. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
20 Inches. 1/11 2/11 2/11 4/11 5/11 6/11 7/11 8/11 9/11 10/11 Parts. Foot.
10. long. 2 4 6 8 10 13 15 17 19 21 Inches. 2/11 4/11 6/11 8/11 10/11 1/11 2/11
5/11 7/11 9/11 Parts. Foot. 11. long. 2 4 6 9 11 13 15 18 20 22 Inches. 3/11
6/11 9/11 1/11 4/11 7/11 10/11 2/11 5/11 8/11 Parts. Foot. 11. long. 2 4 7 9
12 14 16 19 21 24 Inches. 9/22 9/11 5/22 7/11 1/22 5/11 19/22 3/11 15/22 1/11
Parts. 12. 2 5 7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 Inches. Parts. Foot. 12. long. 2 5 7
10 13 15 18 21 23 26 Inches. 7/11 3/11 10/11 6/11 2/11 9/11 5/11 ^/11 8/11 4/11
Parts. Foot. 13. long. 2 5 8 10 13 16 19 21 24 27 Inches. 8/11 5/11 2/11
10/11 7/11 4/11 1/11 9/11 6/11 3/11 Parts. Foot. 13. long. 2 5 8 11 14 16 19
22 25 28 Inches. 9/11 7/11 5/11 3/11 1/11 10/11 8/11 6/11 4/11 2/11 Parts.
Foot. 14. long. 2 5 8 11 14 17 20 23 26 29 Inches. 10/11 9/11 8/11 7/11 6/11
5/11 4/11 3/11 2/11 1/11 Parts. Foot. 14. long. 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30
Inches. 1/30 1/15 1/10 2/15 2/30 4/15 9/30 Parts. Foot. 15. long. 3 6 9 12 15
18 21 25 28 31 Inches. 3/22 2/11 9/22 6/11 15/23 9/11 21/22 1/11 5/22 ^/11
Parts.

Then first repair unto the order of the Chapter that goes before, and
consider by the distance that the piece conueyeth the shot upon the right
line, and look how much the shot may be conveyed at the mount of one
degree, and so from degree to degree, till you have the length in degrees, that
the shot may reach the mark, and then repair unto the piece, and measure how
many foot long the piece is, then according to the length of the piece, there
is a Table in this Chapter going before, in the Margent of the which, toward
the left hand, that number is the length of the piece, then right against that
number in the first square, it does show how many ynces, and parts of an ynche
will make one degree: and the next square will show you how many inches, and
parts of an ynch will make two degrees, and so forth unto the number of ten
degrees, and no more: and the cause is this, for that there is commonly no
service to be done, above the mounting of any piece of Ordnaunce, more then
ten degrees, neither the ynch rule will serve any further, for that the
degrees be taken out of the circumference of a circle, and not out of a right
line. And now to use the matter in the handling of the rule, to make a perfect
shot do this: prepare your rule, and let it be well divided into inches,
half inches, and quarters of inches, and half quarters of inches, and then
let there be a slitte in the middle of the rule, and in the slitte, let
there be made in brass or latin a sight, that it may be moved up and
down at your pleasure, and then the rule is finished. Now when you would
make a shot at any mark, let the piece be truly disparted, and the
disparte set upon the mouth of the piece, or else, if the disparte be not
set upon the mouth of the piece, yet you must know perfectely the Disparte
of the piece, and to make account what number of inches it is, and to reckon
that as part of the mounting of the piece by the degrees. Now the distance of
ground being known unto the mark, and also to know how many inches, and
parts of an ynche will make the number of degrees, the accoumpte of the
dispart beying made, or else the dispart being set upon the mouth of the piece,
then set the rule upon the breech of the same perfectly upright, in such order,
as the top of the rule be not nearer unto the mouth, than that place of the
breech of the piece that the rule does stand upon, whether the piece have much
advantage, or little, so that the top of the rule must not hang backwards or
forwards, but always at on proportion from the mouth of the piece: that being
done, turn the piece right unto the mark, and then koyne the breech of the
piece up and down, until the middle of the mouth of the piece, or else the
top of the disparte, and the mark be seen through the sight, in the slitte
of the rule, just at the number of inches, and parts of an ynche, that will
answer unto so ma^y degrees, as the Table in this Chapter going before does
show. This being done, the shot shall have a good length at the mark. As for
example, suppose that I do shoot in a Saker that conueyeth or drives the
shot upon the right line or point blancke. 26. skore, and the mark that I do
shoot at is 40. skore from the piece, then I have either made proof by the
order prescribed in the. 7. Chapter that goes, before, or else I have the
Tables of some other men, as Tartalia ye Italian has made Tables thereof And so
I do find, that. 2. degres will reach the mark, then I do repair unto the
piece and measure it, how many foot long the piece is, and I do find that
the same is. 9. foot and a half in length from the mouth to the breech, then
I repair to ye Table in this Chapter before, where I find that. 2. inches does
make a degree just, and now the piece must be mounted unto. 2. degrees just,
and then twice. 2. inches, makes. 4. inches: then I do dispart the metal of
the piece, as I do show you in the. 4. Chapter, and so I do find that the
metal of the brech of the piece is an ynche and a half thicker at the brech,
than it is at the mouth of the piece, and then I do set up a rush or a straw
on the mouth of the piece, and so making it fast with a little wax just one
ynche and a half above the metal of the mouth of the piece, then I do take
the ynch rule, and so I do remove the sight in the slitte of the rule unto
just. 4. inches, and I do set ye rule perfitely upright upon the middle of the
breech of the piece, and so remove the piece too and fro, and koyne the tail
of the piece up and down, till such time as I may see the mark through the
sight in the slitt, and the top of the dispart, all three upon one right
line, by the sight of my eye, and the sight in the slitte, to stand at just.
4. inches, then shooting off the piece, you shall make a perfect shot. And
furthermore, if the disparte be not set upon the mouth of the piece, then
you must make accoumpte thereof, for that the piece does mount himself one
ynche and a half, therefore you must give the piece but. 2. inches and a half
advantage, to reach the mark. And furthermore, I will give you a second
example in the same piece at a greater distance, at. 80. skore from the piece,
and that is almost a mile, and then doing (as before is said) to seek how
many degrees will reach the mark, and I find that piece that drives or
co^uaieth the shot. 26. skore upon the right line, that at. 9. degrees it will
co^uey or drive the shot. 80. skore, and (as before is showed) that in that
piece that is. 9. foot and a half long. 2. inches makes just one degree, and
then the piece must be mounted unto just. 9. degrees, which is. 18. inches, if
the dispart be set upon the mouth of the piece, but if the disparte be not set
upon the mouth, then you must rebate so much of the advantage in the mounting,
as the disparte comes unto, and that is one ynch and a half. Therefore, you
must set the sight in the slitte, but upon sixteen inches and a half, and so
doing (as before is said) the shot shall have a good length at the mark. And
furthermore, I had thought to have placed a Table of proportion of the casting
of the piece at the mount of every degree, accordingly as ye piece does convey
or drive the shot upon the right line, but that I have not made any such
exact proof, neither am I of that ability, neither as far as I can judge,
there is no man will be at any such charge. But the exactest matter yt I have
heard that Tartalia the Italian has made perfect proof thereof before diverse of
the nobility of Italy, whereupon, he has made Tables (by report) very exact,
yet I could never come by the sight of them, neither are they in his Book
that he has made for these causes.

CHAPTER. 9.
What manner of course the shot flies in the air.

AS I suppose, it is very necessary to know what manner of course or
proportion the shot flies in the air in his compass, that is to say, at any
degree mounted that the piece is shot at the Randare. All those pieces that
be shot at the mounting of any degree above point blancke, and under the
best of of the Randare, has. 4. manner of courses in his dryuyng or flying,
by the vyolence of the blast of the powder, before the shot come to the
ground, so that the piece be shot against a leuelled ground. The first course
is by a right line, and so long as the shot goes violently. And the second
course does begin for to compass, and yet flies some what upwards into the
air, that is to say, further above the earth circularly. The third course is
for a certain space or quantity at the highest distance from the earth. And
the fourth course is, it comes downwards circularly toward the earth, and
so stouping more and more, till it comes down to the ground: as for example
this: If any piece that is shot at the best of the Randar, that is to say, at
45. degrees, and also at the mounting of thirty degrees, and also at the
mounting of fifteen degrees, and A signifies the right line, and B the second
course in flying of the shot circularly vpwardes, and C shows the uppermost
course for flying at the farthest distance from the earth, and D shows the
circular falling or coming downwards, or the stoupiues or falling more
circularly, than any of the other courses or falling of the shot, and the
more nearer unto the ground, the more circularly the compass is made, as this
figure does show.



Now furthermore, if any piece be shot in ye mounting of any degree, above. 45.
degrees, then the shot shall have a perpendicular line or fall, before that the
shot shall come to the ground. Therefore I do say, that the more that any piece
is mounted above five and forty degrees, by the means of the perpendiculer or
falling, that the shot falls shorter and shorter at the mounting of every
degree: therefore they do never mount any manner of piece above the compass
of. 45. degrees, except it be a Mortar piece, and those be mounted always
above. 45. degrees, for that the more the perpendicular line is, the more
violently the shot comes down, and the more the piece is mounted, the higher
into the air the shot flies, and then the more is the perpe^dicular line,
and the nearer unto the piece the shot falls. Therefore that mortar piece
that is shot above. 45. degrees, the shot has. 5. manner of courses, that is
to say: first his right line up into the air: secondly, his cicular fleeing up
into the air: thirdly, his furthest distance from the earth: fourthly, his
circular coming downewardes: and fifthly, his direct fall or perpendicular line
down to the earth, as this figure may represe^t, the one line to be the best
of the Randare, the other line to be the mounting of. 15. degrees more than the
best of the Randar: and the third, the mounting of. 30. degrees above the best
of the Randar. And the cause that the shot has his direct fall unto the
earth, is his natural course, for first it is driven violently by the blast
of the Powder up into the air by a right line, and then secondlye, as the
violent drifte does decay, so it flies circularly, and thirdly, the force of
the drifte being all decayed, it must needs have his natural course, and
all things that be of earthly substance, must needs return to the earth
again.

CHAPTER. 10.
How to mount a Mortar piece for to lay the shot at any distance appointed.

FOr the shooting of Mortar pieces, it is to be considered, that those pieces
must be mounted above the compass of five and forty degrees, for that these
pieces are used at the seege of Towns, for the annoyance of their enemies, yt
is to say, to the intent to beat down their lodgings or houses, with diueres
other purposes more. And to have the shot to fall at any distance appointed,
they must do this: For every degree that those pieces be mounted, the shot
falls shorter, as in the Chapter before is declared, and til yt the mouth of
the piece does stand directly on your perpendicular line or Zeneth or prick,
with the crown of your head, and then the shot shall fall directly into the
mouth of the piece again, except that the accedence of the wind does put it
beside the mouth of the piece, as this: first shoot this piece at the mount of
five and forty degrees, that is the best of the Randar, then measure the
ground from the mouth of the piece unto the first falling of the shot, and ye
measure being known, divide that into five and fortye equal parts, and every
one of these parts of measure, shall be the falling shorter of the shot, at the
mounting of one degree. As for example, a Mortar piece, that shoots a. 180.
paces at the best of the Randare, shall shoot at the mountyng of every degree
four pace shorter: and so from degree unto degree, till that the mouth of the
piece stands directly vprighte with your Zeneth. Now for to shoot with
your Mortar piece, do this: first lay the rule E cross the mouth of the
piece B, then take your Quadrante and set your square place G upon the rule E,
then put down the tail of the piece A, til that the plummet line F fall at
the corner of the Quadrant C, then shooting off your Mortar piece that is the
best of the Randare, and putting down the tail of the piece A, till that the
plummet line fall at ten degrees toward the middle line of the Quadrant D
then that Mortar piece that shoots a hundredth and eyghtie paces at the best
of the Randare, the shot shall fall forty pace shorter, that is, at a
hundred and forty pace from the piece, then at the mount of twenty degrees,
the shot shall fall 80. paces shorter, that is to say, at a hundred pace from
the piece, then at thirty degrees the shot shall fall a hundred and twenty
pace shorter, that is to say, threescore pace from the piece, then at the
mou^ting of forty degrees, the shot falls at a hundred and threescore pace
shorter, that is, at twenty pace from the piece. And thus it may be seen, that
from the mounting of every degree the shat falls shorter four pace, and
thus, by dividing the best of the Randare into five and forty equal parts,
you shall know the mount of every degree, at what distance the shot shall fall
from the piece, as by these figures following it does appear.



CHAPTER. 11.
How far above the mark the shot flies over the mark by the length of
the piece, and distance unto the mark,

FUrthermore, here is one especial point to be noted, for a number of Sea
Gunners do not use for to diparte their piece: and I do thynk that a great
number of them can not do it very well, for that cause they will say, yt they
need not disparte their Ordnaunce. But if they do not disparte their great
Ordnaunce, and especially those new pieces that be now adays made for the
Ships, they shall do but simple service, besides the great charge in wast that
they shall put them to that bear the charge thereof: for one shatte of the
great Ordnaunce, is twenty times the charge of the small pieces: and many of
the small pieces in a manner needs no disparte, but the great pieces: for the
metal of the tail of the piece is a great deal bigger than the mouth of the
piece. And this is general for ever, look how much that the metal is
thicker upon the one side at the tail of the piece than it is at the mouth of
the piece, then look how many times that the length of the piece is unto the
mark, so many times the thickness of the metal is thicker at the breech of
the piece, than it is at the mouth, so many times the quantity shall the shot
fly over the mark, if so be that the piece be shot without disparting, and
the mark within point blanke, or the right line of the piece: as for example
thus, by a piece of Ordnaunce, that the metal of the breech of the piece is
thicker by three inches on the one side, than it is at the mouth of the piece,
and the piece is just tenn foot long, and the mark is just twentye skore
from the piece. Now the piece being ten foot long, there is just six times
the whole length of the piece in every skore, for that a skore is sixty foot,
and six times ten is sixty foot, then the metal of the breech of the
piece, being three ynchs thicker than it is at the mouth of the piece, ye piece
shall cast over the mark at the end of every skore eyghteene inches, for
that the piece shoots three inches over the mark at every time the length
of the piece, and then six times three inches, makes eyghteen inches: so then
it must needs be said, that at the end of twenty skore, the piece must
needs cast twenty times eyghteene inches over the mark, and twenty times
eyghteene inches, makes three hundred and sixty inches, and that contains
thyrtye foot, so that I do conclude, that the piece which is but ten foot
long, and the metal three inches thicker on the one side at the breeche of
the piece than it is at the mouth, and the mark twenty skore from the piece,
this piece being short without any disparting, being shot against an
upright wall, then bringing the middle of the mouth of the piece, and the
myddle of the tail of the piece, and the mark, all three upon one right
line, and then the shot shall hytte the wall just thyrtie foot right over
the mark, and this shall be true without any fail. Then this being true,
what madd men be those Gunners that will be of such an opinion, that they need
not to dispart their Ordnaunce.

CHAPTER. 12.
How to make a perfect shot with a piece that is not truly bored, that is
to say, that the core or hollownesse goes not right in the middle of the
metal.

AS it chances many times thorough ye negligence or default of Founders, that
some pieces be not truly bored, yt is to say, that the core or hollownesse of
the piece runs not right in the middle of the metal, but ye core or
concauitie declineth or leans more unto the one side, than it does on the
other, for although at the mouth of the piece the metal be round about of one
like thickness, yet at the breech of the piece the metal may be thicker on
the one side, than it is on the other, and then that piece will never shoot
right upon the mark: and also, this piece is very dangerous to shoot in for
fear of breaking. And this is generally for ever. Look at that side that the
metal is most thickest at the breech, from that sidewardes the piece does
cast, and then right against the thickest part of the piece, there is the
thinnest side of the metal, so that the metal be perfect round on the
outside of the piece, and also the hollow and concauitie within the piece, and
toward the thickest side of the metal of the piece, toward that side the
piece casts. And for to know how much, you may easily perceive: look how
much the thickest side of the metal is thycker than the thynner side, look
how many times the hollow of the piece is unto the mark, so many times half
the thickness that ye metal is thicker on the one side, tha^ it is on the
other, so ma^y times that proportion shall the shot fly wide of the mark,
toward that side that the metal of the piece is most thickest. As for example
this, there is a piece, yt the metal is thicker on the one side, than it is
on the other side by two inches, and the core or hollownesse from the
tutchhole, unto the mouth of the piece, is. 10. foot long, and the mark that
the piece is shot at, is 20. skore from ye piece: now there is. 6. times the
length of the hollownesse of the piece in every skore, and the piece casts
one ynche awrye at every time the length of the hollow of the piece, for that
the metal is thicker on the one side, than it is on the other by. 2. inches,
then take from the thicker side one ynch, and add unto the other side that one
ynch, then it will set the hollownes of the piece right in the middle of the
metal, as it is. 5. inches thick on the thicker side, and but. 3. inches
thick on the thinner side, then take from. 5. inches one ynche, and there does
remain but. 4. inches, and then add unto. 3. inches one ynche, and then it
makes. 4. inches, and then both the sides be of one like thicknes: then (as
before is said) there is. 6. times the length of the hollow nesse of the piece
in every skore, so that the piece casts awry in every skore. 6. inches. The^
it must needs be said, that at the end of. 20. skore, the piece casts
besides the mark. 20. times, 6. inches, and it makes. 120. inches, and that
is. 10. foot just. And furthermore, for to make a perfect shot with this kind
of piece, it is a strange matter unto Gunners, and they had need to be very
circumspect for fear of ouercharging, for you must not give this kind of piece
powder according unto the weight of the metal, for that she has too much
metal on the other side, where it does noe good. And now for to make a shot
with this kind of piece, do this: first search the piece with those kind of
instruments that I have spoken of in the. 2. Chapter, then if the thickest part
of the metal be upon the upper side of the piece, that is to say, at the
tutchhole, the piece being as before is declared. 2. inches thicker of metal
there, than it is on the lower side, when that you have disparted your piece
truly, as though the hollownesse of the piece ran right in the middle of the
metal, set up your dispart upon the mouth of the piece one ynch ye more,
for that the metal is thickest upon the upper side thereof by. 2. inches, and
half. 2. inches is on ynche: then bringing the middle of the tail of the
piece, and the top of your dispart, and them mark, all three upon one right
line, by the sight of your eye, the piece being shot off you shall make a
perfect shot upon the right line. Then if the thickest part of the metal by.
2. inches be under the piece, that is to say, that at the tutchhole, the
metal is at the thinnest, when you do set up your true disparte upon the
mouth of the piece, rebate one ynche of the length of the disparte, or else
the piece will cast the shot under the mark, for that the thickest side of
the metal is downewardes. And furthermore, if that the thickest part of the
metal cha^ceth in any other place, howsoever that it cha^ceth, then at the
thickest side of the piece make a little mark, as you may do it with a little
wax as bygge as a pinnes head upon the very breech of the piece: then when you
have disparted this piece truly, as though the hollownesse of the piece did
run right in the middle of the metal, set up your disparte upon the side
of ye mouth of the piece, as right as you can make it, with a line against the
little wax that is on the thickest side on the breeche of the piece, and then
make the dispart one ynche the more, for that it is ye thicker side with
metal by two inches, and then bringing the top of the dispart and the
little wax and the mark, all three upon one right line, you shall make a
perfect shot. And furthermore, if that it chance so, that the thicker side
does lie somewhat underneath the piece, then set up your dispart upon the
thinner side of the piece, and also the little wax upon the breeche of the
piece, and then you must rebate one ynch from your true disparte, and this by
consideration, there can be no piece, but that you may make a perfect shot,
for he that can by Art lay the hollow or concauitie of the piece against the
mark, must needs hitt the mark, so that the mark be not farther off than
the piece can reach upon the right line: and this is true without any fail.

CHAPTER. 13.
How to give level at a mark upon a hill or valley, with the Quadrant.

FOr the shooting at a hill or valley to give level with the Quadrant, there
is two principal things to be considered, and especially, if that the mark
be further than the piece will reach upon the right line. First, when they
do know the distance unto the mark, and the mark more than that the piece
will reach upon the right line, then mount the piece so many degrees, till
that the piece be able to reach the mark, then take your Quadrant, and look
through the two sight of the Quadrant, the plummet hanging at liberty, till
you may see the mark justly upon the hill, winking with one of your eyes,
then look upon what degree and place the plummet line does hang upon, then
mount the piece so many degrees more as that does come unto, for the height
of the hill, then that being done you shall make a perfect shot: as for
example this: by a mark that stood upon the side of an hill, and by Geometry
perspectiue, the distance is found to be sixty skore from the piece, and now
the piece is a Culuering, such a one as shoots thirty skore upon the right
line or point blancke. Now the mark is thirty skore more then the piece can
reach upon the right line, therefore you must mount the piece, till it be able
to reach the mark, and that is, at the mount of four degrees, as it does
appear by the examining of the seventh Chapter, and there you shall find it
to appear to be at the mount of four degrees: now that being known, take
your Quadrant, and take the number of degrees that the hill is in height,
higher then the ground that you stand upon, and that is done (as before is
declared) and then you find that the mark is five degrees higher than the
ground that your piece lies upon, then add that number unto the other, and
that makes in all nine degrees just, for that the piece is mounted four
degrees for to reach the mark, and five degrees for the height of the mark,
which is higher ground than that the piece does lie upon, then laying the
piece right upon the mark, there is no doubt but that you must needs make a
perfect shot, and to lay the piece right upon the mark, the piece being
mouuted (as before is said) then take a plummet of lead upon a small line or
string, and let that be holden up at the breech, at the very end of the
piece, even at the very middle of the tail of the piece, then stand directly
behind the piece, and wind the piece, till you do see the middle of the mouth
of the piece, and the mark, all three upon one right line, by the sight of
your eye, winking with one of your eyes, and there is no doubt, but your piece
does lie right upon your mark, and so forth. And now in like manner, if you
do make a shot toward a valley, and the mark more then the piece will reach
upon the right line, then knowing the distance unto the mark mount the
piece, till it be able to reach the mark, then turn your Quadrant, that the
sight go downwards, the plummet hanging at liberty, then you may see how many
degrees the ground is lower, then the ground that the piece does lie upon, and
rebate so many degrees as that number comes unto, and laying the piece right
upon the mark, there is no doubt but you shall make a perfect shot, as by an
example with that piece and at that distance before rehearsed, to a mark in a
valley, the ground being lower at the mark you shoot at by three degrees,
then that ground that the piece does lie upon: now you must mount the piece
four degrees to reach the mark, and then you must rebate three of those
degrees for the lowness of the mark, and then you may conclude, that the
piece being mounted but one degree, it does shoot that distance that it did at
nine degrees. And the reason thereof is most manifest, for that the one is up
the hill, and the other down the hill. And furthermore, with that piece, and
at that distance before spoken of, and also at that number of degrees down the
hill that the other was up the hill, that was at five degrees, and now four
degrees will reach the mark upon a plain level ground, but for that it is
down the hill, you must rebate five degrees. Wherefore you may conclude, that
the piece must be leuelled with the Quadrant, one degree under the point
blaucke, that is to say, lower then the Horizon by one degree, for that the
deepenesse of the valley is the cause thereof. Wherefore in mine opinion, it is
better for Gunners to use to give level with an ynch rule, as I do before
declare in the eight Chapter, for I do know, that this is the cause that has
deceived a great number that are meanly seen in those matters, and for lack
of considering of those causes that may happen or chance, has discouraged
many that would have been well seen in those matters.

CHAPTER. 14.
How to make a perfect shot upon the land, at the broad side of a Ship
that is under sail, and going.

FUrthermore, for the making of a perfect shot upon the land, at a ship
that is under sail in a River, the chiefest matter is, to have good Powder,
that the piece may go off so soon as she has fire given unto her: and to
shoot at her broad side, do this: First before she comes to you, view at
what proportion she comes, that is to say, whether that she comes in the
middle, or unto any of the sides, or unto any other proportion, then your
pieces being truly disparted, lay your piece against some mark upon the
further side of the River, that being done, then koyne up the tail of the
piece, till the top of the dispart stands with that proportion which the ship
comes upon: that being done, then it is good for you to have another imagined
mark, somewhat nearer the Ship, besides that mark which the piece lies
upon, like a twenty foot, according unto the way of the Ship, for if that
the Ship have fresh way, then give fire unto the piece or peers, twenty or
thirty foot, before that the Ship comes unto your thwart mark that the
piece lies right against, and this being discretely done, there is no doubt
but you shall make a perfect shot. And furthermore, if it be upon the Sea
coast, where there is no land seen upon the further side, then take a thwart
mark by some Cloud that is allow near the Horizon. And furthermore, if that
any ship do go directly from you wards, or else come directly to youwards,
then it is a small matter to make a perfect shatte, that is to say, if that her
head or stern be toward your Ordnaunce. etc.

CHAPTER. 15.
How to make a shot out of one Ship unto another, that although the Sea be
wrought, or out of a Galley to a Ship.

AS for Gunners that do serve by the Sea, must observe this order following.
First that they do foresee that all their great Ordnaunce be fast breeched,
and foresee that all there gear be handsome and in a readiness. And
furthermore that they be very circumspect about their Powder in the time of
service, and especially beware of their limstockes and candels for fear of
their Powder, and their fireworks, and their Ourum, which is very dangerous,
and much to be feared. Then furthermore, that you do keep your pieces as near
as you can, dry within, and also, that you keep their tutchholes clean,
without any kind of dross falling into the^. And furthermore, it is good for
the Gu^ners to view their pieces, and for to know their perfect dispart, and
mark it upon the piece, or else in some Book or Table, and name every piece
what it is, and where she does lie in the ship, and name how many inches, and
half inches and quarters of inches the dispart comes unto, and then in time
of service, although that you have no time to set up your disparte you may
consider of it, and do it well enough. And furthermore, if that you were
driven to make a shot upon a soddayne, and know not what disparte would serve
the piece, yet this you may do, and speed well enough: first look all
along by the side of the piece as near as you may at the middle of the
breech of the piece, unto the middle of the mouth of the piece, and so by the
sight of your eye, lay it right against the mark, and then koyne up the tail
of your piece fast, for that gives the piece the true height of the mark:
then take the next sight aloft upon the piece, from the breech of the piece,
unto the mouth, and so lay the piece right upon the mark. But you would
judge by the sight of your eye, that the piece lie a great deal, under the
mark: for that the metal of the piece is a great deal thicker then the
metal of the mouth of the piece, and therefore the sight of the side of the
piece, gives her the true height of the mark, and then laying the piece right
with the Ship that you do mean to shoot at, looking well to your Steeradge.
Now furthermore, if the Sea be wrought or grown, and the Ships do both
heave and set, then if you would make a perfect shot, do this: First choose
your piece between the Lauflau, and the main Mast, upon the lower Orloppe, if
the Ship may keep the port open, and for this cause you shall do it, for
that the ship does least labor there: for any Ship that does heave, and set
never so sore, does hang as though she were upon an Ariltree, there laboring
least, except she does seel or roll. But if any Ship hang any thing by the
wind, it will not lightly seel or roll. Then if you do make a shot at
another Ship, you must be sure to have a good helme-man, that can stir
steadie, taking some mark of a Cloud that is above by the Horizon or by the
shadow of the Sun, or by your standing still, take some mark of the other
ship through some hole, or any such other like. Then he that gives level,
must observe this: first consider what disparte his piece must have, then lay
the piece directly with that part of the Ship that he does mean to shoot
at: then if the Ship be under the lee side of your Ship, shoot your piece
in the coming down of the Gayle, and the beginning of the other Ship to rise
upon the Sea, as near as you can, for this cause, for when the other ship is
aloft upon the Sea, and she under your Lee, the Gayle makes her for to head,
and then it is likest to do much good.

Now furthermore, if that the Ship you do shoot at have the weather gage of
you, then your piece that you do shoot at her, must needs be on the weather
side of the Ship: then give fire unto the piece in the righting of both the
Ships. When that the Gayle is over, you must awaite when the other Ship does
begin for to arise upon the Sea, and especially that part of the Ship that
you do mean for to shoot at, for this cause, for when that the Gayle is
over, then both the Ships do right, for if that you should shoot in the
helding of your Ship, then you should shoot over the other Ship. And
furthermore, if you shoot when the other Ship is alofte on the top of the
Sea, you have a bigger mark than when she is in the trough of the Sea.
Therefore there is no better time for to give fire, then when she is beginning
to rise upon the Sea, that is, when you see her in the trough of the Sea: and
you must use that according unto the distance between two Ships, for you
must consider, that the shot must have a time for to come to the ship, for
no man can describe the thing so well, as he that does see the thing apparante
before his eyes, for his reason in those causes must help him, and the
principallest thing is that, that he that is at the Helm must be sure to
stir steadye, and be ruled by him that gives the level, and he that
gives fire, must be nimble, and ready at a suddayne. And also he that is at
the Helm, must be nimble and steady, that is, to put roomer, when that the
other Ship does put room, and for to loofe, when that the other Ship
does plye his loofe. And it is good for the Gunner to koyne the mouth of his
piece, somewhat with the lowest, rather then any thing with the highest, for if
that the shot flies over the Ship, then it does no good, but if that it
comes short of the Shipoe, it will graze in the water and rise again, and
speed well enough, so that it be not too much too short of the Ship, for
too much too short does kill the shot in the Sea and especially if that
the distance be any thing far off. And furthermore, for the Sea fight, if
the one do mean to lay the other aboorde, then they do call up their
company, either for to enter or to defend: and first, if that they do mean
for to enter (as you may know) that he will prease to lay you aboorde, then
mark where that you do see any Scottles for to come up at, as they will
stand near there aboutes, to the intent for to be ready, for to come up
under the Scottles: there give level with your Fowlers, or Slinges, or Bases,
for there you shall be sure to do most good, then furthermore, if you do
mean for to enter him, then give leuel with your Fowlers and Portpeeces, where
you do see his chiefest fight of his ship is, and especially be sure to have
them charged, and to shoot, them off at the first boording of the Ships, for
then you shall be sure to speed. And furthermore, mark where his men have
most recourse, there discharge your Fowlers and Bases. And furthermore, for the
annoyance of your enemy, if that at the boording that the Sippes lie,
therefore you may take away their steeradge with one of your great pieces that
is to shoot at his Rother, and furthermore at his main mast, and so forth.
Thus much have I said as touching Sea Gunners, for that I do know they do
meddle with no other fightes, and therefore it is meet for him to seek as
much as in him lies, for to annoy the enemy with fireworkes and Ordnaunce
etc. And furthermore, if the Ship does seell or roll, then the best place of
the ship for to make a shot, is out of the head or stern. And furthermore,
for to make a shot out of a Galley, and especially the Cannon that lies in the
Case, or Prow, he that gives fire, must be ruled by him that is at the helm,
because he can neither koyne her up nor down, for that she lies in the case,
for he that stirs, must give level. And furthermore, the Cannon that lies
in the case, can not lightly shoot a ship under water, neither between the
wind and the water, where that it is not on the Sea, and especially if the Ship
be at hand, for that she lies level, for look how high, that the piece is
above the Sea, so high shall the shot hitte any thing above the water, as
far as the piece can cast upon the right line. And for to make a shot out
of a Galley unto a Ship, for to strike him under the water, or between the
wind and the water. First weight the Sippe lying in the trough of the Sea, when
she does begin to rise upon the Sea, and then in like manner, when you do see
that the Galleys head does begin to descend, then give fire unto the piece,
and you shall make a perfect shot. Furthermore, if the Galley be in fight
with another Ship in a calm, then the Ship will skant wave or stir, and
then the Galley may play off and on at her pleasure: and then to make a shot
at hand, is some matter, for in a calm, the Ships do neither rise nor
fall, but a little, in comparison of any thing to the purpose: neither does
the Galleys head either heave nor set to any purpose, if the Ship be at hand,
to the intent or purpose to shoot a Ship under the watter. Therefore when
you mean to strike a Ship under the water with a Galley, and dare not lay
them aboorde, then koyle your Cabels forwards, with the trimming forward of
your weighty gear into the Galleys head, so low, till it shall serve your
turn, by bringing also your men forwards: then by ye Steeradge with your
Ores, or with your Helm, you may shoot against what part of the Ship you
will, and so shoot her under water at your pleasure.

CHAPTER. 16.
In what order to place Ordnaunce in Ships.

ANd furthermore, I do think it conueniente to show you how to fit or place
Ordnaunce in any Ship: and this is to be considered, first that ye cariag be
made in such shot, that ye piece may lie right in the middle of the port, and
that the trockes or wheels be not too high, for if ye treckes be too high,
then it will keep the carriage that it will not go close unto the Ships
side, and by that means the piece will not scant go out of the port, except
that the piece be of some reasonable length: and also, if that the Ship do
hold that way, the Trockes will always ru^ne close to the Ships side, so
that if you have any occasion to make a shot, you shall not bring the Trockes
off from the Ships side, but that it will ru^ne too again. And the wheel or
Trocke being very high, it is not a small thing under a Trocke will stay it
but that it may run over it, etc.

And also, if that the Trocke be high, it will cause the piece to have the
greater reuerse or recoyle, therefore, the lower that the wheels or Trockes
be, it is the better and so forth.

Always provided, that the piece be placed in the very middle of the port,
that is to say, that the piece lying level at point blancke, and the Ship,
to be vprighte, without any helding, that it be as many inches from the lower
side of the port beneath, as it is unto the upper part above justly. And the
deeper or higher that ye ports be up and down, it is the better to make a
shot, for the heldyng of the Ship, whether that it be the lec side, or the
weather side of the Ship, for if you have any occasyon to shoot either for
wards or backwards, the steeradge of the Ship will serve the turn, but if
that the Ship does heelde much, then if that the piece be let by the
lower part of the port, then you must needs shoot over the mark, and if
it be let by the upper side of the port, then you shall shoot short of
the mark. etc. Wherefore, when that the Carpenters does cut out any ports
in a Ship, then let them cut them out deep enough up and down. etc.

And also, it is very evil, for to have the Orloppe or Deck too low under
the port, for then the carriage must be made very high, and that is very
evil in diverse respects, for then in the shootyng off the piece, it is apt
to overthrow, and also by the laboring and the seelyng of the Ship, and so
forth.

And furthermore, you must have a consyderation for the fytting of your
Ordnaunce in the Ships, as this, the shorter Ordnaunce is best to be placed
out at the Ships side, for two or three causes, as this.

First, for the ease of the Ship, for their shortenesse they are the
lyghter: and also, if that the Ships should heelde with the bearyng of a
Sail, that you must shut the ports, especially if that the Ordnaunce be
upon the lower Orloppe, and then the shorter piece is the easyer to be taken
in, both for the shortenesse and the weight also.

In like manner, the shorter that the piece lies out of the ships side, the
less it shall annoy them in the tacklyng of the Ships Sails, for if that
the piece do lie very far out of the Ships side, then the Sheets and
Tackes, or the Bolynes will always be foul of the Ordnaunce, whereby it may
much annoy them in foul weather, and so forth.

And it is very good for you to have long Ordnau^ce to be placed right out
of the Stern of the Ship for two causes: the one is this.

The piece must lie very far out of the port, or else in the shooting, it
may blow up the Counter of the Ships stern.

And also, the piece had need be very large, for else it will not go very
far out, for the work of a ships stern hangs very far outward from the
deck or Orloppe up to the port, so that the carriage may be close below, but
not aloft, etc. And also if you have any chasing pieces to shoot right
forwards, then they must be long Oronaunce in like manner, so that you must
fit your Ordnaunce, according unto the place that it must lie in, and also
(as is before rehearsed) that it is not good for to have the mountance or
carredge to high. Therefore, if that the Orloppe or deck be too low under
the port, then it is good for you to make a platform under the port, that the
trockes of the carredge may stand upon. And also, when you do take the measure
of the port, from the deck or Orloppe, to the end to fit the mountance or
carredge in height, that the piece may lie right in the middle of the port,
then you viewing the deck or Orlop, and considering what height you will have
the wheel or Trocke, and also mark whether or how that the Ships side does
hang inwards, or outward, and also the Cambring of the deck or Orloppe, and
then you perceiving where the foremost trockes does or must stand, when that
the carredge does go close to the port. Then where as the very middle of the
foremost trockes does stand, there take the true measure in heygth from the
Deck or Orloppe, upwards, and so shall you know justly how many inches will
lay the piece right in the very middle of the port: for if you do take the
measure of the heygth of the port from the port down unto the Deck or
Orloppe, then by the means of the Cambering, the Deck or Orloppe, and also
the wheels or Trockes does not come to stand right under the port, so by that
means the Deck or Orlop is higher inwards, and that shall cause you to make
the mountance or carriage too high, for that the wheels or Trockes that the
carriage lies upon, shall be a foot more or less into the Shipwards, and
then look into the Cambering of the Deck or Orloppe, that it rises inwardes
more, than it is right under the Port, you shall take the measure so much too
high for the piece to lay her right in the middle of the Port etc.

CHAPTER. 17.
How to shoot at a moveable mark upon the land, and also what kind of shot
is the best to be used, according unto the cause etc.

ANd furthermore, to shoot at any moveable mark upon the land, either at
Horsemen, or at footmen, when you do see the^ coming, then place your Ordnance
upon some mark in their way, as right upon some bush, or any other mark that
is in the high way, that they must come by, or most specially at some place
where there is a turning, for in a turning, there they do tarry longest
before they be altered from the mark, and then it is best shooting off your
Ordnaunce to do any spoil: and also upon the land, you may try what any piece
will do at any mark, as touching the keeping of the length of the mark, etc.
And furthermore, as touching this, to know what kind of shot is most meetest
to be used to do service in a field, or otherwise, with their great
Ordnaunce, as Cannons, or Culuerings, at a great distance, to shoot the whole
iron shot as you do at battery, and as they do aproch near, then to shoot
Faucon shot, and as they do come nearer, Faconershotte, or small base shot,
and at hand all manner of spoiling shot, as chain shot, or cliue shot, and
discshot, and such other like. etc.

CHAPTER. 18.
How you shall know if any piece of Ordnaunce be sufficiently mettalled, and
also the cause that the Cannons do not occupy the weight in Powder that the
shot vveieth.

FOr to know whether that any piece of Ordnaunce be sufficiently metalled to
bear her charge with Powder, then this is general, that in the chamber before
the tutchhole, so far as the Powder does reach to ye mouthwards, that the
metal be in thickness as high as the shot round about the sides of the
piece, and somewhat thicker, and if that the metal be not in thickness as
much as the height of the shot, then she is too slenderly mettalled, etc.

And furthermore, the cause why the Cannons and other great Ordnaunce does not
shoot so much Powder in weight as the shot weieth, although that the rule
and order of the founders of Ordnaunce, is to cast the thicknes of the metal
as much as the shot is in height of al sorts of pieces, as well in Cannons, as
in all other sorts of pieces, and yet the Cannon may not have the weight in
Powder that the shot weyeth, as all small Ordnaunce has.

And furthermore, the cause thereof grows by this means, for in the doubling
the thickness of the metal of the piece, it does but increase as a
platform, or superficial, that is, for double measure, to be four times the
quantity. And as for the shot in the doubling of the measure, it is eight
times the quantity, and so it is in all bodies as Cubes, or Globes, and such
other like, as I do more at large declare in the third part of my book, called
A treasure for Travelers. And yet you shall have this example here by a shot
of three inches high, and that shot wayeth three pound three quarters, the
piece being a Minion, and the metal is three inches thick. And now I have
another piece that the shot is double the height, that is, six inches high,
and the shot will wey thirtye pound, and now the metal being double, is
but six inches thick, and the bigger shot is eight times the bigness of
the lesser, and the measure but double, yet notwithstanding, the diversity is
not so much as it seems: for if that both the pieces were cast of one length,
and double in measure, in compass in all places, then the bigger piece should
wey four times the weight of the lesser. And this is the cause, that the
Cannons must not have the weight in powder that the shot wayeth, for the
weight of the piece, and the weight of the shot, must rule the matter, as I
do plainly she we in the third Chapter of this book going before.

CHAPTER. 19.
In what order you shall give level with your Ordnaunce at a battery, to
beat down the walls of any place, and also what to observe, in the giving
fire unto them.

AS I do think, it is not unmeet to show by what order you shall give your
leuel, and shoot off your Ordnaunce at a Bat terie, that is to say, to beat
down, or shake down the walls of any Town or fortress: and for ye beating
them down in the giving of your level, and shooting them off, do this: after
that you have planted your Ordnaunce, either in two places or in three places,
as the place does require, but in my opinion, two places is sufficient unto one
place, to beat it down, to the intent to make a breach, and if it be unto a
Collion point, then it is best to place your battrey but into two parts, and
otherwise as the place does require, and then in giving of leuel, do this.
First, whereas you do mean to begin to make the breach, and being but at one
place of your Ordnaunce, give level with one piece below, at the bottom of
the wall, and with the next piece a foot higher right over that, and with the
third, right a foot over that, and so forth unto every piece at that part of
ye battery, saving you need not give the level unto no piece, more than three
quarters the heygth of the wall, and then in like manner, give your level with
your pieces at the other part of your battrie, unto that place that the other
part was laid right against, within a fadome or more, at your discretion, as
the place requires, so that the one place may flancke or beat against the
other, crossing in the middle of the wall, and when you do mean to shoot
them off, then give fire unto them all at once at both the places, that they
may all beat and shake the wall at one time together, and then it will beat
it down or shake it down the faster, and the bottom being beaten away, the
top will fall away of it self, and so when that you have broken the wall,
and still do make it wider, then give leuel at your discretion upon the wall,
observing the order before rehearsed, both in the leuelling, and of the giving
of fire unto the pieces, etc.

CHAPTER. 20
The weight of all manner of cast pieces of Ordnaunce, from the Cannon, unto
the Fauconte, and also the weight of the shot, and the weight of the Powder
that they do occupy, with the height of the shot, and length of the piece and
all such other like causes, according unto the names of the pieces, etc.

ANd furthermore, I do think it conuentient, to show unto thee the weight of
the shot, and the weight of the Powder that they do wey, and the length and
breadth of the Ladell, and the weight and length of ye pieces, according unto
their names. And first, for the Ca^nons, and there be of sundry sorts. The
eldest and biggest sort of the double Cannons, the mouth of them is in height.
8. inches and a quarter. The shot is in height 8. inches, and wayeth about 70.
pound of iron, and the weight of the piece is about 8000. and in length, about
12. foot more or less, and comporteth in Powder. 46. pound Serpe^tine. The
length of the Ladel is 24. inches, the breadth of the Ladell is. 15. inches etc.

The ordinary double Cannons, the piece is. 8. inches high in the mouth, the
shot is in height. 7. inches three quarters, it wayeth of iron about. 64.
pound, and the weight of the piece is about. 7500. and in length near about
eleven or twelve foot long, and occupies in Powder. 42. pound Serpentine,
the length of the Ladell is 23. inches a quarter, the breadth thereof fifteen
inches and the compass of the shot is four and twenty inches.

The French double Canons, the piece is in the mouth seven inches three
quarters, in height the shot seven inches high, and weyeth being of iron
about. 58. pound, and the piece weyeth about seven thousand, and is in length
as the other before rehearsed, comporteth in Powder near forty pound
Serpentine: the length of their Ladels is but fifteen inches, for that they
do lade their pieces with three Ladelfulles, and we here in England but with
two, and the breadth of the plate of their Ladell is fifteen inches, etc.

Demi Cannons.
ANd first the Demi Cannons of the eldest sort, the piece is six inches three
quarters in height, in the mouth, the shot six inches and a half in height:
the shot of iron wayeth eight and thirty pound, and the weight of the piece
is near six thousand, and in length eleven or twelve foot long, and
occupyeth in Powder six and twenty pound Serpentine, the length of the
Ladell three and twenty inches, the breadth of the plate of the Ladell twelve
inches parts, and the compass of the shot is twenty inches 3/7 parts.

The ordinary Demi Cannon, the height of the mouth is six inches and a half,
the height of the shot six inches a quarter, the weight of the shot in
iron thirty three pound, and the weight of the piece is about 5500. and the
piece is in length ten or eleven foot, and her charge in Powder is four and
twenty pound Serpentine, the length of the Ladell is two and twenty inches,
and the breadth of the plate of the Ladell is twelve inches.

Some sorts of Demi Cannons, the height of the mouth of the piece but six
inches, a quarter, the height of the shot six inches, the weight of the
shot of iron thirty pound, and the weight of the piece five thousand, or.
5400. the length as before, her charge in Powder four and twenty pound
Sarpentine, the length of the Ladell three and twenty inches, the breadth
eleven inches and a half.

The French Demi Cannon, and of some other foraine Nations, the height of the
mouth of the piece but 6. inches, the height of the shot five inches three
quarters, the weight of the iron shot six and twenty pound d. and the
weight of the pieces five thousand more or less, their lengthes of the
ordinary sort, and shoots in Powder two and twenty, or three and twenty
pound Sarpentine, the length of the Ladell sixteen inches, and three Ladell
fulles to charge the piece: the breadth of the Ladell eleven inches.

Culuerings.
THe elder sort of whole Culuerings, called of some Norborow Culuerings, the
height of the mouth of the piece five inches and a half, the height of the
shot. 5. inches a quarter. The weight of the shot in yro^ 20. pound. The
weyghte of the piece. 4800. more or less, their lengthes divided, as. 12. or.
13. foot long, and shoots in Powder. 20. pound Serpentine, the length of the
Ladell. 23. inches, the breadth of the Ladell near ten inches. etc.

The ordinary whole Culuering, the heygth of the mouth of the piece. 5. inches
a quarter, the heygth of the shot, 5. inches. The weyghte of the shot of
iron. 17. pound. The weyghte of the piece about. 4500. more or less, the
length of the piece. 12. foot, and comporteth in Powder. 18. pound
Serpentine, the length of the Ladell 25. inches, the breadth. 9. inches. d. etc.

Culuerings, not so high as ordinary, the heygth of the mouth of the piece. 5.
inches, the heygth of the shot four inches three quarters, the weyghte of the
shot. 15. pound, the weight of the piece more or less. 4300. the length of
the pieces diverse, some the ordinary length, some otherwise, and occupyeth in
Powder. 16. pound, or theraboutes Serpe^tine, the length of the Ladel. 24.
inches, the breadth 9. inches.

Demi Culuerings.
THe elder sort of Demi Culuerings, the height of the mouth of the piece. 4.
inches three quarters, ye height of the shot. 4. inches, the weyghte of the
shot. 12. lb. d. of iron, the weight of the piece. 3200. the length of the
piece. 12. foot more or less, and their charge in Powder 12. pound
Serpentine, the length of the Ladell, 22. inches, their breadth. 8. inches. d.
etc.

The ordinary Demi Culuering, the heygth of the mouth of the piece. 4. inches
d. the heygth of the shot 4. inches a quarter, the weight of iron shot. 10.
pound, three quarters, the weighte of the piece. 27. hundred or thereaboutes,
the length of the piece. 10. foot more or less, and will comport in Powder.
11. or. 12. pound Serpentine, the length of the Ladell. 21. inches a quarter,
the breadth. 8. inches.

Demi Culuerings lower than ordinary, the heyght of the mouth of the piece. 4.
inches a quarter, the heyghte of the shot. 4. inches, the weight of the shot
being of iron is near. 9. pound, the weight of the pieces. 22. hundredth more
or less, the length of the piece. 9. or. 10. foot more or less, and their
charge in Powder. 10. pound or. 10. pound d. Serpentine, the length of the
Ladell. 20. inches, the breadth. 7. inches, three quarters. etc.

Sakers.
SAkers of the oldest sort, the heygth of the mouth of the piece. 4. inches,
the heygth of the shot. 3. inches three quarters, the weight of the iron
shot. 7. pound a quarter, the weight of the piece. 1800. the length of some
of those pieces. 10. foot, and comporteth in Powder. 7. pound a quarter
Serpentine, the length of the Ladell. 17. inches, the breadth. 7. inches a
quarter.

Sakers ordinary, the heyght of the mouth. 3. inches three quarters, the
heygth of the shot. 3. inches a half, the weyghte of the shot of iron is
near. 6. pound, the weight of the piece. 1500. the length of the piece. 8.
foot or. 9. foot, and her charge in Powder is. 6. pound, or thereaboute of
Serpe^tine Powder, the length of the Ladel is. 15 inches three quarters, ye
breadth. 6. inches. 3. quarters. etc.

Sakers lower than ordinary, the height of the mouth of the piece. 3. inches a
half, the heygth of the shot 3. inches a quarter, the weyghte of the shot
of iron. 4. pound three quarters, or near. 5. pound, the weyghte of the
piece. 1300-or. 1400. the length of the piece, 8, foot, or there aboutes, and
comporteth in Powder. 5. pound, or 5. pounded. Serpentine, the length of the
Ladell is fifteen inches, the breadth six inches and a half.

Minyons.
THe Minyon is. 3. inches and a quarter high, in the mouth, the shot is three
inches high, the weyghte thereof of iron, is three pound three quarters, the
weighte of the piece, near about. 1000. The length of the piece eight foot
or theraboutes, and shoots in Powder three pound three quarters, or near
four pound Serpentine, the length of the Ladell thirteen inches d. the
breadth 5. inches and a half, some foraine pieces lower. The ordinary Minyon,
the mouth three inches high, the shot but two inches three quarters, and
weyeth of iron near three pound, the weight of the piece about nine hundred,
the length of the ordinary Minion, and shoots in Powder three pound or
thereaboute, the length of the Ladell. 13. inches, the breadth. 5. inches. etc.

Faucons.
THe Faucon, the heygth of the mouth of the piece. 2. inches three quarters,
the heygth of the shot. 2. and a half, the weight of the iron shot. 2. and
half a quarter of a pound, the weight of the piece seven hundred, or seven
hundred and fifty pound, the length of the piece seven foot more or less,
and occupies in Powder two pound and a half, and the length of the Ladell is
twelve inches and a half, the breadth of the plate of the Ladell is. 4. inches
and a quarter. etc.

Some foraine Ordnaunces not so high as the Fauco^, and the mouth of the piece.
2. inches and a half high, the shot. 2. inches and a quarter high, and
weyeth near one pound three quarters, and the weight of those pieces six
hundred, or six hundred and fifty pound, the length is as the Faucon, and
the charge is in Powder near two pound, the Ladell is eleven inches and a
quarter, the breadth four inches.

A Fauconet, the piece is. 2. inches and a quarter high, in the mouth, the
shot two inches high, and the iron shot weyeth one pound, and near half a
quarter of a pound, and the weight of the piece is about. 360. or. 400 and the
length five or six foot, and the charge is of Serpentine Powder, one pound
and a quarter, the Ladel is ten inches long, and the breadth of the plate of
the Ladell. 3. inches three quarters. And thus much I have said as touching all
manner of pieces that shoot iron shot, thinking this sufficient for
instructions. etc.

CHAPTER. 21.
How many shottes of Powder there is in a last of Powder, from the cannon, unto
the Fauconet: and also, if that you are at any battery, or in any Town,
Castle, or Ship, how to know how much Powder will shoot all your
Ordnannce, etc.

ANd also, I do think it necessary for all sorts of Gunners, to know how many
shottes of powder they may have either in a last of Powder, as also in a
hundred pound, of Powder according unto the pieces, whereby they may readily
know, if that they have any charge of Ordnaunce in any Town, Castle, Forte, or
Ships, that they may know whether that they have Powder to lade al their
Ordnaunce throughout, and also how oftentimes about yt they may shoot al their
Ordnaunce with so much Powder. And al so it is very necessary, if yt there be any
Ordnau^ce placed against any town or fort, and if yt they have anynu^ber of
great Ordnaunce, as Cannons such a number, and Demi Cannons such a number, to
the intent to batter down the walls thereof: and then it is very necessary
to know how much Powder will shoot all those Ordnaunce off at one time, and so
forth, if that they would continue the battery, to shoot. 40. or 50. times
over all their Ordnaunce in one day, and so to know how many last of Powder
that the battery will require to continue such a number of days: wherefore I
do think it convenient to show unto you what a last of Powder is, and that is
this. A last of Powder is 24 hundred weight, caske and all, and every hundred
weight to contain. 112. pound, so that you may make your account, that you
have 24. hundred pound of Powder in every last, and so is allowed 12 pound in
every 100. weight, for the caske, which is in all allowed for the caske of a
last of Powder, 288. pound. etc.

And first this: the biggest sorts of double Cannons do occupy at one
shot. 46. pound of Sarpentine Powder, and you have. 2. charges in. 100 of
powder, and eight pound remains over, so that you have 52. shottes of
Powder, in a last of powder, and 8. pound remains over. And if that it be
such a double Cannon, as does occupy but 40. pound of Serpentine Powder, then
you have 2 shots and a half of Powder in every. 100. weight of Powder, that is
just. 60. shottes in a last of Powder. etc.

And also, those Demi Cannons that do shoot. 24. pound of Serpentine Powder
at one shot, they shall have four shottes in a hundred weight of Powder, and
four pound remains over, and that is a hundred shottes, in a last of powder
just etc.

And also those Culuerings that do shoot eyghtteene pound of Sarpentine
Powder at one shot, then there is five shootes in a hundred weighte of
Powder, and then there remains over ten pound, so that there is a hundred
thirty three shottes in a Last of Powder, and six pound remains over. And
furthermore, those Demi Culurings that do shoot eleven pound of Serpintine
Powder at one shot, then there is nine shottes in a hundred weight of Powder,
and one pound remains over, so that there is two hundred and eighteen
shottes in a last of Powder. etc. And also for those Sakers that do shoot
six pound and a half of Serpentine Powder at a shot, then there is fifteen
shottes in a hundred weight, and two or three pound remains, so that there
is. 369 shottes in a last of powder. And furthermore, for Minions that shoot
four pound of Powder at one shot, then there is. 25. shottes in a hundred
weight, so that there is six hundred shottes in a last of Powder. And also
those Faucons that do shoot two pound and a half of Powder at a shot, then
there is forty shottes in a hundred weight, so that there is, 960. shottes in a
Last of Powder. And in like manner those Fauconets that do shoot one pound
and a quarter of Powder at a shot, then there is. 80. shottes in a hundred
weight, so that there is. 192. shottes in a last of Powder. And thus much I
have said, as touching how many shottes of Powder, according unto ye pieces,
yt there either is in a hundred weight of Powder, or in a whole last of Powder.
And furthermore, if you desire to know how much Powder would shoot off all
the Ordnaunce, either in a Town, Forte, or Ship, then look how many pieces
there is of every sort, and so until that you do know how many pieces there is
of every several sorts through a whole Town, or Castle, or Ship, and then
look how many pieces there is of one sort, multiply the number of those
pieces by the weight of the Powder, that one of those pieces does shoot at one
shot, and that will show unto you how many pound of Powder will serve all
one sort of pieces, and by this order multiply every several sorts of pieces
by themselves, and the^ add al your numbers together. and that shall show unto
you how much Powder will shoot al your Ordnaunce off at one time. As for
example this. There is a town, yt has 3. double Canons and. 6. Demi Canons,
and. 14. double Culuerings, and. 10. Demi Culuerings, and. 30. Sakers, and. 25.
Minio^s, and. 28. Fauco^s, and. 12. Fauconets, and. 36. Foulers, and my desire
is to know how much Powder will serve all these pieces: therefore first, the. 3.
double Canons, and they do shoot 40. lb. of Powder, and. 3. times. 40. is.
102. and then ye Demi Canons do shoot. 24. lb. of Powder, and. 6. times. 24.
makes. 144. lb. of Powder, and then the. 14. double Culuerings and they do
shoot. 18. lb. of Powder, and. 14. times 18. makes. 252. and then the. 10.
Demi Culuerings and they shoot. 11. lb. of Powder, and. 20. times. 11. makes.
220. and now the. 30. Sakers and they do shoot. 6. lb. and a half of Powder,
and. 30. times. 6 is. 195. and then ye. 25. Minions, and they do shoot. 4. lb.
of Powder. and 25. times. 4. makes. 100. and then the. 28. Faucons, and they
do shoot 2. lb. and a half of Powder, and. 28. times. 2 does make 70. and then
the. 12. Fauconets and they do shoot. 1. lb. and a quarter, and. 12. times. 1.
does make. 15. and now the 36. Foulers and they do shoot. 2. lb. of Powder,
and. 36. times. 2. makes. 90. and now this being done, then add al your
numbers together, as this.

Names of pieces. Pieces number. Powder in pounds. Cannons. 3 120. pound. Demi
Cannons. 6 144. pound. Culuerings. 14 252. pound. Demi Culuer. 25 220. pound.
Sakers. 30 195. pound. Minions. 20 100. pound. Faucous. 28 70. pound.
Fauconets. 12 15. pound. Foulers. 36 90. pound. Sum total. 174 1206. pound.

And now by this you may conclude, that all this Ordnaunce does shoot at one
time, to shote the^ off round once over does require. 1206. lb. of powder, and
by this order you may know at al times, whether you are in any town, fort,
Castle, or Ship, how much powder will serve all the Ordnau^ce at your pleasure.
And furthermore, if so be you have such a quantity of Powder, and if you would
know how oftentimes it would shoot all your Ordnaunce, round aboutes, then
you knowing how much powder will shoot all your Ordnaunce once, and as by the
order before is repeated, then divide your whole sum of Powder by that number
of the weight of the powder that all your Ordnau^ce requires, and that sum
that stands in the quantity line, shall show you how oftentimes it will shoot
all your Ordnaunce off: As for example, by the Ordnaunce in a town (as before
is rehearsed) and suppose you have. 20. Last of Powder, and now to know how
oftentimes it will shoot all your Ordnaunce off round about thorough the whole
Town, as you did see that all the Ordnaunce did require 1206. lb. of Powder,
and one Last of Powder is 2400. lb. the^ 20. Last makes. 48000. lb. wherefore
divide. 48000. by 1206. and then there will stand in the quantity line. 39.
and. 966. lb. will remain over, so you may conclude, that twenty Last of
Powder will shoot all the Ordnaunce before rehearsed. 39 times over, and three
quarters of them more, that is to say, that it will shoot all the Ordnaunce
off forty times, lacking almost a quarter of them. etc. And also, if there
were any battery laid against a Town, and then if that you do know how
many Cannons or other pieces of Ordnaunce there is in the battery, then you
may know (as before is rehearsed) how much Powder that they will occupye at
once shooting them off, and also if that you will shoot them off round fortye
or fyftye times in one day, then you may know how much Powder they will
spend in one day: as this first (as before is rehearsed.) Multiply all the
Ordnaunce of one sort together, by the weight of the shot of Powder, and so
the other sorts of Ordnaunce, and add them together (as before is said) and
that being known, then multiply that by the number of times that you have
shot them off, and that shall show unto you the number of pounds that the
Ordnaunce has occupied in that day: as for example this: Suppose that there is
in a battery against a Town. 24 double Cannons, and they do shoot. 40.
pound of Powder a piece, therefore multiply. 24. times 40. and of that
multiplication, there comes 960. and then there is eightteene Demi Cannons,
and they do shoot. 24. pound of Powder a piece, and therefore multiply
eyghteene times. 24. and that makes. 432. pound, and then add both the
numbers together, that is to say. 960. and. 432. and they will make 1392. so
that you may see, that the whole battery does spend 1392. of Powder at once
shooting thereof against the wall of the Town: and then suppose, that in a day
the Ordnaunce has been shot off six andfortie times, then how much Powder
shall be spent that day, then multiplying 1392. by six and forty, and that
will make 64032. so that you may conclude that the whole battery has spent in
one day, 64032 pound of Powder, and yt will be six and twenty last and a
half, and 432. pound of Powder, and then if that the battery should
continue seven days in that order, the whole sum in Powder that should be
spent, amounts unto 448224. pound, and that makes 186. Lasts, three
quarters, and 24. pound: therefore by this order you may know from time to
time, how much Powder is spent at your pleasure, whether that it be in a
battery or in a Town, and also how much Powder will shoot such a number of
Ordnaunce so many times off at your pleasure. And thus much I have thought good
to write unto you for instructions. etc.

CHAPTER. 22
How to know how many shot does wey a Tun.

ANd now in so much as I have showed in the Chapter going before, to know how
much Powder is occupied in Ordnance: so in like manner, I do think it
convenient to show unto you how many shots of every several sorts will wey a
Tun weight, which is very necessary to be known, as well for them that have
occasion to transport them either by Sea or by land. And first this, a Tun
weight is 20. hundred, and every hundred for to conteyne an hundred and twelve
pound, so that a Tun is 2240. pound in weight: and first, the double Cannons
shot, and those that do wey 64. pound, and then 35. shots does wey a Tun:
and then the Demi Cannons shots, and those that do wey 34. pound a piece, and
then 62. or 63. of those shots do wey a Tun: and the Culuering shot of
seauentene pound a piece, and then 131. or 132. will wey a Tun: and also the
Demi Culuerings, and those shots that do wey ten pound a piece, and then
there is 224. in a Tun. And furthermore, those Sakers, that the shot does wey
six pound, and there does go. 373. or 374. unto a Tun: and in like manner the
Minions, and commonly their shottes do wey three pound three quarters, and
597. or 598. shots will wey a Tun. The Faucons shots does wey two pound and
half a quarter, and 1054. or 1055. does wey a Tun: and the Fauconet shot
weyeth one pound, and near half a quarter of a pound, and. 1991. or 1992.
does wey a Tun, And thus much I have said, as concerning how many shottes of
every several sorts does wey a Tun weighte, but if that you have a great
number of shottes of several sorts, and you do desire for to know how many
Tons there is in all of them, multiply every several sort by themselves,
according unto the weight, and so adding all the numbers together, and then
divide that number by 2240. and it will show unto you how many Tons there
is in the whole sum. As for example this, there is such a number of shottes
to be transported, either by Sea, or by land, and you would know how many
that there is of them, as first, that there is a thousand Cannon shottes, and a
thousand two hundred Demi Cannon shot, and two thousand Culuering shot,
and three thousand Demi Culuering shot, and three thousand five hundred
Saker shot, and four thousand Minion shot, and five thousand Faucon
shot, and six thousand Fauconet shot, and now for to know their
weighte, and first for the Cannon shot, and those that be seven inches three
quarters high, and those does wey 64. pound a piece, and then being a thousand
shot, then therefore multiplye a thousand times 64. and that makes 64000.
and then there being 1200. Demi Cannons shot, that are six inches a quarter
high, and those do wey four and thirty pound a piece, and therefore
multiply 1200. times 34. and that makes 40800. and then there is 2000.
Culuerings shot, of five inches almost in height, and they do wey 17. pound a
piece, and then multiply two thousand times seauenteene, and that makes 34000.
and the^ there is three thousand Demi Culuering shot, of near four inches
and a quarter in height, and they do wey ten pound a piece, therefore
multiply three thousand times ten, and that makes 30000. and then there is
3500. Saker shot, that is three inches and a half high, and that weyeth, 6.
lb. and therefore multiply. 3500. times 6. and of that there comes 21000. and
then there is. 4000. Minion shot, of just 3. inches high, and they do wey 3.
lb. 3. quarters a piece, and therefore multiply. 4000. by 3 and that will make
15000. and then there is. 5000. Faucon shot, and they be 2. inches and a half
high, and does wey. 2. lb. and half a quarter: therefore multiply 5000 by 2
and that will be 10625. and then there is 6000. Fauconet shot, of 2. inches
high, and they do wey one pound, and half a quarter, and that comes in
weight 6750. and now add al your numbers together, as by this example
following.

Names of pieces Number of shots. Weight in pounds. Tons, Cannons. 1000
64000 28 4/7 Demi Cannons: 1200 40800 18 3/14 Culuerings. 2000 34000 15 5/28
Demi Culuerings. 3000 30000 13 1^/28 Sakers. 3500 21000 9 21/56 Minions. 4000
15000 6 39/56 Faucons. 5000 10625 4 ^33/448 Faconet. 6000 6750 3 1/224 Sum
total. 25700 222175 99 83/448

And now, al those numbers being added together, does make 222175. pound in
weight. And now to know how many Tons there is in all them, divide the 222175.
by 2240. and that being done, then there will stand in the quantity line. 99.
and 415. will remain over, so that you may conclude, that of all the shot
there is 99. Tons, and 415. lb. that is near part of a Tun more, so that
there lacks little more then three quarters of a Tun of 100. Tons, and by
this order or means, you may know how many Tons of shot there is in any
number of shottes. etc.

CHAPTER. 23.
How and by what order the shot does graze or glaunce upon the land, or water.

FOr to know by what order that the shot does graze or trondle either upon the
land, or the water, it is to be noted, that it does graze or trondle farthest,
when that the piece is laid point blanke, if that you do shoot the piece
toward the water, or aplaine or level ground, and then the shot shall ru^ne
or graze near three quarters of the best compass of the Randare, so that the
shot be not let by any chance by the way: and there is on great
diversity in distance of the grazing or running of the shot, between the
land and the water, so that the ground be a plain and leuel ground, and the
water or Sea to be smooth. And here is one thing to be noted, as touching the
grazing of the shot, whether it be upon the water or the land, look by what
proportion the shot does strike or hitte the ground or water, by that
proportion the shot shall rise again, although that it flies not so far
in that proportion, as long as the shot has force or drifte in his flying,
that is to say, if the shot do strike or hitte any thing glauncingly that then
it shall glance in that proportion from youwardes, and if do strike or hitte
any thing directly, then it shall be driven directly back again, if it do
not enter or stick fast in the thing that it hitteth, even like the shadow of
the Sun, or any other thing in the water or glass, or such other like. As
for example this. If you shoot any piece of Ordnaunce toward the water, and
lay the piece at the point blanke, and the piece be but little higher than the
water, then shall the shot run grazing in this form, to rise again by
that proportion that it does hitte the water, and so to run, till that the
great force be decayed, as this example does show.



And furthermore, if you do mount the piece at much advantage, then it will
not graze at all, if it do graze, then it will be made in this manner.



And furthermore, if you do shoot at any Ship upon the water, and you do
shoot in that piece that do lie very high, and the ship or mark near hand,
so that you must give your level downwards, then if you do give your level
short of the ship, the shot will fly over the Ship, by the means of the
direct hitting of the water, for that the shot does glaunce from the water, by
that proportion that it does hitte the water, as by this example.



So that you may judge by this example, by what proportion the shot does
graze, either upon the water or the land: but the water is the more certayner
and truer if it be smooth and calm, for that the water is not harder in one
place, than it is in another, as the ground is or may be, and the directer
that it hitteth, either the ground or the water, the more it does kill the
force of the shot, and by this means it will fly the lesser way: and the
more glauncingly that it does hitte either the ground or the water, the oftener
it it does glaunce or graze, and the further it flies. etc.

CHAPTER. 24.
How to batter the walls of any Town as well by night as by day

ALthough it has not been commonly used, yet notwithstanding it may be easily
done, for to plant their Ordnance so, that they may batter or beat down the
walls of a Town as well by night as by day, although the night be never so
dark. And also there shall no light appear unto the enemy, as thus. First
after that your Ordnaunce is placed for your battery, and you have begun to
batter, and then the pieces being made ready for to shoot at the wall or place
that you do mean to shoot at, and that you would continue for to shoot at the
place all the night, then take a plommet of lead upon a line or string, the
piece being right upon the mark that you do mean to shoot at, then with a
plo^met and the line, first plome the middle of the mouth of the piece down to
the ground, and look where the lead falls to the ground, there make a mark
upon the ground, and then in like manner plome the very middle of the tail of
the breeche of the piece unto the ground, and there make a mark also upon the
ground, and then draw a right line from the one place unto ye other, as long as
you list, and then that right line will lie right upon the mark, the^ take a
large great Quadrant, set out with degrees, and parts of degrees, and the
Quadrant, for to have a rule fastened unto it, and then the piece being laid
ready for to shoot at the mark, having the true height of the mark, that is
to say, that the hollow or concauitie of the piece do lie right upon the
mark, neither higher nor lower: then put the rule into the mouth of the piece,
and look at what degree or place that the plummet line does hang upon, then
note that in some Book or paper, and then when that the night is come, and
that you do mean to shoot as well by night as by day, then first with your
plommet of lead upon a line, then plome the mouth of the piece right upon
the line that is under the piece, and that will lay the piece right upon the
mark, and then in like manner take the Quadrante, and put the rule into the
mouth of the piece, and then koyne the piece up and down till that the
plommet line does fall upon that degree and place that it did before, and then
that in like manner will give the piece the true height of the mark without
any fail. And for the sea whether that the plommette line does hang upon the
degree or place that it did before, and also to know by the line and the
plommette with the line upon the ground under the piece, for to lay the
piece right upon the mark, there must be prepared a close Box like a
Lan-Lanterne, made with boordes, with a door or a lidde for to open and shut,
to the intent to see how the plommet does hang, and so forth, as for example,
supposing that at the seege of a Town, the Ordnaunce being placed, and had
battred all the day, and to continue that they should not make up their breach
in the night, and furthermore, that the breach should be made wyder in the
morning, then they went unto the middle battery called the persers, and there
took a plommet of lead and a line, the pieces being all charged and leuelled
unto the breach and marks appointed, and first, the plommet at the middle of
the mouth of the piece, and then right under the plommet, they do drive in an
iron pin, and then in like manner at the tail of the piece, they plome the
piece, and right under the plommet they drive another pin into the ground,
and for that they could not draw a perfect line, they made a line or string
fast, longer than the length of the distance of the two pinnes by two yardes,
and the line or thread did come right over the head of those two pinnes, and
so passed a yard further at both the ends, than the two pinnes: and thus they
did lay every piece at that plate, and then the pieces lying still, ready to
have fire given unto them, then they take their Quadrant, being very large, of
two foot in the semy Dyametre, that is to say, from the Senter of the circle,
end every degree was set out in four parts, and put the rule into the mouth
of the piece, and the plommet line did hang at one degree and a quarter just,
and that they did note in a book for remembrance, and this being done, they
shot off their pieces. And now when that the night was come, and the same
very dark, and the morning very foggy, or that they could not see the walls
of the Town, yet they battered the walls of the Town as perfitely all the
night, and as well as though it had bin by day, for every time yt they had
charged all their pieces, they did this, first, they did plome the mouth of the
piece, and likewise at the tail of the piece, right upon the line that was
under ye piece, right upon the mark, and then they took their Quadrant, and put
their rule into the mouth of the piece, the^ koined the tail of the piece up
and down, till that the plummet line did fall upon that degree and place that
it did before the night, and that was at one degree and a quarter just: and
thus when they had laid all their pieces, then they shot them off, and
charged them again, and so contiu^ed all the night long.



And so in this manner, they may in like case handle the two side batteries,
but and if that it chance that the battering pieces do lie upon higher ground
than the place that is battered, then ye rule that is fastened, must be unto
that place whereas the plommet is made fast unto, for that the degrees goes
downwards toward the lower ground as you may see by these two figures.



CHAPTER. 25.
How to plant Ordnau^ce by night, to batter the walls of any Town, or
displace any Ordnaunce in any Bulwarks, or any such other like, as well by
night as by day.

YEt furthermore, there may be means found, that if there be any Ordnaunce
placed that does damage or hurt you, and that you may not come at it by no
means in the day for to displace their Ordnaunce, but unto your great hurt
and loss, both of men and Ordnaunce, yet you may displace them by night near
as well as by day, both for to place your Ordnaunce in the night, and also for
to shoot perfitly unto the place in the night, although the night be never
so dark: and then if that you do see cause, when that you have beaten or
displaced their Ordnaunce, you may carye away your Ordnaunce before it is
day, as thus. First prepare an Astrolobe, the larger the better, and then two
stakes or pinnes of iron like to a foot long, or there aboutes, according unto
your discretion, and also a sledge or beetle, to drive those stakes or pinnes
into the ground, and then viewing the ground meet for the purpose a
reasonable distance from the place that you do mean to beat in the night,
go into that place in the day time, and first where you do mean for to lay
your Ordnaunce, there drive in one of your stakes, and then in like manner go
backawardes about twentye foot, and stand so, that you may see the mark
that you do mean to shoot at over the top of the stick that you have
driven, and then there in that very place drive your other stake, and then go
a little backewardes more, and view whether that the two stakes stand as one
right line unto the mark, and if that they do not, you may amend them, and
set them right, then take your Astrolobe, and hold that upon your thombe
by the ringe, and then turn your Athilleyday or Rule with the two sightes
that is on the back side of the Astrolobe up and down, till that you may
see that place that you do mean to shoot at, thorough the two syghtes of the
Athilleyday holdyng that up before your eyes, winking with one of your
eyes, standing at that place where you do mean for to place your Ordnaunce
that is between the two stakes, then look upon the Athilleyday or Rule with
the two sightes, at what degree and place that the end does point unto, then
reme^mber to write that degree, and place it in some Book or Table, for that
it is finished: then in the night you may bring your Ordnaunce unto that place
between the two stakes, and then place one of your pieces right between the
two stakes, and then take a thread or line, and make that fast unto the two
stakes, and that shall lay the piece right upon the mark. And then for to
place the rest, they must do this. First on the one side measure out just how
many foot you do mean to lay your pieces in distance asunder, then from the
line of the stake, measure it truly, and there make a mark, or drive a stake:
and then at the other end, at that certain distance, there in like manner
drive another stake: then between those two stakes place another piece, and
then make a line fast unto those two stakes, and that in like manner shall lay
the piece right upon the mark, and then you may place another piece upon the
other side of the piece, and so forth. And then when your Ordnaunce is all
charged, then plome the middle of the mouth of the piece right upon the line,
underneath the piece, and then in like manner, the middle of the tail of the
piece to be plomed, that it stand right over the line, underneath the piece,
and then take your Quadrant with the rule fastened unto it, and put the rule
into the mouth of the piece, and then koyne the piece up and down, till the
plommet line do fall upon that degree and place that the Athilley day did
point unto upon, the Astrolobe, and that shall give the piece the true height
of the mark. As for example, suppose this after the breach in the wall of the
Town was made sautable, there the flanckes lay so, that they could not come
near unto the breach, neither could they plant their Ordnaunce for to
displace those flanckes, but that they should be beaten from their Ordnaunce
to their great loss and hinderance, therefore first they prepared an
Astrolobe of the largest sort, and two pinnes of iron made sharp at the ends,
to go into the ground, and then they caused an assault to be given unto the
contrary side of the town, and whilst they held them play there, then two or
three chose out thyr ground meet for their purpose, and there drove one pin,
and then they went back twenty foot, and right against that pin they drove
another pin so eue^, that the two pinnes, and the place of the bulwark where
the flankers lay, were all there upon one right line: and then one of the^
took the Astrolobe, hanging it perpendicularly upright, then they turned the
Athilley day up and down, till he might see thorough both the sightes, the
very place that the flanckers lay, and then they departed, and went their way,
and looked upon what degree the point of the Athilley day stood upon, and
found it to be upon just two degrees and a half, and that they wrote in a
book for remembrance, and then after a night or two, when they saw their time,
the night being very dark, then they carried three pieces of artillery, and
placed the chiefest between the two pinnes, and unto those two pinnes they
made a line fast unto them both close unto the ground, and then they placed
upon the one side, one of the pieces, and the other piece upon the other side,
as this. First they measured out ten foot from the formoste pin just upon
the one side, making a perfect square angle, and then in like manner they
measured out. 10. foot more at the hindermost pin, so that those two pinnes
stood just. 20. foot asunder, and so placed the piece between those two
pinnes: and now for that they must shoot all three pieces unto one place
where the fla^kers lay, and for that the pieces did lie. 10, foot asunder,
therefore they removed the hindermost pinnes of both ye sides. 4. inches, so
that there was. 10. foot distance, and 4. inches, and the cause was this, for
that the mark was. 10. skore off from the place where the pieces lay, and the
pieces lay just from the middle, unto the middel, ten foot asunder, and the
line underneath the piece, was just twenty foot long, and there is thirty
times the length of the line underneath the piece unto the mark, and thirtye
inches makes two foot and a half, and four times two foot and a half,
makes ten foot, so that the hyndermost pin being removed four inches
further off, must needs lay that line just upon the mark that the middlemost
lies upon, without any fail, and in this order the one piece was placed on
the one side, and the other piece on the other side: and now those pieces
being charged, first they plome the mouth of the pieces right upon the
line, and then in like manner the breeche or tail right upon the line, and
then they took their Quadrante, and put the rule into the mouth of the
piece, and koyned the breeche of the piece, till the plommet line fell at two
degrees and a half just, for that the Athiley day did show unto them on the
Astrolobe: and they shooting off those pieces, they made a perfect shot at
the place appointed, and thus they charged and shot all the night, and then
before day, when they had served their turn, they conveyed their Ordnaunce
from that place, for fear of being beaten away from them when it was day light.

And furthermore, by that means in like manner, they may place their Ordnaunce
in the night out of a Town, to annoye their enemies, as they may or can by no
device or practice, but by industry or policy they may be prevented by
practice, and especially if that he do know what the enemy does mean for to
do, for this we do see many times in wars, that policy does prevail as
oftentimes as great and huge armies of men of great strength, having all
kind of engines for that purpose, for even as it pleases God, so goes the
victory, although it comes by a natural cause, and that natural cause that
I speak of, is knoweledge and industry in those affairs!

CHAPTER. 26.
How to keep a Haven or River on the Sea coast for to sincke a Ship as well
by night as by day in all points.

NOw for the keeping of a Haven or River, there may be such means or ways
used by industry, that you may keep a Haven or River in this sort, so that
there may no Ship pass neither by night nor by day, but that he shall be
sunk, or else he escapes very hardly, although ye night be never so dark,
so that the night be not Foggy or Mistie, so that the Haven or River be not
above a mile broad or over, as this. First, if the entrance of the River be
therefore, to have a watch there, then as soon as the watch does perceive
the^ and their number, then they must have a watchtoken, and that must be a
light or lights un to the Castle or Bulwarks, and then the watchtokens being
so agreed upon that the Castles or Bulwarks may know ye number of the Ships
by the form of the lights of the Castles or Bulwarks, if that they be on the
one side, and the other on the other sid, the^ at certain known places
appointed for that purpose, and at a certain distance from the Castles or
Bulwarks toward the Sea wards, each of the^ for to carry a light thither,
and to place the lights as near the water as may be, and if that it chances
so, that there is but one Castle or bulwark, and none upon the other side,
then they having a boat or Skiffe, or any other craft, they may row over the
water, and place their Lights in that known place appointed, and then before
night, that place being always known unto them, they may place their
Ordnaunce right upon that mark upon the farther side of the water, the Light
standing always to the Seawardes of the mark that the Ordnaunce is placed
right against, like. 20. or. 30. foot, and then the night being never so
dark, the light is ye better seen: then must the Ships needs in their
coming between the light and you, take away the sightes of your lights, and
then immediately, as soon as you do see that the light is shaddowed, then give
fire unto those pieces that be placed against your ymagined mark appointed,
and then there is no doubt but you shall make a perfect shot at that Ship,
being sure that the mouth of the piece be koyned low enough, least they
should shoot over the Ship, and especially if it be in a place where it
does ebb and flow: for at the full Sea, they must koyne the pieces at one
proportion, and at a low water, at another proportion: and this being handled
discretely, they shall not fail the hitting of ye Ship. And furthermore, as it
is declared in the, 2. Chapter going before, they may have a line drawn
underneath the piece upon the ground for to lay their pieces right upon their
appointed mark at al times after yt they have shot off their pieces in the
night, then in the night they may place the^ again, etc. As for example, Here
with us at graves end, as there is. 2. Bulwarks ye one right against the
other, the river of Thames running between them, and now they would keep the
river so, that there should no Ship pass, neither by night nor by day, but
that they should be sonke: then they must keep a watch at the Nasse or point
below, at the entrance of ye Tilberrie hope, and that is a mile and a half
from the Bulwark, and there always they must needs see them, and their
number of Ships, and specially by the help of a light upon the further side
of the water, and then they being known unto the whatche, the watch must
make unto them a token by a light or lights that they have agreed upon before,
and then thorough the watch token, the Bulwark knows that their comes
such a number of Ships, or but one or two as it chances, and then each of
the Bulwarks has an imagined mark, twenty skore toward the Nasse or
Seawards, yt they do always plant their Ordnaunce right against it, both by
day, and by night, and then as soon as they do see their watchtoken then both
the Bulwarks do place their lights hard unto the water, like twenty foot to
the Seawards of their imagined mark: then the pieces being planted and koyned,
so that the dispart stands underneath the point blanke at the full sea one
degree, and at the low water three degrees, then giving fire unto the piece or
pieces, as soon as the Ship takes away or shadoweth ye light, the^ theris no
doubt but they do strike the Ship very near ye water without any fail. And
for that the light stands to the Seawards of the mark appointed, the shot
must have a time to come unto the Ship, and the Ship goes away in the mean
time. And furthermore, when that the pieces be charged again, then the line
that is underneath the piece, by plomming of her at the mouth, and at the tail
of the piece, is laid right upon the mark again: and the^ furthermore, if the
Shipp chance to pass further, scaping both the Bulwarks, then they may have
more ymagined marks, and also lights placed there, and in like manner, lines
underneath the pieces right upon those marks. etc. And furthermore, you may
know by the lights, which side of the water the Ship comes two ways, and
one way is this, the land being higher then the water, and the lights being
placed hard unto the water, if that the ship comes hard upon the further side
of the water next unto the light, then the hold of the ship will shaddowe the
light, and if that she comes on your side, then the sails will shaddowe the
lights. And furthermore if the Ship comes right in the middle of the water
or River, then both the Bulwarks shall have the lights shaddowed at one time,
and if the Ship come on the further side of the water from you, then your
lights will be first shaddowed, and if on the side you be on, then your light
will be last shaddowed: and then furthermore for the making of a perfect
shot, if that the other Bulwark shoot before you, then koyne the mouth of
the piece one degree lower, for that the Ship comes upon your side of the
water, and then for the neerenesse of her coming, you must needs koyne the
piece so much the lower. etc.

FINIS.
Some deserve ere they desire,
And yet shall lack when they require,
Some desire and never deserve,
And gets the gain the other shall sterue.

The Table of the contents of this Book, called The Art of shooting in great
Ordnaunce.
FIrst, ten principal things to be considered in the shooting of Ordnaunce.
1. Powder the goodness or badnesse 2. The lading of the piece. 3. The wind.
4. The shot. 5. The wadde or powder too hard or loosse 6. The standing of
the piece. 7. Of shooting up the hill or down the hill. 8. Of the length of
the piece. 9. Of the disparting of the piece. 10. Whether the piece be truly
bored.
Now begins the first Chapter of the Book, called The Art of shooting in
great Ordnaunce, and first, as concerning powder The 2. Chapter shows, how to
know whether any piece of Ordnaunce be truly bored, by the help of certain
instruments. The 3. Chapter shows, how much powder will serve any piece of
Ordnaunce by the weight of the piece, and weight of the shot, and at the end of
this Chapter there is a Table that does declare the weight of iron shot. The
4. Chap. shows how to dispart any piece of Ordna^ce truly. The 5. Chapter
shows how to give level with any piece of Ordnaunce to make a shot,
according as the most sorts of Gu^ners do use to do, although that there is
no art in it. The 6. Chapter shows what a degree is. The 7. Chapter shows
how to make a shot upon the right line, and so how to know how much ground
that any piece of Ordnaunce does drive or convey a shot at the mount of every
degree of the Randare. The 8. Chapter shows, how to mount any piece of
Ordnaunce by the degree with an ynch rule with a table, showing what part of an
ynche rule will make one degree, and so unto ten degrees. The 9. Chapter
shows, what manner of course the shot flies in the air. The 10. Chapter
shows, how to mount a Mortar piece, for to lay the shot at any distance
appointed. The 11. Chapter is how far above the mark the shot flies over the
mark by the length of the piece, and distance unto the mark. The 12. Chapter
is, how to make a perfect shot with a piece that is not truly bored, that is to
say, that the core or hollownesse goes not right in the middle of the metal.
The 13. Chapter is how to give level at a mark upon a hill or valley with the
Quadrant. The 14. Chap. is how to make a perfect shot upon the land, at the
broad side of a ship that is under sail, and going. The 15. Chap. is, how to
make a shot out of one ship into another, although the sea be wrought, or out
of a Galley into a ship. The 16. Chapter shows unto you in what order you
should place Ordnaunce in Ships The 17. Chapter shows unto you how for to
shoot at a moveable mark upon the land, and also what kind of shot is the
best to be used according unto the cause. The 18. Chapter shows, how you
shall know if any piece of Ordnaunce be sufficiently mettalled, and also the
cause that the Ca^no^s do not occupy the weight in powder that the shot
waieth. The 19. Chapter shows in what order you shall give level with your
Ordnaunce at a battery, to beat down the walls of any place, and also, what
to observe in the giving fire unto them. The 20. Chapter, shows the weight of
al manner of cast pieces of Ordnaunce, from the Cannon, unto the Faulco^net, and
also the weight of the shot and the weight of the powder that they do occupy
with the height of the shot, and length of the piece, and al such other like
causes, according unto the names of the pieces The 21. Chapter shows, how
many shottes of powder there is in a last of powder, from the Cannon, unto the
Fauconet, and also, if you be at any battry or in any town castle or ship,
how to know how much powder will shoot al your Ordnaunce off. The 22 Chapter
shows, how to know how many shot does wey a Tun. The 23. Chapter shows
how and by what order the shote does graze or glance upon the land or water.
The 24. Chapter is, how for to batter the walls of any Town, as well by
night as by day. The 25 Chapter does declare how to plant Ordnau^ce by night,
to batter the walls of any Town, or displace any Ordnaunce in any Bulwarks,
or any such other like, as well by night as by day. The 26. Chapter does
declare how for to keep a Haven or River on the Sea coast for to sincke a
ship, as well by night as by day in all points.
FINIS.
AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Dawson for Thomas woodcocke. An. Dom. 1587.


