THE THIRD PART FROM S. JOHN BAPTISTS NATIVITIE TO the last Holy Day in the
whole year.

DEDICATED UNTO THE RIGHT RELIGIOUS AND REsolute Doctor, MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE,
Deane of Exeter.

By JOHN BOYS, Doctor of Divinity.

HIERONYMVS EPIST. AD RIPARIVM. Honoramus seruos, vt honor seruorum redundet ad
Dominum.

AT LONDON Imprinted for William Aspley. 1615.

S. JOHN BAPTISTS DAY.
The Epistle.
ESAIAS 40. 1. Be of good cheer, my people; O ye Prophets, comfort my people,
says your God, etc.
THe Sermons of Isaiah are for the greater part so Gospel-like, that (as
Proaem. com. in Esa. and epist. Paulin. tom. 3. fol. 9. Non prophetiam videtur
texere, sed Euangelium.
Hierome notes) he seems to be rather an Evangelist, or Apostle, then a
Prophet: for he speaks of Christ's Cap. 7. 14.
conception, as if he had been taught by the glorious Angel who brought the
first annunciation of it unto the blessed Virgin his mother: of Christ's Cap.
9. 6.
birth, as if with old Simeon he had lulled him in his arms: of Christ's death
and Cap. 53. verse 3. 4. 5. 6.
passion, as if with the beloved disciple John, he had stood by the cross when
he was crucified: of Christ's Cap. 53. verse. 8
resurrection, as if with all the faithful Apostles he had been present upon
mount Oliuet, where the Lord used a cloud as his heavenly Chariot to convey him
out of the world to his father.

The text now read is a prophecy concerning the coming of Christ in the
Musculus, Hyperius, Calvin in loc.
flesh, and the coming of Christ in the flesh is the Luke 2. 25.
consolation of Israel, and comfort of Jerusalem; and this comfort the 2. Cor.
1. 3.
God of all comfort will have proclaimed unto Hierusalems heart, by the mouth
of all his Preachers, as namely his Prophets, his Apostles, his Prodromus or
Harbinger, John the Baptist a Tertullian cont Marcian. lib. 4. cap. 33. Cyril.
cat. 3. August. de Io. Baptist. ser. 1.
midling between the Prophets and Apostles.

1. By the Prophets, Comfort my people O ye Prophets, comfort my people. etc.
verse 1. 2. 2. By John the Baptist. A voice cried in the wilderness, prepare the
way of the Lord, etc. verse 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 3. By the Apostles, Go up unto
the high hill (O Sion) thou that bring good tidings, etc. verse 9. 10. 11.
Comfort my people] in this commission observe first Gods bounty, then his
Prophets duty. You may behold the riches of Gods mercy toward his afflicted
people. 1. In raising up Prophets unto them in their captivity, when as
otherwise they might have complained with the Psalmist, O Psalm. 74. 1. 10.
God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long, and why is thy wrath so
kindled against the sheep of thy pasture? we see not our tokens, there is not
one Prophet more, no not one is there among us that understands any more.

2. Calvin
For that he sent not one or two, but many: the number is plural, comfort ye,
speak ye, Psalm. 68. 11.
the Lord giving his word, great was the number of the Preachers.

3. For that he called not all his Prophets at once, but at sundry times
according to the Churches exigence. Wherefore Musculus, Calvin.
some read not as our translation here, says your God in the present; but in
the future, will your God say: Geneuaglosse.
Signifying hereby that God will in all ages to come so provide for his Church,
as that it shall never be destitute of Prophets; and so we find in holy Bible
that he stirred up Daniel, Haggai, Malachi, Zachariah, Ezra, Nehemiah, and
other (until the coming of Christ himself the 1. Pet. 54.
chief shepherd) who did always exhort his people to be of good comfort, and
to Romans 4. 18.
hope against hope, so Zacharias in his hymn; Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel for he has visited and redeemed his people, raising up the horn of
salvation unto us, as he spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets which have
been since the world began. So S. Peter in his Sermon adpopulum, Acts 3. 24.
All the Prophets from Samuel, and thence forth as many as have spoken have
likewise foretold of these days; and to Cornelius, Acts 10. 43. To him all the
Prophets give witness, that through his name all that believe in him shall
receive remission of sins.

4. The Hyperius, Musculus.
doubling and tripling of this charge to the Prophets ( comfort ye, comfort ye,
speak ye comfortably) expresses as it were the very bowels of compassion in
God, as if he could not endure that his people should suffer any more misery,
giving them also further assurance that he will ever be their God, even in
their greatest adversity, when as they seem to be swallowed up of death and
desperation, and that they shall be still his Jerusalem and his people, your
God will say comfort my people.

Concerning the Prophets office, God in this charge requires on their part
that they speak comfortably to his Hierusalems heart: Yet here you must
observe with Ecclesiast. 3. 1.
Ecclesiastes, that there is a time for all things; a time for admonition, a
time for reprehension, a time for consolation; a time Esaias 58. 1.
to show Gods people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob their
sins; as well as a time to tell Jerusalem in distress that her travel is
ended, and her iniquity pardoned; a time says our Prophet Esaias 5.
elsewhere, to denounce woe to such as justify the wicked for a reward; a time
to denounce woe to such as speak good of evil, and evil of good; a time to
denounce woe to such as follow drunkenness, and are strong to power in strong
drink. And assuredly (beloved) the Prophets have just occasion in this age to
cry out against such Amos 6. 1.
as are at ease in Sion, making (as Philip. 3. 19.
Paul speaks) their belly their God, and their gullet their glory. For
swinish, idle, base drunkenness heretofore scorned as the beggars fault, is
now reputed (among more then a good many) not only the seruingmans complement,
but also the gentleman's grace. God as having Ezech. 33. 11.
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but a longing desire to have the coalcs
of his wrath quenched with the tears of our repentance, commands his
Prophets in the days of security, to sound out the threats of his severity,
denouncing a woe before woe, that is a woe of instruction, before there come
the woe of destruction. For albeit the Luke 3. 9.
axe be laid unto the root of the tree, yet shall it not be hewn down so long
as there is any hope of the fruits of amendment. Though there be Jonas. 3.
yet but forty days, and Nineue shall be destroyed, yet if Nineue proclaim a
fast, and put on sackcloth from the greatest unto the least; the Lord will
repent of the evil he said he would do unto them, and turn away from his
fierce wrath. As soon then as Jerusalem has received at the Lords hand
sufficient correction for all her sins, it is time to tell her that her
travail is at an end, and that her offense is pardoned. After once the law
has humbled and terrified distressed consciences; after all her Psalm. 42. 9.
waves and storms have rent asunder troubled spirits, it is time to bring Esaias
61.
glad tidings of salvation unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to
preach liberty to the Captive, to comfort all that mourn in Syon, to give
beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness,
among many, this one doubtless is the maine part in the Prophets office to
comfort Jerusalem at the heart.

This ought to be performed plainly, painefully, powerfully: Calvin.
Plainly cry to her, and lift up thy voice, for if the Prophet whisper only,
this consolation happily might seem doubtful or weak, but all doubting is
taken away, seeing it is to be delivered freely with a loud voice: Musculus.
Painefully, comforting Jerusalem again and again, comfort ye, comfort ye,
etc: Hyperius. Dan. Arcularius.
Powerfully, for the Prophet ought to speak not only to Hierusalems ear, but
also fully to her heart, that he may like a good Orator relinquere aculeos in
auditorum animis: Ecclesiastes 12. 11.
the words of the wise are like goades and like nails fastened by the masters
of the assemblies, and the best way to fasten a nail is to strike home, Gods
word is an Jeremy 23. 29.
hammer, and our exhortations are like nails, and therefore we must often and
earnestly strike home that we may prick the hearts of our hearers, as Saint
Peter did Acts 2. 37.

Or as Hierom, Vatablus, Calvin.
other expound this clause, to speak to the heart of Jerusalem is in
Scripture phrase nothing else but to speak that which is pleasing and
acceptable. So Sychem the son of Hamor is said to speak to the heart of Dinah,
Genesis 34. 3. Now the glad message to be preached unto Jerusalem is, that her
travail is at an end, and her offense pardoned, for as Physicians in healing
bodily diseases ordinarily remove first the cause from whence they spring: even
so the Lord deals with us in curing our spiritual infirmities. The rods
wherewith he beats us proceed from our sins, he must of necessity
therefore pardon them, ere his strokes can cease, so that remission of our
sins is the ground of our comfort, that man and only that man is blessed
Psalm. 32. 1.
whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, he that
trauayles with mischief conceiues sorrow, Psalm 7. 15. Esaias 57. 21.
There is no peace to the wicked says our God; a Socrates.
heathen Philosopher could say, that the best way to shun sadness is to live
well. I do latrie, stinking drunkenness, and other sins are called by the
Prophet Cap. 4. verse. 18. See Ribera. in loc.
Hosea shame, because they bring with them always confusion and shame:
Hierusalems warfare was never at an end, till her sins on her part were
repented, and on Gods part pardoned.

But how was her offense forgiven? because she had received at the Lords hand
double for all her sins: Musculus.
that is double grace for her double grief. As Jerusalem had a double
punishment, one in her soul, another in her body: so now she shall have by
Christ a double blessing, to wit, in this world collation of grace, and in the
world to come possession of glory; or a double favor, 1. in that her travail
is ended: 2. for that her sin is pardoned, or double, Vatablus, Arcularius.
that is many benefits, a certain number for an uncertain, the sufferings of
Christ are a sufficient propitiation for all her sins, and for the sins of
the whole world, 1. Ioh. 2. 2. Yea where sin abounded there grace
superabounded, Romans 5. 20.

Hierom, Hyperius, Castalion.
Other have construed it as our Church here translateth it, she has received
double, that is, sufficient correction for all her sins, insinuating that the
Lord will afflict his people no more so long, nor so sharply, because his
loving kindness has overcome his heavy displeasure. Calvin.
So the word double ought to be taken for enough or full, as it is used, Chap.
61. 7. Here then a question is moved, if Hierusalems iniquity were forgiven,
how did she receive sufficient correction at the Lords hand for all her sins?
If she were pardoned freely, what place could there be for satisfaction or
satis-^assion, Musculus in loc. Idem Calvin I^stit. lib. 3 cap. 4. 33.
answer is made that this punishment was inflicted on Gods people not as a
satisfaction for their offense, but as an exercise rather for their
humiliation, and when almighty God had exercised them enough in the school of
affliction, he commanded his Prophets again and again to comfort them at the
very heart: and whereas it is obiecteed further that their sin deserved an
eternal punishment, ergo, this temporary could not be sufficient correction,
it is answered in a word that howsoever it was not in it self sufficient, yet
unto God being pleased it was enough, albeit they deserved to be beaten with a
great many more stripes, yet those few blows sufficed the Lord as Esaias 27. 8.
smiting in measure, moderating his strokes as a Psalm. 103. 13
father who pitieth his children, in his very Abacuc. 3. 2.
wrath remembering mercy: so the Prophet Cap. 10. ver. 24
Jeremy desires the Lord to correct him in judgment, Calvin in Esai. 27. 8.
that is in measure, that so the blows might be proportionable to his
infirmity, not answerable to his iniquity, God says 1. Cor. 10. 13.
Paul is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able
to bear, Psalm. 103. 14.
for he knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust, and
therefore chastising us for our good, he does accept a little punishment for a
sufficient correction.

A voice cried in the wildernes] all the Matthew. 3. 3. Mark. 1. 3. Luke 3. 4.
Joan. 1. 23.
four Evangelists expound this of John the Baptist, how fitly, see Gospel on
the fourth Sunday in Aduent. The summary pith of the proclamation verse 6. 7.
8. is in brief Melanc. in Joan. 1. See D. Abbots sermon at the funeral of
Thomas Earl of Dorset. page 2.
this, our selves are mortal, it is good therefore that we should have
something else to rest our souls upon: we consist of flesh, and that is like
unto the grass, and if we should imagine other men to be better then our
selves, and so put our trust in Psalm. 146. 2.
Princes, yet are they but as we are: for all flesh is grass, and all the
grace thereof is as the flower of the field: Wherefore let us embrace the mercy
which is offered by the son of God, the Savior of the world, the redeemer of
mankind, the great shepherd of our souls, he shall gather the lambs together
with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, etc.

All flesh is grass, and the grace, that is, the best of all flesh (as 1.
Epist. 1. 24.
Peter expoundes it) all the glory of man, as wisdom, valor, industry,
judgment, all is like grass: Calvin.
for the drift of the text shows evidently that Esaias speaks not of the
outward man only, but also comprehends the gifts of the mind whereby men are
beautified above other, Arcularius in loc.
intelligit totum hominem, and quicquid in rebus humanis illustre: all men are
corruptible like grass, and the most graceful among all men are like the
flower of the field, the which happily whilst it flourishes is more glorious
Matthew. 6. 29.
then Solomon in all his royalty, but the flower of the field being devoured
at a trice by the beast of the field, becomes in a few hours a stinking
excrement. I could here compass you about with a very great cloud of
witnesses: the witty Poet Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Anacre^n was in a moment choked with the kernel of a raysen, and Idem.
Fabius a grave Senator in drinking milk was strangled with an hair: the
famous Emperor Ibid. Matthew. Paris in Ric. 1.
Frederick Barbarossa going for Palestina to recover the holy land out of the
hands of the Saracens (a service which he thought acceptable to Christ and for
effecting whereof he left his friends and country) was by the way as he passed
suddenly drowned in the river Sapheth. When Sr. Ric. Barckley, discourse of
felicity lib. 5. page 450.
Harrald King of Denmark made war upon Harquinus, and was ready to join
battle, a dart was seen in the air flying this way and that way, as though
it sought upon whom to rest, and when all men stood wondering what would become
of this strange matter, every man fearing himself; at the last the dart fell
upon Harquinus head and slew him. The French King Philip. Com mi. hist. lib. 8.
cap. 18.
Charles the 8. as he was beholding tenisse players, among other talk he said
that he hoped to do nothing hereafter that should offend God: which words were
no sooner out of his mouth but he fell down speechles, and languishing a few
hours he died in the same place. A popish priest called Eox Mart. fol. 1731.
Nighting all in the days of Queen Mary, Parson of Croudall in Kent, as he
was boasting in the pulpit of the Popes absolution and by reason of it of his
own pureness, most fearfully fell down and dyed instantly. The Pope (though he
does exalt himself above all that is called God) perishes notwithstanding as
a man, and hereupon at his inauguration the Walsingham in Hen. 5. page 444
Idem* Paradinus in sym* bol. page 126.
master of the Ceremonies used to burn an handful of flax before him, as in
solemn procession he passed by, saying with a loud voice, ecce pater sancte
sic transit gloria mundi. I conclude this argument in In Psalm. 5. poeniten.
verse. 4.
Gregory's gloss, man is like to grass, quia per natiuitatem viret in carne,
per iuuentutem c^ndescit in flore, per mortem aret in puluere, by his birth he
is green in his flesh, by his youth he is white in his blossom, by his death
he is withered in the dust.

Whether the grassewither, or that the flower fade away, yet the word of God
endures for euer] Calvin.
this repetition is added once more to bring all the glory of proud flesh unto
nothing: it also contains an excellent comfort, namely that the Lord having
humbled his servants in adversity forthwith affordes them matter of joy, the
grassewithers, but the word of the Lord (which is the ground of our
consolation) endures for ever; it is (as Saint 1. Pet. 1. 23.
Peter terms it) an incorruptible seed, a living, yea everliving word. And
that in Arcularius.
two respects especially: 1. in respect of the giver, as being the word of the
Heb. 10. 31.
living God which 1. Tim. 6. 16.
only has immortality: 2. in respect of the receivers, in that it brings
all true believers unto life which endures for ever, according to that of Peter
unto Christ, John 6. 68.
thou have the words of eternal life. Calvin.
Here then in a few words is comprehended the whole sum of the Gospel; it
consists in acknowledging our own misery, weakness, and vanity, that being
humbled enough in the consideration of our faults and frailty, we might have
recourse to Christ our only Savior, by whose grace we shall be wholly restored.
Again from hence we may learn to seek true consolation and contentment no
where but in eternity, the which is only to be found in God: all flesh is
grass, and the grace thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers,
and the flower fades away, there can be no stability in earth and earthly
things, and therefore let us not set our affections on things below, but always
Coloss. 3. 2.
seek those things which are above, let our conversation be in heaven, and
from thence let us look for salvation. Philip. 3. 20.

Go up unto the high hill O Sion] this commission (as The translatours of our
Church Bible in the contents of this Chapter. Et Arcularius in loc.
some think) concerns especially the Apostles, in which observe 1. How they
must preach: 2. What they must preach. How* they must get up into the high
hill, Musculus.
even so high that their exalted voice may well be heard, and accordingly we
find that Romans 10. 18.
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world. Calvin.
Here you may see that the dumb Idols in the papacy boast of the name of the
Church absurdly, for the Church (as being the 1. Tim. 3. 15.
pillar of truth and Esaias 66. 11. 12, 13.
mother of all the faithful) is not taught of God that she should keep her
knowledge to her self, but that she should proclaim that unto other which she
has learned, and that earnestly with a free spirit, O thou preacher Jerusalem
lift up thy voice without fear. Now the tenor of the doctrine to be published
by the Apostles and their successors in the Church for ever is briefly this,
that Christ Jesus is our God and Savior, behold your God, both able and
willing to redeem his people, able, for that he shall come with power, and a
strong arm, who can measure the waters in his fist, and mete heaven with his
spanne, and comprehend the dust of the earth in a measure, and weigh the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance: willing, for that he shall
feed his flock like an heardman, he shall gather the lambs together with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom and shall entreat kindly those that bear
young.

The Gospel.
LVKE 1. 57. Elizabeth's time came that she should be delivered, and she brought
forth a son, etc.
SAint Sermon. 63.
Ambrose preaching on this day was a great deal troubled, where he should
either begin or end the praises of John the Baptist: for whatsoever was eminent
almost in See Ferus ser. 1. de Io. Baptist.
all other is found in this one Saint, as being an Malac. 3. 1. Angelus offici^.
Angel, a Luke 1. 76.
Prophet, an John. 1. 6.
Apostle, an Mark. 1. 7. John 1. 29.
Evangelist, a confessor constantly teaching the truth, and patiently suffering
for the same, his ingresse into the world, progress in the world, egresse out
of the world, were not (as our text speaks) without a marvelous noise
throughout all the countries of Jury, and the Matthew. 3. 5.
coast about Jordan, he was in his death a Martyr, in his life a miracle, yet
his nativity surmounted both; and therefore whereas the Church ordinarily
celebrates the lives and deaths of other Saints, it does especially solemnize
the birth of John the Baptist; allotting for this feast a Gospel accordingly,
that sets down the chief parts and purtenance thereof, as namely

1. Elizabeth's safe deliverance, when her time was come, verse 57. 2. The
congratulation of neighbors and cosins for this great mercy showed upon her,
verse 58. 3. The circumcision of John, verse 59. 4. The contention about his
name, verse 60. 61. 62. 63. 5. The marueyling of such as were present upon the
sight of these things, and of such as were absent upon the report noysed
abroad, verse 63. 65. 66. 6. The Benedictus of Zachary, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, etc.
Elizabeth's time was come] The word of the Lord is true, Psalm 33. 4. I the
Lord have spoken it, and I will perform it, Ezechiel 37. 14. Whereas therefore
God promised old Zachary by the mouth of his Angel at the 13. verse, that
Elizabeth his wife should bear him a son: he now deals with his servant
according to his word, for albeit Zachary was a forspent man, and Elizabeth in
respect both of years and sickness a Luke 1. 7.
barren woman; yet when her time came that she should be delivered she brought
forth a son. The most almighty truth, and most true almightines effected
whatsoever he determined, Not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 5.
Pliny, Attic. noc. lib. 3 cap. 16.
Gellius, and Arist. de not. animal. lib. 7. cap. 3. 4.
other secretaries of nature report that some children are borne in the 7.
month after their conception, other in the 8. other in the 10. but ordinarily
children are borne in the 9. month: and Aretius. Maldonat.
so John was brought into the world, when his mother Elizabeth's time came that
she should be delivered, according to the most usual course of nature.

Heming. post. in fest. Io. Baptist.
Hereupon we may build a general rule, namely that nothing is able to
disappoint Gods holy determinations and purposes, and therefore whereas he has
Heb. 9. 27.
appointed that all men shall once dye, and after death come to judgment,
whereas he says expressly that they who Dan. 12. 2.
sleep in the dust of the grave, shall awake some to perpetual contempt, and
other to an 1. Pet. 5. 4.
incorruptible crown of glory; (for the Apocal. 20. 13.
sea and the sepulcher shall deliver up the dead which are in them at the last
day:) let us look for the Tit. 2. 13.
blessed hope and glorious appearing of Christ our Savior, who shall Philip.
3. 21.
change our vile body that it may be like his glorious body; though happily the
resurrection of the dead seem most impossible to nature, yet let us which are
John 1. 13.
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God, comfort our selves in these things, as being assured that our Job. 19.
25.
redeemer lives, and that he which is the John 11. 25.
resurrection and the life shall himself 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the voice of the Archangel; and
with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall arise first, and then the
living that remain shall also be caught up with them in the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air, and so we shall be with him evermore.

She brought forth a sonne] it is probable that Zachary being at his devotion
in the temple prayed not for any private blessing, but for the public good of
the whole congregation, and namely that God would (according to his gracious
promises) give his son, and so forgive the sin of his people: the coherence
then of Gabriels speech unto him at the 13. verse ( fear not Zachary, for thy
prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a sonne] may be
Augustine. quaest. Euang. lib. 2. cap. 1.
this, thy prayer is heard for the Messiah of the world, in that thy wife shall
bear a son, who shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall go
before him in the spirit and power of Elias, as a Prophet to prepare his ways,
and to make ready a people for him. He which is the John 1. 9.
light of the world, and Cant. 1. 3. Haggai. 2. 8.
delight of his people, shall ere it be long be borne of a Virgin, and
Elizabeth thy wife shall have a son, who shall as his beadle go before his
face, the son of a barren shall preach unto the world the son of the
Virgin, Ardens hom. in loc.
Et pulchre de seen and sterili nascitur, qui nasciturum de virgin praedicare
veniebat, vt mirabiliter natus mirabilius nasciturum demonstraret.

Or as other Theophylact. Euthym. Iansen.
observe, thy prayer is heard for the sins of the people, because thy wife
Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, who shall openly proclaim the Messiah, and
say, Behold the lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world, Eusebius.
Emisen. hom. 2. de S. Io. Bap.
Dum ille solicitus pro salute populi supplicat, promissus est per quem populus
saluaretur.

Or as Saint Com. in Luc. 1. verse. 13.
Ambrose, God according to his Ephesians. 1. 7.
rich grace James. 1. 5.
giving to all men liberally, did not only hear the prayer of Zachary, for the
common good, but also for his own comfort in particular: and therefore
Arboreus, Calvin.
some construe the clause (thy prayer is heard) of his private suite for a
son, commensed either at this instant in Gods house (for being hie Priest as
Apud Marlorat. and Maldonat. in loc.
many conjecture, his office was to Leuit. 16. 17.
make an atonement for himself, and his household, and for all the congregation
of Israel) or else often Heming. Calvin. Maldonat.
heretofore in his own house praying with Elizabeth his wife. We find a
parallel example to this Acts 10. 4. Cornelius a devout man evidently saw in a
vision an Angel of God coming unto him and saying, thy prayers and thine alms
are come up into remembrance before God. It is not said that Cornelius at that
hour was either praying unto God, or giving alms unto men: but the Lords
Angel speaks of duties and bounties already past: and so Gabriel in saying thy
prayer is heard, insinuates that his former and frequent suite for a child was
obtained now, thy wife shall bear thee a son, and our text reports
accordingly that in due time she brought forth a son, from hence learn, 1.
That the prayer of the righteous James 5. 16.
avails much if it be fervent: John is gotten, and (as Ser. 63.
Ambrose speaks also) begotten of his parents, non tam complexibus, quam
orationibus.

2. Heming. post. infest. Io. Bap.
That (...) must not cease from praying because many times our requests are
delayed long; it is our duty to continue knocking until the father of mercies
open the door of grace; Christ in his preamble to that exquisite form of
prayer inioyneth us to call upon God in faith, hope, love; faith, in saying
father: love, in saying our: hope, in saying which art in heaven: I find the
like conceit in Epist. 121. cap 8.
Augustine upon the fish, egg, and bread, mentioned Luke 11. fides in pisce,
spes in ouo, charitas in pane. Epist. lib. 1. epist. 4.
Paulinus said of the woman anointing Christ's feet that she was pudenter
impudens, and pie improba; so we must in our prayers unto God (as it were) put
on a modest impudence, fainting occasioneth a failing, whereas Luke 18. 5.
importunity prevails even with unrighteous men on earth, and therefore much
more with our holy father in heaven.

3. That married couples ought to live in the fear of God, always relying upon
his gracious providence both in wealth and woe: more principally the Preachers
of the word and their wives ought to shine before others in all kind of
virtues, in fervent and frequent prayers especially.

And her neighbors and her cousins] Plutarch.
Themistocles intending to sell a farm, caused the crier to proclaim that it
had among other commodities a good neighbor, as being assured that this one
circumstance would ye rather induce chapmen to purchase it: old Zacharias and
Elizabeth had good neighbors, who did not envy their happiness, but according
to the precept of Romans 12. 15.
Paul, rejoice with those that rejoice. A Preacher that lives among such has
obtained a fat benefice, he may well acknowledge with Psalm. 16. 7.
David, the lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground, and I have a goodly
heritage, but woe to that Zachary which is a Job 30. 29.
brother unto Dragons, and a companion of Ostriches, Psalm. 120. 5.
constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have his habitation among the tents
of Kedar.

As Zachary the Priest had good neighbors, so likewise kind cousins, for
albeit they might have well expected large legacies if he had dyed without
issue, yet they rejoiced at the birth of his son; an Diez. con. 1. in festo
Io. Bap.
envious man has a great deal of less wit in his malice then a very brute,
for whereas neither foul nor fish is taken in a snare without a bait, the
spiteful wretch is brought to the devils hook without any pleasant bite: the
voluptuous man has a little pleasure for his soul, the covetous a little
profit for his soul, the proud and ambitious a little honor for his soul;
but an envious man has nothing of the devil, or flesh, or world for his
soul, but hearts-griefe, Laurent. Pisan. Euang. paradox.
hoc solum inuidus been agit quod se cruciat. Wherefore 1 Pet. 2. 1.
laying aside all malitiousnes and envy, let us imitate the good neighbors
and allies of Elizabeth here: let us as feeling and fellow members of the same
mystical body Heb. ^2. 2.
remember those that are in bonds, as though our selves were bound with them,
and if any 1. Cor. 12. 16.
member be had in honor to rejoice with it.

These neighbors and cousins visiting Elizabeth in childe-bed, came not (as
Culman. con. 1. in loc.
one notes upon the place) with basket and bottle to drink and eat, (though I
confess that kind of neighborhood were better used in a Priests house, then
in a tap-house) neither came they like the gossips in our time with a great
deal of 1. Tim. 5. 13.
tattle speaking things uncomely: but they came to praise God for his goodness
showed upon their friend Elizabeth: 1. Paludensis Beauxamis.
In taking away the reproach of barrenness: 2. For giving her a son; so the
text, they heard how the Lord had showed great mercy upon her, and they
rejoiced with her; it was mercy that she brought forth a son; great mercy,
that she bare such a son. The Thracians used to laugh at the death, and to
weep at the birth of men; but the Scripture teaches us to rejoice when a
son is borne: Psalm. 127. 4.
children and the fruit of the womb are a gift that comes of the Lord, and
therefore when Eua conceived and bare Cain she said, Gen 4 1.
I have gotten a man from the Lord: and Genesis 5. 29.
Lamech having gotten a son called his name Noah, saying, this same shall
comfort us concerning our work and sorrow of our hands, etc. When Isaac was
borne Sarah his mother said, Genesis 21. 6.
God has made me to laugh: a woman (as Christ speaks John 16. 21.) when she
is in travel has sorrow, because her hour is come, but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembers no more the pain, for joy that a man is
borne into the world: Aeneas Syluius epist progenitori suo.
quid dulcius in humanis quam gignere sibi similem, aut beatius in terris quam
natos videre natorum. Elizabeth then had good cause to praise God in the gift
of a son; but her self and her friends had greater cause to rejoice because
she bare such a son, Paludensis.
tantum and talem filium, a son so great in the sight of the Lord, filled
with the holy ghost, and strong in spirit even from his mothers womb; such a
son, of whom as yet in swaddling cloutes his father moved by the spirit said,
he should be the prophet of the most high, of whom also (when he was grown
up and executed his office) Mat. 11. 11.
Christ himself gave this testimony, that among those which are borne of
women there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist. If a* Proverb. 10.
1.
wise son make a glad father, and a foolish son bring heaviness to his
mother: Elizabeth; had great mercy showed upon her, in that she brought forth a
John into the world.

Eusebius. Emisen. hom. 2. de Io. Bap. Idem Beaux. and alij.
Mystically, gracious John borne of barren Elizabeth, lively represents the
fulness and fruitfulnes of the Gentiles arising from the barrenness of the
Jews, and therefore the Esaias 54. 1. Galat. 4. 27.
Prophet exhortes the Church, rejoice thou barren that bear not, break
forth into singing thou that trauaylest not, for the desolate has many more
children then she which has an husband.

In the eight day they came to circumcise the child] Zacharias and Elizabeth
Luke 1. 6.
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord without blame,
caused their newborn babe to be circumcised according to the prescript of the
law, concerning the time when, part where, cause why; see Gospel on the
circumcision of Christ.

Now Coloss. 2. 11. 12.
baptism succeeds circumcision, and so consequently parents are taught by this
example to bring their children in due time to holy baptism; wherein they be
made the members of Christ, the children of God, and inheritours of the
kingdom of heaven. Again parents may learn by this Calain, Beauxamis.
president (except some great necessity compel them otherwise) to baptize
their infants in the face of the congregation, and not in the corner of a
chamber or chimney: there was a great meeting of neighbors and cousins at the
circumcision of John in his fathers house, and the Jews at this day circumcise
their children in their public Synagog^es: and lastly from hence we may
further observe three things, especially concerning imposition of names among
Gods children in old time.

1. That names were given in circumcision, as among us in baptism, they came
to circumcise the child, and called his name Zachary: the reason hereof is
plain, Heming. post. in Euangel. circum. Christi.
that as often as we hear our selves named, we might instantly call to mind
the solemn covenant between God and us in holy baptism: or (as Theophylact.
Iansen. Beauxam. in loc.
other observe) because circumcision and baptism are seals of Gods grace
whereby men are first admitted into the Church, and as it were Psalm 69. 29.
See Sixth. s^nen. Bibliothec. sanct. lib. 2. fol. 126.
written in the book of the living: it is fit that none should be named or
registered as the servants and soldiers of Christ before they have received his
Sacrament, which is the Anglican. (...). art. 27.
badge of their profession and sign of their new birth.

2. From hence we may note Maldonat.
that Gods people did usually name their children after the names of their
ancestors, except God in some singular case by revelation enjoined the
contrary: for the neighbors and cousins of Elizabeth (as not knowing the Lords
express pleasure concerning the naming of her child) began to call his name
Zachary after the name of his father; and when Elizabeth answered and said, not
so but his name shall be called John; they replied there is none of thy kindred
that is named with this name. This example condems the nicenes of some, who
think it unlawful to give their children Aretius.
usual names of their nation and families, as Edward, George, Robert, and the
like: as also the prophanes of other, who give names of Estey hyst. of the
Gospel page 125.
flowers, or stones, or heathen names unto christians: if we name not our
children after the names of our ancestors, it is fit that we should take the
names of Rhem. in loc.
Saints that may put us in mind of their virtues, as John, Peter, Stephen,
etc. And not the names of Idols, as Venus, Mercury, Bacchus, or the strange
names of Saxon and Roman infidels, and therefore the Popes and Cardinals are
worthily censured by reverend Annot. in loc.
Fulke, for that having most antichristianly renounced their names given in
baptism, by which they were first dedicated unto Christ: they choose many times
unto themselves profane names, as Sergius, Leo, Julius, Caesar, Sixtus, etc.

3. We may learn from hence that imposition of names is a duty belonging
properly to parents, especially to the father, and therefore Gabriel said unto
Zachary, thou shall call his name John. And in our present text, the
determination of the question about the childs name was wholly referred unto
the father, they made signs to his father, how he would have him called, and
he asked for writing tables, and wrote, saying, his name is John.

Not so, but his name shall be called Iohn] It Maldonat.
may be ( Zachary being now dumb and not able to speak) that the neighbors
asked Elizabeth his wife how the child should be named, or happily hearing
their consultation about this business, she might (as knowing the Lords
pleasure herein) answer them unasked, his name shall be called John. Here then
a question is moved, by what means Elizabeth understood Gods express
commandment in appointing his name, seeing her husband (to whom only Gabriel
had made this known) was mute; to this objection Theophylact. Euthym. Caietan.
answer is made, that she knew the name by revelation as a prophetisse, per
prophetiam didicit, quod non didicerat a marito says Com. in loc.
Ambrose: or (as Di^. Carthus. Aretius.
other assoyle the doubt) it may be Zachary signified so much unto her in
writing heretofore, as now to his neighbors and kinsmen, for he asked for
writing tables, and wrote, saying, his name is John. Beauxam. Culman.
Here then observe, that the parents of John obeyed the commandment of God
before the counsel of their friends and kinsemen, albeit they were never so
dear to them. Paulinus epist. lib. 1. epist. 1.
Agamus quae Christus iussit, vt adipiscamur quae Christus spopondit, verit as
illius nobis adsit, illi fides nostra non desit etc. If the Lord say follow me,
then instantly we must forsake all, and leave the dead to bury the dead, Matthew.
8. 22.

His name is John,] Ambrose Iansen.
As if Zachary should have said, I gave not this name, but God himself has
appointed it. The words of his Angel ( thou shall call his name John) are
Maldonat.
non solum praedictio, sed etiam praeceptio nominis imponendi. Now the word
signifies favored of God, or the grace of God, a name fit for the Baptist in
many respects, as first, Ard^ns. Luther. Culman.
for that he was the forerunner and first preacher of Christ, John 1. 16.
of whose fulness we receive grace upon grace, for the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Numb. 13. 23.
The bunch of grapes that the spies of the children of Israel carried from the
land of promise was borne by two strong men upon a staff or pole, he that went
before could not see the grape, but he that was behind might both see and eat
of it: So the Fathers of the old testament did not in like manner see the bunch
of grapes, that was the son of God made man, as they that went behind under the
new testament saw and tasted it, after John had openly showed this grape,
behold the lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world.

2 The Baptist is so called, Aretius Paludensis.
as being filled with the holy ghost, abounding with a great many See Raulin.
ser. de not. Io. Baptist.
prerogatives of grace both in his conception, birth, and conversation.

3 So called, as being borne not by natures ordinary power, Bonauent.
Beauxamis.
but bestowed upon his parents by Gods extraordinary grace.

4 So called, as being Paratus ser. 2. de Io. Baptist.
gracious among men, for many rejoiced at his birth, and more at his doctrine,
Matthew. 3. 5. Mark. 1. 5.
Jerusalem and all Judea went out unto him in the wilderness, and were baptized
of him in the river Jordan. To compendiat all these notes in a few words, John
was gracious*

In the sight of

God the Father, as being upon the point his Godfather, Luke 1. 13.
imposing his name by the mouth of his Angel. Son, for Matthew. 11.
Christ highly commended him in respect of his calling and carriage. Holy
Ghost, as being strong in spirit, and going before Christ in the power of
Elias, Luke 1. 17. 18.
Men, Kindred, The blessed virgin Mary visited his Mother before his birth,
Luke 1. 40. Other Cousins rejoiced at his birth, acknowledging it for a great
mercy.
Strangers, Good, who were both Luke 3.
advised by him, and Baptized of him: he spoke comfortably to Ierusalems heart,
and therefore gracious in the eyes of all good people. Bad, for they thought
his life too strict, Matthew 11. 18. and his greatest enemy cruel Herod:
Matthew. 14.
who bound him, and put him in prison, and in fine beheaded him also for
Herodias sake his brother Philips wife, did notwithstanding Mark. 6. 20.
reverence him, and in many things heard him gladly, knowing that he was a just
man, and an holy. We may pronounce then in some sort of John, as the Psalm. 48.
9.
Psalmist of God, according to thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end:
John is thy name, and gracious was thy person. O blessed Saint if thou were now
living, thou would go to the courts of Princes, and tell Herod to his
face (whilst other Prophets happily sow Ezechiel. 13. 18.
pillowes under his elbowes) that Mark. 6. 18.
it is not lawful for him to have his brothers wife: if he were now living,
he would call our Pharisees a Mat. 3. 7.
generation of vipers: if he were now living, he would not stand upon
by-questions and idle disputations which are fruitless, but the sum of all
his sermons should be repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand: If he were
now living, and preaching in the wilderness, he would teach us all to be more
modest in our apparel, and moderate in our diet.


This gracious Saint has a Caietan. in Mat. 3.
surname added to his name, called Mat. 3. 1. John the Baptist, either Maldonat.
for that he baptized Christ, or else for that he was the Aretius, Marlorat.
Piscator.
first Minister of holy baptism.

And his mouth was opened immediately] The dumbnes of Zachary (says Hom. 2. de
S. Io. Bap.
Eusebius Emisenus) Et fidem reipraesentis expressit, and mysterium figurauit:
it was a seal of Gods present promise, for when old Zachary doubted, and said
unto Gabriel at the 18 verse, whereby shall I know that I shall have a son?
the Lords Angel answered, behold, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak
until the day that these things be done, because thou beleeuest not my words
which shall be fulfilled in their season. His punishment is Theophylact. Calvin.
answerable to his fault, he was stricken deaf for that he would not hearken
unto the word of God, and dumb for that he contradicted it: he was made mute
through unbelief, but as soon as he believed his mouth was opened, Ambros.
com. in loc.
quam vinxerat incredulitas, fides soluit: so that Zachary might apply that of
the Psalm. 116. 10.
Psalmist unto himself, I believed, and therefore have I spoken. At the birth
of John (which as I have showed signifies the grace of God) he who was dumb
began to speak and to praise the Lord. Hug^o Card. Beuxamis.
Sin closed his mouth, and on the contrary grace loosed his tongue. The guilt
of grievous sin confounds a man, and makes him mute, not daring to Ezech.
16. 63.
open his mouth any more because of his shame. Ignorance makes a man mute,
Ecclesiast. 20. 6. Some man holds his tongue because he has not to answer.
Esaias 56. 10. Their watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge, they are all
dumb dogs and cannot bark. The forgetting of Gods abundant mercy makes a man
mute, Psalm. 137. 6. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth. Now Gods grace remoueth all these stops and impediments, it
is he that Psalm. 94. 10.
teaches man knowledge, it is he that out of the mouth of Psalm. 8. 2.
infants has ordained strength, it is he that opens a Coloss. 4. 3.
door of utterance. Wherefore let us pray with David, O Lord open thou my
lips, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

2. The dumbness of Zachary the Priest upon the conception of John the
Baptist is Hierom. com. in Job cap. 29. Origin. hom. 5. in Luc. August. hom. 44.
mistycall, insinuating that now the Priests and Prophets also should hold
their peace. So Christ himself teaches in the Mat. 11. 13.
Gospel, all the Prophets and the Law prophesied unto John, but after once
John had not only painted out in his preaching, but also pointed out with his
finger the Messiah of the world, saying, behold the Lamb of God, etc. After
once the Center of the Prophets, and end of the law was come, it was time for
Priest and Prophet to be silent, he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to
cease, Dan. 9. 27. Then as Ubi sup.
Hierome does apply the words of Job, The Princes stayed talk, and laid their
hand on their lips, and their tongue cleaued to the roof of their mouth, Job
29. 9. In this hour the time drew nigh wherein there should be Song of the 3.
children, ver. 38
neither Prince, nor Prophet, nor burnt offering, nor sacrifice, nor oblation,
nor incense. John is the voice of him that cries in the wilderness, it was
therefore fit that his father Zachary should upon his conception become mute,
as Hom. 44.
Augustine acutely, Tacet Zacharias generaturus vocem. Hence we may learn to
confound the stubborn Jews as yet continuing in unbelief, Emisen. hom. 2. de
Io. Baptist.
Aut Christum venisse consentiant, aut si renuunt, dent prophetas qui
annuncient esse venturum, either they must acknowledge that the Messiah is
come, or else show the Priests and Prophets in holy Bible which as yet foretell
his coming.

The hand of the Lord was with him] Almighty God is said in sacred writ to have
feet, and hands, and eyes, August. de genesis ad lit. lib. 6. cap. 12. and
octogin. quaest. 52. quaest. Thomas part. 1. quaest. 3. art. 1.
not properly, but metaphorically, not simply, but in a simile, nihil enim in
deo nisi deus, nihil habet in se nisi se, non partibus constat vt corpus, non
affectibus distat vt anima, non formis substat vt omne quod factum est, vnus
est, sed non vnitus as Lib. 5. de consid. ad Eugen.
Bernard excellently.

Now the word hand, in a borrowed sense signifies sometime counsel, as in the
words of David unto the woman of Tekoah, 2. Sam. 14. 19.
Is not the hand of Ioah with thee in all this? Sometime hand is used for
power, as Psalm. 102. 25. The heavens are the work of thy hands, and Ier. 18.
6. Behold says the Lord, as the clay is in the potters hand: so are ye in mine
hand. And Psalm. 136. 12.
David reports how God brought his Israel out of Egypt, with a mighty hand and
stretched out arm. Sometime the giving of the hand is a token of amity, so 2.
King. 10. 15.
Iehu to Ionadab, give me thine hand. So Galat. 2. 9.
James and Cephas and John gave to Paul and Barnabas, the right hand of
fellowship. In all these respects the hand of the Lord was with John, his
counsel and power, and love was with him. 1. John as being filled with the
holy Ghost had the spirit of Esa. 11. 2.
counsel, he was the forerunner of the Esa. 9. 6.
counselor, and so consequently well acquainted with that hidden Ephesians. 3. 4.
mystery of Christ in other ages unknown unto the sons of men. 2. The power of
the Lord was apparently with him in his conception and birth, in so much that
all marueiled at these things, and said in their heart, what manner of child
shall this be? 3. Gods grace and love was with him even from his mothers womb
both in his conversation and doctrine. See Illephons. Giron. Con. 3. in festo
Io. Baptist.

A man's writing is called his August cont. Faust. Man. lib. 14. cap. (...).
hand, so the Clyent has his lawyers hand to his bill, and the Merchant his
debtors hand to his book; the cunning Artificer also calls his painting his
hand, and his Caruing his hand; and so the pillar of Absolon is termed manus
Absalom in the vulgar translation, 2. Sam. 18. 18. After this manner the Lords
hand was with John, he was so powerful in his preaching, so sanctified in his
life, that every one might say with Psalm. 109. 26.
David, how that this is thine hand, and that thou Lord have done it. Diez. con
1. in fest. Io. Baptist.
A bird taken in the nest is so one made gentle; whereas a flying bird caught
in a net is hardly tamed: our blessed Savior enclosed his Apostles within the
net of his mercy when they were grown ancient; and therefore they forsook
their old nature with a great deal of difficulty; but he took John the
Baptist in the nest as it were, sanctifying him even in his mothers womb, so
that he was from his childhood Ioh. 5. ^5.
a burning and a shining light, that is, as Ser. fest. in loc.
Aquine glosseth, Ardens per exemplum, lucens per verbum.

God has two hands, a right hand of mercy, and a left hand of justice. So we
read in the Mat. 25. 33.
Gospel how Christ at the last day shall set the sheep on his right hand, and
the goats on his left. His right hand is full of mercies, able to guard, open
to give: Able to guard his people; for he says of it, Ioh. 10. ^8.
none shall pluck my sheep out of my hand; Open to give, for he does Psalm.
145. 16.
open his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse. In these two
respects his hands are termed by the Church as Cant. 5. 14.
gold rings set with the beril, that is, exceeding rich unto such as call upon
him. Romans 10. 12. the cup of wrath is in his left hand, Esa. 51. 17. The Dan.
5. 5. 25.
fingers of this hand wrote upon the plaster of ye wall of Balshazzars palace,
Mean, mean, Tekel, vpharsin. Of this hand Job said, withdraw thine hand from
me. Job 13. 21. And Heb. 10. 31.
Paul, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Now both hands of God are right hands unto the just and godly, Psalm. 37. 24.
though he fall he shall not be cast away, for the Lord vpholdeth him with his
hand, Romans 8. 28.
all things even woe so well as weal work together for the best unto him, he
finds and feels each hand of the Lord gentle, for Prou. 3. 16.
in his right hand is length of days, and in his left hand riches and glory.
Both hands of the Lord were so with John the Baptist, as that it was no wonder
if al men wondered at him. The first part of Zacharies hymn concerning Christ
and his kingdom, is expounded in the Liturgy tit. the Benedictus. The latter
touching John the Baptist and his office. Gosp. Sun. 3. and 4. in Aduent.

The Epistle,
ACTS 12. 1. At the same time Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex
certain of the Congregation, etc.
THis Chapter contains a relation of Herod's

bloody life, in Killing James the brother of John with the sword. Imprisoning
Peter.
terrible death, an Angel of the Lord smote him in the midst of his pride,
because he gave not glory unto God, so that he was eaten up of worms, and
gave up the ghost.


I am to treat of Saint James martyrdom upon his proper holy day, that which
especially concerns our present festival is S. Peter's imprisonment. Wherein
(according to the record of S. Luke) two things are more chiefly remarkable; to
wit, his

Durance by Herod's cruelty in apprehending and taking him, aggrauated by
circumstances of the cause why, for that it pleased the Jews. time when, in
the days of sweet bread.
holding and keeping him fast 1. He put him in prison. 2. He delivered him to
four quaternions of soldiers to be kept. 3. He caused him to be bound with
two chains. 4. He set keepers and a double watch over him.

Deliverance by Gods mercy, wherein also note the Motives, prayer with out
ceasing of the congregation. Mean, an Angel of the Lord. Manner, a light
shined, etc.

Because he s^w it pleased the Jews.] Herod persecuted the Saints of God
Calvin and Pelargus in loc.
not out of any hatred to Christ's gospel, or any love to Moses l^w, but only
to serve his own turn, namely, to please the people. So Pilat to content the
Jews (as it is apparent in the Mat. 27. Mark. 15. Luke 23. Ioh. 19.
gospels history) quit (...) a notable prisoner, Math. 27. 16. a notorious
murderer, Mark. 15. 7. but scourged Jesus, and delivered him into their hands
to be crucified, albeit he did openly confess that he was a just man, in whom
he could find no fault at all, John 19. 4. So Felix willing to get favor of
the Jews, left Paul bound Acts 24. 28. It is a base sin in a subject to be
made his Princes instrument in any wicked design, as 2. Sam. 11.
Ioab was king David's agent in murdering Vriah the Hittite, and the 1 Kings 21.
nobles of Iezreel Ahabs and Iezebels instruments in killing Naboth for his
Vineyard. But it is a most unworthy thing for a Prince to flatter* and to
follow his subjects in their giddie courses, for ordinarily the people walk
not in the best, but in the beaten way, ^eneca.
non qua eundum est, sed qua itur. It is a good Sir Fran. Bacon apolog. page 17.
observation that popular and military dependence in noble men to make them
great, are like I^arus two wings, which were joined on with wax, they will
happily for a while mount them aloft, and then fail them at the height. It is
therefore better to stand upon two feet, then to fly upon two wings, the two
feet are the two kinds of Justice, Commutati^e and Distributive, for great men
shall grow greater if they will advance merit, and relieve wrongs.

The scriptures are plentiful in this argument, Proverb. 1. 10.
If sinners entise thee consent not; Exodus 23. 2.
thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: Psalm. 1. 1.
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stood in the way of sinners, etc. If said Galat. 1. 10.
Paul, I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ: and therefore
let Princes and Prelates also take heed that they be not too popular in their
courses, always remembering the words of Peter and John Acts 4. 19. Whether it be
right in the sight of God to harken unto you more then unto God, judge ye.

2 From hence we may learn, that the wicked accord in doing mischief, though
otherwise they be most opposite. The Sadduces, Herodians, and Pharis^es were
Sectaries of diverse and Josephus antiquit. lib. 18. ca. 2.
adverse factions, all differing one from another, and yet all these joined
together against Christ, Math. 22. The Libertines, and Cyreneans, and
Alexandrians, and C^licians, and Asians disputed against S. Stephen Acts 6. The
Macedonians, Arrians, and Eunomians had Socrates hist. lib. 5. cap. 10.
confused language like the Giants in old time, who built the tower of Genesis 11.
Babel; and yet in malice they were lincked against the true Catholics. Herod
neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews Herod, yet both agree to vex the Church,
according to that in the second Psalm, The kings of the earth stand up, and
the rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed*
and therefore that Luke 7. 35.
Wisdom may be justified of all her children, let us which are true
Christians Eph^s. 4. 3.
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, being of Acts
4. 31.
one heart, and of one soul, of one Philip. 2. 2.
accord, and of one judgment, that as there is a society of Jesuits, a family
of Anabaptists, a brotherhood of Scismaticks; even so to confront all these,
let there be still a communion of Saints, and a perpetual holy league in truth
against all such as trouble Gods Israel. See Gospel Sun. 18. and 23. after
Trinity.

Then were the days of sweet bread] The feast of unleavened bread was
instituted by Exodus 12.
Moses according to Gods own direction, and afterward repeated by Duke Joshua
5. 10.
Joshua, and from his time celebrated by Gods people solemnly till this day
Aretius, Salmeron.
This circumstance then aggrauates the bloody sin of Herod, who did not
abstain from his mischeuous enterprises on a feast so high and holy. The Jews
observed their Easter in abstayning from leauened bread, the mystery whereof
and moral (as 1. Cor. 5. 7. 8.
Paul teaches) is, that we should purge the old leaven of sin, Church hom.
of the resurrection of Christ.
that corrupts and sowreth all the sweetness of our life before God, and
become a new lump void of the leaven of malitiousnes and wickedness: but Herod
here contrariwise sowred the whole dough with his leaven of mischief and
malice.

Again from hence we further observe Herod's Calvin, Kilius, Arcularius.
hypocrisy, who seemed to reverence the feast in such sort that he would not
slay* Peter in the days of sweet bread, and yet he caught him, and put him in
prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to be kept,
intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people: so the chief priests
who gave Judas Iscariot* thirty pieces of silver to betray Christ, afterward
said, Matthew. 27. 6.
it was the price of blood, and therefore not lawful for us to put them into
the treasury: so the Pharisees Matthew. 23. 24.
strayned out a gnat, and swallowed up a camel: so the Sea Epistle Sun. 1. in
Lent.
popish Monks hold it an honester thing for a priest to be entangled with many
concubines in secret, then openly to be joined in marriage with one wife.

He put him in prison Lorinus and glossa in loc.
.] Four things increase the miseries of a man in custody, the prison,
soldiers, chains, and keepers, all which Herod used in the persecution of S.
Peter at this time. 1. He put Peter in prison. 2. Aretius.
Doubting that the prison was not strong enough, he delivered him unto four
quaternions, Oecumen. vertit syrus sexdecem militibus.
that is, sixteen soldiers: for Lorinus.
quaternion is not as centurion a word of office, but of number. Now these
sixteen by four and four did every Arius montan.
six hours thoroughout the whole night and day watch Peter, or else every
Oecumen.
three hours in the night only: Ar^tius.
or it may be that all the sixteen did watch all the night, two within the
prison, and the rest in a guard without. 3. Herod fearing that his prisoner
notwithstanding all this might escape, caused him to be bound with two chains.
4. Least happily chains and all should fail, the keepers before the door kept
the prison, his intent was to make all sure, that he might after Easter bring
him forth, and expose him unto the peoples malice. Poor Peter was bound not
only with one, but with two chains, and he slept between two soldiers, and
he was guarded by two watches, the first and the second. So Dan. 3. 19.
Nebuchadnezzar full of indignation and rage commanded that the fiery furnace
into the midst whereof Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego were to be cast, should
at once be made hot seven times more then it was wont. So the persecutors of
Dan. 6. 17.
Daniel after he was thrown by them into the Lions den, laid a stone upon the
mouth of the den, least otherwise he might escape their violent jaws and
paws. So the Priests and Pharisees entreated Pilate when Christ was dead, that
he would give Matthew. 27. 64.
command for the making of his Sepulcher sure, least his disciples should come
by night and steal him away. Now the Lord who dwells in heaven, and is a
present help to his servants in trouble, Psalm. 2. 4.
laughs them to scorn, for when the three children were now ready to be cast
into the flames of the scorching furnace, they told Nebuchadnezzar unto his
face, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. And Daniel in the
Lions den had an Angel of God for his guard, who stopped the mouths of the
beasts, and so no manner of hurt was found upon him: and so S. Peter here,
though he were cast into prison, and bound with two chains, yet (having a good
cause and a good conscience) securely slept between two soldiers even the
night before cruel Herod would have brought him out to the people. The profane
Plaut. prolog. Amphit.
Poet spoke divinely, sat fautorum habet semper qui recte facit; and therefore
Peter in his indurance cast his Psalm. 55. 23.
burden upon the Lord, and said happily with Psalm. 4. 9.
David, I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord
only that makes me dwell in safety. God either delivers his servants out of
persecution, as he did Peter; or else if he crown them with martyrdom as he
did S. James, he will in his kingdom of glory give them in stead of this
bitter a better inheritance. August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 30.
Pro veritate morientes, cum veritate viuentes.

Prayer was made without ceasing of the congregation] Prayers and tears are
the Churches armor, and therefore when Peter was imprisoned by cruel Herod,
the congregation comes unto prayer, and not unto powder for his deliverance;
they did not assault the prison, nor kill the soldiers, nor break the
chains, only prayer and patience were there weapons, Salmeren tract. 35. in
Act.
arma christianorum in aduersis alia esse non debent quam patientia and
precatio: prayer (quoth Church hom. concernig Prayer, part. 2.
Augustine) is the key of heaven, and as it were that fiery chariot of 2. Kings
2. 11.
Eliah whereby we mount up and have our conversation with God on high, it is
the hand of a christian which is able to reach from earth to heaven, and to
take forth every manner of good gift out of the Lords treasure; so the
Scripture speaks in express terms, Mat. 7. 7.
ask and ye shall have, etc. The prayer of a righteous man avails much if
it be fervent, James 5. 16. Ask in James 1. 6.
faith, and then all things are possible to him that believes, Mark 9. 23.
Many times our Prayers are sent out like to incense made happily according to
the Lords direction, but not kindled with fire from his altar; that is,
petitions lawful enough and agreeable to Gods holy word, but not poured out in
feruency. We fall into them often without preparation, and utter a number of
words without devotion, and therefore no marvel if we miss, when as we thus
ask amiss. But if our prayer be like the Churches here, made without ceasing,
if it be faithful and fervent the God of all grace will out of the riches of
his mercy give us either that we desired, as James 5. 18.
Eliah prayed for rain and the heaven gave rain: or else that which is
better, as God took Deuteronomy. 34.
Moses into the spiritual Canaan, because he did not enjoy that earthly
Canaan: or at the least that which is sufficient, as he told Paul, 2. Cor. 12.
9. My grace is sufficient for thee. See Gosp. Sun. 5. after Easter,

There is nothing in the world Chrysostom.
more strong then a man who gives himself to fervent prayer, his devotion is
so powerful as that it Est quaedam omnipotentia praecum, Alstedius system.
Theolog. lib. 4. cap. 2.
commands all things in heaven, earth, and hell; it commands all the four
Elements, air, fire, water, earth: Air, James 5. 17. Elias prayed earnestly
that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three years and
six months, he shut up heaven as the Eccle. 48. 3.
wiseman reports of him, he said, 1. Kings 17. 1.
as the Lord God of Israel lives before whom I stand, there shall be neither
dew nor rain these years, but according to my word: again he prayed for
rain, and the rain fell, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Fire, the
same Prophet Elias by his prayers 1. King. 18. 38. 2. King. 1. 10. 12.
three times brought fire from heaven, Ecclesiasticus 48. 3. Water, at the
Exodus 14.
crying of Moses unto the Lord, the red sea run back and was made dry land,
so that Gods Israel walked upon firm ground in the midst of the sea: but
when their enemies pursued them, all the divided waters returned, and
overwhelmed them in the deep; and at the prayer of the same Moses, bitter
waters were made sweet, Exodus 15. 25. Earth, upon the complaint of Moses unto
God the Numb. 16.
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up Korath, Dathan, and Abiram, and all
their families, and all their goods: in so much that they together with all
theirs went down quick into the pit, and the ground closed upon them, and
they perished in the sight of Gods people. Nay the prayer of one devout man is
able to conquer an host of enemies in battle, for in the fight between
Israel and Amalek, Exodus 17. 11.
when Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed, but when he let his hand down,
Amalek prevailed. In this present text the prayer of the congregation without
ceasing fetched an Angel out of heaven, and brought a shining light into the
dark dungeon, and loosed the fetters from Saint Peter's feet, and the chains
from his hands, it brake thorough the first and second watch, and opened an
iron gate, and so delivered the servant of God from the waiting of the Jews.

What should I say more? prayer is so potent that it raises the 1. Kings 17.
21.
dead; it overcomes Genesis 19 22.
Angels, it casts out Mat. 17. 21.
Devils, and that which is yet more wonderful, it mastereth even God himself:
for when Genesis 32. 16.
Jacob wrestled with God, he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me: when the Lord said let me go, becomes it Jacob to say, I will not let
thee go: yea (beloved) there be some things wherein the Lord is very well
content that his servants strive with him, as namely, when they have his word
for their warrant, it is a commendable strife to take no refusal at his hand,
and in effect it is nothing else but a constant affirmation that his truth is
inviolable. So the woman of Mat. 15.
Canaan strove with Christ, she would take no denial of that which he had
promised: and blind Mark 10. Luke 18.
Bartimeus made Christ as he passed in his way to stand still, he could not
for the multitude lay hands on him, and yet his prayers reached unto him, and
held him fast until he received a comfortable answer, receive thy sight, thy
faith has saved thee. So when almighty God would have destroyed his people
because they worshipped the golden calse, saying, these be thy Gods O Israel,
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt; Moses fell down on his face
before the Lord, and prayed unto his God, he stood (says the Psalm. 106. 23.
Psalmist) in the gap as a mediator between God and his people to turn away
his wrathful indignation, and this prayer was so powerful, as that it
constrained the Lord in the midst of his anger to say unto Moses, Exodus 3^. 10.
let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them: all the powers of
heaven, and the crying of all men on earth are not able to hold the Lord from
doing any work he is about to do, for he can Esaias 40. 12.
measure the waters in his fist; and mete heaven with his spanne; and weigh the
mountains in scales; and the hills in a balance, Psalm. 135. 6.
what soever pleases him he does in heaven, and in earth, and in the sea: yet
the prayers of his children are able to bind him hand and foot, and to compel
him (as it were) to power down an undeserved blessing, and to turn away a
just deserved punishment: the very crying of an infant that vtters no distinct
voice, moves a mother unto compassion, and so the Lord pitying us as a Psalm.
103. 13.
father, and comforting us as a Esaias 66. 13.
mother, hears our very groans, and so Psalm. 145. 19.
fulfilleth our desires if we call upon him in faith and fear.

Now the reason why the prayers of the faithful are so powerful is, because
they be not ours, but the intercession of Gods own spirit in us, powered out in
the name of Christ his own son, in whom he is ever Mat. 3. 17.
well pleased. For as for us, Romans 8. 26.
we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request
for us with sighs which can not be expressed; it is the spirit whereby we cry
abba father, Bernard in festo Pent. ser. 1.
as in us the spirit makes request for us, so with the father he grantes our
suites, and forgiues our sins, that for which we pray even he gives unto us
who gives us this grace to pray: God inuiteth us to Mat. 11. 28.
come unto him, and to Psalm. 50. 17.
call upon him in all our troubles, and his holy spirit when as we present our
selves before the throne of grace helps our infirmities and makes
intercession for us: and therefore no marvel if the Lord be bound by devout
men with his own promises, as Judges 16.
Sampson was by Dalila with his own hair. Let these godly meditations
strengthen our feeble hearts and weak hands that they faint not in devotion,
but according to the pattern of the Saints here, and the precept of Paul
Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
elsewhere, we may without ceasing always pray, Zinchius in loc. ad Ephesians. see
Thomas 21ae. quaest. 8^. art. 14.
that is, upon all occasions offered as well for our selves as other: Nilus in
se^tentijs.
Omne quod agis ^ratione obsignato, id vero maxim de quo mentem vides
dubitantem.

Behold the Angel of the Lord was there present] I am occasioned here to treat
of two questions especially: The first concerning Angelical protection in
general, as namely, whether Angels help and keep men from evil or not? The
second whether beside the general protection of many or all Angels in common,
every man has one peculiar. Angel as his peculiar guard and guide? The
doctrine concerning Angelical protection in general at the first appearance
may seem strange, because the Scripture teaches us expressly, that Psalm. 37.
23.
the paths of man are directed by the Lord, and Psalm. 34. 18. Great are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all: and for this
so particular care and providence, God is often compared unto a Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
father, Esaias* 49. 15.
mother, Psalm. 23. 1.
pastor, Cant. 5.
bridegroom, Psalm. 18. 1.
buckler, Exodus 19. 4.
Eagle. etc. To show that he only is to us 1. Cor. 15. 28.
all in all: Esaias 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel know us not: yet thou O Lord art our father, and our
redeemer. As who would say, those that are fathers according to the flesh, are
not worthy of that name if they be compared with thee: can a woman forget her
child? and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though she should
forget (says the Lord, Esaias 49. 15.) Yet I will not forget thee; behold, I
have graven thee upon the palm of my hands, and thy walks are ever in my
sight. Ambrose.
If thou be burdened with unrighteousness, Christ is thy righteousness if thou
need help, he is thy strength: if thou fear death, he is life: if thou desire
heaven, he is the way: if thou hate darkness, he is light: if you seek for meat
he is food: for although he be but one in himself, yet he is all things unto
us for the relieuing of our necessities which are without number: and therefore
if the rule be true non sunt multiplicanda entia sine necessitate, what need
any man expect other side from other powers, though Angelical and never so
great, seeing almighty God himself is the Psalm. 111. 4.
keeper of Israel, our immediate protector, Psalm. 46. 1.
strength, hope, and help in trouble.

Thom. part. 1. quaest. 113. (...). and 2.
Answer is made that Angelical custody does not extenuate, but rather extol
the greatness and goodness of God toward mankind, for as much as it is an
execution of his high and holy providence. For as by the Chrysostom ser. de
ascens^m.
wisdom of an excellent Emperor, all the Towers, all the Cities, all the
Castles, are fortified with men and munition against the common enemies
assault, lest by barbarous invasion they should be destroyed: even so, because
the devils are in every corner raging and ranging for our overthrow, God has
ordained for our guard that an host of Angels should Psalm. 34. 7.
pitch their tents about us, and Psalm. 91 11.
keep us in all our ways. Indeed God is able to defend us himself by
himself thorough his immediate concourse which he has in all things, but to
manifest his abundant love to men which are Job 25. ^.
worms, and rottennes, and mere Psalm. 39. 6.
vanity, he does inioyne the pages of his honor and princes of his court, even
his glorious Angels to become messengers and Ministers for their sakes, who
shall be heirs of salvation, and that all the time of this life, in the hour
of death, and in the day of judgment.

The good which Angels procure to the Saints in this life, concerns either
the body or the soul: as for the body, these ministering spirits attend us even
from the beginning of our days unto the end, most carefully performing all
manner of offices appertaining necessarily to the preservation of our
temporal life. When Genesis 16. 7.
Agar cast out of Abraham's family wandered in the wilderness, an Angel appeared
unto her, and advised her to return to her mistress, and to humble her self
under her hands: the revenging Angels caught and carried Genesis 19. 16.
Lot out of Sodom and Gomorrha, before they did burn those Cities with fire
and brimstone. Genesis 24. 7.
Abraham as being assured of the protection of Gods Angels in all his ways,
said unto his servant, the Lord God of heaven who took me from my fathers
house, etc. will send his Angel before thee: when Genesis 32. 1.
Jacob feared his brother Esau, he met Angels coming unto him, and thereupon
he did acknowledge that they should be his guard in his journey, saying* this
is Gods host: an Angel appeared unto Duke Joshua 5. 13.
Joshua when he was about to sack Jericho, with a drawn sword in his hand as a
captain to fight for Israel: an Angel comforted and fed 1. Kings 19.
Elias when he fled from Iezebel: an Angel delivered the three children out of
the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. An Angel assisted Daniel in the Lions den, and
kept him also from all manner of hurt, Dan. 6. An Angel directed Mat. 2. 13.
Joseph, to fly into Egypt. An Angel ministered unto Mat. ^. 11. Luke 22. 43.
Christ in his heaviness, and in our present text the Lords Angel brought Peter
out of prison, and delivered him out of the hands of Herod, and from all the
waiting of the people of the Jews.

Angels procure good unto the souls of the faithful illuminando and
confortando says Part. 1. quaest.
Aquine, because they be maintainers and furtherers of the true worship of God,
and of all good means whereby salvation is attained. The Galat. 3. 19. Acts 7.
38.
law was delivered in mount Sina by the hands of Angels; an Angel expounded
unto Dan 9. 21.
Daniel the 70. weeks; an Angel forbids Apocalip. 19. 10.
John to worship him, and inioyneth him to worship God the creator of heaven
and earth; an Angel declared the will of God unto father Genesis 22. 12.
Abraham that he should not kill his son Isaac; an Angel revealed the mystery
of Christ's Luke 1. 31.
conception, unto the Virgin his mother; of Christ's birth, unto certain
shepherds in the field attending their flocks by night, Luke 2. 10. Of
Christ's resurrection, unto Mary Magdalen and other devout women, Mat. 28. 5. In
a word, Angels are pursiuants, harbingers, and Heralds betwixt heaven and earth
always in a readiness to make known the will of God unto men.

In the hour of death Angels convey the souls of the faithful, as they did
the soul of Luke 16. 22.
Lazarus into blessed Abraham's bosom. And in the day of judgment they shall
Mat. 24. 31.
gather together all Gods elect from the four winds, and from the one end of
heaven unto the other, that they may come before Christ and enter into the
fruition of eternal glory both in body and soul.

The use of this doctrine is manifold. 1. It serves to terrify the wicked who
despise Gods children, for so Christ himself reasons, Mat. 18. 10. Despise
not one of these little ones, because I say unto you, that in heaven their
Angels always behold the face of my father. It behoues reuiling scoffers
therefore to take heed who^ they mock, for though happily good men (called
little ones in respect of their innocence and humility) for their parts are
content to put up abuses and injuries; yet their Angels may take just revenge
by smiting them (as they did Herod in this Chapter) with heavy punishments for
their offenses.

2. This may teach us humility; for if Angels high and holy serve us, let us
not think it any bad or base duty to Galat. 5. 13.
serve one another in love.

3. We may learn from hence to behave our selves in open and in secret places
after a reverent and seemly manner, as being spectacles unto glorious Angels,
which are Bucan loc. com. tit. Angel. quaest. 34.
witnesses and obseruers of all our words and deeds. To this purpose 1. Cor.
11. 10.
Paul says, that the woman ought to have power on her head, because of the
Angels. Perkins expos. Creed tit. creation of Angels.
That is, not only the Ministers of the Church, but Gods heavenly Angels,
which daily wait upon his children and guard them in all their ways.

4. This ought to stir us up unto the Lords praise, saying with Psalm. 144. 3.
David, Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him, or the son
of man that thou should so regard and guard him? Alas all flesh is grass,
and man is like a thing of naught; yet behold if he truly love God, Romans 8.
28.
all things are for his good, for God is his father, the Church his mother,
Christ his brother, the holy Ghost his comforter, Angels his attendants, all
other creatures his Psalm. 8. 6.
subjects, the whole world his 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Inn, and heaven his John 14. 2.
home. I will end this observation with a meditation of S. Soliloqui. cap. 27.
Augustine.

O Lord, thou make thy spirits messengers for my sake, to whom thou have
given charge over me to keep me in all my ways, that I hurt not my foot
against a stone. For these are the watchmen over the Esaias 62. 2.
walls of the new Jerusalem, and of the mountains about the same, which
attend and keep watch over the flock, lest he as a Lion make a prey of our
souls, while there is none to deliver; he, I mean that old Reuelat. 12. 9.
serpent, our adversary the devil, who walks about as a 1. Pet. 5. 8.
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. These Citizens of Jerusalem above
walk with us in all our ways, they go in and out with us, diligently
considering how godly and how honestly we do walk in the Philip. 2. 15.
midst of a naughty and crooked generation, how earnestly we seek the Mat. 6.
33.
kingdom of God and the righteousness. (...) of; with what Psalm. 2. 11.
fear and trembling we do serve ^hee, and how our hearts Zacha. 10. 7.
rejoice in thee O Lord: those which labor they strengthen, those which rest
they protect, such as fight they encourage, they crown such as overcome, they
rejoice with such as Romans 12. 15.
rejoice, such I mean as rejoice in thee; and they suffer with such as suffer,
I say with such as suffer 1. Pet. 4. 14.
for thy names sake: great is the care which they have of us, and great is the
affection of their love toward us, and all this for the honor of thine
inestimable good will, wherewith thou have loved us: for they love those, whom
thou do love: they keep those, whom thou do keep: they forsake those,
whom thou do forsake: neither can they abide such as work iniquity, because
thou also Psalm. 5. 5.
hate all them that work iniquity. When we do well the Angels rejoice, but
the devils are sad: when we do ill the devils rejoice, but the Angels are sad:
grant therefore good Lord, that they may always rejoice over us, that both
thou always may be glorified in us, and we may be brought with them into
thy fold, that together we may praise thy name O creator both of men and Angels.

To the second quaere, whether beside the general protection of all Angels in
common, every particular man has one peculiar Angel for his guard; I find
that many learned and ancient doctors hold the affirmative part. So S. In
Psalm. 33. and 48.
Basile categorically, to every one that believes in Christ an assistant
Angel is appointed, unless we drive him away from us by our wicked actions;
for as smoke drives away bees, and stinch doves: so filthy sin the Angel
the keeper of our life. The which assertion he confirms Lib. 3. contra
Eunomium cir. prin.
elsewhere more at large by diverse testimonies of holy writ: so S. Com. in
Esaiae 66.
Hierome, that every one of us has his Angel, many places of Scripture teach,
as namely that of Christ, Mat. 18. 10. See that ye despise not one of these
little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels always behold the
face of my father, etc. As also that which is recorded, Acts 12. 15. It is
Peter's Angel: So Hom. 3. in 1. Coloss.
Chrysostom, every faithful one has his Angel, in deed at the first holy
Angels were according to the number of the nations, but now not so, but
according to the number of the faithful. So In Mat. 18.
Theophylact, all men, especially the faithful have their Angels. So In vita
Moseos.
Gregory Nyssen speaking of this argument insinuates that it was ordinarily
holden of the fathers, a true speech has descended unto us, by which we
believe that our nature since our fall into sin, is not altogether forlorn
of the divine clemency, neither left without his succor, but that then also
there is given to every man one of the Angels as an helper and protector. So In
Heb. ^. 14.
Primasius, unto every man (as the Doctors say) there is generally given an
Angel for his custody, and this either from his birth, or rather* from his
baptism. Unto these fathers I might add ^om. 8. in Genesis
Origin, (...). 30.
Iustine Martyr, Strom. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Soliloq. cap. 27.
Augustine, De praeparat. Euang. lib. 13. cap. 7.
Eusebius, etc. As also most of the I^ 2. sent. did. 11.
schoolmen, and Salkeld treat. of Angels cap 44.
many protestant divines.

Yet for mine own part I say ( saluo semper meliore iudicio) with Calvin
institut. lib. 1. cap. 14.. 7. An singulis sidelibus singuli angeli sint ad
eorum defensionem attributi pro certo asserere non ausim: and my reason is, for
that I see not any clear ground in holy Bible for such an assertion. The two
chief places in the judgment of all divines as well ancient as modern are
Mat. 18. 10. and Acts 12. 15. The first whereof (as Com. in loc.
Caietan and Ambros. Comps^ Epis. apud S. sen^n. Bibliothec. lib. 6. annot. 77.
other popish expositours observe) proves not evidently, that every little one
has one peculiar Angel for his guardian in particular, but only that all are
appointed over all in general, as the Scripture construeth it self Luke 15
10. Saying of every one of those little ones which turn from their sins,
that all Gods holy* Angels rejoice at it: and as for the words of the
disciples astonished at the sudden news of Peter's coming, it is not he, but
his Angel; D^ering lect. 6. in Heb.
answer is made, that this allegation is a very slender proof, because the
disciples in Mary's house being amazed upon the strange report of Rhode, spoke
they knew not what: so we might prove that the Saints departed may dwell in
tabernacles, because Mat. 17. 4. Mark 9. 5.
Peter said, Lord, let us make tabernacles, one for Moses, another for Elias:
and whereas it is further objected that they spoke after the common opinion of
men in that age; we reply that in those days it was a received opinion that
dead men did walk, as it appears by Mat. 14. 2.
Herod, who thought our Savior was John Baptist risen again from the dead.
Vox populi is not always vox dei, common errors are no certain rules of truth:
and what if that place were so manifest as they could wish it, why might it not
be construed thus, it is his Angel, Calvin instit. lib. 1. cap. 14.. 7. and
com. in loc.
that is, some Angel which almighty God has sent for his deliverance, this
being according to the Scripture more then that, to have it his particular
Angel; so the present text here, behold the Angel of the Lord was their
present, and a light shined in the prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and
stirred him up, saying, arise up quickly, and his chains fell from his hands,
etc.

The Gospel.
MAT. 16. 13. When Jesus came into the coasts of the city, which is called
Caesarea Philippi, etc.
THis Scripture being a dialogue between Christ and his Apostles, of it own
accord falls into two questions, and two answers unto those questions.

1. Quest. Whom do men say that I the son of man am? answer, some say thou
art John Baptist, etc. 2. Quest. Whom say ye that I am? answer, thou art the
Christ the son of the living God: the which answer is commended, blessed art
thou Simon, etc. rewarded, upon this rock I will, etc.

Caesarea Philippi] there were two Caesareaes, one called Joseph. antiq. lib.
15. cap* 13. and de bello iudaico* lib. 1. cap. 16.
Stratonis upon the mediterrane sea, which Herod sumptuously built in the
honor of Augustus Caesar, another called Caesarea Philippi, Joseph. antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 3.
founded by Philip ( Hierome Anselm.
brother of Herod the tetrarch who beheaded John the Baptist) in honor of
Tiberius Caesar at the foot of Libanon. Philip built, Aretius. Marlorat.
Iansenius.
or rather repaired and enlarged this town out of his serviceable love to
Caesar, but yet for his own glory he did add a Philippi to Caesarea. The
Papists in mingling the blood of their Saints with the precious blood of our
Savior, and in making themselves also (by relying too much upon their own
merits) half mediators, and joint purchasers of salvation with Christ, have
set up in the Synagogue of Antichrist as it were a Caesarea Philippi. The
Iesuited Papists especially swearing to the Kings Supremacy, with a Romish
equivocation, or Spanish reservation, add a Philippi to Caesarea. This as
Ardens.
some think was the City where the Kings in old time received their tribute,
and therefore the King of heaven aptly required of his disciples in the very
same place tributum confessionis: Diez con. 1. in fest. Pet. and Pauli.
or it may be that Christ exacted this confession of faith in the coasts of
Caesarea Philippi, to signify, that his Apostles should not only preach the
Gospel among the Jews, but also that Romans 10. 18.
their sound should go through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of
the world; or he made this demand far from Jerusalem out of the Scribes and
Pharisees hearing, Theophylact Iansen.
that they might the more fully and freely confess what they thought of him.

Whom do men say] He did not ask this question as being Euthym. Rabanus.
ignorant hereof himself, but to teach other, especially his Apostles, and
such as hold the like place, not to be Caietan Ardens Iansen ex origin.
negligent in examining what opinion the world conceiueth of them, that if they
hear ill, they may labor to cut off all just occasions of so bad a report: if
well, endeavor to deserve and preserve the same to Gods and the Gospels honor:
Aretius.
or he began with this quaere, whom do men say? that he might hereby come the
better unto that other, whom do ye say? he did not enquire what the
Theophylact Euthym.
Pharisees or Priests say, for they reputed him a Matthew. 27. 63.
deceiuer, a John 8. 48.
Samaritan, a Matthew. 11. 19.
glutton, and drinker of wine; but he does ask what the people say, for so
Luke 9* 18.
S. Luke does expound S. Matthew, whom say the people that I am?

The son of man] He did ordinarily use this style speaking of himself for
Ardens.
three causes especially, 1. To put us in mind how much he did abase himself
for our sake, Philip. ^. 6.
who being in the form of God, made himself of no reputation, and took on
him the form of a servant, and was found in shape as a man. 2. To confute the
August. haeres. 46.
Manichees and other Heretics denying his humanity. 3. By his example,
teaching us, how we should think and speak of our selves with humility.

Some say that thou art John Baptist, some Elias, some Ieremias.] Theophylact.
They who conceived he was John Baptist, agreed with Matthew. 14. 1.
Herod the Tetrarch, for when he heard of the fame of Jesus, he said unto his
servants, This is John Baptist, he is risen again from the dead, and therefore
great works are wrought by him: other thought him Elias, for that he did so
sharply rebuke all degrees of men in his Matthew. 3. Luke 3.
preaching: other said that he was Jeremy, for that he was endued with
excellent knowledge, which he learned of no man, and that as Jeremy 1. 5.
Jeremy from his childhood.

Ardens.
Hence we may learn, that the rumors of the vulgar sort are most usually
false, Bugs (as one Socrates.
said) to fear children and fools. Again we note here Steph. Guard. Ser.
before King Edw. 6. ann. 1550. ^dem Iansen con. cap. 66.
that there were sundry discrepant opinions of Christ among those who were not
of his school, some said he was John Baptist, other Elias, other Jeremy as,

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus; But his own disciples agreed
altogether in one truth, one speaking it, and all according in it.

Now the reason why men err so much, and have so many Creedes almost as heads,
is, because they be men; for Psalm. 116. 10.
all men are liars, and being left unto themselves are 2. Cor. 3. 5.
not able to think any thing which is good. The Philosophers ingenie was
great, and industry greater, yet because they were not guided by Gods spirit
their Romans 1. 21.
imaginations were so vain, that (as Lib. 8. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 3.
Augustine notes) alij atque alij, aliud atque aliud opinati, Scholars of the
same School differed among themselves, Idem lib. 18. De Ciuit. Dei. cap. 41.
dissenserunt a magistris discipuli, and inter se condiscipuli, never agreeing
in any thing but in the unity of vanity. The taletell Astrologers and
Chronologers are so constant in their inconstancy, that it is truly said of
them, Theodor. Bibliander de rat. temp. page 1.
inter horologia magis conuenit quam inter exactos temporum calculatores.
Annot. in Matthew. 21.
Erasmus has observed the like of the Rabbis, and all Heretics are in the
same predicament, for being once run out of Christ's School, they be divided
among themselves, having confused language like to the builders of Genesis 11. 19.
Bab^l, and contrary tales like to the wicked accusers of Susanna. Lucret.
(...) mari magno, etc. quoth a Poet, It is a view of delight to stand on the
shore and to see Ships tossed with a tempest on the Sea: or in a fortified
Tower to behold two battles join upon a plain: but it is a greater pleasure
for the mind of man to be firmly settled in the certainty of truth, and from
thence to descry the manifold perturbations, errors, wauerings and wanderings
up and down of other in the world. Blessed is Peter, and blessed are all such,
as Ephesians. 4. 3.
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, confessing
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

Whom say ye that I am] As who would say, men have diverse, yea perverse
judgments of me because they be mere men: but what say ye which are more then
men, as being directed by the spirit of God. For S. Hierome, Ardens, Anselme,
Druthmarus upon the place have noted an antithesis here, Hierom. in loc.
prudens lector attend, quod ex consequentibus textuque sermonis, apostoli
nequaquam homines sed dij appellantur. The sons of men as being Psalm. 62. 9.
lighter then vanity it self have many fond imaginations of me, but I would
know of you which are the sons of God, of you which have seen my wonders,
and heard my words, of you which have long conuersed with me, whom say ye that
I am? Simon Peter as the Maldonat. ex Augustine. and Chrysostom. in loc. Idem
Iansen. con. cap. 66.
mouth of the rest, and Steph. Gardener vbi sup.
head man of the quest, answered for Anselm.
all the company, saying, thou art that Christ the son of the living God, a
short, but a sweet confession, comprehending in one sentence the Melanct.
Marlorat. (...) Beza.
whole Gospel of Christ as well concerning his natures, as his offices: he
confesses his natures, in affirming thou which art the son of man, art also
the son of the living God: his offices, in auowing, thou art thaet Christ.

It is a witty saying of Sermon. 1. in epiphan.
Bernard, Fides linceos habet oculos, and therefore Simon Bar-Iona, though he
beheld Christ with his corporal eyes in the form of a servant as the son of
man, yet with his spiritual eyes of faith he perceived that he was also the
son of the living God. The Lord is termed a living God, to distinguish him
from Idols, which are dead Gods, Psalm. 135. 16.
having mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not, neither
is there any breath in their mouths. And for as much as Angels and Kings are
styled Gods in holy scripture, to distinguish him also from these living Gods,
he is called the living God, Acts 17. 28.
in whom all other Gods live, and move, and have their being. And because
Saints are called often sons of God, he is termed, (...) the son,
Theophylact. Caietan.
insinuating, that Christ is not a son of God by grace, but the son of God by
nature, that John 3. 16.
only begotten son of God, (...). As for his offices, it is said Aret^us.
Erasmus.
Emphatically, that Jesus is (...), not a Christ only, but also the Christ,
or, that Christ, even the promised Messiah of the world, for so that word is
expounded John 1. 41. We have found the Messiah, which is by interpretation
the Christ. Jesus then is that anointed of God, anointed with oil of gladness
Heb. 1. 9.
above his fellows, our anointed King to govern us, our anointed Prophet to
teach us, our anointed Priest, who did suffer and offer up himself for our
sins, and for the sins of the whole world. Lenit. 8. 12.
Aaron the Priest was anointed, 1. King. 19. 16.
Elisa the Prophet anointed, 1. Sam. 10. 1.
Saul the king anointed. In the Savior which is Christ, all these meet, that
he might be a perfect Savior of all, he was all. A Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck Psalm. 110. 4. A Prophet, to be heard when Moses should hold his
peace, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. A King to save his people, whose name should be the Lord
our righteousness, Jeremy 23. 6. David's Priest, Moses Prophet, Ieremyes King,
and these formerly had met double, two of them in some other; Melchisedeck,
King and Priest; Samuel, Priest and Prophet; David, Prophet and King, never all
three, but in him alone, and so no perfect Christ but he: but he all, and so
perfect. Thus in S. Peter's confession every particle and article has his
force, thou which art the son of man, as being borne of Mary the Virgin, art
the Christ the son of the living God. S. Luke Luke 9. 10.
reports that Peter answered the Christ of God, and Mark. 8. 29.
S. Mark says only, thou art Christ, whereas our Evangelist here, thou art
the Christ, the son of the living God, Steph. Gardener vbi s^p.
but all in effect is one, seeing Christ alone is the whole: for he that
confesses thoroughly Christ, is thoroughly a Christian, and does hereby
confess him to be the son of God, and savior of men, even that anointed 1.
Pet. 2. 25.
Bishop of our souls, who Romans 4. 25.
dyed for our sins, and is risen again for our Justification, and Heb. 9. 24.
appears in the sight of God for us as our agent and John (...). 1.
advocate.

Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona] upon Peter's answer, thou art the Christ the
son of the living God. Jesus replied after this sort, Chrysostom. Theophylact.
Iansen.
as if he should have said, I am the natural son of God, as thou art the son
of Iona. Mystically Simon signifies obedience, and Jonas a dove: to Ste.
Gardener.
signify that every Scholar in Christ's School must have these two
properties, obedience, and simplicity. Curious pride is a great let in
Christianity, James 4. 6.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The Philosophers in
Romans 1. 22.
professing themselves to be wise, became fools, and were so far from
acknowledging Jesus for the son of God, as that the preaching of Christ
crucified seemed foolishnes unto them, 1. Cor. 1. 23. Erasmus.
or Simon is called the son of a dove, because flesh and blood revealed not
this mystery, but the holy spirit which appeared in the likeness of a dove,
Matthew. 3. 16. or as Com. in loc.
Hierome, Bar-Iona is put for Bar-Iohanna the son of John, as Christin the
21. Chap. of S. John's Gospel at the 15. verse. Now Iohanna signifies the grace
of God, insinuating (as the same Father and Anselm. Ianse^.
other Doctors observe) that Peter in understanding this hidden mystery was
the son of grace, so Christ in the words immediately following, flesh and blood
has not opened that unto thee, Hilarious.
not my flesh and blood, for if thou look upon me with a corporal eye, thou
see a man and nothing else: not thy flesh and blood, non consanguinei Anselm.
thy father and thy mother taught it not, Ardens.
this knowledge comes not from other men, or from thy self, no flesh and
blood, Euthym.
that is the will and wit of man (as Paul Galat. 1. 16. I communicated not with
flesh and blood) I say the wisdom of man has not opened this unto thee, but
my father which is in heaven, as Ser. 2. in not. Pet. and Paul.
Le^ the great glosseth it, non opinio te terrena fefellit, sed inspiratio
caelestis instruxit. Faith is the John 6. 29.
work of God, and Matthew. 11. 27.
no man knows the son but the father, and no man comes unto me except my
father draw him John 6. 44. Blessed art thou therefore Simon Bar-Iona, because
my father which is in heaven h^th inspired this confession into thee: blessed
art thou here, yet more blessed hereafter, as having hereby the 1. Tim. 4. 8.
promises of the life present, and of that which is to come. So truth it self
tells us expressly, John 17. 3.
this is eternal life to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. He that
is a true believer is De^t. 28.
blessed in the City, blessed in the field, blessed in his going forth, and
blessed in his coming home, blessed in the Psalm. 128.
labors of his hands, in the fruit of his ground, in the flocks of his sheep,
blessed in his wealth, and blessed in his Psalm. 119. 71.
woe, blessed in his health, and blessed in his sickness also, for the Lord will
comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed, and make his bed in his sickness,
Psalm. 41. 3. blessed in all his life, blessed in his hour of Apoc. 14. 13.
death, and most blessed in the day of Judgment, when he shall have perfect
consummation of bliss both in body and soul, Come ye blessed inherit ye the
kingdom, etc.

Upon this rock will I build my Church.] Stephen Gardener preaching upon this
text before King Edward the 6 said, It is a marvelous thing that upon these
words the Bishop of Rome should found his Supremacy, for whether it be super
Petram, or Petrum, all is one matter, it makes nothing at all for that his
purpose: This place (quoth he) serves only for Christ, and nothing for the
Pope; but afterward in the days of Queen Fox Martyr. example of John Rogers
Martyr.
Mary, reading this Scripture with the Popes own spectacles, he maintained
that the bishop of Rome was the supreme head of the Catholic Church, and he
bloodily persecuted all those which held the contrary doctrine. And after him
in our age De Romans pon. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Bellarmine, Tom. 1. ad an. 34. fol. 207.
Baronius, and other Papists of most eminent note for learning, cite this text
as a pregnant testimony, to prove S. Peter's Lordship over the rest of the
Apostles, and so (though inconsequently) the Popes unlimited Jurisdiction over
all the Bishops in the world, wherein (as our Divines have showed) they
contradict 1. the Scriptures, 2. the Fathers, 3. their own writers, 4. their
own selves.

The Scriptures affirm plainly, that the Church is Ephesians. 2. 20.
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone, to wit, a Esaias 28. 16.
tried stone, a precious stone, a sure foundation, and 1. Cor. 3. 11.
other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

The Fathers auow likewise that Christ is the rock upon which his Church is
built, so Tract. 124. in Joan. and ser. 13. de verbis dom. secundum Mat.
S. Augustine in many places of his works, Petrus a Petra, non Petra a Petro,
quomodo non a Christiano Christus, sed a Christo Christianus vocatur: upon this
rock then I will build my Church, is nothing else but upon my self the son
of the living God I will build my Church, aedificabo te super me, non me super
te, and whereas he did once construe this of Peter, he Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21.
retracted his opinion, and expounds it of Christ, Com. in Amos 6.
Hierome, Moral. lib. 31. cap. 34.
Gregory the great, In Ephesians. 2.
Primasius, In loc.
Anselm accord in the same judgment.

Other of the most ancient fathers interpret it thus, upon this rock, that is,
upon this faith as being a firm rock, upon this confession ( thou art the
son of the living God) I will build my Church, and hell gates shall not
prevail against it. So S. Lib. 6. in Luc. cap. de inter. Jesus.
Ambrose, fundamentum ecclesiae fides est: so Hom. 55. in Mat.
Chrysostom, upon this faith and confession I will build my Church, Idem
operis imperfect hom. 7.
fortitudo fidei petra est, propter quam Simon dictus est Petrus: so In loc.
Theophylact, this confession is the foundation of all such as believe: so
Inter opera Nyssen. latin. Basiliae fol. 255.
Gregory Nyssen, delect. testimon. ex vet. testament. de sanct. trinit. contra
Iudeos, upon this rock, that is upon this confession of me to be the son of
the living God: so S. Exposit. in epist. Joan. tract. 10.
Augustine, upon that which thou have acknowledged and said, I will build my
Church: so Cyril and Hilarious and other Doctors apud Maldonat. in loc. In one
word Jonas sometime Bishop of Orleance writes peremptorily Habetur in monument.
patrum fol. 1578. See B. Tonstal se^. before K. H. ^. on Palm. Sun. and letter
to Car. Poole apud Fox Martyr.
lib. 3 de cultu imaginum, that many, yea most expound ( upon this rock) to be
nothing else but upon this confession of faith in saying thou art the Christ,
the son of the living God: so that I am occasioned here justly Rat. 5.
to return Campians flourish upon the papist, patres admiserit, captus est:
excluserit, nullus est.

Their own writers in their commentaries upon this text accord with us and the
fathers about this exposition, as namely Hugo Cardinal, ord. gloss. Dio.
Carthusia; Soarez Epis, Conimbricensis; Johan. Arboreus; Johan. Ferus; Alphons.
Tostatus and many more. I conclude this observation with Lib. 6. in Luc. cap. de
interrog. Jesus.
Ambrose Christ denied not to his disciple, the grace of this name that he
should be called Peter, because he had solidity of constancy, and stedfastnes
of faith of the rock, endeavor therefore that thou may also be a rock,
seek the rock not without thee, but within thee, thine act is thy rock, thy
mind is thy rock, let thine house be built upon this rock, that it may not
be beaten with any storms of spiritual wickedness: faith is thy rock, faith
is the foundation of the Church, if thou be a rock thou shall be in the
Church, because the Church is upon a rock, etc.

De Romans pont. lib. 1. cap. 10.. respond. fidem.
Bellarmine being compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses answers by
distinction, affirming that faith as it is considered in it self is not the
foundation of Gods house, but as it has a relation unto the person of Peter:
in which assertion he contradicts himself Lib. and cap. vbi sup. praefat.
Tom. 1. and cat. cap. 1.
elsewhere both alleging often and approving also the saying of Augustine,
Domus dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur. As to
make an house (says he cap. 1. cathechis.) it is needful first to place the
foundation, then to raise the walls, and last of all to cover it with the
roof, and to do these things there be some instruments necessary: so to make
in our selves the building of salvation, we need the foundation of faith, the
walls of hope, the roof of charity, and the instruments are the most holy
Sacraments. It is Bellarmines opinion then in that place, that faith in
abstracto considered without any mention of any relation unto Peter is the
foundation of our justification and eternal salvation. Now the universal
Church, and every particular temple of the holy Ghost (as Com. in Mat. 16.
Theophylact observes) have one and the same foundation, and that is faith, and
that faith is not the personal and particular faith of Peter alone, for hell
gates (as In loc.
Abulensis notes) have prevailed against it, and In loc.
Lira tells us that many Popes have bin Apostataes, and Io. In loc.
Arboreus confesses honestly that Romanus pontifex potest esse schismaticus
and haereticus. It is a seely shift of Dialog. 1.
Alanus Copus to say that Peter denied not the faith of Christ, but, his faith
saved, he denied no more then Christ: for as reverend Defense of Apolog part.
6. cap. 5. division. 2.
Jewel acutely replies, by this pretty trick a man may have both Christ
without faith, and also faith without Christ. The fathers then in making faith
the foundation of Gods house, mean the common faith (of which a confession is
made here by Peter as the mouth of his fellows, and type of the whole Church)
it is the D. Mortons Apolog. part 2. cap. 21. obiec. 5.
Creed of the Apostles, and not the singular belief of Peter only. Saint Paul
told his Ephesians that they were built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; Lombard, Anselm,
Caietan, in Ephesians. 2.
that is, upon Christ as being the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
upon that Salmeron in 2. ad Ephesians. disp. 6.
faith and doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles taught in the Ambros. in 2.
ad Ephesians.
old and new testament, the sum whereof is briefly this, that Jesus is that
Christ the son of the living God. The same Paul in the same letter affirms
that there is but one Lord, and but one faith: Vna (quoth 22 ^. Quaest. 4. art.
6.
Aquine) ratione obiecti, sed diuersa ratione subiecti, faith in regard of her
especial object is but one, because there is but one Lord the son of the
living God; but it is diverse in respect of diverse believers, all which are
Peter's and living stones in the building of Gods house, 1. Pet. 2. 5. If
Bellarmine then understand by the faith of Peter that general faith that was
in all the Apostles, who did all by Peter's mouth confess the same: D. Fulke in
loc.
then are they all by Christ's answer made foundation-stones of the Church as
well as Peter. It is certain that Christ had his Church from the beginning of
the world built upon the foundation of the Prophets, himself being the corner
stone set up in the most conspicuous place thereof, and a head stone in the
very top and highest part of all, and therefore he speaks in this text of the
continuance and enlarging of his Church among the Gentiles by the ministration
of his Apostles.

Among other contradictions of the Papists, it is an axiom received in their
own Thom. 1. part. quaest. 1. art. 10. and Caietan, ibid.
school, symbolica theologia non est argumentatiua, that is, we may not fetch
an argument in divinity from allegories and metaphores, unless we can
elsewhere show that the same thing is taught in a literal sense, but the
Papists are not able to produce so much as one Scripture where Peter is
expressly called the foundation of the Church, ergo to raise his absolute
Monarchy upon the bare metaphor of a rock, is not to build on a firm rock,
but upon the fickle sand: how they further oppose the fathers, and Esaias 19. 2.
Aegiptian-like fight one against another in their expositions of this place,
see Doctor Fulke in loc. D. Sutlif. de Romans pon. lib. 2. cap. 2. 3. 4. D.
Morton Apolog cat. part. 2. lib. 5. cap. 21. 22. M. Mason tract. of
consecration lib. 4. cap. 2. but especially Causabon exercit. 15. ad annal.
eccles. Baron. where you shall find every word of this our text examined most
exactly.

The Epistle,
ACTS 11. 27. In those days came Prophets from the City of Jerusalem unto
Antioch, etc.
THe contents of this text are dearth and death; the dearth is general, a
great dearth thorough out all the world: the death is particular, of one person
only, to wit of James the brother of John whose memory we celebrate this day.

In the dearth observe

1. Gods justice in punishing the wicked, with a dearth, and that a great
dearth, and that through out the world. 2. Gods mercy in preserving the godly,
foretelling it by his Prophet Agabus, and so consequently preventing the rage
of it by the provident care and charitable contributions of Disciples and
brethren.
In the death observe the

Murderer, Herod the King. Martyr, James the brother of John. Matter, or cause
why for that he was of the Church. Manner, with the sword.
Dearth is one of Gods four sore judgments Ezechiel 14. 21. Barrennes of the
ground is a maine string of his whip against sin, when (says Ez^ch. 14. 13.
he) the land sins against me by committing a trespass, then I will stretch
out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and
will send famine upon it. If ye will not obey me, nor hearken unto my
commandments, Leuit. 26. 19. Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass, your strength shall
be spent in vain, neither shall your land give her increase, neither shall the
trees of the land give their fruit. Famine then is brought upon a kingdom by
Amos 3. 6.
Gods appointment, and that for the sins of the land: and surely Saint Luke
Gualter in loc.
points at the causes of this universal dearth in saying it came to pass in
the days of Claudius Caesar. For by the worlds Emperor we may judge much of
the worlds estate, the vices of Princes first infect the nobles, and then
afterward the nobles infect the gentlemen, and the gentlemen in fine corrupt
the commons, Traian. symb. vti Reusner. in symb.
qualis rex, talis grex, such prince such people. It is reported of this
Claudius that he did Xiphilin in vita Claudij.
indulgere conuiuijs and concubitibus effusissime, growing thorough his
intemperance so dull and unfit for any good service, that his Sueton. in
Claudio.
mother used to say he was a monster of men, a work of nature begun, but not
finished: he got his Empire by corrupting the soldiers, and during his reign
he served his belly, committing all uncleanness Ephesians. 4. 19.
even with greedines, no marvel then if the Lord sent a dearth in the days
of Claudius, no wonder if he denied the fruits of the ground unto such a
drunken and dissolute generation: in our age more then one Claudius reigns,
there be many Kings of good fellows in the world; drunkenness domineers in
every place (the country village not excepted) abusing the manifold blessings
of God in wantonness and idleness: and therefore we may fear justly, that the
Lord ere it be long will send some great dearth among us, as he did in the
days of our forefathers: he has already Psalm. 7. 13.
whet his sword, and bent his bow, and prepared his arrowe to shoot at us, he
has in these latter years turned our winters into summers, and our summers
into winters, so that whereas Luke 10. (...).
Christ said the harvest is great, and the laborers are few: we contrariwise,
the laborers are many, but the harvest is little; he has in the spring nipped
the fruits of our trees, and in autumn taken away the flocks of our sheep,
he has also cursed our Deuteronomy. 28. 17.
basket and our dough, in so much as the poor have long felt a dearth, and the
rich also begin to fear a famine, the which is the Sea Lorin. in loc. and in
Act. 7. 11.
most grievous of all the four sore judgments of God, for the noisome beasts
and the sword kill in a moment, but there be many lingering deaths in a dearth,
as the Ierem. Lament. cap. 4. 9.
Prophet in his lamentations, they that be slain with the sword are better
then they that be killed with hunger, and to the same purpose De re milit. lib.
3. cap. 3.
Vegetius, ferro saeuior fames: And as for the pestilence, there was always in
nature so well as in name so great affinity between (...) and (...), that (as
Galen. apud Lorin. in loc.
Physicians and experience daily teach) after a great dearth ordinarily there
follows a great plague, because men in a scarsity of victuals are constrained
out of necessity to feed on unwholesome and unsavory meats: in holy Bible we
find example that extreme hunger made mothers murderers, and so turned the
sanctuary of life into the shambles of death. Lamentat. 4. 10. The hands of
pitiful women have sodden their own children, which were there meat in the
destruction of the daughter of my people. Famine then as S. Ser. 3. contra
diuites auaros.
Basile terms it, is the top of all humane calamities, for whereas the
noisome beasts, and the sword, and the pestilence make quick dispatch out of
misery: fames diutius malum, ocyus torquet, lentius tabefacit, sensim occidit.

In this great dearth it is certain that the godly suffered among the wicked,
the good among the bad, the believing Christians among unbelieving Gentiles:
the Church of Antioch (as we read in the former part of this present Chapter)
endued with many notable graces and adorned with this eminent honor, that the
Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch, is afflicted now with a
grievous dearth, I say now Gualter.
when her goods were partly taken away by the rage of persecution, and partly
given away to releive the poor brethren: all the world was infested with this
dearth, and the Church (in these respects) more then all other of the world.

Now the reasons are manifold why God suffers his own people to be crossed: 1.
To bridle the lust of our flesh, that we should not be 1. Cor. 11. 32.
condemned with the world: 2. To teach us patience, saying with holy Job 2. 10.
Job, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
3. To show that he is as well able to deliver us in adversity, as to keep us
in prosperity. Psalm. 37. 19. The godly shall not be confounded in the
perilous time, and in the days of dearth they shall have enough. So we find
here that God in his Habacuc. 3. 2.
anger remembering mercy, comforted his Church in this universal hunger-rot
over all the world: first in foretelling it, and afterward by stirring up the
charitable minds of good people to prevent the furiousnes of it as well in
themselves as in other, he foretold this famine, for Amos 3. 7.
surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret unto his
servants the Prophets. He foretold the flood, unto Genesis 6.
Noe; the destruction of Sodom, to father Genesis 18.
Abraham and righteous Genesis 19. 13.
Lot; the dearth in Egypt, unto Joseph; Genesis 41. And here the Prophet Agabus
Calvin, Salmeron, Arcularius.
not by starre-gazing, or figure-flinging, or coniu^ing, or any curious art,
but by the spirit signified that there should be great dearth thorough out all the world, which also came to pass in the days of Claudius the Emperor.

It is objected here which is said, Mat. 11. 13. All the Prophets and the law
prophesied unto John, how then could there be Prophets in this age? to this
objection answer is made, that the Musculus, Aretius. in Mat. 11. See Lorin.
in Act. 2. 17.
meaning of those words is, that Christ is the Romans 10. 4.
end of the law and the Prophets, and so consequently their office who
prophesied he should come, was at an end when John the Baptist had openly
preached that he was come: but there continued still in the Church other
Prophets of another kind, for Christ ascending up on high gave gifts unto men,
and ordained some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4. 11. Now these
Prophets are such as Lombard. Aquin. in Eph^s. 4.
interpret the words of the Prophets, as 1. Cor. 14. 4. He that prophesies
edifieth the Church, and Mat. 23. 34. Behold (says our blessed Savior) I send
unto you Prophets, that is, preachers. Or else Prophets are such Anselm, Beza,
Zanchius.
as by the powerful instinct of the spirit foretold things to come, as the
four daughters of Philip, Acts 21. 9. And Agabus in this history. See further
Epist. on S. Marks day.

Then came Prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch] Lorin. in loc.
Happily to get some releife for the poor brethren in Jury: or else to
confirm the new planted Church in Antiochia, for as the 1. Cor. 1. 22.
Jews required a sign, so the Grecians sought after wisdom. And therefore
the Prophets in speaking with diverse tongues, and in foretelling things to come
manifested exquisite wisdom among those conuerts, and thereby strengthened
them in the faith: it is said here that many Prophets came from Jerusalem, and
yet Agabus only stood up, and signified by the spirit that there should be
great dearth in all the world, hereby showing that every Prophet had his
particular gift, and that in a certain proportion according to the will of the
spirit dividing to every man a several grace, 1. Cor. 12. See epist. 2. Sun.
after the Epiphan. and 10. Sun. after Trinity.

Then the Disciples every man according to his ability purposed to send
succour] There be two principal heads of Christianity, faith and good works.
The Disciples of Antiochia were so thoroughly converted unto the faith of
Christ, as that they received this honor to be the first of all the world
that were called Christians. And Iustus, Jonas, Gualter.
now they show their faith by there good works, in sending succor unto the
brethren in Jury. Faith is operative, made full, and fat, and fair by deeds of
charity, for so Chemnit. loc. com. tit. de bonis operibus quaest. 4.
Luther and Chemnitius write, Alsted. System. Theolog. lib. 3. loc. 17.
fides est radix charitatis, and charitas est fructus fidei, fides efficit
filios dei, charitas probat. And it has often been objected against the
professors in our age, Camden. epist. before his Britan.
that our forefathers in the days of ignorance did more then they knew: but we
living in the great light of the Gospel know more then we do: many purpose
much in their mind, and promise much also with their mouth, who fail
notwithstanding in performance. The witles unthrift has a purpose sometime to
follow the works of his calling diligently, yet either all the day bowling or
bowzing hold him as a prisoner in his idleness: a factious schismatike promises
under his hand conformity, yet sometime to please the people he runs a
course contrary to the proceedings of the Church; even the best men have their
fallings and failings in this kind, for after we purpose to visit the sieke,
and to send succor unto the poor brethren, either our pleasures abroad, or
else profit at home keep us (often I fear) from so good a work: but it is
said of the Disciples here, that they did not only purpose to relieve the
distressed members of Christ among the Jews; but also that they performed it
indeed: so the text, which thing also they did, and sent it to the Elders by
the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Gueuara epist.
One said that hell is like to be full of good wishes, but heaven full of good
works. If a good motion then arise in our mind let us instantly cherish it,
and if it break forth into promise, let us according to our ability perform
it.

Worldly minded cormorants in a dear year desire to make the famine greater,
Brentius in loc.
quanto aestu, quanto astu, how do they sweat in brain and body to hord up
corn to their neighbors hinderance, if these Merchants had the spirit of
prophecy but one year they would afterward turn Gentlemen all the days of
their life. But the Christians of Antiochia contrariwise being admonished by
the Prophet Agabus of a great dearth in all the world, consult presently how to
lessen and mitigate the furiousnes of it, as well in other as in themselves:
and this provision and prevention is not against our Mat. 6. 25. 34.
Saviors precept, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, care not for the morrow, because Christ in so saying only forbids
extraordinary diffidence, not ordinary providence; immoderate carking, not a
moderate care: for every man must Ephesians. 4. 28.
labor in his vocation, and 1. Tim. 5. 8.
provide for his own, namely for them of his household, otherwise he denies
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. If it be not lawful to care
prouidently for to morrow, wherefore should the Genesis 41. 35. 48.
scripture magnify the wisdom of Joseph, in laying up corn for seven
years to come. Wherefore did Solomon commend the good housewife Proverb. 31.
13. and send the sluggard unto the pismire Proverb. 6. 6. Wherefore did 2. Cor.
12. 14.
Paul advise fathers to lay up for their children; wherefore had Benjamin a Genesis
44. 12.
sack, David a 1. Sam. 17. 40.
scrip, Christ himself a John 13. 29.
bag, See Epist. 3. Sunday after Trinity.

Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Aristotle requires in true liberality these four circumstances, especially

quid, what. quibus, to whom. quando, when. quomodo, how.
The Disciples of Antioch observed in their alms all these, first for quid,
they gave neither too little, which had been miserableness, nor yet too much,
which on the contrary had been prodigality; but every man sent succor
according to his ability. We must in deed give said Mat. 5. 42.
Christ omni petenti, but as Lib. 1. de ser, dom. in monte.
Augustine glosseth it sweetly non omnia petenti, we may not exhaust the
fountain of bounty, but so give to day that we may likewise give to morrow,
and that not niggardly, for 2. Cor. 9. 6.
he that sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally.

2. The Disciples here gave quibus unto such as they should, in sending succor
unto the brethren who dwelt in Iewry. De benefic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Seneca said, beneficia sine vllo delectu proijcimus magis quam damus: as
therefore they did not give profuse but according to their ability, so likewise
not confuse, but addressed their alms unto those who wanted most, and had
deserved best of them. The brethren in Iewry had more need then Infidels in
Antiochia, because they were Heb. 10. 34.
spoiled of their goods as Paul witnesses in an Epistle to them. And these
conuerts of Antiochia were debtors unto the Jews, Brentius, Calvin, Arcularius.
as having received the sweet comforts of the Gospel from them. It is our duty
to Galat. 6. 10.
do good unto all men, especially to those which are of the household of faith,
and among the household of faith above the rest unto such as have been our
spiritual fathers in 1. Cor. 4. 15.
begetting us unto Christ. Romans 15. 27.
If the Gentiles be made partakers of the Jews spiritual things, their duty
is to minister unto them in carnal things, as 1. Cor. 9. 11.
Paul told his Corinthians, if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it
a great matter if we reap your temporal things? This pattern condemns
exceedingly the practice of some professors in our age, whose chief policy,
yea piety consists in contriuing how to lessen the Clergy-mans estate. The
Merchants trade concerns our dainty diet and bravery, the Lawyers occupation
our goods, the Physicians art our body; but the Pastor has a cure of our
souls: now says Christ in the Gospel, Mat. 6. 25.
is not the life more worth then the meat, and the body then raiment? and the
soul more precious then Mat. 16. 26.
all? and yet the carnal Gospellors envy not the prodigious wealth of
Merchants, of Lawyers, of Players, all is well if the Priest be poor, this
upon the point is their only Diana both in public parlie, and in private
conference; they labor to decrease the Ministers wages, and yet increase his
work: the which is like Pharoes oppressing Gods people mentioned Exodus 5. get
you straw where ye can find it, yet shall nothing of your labor be
diminished. I know worldlings entertain some Prophets kindly, but it is not as
Mat. 10. 41.
Christ said in the name of a Prophet, it is happily for that the Prophet is a
kinseman, or a Gentleman, or a merry man, a good neighbor, a good fellow, a man
of their own humor; but a Prophet is not embraced of them in the name of a
Prophet. The disciples of Antiochia because they received the Gospel of some
Jews, acknowledged themselves debtours unto all Jews: but uncharitable
factious hypocrites in our time because they have received a little hard usage
from some one Preacher, hate the whole reverend order of the Clergy for the
same, Hierom. epist. ad Nepo. devita Cleric.
neminem hic specialiter me us sermo pulsauit, generalis de vitijs disputatio
est, qui mihi irascuntur Idem epist. ad Rustic. de viuendi forma.
suam iudicant conscientiam, and multo peius de se, quam de me iudicant.

3. For quando, they provided a medicine so soon as they heard of the malady,
when Agabus had signified by the spirit, that there should be great dearth in
all the world, then the disciples every man according to his ability, purposed
to send succor, etc. A good man is Psalm. 1. 3.
like a good tree that will bring forth fruit in due season. Proverb. 13. 12.
Hope deferred is the fainting of the heart: one bird in the hand is worth two
in the bush, in giving of alms bis dat qui cito dat, is a better rule then
sero sed serio: a late largess contents not a distressed soul so much as a
little given opportunely, non bona tam pensat quam benefacta deus. De benefic.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
Seneca who spent many hours in discussing of this argument, gives this
advise, fac si quid facis, tarde velle nolentis est, an non intelligis tantum
te gratiae demere, quantum morae adijcis, est proprium libenter facientis cito
facere. Lend to thy neighbor in time of his need, Ecclesiast. 29. 2. it is not
a good turn, unless it be done in a good time.

4 For quomodo, the disciples of Antiochia bestowed their alms cheerfully and
carefully. Aretius, Brentius, Calvin.
Cheerfully, for that every man according to his ability purposed to send
succor, it was an act not enforced by law, but only proceeding out of their
love, the which exceedingly commended their bounty, for a benefit consists in
the mind more then in the mine, Seneca de benefic. lib. 1. cap. 5.
manu non tangitur, animo cernitur, and multo gratius venit quod facili, quam
quod plena manu datur: and it is said in holy scripture that God loves a
cheereful giver, 2. Cor. 9. 7. John 7. 38.
He that believes in me (quoth our blessed Savior) shall have rivers of
living waters flowing out of his belly, Tyndal prolog upon Exodus
that is, all good works and all gifts of grace spring out of him even by their
own accord, thou need not to wrest any good deeds out of him, as a man
would wring veriuce out of crabs, because they flow naturally out of him as
springs out of rocks. Again the disciples here gave their alms carefully,
using trusty messengers and ministers in this business: they sent not their
succor unto the people promiscuously, but to the governors and elders of the
Church, that it might be distributed with discretion and distinction, according
to the several necessities of the Saints; and that it might be safely conveyed
unto the brethren, it was delivered into the hands of Barnabas and Saul, men of
Concerning Paul's care, see Romans 15. 1. Cor. 16. and 2. Cor. 8.
approved credit.

Hitherto concerning dearth, it remains I should now speak of death, to wit,
of S. James martyrdom, and in it first of the murderer Herod the king, not
Herod the great, who butchered the Bethlehemitish innocent infants Matthew. 2.
nor Herod the Tetrarch, who beheaded John the Baptist Matthew. 14. but Salmeron,
Arcularius.
Herod Agrippa, grandchild to Herod the great, the which I find thus
distinguished in Guido ex Lyran. and Aretius, ex Barthold^. in loc. See D.
Hanmer notes upon Eusebius hist. lib. 2. cap. 10.
verse.

Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Ioannem,
Agrippa Iacobum, claudens in carcere Petrum.
This Herod stretched out his hands, and Kings have Non nosti longas regibus
esse manus? Ovid.
long hands, not to cherish, but to vex: for Tyrants delight most in
destructive power: Aretius.
not to vex ruffians, or ribalds, or robbers, but certain of the Church:
Marlorat.
for the Devil and all his instruments are disquieted at the light of the
Gospel. Herod therefore stretched out his hands against the Church, and vexed
certain, Salmeron.
that is, some who were strong soldiers in fighting the Lords battle, for
God will not suffer the weak to be tempted above there ability, 1. Cor. 10.
13. First, Herod killed James the brother of John with the sword, and afterward
he proceeded further and took Peter also. James first drank of Christ's cup,
and Pelargus.
so consequently (...) the first of all the twelve Apostles in Christ's
kingdom, according to the request of his mother in the Gospel allotted for
this day: now the reason why God suffers blody tyrants to vex his Church is
Ardens, hom. in Epist. in festo Petri.
threefold. 1. For the trial and exercise of the godly, quod enim fornax auro,
quod lima ferro, quod aqua panno, hoc confert tribulatio iusto. 2. For the
confusion and illusion of the wicked, because sanguis martyrum is semen
ecclesiae. 3. For the manifestation of his infinite power and wisdom, who can
bring light out of darkness, and use wicked instruments unto good purposes.

The Gospel.
MAT. 20. 20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedeus children with her sons,
etc.
THere be two parts of this Scripture

1. An indiscreet petition, in which observe the Mouer of the suite, a woman
and a mother. Manner of suing, she came worshipping him and saying, etc. Suite
it self, grant that these my two sons, etc.
2. A discreet answer to the same containing a Correction in particular,
addressed especially to the mother and her sons, ye wot not what ye ask,
etc. Direction in general, unto the rest of his Disciples and in them unto all
Christians, ye know that the princes, etc.

Then came to him the mother of Zebedeus children This woman (as it is apparent
by comparing Mat. 27. 56. with Mark 15. 40.) Was Solome, the sister (as
Aretius in loc. vide Thom. Aquin. in Galat. 1. lect. 5.
some think) of Joseph, husband unto the blessed Virgin mother of Christ. Her
sons were Mat. 10. 2.
James and John, James the greater, so called Aquin vbi sup.
for that he was elected an Apostle before James the son of Alpheus,
otherwise styled James the Mark 15. 40.
less. Raulin. ser. 2. de Jacob maio.
Or James the greater, because he was more familiar and great with his master
Christ then that other James, (for as we read in the Gospels history) Jesus
suffered none of his Apostles to see his Mat. 17. 1.
transfiguration, or the raising of Luke 8. 51.
Iairus daughter from the dead, save Peter and James, and John: or James the
greater, Didac. de yanguas con. de S. Jacob.
for that he was endued with great courage to drink first of Christ's cup, and
to become the first Martyr of all the 12. Apostles: his brother John was John.
21. 20.
the Disciple whom Jesus loved, who leaned on his masters breast at supper,
unto whose care Jesus on the cross commended his mother, John 19. 27. These
two move their mother, to move their master for their advancement, it was she
who came worshipping Christ and desiring, etc: but it was by the Augustine,
Ardens, Anselm.
suggestion and instigation of her ambitious children. And Hierom. in loc.
therefore Christ in his answer said not, thou know not what thou do
ask, but ye know not, addressing his speech unto the sons, so well as to the
mother: and indeed Saint Cap. 10. 37.
Mark reports expressly that they came to Christ in their own name to make
this suite, they did use the mediation of their mother happily Paludensis ser.
de S. Iacob^.
that if Christ in any sort misliked the request, it might be thought a fond
woman's error; if approved, then it might be granted easily to a mother
earnestly suing for her sons. Now (says our text) when the ten heard this,
they disdained at the two brethren: all the twelve were faulty, two sinned in
ambition, and ten in envy. Isti (quoth In loc.
Anselm) ambitiosi, illi inuidiosi, vtrique tamen nobis profuerunt. James and
John were carnal in their pride, the rest as carnal in their malice: yet we
may reap benefit by them all. For Melancthon. Marlorat, Mollerus.
here we may see that even the best men have their infirmities, and they be
recorded in holy Bible for our Romans 15. 4.
learning, that we might neither presume, because the chief Saints have had
their slippes: nor yet despair, because Christ himself forgiues them, and
inioyneth other also to strengthen them. Galat. 6. 1.
If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one
in the spirit of meekenes, considering thy self least thou also be tempted.

In the manner of Solomes suing, observe the time when, and how she sued: then
came the mother of Zebedeus children, etc. Hierom. Anselm, Caietan.
That is, after Jesus had took his Disciples apart in the way to Jerusalem,
and had said unto them (as you may read in the words a little before this text)
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered unto
the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him unto the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to
crucify, but the third day shall he rise again. When the sons of Zebedeus
heard this, instantly they conceived, that Christ after his resurrection would
Acts 1. 6.
restore the kingdom of Israel, and so reign as a Monarch in this present
world. Wherefore they thought it a fit time now to make some motion for their
promotion in his kingdom, namely, that one might sit at his right hand, and
the other on his left in glory. For the better effecting whereof their mother
Solome comes unto Christ, and worshippeth him, and desires, etc. Ambitious
wretches (as S. Jude speaks in his Epistle) have the persons of men in
admiration for advantage, Eccles. 29. 5.
till they receive, they kiss their hands, and humble their voice. So long as
they be mendicant, they be Friars obseruant, what will they not say, what will
they not do, to serve their own turns: the mother here comes worshipping and
fawning, and her sons flattering and lying, for in the judgment of Chrysostom.
Theophylact, Euthym.
many learned Doctors they did answer rashly, we are able. Christ himself was
afraid to drink of this cup, Mat. 26. 39.
O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not
as I will, but as thou will. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his master
is, and the servant as his Lord, Mat. 10. 25. If James and John had advisedly
considered of the business, they would not have given a peremptory possumus,
but have rather answered in the words of 2. Cor. 3. 5.
Paul, of our selves we are not sufficient, all our sufficiency is of God,
Philip. 4. 13.
able to do all things thorough the help of Christ who strengthens us.
Ambition is charities ape, for as 1. Cor. 13. 7.
love for verity, so ambition for vanity, suffers all things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things. An ingenious man assuredly
makes a parenthesis of his good nature, whilst he runs ambitious courses,
he seldom or never returns to himself and true sense, till his suites end.
For he must (if he will understand his trade) turn Magdeburg. epist. praefix.
cent. 7.
Gnatho pleasing every man's humor, as a reed shaken with every wind, blowing
hot and cold out of the same mouth, holding dissimulation Budaeus lib. 5. de
ass.
and impudence commendable virtues, in a word making preferment his God, and
Mammon his mediator.

Grant that these my two sonnes] Solome Paludensis.
seems here to beg of Christ for her children especially three things. Ease,
riches, honor: Ease, that they may sit: Riches, in thy kingdom; Honor, one
on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, Iansenius, Didac. de yanguas.
that is, next unto thy self, and before the rest of their fellows, on
Caietan.
each hand first: it is ordinarily seen that mothers are more fond in their
love, and more solicitous in their care for their children then fathers are,
Esaias 49. 15.
can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? the reason hereof (as Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 7.
Aristotle teaches us) is twofold. 1. Because mothers are best assured that
their children are their own: 2. Because mothers endure more pains then
fathers in breeding in bearing, and in bringing up of their babes; honor thy
father that begat thee, (said Proverb. 23. 22.
Solomon) and thy mother that bare thee*: that bare thee nine months in her
womb, twelve months in her arms, many years in her heart. Hierom. epist. de
suso^cto contubernio.
Illa te diu portauit in vter^, diu aluit, and difficiliores infantiae mores
blanda pietate sustinuit, lauit pannorum sordes, and immund^ saepe foedata est
stercore, etc. Wherefore though a father in respect of his dignity (being
Thomas 22^. quaest. 26. art. 10.
principium generationis nostrae per modum agontis) is to be loved more then
our mother, as being rather principium per modum patientis and materiae; yet
our mother (as Epist. 19.
Phalaris advises) is to be reverenced so much, if not more then our sire, for
her affectionate tender care. S. Confess. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Augustine writes of his mother. Monica, maiori solicitudine me parturiebat
spiritu quam carne, and in Confess. lib. 9. cap. 9.
another place, ita pro nobis omnibus curam g^ssit quasi omnes genuisset, ita
seruiuit quasi ab omnibus genita fuisset.

Ye wot not what ye aske] for either ye err very much in the matter, or else
in the manner; in the Marlorat, Mollerus, Kilius.
matter, if ye think that my kingdom is of John 8. 36.
this world: in the manner, if ye desire to sit in my kingdom, before ye have
drunken of my cup: I must (as ye shall one day further understand) first Luke
24. 26.
suffer, and then enter into glory. Mat. 16. 24.
If any man will be my Disciple, let him forsake himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me; you must enter into my kingdom thorough many
tribulations, Acts 14. 22. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm.
126. 6. He that will have wages at night, must labor first about the Lords
vineyard in the day, Mat. 20. 8. None receive the price before they run, 1.
Cor. 9. 24. And if any man also strive for a mastery, yet is he not crowned
except he strive as he ought to do, 2. Tim. 2. 5. Well then (I tell you the
truth) if ye seek to sit on my right hand and on my left in my kingdom, ye
must first drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with, Theophylact, Euthym, Ardens.
that is, ye must of necessity bear the cross, before ye can wear the
crown. Apocalip. 3, 21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
over came, and sit with my father in his throne, when holy Moses Exodus 33. said
unto the Lord, I beseech thee show me thy glory; the Lord answered, thou can
not see my face, but thou shall see my back parts. Didat. de yanguas con. de
S. Jacob.
Insinuating hereby that we can not enter into Christ's glory, unless we follow
him, and see his hinder parts in this world; why Christ called his sufferings a
cup, and baptism: see Iansen. concord. cap. 104. Theophylact, Aretius,
Marlorat, Maldonat, in loc.

Ye shall drink indeed of my cup] Origin. apud Aquin. caten. in loc.
he said not ye can, as being able by their own virtue: but ye shall, as being
made able by grace: but how did they drink both of Christ's cup seeing John is
said in Ecclesiastical history to have dyed in his bed peaceably? Apud
Paludens. in loc.
Remigius answers in one word, bibit Iacobus in passione, Ioannes in
persecutione. James drank of Christ's cup in his martyrdom being slain with
the sword by cruel Herod, as our Epistle this day witnesses, and John tasted
of Christ's cup, as being banished Apocalyp. 1. 9.
into the Isle Pathmos for the word of God, and for the witness of Jesus Christ.
John drank of the cup of Hierom.
confession as the three children in the fiery furnace, though he were not
actually martyred, actually I say, for in his Missu^ in feruentis olci dolium
sieve solium illaesus exijt. Baron. ad an. 99
readiness to suffer he was a very martyr, yea the 10. Os^rius in Euang. fest.
10. Euang.
Proto-martyr, suffering for Christ under the cross when he saw Christ suffer
on the cross.

But to sit on my right hand, or on my left is not mine to giue] Christ says
in this Gospel Chap. 11. verse 27. All things are given unto me of my father,
and chap. 28. 18. All power is given unto me both inheauen and in earth, and
John 14. 2. In my fathers house are many mansions, and I go to prepare a place
for you, and Luke 22. 29. I appoint unto you a kingdom, etc. How then is it
true to sit on my right hand, and on my left is not mine to give? S. Lib. 1. de
trinit. cap. 12.
Augustine, Epist. 141. ^ Caesarianos.
Basile, Apud Paludens* in loc.
Remigius, and Ambros. lib. 5. de fide cap. 3.
other answer thus, it is not mine to give as I am a man, and allied unto you:
but as I am God, equal to my father and heir of all things. Or as Hom. in loc.
Ardens it is not mine to give you now, namely before ye have drunk of my cup.
Musculus, Iansenius.
Or it is not in my power to give as you conceive, to wit in respect of kindred
and alliance. Ardens, Di^at. de yanguas.
By which example Bishops may learn not to prefer their nephews on their
right hand and on their left hand in their diocese, except they be men of
merit. For God says expressly, non afcendes per gradus ad altar meum, Exodus
20. 26. And Melchisedeck the first Priest is said, Heb. 7. 3. To have hin
without father, without mother, without kindred, hereby signifying that we must
ascend to dignities in the Church of God not by degrees of Consanguinitie, but
by steps of virtue: or it is not mine to give to Epiphan. here is. 69. Idem
Hierom. Chrysostom. Maldonat in loc.
such as you are now, namely to proud and ambitious men, according to that in
the 101. Psalm, verse 7. Who so has a proud look and an hie stomach, I
will not suffer him in mine house, so that (as Vbi sup.
Ambrose notes) Asserit non sibi potestatem deesse, sed meritum Creaturis; or
as Christ here construeth himself, it is not mine to give, but it shall be
given unto those for whom it is prepared of my father. John 10. 30.
I and my father are one, and therefore most Aretius, Musculus.
unfit either for you to request, or for me to grant any thing contrary to the
determination of my father. His kingdom is an inheritance Mat. 25. 34.
prepared before the foundations of the world, Romans 8. 30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he
also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Concerning
Christ's direction here following addressed unto all his Apostles, and in them
unto all Christians: see Gospel on S. Bartholomewes day.

The Epistle.
ACTS 5. 12. By the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders showed
among the people, etc.
SOme thing in this Epistle concerns more specially the Pastors, by the hands
of the Apostles were many signs and wonders showed; some thing more specially
the people, the people magnified them, and the number of them that believed in
the Lord both of men and women grew more and more; some thing generally both
Pastors and people, they were all together with one accord in Solomon's porch,
Calvin. in loc.
insinuating that it was their ordinary custom to meet in that holy place
not only to preach and pray; but also to consult about the proceedings of the
Gospel and business of the Church. From which assembly no convert absented
himself either upon any proud opinion of his own private conceits, or under
pretense Aretius.
that the Temple was now superstitiously profaned, or for fear of the common
enemy the Iustus Jonas in loc.
Pharisees especially: but all, (...), according, concording, joined together
for the good of the public weal. Wherein observe not only their unanimity,
but also their magnanimity, not only their loving carriage one toward
another, but also their resolution and zeal for the Gospel, exposing
themselves unto very much danger in a place of such sort and resort. The chief
point is the working of miracles by the hands of the Apostles, and that is
nothing else but an execution of Christ's promise, Mark. 16. 17. 18. In my name
they shall cast out devils, and they shall lay their hands on the sick, and
they shall recover, etc. of which I have sufficiently spoken in my notes upon
the Gospel on Ascension day.

The Gospel.
LVKE 22. 24. There was a strife among them which of them should seem to be
the greatest, etc.
CHrist in this Scripture teaches his Apostles ambitiouslie contending for
rule,

1. By precept, The kings of the nations, etc. but ye shall not so be, etc. 2.
By pattern, I am among you as one that ministers, etc.
But ye shall not so be] Or as S. Mat. 20. 26.
Matthew, it shall not be so among you. Now this kind of speech is used in
holy Scriptures, and in our english tongue two manner of ways, either
forbidding a thing to be done, or else foretelling a thing not to be done: as a
master in saying to his servant, this shall not be done to day, forbids a thing
to be done: but when an Astronomer says of the weather it shall not be cold,
or hot, upon such a month or day, he does not forbid, but only foretell a
thing that shall not be: so the words, (...), are used Apocalip. 10. 6. and 22.
5. According to this twofold acception I find a twofold construction of this
clause ( but ye not so) first, by way of prophecy; secondly, by way of
proposition or prohibition: if it be taken Prophetically, then it is a
prophecy concerning the disciples estate either in this, or in the world to
come. If in this life, the meaning is briefly this, the kings of the Gentiles
do reign, and they that are in authority are called benefactors; but ye not
so: that is, I do foreshew unto you that ye shall not be so; as if he should
say, they in their government are called benefactors, but you exercising
authority shall be called malefactors: they ruling ill are called good men, ye
ruling well shall be reputed evil men: John 16. 33.
in the world ye shall have affliction, and ye must of necessity drink of my
cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, and so Christ
is made to speak that in this place which he says Mat. 10. 20. John 15. 20.
elsewhere, The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
Lord: if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them
of his household. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: me,
who came to minister unto them, and to give my life for them; even so you,
which in your authority shall intend the good of all, and spend your lives in
serving them all. This sense doubtless is true, for by woeful experience we
find it to be so, when as See dangerous positions under pretense of
reformation lib. 2. cap. 5. 7. 8. 10. 11. 12. 13.
among us some for their superiority, are called Antichrists; other for their
authority, tyrants; other for restraining the licentiousness of certain
factious people, persecutors.

If we take ( but ye not so) for a Prophecy touching the life to come, the
meaning is, the kings of the Gentiles have lordship over them, etc. but ye not
so: that is, in my kingdom (which you falsely conceive to be upon earth) I
do foretell unto you, that it shall not be so. For though I appoint unto you
a kingdom, and ye shall eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit
on seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel in my kingdom: yet my kingdom
is not of John 18. 36.
this world, ye shall not (I assure you) tyrannise in heaven, as the kings of
the nations upon earth. This sense likewise is good, and fitting other places
of Scripture, but it does not fit our present text: for it will appear by
comparing one Evangelist with another that Christ's Piscator schol. in Mat. 20.
26.
(...), it shall not be, is nothing else but (...), let in not be: for whereas
Saint Mark says, chapter 10. 43. shall be your servant, and verse 44. shall
be servant of all: S. Matthew chap. 20. 26. has it in terms imperative, let
him be your servant, and S. Luke here, he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the least, and he that is chief, as he that does serve. These terms of
command insinuate that our blessed Savior spoke ( vos autem non sic)
imperatiuely, forbidding a thing to be done. Wherefore let us examine two
points especially; first what is said; secondly, whom it concerns.

T. C. Reply to D. Whitgif^s anwere to the admonit. page (...). sect. 1. 2.
Some refer so to the word benefactors, here translated gracious Lords,
making the sense to be, they that are in authority are called gracious Lords,
but ye not so; that is, ye shall not be called gracious Lords. T. C. Vbi sup.
page 10. Marlorat. and Piscator in Mat. 20. 25. 26.
Other refer so to the verbes, reign and rule, making the sense thus, the
kings reign, and great men rule, but you not so; that is, ye shall not rule:
other attribute so to the same verbes, yet make the construction otherwise, the
kings of the Gentiles do rule, but ye not so: Theophylact, Euthym. Bucer,
Musculus, in Mat. 20.
that is, ye shall not so rule, to wit as the kings of the nations rule. So
that either titles of honor are forbidden as gracious Lords, or ruling, or
else so ruling. The Nouelists in the first exposition have condemned the titles
of our Archbishops, in the second, the jurisdiction of our Bishops; our D
Whitgift defense of his answer to the admonit. cap. 1. division. 1. following
the Doctors above cited.
Divines therefore like best of the third, affirming that Christ here
prohibited neither titles of honor, nor ruling, but only so ruling.

Not titles of honor, as Lord, ruler, benefactor: for as Christ in saying Mat.
23. 8.
elsewhere, be not ye called Rabbi for one is your master: and call no man
father upon (...), for one is your father which is in heaven; and be not called
Doctors, etc. D. Whitgift vbi sup. cap. 2.
Forbids not simply the names of Rabbi, father, and Doctor; for a child may
call his parent father, and a scholar may call his teacher Doctor, and a
servant may call him under whose government he lives master; and so Paul called
himself the 1. Tim. 2. 7.
Doctor of the Gentiles, and the 1. Cor. 4. 15.
Corinthians father. As I say Christ there forbids not absolutely the names of
father and master, much less the functions: but only the pharisaicall
affection, and arrogant affectation of superiority: so Christ here likewise
forbids not his Apostles to be called Lords, or rulers, or benefactors: but
condemns only the carnal ambition of these titles, and insolent using of the
same. For we read in holy Scripture that these titles were given to Christ and
his Disciples, as John 13. 13. Ye call me master, and Lord (says he) and ye
say well, for so am I. Yea his Apostles are styled by that title which is
rendered elsewhere Lords, Acts 16. 30. Lords, what must I do to be saved, said
the Iaylor to Paul and Silas, and yet they reprehended not this title, which
they would have done had it been unlawful; as Acts 14. 15.
Paul and Barnabas rebuked the men of Lystra when they would have sacrificed
unto them as unto Gods, O men why do ye these things? so likewise Preachers of
the word are styled rulers, Heb. 13. 7. Remember those which have the rule over
you, who have preached unto you the word of God: and verse 17. of the same
Chapter, Loquitur hoc de pastoribus ^cclesiae sicut D. Fulke, Marlorat.
P^scator in loc.
obey those which have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls. Hence the parsonages in England were termed anciently
rectories, and the parsons rectors: as for the style gracious Lords, urged so
much by the T. C. vbi s^p.
Nouelists against our reverend and honorable Primats: answer is made that
there is not one syllable in the word (...) that signifies a Lord. It is true
that our learned English interpretours in old time sought by (the periphrasis)
gracious Lords, to set down the meaning of Christ, using Lord for a title of
honor, and gracious for a title of doing good. But our new translation
expresses it better in reading benefactors: the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them are called
benefactors: so Beza, benefici vocantur: so the vulgar latin, Erasmus, To.
Stephanus and other as well ancient as modern interpretours: so that the
clause vos autem non sic, is referred by the two other Evangelists, and almost
all D. Whitgift vbi sup.
learned expositors unto the fond ambition and tyrannical oppression of the
Gentile Kings, and not unto their titles or names. Indeed we find that the
Kings of Calvin apud Marlorat. in loc. Mat. 20. 25. See prolog. of
Ecclesiasticus and Strabo Geograp. lib. 17.
Egypt and of other Cleomenes K. of Sparta so called.
nations vaine-gloriously desired to be called (...) munificent benefactors,
when as they deserved rather the names of tyrants and oppressors: as the Popes
of Rome have called themselves (I verily think contrary to Christ's but you not
so) Clement, Pius, Boniface: when they were most unmerciful and impious
malefactors. All that may be gathered hence then is, that the Kings of the
Gentiles assumed flattering titles unto themselves, being indeed nothing less
then that which their styles imported; and it may be a good admonition for all
men, especially for Clergy men, to frame their lives answerable to their names
and titles of honor given unto them. An ambitious desire to be called
benefactor is prohibited here, but the name it self is commendable, for Saint
Peter applies it unto Christ, Acts 10. 38. Jesus of Nazareth went about doing
good, and S. Paul exhorts Galat. 6. 10.
us to do good unto all men, especially to them of the household of faith.

As for ruling, we say that it is against all sense, that where the titles of
rulers are given, there ruling should be denied: nay Christ in the words
immediately following ( he that is greatest among you, let him be as the least,
etc. Insinuates that there must be some great among them. He says not (as
Com. in Mat. 20. 26.
Musculus observes) no man ought to be chief among you, which he would have
said, if it had not been lawful in the kingdom of God for some to be great
and chief, or if it had bin necessary that all should have bin in all things
equal. The celestial spirits are not equal, the stars are not equal, the
disciples themselves were not in all things equal. It is not therefore Christ's
meaning to have none great or chief among Christians, seeing our state
requires necessarily that some be superior, and other inferior, So In Mat.
20. 26. Id^m Luther postil mayor. in festo. Bartho.
Martine Bucer, the fond Anabaptists collect here that no man may be together a
Christian, and a magistrate, because Christ said to his Disciples it shall not
be so among you, not considering that those which according to the will of the
Lord bear rule godly, nihil minus quam dominari, immo maxim seruire, and
tanto pluribus quanto pluribus praefuerint, do nothing less then domineere,
yea verily do most of all serve, and even so many do they serve, over how many
soever they bear rule. So Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and it is the
D. Whitgift vbi sup.
common opinion of other writers that these words of Christ do not condemn
superiority, Lordship, or any such like authority: but only the ambitious
desire of the same, and the tyrannical usage thereof. If Christ here would
have forbidden civil government in all men, he would have said the Kings of
Israel have rule, but ye not so: or if his intent had bin to forbid it in
Ministers only, then he would have said, the Priests of Israel rule, but ye not
so; but in saying the Kings of the Gentiles bear rule, but ye not so: he does
evidently show that he mislikes only such an insolent kind of ruling as the
Gentiles used. He condemns neither temporal authority, nor Ecclesiastical:
not temporal authority, whether it be supreme or subordinate; not supreme,
for Acts 25. 11.
Paul appealed to Caesar as supreme governor, aduising every soul to be Rom
13. 1.
subject unto superior powers; not subordinate, for S. 1. Pet. 2. ^3.
Peter gave this rule concerning rulers, submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as to the chief head, or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the laud of them that do well.

Not Ecclesiastical authority, for S. Acts 5.
Peter notwithstanding this (but you not so) iudicially sat upon Saphira^ and
Paul exercising this authority delivered 1. T^m. 1. 20.
Hemineus and the incestuous 1. Cor 5. 5.
Corinthian unto Satan. And the same Paul exhorts Timothy the Bishop of
Ephesus, 1 Timothy 5. 19.
against an elder receive none accusation under two or three witnesses. He
grants unto Timothy, to receive bills of complaint, and so iudicially to proceed
against Elders in citing them, and examining them, and if need be deposing them.

Well then, if Christ here forebad neither titles of rulers, nor yet ruling it
self whether it be civil or ecclesiastical: it remains that he prohibited
only so ruling, that is, such a tyrannical kind of government as the Gentile
Kings used, and that ambitious desiring of the same which ruled in them. And
indeed Christ often in the Gospel uses to call back those that are his from
errors and corrupt affections by the behavior of the Gentiles, Mat. 6. 7. The
Gentiles do think that by their much babbling they shall be heard, be not ye
therefore like unto them, and in the same Chapter verse 31. 32. Take no
thought, saying what shall we eat or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall
we be clothed (for after all these things seek the Gentiles) but seek ye
first the kingdom of God, etc. And that this is Christ's meaning, I prove by
these three reasons collected out of the context it self, 1. he says Mat. 20.
25. and Mark 10. 42. Ye know that the Kings of the Gentiles, speaking of
those rulers they knew, and they were tyrants and oppressors, as Pontius Pilate
who condemned Christ an John 19. 4. 16.
innocent, in whom he found no fault; and Mark 6. 20. 27.
Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the Baptist (a just and holy man whom he
reverenced and heard in many things) at the request of his minion; and Herod
the great who butchered all the male children in Mat. 2. 16.
Bethelem, and under pretense to worship, eagerly sought to worry Christ in his
cradle: ye know that these Kings now reign, but ye not so, that is, I would
not have you so to reign.

2. (...), used in Mat. and Mark is to tyrannize; so learned Erasmus in his In
Mat. 20.
paraphrase, qui principatum gerunt inter gentes, dominatum ac tyrannidem
exercent in illos quibus imperant, and in his annotations, dominantur in eas,
sieve adv^rsus eas. So Musculus in his comment upon these words in S. Matthew,
non regunt populum, sed premunt, suisque affectibus seruire cogunt: so Com. in
Mat. 20. 25.
Benedict. Aretius, (...), est dominari cum aliena Cum acerbitate quadam, as
the compiler of the lesser and latter annotations under Bezaes name, in Mat.
20. 25.
tyrannide, and (...), in potestate violenter tenere: (...) is taken in other
places of the new testament, as namely, 1. Pet. 5. 3* and Acts 19. 16. Whereas
it is objected that in our present text the simple verb is used, and therefore
not tyranny but jurisdiction is forbidden: answer is made that this of Saint
Luke must be construed by the places of Mat. and Mark, seeing all three mean
one and the same thing by the concent of all Harmonies.

3. Christ expoundes himself thus in the words immediately following, let the
greatest among you be as the least, and the chief as he that serves. Ardens,
Musculus, Bucer.
As if he should say, the Kings of the nations are tyrants in their government,
making mischief their minister, and lust their law: but I would have you to
bear rule so moderatly, that even the sovereign may behave himself as a
servant, and the master as a Minister. I would have Princes among you to be
Esaias 49. 23.
nursing fathers unto the Church, and Prelates among you to be Ephesians. 4. 11.
pastors of my people. So S. 2. Cor. 4. 5.
Paul exercising authority, said, we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to
be the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake, and in 1. Cor. 9. 19.
another place, I made my self a servant unto all men. A Minister must (as it
is in our english phrase) s^rue his cure, a magistrate must also minister unto
those which are under him, even the King himself is a great servant of the
common weal: he must (as Job 29. 15.
Job speaks) become eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, he must with
Plutarch com. adprin. indoctum.
Epaminondas watch, that other may the more securely sleep; and labor, that
other may the more freely play. Magna seruitus magna fortuna quoth Consolat. ad
Polybium.
Seneca, nam ipsi Caesari cui omnia licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non licent:
omnium domos illius vigilia defendit, omnium otium illius labor, omnium
delicias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio. As those Princes
are most unprofitable, qui nihil in imperio nisi imperiu^ cogitant, which in
their Empire think of nothing so much as of imperiousnes: so they doubtless are
most happy to the state, who being greatest are as the least, and being chief
as they that serve. I conclude this observation in Lib. 3. de confiderat.
Bernards advise to Pope Eugenius, praesis vt prouideas, vt consulas, vt
procures, vt serves, praesis vt prosis, etc. O Mat. 24. 46.
blessed is that faithful and wise servant, whom his master when he comes
shall find so ruling over his house.

Thus have I showed what is said, let us see now whom it concerns; it is
certain that Christ spoke this unto his Apostles only, but in them unto some
other representatiuely; the question is then here whether he spoke
representatiuely to the whole Church, that is, all Christians; or else
representatiuely to the ministers of the Church only. We say with Aretius,
Bucer, Musculus in their commentaries upon Mat. 20. That he does understand all
Christians as well lay men as Clergy men, and this also we prove by these
reasons ensuing.

1. Christ in this Chapter immediately before, and also presently after, using
this word you, and speaking unto his Disciples and none but them (as in this
place,) speaks unto them as representing the whole Church and not only the
Ministers, as verse 19. This is my body, which is given for you; and verse 20.
This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you, by you,
though it be spoken only to the Disciples, is not understood the ministers
only, for if Christ's body were given, and his blood shed only for them, it
would follow that none should be saved but Ministers, and that is contrary to
the text 2. Cor. 5. 15.
elsewhere Christ died for all, again verse 29. I appoint unto you, as my
father has appointed unto me, a kingdom. Where by you, he means all true
Christians of whatsoever estate, quality, degree: for as John 1. 12.
many as received him and believed in his name, to them he gave power to be the
sons of God, and if they be sons and children of God, then heirs also,
Romans 8. 17. So that if thou will have any part in Christ and his kingdom, then
thou must also take some part of this text, thou must become as one of us, and
be numbered among these you, but ye not so.

2. The opposition here which is between Gentiles and you, does evidently
prove that it is spoken unto the whole Church; as for example, the Kings of the
Gentiles do tyrannize over them, that is over the people: among them are Kings
tyrannizing, and people tyrannized: but you not so, that is, I do command that
among you there should be neither Kings tyrannizing, nor people tyrannized. It
is thus with them, it shall not be so with you Ministers, is no good
opposition; it is thus with the Gentiles, it shall not be thus with you
Christians, is a full and a fit antithesis, the like whereof is found, Mat. 6.
7. 8. 31. 32. Luke 12. 29. 30. 1. Thessal. 4. 4. 5.

3. This place compared with that of Mat. chap. 23. verse. 8. 9. shows plainly
that it is spoken unto the whole Church, for Christ in that place speaking of
the same matter uses a like form of words, as for example, the scribes and
the Pharisees are called Rabbi, etc. but be not ye so called. Now that he
delivered this exhortation as well to the people as to the pastors, is apparent
in the very first verse of the Chapter, then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and
to his Disciples. I will end this exposition with an Epitap. Roberti Lincol.
episc. apud Huntindon hist. lib. 7. page 218.
Epitaph which I think may serve for a gloss to the whole Gospel.

Hic humilis dives (res mira) potens pius, vltor
Compatiens, ^itis cum pateretur erat.
Noluit osse suis dominus, studuit pater esse,
Semper in aduersis m^rus and arma suis.
The Epistle.
2. COR. 4. 1. Seeing that we have such an office, etc.
THis text is part of S. Paul's Apology justifying his doctrine as well for the
matter as the manner against all the slanders of his adversaries the false
Apostles: he remembers here more particularly three virtues in his preaching

sedulity, seeing we have such an office, even as God has had mercy on us, we
go not out of kind, or we faint not. sincerity, but have cast from us the
cloakes of vnhonesty. humility, for we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus
to be the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.
Seeing that we have such an office] Aretius, Piscator.
Two things especially caused Paul to be diligent in his office. 1. The
worthiness of his Ministry, seeing that we have such an office: 2. The goodness
of God in calling him to such an high calling, even as God has had mercy on
us. The ministration of the Gospel (as he showed in the Chapter before) does
excel See Epist. 12. Sun. after Trinit.
in grace and glory the ministration of the law: In grace, for the letter
kills, but the spirit gives life, the law being the ministration of
condemnation, but the Gospel the ministration of righteousness: In glory, both
in respect of countenance, for it is more honorable to be the minister of
mercy, then executioner of Judgment: and in respect of continuance, for Moses
glory is done away, but the Gospels ministry remains: all Moses glory was
but a type of Christ's glory, now the substance being come, the shadow
vanishes; Mat. 11. 13.
all the Prophets and the law prophesied unto John, but John 1. 17.
Truth and grace came by Jesus Christ. As far then as the sun does obscure
the lesser lights; even so far the Gospel exceedes in glory the Law, 1.
Cor. 13. 10.
for when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect is
abolished.

The second thing that made Paul constantly diligent in his function is Gods
mercy showed on him in his office, being an Apostle, Galat. 1. 1.
not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 1. Acts 13. 2.
put a part to preach the Gospel by 2. Cor. 1. 1.
the will of God. I was (says he 1. Tim. 1.) both a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and an oppressor, but Christ receiving me to mercy, put me in his
service, by whose grace I am whatsoever I am, 1. Cor. 15. 10. wherefore seeing we
have such an excellent office, so gracious, so glorious: and seeing God has
(out of the riches of his mercy, Theophylact. Aquin. Anselm.
not out of any worth of our own merit) called us unto such an office, we
faint not in this our ministry for any Hierom. Primasius. Lombard.
tribulation or trouble whatsouer. Marlorat.
So Paul expounds himself in this present Chapter, we are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed: in poverty, but not in despair: persecuted, but not
forsaken: cast down, but not cast away: therefore we faint not, for though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily, for our light
affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent and
an eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things which are seen,
but on the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen eternal, as if he should say,
seeing our work is excellent, and our reward (when we have 2. Tim. 4. 7.
fought our fight and ended our course) most excellent: we slack not our
duty for any cross or care, but 2. Cor. 6. 4.
approve our selves as the ministers of God in all things, in afflictions, in
necessities, in anguishes, in stripes, in strifes, in labors, etc. by honor
and dishonor, by bad report and good report, as sorrowing and yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things.

We have cast from us the cloakes of vnhonestie] For as much as the B. Latymer
ser. ^t Paul's.
devil is the most diligent preacher in the whole world, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
walking about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, and his agents
Mat. 23. 15.
compass sea and land to make men of their profession: our Apostle to his
industry further adds in his preaching sincerity, we cast from us the
cloakes of unhonesty etc. that is, we have renounced ( Aretius.
as a father utterly forsakes a disobedient son) Lombard Aquin.
not only notorious and open crimes, but also those which are hidden, and as
it were clothed with cloaks and colors of excuse: for so Paul Theophylact.
construeth himself in the clause following, we walk not in craftiness etc.
that is, we deal not as the false Apostles in Anselm.
hypocrisy, Mat. 7. 15.
coming unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves; neither
handle we the word deceitfully, that is, Aretius. Marlorat. Beza.
as he said in this Eap. 2. verse. 17.
epistle before, we do not as many, make merchandise of the word. Aquin.
Lombard. Anselm.
We preach not for gain or glory, for such are hirelings, John 10. 12.
neither do we sophisticate the word, as they who mingle heaven and earth, and
join the ceremoni^s of Moses law with the Gospel of Jesus Christ as necessary
to salvation, for such are wolves. We preach neither Primasius.
flattringly, nor falsely, but open the truth, and commend ourselves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, Bullenger.
that is, we have delivered ye word so plainly, so purely, neither Apocalyp.
22. 18.
adding any thing to it, nor diminishing any thing of it, Theophylact.
as that our deeds speaking for our doctrine, we appeal to the consciences of
all such as have heard us, and to God himself who sees all things, and
understands every secret of our heart so well as every word of our mouth,
even he that knows all things 2. Cor. 11. 31.
knows that I lie not.

If our Gospel be yet hid, it is hid among them that are lost,] Aquin.
Aretius. Beza.
Here Paul preuenteth an objection, if you faint not in opening the truth unto
the consciences of all men, how comes it to pass that many believe not your
Gospel? He does answer directly, that the fault is not in the Gospel it
self, for that is a shining light to such as are in darkness: but in
unbelievers whose minds are blinded by the god of this world, least the light
of the Gospel of the glory of Christ (which is the image of God) should shine
unto them.

That is every man's god in this world which he likes best, and loves most, as
Ephesians. 5. 5. Job. 31. 24.
gold is a covetous man's god, and Philip. 3. 19.
belly cheer a voluptuous man's god, and preferment an ambitious man's god. And
Aquin. Caietan.
these gods blind the mind of unbelievers, that they should not in this world
see the light of grace, nor in the world to come the light of glory. So we
read Luke 14 when a certain man had ordained a great supper, and invited many,
saying, come, for all things are ready: the first said, I have bought a farm,
and I must needs go to see it, Honor was the god that blinded his eyes. Another
said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them, Riches was the
god that blinded his eyes. A third said, I have married a wife, and therefore I
cannot come, Pleasure was the god that blinded his eyes. See Gospel 2. Sun.
after Trinity.

Theophylact. Primasius. Anselm.
Other understand this of the true God, which is the God of this world, for
that he made it, according to that of Psalm. 24. 1.
David, The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the
world, and they that dwell therein. And God is said to blind the minds of
unbelievers, Aquin.
Non inducendo malitiam, sed merito, potius demerito praecedentium peccatorum
subtrahendo gratiam. It is Gods mercy, that the light of the word shines in
the hearts of his elect, and it is Gods justice, that it is hidden among those
which are lost. I am come said John 9. 39.
Christ unto judgment in this world, that they which see not, might see, and
that they which see, might be made blind. And Romans 11. 8. God has given them
the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear; that the Gospel in it self a shining light, and the Romans 1.
16.
power of God unto salvation, should be hidden among the lost, and so become
the 2. Cor. 2. 16.
savor of death unto death; is an heavy, yet an holy judgment: For, Romans 1.
28.
as they regard not to know God, even so God delivers them up unto a reprobate
sense, Theophylact. Oecumem.
suffering their eyes to be blinded, least the light of the Gospel should shine
unto them. Aretius.
As by the bright beams of the sun wax is softened, and yet dirt is hardened:
even so by the preaching of the word, the hearts of such as shall be saved are
mollified, but the hearts of such as are lost are further hardened. To day then,
even while it is called to day, suffer the words of exhortation, if thou have
an ear to hear, harden not thine heart, but harken unto Gods voice, speaking
in the books of his Scriptures, and by the mouths of his Prophets unto thee.

Lombard. Aquin. Calvin.
Other understand this of Satan, here called the god, as elsewhere, John 12. 31.
the prince of this world, that is, seculariter viuentium, of the wicked of the
world, in Ephesians. 2. 2.
whom he rules and works, as yelding to his suggestions. It is not Satan's
power that makes him a god, and a prince, but only the weakness of the wicked,
admitting him as a lord of mis-rule; for, he (says Romans 6. 16.
Paul) is our master to whom we submit our selves as servants. Christ is the
Lord of heaven and earth by a threefold right, Bernard. lib. 3. deconsiderat.
iure creationis, merito redemptionis, dono patris: but the devil is god of
this world only (quoth Aquine) imitatione, because the wicked of this world are
his followers, as having their Ephesians. 4. 18.
understanding darkened, and their minds blinded, and hearts hardened thorough
his entising temptations. And so Paul in this present epistle chap. 11. verse.
3. I fear least as the serpent beguiled Eve thorough his subtletie; so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. The Gospel
is a glass wherein we may behold Christ; and Christ is an Heb. 1. 3.
express character and image of God, as himself said, John 14. 9.
he that has seen me, has seen my father, and this is eternal life to know
God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, John 17. 3. If then thou hear the
word often, and yet continue still in unbelief, the fault is not in God or his
Gospel, but in thy self and Satan, who blinds the minds of such as are lost,
etc.

We preach not our selues] Calvin. Marlorat. Piscator.
least he should be thought arrogant in commending his sedulous and sincere
preaching, he confesses humbly that himself and his fellows were not
principal agents in their conversion, but isntrumental only; Christ is the
Lord, and we your servants for his sake, for it is God that commands the light
to shine out of darkness, which has shined in our hearts, for to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And we
have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of that power might
be of God, and not of us. See epistle 3. Sun. in Aduent, and 1. in Lent.

This scripture may be termed aptly manipulus Curatorum; 1. Instructing all
such as have cure of souls to be diligent in their ministry, considering the
worthiness of their function, and the goodness of God in making them 1. Tim.
3. 2.
apt to teach, and in calling them unto such an high office. 2. To be rather
solid then subtle, preaching plainly to the conscience. 3. To be humble, 1.
Pet. 5. 3.
not as though they were lords over Gods heritage, but in meekness of spirit,
behauing themselves as servants for Jesus sake.

The Gospel.
MATTHEW. 9. 9. As Jesus passed forth from thence he saw a man named Matthew,
etc.
IN this text 2. points are more chiefly regardable, namely the

Calling of Matthew, wherein observe the Bountifulnes of Christ in calling, he
saw a man named Matthew, etc. Duetifulnesse of Matthew in coming, he arose,
and followed him.
Cauilling of the Pharisees, and in it Their accusation, Why eats your master
with Publicanes and sinners. Christ's excusation, answering for himself by
grounds of Reason, they that be strong need not the Physician. Religion, go
ye rather and learn, etc.


As Jesus passed forth from thence] we may not slightly pass over the passing
of Jesus here from place Acts 10. 38.
to place doing good, and acting works of mercy and miracle. Crafty
politicians thrust themselves into the center of the world, as if all times
should meet in their ends, never caring in any tempest what becomes of the
ship of estate, so they may be safe in the coc-boat of their own fortune. But
Christ here neglecting his private boat, was all for the public ship of the
Church, being not only painful in his own person all his life, but also
careful in calling apostles, who might as cunning masters and pilots guide the
Churches ship after his death.

Musculus in loc.
By this example princes (which ought to be Esaias 49. 23.
nursing fathers unto the Church) are taught, not only to see that matters be
well ordered for the present; but also to foresee such things as may be for the
good of the Church in time to come. They must especially maintain the schools
of the prophets as the seminaries and nurseries of the Clergy, that there may
be from time to time Peter's and Matthewes, apt and able Luke 10. 2.
laborers in the Lords harvest. As for you which are men of mean quality,
though it be true that ye can not found Colleges, or endue the Church with
any large revenues: yet ye can Psalm. 122. 6.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and wish heartily that plenteousnesse may be
within her palaces: And therefore when any suit concerning the Clergy shall
be tried by your verdite, Deuteronomy. 12. 19.
forsake not the Leuite as long as thou live upon earth. Let no malignant
humor cause thee to rob God of his due, the Minister of his duty, that the
Gospel may not only flourish in our days, but that there may be still a
succession of learned men in all ages to come, who may Esaias. 40. 2.
comfort Jerusalem at the heart, and withstand all her Psalm. 127. 6.
enemies in the gate.

He saw a man named Matthew sitting at the receipt of custome] He saw Matthew
not (as then he saw many more) with his corporal eyes only, Ardens, Rupert.
but also with his all-seeing eyes of prescience, knowing that he was a
Chrysostom. apud Panigarol. hom. in loc.
pearl in a dunghill, a chosen vessel unto the Lord from all eternity. And
with his pitiful eyes of mercy, even with the very same eyes he saw the
grievous troubles of his children in Exodus 3. 7.
Egypt, and with the same eyes he saw Peter weeping, and with the same eyes he
saw John 1. 48.
Nathanaell under the fig tree. Now the greatness of his exceeding rich
mercies is amplified here by circumstances of the person, and of the place, and
of the time. By circumstance of person he saw and called Matthew, a rich man, a
covetous rich man, a covetous rich man in a corru^pt office, Matthew the
Publican. Mark 2. 14. Luke 5. 27.
Other Evangelists in relating this history calls him leui, Hierom. ^ansen.
Maldenat.
but he calls himself by that name he was best known, he confessed his fault,
and acknowledged his folly, stiling himself Matthew the Publican. And this he
did unto Gods glory, for the greater was his misery, the greater was his
Saviors mercy; the children of Israel paid no custom before their captivity,
wherefore toll-gatherers as being subject to many foul extorsions and
oppressions were most odious officers among the Jews; in so much as Publicans
and notorious malefactors are coupled usually together in the gospel: as if
Mat. 18. 17.
he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a
Publican, and Mat. 21. 31. Verily I say unto you that the Publicans and the
harlots shall go before you into the kingdom of God, and Luke 15. 1. Then
resorted unto him all the Publicans and sinners; and in our present text, why
eats your master with Publicans and sinners? So that Publicans are joined
sometime with heathens, sometime with harlots, always with sinners.

But the goodness of Christ is amplifyed more by circumstances of place and
time, for that he called Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom; he called
Mat. 4. 18.
Peter and Andrew while they were fishing; James and John while they were
mending their nets; he called other, while they were doing some good, but (O
the deepenes of the riches of Christ's unspeakable mercies) he called Matthew
when he was doing hurt, executing his hateful office, sitting at the receipt of
custom. Euthym. Calvin, Genebrard. in Psalm. 1.
There be three degreees in sin mentioned, Psalm. 1. 1. The first is walking
in the counsel of the ungodly; the second is standing in the way of sinners;
the third is sitting in the seat of the scornful: now Matthew the Publican
had proceeded Doctor in his faculty, he was seated in the chair, sitting at
the receipt of custom, the which is worse then either walking in the counsel
of the ungodly, or standing in the way of sinners.

Hence we may learn not to despair of other, much less of our selves: not of
other, albeit they be never so covetous misers and great oppressors. Indeed
Mat. 19. 24.
Christ said, it is easier for a Camel (or as Theophylact, Erasmus, Drusius, in
loc. Mat.
other read) for a cable to go thorough the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God, but he does add withal and say, with
man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. He can vn-twine a
cable rope in every cord and thread, and so draw it thorough the eye of a
needle: he can undo the cords of vanity, and cart-ropes of iniquity which
hold covetous men from him, and so make them (as he did here Matthew) to follow
him. He did untwine Zacheus when he said, Luke 19. 8.
behold Lord half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken from
any man by forged cauillation, I restore him fourefold: and so Zacheus
notwithstanding his Camels back, that is in former time his prodigious wealth,
entered into the strait gate of heaven.

And let no man ever despair of himself, seeing Christ called Matthew when he
was doing of evil, and the thief on the cross, Luke 23. when he was
suffering for evil. Psalm. 48. 9.
According to his name so is his praise, Mat. 1. 21.
Jesus is his name, and he is a savior of his people; coming into this world
(as he protests and proves in this Scripture) not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance.

In Matthewes obedience to Christ's call, observe with Hom. in loc.
Ardens a threefold abrenunciation

1. Of his wickedness, he arose, namely from his old unconscionable course unto
newnes of life. 2. Of his wealth, he left all, Luke 5. 28. 3. Of his will, he
followed him, and that as Paratus ser. de S. Mat.
one writes celeriter, laetanter, conuenienter, perseueranter,

1. He followed Christ immediately without delay, for as soon as Christ had said
follow me; forthwith he arose and followed him.

2. He followed Christ cheerfully Aretius.
without any murmuring or disputing who should execute his office, or look to
his account. Musculus.
It was in the worlds eye a great folly to leave such a gainefull occupation, a
greater folly to forsake that which he had already got, and the greatest of all
to follow him who was so poor that he wanted a nest and an hole where to rest
his head, Mat. 8. 20. Yet Matthew beholding his Savior with eyes offaith, and
2. Cor. 4. 18.
looking not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not
seen, simply and cheerfully followed him, and in Rupert. in loc.
token hereof (as Saint Luke 5. 29.
Luke reports) he made him a great feast in his own house.

3. Matthew followed Christ conveniently, because he left all and followed him:
all his worldly business, all his unconscionable gains, all his corrupt
affections, and whatsoever hindered him in the way to God. And Hierom, Caietan.
herein he dealt not (as profane Porphirius and Julian object) unadvisedly to
forsake all things, and to follow one which had nothing, for Matthew doubtless
had before seen many miracles of Christ, and at this present he was also
drawn by the holy spirit, according to that of our Savior, John 6. 44.
no man can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw him. And
this spirit assured his spirit that Christ as God is Genesis 17. 1.
all sufficient, and a Heb. 11 6.
rewarder of such as seek him and come unto him. Here the Gospel and Epistle
meet, Paul preached not the word for worldly gain, Matthew left all and
followed Christ. He did not abandon all his estate, for he feasted Christ in
his own house: but he was Apostoli quantum ad voluntatem totum mundum
reliquerunt. Hierom. epist. ad Pammac.
willing to leave the whole world to gain that good which he could neither
Augustine. de ciuitate dei lib. 1. cap. 10.
prodere nor perdere.

4. Matthew followed Christ constantly, being first a Disciple, then an
Apostle, afterward an Evangelist, and last of all a Martyr: as a Disciple he
heard the Gospel of Christ, as an Apostle he preached the Gospel of Christ,
as an Evangelist he wrote the Gospel of Christ, as a Martyr he suffered for
the Gospel of Christ. He was not only a Disciple, but an Apostle, numbered
among the Mat. 10. 3.
twelve, preaching the Gospel in Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 2^. Idem Magdeburg.
cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 576.
Judea and Socrates hist. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Aethiopia, for I remember Cassanaeus catalog. 1. parl. 3. considerat. 29.
one says of him Aethiopiam nigram doctrina fidei fecit candidam. And that he
might preach unto the whole world after his death, he penned the book of the
generation of Jesus Christ, etc. In which (as Eusebius. Emisen observes) he makes
a great feast unto Christ, and that in Panigarol bom. in loc. part. 1.
sundry respects as 1. His Gospel is great, as being written in Hebrewe, the
most ancient and most holy tongue. 2. Great, as being the August. de consensu
Euangel. lib 1. cap. 2.
first of all the Gospels. 3. Great, as being the most large, See Panigarol vbi
sup. and Sixth. Bibliothec. lib. 1. page 17.
divided by the modern Latins into 28. Chapters, but according to the
partition of Hilarious in former ages into 33. or as Druthmanus into 67. Canons.
Among the Grecians Euthymius parts it into 68. Chapters, Eusebius, Ammonius,
Suidas into 355. and lastly great, as intending principally to show that the
man Christ is the Messiah and Savior of the world, promised by the Prophets,
and prefigured in the sacrifices of the law. Saint Matthew having cheerfully
followed Christ in hearing his Gospel, in preaching his Gospel, in writing
his Gospel, Vide not. Baron in Romans Martyr September. 21.
on this day suffered martyrdom constantly for his Gospel.

Christ every day calls us, and says unto us as here to Matthew, follow me,
though he do not this immediately by himself, yet he speaks unto us by the
tongues of his Preachers, as he spoke in Heb. 1. ^.
old time to our fathers by the mouths of the Prophets. It is our duty
therefore to come when he calls (as his servant Matthew) quickly,
conveniently, constantly, cheerfully. Quickly without delay, Ecclesiast. 5 7.
make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, but to day, Heb. 3. 13.
while it is called to day, let us hear his voice: conveniently, forsaking our
selves, and casting away every thing that presses down, and hinders us in
our way to Christ, Heb. 12. 1: constantly, Psalm. 84. 7.
going from strength to strength, and continuing Apocalyp. 2. 10.
faithful unto the death: cheerfully, making Christ a great feast in our own
house.

Happily thou will object, if I had lived in that golden age, when Christ my
Savior blessed the world with his bodily presence; then I would have
worshipped him, and followed him, and feasted him: but alas, I have good cause
to complain with Mary Magdalene, John 20. 2.
they have taken away the Lord, and where should I find him, if I would now
feast him? O beloved, albeit Christ Ecclesiast. 5. 1.
is in heaven and thou art on earth, yet thou may (and that in thine own
house) make to him a Ardens, Musculus, in loc.
double feast; a spiritual feast, and a corporal: a spiritual, for his meat
is to do the will of God, John 4. 34. And the will of God is to believe in him
whom he has sent, John 6. 29. So that whosoever believes in Christ, and
opens the door to his knock, makes him a feast in the parlour of his
heart. So Apocalyp. 3. 20.
himself says, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him, and he with
me. The Poets feigned that their God Jupiter fed on Nectar and Ambrosia,
Persius.
Jupiter Ambrosia satur est, and Nectare plenus. But the God of heaven is
refreshed with the Galat. 5. 22.
fruits of the spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekenes, temperance, these dishes are his dainties.

Thou may also feast him corporally; for whatsoever is done to his
followers, he takes as done to himself, because they be Ephesians. 5. 30.
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone: this he will openly
protest at the last day, Mat. 25. 35. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I
thirsted, and ye gave me drink: for in as much as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

And when the Pharisces saw it] In the Pharisces accusation observe these two
circumstances especially: To whom; And of whom it was made; to whom, they said
unto his Disciples: of whom, of Christ and the rest of the guests in Matthewes
house, why eats your master with publicans and sinners, etc. In making this
objection unto the Disciples, and not unto Christ himself, they show
themselves to be crafty calumniatours. It was Ar^tius, Marlorat.
craft to set upon the weak Disciples being a little before confounded by
their master: and it was a Bullinger.
calumny to mutter that behind his back, which they dare not utter unto his
face. But this was their ordinary guile to vent their gaul, when they
conceited that the Disciples did amiss, they cauilled with Christ, Mat. 15. 2.
why do thy Disciples transgress the traditions of the fathers, for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread. And when they thought Christ offended,
they told his Disciples, why eats your master with publicanes and sinners? In
the fact of the Disciples, they cauilled with Christ: in the fact of Christ,
they cauilled with the Disciples; in both their malicious intent was to
dishonor the Gospel, and estrange the Disciples from Christ, and Christ from
his Disciples. In our age there be many such envious sycophants, who being once
got between the pot and the wall, chat in secret against that which Christ and
his Ministers have chaunted in public.

The Pharisees accusing Christ and his company Publicanes and sinners, offended
in uncharitableness and pride: in uncharitableness toward Christ, Ardens.
ac si consentiens in culpa, qui consentiens in coena, as if he had
communicated with them in mischief, as he did common with them at meat:
whereas Christ conuersed with publicans and sinners as the physician with the
sick, Ar^tius.
they made not him worse, but he made them better; he had no fellowship with
Ephesians. 5 11.
unfruitful works of darkness, but only with the workers, he did love their
persons, but leave their vices, see Gospel on the 3. Sun. after Trinity.
Again the Pharisees were very cruel and uncharitable toward the Publicanes,
in that they despised them, and had no feeling of their miseries, or care for
their conversion: and lastly they show their pride by justifying themselves
impudently, whereas they should rather have confessed ingeniously with the
Psalm. 143. 2.
Psalmist, enter not into judgment with thy servants, for no flesh is
righteous in thy sight: and with Job 25. 5.
Job, if the stars are unclean in his sight, how much more man a worm, even
the son of man which is but a worm? and with Esaias 64. 6.
Esaias, we have all bin an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes.

When Christ heard that, he said unto them] He replied unto the Pharisees
Musculus, Culman.
not as hoping to mende them by his answer, but least his Disciples otherwise
might be scandalized, hereby giving us an example to meet with opprobrious
cauils and calumnies against the Gospel, and that not to satisfy so much our
adversaries, as to strengthen our auditors.

They that be strong need not the physitian] This sentence may be considered as
a Theophylact.
scomma to the Pharisees, who were so righteous and strong in their own
conceit, as that they did not in any case need a physician; but as a Lemma for
Calvin.
others, in which (as in the rest of his Apology) Christ insinuates that he
came into the world, not to constrain, but to call; not the righteous,
Hilarious, Panigarol, Marlorat.
who justify themselves, but sinners, even such as feel their wickedness and
weakness, such as are Luke 4. 18.
broken hearted, such as are laden and Mat. 11. 28.
weary with the burden of their iniquity: Musculus, Calvin.
not to licentiousnes in their sin, or to punishment for their sin, or to
satisfaction for their sin, but to repentance for their sin, that they
being delivered out of the hands of all their enemies, might serve God in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. Epist. lib. 1. epist. 4.
Paulinus says excellently that a sinner irrepentant is like Samson in the
mill grinding corn for his enemies: but if he 1. John 1. 9.
confess his sins, and be sorry for the same, Christ is faithful and just
to forgive him his sins, and to cleanse him from all unrighteousness.

Almighty God, which by thy blessed son did (...) call Matthew from the
receipt of custom, to be an Apostle and Evangelist: grant us grace to forsake
all covetous desires and inordinate love of riches and to follow thy said son
Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, etc. The
Epistle,
APOCAL. 12. 7. There was a great battle in heaven, etc.
In this Scripture 3. points are to be considered, and they be points of war,
to wit a

Battle, verse 7. described by circumstances of the Time, when it was fought,
there was. Field, where it was fought, in heaven. Captains and soldiers, by
whom it was fought, on the one side, Michael and his Angels, on the other, the
Dragon with his Angels.
Victory following the battle, set down Negatiuely, they prevailed not,
neither was their place found any more in heaven, verse 8. Positiuely, the
Dragon and all his Angels with him are cast out of heaven into the earth, verse
9.
Triumph after the victory, containing the causes Principal, the blood of the
lamb. Instrumental A sound profession of the faith, and by the word of their
testimony. A resolute constancy to the end, they loved not their lives unto the
death, verse 11.

Effects and fruits of the victory, verse 10. and 12. I heard a loud voice
saying, in heaven is now made salvation, etc. Therefore rejoice Oye heavens,
etc.

For the better understanding of the whole text, I purpose Coloss. 2. 15.
to treat first of the commanders and soldiers in this warre-fare, Michael and
his Angels fought, and the Dragon and his Angels fought. Cardinal De Romans pon.
(...). lib. 1. cap. 9.. post casum vero.
Bellarmine affirms that Michael ever since the fall of Lucifer is head of the
glorious Angels, and the Rhemists observe the reason here why S. Michael is
ordinarily painted fighting with a dragon: but I think neither the foolish
painter, nor yet learned Bellarmine can tell us how Michael came to be chosen
into Lucifers rome. For all the wicked Angels (as S. Jude teaches in his
Epistle) who left their habitation, are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, and such as fell not are not preferred unto higher place, but continue
still in their first estate and dignity, we grant that there be certain
distinctions and degrees of Angels in the quire of heaven, as reading in holy
Scriptures of Ephesians. 1. 21. Coloss. 1. 16.
principalities, and powers, and thrones, and dominations, and Esaias 6* 2.
Seraphims, and Gen 3 24.
Cherubims; but we find not in the Bible that Michael is the chief commander
of all. Indeed S. Jude calls him an Archangel, and Dan. 10. 13. and 12. 1.
Daniel vnum de principibus, that is, one of the principal Angels, as Vatablus
upon the place; but he never was or shall be Monarch and head of all Angels,
and that I prove (by these reasons ensuing) unto the Papists.

1. According to the doctrine of their Thom. part. 1. quaest. 142. art* 2. and
4,
own school, Michael being employed as a messenger between God and man is
not of the first Hierarchy, but of an Pererius in Dan. 10.
underling order, and so consequently not supremus Angelorum, as their own
Doctor Praefat. in ser. de S. Michael.
Georg. Bartholdus Pontanus acknowledges.

2. Because the greatest Angel is used in the greatest embassage, but Gabriel
was sent for the contracting of that sacred match between the blessed Virgin
and the God of heaven, ergo, Gabriel is rather supreme both in natural and
supernatural graces and prerogatives. So Hom. 34. in Euangel.
Gregory the great sometime bishop of Rome notes, ad hoc mysterium summum
Angelum venire dignum fuerat, qui summum omnium nunciabat; it was convenient
(says he) that to this supreme mystery of mysteries the supreme of all
Angels should be destinated, who should annunciate the conception of the
supreme Lord of all.

3. Because Christ is the Michael here mentioned, as the commentary under Hom.
8. in Apocalyp.
Augustines name, Michaelem intellige Christum, by Michael understand thou
Christ. D. Fulke in loc.
For the blessed Angels cannot be said to be any other Michaels Angels, but
only the Angels of God and Christ: in the vision happily Michael and an host of
Angels appeared unto John, but they represented Bullinger, Aretius, Marlorat.
Christ and his members. The name Michael signifies quis vt Deus, who is as
God, a name best agreeing unto Christ, as being very God of very God, even the
brightness of his glory and ingraued form of his person, Heb. 1. 3. Michael (as
we find in the 10. and 12. Chapter of Daniel) was the patron of the Jews, and
the defender of Gods people. But herein he was a type of Christ and a figure,
for Jesus alone is this Savior, as Cap. 7. 14.
Esaias foretold, and Zacharias in his Evangelical hymn chaunted plainly, the
light of the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel.

So that the meaning of our text is briefly August. vbi sup.
this, Christ and his members fight against the Devil and his accomplices: and
indeed it is against the principles of holy belief to ascribe this victory to
Michael or any other Angel whatsoever, seeing the Scripture says expressly, Gen
3. 15.
the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, and Romans 16. 20.
the God of peace shall tread down Satan under our feet, and a loud voice
from heaven proclaims in this Chapter at the 11. verse, they overcame the
Dragon by the blood of the lamb.

Our blessed Savior did fight a single combat with the Dragon in the
wilderness and overcame him, Mat. 4. A point full of instruction and comfort as
I have showed in my notes upon the Gospel 1. Sun. in Lent. Again Christ
fought with the Devil and all his accomplices on the cross, where says Coloss.
2. 15.
Paul he spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly. For
as a mighty Judges 16. 30.
Samson he did bear away the gates of his enemies upon his own shoulders,
killing at his death more then he had slain in his life: by death he destroyed
death; and by his going down to the grave he did open the grave, and gave life
to the dead, in the house of death, and kingdom of hell; he triumphed over
Satan, and spoiled him of all his strength and power, as Ser. de quadr uplici
debito.
Bernard sweetly, Diaboli fortitudo per redemptoris vulnera traducta and
deducta ad nihilum.

As Michael did fight, so likewise his Angels, Aretius.
Christus est ecclesiae suae promachus, Angeli eius symachi: Ardens, Rupert.
Some construe this of the glorious Angels, as being ministering spirits for the
good of such as shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. These soldiers being
more then twelve legions. Mat. 26. 53. Thousand thousands and ten thousand
thousands, Dan. 10. 7. A number without number, Heb. 12. 22. Psalm. 34. 7.
Pitch their tents about us, and fight against such as fight against us: here
the Gospel and Epistle meet, Michael and his Angels (says our Epistle) sight
against the Dragon and his Angels: and the Gospel insinuates as much in
saying, take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto
you that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my father, etc.
And here you may note the reason also why both are appointed by the Church to
be read on this festival of Angels.

Marlorat.
Other expound this of the Ministers of Christ, often styled in respect of
their honorable function and mission Angels. These bear the Captains
colors, preaching the true faith whereby the soldiers of Christ are
distinguished from all other. Or as Bullinger.
other, by the word Angels is meant all the members of Christ in heaven, and on
earth; as well Magistrates as Ministers; as well people as Pastors; all his
Apostles, Confessors, Martyrs, and whosoever else fights under his banner.

The Devil is the general on the contrary side, called here for his Ardens.
open mischief a great Dragon, for his cunning and secret malice an old
Serpent, for his false cauils, an accuser of his brethren and a Devil, for his
obstinate contradiction and opposition of God and godliness Satan. And the
Dragon is not only chief of Devils, but also 2. Cor. 4. 4.
god of this world, that is of all wicked men in the world. Deceiving (says
our text) all the world, Ardens.
that is endeavoring to deceive all in the world, but actually deceyuing all
such as are Marlorat.
of the world, stirring them up always to fight against Michael and his angels,
Psalm. 2. 2.
against the Lord, and against his anointed. Entising the Magistrate to
tyranny, the people to security, the learned to curious impiety, the simple
to brutish Epicurisme, all to disorder and dissoluteness. Rupert.
Quo enim vel vnde seducit vel abducit orbem terrarum, nisi a cultu Dei debito
ad cultum suimet indebitum.

Now we know the Captains and the soldiers: let us see when the battle is
fought, and where; when, there was a battle, indefinitely; for there was, is,
and ever will be war between Michaell and the Dragon until the worlds end.
And therefore this battle is called in our and some other translations
praelium magnum, as being great, not only in regard of the great number of
those who fight, or in regard of our enemies great might, great malice, great
experience, great cunning, all which are very great: Marlorat.
But also great in regard of the great time this war shall continue; for God
said unto the Serpent in the beginning of the world, Genesis 3. 1^.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed, he shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. And S. Paul
living in the latter ends of the world says in his epistle to the Cap. 1. 29.
Galatians, as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was
borne after the spirit: even so it is now; so that as long as there is a world,
and a prince of the world, so long the children of God must put on the armor
of light, and fight against the works and princes of darkness. Every
Christian is a professed soldier, not only for a time to see the fashion of
the wars, as young gentlemen use in our time: but (as he has in holy
baptism vowed) manfully to fight under Christ's banner against sin, the
world, and the devil, and to continue his faithful soldier and servant unto
his lives end. When Restitution of decayed intelligence page 176.
William the Conqueror had landed his men in Sussex, he caused all his ships
to be suncke, that all hope of flying back might be taken away: Beloved, seeing
we are landed on this valley of tears as it were the Battle of the world, let
us neither faint nor fly, but fight it out valiantly till death our 1. Cor.
15. 26.
last enemy be destroyed.

3. This battle is described by the place, there was a great battle in
heaven, this cannot fitly be construed of heaven in heaven, for the Devil in
the beginning was cast out of that heaven, and there is no war-fare, but all
welfare, no jar but love, yea such a peace as passes all understanding.
But by Heaven is meant the Church of God on earth, as Augustine. Ardens, Rupert.
Bullenger.
Interpretours observe generally, called in holy Scriptures Heaven and
Jerusalem above, for that her chief treasure is in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 20. her
affections in Heaven, Colloss. 3. 2. her conversation in Heaven, Philip. 3. 20.
and for that the Lord of Heaven dwells in her heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. All
this battle then is fought in Heaven upon earth, according to that of Job 7. 1.
Job. The life of man is a war-fare upon earth: Here is the field where we must
1. Cor. 9. 24.
so run, that we may obtain; so fight that we may overcome: no part of the
battle is fought in Hell or purgatory, but all upon earth. Or this battle is
said to be fought in Heaven, as being a Rupert. Eras. (...).
spiritual war-fare, Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places. Gross wickedness
is easily seen, and prevented soon, but our adversaries abound with invisible
wickedness, being our greatest enemies while they seem our best friends: and
therefore seeing we live in a besieged city, which is assaulted on every side
by cruel and cunning opposers (as the Ecclesiasticus 9. 15.
wiseman speaks) in the midst of snares, it behooves us as Paul exhorts, to
put on the whole armor of God, that we may stand against all the assaults of
the Devil. Let us fear nothing in this holy war, for our captain is good,
our Michaell is the Lord of hosts, Nil desperandum Christo duce, and auspice
Christo, our cause good, for we fight for the word of Truth against the father
and favorers of lies, against the Dragon and his angels; our company good,
all the glorious Angels in Heaven, and all the good men on earth are on our
side; our reward good when our fight is finished, palms in our hands, and
crowns on our heads. See epistle 21. Sund. after Trinity.

And prevailed not] Albeit the Devil as a great dragon, and an old serpent,
and a roaring lion seek daily whom he may devour: yet the gates of Matthew. 16.
18.
Hell are not able to conquer the Church; albeit Satan rage and rave never so
much, he shall have no prevailing power against Gods elect, he shall not pluck
any of Christ's sheep out of Christ's hand, John 10. 28. The prince of this
world is John 12. 31.
cast out, and has naught in me says our blessed Savior, John 14. 30. no
part in me, no part in mine which are Ephesians. 5. 30.
flesh of my flesh, and bones of my bones. I know the Dragon and his angels
assault Michaell and his angels every hour, but all the hurt they can do is
to bruise the heel, Genesis 3. 15.

Neither was their place any more found in Heaven,] Augustine. Bullenger.
Marlorat.
That is, in the hearts of the godly, whose conversation is in Heaven. Albeit
the devil and his associats besiege Gods elect every day, yet they find in
them no resting place, their dwelling is among the reprobate wicked, according
to that of S. Cap. 12. 43.
Matthew, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through out
dry places, seeking rest and finds none, then he says, I will return into
mine house, from whence I came; and when he is come, he finds it empty,
swept, and garnished, then he goes, and takes unto him seven other spirits
worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the end of this man
is worse then the beginning. The Devil is cast out of Heaven into the earth,
as in the text following, Rupert. idem Primasius apud Marlorat.
that is into men of earthly minds, who Genesis 3. 14.
go upon their bellies and eat dust all the days of their life. The Devil is
cast out of the Temple into the court, Apoc.
which is without the Temple, Apocalyp. Apocalypse.
that is out of the bounds of the Church, among the Gentiles, and such as know
not God, or else knowing God, glorify him not as God, Romans 1. 21. professing
that they know God, but deny him in their works, Tit. 1. 16. In these who
Philip. 3. 19.
mind earthly things, Satan rules and Ephesians. 2. 2.
works as their God and prince.

I heard a loud voice saying, in Heaven is now made saluation] Here begins the
Saints (...), or victoriall hymn, for the loud voice from Heaven is nothing
else Rupert. Bullenger. Marlorat.
but the public consent of the faithful in magnifying the mercies of God
toward them in their fight against the Dragon and his angels. And this conquest
is termed in respect of men, Salvation: in respect of God, the strength of his
kingdom, and the power of his Christ. Where Satan and sin reign, there
destruction is at hand, for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. But when
once Satan is cast out, and the word of God which is the Ephesians. 1. 13.
saving Gospel, and the word of Philip. 2. 16.
life Colloss. 3. 16.
dwells in us plenteously, then (as Luke 19. 9.
Christ said unto Zacheus) salvation is come to our house. It is termed the
power of Christ, and strength of Gods kingdom, Ardens*
because this evidently shows his might and Majesty. So the Text following,
They overcame the Dragon by the blood of the Lamb. Christ fights in us, and
for us, and thorough his Philip. 4. 13.
help we are able to do all things, even to cast out Satan, and to cast down
holds, and whatsoever is exalted against the knowledge of God, 2. Cor. 10. 4.
So that we may triumph and say with Romans 8. 33.
Paul, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that
justifies? Who shall condemn, it is Christ which is dead, yea rather that is
risen again, who, is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us?
And 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?
the sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law: but thanks
be unto God which has given us victory thorough our Lord Jesus Christ.

And by the word of their testimonie] the blood of the Lamb, that is the death
of Christ our paschall lamb is the chief cause of this one victory, but
Rupert. Ardens.
Faith is the hand and instrument applying the merits of Christ, and opposing
them against all the dangerous assaults of the dragon. For when that common
informer and accuser of his brethren shall accuse thee before God for breaking
his Laws (as in James 3. 2.
many things all of us offend) then thou may answer, 1 John 1. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; and Romans 8. 1.
there is no condemnation unto those which are in Christ; he so Galat. 2. 20.
loved me, that he died for my sins, and ros^ again for my justification.
All that is borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, and the prince of this world, even our Faith, 1. John 5.
4. See Epistle Sun. 1. after Easter. And therefore Paul advises the Christian
soldier above all other weapons in the spiritual war-fare, to put on Faith,
Above all take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery
darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. See Epistle Sun. 21. after Trinity.

Now for as much as it is not sufficient unto salvation to believe with thine
heart, unless thou likewise Romans 10. 9.
confess with thy mouth: It is said here that the soldiers of Christ
overcame the dragon by Faith in the Lambs blood, and by the word of their
testimony. And Ardens.
for as much as a true Faith is never idle, but always James 2. 18.
manifesting it self by good works; it is added in the next clause, they
loved not their lines unto the death, as who would say, they were willing to
sacrifice their loves and their lives in the quarrel of Christ against the
Dragon and his Angels; they remembered the words of their General, John 12. 25.
he that loves his life shall loose it, and he that gives his life in this
world, shall keep it to life eternal; and Mark 8. 35.
who soever shall loose his life for my sake and the Gospel, he shall save it.

The Gospel.
MAT. 18. 1. At the same time ^ame the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
THere be two parts of this text

1. A question verse 1. wherein observe 1. When it was asked, at the same time.
2. By whom, the Disciples. 3. Of whom, they came unto Jesus. 4. What, who is
the greatest in the kingdom, etc.
2. An answer to the same verse 2. 3. etc. The sum whereof is briefly this,
Heming. pos^it. in loc.
he that in Christ's Church is most servant is the greatest, and he that is most
Lordly the least: Ardens.
or he that is least in his own conceit, is the greatest in Gods eye; the
least in Maldonat.
this kingdom of heaven which is present, shall be the greatest in that
kingdom of heaven which is to come. The which one point is pressed by the
great Doctor of humility with a great deal of earnestnes: for 1. (as S. Mark
9. 35.
Mark reports) he sat down: 2. He called the twelve: 3. When they* were
called together he taught them by spectacle to their eye, so well as by
precept to their ear, he set a child in the midst of them, and said: 4. He
used a vehement asseueration, verily I say unto you: 5. A commination, except
ye turn, and become a^ children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.
At the same time] the occasion of this question among the Disciples (as In loc,
Hierom and Chrysostom. Theophylact, Druthmarus.
other learned Doctors write) was upon emulation toward Peter, whom alone they
saw preferred before the rest in the payment of the tribute, by these words of
Christ in the former Chapter at the last verse, that take and pay to them for
me and thee. But S. Mark relates Chap. 9. verse 34. that this contention began
in the way, before they came into the house where Christ appointed Peter to pay
tribute for them both, and D. Fulke. Musculus.
therefore the question here for maiority was not upon that occasion, it was
happily Marlorat, Maldonat.
cherished by it, but engendered in their minds long before, for that Christ
had admitted none of his Apostles to the sight of his Mat. 17. 1.
transfiguration, and the raising of Luke 8. 51.
Iayrus daughter from the dead, save Peter, and James, and John. Or it may be
this emulation arose, for that Christ had said unto Peter, Mat. 16. 19. I will
give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. But what need we so
curiously to seek for the reason of this quaere; Musculus.
seeing these two things are certain: 1. A desire to be like Gods on earth is
an inbred sin derived from the transgression of our first parents Adam and
Eve: 2. The Devil is ever most busy to nourish this ambitious humor in the
ministers of the word, as it is apparent in the Mat. 20. 21. Mark 10. 37. Luke
22. 24.
Gospel and Legantur epist. decretales and gesta conciliorum.
Churches history. What a deal of time was usually spent in the Councels about
precedence of Bishops, and in our age the question of the Popes primacie is
termed by Cardinal Praefat, in libros de Romans pont.
Bellarmine, Summa rei Christianae.

Came the Disciples unto Iesus] In whom are hid Coloss. 2. 3.
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and this fact of theirs is Origin*
apud Thom. in loc.
imitable, for when any doubt arises in our minds concerning the kingdom of
heaven, it is our best way to come unto Jesus, who John 1. 9.
lights every man that comes into the world. If any lack wisdom (says S.
James in ^is Epistle cap. 1. verse ^.) let him ask of God, for God is only
wise, Romans 16. 27. Come therefore to his Esaias 8. 20.
law, to his testimony, John 5. 39.
search his Scriptures which are able to teach, and instruct, and to make the
man of God absolute, 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. And for the better understanding of the
dead letter come to his living Oracles and walking Bibles, I mean the true
Prophets and learned Preachers of his word, for he calls them expressly Mat. 5.
14.
the light of the world, and their Malac. 2.
lips should preserve knowledge, Hierom epist. ad Paulin.
praeuij sunt and monstrantes s^mitam in script^ris* Come to Jesus, come to the
word of Jesus, come to the Preachers of the word of Jesus, least happily the
Lord say to you as he did once to the Jews, ye have not asked at my mouth,
Esaias, 30. 2.

Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heauen] It is certain that there arose
a disputation among Luke 9. 46.
them which of them should be greatest, and Caietan.
yet to cloak their ambitious pride, they do not ask who shall be greatest
among us, but indefinitly who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven,
Melanct. Musculus, Marlorat.
understanding by the kingdom of heaven, the kingdom of Christ in this world,
for they carnally conce^ed that Christ after his resurrection would Acts 1. 16.
restore the kingdom of Israel, and so reign as a Monarch upon earth, and
therefore they make suite to Mat. 20. 21.
sit next to him at his right hand and on his left in his kingdom. I know Apud
Thom. in loc.
Chrysostom construeth it of the kingdom of heaven in that other world,
condemning the men of his age, because they did not attain to the defects of
the Disciples, all our question is (says he) who shall be greatest in the
kingdoms upon earth, and not who shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
But by Chrysostomes leave to contend who shall be greatest in heaven is
charity, not vanity. Luke 1^. ^4. Strive to enter in at the strait gate. As in
the A^ke there was three Genesis 6. 16.
lofts one above another: even so there be many mansions in Gods house, John
14. 2. There be degrees among the Saints in heaven, as there be degrees among
Angels: there is a Prophets reward, and a Disciples reward, Mat. 10. 41. 42. We
should therefore strive to be greatest in heaven, out-stripping one another in
goodness, as they who run in a race, 1. Cor. 9. 24.

Again it is apparent by Christ's answer both in our present text, and also
Mat. 20. and Luke 22. That his Disciples expected a kingdom after the fashion
of this world, Melanct. Heming.
dreaming that he should reign as a Sovereign, and themselves domineere like
Dukes and Lords under him. They call it indeed the kingdom of heaven, in
Aretius.
imitation of their master often tearming his kingdom the kingdom of heaven;
Iansen. concord. cap. ^0.
or for that they thought his kingdom (though upon earth) should
notwithstanding be divine and heavenly, see Gospel on S. James, and on S.
Barthelomewes day.

Jesus called a child unto him] Jesus seeing the thoughts of his Disciples,
and understanding the causes of their error, (...).
heales the desire of glory with the contention of humility, in reading of his
lecture. S. Mark reports that he sat down: now we find in the Gospels
history that the Doctors among the Jews in their teaching used sometime to
stand, and sometime to sit; Acts 1. 15. and 2. 14.
Peter in Jerusalem, and Acts 13. 16.
Paul at Antiochia preached standing, but the Scribes and the Pharisees are
said to sit in Moses chair, Mat. 23. 2. So Christ himself sometime taught
standing, as Luke 6. 17. And sometime sitting both in the Mat. 5. 1.
mount and in the John 8. 2.
temple. It may be therefore that it was the Jews custom See Panigarol him.
in fest. om. sanctorum and Lorin. in Act. 1. 15.
partly to stand and partly to sit, for Christ (as it is apparent in the Verse
16. 20.
4. Chapter of S. Luke) preaching at Nazareth in the Synagogue stood up when he
read his text, and sat down when he did expound it. Whatsoever the Jews
order was, at this instant there was no^ fitter gesture for Christ then
sitting, for this (as Lib. 1. deser. d^m. in monte.
Augustine notes) showed that he taught as one which had authority. When he
was sat down he called all the twelve, doubtless he knew who they were which
ambitiously contended to be greatest in his kingdom, Musculus in loc.
yet he called all his Apostles, as being assured that his lesson of Humility
was exceeding necessary for them all. It is reported in the 20. chapter of
this Gospel, how James and John only desired to sit on his right hand and on
his left in his kingdom: yet Christ admonished them all, and said, Ye know
that the Princes of the nations have dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise authority upon them: it shall not be so with you, but whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Now the reason why Christ,
and after him his Church, use general admonitions in rebuking of particular
malefactors which are worse then the rest, is twofold. First, That the
delinquents may the better admit that checking which is common, and not
particular or personal. 2. That such as have not offended in that kind, may
learn to be more careful in their ways, and to hate the garment spotted by
the flesh, as S. Jude speaks. Often having in mind the saying of Augustine,
Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic est.

When Christ had called his Apostles unto him, he set a child in the midst of
them, as it follows in our present text. He set him by him according to the
record of Luke 9. 47.
S. Luke; and took him in his arms as Mark 9. ^6.
S. Mark, yet all agree, for it may be (says Com. in loc.
Euthemius) that Jesus first set him in the midst of them as S. Matthew; then
afterward set him beside him as S. Luke; and last of all embraced him in his
arms as S. Mark. Anselm. Iansen. post. man cum glossis et figur is in loc.
Some think that this child was one Martialis, afterward a famous Bishop in
France, but this idle tradition is beside the text, and therefore not of the
necessity of faith. Hierom. in loc.
Other imagine that Christ himself might be this little one being among his
Disciples as a servant, Luke 22. 27. but this opinion is against the text.
Jesus called a child, and set him by him, and took him in his arms, it
says, he set a child in the midst of them, but what child it does not say not
a great boy, but a little child, (...), which Erasmus translates puellum, Beza,
puerulum, the vulgar Latin paruulum, as Musculus upon our text, Oportet
imitaripuellos anniculos, and forte bimulos. And so 1. Epist. 2. 2.
S. Peter exhorts us to be like newborn babes: and surely Diez. con. 1.
festo Michael.
parents are commonly so negligent in instructing their children, as that
Christ hardly could find any yongling above three or four years old of such
innocent behavior, of whom he might say, Whosoever humbles himself as this
child, and except ye turn and become as children.

Let us examine therefore wherein we must be like to children, and wherein
unlike. First, We may not be like to children in Theophylact.
ignorance, so Paul 1. Cor. 14. 20. In malice be ye children, but in
understanding men. 2. Not like to children in inconstancy, Ephesians. 4. 14.
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine. 3. Not weak in faith
as children; which are not able to discern spiritual things for want of
years of discretion. 4. Not like to children in Heming. post. in festo Michael.
seeking after untoward things, because their senses are not yet settled, our
Collos. 3. 2.
affections are to be set on things which are above, having our conversation in
Philip. 3. 20.
Heaven, and therefore we may not imitate children in eating dirt, and in
padling in the mire. The child plays with the light of the candle till his
finger be burnt, and Diez. con. 2. in festo Michael.
so the reprobate-wicked plays with Hell fire, reputing it a fable, till at
the last he comes to be tormented in that unquenchable flame. The child does
esteem an apple more then his fathers inheritance; so the witless worldling
prefers things temporal in this life, before the things eternal in the
kingdom of Heaven. In these childish humors and the like, we may not be like
to children.

But we must be like children, 1. As being Clemens strom. 4.
mundi corpore, sancti animo, chaste in body, pure in mind. 2. Like to children
in Heming.
obedience, for good children stand not reasoning what manner of thing it is
that their father commands, but instantly they follow his will and word as
their rule to work by. So faithful Abraham at Gods commandment was ready to
sacrifice his only begotten son Isaac, he stood not arguing the case, the
death of my child can do no good unto God, and it will procure much evil unto
me, but rather he thought that it is my father in Heaven who commands, and I
will obey.

Du Bartas hist. of Abraham.
He Is loath (alas) his tender son to kill,
But much more loath to break his fathers will.
3. Like to children in respect of merit, for as children can not boast of
their own deseruings against their parents: even so the followers of Christ
may not brag of their merits before God, but acknowledge themselves to be
babes, able to do nothing without his fatherly favor.

4. As little children commit themselves altogether unto the tuition of their
parents and guardians: even so Christians ought to 1. Pet. 5. 7.
cast all their care on Christ, as looking for every good gift at his hand.

5. Like to children as concerning 1. Cor. 14. 20.
malice, both Culman.
innocentia and ignoscentia: for as little children being injured take not any
revenge, but only make complaint either to their father or mother: even so,
when any wrong us we may not Romans 12. 19.
avenge our selves in recompensing evil for evil, or 1. Pet. 3. 9.
rebuke for rebuke, but only complain to God our father in Heaven, or to the
Church our mother on earth. It is written that vengeance belongs unto God, and
therefore we must humbly call upon him in our persecutions, as the Psalm. 35. 1.
Prophets did, O Lord, plead thou my cause with them that strive with me, and
fight against them that fight against me. Psalm. 43. 1.
Give sentence with me O God, defend my cause against ungodly people. And
Psalm 80. 1. Hear thou shepherd of Iraell, thou that leadest Joseph like a
sheep, show thy self thou that sit upon the Cherubims. And Psalm 83. 1.
Hold not thy tongue O God, keep not still silence, refrain not thy self, for
thou Lord have been our Psalm. 90. 1.
refuge from one generation to another.

I have Sir Ric. Barckley tract. of felicity lib. 5. page 451.
read of a reverend and religious Archbishop of Mentz, who (being a long time
depraved, and in fine deprived of his dignities and office by two corrupt
Cardinals his Judges, and a false hearted Advocate his familiar friend) out of
the bitterness of his spirit made this appeal from them unto the Lord of
Heaven. God knows (unto whom all things are naked) that I am unjustly
condemned, yet I will not appeal here from your sentence, for that I know ye
shall sooner be believed in your lying, then I am in speaking the truth; and
therefore I receive this heavy censure for the rebellions of my youth and
other sins; Nevertheless I appeal from your judgment to the Judge eternal,
and only wise, which is Christ Jesus, before whom I summon you. The Cardinals
fell into a laughing, and said, That if he would go before, they would follow.
It happened that the poor Bishop having withdrawn himself into a Monastery
dyed within a year and half after, and the Cardinals hearing thereof, in a
scoffing manner said one to another, that they must go seek the Archbishop.
Now within a few days after one of them was bloudily slain, and the other
grinding his teeth, eat up his own hands and dyed mad. And lastly the Judas
who betrayed him (I mean his false friend placed in his room) was so mortally
hated of all men for his sedition and cruelty, that being assaulted in a
Monastery, he was there butchered, and his carcass cast into the town ditch,
where lying three days, all sort of people both men and women used all manner
of despite upon it. An example very remarkable, teaching us not to despise one
of these little ones, because in heaven their angles always behold the face of
our Father which is in Heaven.

Again, we may complain to the Church our Mother, as in this present Chapter
at the 17. verse, If thy brother trespassing against thee, will not vouchsafe
to hear thy self alone, nor yet thy witnesses and arbitrators: Tell it to the
Church. He that commits his cause to the Magistrate civil or ecclesiastical,
gives place to divine Judgment, for as much as all higher powers are Romans 13.
1.
Gods ordinance, substituted Judges and deputies in his place. See Epist. 3.
Sund. after Epiphan.

Lastly like to children (as Christ expounds himself) in humbleness and
harmelesnesse. In humbleness, v. 4. Whosoever humbles himself as this child
etc. In harmlesnesse, verse. 6. Whosoever offends one of these little ones
etc. So Ser. 10.
S. Ambrose, in loc.
Theophylact, in loc.
Euthymius and other as well ancient as modern writers. As Iansen. Druthmarus.
if Christ should have said, Except ye turn from your ambition and
indignation, and become like to children, little ones in your minds, as they be
little ones in their bodies; unless ye become that by grace, which children
are by nature, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. I say by grace,
for every good gift is from above, descending from the Father of lights, and
therefore Christ here said not (as Diez.
one notes) Nisi efficiatis vos sicut par^los, sed nisi efficiamini. To become
like to little children in humbleness is not in our power, it is the work of
Gods hand and help. Pontan. ser. in festo Michael.
Yet to show that we must (as we may) work with his preuenient grace, Christ
adds in the next clause, Whosoever humbles himself: according to the saying
of Gregory, The good which a man does, is both the work of God, and the work
of man; of God, as being author in giving grace; of man, as being an actor in
using grace, yet so that he cooperate with grace by grace. See Epist. Sun. 11.
and 14. after Trinit. and Gospel on S. Marks day.

Whosoever humbles himselfe] Iansen.
That is, humbles his heart, for as Plato said, every man's soul is himself:
it is not sufficient that our words are humble, our gestures humble, our habits
humble (though I see that be more then many professors in our age will afford)
unless our souls and our selves are humble. Lord (said Psalm. 131.
David) I am not puffed in mind, I do not exercise my self in great matters
which are too high for me, but I refrain my soul and keep it low, like as a
child that is weyned from his mother, yea my soul is even as a weined child.
Men of great wits are commonly state-criticks, over curious eaues-dropers of
the Counsel table, prying into the secrets of court and Prince so long until
in fine they complain with Actaeon, cur aliquid vidi? for when our hearts are
sowred with the leaven of our pride, there arises often times a bitterness out
of the stomach into the mouth, so that we cannot forbear to speak 2. Pet. 2.
10.
ill of such as are in authority, yea profanely of the Kings sacred Majesty;
the spirit of wisdom gives another rule, 1. Thessal. 4. 11.
study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business. A private person
has a common wealth of his own, let him intend the government thereof in 1.
Tim. 5. 8.
providing for his household, in 1. Cor. 13. 14.
laying up for his children, in Ecclesiast. 9. 9.
rejoicing with the wife of his youth, abounding with all works of piety
toward God and pity toward his neighbor. He that thus humbles himself as a
little child, the same doubtless is a good subject unto the King, and shall
hereafter prove the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

All they which are drunken are not drunken with wine says Cap. 29. 9.
Esaias, for there is a dry drunkenness as well as a wet; ambition is a dry
drunkenness making such as are given over to humors of vain glory to stagger
often in the way, and sometime reele out of the way. This kind of drunkenness
made Lucifer reele out of heaven, Adam out of paradise, Saul out of his
kingdom, Nabuchadonozer out of men's society to converse with beasts. It is
impossible that great ones (I mean such as are drunken with their own
greatness) should either walk in the Mat. 7. 14.
narrow path, or enter in at the strait gate, only little ones are great ones
in Gods kingdom. So the text here whosoever humbles himself as a little
child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven: So the text elsewhere,
blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; theirs
is the kingdom of grace, which is heaven on earth: and theirs is the kingdom
of glory, which is heaven in heaven. See Gospel on all Saints day.

The Epistle,
2. TIM. 4. 5. Watch thou in all things, suffer afflictions, etc.
THis Epistle was written by Paul at Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap. 22. Idem
Primasius, Anselm, Lombard.
Rome in his last apprehension and imprisonment there, for so we may gather out
of these words, Cap. 1. verse 16. Onesiphorus was not ashamed of my chain,
but when he came to Rome carefully sought me, and found me, etc. It is an
admonition unto Timothy to Cap. 1. 6.
stir up the gift of God in him by the putting on of hands, and Aretius in
dispositione huius epist.
that is done by preaching sound Doctrine painefully, and by suffering for the
same patiently. This our text then is a short abridgement of the Bullinger apud
Marlorat in loc.
chief points in the whole letter, for Paul exhortes Timothy to diligent
preaching of the truth, in saying watch thou in all things, do the work of an
Evangelist: and to Martyrdom for the truth, in saying suffer afflictions: and
to both, in saying fulfill thine office unto the uttermost: all which
exhortations are hedged in as it were with a forcible reason at each side.

1. Timotheus ought to be vigilant in executing his office thoroughly, because
the time will come when as men shall not endure wholesome Doctrine, etc. 2.
Because Paul cannot any longer continue to help him, I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departing is at hand, etc.
Watch thou in all things] The time will come when as men will not endure sound
doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get
them a^ heap of teachers, and shall turn away their ears from the truth, and
shall be given unto fables. And therefore Lombard.
while thou have time, Theophylact.
before this dangerous time come, that Acts 20. 29.
greiuous wolves enter in among you, be watchful over the flock committed
unto thy charge: such as have itching ears are like to prove scabby sheep,
and therefore Oecumen.
prevent that mangie disease by possessing their ears with a 2. Tim. 1. 13.
form of sound words. Anselm.
Before they turn away from the truth and give themselves unto fables, 2. Tim.
2. 25.
instruct them in meeknes, 2. Tim. 4. 2.
preach the word in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, be
watchful, in Lombard.
discipline and doctrine, yea vigilant in all things, Primasius, Claudius,
Espencaeus.
that is, in all things which are profitable for thine hearers: Aretius.
or in all the works of an Evangelist and offices of thy calling use
watchfulnes: or (...), may be construed of all Aquin, Lombard, Espencaeus.
men, as if he should have said, the time will even shortly come, when as many
shall not endure wholesome doctrine; but endeavor thou to convert all sorts
of men unto the truth, according to that, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all nations,
and Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel unto every creature, teach all men, and
that by all means, do the work of an Evangelist thoroughly, that is, as he
speaks 1. Tim. 4. 12.
elsewhere, be to them an ensample both in word and in conversation, in love,
in spirit, in faith, in pureness. Many which are called lights of the world are
Ardens hom. in Euangel. in festo S. Luc.
fumantes magis quam flammantes, affording more smoke then flame; but let your
light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven; instruct thy flock by good deeds as well as holy
doctrine. Thoroughly to do the work of an Evangelist, Primasius, Anselm,
Caietan.
is to preach well and to live well, he that does both executes his office
unto the uttermost.

The perilous times instant in the days of Paul, are become extant in our
age. This prophecy (beloved) is fulfilled among us in the Church of England,
for albeit I confess to Gods glory, that there may be found a righteous
Abraham in Caldea, a just Lot in Sodom, a godly Daniel in Babylon, a patient
Job in the land of Husse, a devout Tobias in Nineu^e, a zealous Ananias in
Damasco. Though I say there be found wheat among tares, and corn among chafe,
and a pearl in a dunghill, and a lilie among thorns. Albeit there be many
good professors and true Christians among us 1. Cor. 15. 58.
abundant always in the work of the Lord; yet I fear that there be more, which
either revolt to popery, Turning away their ear from the Truth unto fables,
attending the spirits of 1. Tim. 4. 1.
error, and doctrines of Devils: or else start aside to schism, having
itching ears, and getting unto themselves after their own lusts an heap of
such irregular and hypocritical instructors, as shall do nothing else but
increase their itch by clawing: or else falling into foul Epicurisme, will not
endure the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is
according to godliness, 1. Tim. 6. 3.

Our Bishops and pastors therefore need to be watchful in all things, doing
thoroughly the works of Evangelists, and executing their office to the full.
The patriarch Genesis 31. 40.
Jacob commending his pastoral care to Laban, said, I was in the day consumed
with heat, and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
In which observe with Prolog. in 2. Epist. ad Tim.
Aquine three remarkable virtues in a good Pastor, Assiduitie, Patience,
Solicitousnesse: Assiduitie, looking to his flock night and day without
intermission. He that is a watchman ought continually to stand upon his
watchtower in the day time, and to set in his watch every night, Esaias 21. 8.
feeding his sheep in the day, praying for his sheep in the night: Patience,
both enduring the heat of present persecution, and the frost of future sear:
Solicitousnesse, in that his sleep departed from his eyes.

Now seeing our calling is so good, and our charge so great, it behooves all
people to Heb. 13. 7. 17.
remember and obey those which have the oversight of them, and submit
themselves, because they watch for their souls, as they that must give
account, that they may give it with joy, and not with grief.

Suffer afflictions] All that will according to the rules of Christianity live
godly, shall suffer 2. Tim. 3. 12.
persecution, especially the preachers of righteousness, to whom it belongs
ex offici^ to reprove, to rebuke, to exhort with all long suffering and
doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. 2. to pluck up, and to root out, and to throw down,
Jeremy 1. 10. in a word, to lift up their voice like a trumpet, showing Gods
people their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins, Esaias 58.
1. When our blessed Lord sent forth his Apostles to preach, he said, Mat. 10.
16.
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves, and when he sent
his Disciples to preach (as it is in the Gospel appointed to be read this day)
he said, Go your ways, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Bishops
succeeding the apostles are like sheep among wolves, inferior Ministers
succeeding the Disciples are like lambs among wolves, not as wolves among
wolves, or sheepheards among wolves, or sheep about wolves: but as sheep among
wolves, harmless and innocent lambs in the midst of hurtful and hungry
wolves. And Matthew. 23. 34. Behold, I send unto you Prophets, and wisemen, and
Scribes, and of them ye shall kill, and crucify, and of them ye shall
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from city to city. So that (as Hom.
6. de laudibus Pauli.
Chrysostom said) a man should not enter into this high and holy calling,
except he be willing to suffer a thousand deaths, as Paul 1. Cor. 15. 31. I
dye daily. Mat. 11.
John Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, and yet the people said he had
a devil. Christ himself came both eating and drinking, and they said he was a
glutton, and a wine-bibber. John 13. 16.
The servant is not greater then his master, neither is an Ambassador greater
then he that sent him. Mat. 10. 25.
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
the household? That Timothy therefore may fulfill his office, doing thoroughly
the work of an Evangelist, he must suffer afflictions as a good souldior of
Christ, ever ready to bear bloody blows of open enemies, and dry bobs of
false friends. The resolute doctor Martine Luther, opposing the Devil and the
Pope, who does exalt himself 2. Thessal. 2 4.
against all that is called God, in the midst of his trouble for the Gospel,
used merrily this byword, Loc. com. tit. antidota contra curas in qualibet
vocatione.
Mitte mundum vadere sicut vadit, nam vult vadere sicut vadit. Art thou called
to preach, execute the work of an Evangelist unto the full, and leave the
success to God. If the world do not believe, What is that to thee, said John
21. 12.
Christ unto Peter in the like cause, follow thou me, Luther vbi sup.
Tu me, me, me sequere, non tuas quaestiones aut cogitationes. And a reverend
Bishop in our age, who has had his part in afflictions, often repeates this
disti^hon:

Spernere mundum, spernere nullum, spernere sese, Spernere se sperni, quatuor
ista beant. Luther loc. com. tit. de ministerio verbi.
O economical labor is great, Political greater, Ecclesiastical greatest of
all, Vbi sup.
as Luther speaks, to preach the Gospel as we should, is to stir up all the
furies of Hell against us. And yet let not any Timothy be discouraged in his
office, seeing after his fight is ended, and his course finished, a crown of
righteousness is laid up for him, and shall be given unto him at the coming
of our Lord Jesus unto judgment.

Fulfill thine office unto the vttermost] Marlorat.
As if he should have said, thou can not execute thine office to the full,
unless thou be watchful, and suffer afflictions. Or by these things thou
shall make Erasmus.
proof of thy ministry to the whole world, when as they shall see thy doings
and sufferings answerable to thy doctrine and sayings. Painfully to preach, and
patiently to persevere, doing the works of an Evangelist, and suffering
affliction for the Gospel, are true Calvin.
notes of a true pastor.

I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand] Every true
Christian offers up himself an holy Romans 12. 1.
sacrifice to the Lord, Are^. in loc.
the which is begun in our baptism, continued in our life, finished at our
death. And surely (beloved) if all be blessed who dye Apocalyp. 14. ^3.
in the Lord, much more they who dye for the Lord, Psalm. 116. 13.
right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of such his Saints. The
glorious Martyr Polycarpus like a notable Ram picked out of a great flock,
fit for an acceptable burnt sacrifice to God, used Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap 15.
Diverse other holy Martyrs used the like form of prayer, apud Fox Martyrol.
this prayer when he was offered up: O father of thy well beloved and blessed
son Jesus Christ, thorough whom we have known thee; O God of the Angels, and
powers, and of all sorts of just men that live in thy presence: I thank thee
that thou have graciously vouch safed this day and this hour to allot me
aportion among the number of Martyrs, among the people of Christ, unto there
surrection of everlasting life both of body and soul in the incorruption of
the bo^y Ghost, among whom I shall be received in thy sight this day as a
fruitful and a well pleasing sacrifice, etc. How death is called a departing,
see Nunc dimittis in the Liturgy: how our life is a fight, Epist. 1. Sun.
after Easter, and Epist. 21. Sun. after Trinity; how a course or race, Epist.
on Sept^agesima Sunday.

There is laid up for me a crown of righteousnes] Almighty God renders heaven
as a just judge, D. Fulke, Marlorat, Piscator.
not to the worthiness of our works, but to the merits of Christ, and as due to
us by his promise freely made in Christ, in respect of us it is a garland of
favor only; but in respect of Christ who meritoriously purchased it for us, it
is a crown of justice. So S. Lib. de great. and liber^ arbitri^ cap. 6. and 7.
Tom. 7. fol. 890.
Augustine construeth our text, cui redderet coronam iustus iudex, sinon
donasset gratiam misericors pater? and quomodo esset ista corona iustitiae,
nisi praecessisset gratia quae iustificat impium? quomodo ista debita
redderetur, nisi prius illa gratuita donaretur. How should he repay as a just
Judge, unless he had first given as a merciful father? and how should this be
a crown of justice, if grace had not gone before which justifies the ungodly
man? dona sua coronat Deus, non merita tua, siergo dei dona sunt bona merita
tua, non Deus coronat merita tua tanquam merita tua, sed tanquam dona sua. See
Gospel on Septuagesima Sunday.

The Gospel.
LVKE 10. 1. The Lord appointed other seventy, etc.
IN this Scripture two points are to be considered especially

Vox domini, Christ's word and ordination of his Disciples, the Lord appointed
other seventy, etc. To whom he said, go your ways, behold, I send you forth,
etc. Via discipuli, the Disciples work and condition, as laborers in an
harvest, as lambs among wolves.
Of all which I have treated often elsewhere, but of the most obseruable notes
hereof especially, Gosp. 1. Sun* after Easter, and Gosp. on S. Andrews and
Ascension day. The reason why the Church allotted this Epistle for this
festival, is because S. Luke was (as Epiphan. h^res. 51.
some think) one of the seauenty Disciples, and the reason in appointing our
Gospel is for that S. Luke was an Evangelist.

The Epistle.
IVDE 1. Judas the servant of Jesus Christ, etc.
THis Epistle may be divided in two parts, a

Salutatio^, in which observe the Saluter, described by his Name, Judas.
Office, servant of Jesus Christ. Kindred, brother of James.
Saluted, commended by 3. graces Called. Sanctified. Preserved.
Salutation it self, mercy unto you and peace and love be multiplied.
Salve, consisting of an Exhortation, to continue steadfast in the faith once
given unto the Saints, etc. Reason, because certain ungodly men are craftily
crept in, etc.

Iudas] Judas signifies a I siodor. Origin. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Confessor, of which name there was another Apostle called Judas Mat. 10. 4.
Iscariot who betrayed Christ; in these two Iudasses is shadowed this mystery,
that in the visible Church there will always be some bad as well as good
professors; Judas a Io^ 6. 70.
Devil as well as Judas a Saint. See Gospel Sunday next before Easter.

The servant of Jesus Christ] Among all his titles he reputed this most
honorable, for it is an excellent freedom to serve the Lord, 1. Cor. 7. 22.
Romans 1. 1.
Paul and 2. Pet. 1. 1.
Peter name themselves first servants of Jesus Christ, and then Apostles: and
S. James which is called the Lords brother, Galat. 1. 19. Leaving that name
styles himself the servant of Jesus Christ, James 1. 1. If it were such a
noble privilege to be subject unto Acts 22* 25. 28.
Caesar, how much more to be servant unto Christ which is the King of all
Kings. And that in regard of his protection, and provision, as for his
protection, he says, Joshua 1. 9.
I the Lord thy God will be with thee whether soever thou go, I will not
Heb. 13. 5.
fail thee, nor for sake thee; and then if God be for us who can be against
us, Romans 8. 31. As for provision, all his servants in this world have bread
enough, Luke 15. 17. And in the world to come they shall be no less then
Kings, Mat. 19. 28.
sitting upon thrones, having Apocalyp. 7. 9.
palms in their hands, and on their heads crowns of gold, Apocalyp. 4. 4.
See Nunc dimittis and Epist. on S. James day.

The brother of Iames] He remembers his kindred and alliance partly to Aquin,
Aretius.
distinguish himself from Judas the traitor, and partly to gain credit to
his writing. Calvin.
For albeit the word of God depend not upon the worth of men, yet it is
certainly true that his doctrine is best accepted, whose person is most
honored. If a preacher then be borne of nobles, or allied to men of great name
and quality, let him not in any sort neglect this outward blessing of God, but
use it (as S. Jude here) to the furtherance of the Gospel, and setting forth
of Gods glory: James and Jude were brethren in blood, and brethren in good; (as
Aquin and the gloss) fratres natura, fide, doctrina, vita. How Judas is
distinguished from Simon, and why both are joined together in one festival, I
refer thee to Baronius Tom. 1. ad an. 68. sol. 645.
annal. Eccles. and not at. in Romans martyrolog. October. 28.

To them which are called and sanctified* To be called into the Church, and
unto the hearing of Christ's Gospel is Piscator.
vocation external, to be sanctified is vocation internal, to be preserved in
Christ is vocation D. Willet in loc.
eternal. Here then are set three parts of our justification and
incorporation into Jesus Christ, vocation by God the father, sanctification by
the holy Ghost, preservation by Christ. Vocation is an Bullinger.
effect of election, and so happily S. Jude calls them called, whom God has
elected, as Romans 1. 7. Beloved of God, called to be Saints: Marlorat.
he does insinuate that we come not unto God except he call us, if we love him,
it is because he loved us first: 1. John 4. 19. As he speaks by the mouth of
his holy Esaias 65. 1.
Prophets, I have been sought of them that asked not, I was found of them that
sought me not, he calls us before we call on him.

The 2. grace is sanctification, and sanctified; such as are called are by
nature the children of Ephesians. 2. 3.
wrath as well as other; it is in vain therefore to be called, that is,
stirred and moved to receive the faith, unless we be sanctified, James 2. 14.
What avails it (my brethren) though a man says he has faith, when he has
no works. Mark 6. 20.
Herod seemed to be called, and somewhat inwardly touched, but he would not
forsake his secret sin of incest in keeping his brothers wife. Acts 8. 13.
Simon Magus was baptized, and so called, but he was not sanctified to leave
his gainefull sin of covetousness. Judas as being an Apostle was called, and
yet he was a devil: and many deceive themselves who think hearing of the
word to be sufficient without doing, James 1. 22. A sheep resembles a true
Christian, every thing in a sheep is good and useful, his fleece is good, his
fell is good, his flesh is good, his entrals, yea his excrements are good: and
so the sanctified Christian is a servant unto all the servants of God, every
good gift in him is profitable, to some he lends his fleece, clothing the
naked: to some his bread, in feeding the hungry: to some he lends his eyes,
and so becomes a guide to the blind: to some he lends his strength, and so
becomes feet to the lame: to some he lends his understanding, and so
becomes an instructor of the simple: he becomes (as 1. Cor. 9. 22.
Paul speaks) all things unto all men, that he may win some unto Chtist. In
this point of doctrine the Papists have slandered us exceedingly, saying, that
our divines in preaching of faith, have destroyed good works; whereas we
profess that our calling is fruitles without holiness of life. See Epistle 2.
Sun. in Lent.

Preserved in Jesus Christ] As it is in vain to be called first, unless we be
sanctified: so likewise to be sanctified, unless we may be kept and preserved
in Jesus Christ not to lose our sanctification. Our life is a continual
warre-fare upon earth, and therefore though we be called outwardly, and
sanctified in some part inwardly; yet the Apocalyp. 127.
Dragon and his Angels fight against us daily, that we may fall from faith and
hope received, that we may Epist. Jude verse. 4.
turn the grace of God into want onnesse, like the 2. Pet. 2. 22.
dog returned to his own vomit, and the sow that was washed to the wallowing
in the mire, and so Galat. 3. 3.
end in the flesh, howsoever we began in the spirit. 2. Tim. 4. 10.
Demas fell away from the Gospel embracing the present world, many are called
but few chosen, Mat. 20. 16. It behooves us therefore continually to pray that
Christ Jesus the great 1. Pet. ^. 25.
shepherd of our souls, may hold us in his hands from the griping paws and
grinding Jaws of the roaring Lion, who goes about daily seeking whom he may
devour. And surely such as are given unto Christ, effectually called, and
truly sanctified; shall be preserved to the end. Zach. 4. 9.
Zerubbabel did both lay the foundation of the temple, and finish it: so God
will establish and make perfect his work begun in us, Psalm. 68. 28. He that
has begun this work of our salvation will also perform it, Philip. 1. 6. I
know Gods elect may for a time lose some good means, and some great measure of
grace too: David, and Aaron, and Peter, and other have fallen foully, yea
fully, but none finally: God is more watchful in helping us, then Satan is or
can be wrathful in hurting us. He which is the father of mercies gives us
preuenient grace, subsequent grace, cooperant grace, grace before grace, and
grace after grace, 1. Pet* 1. 5.
keeping us by his power thorough faith, and preserving us to his heavenly
kingdom. It is not of our selves that we persevere thus unto the end and in
the end, it is the power of God, who gives (as our Apostle shows here) grace
first to be called, secondly to be sanctified, thirdly, to be reserved or
preserved in Jesus Christ.

Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied] Aretius.
Mercy from God the father, in the forgiveness of your sins: Peace in Christ
in feeling this forgiveness: Love in the holy Ghost in being assured of Gods
grace toward us every day more and more: Mercy from God the father of Mercy:
Peace, from God the son, the Prince of peace: Love, from God the holy Ghost,
the love of the father and the son. Mercy, in pardoning your sins; Peace,
in quieting your conscience; Love, joining you to God, and one to another:
Marlorat.
or he wi^eth increase of Gods mercy toward them, and a multiplication of
their peace and love toward one another. Aquin.
That their sins may be forgiven, he prays for Gods mercy: that they may
forgive other men their trespasses, he prays for peace: that both these may be
multiplied in them, he prays for love. First, he begins with Gods mercy, which
is the fountain of every good and perfect gift, if we taste of his mercy, we
shall soon be filled with his other graces, he that has enough mercy can want
nothing. For as Samsons chief strength was in his hair, so Gods chief virtue
in his mercy. Mercy (good Lord) is the total sum, in the humble suite of a
sinner; O Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners, is the first petition; and
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the last in our Liturgy.

When I gave all diligence] Here S. Jude begins to prescribe his Salve, which
is an exhortation to contend earnestly for the faith, and the causes moving him
to write this unto the Saints are two: 1. His duty, when I gave all diligence
to write unto you of the common salvation, etc. 2. Their danger, because they
nourished certain seducers as serpents in their own breasts, whom he
describes by their

sin in general, verse 4. showing their hypocritical entering into the
Church, craftily crept in. ungodly carriage being entered, In their life,
turning the grace of God into wantonness. In their doctrine denying God, which
is the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

In particular from the 4. verse to the 17.
Punishment, of old ordained to this condemnation, and so S. Jude describes
these wicked impostors and false brethren, as Pope Walsingham in Ed* 1. page 26.
Celestine did his successor Bonifacius the 8. Ascendisti vt vulpes, craftily
crept in; regnabis vt leo, denying God and turning his grace into wantonness:
morieris vt canis, of old ordained to this condemnation.
The Gospel.
JOHN 15. 17. This command I you, that ye love together, etc.
CHrist in this Gospel is said to do three things especially: 1. He does
exhort his followers unto mutual love: 2. He comforts them against the worlds
hatred: 3. He promises to send unto them the holy Ghost, who being the
comforter and the spirit of love may both instruct them how to love together,
and how to suffer affliction in the world. Of the first I have spoken Epist.
Sun. 1. after Trinit. Of the second, Epist. 2. Sun. after Trinit. Of the third
Gosp. on the Sun. after Ascension.

Epistle
APOCALYP. 7. 2. Behold, I John saw another Angel, etc.
IN this Scripture concerning the sealing of the Saints and servants of our
God, observe the

Minister sealing, An Angel ascending from the rising of the Sun, etc. Men
sealed, I heard the number of them who were sealed, etc.
Behold, I John saw another Angell] In the words immediately going before, S.
John said, he saw four Angels stand on the four corners of the earth, holding
the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth,
neither on the Sea, neither on any tree. These four Angels are four agents of
Satan, Bale^ Marlorat in loc.
Hypocrites with their impostures, Antichrists with their pestilent decrees and
traditions, Tyrannous Princes with their bloody Laws, Ungodly Magistrates
with their ignorant blindness. These four reign in the four quarters of the
world with lies in hypocrisy, with errors in superstition, with tyranny in
power, and with cruelty in executing humane Laws. Or these four Angels
employed by the prince of darkness, are four works of darkness, Contention,
Ambition, Heresy, War. Apocalyp Apocalypsc^s.
Contention arising from the East; Ambition arising from the West; Heresy from
the South; War from the North. Or as Hom. in loc.
Ardens, These four Angels are the spirit of Luxury, the spirit of Pride, the
spirit of Gastrimargie, the spirit of Avarice. For as the Joel 1. 4.
Prophet speaks, That which is left of the palmer worm has the grasshopper
eaten, and the residue of the grasshopper has the canker worm eaten, and the
residue of the canker worm has the caterpiller eaten. Luxury consuming the
flesh in which it is bred, resembles the palmer worm; Lofty pride with her
low fall the skipping grasshopper; Ravenous gluttony the canker worm;
Cutthroat avarice the caterpiller. Now Luxury does hurt many trees in the
garden of God, and that which luxury has left, has pride devoured; and that
which is left of pride, gluttony has eaten; and that which is left of all
these vices, is often overcome by Covetousness. Aretius.
Or happily these four Angels, are 4. great powers in the world, the Turk,
the Roman Emperor, the Pope, the king of Spain combined in a bloody league
with other popish Princes, as Genesis 49. 5.
brethren in evil. All these furiously raging together against the Lord, and
against his anointed, withhold the four winds of the earth, that the wind
should not blow. Bullenger.
that is, They persecute the preachers of the word, and hinder the doctrine of
the spirit called often in John 3. 8* Acts 2. 2.
holy bible Wind; least it should blow upon the earth, which is the Cant. 4.
16.
garden of God, driving from thence all filth and corruption: Or on the Sea,
Balaeus.
that is a wavering conscience, bringing men to a quiet haven and hold in the
Lord: Or upon any tree, that is growing here, which are men Psalm 1. 3.
planted by God on earth to bring forth fruit in Christ unto the comfort of
other. All these wicked angels exercise both head and hand, how to cross the
proceedings of the Gospel, and to drive this Heavenly blast away. The Turk
does infest Christendom with his war; the Roman Emperor with his edicts; the
Pope with his excommunications and Bulls; the popish Princes (which have
committed abomination with the great whore of Babel, and are Apocal. 17. 2.
drunken with the wine of her fornication) hold the winds of the earth by
their inquisition, fire, faggot, treachery, rebellion. And for this end they
found and feed Monasteries of Friars, and Colleges of Jesuits, as the
Seminaries of sedition and conspiracy.

Or four, being a Aretius.
complete number, it does insinuate that all execrable ministers of Satan in
the whole world, cross (so much as may be possible) the blowing of the spirit
both in the books of holy Scriptures, and in the mouths of godly Preachers.
In nature their is but one wind, yet said to be diverse in respect of the
diverse corners of the earth out of which it blows, East, West, North, and
South; and so called four winds in regard of the 4. quarters of the world. In
like sort the spirit is but one Ephesians. 44. But it is termed here four winds
in respect of the English gloss.
four Evangelists who wrote the Gospel. It is diverse Bullenger. Marlorat.
for that it blows on diverse men diversely, giving to one the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another faith, to another the
gifts of healing, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to
another diversity of tongues; all these things works even the self same
spirit, distributing severally to every man as he will, 1. Cor. 12. 11. These
manifold blastes of the spirit, or (as S. 1. Cor. 12. 4.
Paul speaks) these diversities of gifts, and diversities of administrations,
and diversities of operations are withstood by reprobate men and Angels in
every corner of the world; by the Papists especially inhibiting the people to
read the Gospel in the mother tongue, and prohibiting the Pastors to preach
the Gospel in any tongue.

Now while these cursed Angels were stopping the wind, or letting the Gospels
free passage, behold another Angel ascending from the rising of the sun,
which had the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the
four Angels (to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the sea) saying,
hurt not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their forehead. Albeit the Dragon and his Angels rage
never so much against the Church, yet the 2. Tim. 2. 19.
foundation of God remains sure; and has this seal, the Lord knows who
are his; and John 10. 28.
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand.
Indeed the four foul Angels have power to hurt the land and the sea, but it
is limited, a power given of God, and God is 1. Cor. 10. 13.
faithful, who will not suffer his elect to be tempted above their ability,
but sends one good Angel to suppress four bad, crying to them, and that with
a loud voice, hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees.

Some think this Angel arising from the East was Brightman in loc.
Constantine the great; Ardens, Aretius, Meyer.
other expound this of Christ; other of the Ba^aeus.
Ministers of Christ: it is certain that Constantine, succeeding immediately
Dioclesian and other persecuting Emperors, was a notable Esaias 49. 23.
nourishing father unto the Church, under whose Ezechiel. 31. 6.
shadow the Christians dwelt and prospered a long time. He did (according to
the tenor of our text) ascend from the Sea Apocalyp. Apocalypse.
east, and he had the seal of the living God, that is, the true faith of
Christ, openly professing it, and Socrates hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
establishing it also by the consent of three hundred eighteen reverend Bishops
in the Council of Nice, summoned by him against Arius and other impious Angels
holding the four winds of the earth. This Emperor cried with a loud voice to
the wicked instruments of Satan, hurt not the earth, etc. He made many Eusebius
hist. lib. 10. cap. 5. 6. 7. and de vita Constantin. lib. 2. cap. 43. 44 45.
proclamations and edicts in favor of the Christians, in so much as the whole
rabble of the hateful enemies of God (as Hist lib. 10. cap. 1.
Eusebius reports) seemed to be wiped away from the sight of men, according
to that of the Psalm. 37. 36.
Psalmist, I saw the wicked exalted as the Caedars of Libanus, and flourishing
like a green bay tree: but I went by, and lo he was gone, I sought his place,
but it could no where be found.

Other construe this rather of Christ as being Malac. 3. 1.
Angelus testamenti the messenger and Angel of the covenant, the Malac. 4. 2.
sun of righteousness manifesting himself in the great darkness of
Anti-christianisme. He has indeed the seal of the living God, as being the
Heb. 1. 3.
character of his person, and brightness of his glory, Romans 1. 4.
declared mightily to be the son of God. He cries with a loud voice to the
four foul Angels, Aretius.
that is, he fights against such as fight against his elect servants, and
delivers us out of the hands of all our enemies. In the Bullinger.
darkness of blind superstition he does illuminate his, and seal them in their
forehead, making them English gloss.
openly to confess his faith unto salvation Mark 8. 38.
among an adulterous and sinful generation. D. Fulke in loc.
This sealing in the forehead is not an allusion to the sign of the cross,
for many reprobates have received that in baptism; the true mark whereby Gods
elect are discerned from all other, is a lively faith in the heart, breaking
forth into confession with the mouth, according to that of Romans 10. 10.
Paul, with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth he
confesses to salvation.

Now for as much as faith is by hearing, and hearing is not without a preacher,
and how shall any preach except they be sent, Romans 10. 14. 15? Therefore some
divines have conceived, that the true Prophets and Preachers are this Angel
ascending from the rising of the sun. Balaeus.
They have power to mark the faithful unto life everlasting, their tongues
are the Psalm. 45. 2.
writing pens of the holy Ghost, by whom the word of God is registered in the
hearts of them that believe. This Angel had the seal of God in his hand, and
the Prophets have the powerful and effectual word of truth in their mouth;
and they cry with a loud voice to the wicked instruments of Satan, hurt not
the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees. As if they should say though some
hearts are worldly, some consciences wavering, some minds unfruitful and
barren; yet they may repent and come to goodness. When the seed is sown some
falls upon Mat. 13. 8.
good ground, and brings forth fruit in abundance, cease therefore from
withholding the sweet blast of the Scriptures, till we have sealed up the
chosen servants of our God in their forehead, and imprinted a true belief in
their hearts by his spirit. S. Ephesians. 1. 13. Uide Zanchium 168.
Paul has said all this in a few words, after that ye heard the word of truth
even the Gospel of your salvation, and therein believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise.

Vitorinus com in loc.
Some think this Angel is Elias the Prophet, imagining that he shall in the
latter end of the world come again to fight against Antichrist, and to seal
Gods elect in their forehead. But our renowned Sovereign King James in his
From the 62. page to the 80.
premonition has excelle^tly discovered the vanity of this idle Jewish fable;
besides our text says in the plural number till we have sealed, etc. Balaeus.
Insi^uating that by this Angel is not meant one Preacher only but many, yea
so many as be both instant and constant in crying with a loud voice to the le^d
Angels, hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees. If this one point
were well understood and learned, it would make you more diligent in coming to
the temple, which is the house of God; in reading the Scriptures, which is the
book of God; in hearing the true Prophets, which are the Ministers of God,
appointed for this end to separate you from the wicked of the world, and to
seal you with his mark for his kingdom. Hitherto concerning the Minister
sealing, I am now to treat of the men sealed, all agreeing in one confession,
howsoever differing in condition and country.

There were sealed one hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes
of the children of Israel] The Jews are sealed first, as being Gods Exodus 4.
22.
eldest sons, a peculiar and precious people chosen to himself Deuteronomy 7. 6.
above all other in the world. After them in course follow the Gentiles as the
younger sons of God, for there was sealed an infinite number of other nations,
as well as a great number of the Jews. And among both Jews and Gentiles all
sorts of men were sealed, the people so well as the Priest, even twelve
thousand of every tribe, so well as twelve thousand of the tribe of Leui. And
among the people men of all occupations and* trades, for Aretius.
by the land, he means such as till the ground; and by the sea, mariners and
Merchants Psalm. 107. 23.
occupying their business in great waters; and by trees, such as are noble,
rich, and potent in a flourishing estate. So that men in Acts 10. 35.
every nation of every fashion, if they fear God and work righteousness, are
sealed with his seal for his chosen servants: Cap. 9. 4.
Ezechiel reports that none are sealed, but such as mourn and cry for all
the abominations that are done here, none but such as grieve to see the Gospel
of Christ despised, and his Church despited. On the contrary, such as are
common blasphemers of his name, contemners of his word, and persecutors of his
Prophets, have not the seal of the living God, but the Apocal. 13. 16.
mark of the dying beast. In that it is said one hundred and forty four
thousand were sealed of the children of Israel, Aretas observes that every one
of the twelve Apostles multiplied his talent twelve times, a curious and a
conscionable conceit too, but how consonant to the text, I leave to the
judicious examination of the learned and godly, remembering the resolution of S.
Lib. 1. de Trinit. cap. 3.
Augustine in a case not much unlike, quisquis haec legit, vbi pariter certus
est, pergat mecum: vbi pariter haesitat, quaerat mecum: vbi errorem suum
cognoscit, redeat ad me; vbi meum, reuocet me. Nam in his vt in omnibus meis
scriptis August proaem. in lib. 3. de trinit.
non modo pium lectorem, sedetiam liberum correctorem desidero.

The Gospel.
MAT. 5. 1. Jesus seeing the people, went up into a mountain, and when he was
set, his disciples came to him and after that he had opened his mouth, he
taught them, saying, blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven, etc.
THe first word of the first lesson in Christ's first Sermon is blessed, a point
of conning and of comfort; of conning and good art, woeing us in the very first
entrance to mark well his whole discourse, because Arist. ethic. lib. 1. cap.
1. and 2.
never any was, is, or shall be, but he desires (according to his own sense)
to be blessed. It is the devils oratory to deter men from piety with an
opinion of unhappiness and trouble which accompany the godly, but the
rhetoric of Gods holy spirit allureth us contrariwise by sweet premises, and
gracious promises, blessed are the poor, blessed are they that mourn, blessed
are the meek, etc. And it affordes comfort, for hereby we know that the
Gospel is a good-spell, even Luke 2. 10.
tidings of great joy to all people; when as we read that the first apothegme
of Christ's first Homily reported Aretius.
at large, was, blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven; and the last period in his last homily, Mat. 28. 20.
behold, I am with you always until the end of the world.

Now (beloved) all his actions are our instructions, it therefore behooves us
in winning our children, our friends, our auditors unto God and godliness, to
learn and use this gentle craft, being the sons of consolation, as well as
the Mark 3. 17.
Boanarges the sons of thunder. As sometime we must Mat. 11. 17.
mourn, that ye people may lament; so likewise sometime pipe, that the people
may dance. There was in the Arc of the testament, Heb. 9. 4. The golden pot of
Manna, so well as the rod of Aaron; and a Preacher (as Bernard wittily) should
resemble a good mother which has vbera, so well as verbera; like a Be says
Ser. 83.
Ambrose which has honey so well as a sting. As it is our part to be 1. Cor. 4.
1.
disposers of the Gospel, and messengers of peace: Romans 10. 14.
so let it be our art to call home such as are out of the way, and to restore
such as fall in the way with the spirit of Galat. 6. 1.
meekenes, for blessed are the poor in spirit, etc.

Of this Apothegme there be two parts a

Proposition, blessed are the poor in spirit. Exposition, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.
In the proposition observe the

Subject, poor in spirit. Predicate, blessed; for so we may convert it aptly,
the poor in spirit are blessed.
Concerning the subject I find three sorts of poor, namely

1. The worlds poor. 2. The devils poor. 3. Gods poor.
The worlds poor are either impotent, or impudent poor: impotent by birth, or
casualtie; by birth, as the fatherles orphans, and beggars children,
especially such as are creeples or borne blind; by casualtie, as the decayed
householder, the maimed soldier, the visited with any grievous plague or
sickness: all these kinds of poor wretches are to be relieved as well with our
alms as advise. To bind up their Esaias 61. 1.
broken hearts, and to Galat. 6. 2.
bear part of their burden, is a great evidence that thou art Gods heir, Luke
6. 36.
merciful as our father in heaven is merciful; Blessed in this world, for so
David in the 41. Psalm. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the
Lord comfort him in his affliction, and makes all his bed in his sickness.
Blessed in the world to come, for so the son of David even Christ himself,
come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you, for I
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me drink: I was
a stranger, and ye lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me. It is therefore my humble suite to those (which are by statute
made overseers of our overseers for the poor) that hereafter in every village
the distressed members of Christ, even Ephesians. 5. 30.
flesh of his flesh; and bone of his bone, may be more charitably provided for,
according to the true meaning of godly laws established in this case.

Among impudent poor, some be little beggars, and some be great beggars; among
little beggars I marshall the riotous spend-all, and the lasie get-nothing. The
drunkard and the glutton shall be poor says Proverb. 23. 21.
Solomon, and no marvel, seeing in a little while they draw their whole
patrimony, woods, house, land, thorough the narrow passage of their throat,
etc. It is therefore my humble suite to the reverend and grave Judges of the
land, that they would in their circuits, upon all occasions offered, endeavor
to suppress and disgrace these brutish, incorrigible, ding-thriftie
dearth-makers. It is said of the Surgeon, that he must have a Ladies hand, and
a Lions heart: But it is to be wished, that a Judge in this corrupt age should
have contrariwise, the heart of a Lady, for, Blessed are the poor in spirit,
yet in punishing notorious offenders, the hand of a Lion. It is an old saying,
Qui non corripit, corrumpit; and all honest men howsoever otherwise poor in
spirit, have notwithstanding evermore complained of a cruel pity, which is
the mother of licentiousness, and licentiousness is the mother of contempt,
and contempt is the mother of sedition, and sedition is the mother of
rebellion, and in fine rebellion is the mother of desolation.

Of Rogues, I mean vagabond idle persons, out of covenant, out of course,
there be two sorts, as namely, wild rogues so bred, a great part whereof is an
uncircumcised generation, unbaptized, out of the Church, and so consequently
Ephesians. 2. 12.
without God in the world. Other being better bred, for want of good discipline
turn rogues, and become tame ruffians, and these drones have swarmed so much
in some parts of our County, that they drive many good bees out of their
hiues, in plain English, many Gentlemen and Justices too, during all the hard
winter, out of the Country into the City, where they lie non-resident from
their benefice, their mansion house where their living is; and non-resident
also from their charge, where they should execute his Highness Commission for
the peace. I do not think with De vtilitate condit. human. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Innocentius, Iustitia non datur nisi vendatur, that Justice is dearly bought
in any corner of our Kentish soil (God forbid) and yet in the behalf of my
poor neighbors, I must say, that it is pity Justice should (considering the
number of Justices) be so far fetched in the midst of winter. Ungodly
politicians, who make the works of Lucian their old Testament, and Machiuels
prince their new: thrust themselves into the center of the world, as if all
times should meet in them and their ends, never caring in any storm what
becomes of the ship of estate, so they may be safe in the coc-boat of their
own fortune. But nature tells thee, that no man is borne for himself; and
Galat. 5. 13.
Scripture tells thee, that we must in love serve one another. Our Christian
estate necessarily requires that some should be great, and other little; that
some should be subject, and other sovereign; that some should command, and
other obey: But says our blessed Savior (speaking to his Disciples, as
representing the whole Church) Luke 22. 26.
He that is greatest among you, let him be as the least, and he that is chief,
as he that does serve. Praesis, vt prosis, as Lib. 3. de'consid. ad Eugen.
Bernard told Eugenius, and as In Mat. 20. 27.
Martine Bucer notes out of these words of Christ against Anabaptists, He
which according to the will of the Lord bears rule godly, does nothing less
then domineere, yea, most of all serve. The Justice, the Judge, yea, the King
himself (as statesmen are bold to call him) is a great servant of the Common
wealth. It is therefore my humble suit to the worthy Knights, and other
Justices (having received large money for the building and maintayning of
Bride-wols in our County) to perform better offices in banishing all
unprofitable vagabonds out of our coasts.

I am now to speak of no small Beggars; of such as beg in the courts and houses
of Kings; of such as come to something, when other come to nothing; of whom in
old time Roderic Mors complaint to the Parliament of England cap. 10. printed
at Geneua by Michael Boys.
complaint was made to the Parliament of England, That they did by cob-web
subtleties of the Law, first rob the Subject, and then afterward rob the King.
I hope there be none such in our days under the government of our most
illustrious, wise, learned, meek, religious, and pious Prince K. James, (whom I
beseech God of his infinite goodness to prosper long among us in health, and
wealth, and all happiness, as well concerning this, as the world to come) But
if a Judge hereafter in another age should unhappily meet with such a sturdie
beggar, I wish heartily that he may follow Justice Job 29. 14.
Jobs example, who says of himself, I put ^n righteousness, and it clothed
me; my judgment was a roab and a crown. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was
I to the lame. I was a father unto the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out diligently. I brake also the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the
pray out of his teeth. If he prove too great a fish to be caught in thy net,
envy not his prosperity, for he builds his house as the Job 2^. 18.
moth; and if thou possess thy soul in patience but a little while, Psalm. 37.
10.
thou shall look after his place, and he shall not be found. As he was a
beggars brat, so he shall dye the first gentleman, and the last knight of his
name.

There be three ranks of the Devils poor.

Covetous. Vainglorious. Superstitious.
The Covetous, who want even that they have, being as they are termed aptly the
greatest Misers in the world, like the market horse laden with dainty cates,
and yet feeds on thistles.

The vainglorious, who to get a name, forget often their estate, as certain
Philosophers in old time (whom I will not name, because they did it for a name)
cast all their goods into the Sea, least they should hinder their courses in
the studies of philosophy. Nolebant censu abundare terreno, vt magis sensu
abundarent suo, says a Iansen. concord. cap. 39.
learned expositor upon this text. And certain Schismatickes in latter ages,
have for the crasie credit of a desperate cause forsaken their own Countries,
and their own free-holds which were certain, to depend upon the breath and
bread of other men which is uncertain.

The Superstitious, as the popish Monks and Friars, who transported with a
blind devotion, abandoned all worldly possessions, and yet abounded in all riot
and excess; Regulares gulares, they were more then men at their meat, less
then women at their work, says In coll^ franciscan.
Erasmus. (...) in loc. c^.
Albertus duke of Saxony was wont to say, that he had three wonders in one
City, namely three Monasteries, For the Friars of the first had children, and
yet no wines: The Friars of the second had a great deal of corn, and yet no
land: The Friars of the third abounded with moneys, and yet had no rent.

Poem. de corrup^ statu Ecclefiae per Illiri^.
Hic dolu^ est magnus, lupus est qui creditur agnus. So then (as you see) the
Devils poor differ very much one from another: for the Covetous have the
possession; but not the free use: the Superstitious have the use, but not the
free possession: the Vainglorious upon the point have neither free use, nor
free possession of such worldly wealth as they desire, being all in their
several kinds exceeding poor.

The third sort of poor are Gods poor, which abound with inward wants, and
want also many times outward abundance. Where of some undergo patiently loss
of their goods, as Job; other forgo cheerfully the use of their goods, as the
blessed Apostles. These are the poor in spirit, or (as In regulis
contracti^ribus quaest. 205. Idem Beza in loco.
S. Basile construeth it) the poor for the spirit, wholly submitting themselves
to be ruled by Gods holy spirit, the humble and the meek, truly feeling their
inward, and patiently bearing their outward poverty. Christ then here does not
understand such as are merely the worlds poor; for albeit they be humbled,
yet are they not humble; nor the devils poor, for they are neither actually
humbled nor humble; but only Gods poor, which are both humbled and humble,
humbled in their poverty, humble in their spirit, blessed are the poor in
spirit.

So S. In loco.
Hierome, Lib. ^. deser. do^. in moute.
Augustine, Lib. 5. in Luc. cap. de beatitud.
Ambrose, Lib. d^ beatitud.
Gregory Nyssen, In loc.
Theophylact, In loc.
Euthymius and other Doctors expound it. And this appears to be Christ's
meaning in that the word spirit signifies elsewhere will, as Mat. 26. 41. The
spirit indeed is ready, but the flesh is weak, and 1. Cor. 7. 34. The virgin
cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in
spirit, that is, in thought and mind. So that to be poor in spirit, is nothing
else, but willingly to Mat. 16. 24.
forsake our selves, and to follow Christ, evermore being ready for his sake
to bear the loss of our wealth, when as we are made poor; and to forbear
the use of our wealth, when as we are rich, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
using the world as though we used it not. For this blessing belongs as well to
the rich, as to the poor. As the bad poor are proud in spirit; so the good
rich are poor in spirit. Ardens hom. in loc.
As some be poor in substance, and not in spirit; so some rich in substance,
yet poor in spirit. A cable untwined in every cord and thread, may go through
the Mark 10. 25.
needles eye: so the rich man, if once he be well untwined, dividing his goods
according to the will of the giver, may notwithstanding all his greatness
walk in the narrow path, and enter into the strait gate of Heaven.

The worlds poor are miserable, because dejected in their poverty: The devils
poor cursed, because proud* in their poverty: Gods poor only blessed, as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2. Cor. 6. 10.

Here then observe what an excellent virtue contentation and lowliness of
mind is. As the first vice the Devil thrust upon Adam was coffeehouse and
pride: So the first virtue Christ commends unto his followers, is an humble
contentment. The eight beatitudes (says Ser. de ^. Beatud.
Cromatius) are like Jacobs ladder, reaching from earth unto Heaven; and the
very first step of the ladder as the Theophylact. in loc.
foundation of the rest is lowliness of mind. For as God is said to Job 26. 7.
hang the earth upon nothing, that it might wholly depend upon him: even so
does he found the world of his Christian commonwealth upon nothing; and this
nothing is an humble dis-prising and forsaking of all our own abilities, and
an only relying upon his almighty power and goodness. As pride is the
beginning and original of sin, Ecclesiasticus 10. 14. because iniquity is
nothing else but inequality, and pride is most unjust, attributing unto it
self too much, unto all other too little: so contrariwise, contented
humbleness is the Primer, and as it were A. B. C. of our Christian Ethics; it
is as Ambrose and Bernard write, the mother virtue, yea, Custos sigilli magni,
the keeper of all Gods great seals and graces, without which his other gifts
are rather curses then blessings to us. It is an eminent grace for a man to
speak with the tongues of 1. Cor. 13. 1.
Angels, and so to transport other with the wind of words and floods of
eloquence whither he list; and yet if learning be not seasoned with humility,
knowledge says 1. Cor. 8. 1.
Paul puffs up, and as Aristotle speaks, it is armata iniustitia, like a
sword in a mad-mans hand. Fasting that tames the body, without humility,
makes proud the mind, I fast twice in the week, quoth the Pharisee, Luke 18.
12. Alms are a Heb. 13. 16.
sacrifice pleasing to God, for he that Proverb. 19. 17.
gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord: yet if a Trumpet be blown, and
we give merely to be seen of men; if we bear not our poor brethren in our
bowels and bosom, we shall have no reward of our Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 6. 1. And therefore Christ inculcates often this one lesson as well by
pattern as precept, Learn of me, for I am humble and meek. John 16. 33.
In the world ye shall have affliction, he that will follow me, must of
necessity Mat. 16. 24.
forsake himself, and yet be of good cheer, for Mark 10. 29.
there is no man that has forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold, now at this present houses, and brethren, and
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the
world to come eternal life. I tell you, that in the beginning which you shall
find most true in the end, Blessed are the poor in spirit.

For, Blessed is the predicat of the proposition. And there is a twofold
blessedness, Beatitudo viae, and Beatitudo patriae, blessedness in this
world, and blessedness in the next. The poor in spirit have the promises of
both, 1. Tim. 4. 8. The present happiness is either outward and worldly, or
else inward and ghostly; Outward, as Psalm 132. 16. I will bless her victuals
with increase, and I will satisfy her poor with bread. And Psalm 144. 15.
Happy are the people that be in such a case. And Deuteronomy. 28. Blessed shall thou
be in the field, and blessed in the city, blessed shall be the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep. These temporal and worldly blessings often accompany the meek
more then the proud, because fortune, as Advancement of Learning lib. 2. page
105.
Charles the 5. told his son, Is like a woman, if she be too much woed, she
will be the farther off. Howsoever it be, 1. Tim. 6. 6.
godliness is great gain, and the poor in spirit want nothing, as being
content with any thing. But the blessedness promised by Christ here,
surpassing all worldly treasures and pleasures is inward and ghostly,
consisting in the riches of the mind, and in a sweet contentation of the
conscience, which is a Prou. 15. 15.
continual feast, and a daily Christmas, whereby the poor in spirit are made
lords, and as it were tyrants over the whole world, domineering over Justices
and laylour, our Judge and Jury. Treasons, and murders, and felonies, and
other routs and riots inquired after at Sessions and Assizes, are bred of
coffeehouse and pride. But though all the Devils in Hell, and all their
agents in earth and air, combine themselves against one little one; yet Qui
vadit plane, vadit sane, Proverb. 10. 9.
He that walks uprightly, walks confidently; The Psalm. 125. 1.
text will always be found true, They that put their trust in the Lord, shall be
even as the mount Sion, which may not be removed, but stands fast for-euer.

But here we must observe with incomparably learned Com. in loc. et apolog.
con. fest. Augustine. tit. de Dilect. et implet. legis.
Melancthon, and Calvin instit. lib. 3. cap. 17.
other protestant divines, That in this, and all other like places of holy
Scripture, where good works are commanded, or commended in any, that Christ is
the sole cause of our happiness, Without me (says John 15. 5.
he) you can do nothing, and without faith in him, it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11. 6. Our persons must be first reconciled unto God, having for
Christ's sake pardon of our sins, and imputation of righteousness, and then
our works shall be blessed and acceptable, Psalm 32. 1. Blessed is the man
whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Blessed,
Martyr. in Romans 4. 8.
that is justified, for justification is blessedness begun, glorification
blessedness perfited. It is a sweet saying of our Hom. of good works part. 1.
Church; Faith is the nest of good works, albeit our birds be never so fair,
yet they will be lost, except they be brought forth in true belief. The
sparow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she may lay her
young, even thine Altars O Lord, Psalm 84. 3. Such as are true believers,
having their unrighteousness forgiven, and their sin covered, are blessed
men; and all their works as being laid upon Christ's Altar, are a sweet
smelling sacrifice to God. But says In Psalm 83.
Augustine, Heretics and Infidels in doing glorious acts and honorable deeds,
have no where to lay their young, and therefore they must of necessity come to
naught; as the fathers of our common Law speak, Moritur actio cum persona,
their actions are damnable with their persons. He which is poor in spirit is
blessed, he which is merciful is blessed, he which is a peacemaker is blessed.
But as our Divines have iudiciously noted against the Papists, in all these
Beatitudes a lively Faith is presupposed, according to that Romans 14. 23.
Apostolical axiom, Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. The Saints of God
are sealed inwardly with Faith, as it is in our Epistle; but outwardly with
good works, as in our Gospel. To be poor in spirit, to mourn, to be
merciful, are not causes but effects of our justification, as we commonly
speak out of Bernard, Via regni, non causa regna^di; Musculus. Marlorat.
For the followers of Christ are blessed, not because they be poor in spirit,
but because theirs is the kingdom of Heaven, That is the right exposition of
the proposition, Blessed are the poor in spirit.

Now the kingdom of Heaven in holy Scripture signifies either the kingdom
of Mat. 3. 2. Luke 18. 17.
grace, which is heaven on earth; or else the kingdom of Mat. 7. 21. Acts 14.
22.
glory, which is heaven in Heaven: And both these belong unto the poor in
spirit. Hierom. Musculus. Aretius.
Some construe this of the kingdom of grace, because Christ says expressly,
Luke 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord has anointed me, that I should preach the
Gospel unto the poor; he has sent me that I should heal the broken hearted;
that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind; that I should set at liberty them that are bruised. And Mat. 9. 13.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. And I give
thee thanks O Father Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened them unto babes.
The carnal wise, Credentes oculo magis qu^m oraculo, rely more upon their five
senses, then the four Evangelists; and therefore, Dr. Edes Ser. Physic for the
plague.
because they can not find a reason of natural things, they make to themselves
false gods; and because they can not find a reason of supernatural things,
they deny the true God. The curious, while they desire to know what they
should not, are not able to conceive what they should; by dyuing too much into
the subtleties of reason, they forget often ye principles of Religion. As
wholesome Laws are lost many times in the cases of the law; so Religion it
self is lost among Sophisters in the questions of Religion. It was the Serpent
that first opened Adams eyes, and enticed him to pry into the secrets of God.
Our care therefore (said Loc. com. tit. de pugna Fidei and rationis humanae.
Luther) must be to shut up our eyes again, that we seek not ambitiously to
see more then almighty God would have us to know. Christ would have us to bring
Faith and humility to his school, leaving our arguments at home, Non vult nos
esse curistas and quaristas. 1. Pet. 5. 9.
He resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The Mat. 11. 5.
poor receive the Gospel, as it is in our text, Theirs is the kingdom of
Heaven.

But Euthym. Rupert. Caietan.
other expositors understand this of that incorruptible crown of glory; for
as this world seems to be made for the presumptuous and proud: so that other
only for the humble and meek. It is Theirs, and that in present Is, and it is
a kingdom, and that a kingdom of Heaven. According to the terms of our
common Law Terms of the Law page ^03.
there be two sorts of Freeholds; A Freehold in deed, when a man has entered
into lands or tenements, and is seized thereof actually and really; A Freehold
in law, when a man has right to lands or tenements, but has not yet made his
actual entry. Now the kingdom of Heaven is our Freehold in law, though as
yet while we live, we can not actually be seized thereof. It is ours, as being
Mat. 25. 34.
prepared for us by God the Father: It is ours, as being purchased in our
behalf by God the 1. Pet. 14. 19.
Son: It is ours, as being assured to our spirit by God the holy Ghost, Romans
8. 16. 17. We have now right to this inheritance, Habemus ius adrem (as In Romans
8. 24. Idem Caietan in loc.
Melancthon acutely) nondum in re. Or as Augustine, and other of the fathers
usually, the kingdom of Heaven is ours already, Non in re, sed in spe. The
Scripture says as much in plain terms; We are Romans 8. 24.
saved by Tit. 2. 13.
blessed hope, which is Coloss. 1. 23.
immovable, without Heb. 10. 23.
wavering. Alstedius System. theolog. lib. 3. loc. 17.
Fides int^etur verbum rei, spes vero rem verbi. Romans 5. 2. Thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ we have access by Faith unto this grace, wherein we stand and
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.

And we may well under hope rejoice* seeing our reward (when our 2. Tim. 4. 7.
fight is finished) is no less then a kingdom. The citizens of Tyrus are
described by the Prophet Cap. 23. 8.
Esaias to have been companions unto Nobles and Princes: but in that heavenly
Jerusalem, every burgess by his John 3. 3.
second birth, is the Heb. 2. 17.
brother of a king, the Romans 8. 14.
son of a king, and himself a king; having in token hereof a triumphant
Apocalyp. 7. 9.
palm in his hand, and a Apocalyp. 4. 4.
golden crown on his head. And this kingdom is not a 1. Pet. 1. 4.
fading inheritance, but a kingdom of Heaven, an immortal and everlasting
life. Men on earth have Life, but it is Job. 14. 1.
full of trouble, and of small continuance, not everlasting; The damned in Hell
have an eternal being, but because they can not move, but are perpetually tied
unto their torments, it is not a Life, but a death. Only the Non dicit pauperes
spiritus sed spiritu. Caietan in loc.
rich in grace, the poor in spirit shall have, when this world has his end,
an everlasting Life without end. Tell O man what thou most earnestly desire?
Is there any thing thou love bettter then life? Is there any life better then
a blessed life? Is there any blessed life without hope here, and hold hereafter
of everlasting life? Yet all these things, and more then I can utter, or you
conceive, are 1. Cor. 2. 9.
prepared and reserved for such as are poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven.

Preached at Maydston Assizes, July 28. 1614. upon the request of my much
honored and worthily beloved friend and kinsman Sir Anthony Aucher Knight,
high Sheriff of Kent.

Almighty God, which have knit together thy elect in one communion and
fellowship in the mystical body of thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us grace
so to follow thine holy Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we may
come to those unspeakable Joys, which thou have prepared for them that
unfeignedly love thee, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

