THE MONARCHICKE TRAGEDIES; Croesus, Darius, The Alexandraean, Julius Caesar.

Newly enlarged

By William Alexander, Gentleman of the Princes privy Chamber.

Carmine dij superi placantur, carmine manes. London Printed by VALENTINE
SIMMES for ED: BLOVNT. 1607.

To the Author of the Monarchicke Tragedies.
WEll may the programme of thy Tragic stage
Inuit the curious pompe-expecting eyes,
To gaze on present shows of passed age,
Which just desert Monarchick dare baptize.
Crowns thrown from Thrones to tombs, detomb'd arise
To match thy Muse with a Monarchick theme;
That whilst her sacred soaring cuts the skies,
A vulgar subject may not wrong the same:
And which gives most advantage to thy fame;
The worthiest Monarch that the Sun can see,
Does grace thy labors with his glorious Name,
And daignes Protector of thy birth to be:
Thus all Monarchick, Patron, subject, style,
Make thee, the Monarch-tragick of this I Will.
Robert Ayton.
The Argument.
AT that time when the states of Greece began to grow great, and Philosophy
to be thought precious, Solon the first light of the Athenian commonwealth
like a provident Be gathering honnie over many fields, learning knowledge over
many countries, was sent for by Croesus King of Lidia as famous for his Wealth,
as the other was for his Wisdom. And not so much for any desire the King had
to profit by the experience of so profound a Philosopher, as to have the report
of his (as he thought it) happiness approved by the testimony of so renoumed a
witness. But Solon always like himself entering the regal Palace, and seeing
the same very gloriously apparelled, but very incommodiouslie furnished with
Courtiers, more curious to have their bodies decked with a womanishlie affected
form of raiment, and some superficial complements of pretended courtesies,
then to have their minds enriched with the true treasure of inestimable virtue,
he had the same altogether in disdain. Therefore after some conference had
with Croesus concerning the felicity of man, his opinion not seconding the
Kings expectation, he was returned with contempt as one of no understanding.
But yet comforted by Aesop (Author of the witty fables) who for the time was
resident at Court, and in credit with the King.

Immediately after the departure of Solon, Croesus having two Sons (whereof
the eldest was dumb, and the other a brave youth) dreamd that the youngest dyed
by the wound of a dart, wherewith being maruellously troubled, he married him to
a Gentlewoman named Caelia, and for farther disapointing the suspected, though
inevitable destiny, he discharged the using of all such weapons as he had
dreamed of. Yet who could cut away the occasion from the heavens of
accomplishing that which they had designd. The spiritfull youth being long
restraind from the fields, was invited by some countrie-men to the chase of a
wild Boar, yet could very hardly impetrate leave of his lovingly suspicious
father.

Now in the mean time there arrived at Sardis a youth named Adrastus, Son to
the King of Phrigia, one no less unfortunate then valourous, he having lost
his mistress by a great disaster, and having killed his brother by a far
greater, came to Croesus, by whom he was courteously entertaind, and by the
instancie of the King, and the instigation of others against his own will, who
feared the frowardnes of his infectious fortune, he got the custody of Atis
(so was the Prince called) whom in time of the sport thinking to kill the
Boar, by a monstrous mishap he killed. After which disastrous accident
standing above the dead corpse after the inquiry of the truth being pardoned by
Croesus, he punished himself by a violent death. There after, Croesus
sorrowing exceedingly this exceeding misfortune, he was comforted by Sandanis,
who labored to dissuade him from his unnecessary journey against the Persians,
yet he reposing on superstitious, and wrong interpreted responses of deceauing
oracles, went against Cyrus, who having defeated his forces in the field, and
taken himself in the City, tied him to astake to be burned, where by the
exclaiming diverse times on the name of Solon, moving the Conqueror to
compassion, he was set at liberty, and lamenting the death of his Son, and
the loss of his Kingdom, makes the Catastrophe of this present Tragedy.

The Scene in Sardis
Actors.
Croesus King of Lydia. Atis his son. Caelia wise to Atis. Adrastus. Sandanis
a Counselor. Chorus of all the Lidians. Solon. Aesope. Cyrus king of Persia.
Harpagus Lieutenant to Cyrus. Chorus of some Countrie-men.
THE TRAGEDY of Croesus.
Act. I.
SOLON. Lo how the trustlesse world the worldlings tosses,
And leads her lovers headlong unto death,
Those that do court her most have maniest crosses,
And yet vain man, this halfe-spent spark of breath,
This dying substance, and this living shadow,
The sport of Fortune, and the spoil of Time,
Who like the glory of a halfe-mow'd meadow
Does flourish now, and strait falls in his prime,
Still toils t'attaine (such is his foolish nature)
A constant good in this inconstant ill:
Unreasonable reasonable creature
That makes his reason subject to his will.
Whilst in the Stage of Contemplation placed
Of worldly humors I behold the strife,
Though different sprites have diverse parts embraced,
All act this transitory Scene of Life:
Of curious minds who can the fancies fetter,
The Soul vnsatisfide, a prey t'each snare,
Still loathing what it has, does dream of better,
Which gotten, but begets a greater care.
And yet all labor for t'attaine the top
Of th'vnsure sovereign bliss that they surmise,
Flowers of Felicity, that few can crop,
Yea, scarce can be discerned by the wise.
Some place their happiness (unhappy beasts,
And I must say, more senseless then their treasures)
In gorgeous garments, and in dainty feasts,
To pamper breath-toss'd flesh with flying pleasures.
Some more austerely with a wrinckled brow
That triumph over their Passions with respects,
With neither fortune moved to brag or bow,
Would make the world enamored of their sects.
Some ravished still with virtues purest springs,
Feed on the Idea of that divine brood,
And search the secrets of celestial things
As most undoubted heirs of that high good.
Thus with conceited ease and certain pain,
All seek by several ways a perfect bliss:
Which, O what wonder, if they not obtain,
Who cannot well discern what thing it is!
What happiness can be imagined here?
Though we our hopes with vain surmises cherish,
Who hardly conquer first what we hold dear,
Then fear to loose it still that once must perish.
Think (though of many thousands scarcely any
Can at this point of Happiness arrive)
Yet if it chance, it chances not to many,
Only to get for what a world did strive.
And though one swim in The Ocean of delights,
Have none above him, and his equals rare,
Ears ioying pleasant sounds; eyes stately sights;
His treasures infinite; his buildings fair.
Yet does the world on Fortunes wheel rely,
Which love's t'aduance the wretched, wrack the great,
Whose course resembles an inconstant eye,
Ever in motion compassing deceat.
Then let the greedy of his substance boast,
Whilst th'excrements of the earth his senses smother,
What has he gayn'd, but what another lost?
And why may not his loss enrich another?
But ah! all loose, who seek to profit thus,
And found their confidence on things that fade,
We may be robbed from them, they robbed from us,
All Is grieved for the one, as for the other glad.
Vain fool, that thinks soliditie to find
In this frail world, where for a while we range,
Which like sea-waues, depending on the wind,
Ebbes, flows, calms, storms, still moving, still in change.
Each surge, we see, does drive the first away,
The foam is whitest, where the Rock is near,
And as one grows, another does decay,
The greatest dangers often do least appear.
Their seeming bliss that trust in frothie shows,
In Fortunes danger, burdened with the Fates,
First to a full, then to confusion grows,
A secret Destiny does guide great States.
But I scorn Fortune, and was ever free
From that dead wealth that wauers in her power,
I bear my treasure still about with me,
Which neither Time nor Tyrants can devour.
Light author of events, and vain aduenters,
Now do thy worst, I know how to undo thee,
The way is stopped by which thy poison enters,
Thou can harm none but them that trust unto thee.
And I have learned to moderate my mind,
Contentment is the crown of my desires:
My clothes are course, my fare such as I find,
He has enough that to no more aspires.
What satisfaction does ouer-flow my soul,
While as I weigh the world which few hold fast,
And in my memories vnblotted scroule,
Judge of the present by the time that is past?
The poore-rich heir of breath that boastes of smoke,
And come of dust, yet of the dross still thinks,
Whilst baser passions do his virtues choke,
The soul ouer-ballanc'd with the body sinkes.
Yet need I not to loathe the world and live,
As one whom stepdame she would never nourish,
I had a part of all that she could give,
My race, my house, by fame and wealth did flourish.
And if that I would vaunt of mine own deeds,
Fair City, where mine eyes first sucked the light,
I challenge might what most thy glory breeds
Whose labors both enlarged thy fame and might.
When Salamina utterly was lost,
And by the rascal multitude neglected,
A counterfeited fool, I went and crossed
All their desseignes, whose courses were suspected.
And when I had by policy persuaded
My country to embrace the wars again,
I both by stratagems and strength invaded
That famous I Will which vanquished did remain.
Then having compassed that exployt with speed,
And turned in triumph decked with strangers spoils,
No perfect bliss below worse did succeed,
The peace that was abroad bred civil broils.
What with more violence does fury lead,
Then a rash multitude that wants a head?
The meaner sort could not their minds conform,
To Abide at what their betters did command:
Then the weale-publike in a dangerous storm,
All joined to place the ruther in my hand.
I reunited that divided state,
And managed matters with a good success,
Which farther kindled had been quenched too late,
That Hidra-headed tumult to suppress.
When I had both these glorious works effected,
And troad the path of sou'raignty a space,
The minion of the people most respected,
None could be great save such as I would grace.
Thus carried with the force of Fortunes stream,
I absolutely acted what I would,
For the Democratie was but a name,
My hand the raines did of the City hold.
I might a Tyrant still have governed so
But my pure soul could no such thought conceive,
And that oversight yet made me never woe,
If I may rule my self it is all I crave.
Yet some that seemed to be more subtile-witted,
Said my base sprite could not aspire t'a crown,
And foolish Solon had a fault committed,
Who would not do the like in every town.
My mind in this a more contentment finds,
Then if a Diadem adorned my brow,
I chain d the affections of undaunted minds,
And made them civil that were wild till now.
I hardly could rich Citizens entise,
To Embrace the statutes that my Laws contained,
What one approou'd another did despise,
Some loved, some loathed, even as they thought they gained.
At last at least in show, all rest content,
Even those that hate me most lend their applause,
A worthy mind needs never to repent
To Have suffered crosses for an honest cause.
I travel now with a contented thought,
The memory of this my fancy feeds,
When all their Empires shall be turned to naught,
Time cannot make a prey of Virtues deeds.
Where seuen-mouth'd Nil from a concealed source
Inunding over the fields, no banckes can bind,
I saw their wonders, heard their wise discourse,
Rare sights enriched mine eyes, rare lights my mind.
And if it were but this, yet this delites,
Behold, how Croesus here the Lidian King,
To be his guest us earnestly inuites,
The which to some would great contentment bring.
But I disdain that world-bewitched man,
Who makes his gold his God, the earth his heaven,
Yet I will try by all the means I can
To make his judgment with his fortune eauen.

CHORUS.
What can confine man's wandering thought,
Or satisfy his fancies all?
Is ought so great, but it seems small
To that tos'd spirit, which still af flought
Does dream of things were never wrought,
And would gripe more then it can hold:
This sea-inuiron'd centerd ball
Is not a bound unto that mind,
That mind, which big with monsters,
The right delivery never consters,
And seeking here a solid ease to find,
Would but melt mountains and embrace the wind.
What wonder, though the soul of man,
A spark of heaven, that shines below,
Does labor by all means it can,
It self like to it self to show,
This heavenly essence, heaven would know,
But married with this mass we see,
With pain they spend lives little span,
The better part would be above,
The earth from the earth cannot remove,
How can two contrair's well agree?
Thus as the best or worst part does prevail,
Man is of much, or else of no avail.
O from what source can this proceed,
To Have humors of so many kinds,
Each brain does diverse fancies breed,
All Is many men, all is many minds,
And in the world, a man scarce finds
Another of his humor right,
There are not two so like indeed,
If we remarke their several graces
And lineaments of both their faces,
That can abide the proof of sight:
If the outward forms then differ as they do,
Of force the affections must be different to.
Ah! Passions spoil our better part,
The Soul is vexed with their dissentions;
We make a God of our own heart,
And worship all our vain inventions.
This brain-bred miste of apprehensions*
The mind does with confusion fill,
Whilst reason in exile does smart;
And few are free from this infection,
For all are slaves to some affection,
Which does extorse the senses still.
These partial tirants rage the sight ouersyles,
And does ecclipsie the cleerest judgment whiles.
A thousand times o happy he,
Who does his passions so subdew,
That he may with clear reasons eye,
Their imperfections fountains view,
And as it were himself renew.
If that one might prescribe them laws,
And set his soul from bondage free,
From reason never for to swerue,
And make his passions him to serve,
And be but moved as he had cause:
O greater were that monarch of the mind,
Then if he might command from Thule to Inde.
Act. II.
Scen. I.
CROESVS. AESOPE. SOLON. Croe. WHo ever was so favored by the Fates,
As could like us of full contentment boast,
Loved of mine own, and feared of foreign states,
I know not what it is for to be crossed.
No thwarting chance my good hap does importune,
In all attempts my success has been such,
The darling of heaven, the minion of fortune,
I wot not what to wish I have so much.
Mine eyes did never yet dismay my heart
With no delightlesse object that they saw,
My name applauded is in every part
My word an Oracle, my will a Law.
My breast cannot contain this flood of joys
That with a mighty stream o'reflowes my mind,
Which never dreamed of sorrow or annoyes,
But did in all a satisfaction find.
My Soul then be content and take thy pleasure.
And be not vex't with fear of any ill,
My bliss abounds, I cannot count my treasure,
And gold that conquers all, does what I will.

Aesop. That Grecian (Sir) is at the Court arrived,
Whose wisdom, Fame so prodigally prayse's.

Craes. And have you not t'extend my greatness strived,
And entertained his ears with courteous phrases.

Aesop. I think in all the parts where he has been,
In foreign Countries or his native home,
He never has such stately wonders seen,
As since unto this princely Court he come.
When first he in the regal Palace entered,
As one, who borne amongst the craggie Mountains,
That never for to view the plains aduentred,
Acquainted but with dew and little Fountains:
If he be forced for to frequent the Vailes,
And there the wanton water-Nimphs to see,
The rarenes of the sight so far preuailes,
Each strip appears a flood, each flood a Sea.
So all that he re'ncountred by the way,
Did to his mind a great amazement bring,
The gold-embroidred Gallants made him stay,
Each groom appeared a Prince, each squire a King.
And now he com's t'attaine your Graces sight,
Whom in his mind, no doubt he does adore,
He gazd on those, who held of you their light,
Of force he must admire your self far more.
Now he will set your happy Empire forth,
And be eye-witnes of your glorious Reign,
One wise man's testimony is more worth
Then what a world of others would maintain.

Sol. Disdain not (mighty Prince) the loving zeal,
Which a mean man, yet a good mind affords,
And who perchance as much affects your weal,
As those that paint their love with fairer words.

Croes. Thy love (sage Greek) is grateful unto us,
Whom Fame long since enamored of thy deeds,
We of thy virtues have heard her discuss,
Who in extolling of the same exceedes.
I wish that many such should here resort,
Whose unstained life would teach us what were best;
Whose grave aspect would grace so great a Court,
And like clear Lamps give light unto the rest.

Sol. My Sovereign spare, I merit no such praise,
I am but one that does the world despise,
And would my thoughts to some perfection raise,
A Wisedom-louer that would feign be wise.
Yet with great toil all that I can attain
By long experience, and in learned schools,
Is for to know my knowledge is but vain,
And those that think them wise are greatest fools.

Croes. This is the nature of a worthy mind,
It rather would be good then be so thought,
As if it had no aim but Fame to find,
Such as the shadow not the substance sought.
Yet that pursues thee too which thon so fliest,
Still troops applaude thy worth though thou not spy them,
Whilst thou would press it down, it mounts up hiest;
For Fame and Honor follow those that fly them.
And now I think in all the world none liue's,
That better may unfold what I would learn,
Then thou to whom frank Nature largely gives
The grace to see, the judgment to discern.

Sol. I Will answer freely to what you propose,
If my small skill can comprehend the sense.

Croes. Lo, you have seen in what I most repose
My treasures huge, my great magnificence.

Sol. This is the dream of bliss that Fortune brings,
On which the wisest never have presumed
I saw naught but a heap of senseless things,
A momentarie treasure soon consumed.
This only serves the body to decore,
And for corruption framed cannot persevere:
The mind immortal lays up better store
Of vnconsuming joys that last for ever.

Croes. I wot not what you mean by such surmises,
And faind Ideaes of imagined bliss,
This portrait of Fancy but intices
Sick brains to dream that which indeed they miss.
But I brook more than their conceits can show,
Whose rich conjectures breed but poor effects:
And I beseeke you, did you ever know
A man more blessed then I in all respects?

Sol. Yes, I knew Tellus an Athenian borne,
Whom I hold happy in the first degree:
Who even the harvest of Happiness has shorn,
He lived with fame, and did with honor die.
For having long time lived, loved and respected,
His country in a conflict had the worst:
He come, and there fallen courage re-erected,
And having won the field did die vnforst.
More happy now nor when he was alive;
He dead, does reap the guerdon of his merit,
And in his childern does again revive,
Who all their fathers worthy parts inherit.

Croes. Well, since that to a private Citizen
You do ascribe the first most blessed estate.
Now in the second rank of happy men
Whom would you number in your own conceate?

Sol. o Cleobis and Biton! now I may
No doubt prefer you next, without reproach,
Their mother chanced on a festival day
To want two horses, for to draw her coach.
Them to supply the place, Love kindly raised,
Who drew her to that place of public mirth,
And both of them exceedingly were praised,
They for their piety, she for her birth.
This charitable office being ended,
Both in the Church were found dead the next morrow,
I think the gods who this good work commended,
Were loath to let them taste of farther sorrow.
For why? our lives are frail, do what we can,
And like the brittle glass, are but a glance,
And often the heavens t'abate the height of man,
Do entersour our sweets with some sad chance.

Croes. Then from this Cathagorie am I secluded,
And is my state so vile unto thine eyes,
That as one of all happiness denuded,
Thou thus do my felicity despise?
Or think thou me of judgment too remiss,
A miser that in misery remains,
The bastard child of Fortune, barred from bliss,
Whom heavens do hate, and all the world disdaines?
Are base companions then to be compared
With one that may consume such in his wrath?
Who, as I please, do punish and reward,
Whose words, nay, even whose looks yield life or death.

Sol. Sir, be not thus commoo'ud without all reason,
Nor misconceiue my meaning as you do,
Those that speak freely, have no mind of treason,
I cannot be your friend and flatter to.
Unto us Graecians (Sir) the gods have granted
A moderate measure of a humble wit,
And in our Country there have never wanted
Some whom the world for wise men did admit.
And yet amongst us all, the greatest number
Have here dispair'd of any perfect rest,
Though some a while in Fortunes bosom slumber,
And to world-blinded eyes seem to be blessed.
Yet over all mortal states, change so preuailes,
We alterations daily do attend,
And hold this for a ground that never fails,
None should triumph in bliss before the end.
I may compare our state to table-playes,
Where by dumb judges matters are decided,
Their many doubts, the earnest mind dismayes,
The dice must first cast well, then be well guided.
So all our days in doubt what thing may chance us,
Time runs away, the breath of man does chase it,
And when the occasion come's for to advance us,
Amongst a thousand one can scarce embrace it.
When two by generous indignation moved,
Would try by sword, whose glory, fame will smother,
Whilst valor blindly by the event is proved,
And th'ones overthrow can only grace the other.
O what a fool his judgment will commit
To crown the one with undeserved applauses,
Where fortune is for to give sentence yet,
While bloody agents plead such doubtful causes.
This world, it is the field, where each man ventures,
And armed with reason, resolutely goes,
To fight against a thousand misaduentures,
Both with external and internal foes.
And how can he the victors title gain,
That yet is busied with a doubtful fight,
Or he be happy that does still remain
In Fortunes danger for a small delight.
Th'abortiue course of man away fast wears,
Course that consists of hours, hours of a day,
Day that giue's place to night, night full of fears,
Thus all things alter, still all things decay.
Who flourish now in peace, may fall in strife,
And have their fame with infamy suppressed;
The evening shows the day, the death the life;
And many are fortunate, but few are blessed.

Croes. I see this Grecian of a simple spirit,
The which is capable of no great things,
Men but advance him far above his merit,
He can not comprehend the States of Kings.
Fame did so largely of his worth report,
It made me long to have him in my house,
But all my expectations are come short,
I think a Mountain has brought forth a mouse.

Exit Croesus. Act. II. Scen. II.
SOLON. AESOPE. Sol. THis king has put his trust in trustlesse treasures,
Cloi'd with the abundance of all worldy bliss,
And like a hooded hawk gorged with vain pleasures
At randon flies, and wots not where he is.
O how this makes me wonderfully sorry,
To see him keep this lifelesse wealth so straightly,
Whilst witless worldlings wonder at his glory,
Which I not envy, no, but pity greatly!
Thus worms of the earth, whose worst part does prevail,
Love melting things, whose show the body fits,
Where Souls of cleerer sight do never fail
To thesaurize the gifts of gallant wits.
Those worldly things do in this world decay,
Or at the least we leave them with our breath,
Whereas the other makes us live foray,
So differ they as far as life and death.

Aesop. And yet what wonder though that he be thus,
Whose knowledge clouded is with prosperous winds,
Though this indeed seem somewhat strange to us,
Who have with learning purifide our minds.
Was he not borne heir of a mighty State?
And used with Fortunes smiles, not feared for frowns,
Does measure all things by his own conceate,
Th'infirmitie that fatal is to Crowns:
He has been from his infancy addicted
To all the pompous shows wealth could devise,
And still entreated, never contradicted,
Now does all liberty of speech despise.
Though I durst not so to his fight appear,
Whose corrupt judgment was from reason sweruing,
I grieved to see your entertainment here
So far inferior to your own deserving.
That divine Wisdom which the world admires,
And ravished with delight amazed hears,
Because it answered not his vain desires,
Did seem unsavory to distempered ears:
Ears that are ever stopped to all discourses
Save such as enter fraughted with his praises,
He can love none but them that love his courses,
And thinks all fools that use not flattring phrases.
This wracks the great, and makes the heavens despite them;
Let virtue spread forth all her heavenly powers,
If not in their own livery to delight them,
They will not daigne her audience a few hours.

Sol. I care not Aesop how the King conceated
Of my frank speeches, which I ever use,
I came not here, till I was first entreated,
Nor being come, will I my name abuse:
Should I his poisonous Sycophants resemble,
A hateful thing to honest men that know it,
I would not for his Diadem dessemble,
What the heart thinks, the tongue was made to show it.
And what, if his vain humor to have cherished,
I had my speeches for the purpose painted,
I had but gotten gifts that would have perished,
But nothing could have cleared my fame once tainted.
If I had show'n my self toward him officious,
It would in end have but procured my shame:
To have our virtue praised by one that is vicious,
This in effect is but a secret blame.
He thinks him simple, who his anger raises,
But better simply good, then doubly ill;
I never value my worth by others praises,
Nor by opinions do direct my will.
And it content's me more to be applauded
By one of judgment (though of mean degree)
Then by a Prince of princely parts defrauded,
Who has more wealth, but not more wit then he.

Aesop. Who come to Court, must with Kings faults comport.

Sol. Who come to Court, should truth to Kings report.

Aesop. A wise man at their imperfections winks.

Sol. An honest man will tell them what he thinks.

Aesop. So should you loose your self, and them not win.

Sol. But I would bear no burden of their sin.

Aesop. By this you should their indignation find.

Sol. Yet have the warrant of a worthy mind.

Aesop. It would be long, ere you were thus preferred.

Aesop. Then it should be the King not I that er'd.

Aesop. They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.

Aesop. They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.

Sol. Yet when I merit well, I care the less.

Aesop. It Is good to be still by the Prince approved.

Sol. It Is better to be upright, though not loved.

Aesop. But by this mean, all hope of Honor fails.

Aesop. Yet honesty in end ever preuailes.

Aesop. I think they should excel as often they do
All men in wit, that unto men give laws:
Kings are the Center of the Kingdom, to
The which each weighty thing by nature draws:
For as the mighty Rivers, little streams,
And all the liquid powers that rise or fall,
Do seek in sundry parts by several seames
To the maine Ocean that receiue's them all.
Who as he were but steward of those waters
Returne's them back by many secret veins,
And as the earth has need of moisture, scatters
His humid treasures to refresh the plains.
So are Kings breasts the depth where daily flows
Clear streams of knowledge with rare treasures charged,
And thus continually their wisdom grows
By many helps that others want enlarged.
For those that have intelligence over all,
Do commonly communicate to Kings
All th'accidents of weight that chance to fall,
Their greatness to them this advantage brings.
They being jealous find out many drifts,
And by a long experience learn to scance them,
Then those whom Art or Nature lend's great gifts,
All come to Kings as who may best advance them.
No doubt, those Powers who put them in their places
To make their qualities with their charge even,
Do dote them with some supernatural graces,
Vice-gods on the earth, great Lieutenants of heaven.

Sol. As you have shown, Kings have a good occasion
Whereby t'attaine unto the height of wit.
Which whosoever do embrace by good persuasion,
Are surely worthy on a Throne to sit.
But ah! those Rivers are not ever pure
The which through tainted channels whiles conuaid,
Vile flatt'ries poison rendered has impure.
Thus are Kings hearts often by their ears betrayed.
For impudent effronted persons dare
Court with vain words and detestable lies,
Whilst purer sprited men must stand afar,
The light is loathsome to diseased eyes.
But this does ravish often my soul with wonder,
Some that are wise, with flattery can comport,
And though of all men best men's parts they ponder,
Yet ever entertain the baddest sort.
Is It that such men as those cannot controlle them,
Nor never cross their appetite in ought,
But for each purpose that they speak extolle them,
Where better wits would argue as they thought,
Or as they would have none for to resist them,
So for th'aduancement of the worthiest sorry,
They will have none that may seem to assist them,
Lest any challenge intrest in their glory.
This selfe-conceate is a most dangerous shelfe,
Where many have made shipwreck unawares:
He that does trust too much unto himself,
Can never fail to fall in many snares.
Of all that live, great Monarchs have most need
To balance all their actions, and their words,
And with advise in all things to proceed:
A faithful Counsel often great good affoordes.
Lo, how th'inferior Spears their courses bend
There, whither the first Moouer does them drive:
The Commons customs on the Prince depend,
His manners are the rules by which they live.
No man is only for himself brought forth,
And Kings for the use of many are ordaind,
They should like Suns, clear Kingdoms with their worth,
Whose life a pattern must be kept unstained.
Those that are virtuous have an ample field
To Express their wisdom and t'extend their merit,
Where mean men must to their misfortune yield,
Whilst lack of power does burst a gallant spirit.
As precious Stones are th'ornaments of rings,
The Stone decores the ring, the ring the hand:
So Countries are conform unto their Kings,
The King decores the Court, the Court the Land.
And as a drop of poison spent alone,
The Infected fountain does with venom fill,
So mighty States may be orethrowne by one;
A vicious Prince is a contagious ill.

Aesop. This is an easy thing, for us to spy
And paint in the air the shadows of our minds,
And t'apprehend with th'intellectuall eye;
A blessing that no worldly Kingdom finds.

Sol. I grant imaginary grounds of ours
Will never move a world-bewitched Prince,
To disenchaunt himself, and spend some howrs
His own disseignes of folly to convince.
Ere Croesus can refrain from this his fury,
He must forsake himself, and be renewed,
And in the Lethe of oblivion bury
The vanities that have his soul subdewd.
He first must his prerogatives al smother,
And be a man, a man to be controld,
Then all his faults as they were in another
Like an impartial Arbiter behold.
Could he cast off this veil of fond self-love,
Through which all things not as they are he spies,
He would those wicked Parasites remove,
Vile instruments of shame that live by lies.
And the only means to force them to depart,
That he might judge more freely of his state,
Were to cast out the Idol of his heart
Which puffs him up with a pride-swolne conceate.
For foreign flatterers could not find access,
Were not ouer-valuing his own worth too much,
He flattred first himself and thinks no less
But all their praises ought for to be such.
And when these hireling Sycophants have found
A Prince whose judgment selfe-conceat disarmes,
They breach his weakest part, and bring to ground
The greatness of his State with flatteries charms.
Then bearing over his Passions once the sway,
Least by the better sort he be aduisd,
To wholesome counsel they close up the way,
And use all means to have honest men despisd.

Aesop. If you at Court to credit would arise,
You must not seek by truth t'acquire renown,
But learn t'applaud whiles what you most despise,
And smile in show, whilst in effect you frown.

Sol. From Court in time I will my self retire,
I find my humor is not fit for Court.
I Am none of those whom Croesus does desire,
I can not always of his worth report.
O that he cannot see light Fortune flout him
While as he glories in this outward show,
Hedged in with greedy Harpies round about him,
That gape to enrich themselves with his overthrow.

Exeunt Chorus.
OF all the creatures below
We must call Man most miserable,
Who all his time is never able
T'attaine unto a true repose,
His very birth may well disclose
What miseries his bliss overthrow,
For being borne he can not know
Who to his state is friend or fo.
Nor how at first for to stand stable,
But even with cries and tears does show
What dangers do his life enclose,
Whose griefs are sure, whose joys a fable?
Thus still his days in dolor so
He to all perils must expose,
And with vexation lives, and dies with woe,
Not knowing whence he come nor where to go.
While as he brooks this lowest place,
O how uncertain is his state,
Which gouernd by a secret fate
Is subject to inconstancy,
And ever changing as we see
Is still in toil, never in peace.
For if man prosper but a space,
With each good success too too bold,
And puffed up in his own conceit,
He but abuses Fortunes grace:
And when that with adversity
His pleasures come to end their date,
And with disasters are controld,
Straight he begins for grief to die:
And still the top of some extreme does hold,
Not suffering summers heat, nor winters cold.
His state does in most danger stand
That most abounds in worldly things,
And soars too hie with Fortunes wings,
Which carry up aspiring minds
For to be beaten with all winds,
The course of such being rightly scand,
Whilst men can not themselves command
Transported with a pow'rles name,
Often unexpected ruin brings.
W' have seen examples in this land,
How worldly bliss the senses blindes,
And on a reed vnsurely hings,
He that presumes upon the same
Hid poison in his pleasure finds,
And sailing rashly with the winds of fame,
Does often times sink into a sea of shame.
It Is to be feared our King at last
Whilst he for nothing is afraid,
Be by prosperity betrayed,
For growing thus in greatness still,
And having worldly things at will,
He thinks though Time should all things wast,
Yet his estate shall ever last,
The wonder of the inferior round,
And in his own conceit has said,
No course of heaven his state can cast,
Nor make his success to be ill;
If Fortune once those thoughts t'obbraid
Will have our King to be vn-cround,
She may that mind with horror fill,
And in an instant utterly confound
The state, that stands upon so slipprie ground,
When such a Monarchs mind is bent
To follow most the most unwise,
Who can their folly disaguise
With sugared speeches poisonous baits,
The secret canker of great states,
From which at first few disassent,
The which at last all do repent,
While as repenting lust must go,
When Kings begin for to despise
Of honest men the good intent,
Who to assure their Sovereigns seats,
Would feign in time some help devise,
And would cut off all cause of woe,
Yet can not second their conceats,
These dreadful Comets commonly forgo
The Kings destruction that is miscarried so.
Act. III.
Scen. I.
CROESVS. ADRASTVS. Croes. WHat uncouth fancies do affright my soul,
And have captived it to a thousand fears?
Strange cares suggesting grief my joys control,
My mind some coming evil charactred bears,
And credulous suspicion too too wise,
To fortify my fears does means invent,
Whilst sudden terrors do my sprite surprise,
An ominous presage of some bad event.
I think the soul come of immortal brood
As being partner of a divine power
Has a foreknowledge both of evil and good,
Although she can not fly a fatal hour.
Though with this mortal veil being made half blind,
She can not soar outright with her own wings,
Yet she communicates unto the mind
In cloudie dreams and mysteries strange things.
Th'imagination wonderful in force
Of foiles the judgment with confusion so,
That presupposing all things to be worse
Then they fall forth, we double our own woe.
For as the shadow seems more monstrous still
Then does the substance whence it has the being,
So th'apprehension of approaching ill
Seems greater then it self, whilst fears are lying.
This alteration too seems more then strange,
Which at an instant has ore-whelm'd my senses,
I see (more then I thought) all states may change,
Against the heaven the earth can find no defenses.
My soul her wonted pleasure else is loathing,
This has indeed so deep impression left,
A dream, a fantasy, a shadow, nothing
Has all my mirth even in a moment reft.

Adras. Whence (mighty Sovereign) can this change proceed,
That does obscure the rays of princely grace,
Those that are schoold in woe may clearly reed,
A mighty passion written in your face.
And if a stranger may presume so far,
I would the copy of your passions borrow,
I else conjecture in what state you are,
Taught by a secret sympathy in sorrow.
Two strings in diverse Lutes set in accord,
(Although the one be but touched) together sound,
Even so souls tuned to grief the like afford,
And other with a mutual motion wound.

Croes. No doubt but it disburdens much the mind,
A Secretary in distress to have,
Who by his own another grief can find,
Where glad minds scorn what they can not conceive.
And I (Adrastus) would the cause declare
With which I so torment my self in vain,
O but I blush t'vnfold my foolish care,
It Is but th'illusion of a drowsy brain.

Adras. According to the bodies constitution,
The soul by night with fancies is afflicted,
Or by these thoughts continual revolution,
To which by day the mind is most addicted.

Craes. Now whilst the Sun did peep through Thetis bower,
And on the beauties of Aurora gazed,
Out of my body spoild of moving power,
All faculties of life dull sleep had razed,
While as the sprite more powerful then ever
Since least impeached with this earthly part
The verity from lies could best disseuer
Hid mysteries vnclouding to the heart.
I only have two sons, and the one you see
The sign of Natures indignation bears,
And from his birth day domme is dead to me,
Since he can power no pleasure in my ears.
The other Atis all my life's delight,
In whom the treasures of my soul are kept,
I thought (vain be my thought) in the twie-light
I wot not whether yet I walked or slept.
Whilst he was sporting void of worldly cares,
Not in a lists belonging to his merits,
A pointed tool of iron fell unawares,
And pearc'd his temples, and expeld his spirits.
Whilst the pale carcass seemed t'vpbraid mine eyes,
The horror of the sight my sense recald,
Which when I think of, yet my comfort dies,
Such an exceeding fear my sprit appald.
This has me moved, it touched my state so neerelie,
To match my son in marriage at this time
With beauteous Caelia whom he loved most dearly,
That both might reap the pleasure of their prime.
And if the heavens his overthrow have decreed
By destiny that can not be revoked,
So shall we have behind some of his seed,
Ere in his blossom all our hopes be choked.
Thus ere his soul lodge in the lightlesse shade,
To Have of his race twill mitigate my mind,
I can not hold him altogether dead,
That leaves his Image in some one behind.
And for the time we do all that seems best
For to prevent those but surmiz'd annoyes,
Yet for all this my mind has never rest,
Some secret terror still disturbs my joys.

Adras. Ah Sir! if but th'imagind evil of this
Has plunged your soul in such a gulf of grief,
Unhappy I who wail a thing that is,
And have not means to hope for no relief.
If all these dreadful fancies took effect
(Which heavy chance the almighty Jove withhold)
It could not be compared in no respect
With those misfortunes that my state enfold.
For when your son fell by another hand,
You should but wail his death, and not your crime,
The heavens of me my brothers blood demand,
His fate, my fault, mourn must I all my time.

Croes. In what strange form could this disaster fall,
That is the occasion of so great distress,
Tell on at length the original of all,
To hear of greater grief it will make mine less.

Adras. I have conceald my sorrows still till now,
As too offensive food for dainty ears,
Yet since of such a subject you allow,
I Will tell a tale that may move stones to tears.
My Father of the Phrigian Princes come,
Had in my growing age a tender care,
That all my education might become
One whom he might for mighty hopes prepare:
As yet four lusters scarcely had begun
For to discern my sex with downie cheeks,
When I into that Labirinth was run,
Whence back in vain the straying entrer sheekes.
I loved, O fatal love! unlovely fate,
The virtuously fair, yet fairest Dame
That ever was enshrined in souls conceat,
Or gave a dittie to the sounds of fame.
Straight were my fancies to her beauties tied,
None can paint passions but in feeling minds,
I burnd, freezd, hopd, dispaird, and liud, and dyed,
My actions changed as often as the Autumnes winds.
Yet after many doubtful hopes and fears
That I attaind the height of my desires,
She had subscribed a truce unto my tears,
And temperd with encountering flames my fires.
For as she was the most affected Saint,
Whose image was erected in my thought,
She had compassion too of my complaint,
And to acquit my firm affection sought.
Thus whilst I triumphd in mine own conceat,
As one whose love his Lady did prefer,
I was corriuald (O unhappy fate!)
By one who loved, but was not loved by her.
He looking as I looked, saw what I saw,
Saw Natures wonder, and the worlds delight:
And as a blind god blind guide did him draw
Still like a lizard lived but by her sight.
Then strait he strives the Jewel for to won,
Whose unstained worth he rates above his breath,
He hates the light that comes not from my Sun,
And thinks to live without her worse then death.
And this affection favored was by Fortune
Which seemed to ratify his high reared hopes,
The Nymph her parents daily did importune,
For to confine his flying fancies scopes.
Now judge if that my miseries were rife,
Who threatened thus with eminent mishap,
Was like to lose a deerer thing then life,
Whilst others strived my treasure to entrap.
The man that sought my joys to undermine,
I could not wish for this to have him overthrown,
Nor blame the sprite that sympathiz'd with mine,
I envied not his hap, but wail'd mine own.
Now in my breast a battle did begin,
Which forced my soul with inward wounds to bleed,
Some fancies feared to what his love might win,
And possibility for to come speed.
Then others called her constancy to mind,
Which would not yield although she were invaded,
Yet forced to fear the frailty of her kind.
A woman that has ears may be persuaded.
Thus tossed with doubts into a deep of woe,
Which with suspicion had my joys supplanted,
I blamed the thoughts that durst accuse her so,
As virtues pattern had one virtue wanted.
As I concluded, so it come to pass,
Th'affliction served for fuel to affection,
For she who th'ornament of women was,
Would never wrong her worth with a defection.
When in my absence they had often assayed
To have me from her memory removed,
The Sun burn's hottest when his beams are stayed,
The more that they would let, the more she loved.
And finding that delay no end affords,
And that fair generals are th'abusers Art,
She did repel him with disdainful words
To raze all thought of her out of his heart.
Love is a joy that upon pain depends,
A drop of sweet drowned in a sea of sowres,
What Folly does begin, often Fury ends,
They hate for ever, that have loved for hours.
When all his arguments proved of no force,
Strait with disdain his soul in secret bur'nd,
And what he thought was evil, to make far worse,
He unto furour all his favor turned.
As he extremely loved, far more he hated,
And musde of many means how to annoy her,
Which was the best a long time he debated,
To see her dead, or to see me enjoy her.
What? says he when he first had musde a space,
So hard it is to quench a great affection:
Shall I disfigure that angelike face,
And make the world ecclypsde of all perfection?
Shall she by me be to confusion brought,
To whom I vows and prayers did impart,
To whom I sacrificed my secret thought,
And on her beauties altar burned my heart?
Or shall I see her in another power,
And in his bosom lie t'vpbraid my loss,
Whilst both with scornful smiles then death more sour,
To point me out for sport report my cross?
That sight which sometime did me sweetly charm,
Should it become a cause of grief to me?
No, none that liue's, shall glory in my harm,
Since she will not be mine, she shall not be.
Th'unlouing Lover having vowed her death,
Did with a cup of poison drown my joys.
The fairest body from the sweetest breath
Was parted thus, (O Ocean of annoyes!)
That Monster Fame, whose many mouths and ears
Must know, but not conceal a rare thing long,
And prodigal of ill, most chiefly bears
The worst news first, informed me of this wrong.
For neighboring near the most unhappy part
That had been spoild of such a beeauteous guest,
No sooner had death seazde on the chaste heart
Then sorrow on my ears to rob my rest.
How the sad news first sounded in my soul,
I will not weary you with long laments,
Rage did the outward signs of grief control;
When great winds blow the fire, the smoke worst vents.
Whilst generous disdain disguisde my grief,
(As one transported with a mighty rage)
I ran unto the Theater of mischief,
A tragic Actor for a bloody stage.
For I was come no sooner to the place
Whereas I thought the Murderer to have found,
But I re'ncountred (O unhappy case)
Too dear a friend to catch an enemies wound.
Ah passions! dimmed mine eyes, wrath led my hand,
I was no more my self, sorrow had killed me,
The first (it was night) that did before me stand,
I fiercely did pursue, as Furor willd me.
And as it chanced, ere one could speak a word,
I filld his bosom with a luke warm flood,
And in his kind breast drowned the cruel sword,
That in another body drank my blood.
When as a Torch had partly robde the night,
Proud of supposde revenge (ah bitter gain)
I saw, I knew, black knowledge, cruel sight,
It Was mine own brother that my self had slain.
O bitter loss that nothing can repair!
My soul at once with all woes army wounded,
Grief, rage, spite, shame, amazement and despair,
Gauld, tossd, burnd, dashd, astonishd, and confounded.
The thought of my offense torments me most,
Yet am I whiles by my Loves verdict cleansde,
And whiles my brothers violated ghost
By dreadful dreams does boast to be reuengde.

Croes. Now whilst this great disaster did occur,
What came of him who was the cause of all?

Adra. He having heard this lamentable stir,
Whom selfe-accusing thoughts did guilty call,
Srait stricken with a wonderful remorse,
I wot not whether fear or pity moved him,
If not t'ore-liue her death, or dreading worse,
He killd himself, his conscience so disproou'd him.

Croes. I grant the manner of so rare mischances
Would force compossion from your greatest foe,
Where all the griefe-begetting circumstances
Do join to make a harmony in woe.
But natural love does at our self begin,
It mooues far more to feel then hear mishaps,
The perturbation that my sprite is in,
Me in a maze of miscontentments wraps.
We should such past misfortunes pretermit,
At least no more immoderately lament them,
And as for those which are but coming yet,
Use ordinary means for to prevent them.

Adrast. No wonder Sir, although you take great care,
Lest all your hopes in Atis person perish.

Croes. I will by all the means I may, prepare
To save his youth, that he my age may cherish.
If it be possible for mortal states
To strive against the Stars and be more strong,
I Will unarm Fortune, and resist the fates,
By barring both all means to do me wrong.
I have commanded under pain of death,
That no such weapon be within my walls,
As I supposed should have abridg'd his breath,
T'eschew such sudden evil as rashly falls.
He shall go rarely to the fields, and then
With chosen bands be guarded all the time:
Lo where he communes with some contrymen,
We will go try what they would have of him.

Act. III. Scen. II.
CHORUS of countrymen. CROESVS. ATIS. ADRASTVS. CAELIA. Lend (Sir) a willing
ear to humble words,
Let not our baseness bar us from your grace,
Which still it self alike to all affords
Who bless their sight with that Maiestike face.
My Sovereign all his subjects well remembers,
As vile as our estate is thought of now
You are our head, and we are of your members,
And you must care for us, we care for you.
Our poverty to us is no reproach,
Which th'innocencie of our mind adorn's,
We never on our neighbors bounds encroach,
But by our labors live midst many thorns.
And ever busied for the Countries good,
We have no time to muse of vain conceates,
Yet earning with continual toil our food
We entertain the pomp of prowder States.
And (Sir) conceive not of our meaning ill,
That thus dare speak so freely as we do,
Whilst mediators do dilate our will
They wrest it as they will, and wrack us too.
To countenance such as us you need not shun,
A great man too well graced may do more harm:
And it is no stain unto the glorious Sun,
Though often his beams an abject object warm.
Croes. Be not discouraged by your base estate,
Ye are my people, and I Will hear your plaint,
A King must care for all, both small and great,
And for to help the afflicted never faint.
The Scepter such as these should chiefly shroud,
Not cotages, but Castles spoil the Land,
T'aduance the humble and t'abate the proud;
This is a Virtue that makes Kings to stand.

Cor. Sir, our estate some speedy help requires,
In Misia near unto the famous Mountain
Of great Olimpus that the World admires,
There haunt's a Boar by Dianaes Fountain
Of a big body, and a hideous form,
His fomie Iawe with tuskes like Iauelins strikes,
And all parts in deformity conform,
His back has bristles like to iron Pikes.
This Monster of Nature, wonder of Men,
The Forests tyran, and the Countries terror,
Tears all to death, and draws them to his Den,
That chance into his way by fatal error.
Whilst tenderhearted Mothers do bewail
The goared Infants toyling in their blood,
Th'abhominable beast them does assail,
And in his bowels buries both for food.
Then when we fly the field where he soiournes,
To have his hunger or his rage alayde,
He wastes the fruits, and ruins all the corns,
Thus the poor husbands hopes are all betrayde.
Ere this, of true Repose we were the types,
And pastur'd on each plain our fleecie flocks,
And made a consort of our warbling pypes,
With moving christals the issue of the rocks.
And sometime to refresh us after travel,
With flowrie garlands shielded from Sunne-beames
We gazd upon Pactolus golden gravel,
Glassd, bathd, and quenchd our thirst with his pure streams:
Whilst we preferred, the River seemd amazd,
Unto his golden bed, his grassye bancke,
And lay and lookd whereas our cattle grazd,
Without all envy of a greater rank.
That to repress oppression you take care,
This rest of ours is an effectual token,
Your Laws like Spiders webs do not ensnare
The feeble flies, and by the Bees are broken.
For we by them are fenced from great men's pride,
The Heavens perpetuate your prosperous reign,
And suffer not this savage Boar to abide,
To turn that ease which men have spared to pain.

Croes. What would ye then, that should be done by me?
For to repay your loss; repair this wrong.

Chorus. We crave none of your wealth, yet wish to see
This Boar be-blood the staff of the most strong:
Let valorous Atis worthily your son,
Backd with the best of all the Lidian Youth,
Go to the fields before the rising Sun
Quench with the mornings tears his mid-dayes drouth,
And we shall lead them crowned with laurel forth,
Where in a circuit small, yet a large Theater
For men to make a trial of their worth
This Monster stays: the earth never nurc'd a greater.
So shall we both reap profit, and they pleasure,
Which may be brought to pass without great obstacle,
By making this waster of the worlds treasure,
Of a horrid sight, a delightful spectacle.

Croes. I may not spare my Son for a respect,
Which is not needful now for to be known,
But I Will send others for the same effect,
That this pestiferous Beast may be o'rethrowne.
Th'ostentiue gallants that our Grace attend,
And wait the occasion but t'aduance their strength,
Against the Boar shall all their forces bend,
With hounds and darts still till he fall at length.
I swear this Monster shall when he is dead,
A memorable monument remain,
To Dians Church I Will consecrate his head,
The Virgin-goddesse darts no shaft in vain.

Atis. Ah wherein Father have I thus offended!
Or what vile sign of a degenerd mind
Have you remarked in me that ever tended
To the reproach of our Imperial kind?
That of this praise you would give me no part,
But bar me from a famous enterprise,
As one unworthy for to weeld a dart:
Who still in vile repose inglorious lies,
Lies like a wanton with vain thoughts bewitchd,
Who spoyld of force effeminately lives,
A Peacocke but with painted pens enrichd,
Yet poor in all the parts that Glory gives.
What glory gives those glorious Styles to me
Which by succession fall, not by desert,
Should but my Fame with borrowd feathers flee;
For come of Kings a kingdom is my part.
Who only by his Birth advancement claims,
Like a base bastard does his birthright blote,
I will not beg my worth from dead men's names,
Nor conquer Credit only by my Cote.
What comforts this to brook The Imperial seat,
And all the bliss that Majesty impartes?
If those whom only we exceed in State,
Be our Superiors in far better parts.
More then a Crown true Worth is to be valued,
The One Fortunes gift, and the other our own merit,
By which often times the afflicted Mind is salued,
When Fortune takes what we by her inherit.

Croes. I see what brave Desires boil in thy Soul,
And make thee with immortal wings to flee,
This hie-bent courage, nothing can control,
All Lidia is not large euough for thee.
Go, seek an Empire equal with thy mind,
No common limits can confine thy thought;
But while a full perfection thou would find,
I fear thy fall turn all our hopes to naught.
And pardon me, (dear Son) it is a great Love
That makes me watch so warily over thy ways,
The Affection of a Father what may move,
Whom such an eminent danger not dismayes?
The Heavens of late aduertisde me by Dream,
That some sad fortune did attend thy Youth,
New Meteors and strange Stars through the air still stream,
Which are as Oracles of Jove's own mouth.
This was the cause that hastened Us so much
To have thee bound to Himens hallowed Law,
This was the cause that all our care was such,
Out of our sight all weapons to withdraw.
Scorn not th'amazing Comets that thou notes,
The Stars to mortal States have terms prefixed,
And think not only that my love but dotes,
For if thou fall, my fate with thine is mixed.

Atis. Would God I had some means once ere my death
To satisfy that infinite desert;
Which I shall hold so long as I have breath,
Deep registered with reu'rence in my heart.
Yet (Sir) we see it is a natural thing
For too excessive love t'engender fears,
A sport like this can no great peril bring
Where either all delights the eyes or the ears.
If from my former deeds I now should shrink,
As void of virtue to soft pleasure thrall,
Of your two Sons what might your subjects think,
The One wanting but one sense, and the other all.
What fancies might my late spousd love possess,
To see her husband hateful in their sights?
And from the height of Honor to digress,
To womanize with courtly vain delights:
Though women love to have men at their devotion,
They hate base minds that hatch no noble motion.

Croes. Well, well, my Son, I see thou must prevail,
Go follow forth the chase, use thine own will,
Yet stay, or let my words thus much avail,
Walk warily now t'eschue this threatened ill.
Thy hautie sprite t'attempt all hazards bent,
I fear transport thee to a fatal strife,
(God grant I be deceau'd) yet take good tent,
Thy ouer-franke courage may betray thy life.
And (dear Adrastus,) I must let him know
What benefits I have bestowed on thee,
Not to vpbraid thee, no, but for to show
How I may trust thee best that is bound to me.
When thou from Phrigia come defild with blood,
And a fraternall violated love:
When in a most extreme estate thou stood,
Chased from thy fathers face, cursed from above.
Thou found me friendly, and my Court thy rest,
A Sanctuary sacred for thy safety,
Where thou wast entertained as pleased thee best,
I think those dangers escaped should make thee crafty.
Yet though I graced thee erst, it was but a sign
Of a heroic mind that helps the wretched:
But in thy hands my soul i will now consigne,
And give a proof of love not to be matched.
Behold how Atis of our age the shield,
Whose harm as you have heard I feared ere now,
Is to go take his pastime in the field,
And with his custody i will credit you.
I must my friend even fervently exhort,
Wait on my son, remember of my dream,
This dangerously delectable sport,
Does make me fear the grief exceed the game.

Adras. I never shall those courtesies neglect,
It irkes me not to think nor hear the same:
For while this sprite these members does direct,
All shall concur to celebrate your fame.
If it were your will I would not hence depart,
Who all such motives unto mirth abhore,
But with my passions here, retird apart,
Would wail woe past and shun all cause of more.
For if I strive t'abandon my annoyes,
I fear my fellowship infect with woe:
Those that would recreat themselves with joys,
Still strange mishaps attend me where I go.
Yet since you will commit this charge to me,
I Will use all means that you may not repent you,
At lest all my defects faith shall supply,
I covet nothing more then to content you.

Atis. Now for to see this monsters ouglie shape,
With an enflamed desire my thoughts do burn,
And Father, be not feared for no mishap,
I hope soon, and victorious to return.

Caelia. Return? and whither love? O deadly word!
That does import thy parting from my sight,
I heard thee name, mishap, ah my dear Lord!
Should such strict limits bound so large delight?
O cruel resolution, unkind dealing,
And can thou condescend to leave me so?
Or from my presence privily thus stealing,
Think thou to rob a portion of my woe?
This might indeed to thee yield some relief,
To have thy ears not wounded with my moan,
But would wound me with a continual grief.
To fear all things where I should fear but one.
Desist in time from this intended strife,
With which thy thoughts have vnaduisdlie entered,
Remember I have interest in thy life,
Which I consent not to be thus aduentred.
Have thou not given a proof in thy green prime,
That may content the most ambitious hopes,
Whilst Atis was his own, O then it was time
To follow fancies vnconfined scopes.
Thy self then only camp'd in Fortunes bounds,
Thou do endanger Caelia likewise now,
You sigh her breath, she suffer's in your wounds:
You live in her, and she must dye in you.

Atis. Life of my soul, how do such broken speeches
From confusde passions thus abruptly rise?
I know my love, thy love my mind o're-reaches,
Affection schoold with fears is too too wise.
I go o're-thwart the fields for sport to range,
Thy sighs do but my soul with sorrow fill,
And pardon (dear) I find this wondrous strange,
Thou never did till now resist my will.
If I trespass in aught against my duty,
Which makes thee thus my faith for to mistrust,
Mistrust not yet the chains of thine own beauty,
Which bind all my desires and so they must.
Are we not now made one such fears overcome,
Though I would fly my self my self do fetter,
And if that I would fly, from whom? to whom?
I can love none so well, none loves me better.
Have pity of those peareles (sweet eyes souls pleasures)
Lest they presage what thou would not have done,
The heavens had not given me those precious treasures
Of such perfections to be spoiled so soon.

Chorus.
THose that domine above,
High presidents of heaven,
By whom all things do move
As they have order given:
What worldling can arise
Against them to repine?
Whilst castel'd in the skies
With providence divine
They force th'inferior round
Their judgments to confess,
And in their wrath confound
Proud mortals that transgress
The covenant they made
With Nature in heavens stead.
Base brood of earth, vain man,
Why bragst thou of thy might?
The heavens thy courses scan,
Thou walkst still in their sight,
Ere thou wast borne, thy deeds
Their registers dilate,
And think that none exceedes
The compass of his fate.
What heavens would have thee to
Though they thy ways abhor,
That thou of force must do,
And thou may do no more.
This reason would fulfill,
Their work should serve their will.
Are we not heirs of death,
In whom there is no trust,
Who tossd with circkling breath,
Are but a dram of dust?
Yet fools when as we err
And do th'heauens wrath contract,
If they a while defer
A just revenge t'exact,
Pride in our bosom creepes,
And mis-informes us thus,
That the Eternal sleeps,
Or takes no care of us.
No, the eye of heaven beholds
All what our heart enfolds.
The gods digest no crime
Though they continue long,
And in th'offenders time
Seem to neglect their wrong,
Till others of their race
Fill up the cup of wrath,
Whom ruin and disgrace
Long time attended has,
And Giges fault we fear
To Croesus charge be laid,
Which love will not forbear
Though it be long delayed:
For o sometime the gods
Must plague sin with sharp rods.
And lo how Croesus still
Tormented in his mind,
Like a reed on a hill,
Is shiuering with each wind.
Each step a terror brings,
Dreams do by night afflict him,
And by day many things,
All his thoughts do convict him:
He his star would control,
This makes evil not the worst
Whilst he wounds his own soul
With th'apprehension frist:
Man may his fate foresee,
But not shun heavens decree.
Act. IIII.
Scen. I.
ADRASTVS CROESVS. CHORUS. CAn heaven behold hands staind with blood ofttimes,
And to the Stigian streams not headlongs hurld?
Can the earth support one burdened with such crimes,
As may provoke the wrath of all the world?
Why sends not Jove to have my curss'd course confind,
A death-denouncing flash of rumbling thunder,
Or a tempestuous terrour-breeding wind,
With violence to tear me all asunder.
What unknown corner from the world removed
T'inhabit in th'horizon of despair
Shall I go now possess and be approved
By monsters like my self that hate repair.
I Will go indeed whom all the world detests,
Who have no interest in the fields of bliss,
And barbarize among the barbarous beasts,
Where Tigers rage, Toades spue, and Serpents hiss.
Yet though both th'Artike and Antartike Pole
I should ouerpasse, and find th'vnpeopled zones,
A wilderness where naught were to control
My damnable cruelties but trees and stones:
Yet of my deeds which all the world do tell,
All this could not deface th'infamous scroule,
Within my breast I bear about my hell,
And can not escape the horrors of my soul.
Those fearful monsters of confusd aspects,
Chimera, Gorgon, Hydra, hellish apes,
Which in the world wrought wonderful effects,
And borrowed from the infernal shades their shapes.
Their deuilish forms that did the world amaze,
Not half so monstrous as my self I find,
When on mine own deformities I gaze,
In the black depth of a polluted mind.
No, but my mind untainted still remains,
My thoughts in this dilict have had no part,
Which accidentally this foul fact stains,
My hands had no commission of my heart.
Yet, whether it was fortune or my fate,
Or some hell-hag that did direct my arm,
I quaild the Lidians hopes abortiue date,
And am the instrument of all their harm.
Then swelling mountains come and fall upon me,
Your height may hide me from the wrath of heaven:
But this needs not, my fault has else undone me,
No torment can with my offense be even.
Ah of what desert shall I now make choice,
T'auoid the countenance of an angry King?
I know th'auenging sword of Croesus voice,
To wound my soul hosts of rebukes does bring.
No, th'obiect of distress i will stand alone,
A memorable monster of mishap,
For though Pandoraes plagues were poured in one,
All were too few so vile a wretch t'entrap.
Chor. O how the King is moved with Atis death,
His face the impression of a passion bears
With bended eyes, crostarmes, and quiuering breath,
His princely roabe he desperately tears.
Lo, with a silent pittie-pleading look,
Which shows with sorrow mixed a high disdeine,
He whilst his soul seems to dissolve in smoke,
Whiles eyes the corpse whiles him by whom it is slain.

Croes. Thou ruthlesse Tyrant, ruin of my bliss,
And did thou so disguise thy deuilish nature
To recompense my courtesies with this?
Ah cruel wretch, abominable creature.
Thy Tigrish mind who could have well detected?
In mortal breasts so great barbaritie?
What forward sprite could have such spite suspected?
In hospitality hostility?
Did I revive thee when thy hopes were dead,
When as thy life thy parents had not spared?
And having heapt such favors on thy head,
Is this? Is this?

Chor. he would say the reward.


Adrast. I grant what you allege, and more, is true,
I have unto the height of hatred run,
A blood-staind Wretch, not worthy for to view
The rolling Circles, nor the rayie Sun.
I Will never strive to cloak my foul abuses,
So for to make my forfeit to seem less,
And paint my fault with imperfect excuses,
It Is greater far then words can well express.
Nor go I thus to aggrauate my crime,
And damn my self to be absolu'd by others;
No, no, such Rhetoric comes out of time,
I Will not survive his death, as erst my brothers.
Whose unkind fall if I had followd straight,
As then indeed I dyed to all delight,
I had not groaned chargd with this inward weight,
But slept with shadows in eternal night.
Yet must I die at last, though late grown wise,
This in my mind most coffeehouse breeds,
A thousand torturing deaths cannot suffice
To plague condignely for so heinous deeds.
Come, cause him, who the Spritelesse body buries,
Upon the Tomb to sacrifice my blood,
No fitter offering for the infernal Furies
Then one, in whom they reigned while as he stood.
In whom they often infusde their diu'lish rage,
And in my bosom all their Serpents nestled,
So that this hellish horror to assuage,
I all my days have with disasters wrestled.

Croes. I find Adrastus, when I deeply scaunce
Th'effectuall motives of this fatal cross,
That not thy malice, but mine own mischaunce
Has been the occasion of our bitter loss.
Whilst barely with a superficial wit,
We weigh the outside of such strange events,
If but the mediate means our judgments hit,
We search not the first cause, this much contents.
When such prodigious accidents fall out,
Though they amaze our minds, and so they must,
The ground of all comes from our self no doubt,
Ah! man has sinned, the heavens are always just.
Now when I search the secrets of my soul,
And rip the corners of my corrupt mind,
Mark of my former life th'offenciue scroule,
And do examine how I was inclinde,
O then I see the angry hosts of heaven
Come girt with flames to plague for my offenses,
Which once no doubt will with the world be even,
And judge our thoughts, words, acts, and vain pretenses.
Son, it is my pride that has procurde thy fall,
I Am guilty of thy blood, I gave the wound
Which was thy death, and whose remembrance shall
My life each day with many deaths confound.
Then iniust Stars, your statutes I contemn;
O! if I were confronted with the gods,
I would their partial providence condemn,
That in such sort do exercise their rods.
Ah! my Sons death does show their judgment naught,
What could he perpetrate against such Powers?
Should he have suffered for his Fathers fault?
Whom without cause their wrong-spent wrath deuours.
Now all the world those deities may despise,
Which plague the guiltless, and the guilty spare:
Cease haples man t'outrage thy self thus ways;
I pardon thee, and pity thy despair.

Adrast. O cruel judgment of a rigorous fate!
Must I o're-liue my self t'entombe my Fame?
All things that I behold vpbraid my state;
Too many monuments of one man's shame.
All (and no more then I) my deeds detest,
Yet some not find a friend, I find no foe
To rid the world of such a dangerous pest,
Borne but to be an instrument of woe.
I know what makes all worthy minds refrain
The sword against a Catife for to stretch,
They this opprobrious office do disdain,
To be the Deaths-men of so base a wretch.
Or must I yet a fouler fact commit,
And fill the world with th'horrour of my name?
Is there some new disaster resting yet,
And other funerals famous by my shame?
Or would some bastard thought life's cause debate,
That in the blasted field of comfort gleanes,
No, no, in spite of heaven I Will force my fate,
One that is resolved to die, cannot want means.
Proud tyrant Death, and must thou make it strange?
Tinvolue my wearied soul in further strife,
Unless my courage with my fortune change,
I can appoint a Period to my life.
But this (Ay me) all hope of help deuours,
What gains my soul by death in those sad times?
If potent still in all her wonted powers
She must remember of my odious crimes.
What though unbodied she the world forsake?
Yet cannot from her conscience be diuorc'd,
It will but vex her at the shadowie Lake,
Till even to groan the god of ghosts be forced.
But welcome death, and O would God I had
Less famous or more fortunately lived!
Then had I never shown my self so mad
To Have only been by infamy suruiu'd.
Ah! have I lived to see my Lady die,
And die for me, for me not worth so much;
Ah! have I lived (unnatural man) to be
My Brothers death, whose love to me was such.
Ah! have I lived, with mine own hands to kill
A gallant Prince committed to my charge,
And do I gaze on the dead body still,
And in his Fathers sight my shame enlarge.
Ah! have I lived (O execrable Monster)
To be accounted of a diu'lish nature,
And even by them that best my actions conster,
For to be called (and justly called) a Traitor.
Yet with my blood this stain away I Will wash,
And lest my memory make the earth detracted,
Let my name perish in my bodies ash,
And all my life be as a thought vnacted.
Brave Atis, now I come to plead for grace,
Although thou frown'st on my affrighted ghost,
And to revenge thy wrong this wound embrace;
Thus, thus, I toil t'attaine the Stygian coast.

Cho. The man himself does desperately wound,
With leaden lights, weak legs, and head declinde,
The body in disdain does beat the ground,
That of his members one has proved unkind:
The fainting hand falls trembling from the sword
With this micidiall blow for shame grown red,
Which strait the blood pursues with vengeance stored
To drown the same with the same floods it shed.
Who of those parties can the combat show,
Where both but one, one both, struck and sustaind,
Or who shall triumph for this strange ore'throw
Whereas the Victor lost, the Vanquished gaind.

Croes. Cursde eyes, what sudden change has drowned your lights,
And made your mirthfull objects mournful now?
Ye that were still inurde to stately sights
Since seated under an Imperial brow.
O'reclouded now with vapors of my cares,
Are low thrown down unto a hell of grief,
And have no prospect but my souls despaires,
The sad beholders of a rare mischief.
O dead Adrastus I absolve thy ghost,
Whose hand some secret destiny did charm,
Thou hated by the Heavens, were to thy cost
An accidental Actor of our harm.
No doubt some angry God has laid this snare,
And whilst thy purpose was the Boar to kill,
Did intercept thy shaft amidst the air,
And threw it at my Son against thy will.
Ah Son! must I be witness of thy death,
Who view thee thus with violence to bleed,
And yet want one on whom to power my wrath,
To take just vengeance for so vile a deed?
This wretch whose guiltless mind has cleard his hand
Grieved for his error, lo, vnforcd does fall,
And not as one that did in danger stand,
For he lived still till I forgave him all.
Thus have I but the heavens on whom I may
Power forth the poison of my troubled spirit,
In my souls bitterness I Am forcd to say,
This seconds not their custom and my merit.

Act. IIII. Scen. II.
SANDANIS. CROESVS. WHy spend you (Sir) with sighs The Imperious breath,
Which naught but words of Sovereignty should breed,
O weak revenge for one that is wronged by death,
T'adorne his triumph with a mourning weed!
This pale-faced tyrant, author of our ill,
Who did, t'ecclypse our Joys, that black shaft borrow,
Should you frame Trophies to his Tigrish will,
And wear his livery, and succumbe to sorrow?
No, though he might this outward bliss o're-throw,
And you save you of all that is yours might spoil,
Yet whilst of one that yields no sign you show,
You triumph still, and he receives the foil.
Th'o're-flowing humor that would drown your soul,
In baser breasts might better be excusde,
Who want the sprite their passions to control,
As from their birth still to subjection used.
But you, in whom high Thoughts have been innate,
To this decay how is your Virtue come?
I blush to see my Sovereign so abated,
And Majesty by misery overcome.
Nor are my words out of a rockie mind,
T'unnaturallize you, as not feeling smart,
No, none can bar a Prince from being kind,
Th'undoubted badge of an Heroic heart.
That supreme Power, by which great States do stand,
Should order but the affection, not undo it
And I could wish you might your self command,
Which though you may not well, yet seem to do it.
Croes. I will not now rehearse, t'enlarge my grief,
On what just reasons my laments are grounded,
But still will muse upon mine own mischief,
While as my soul a thousand ways is wounded.
What pensive pensill ever limm'd aright
The sad conceats of soule-consuming woe:
Ah! words are weak to show the swelling hight
Of the inward anguish that o're-whelms me so.
Though many Monarchs iealously despise
The rising Sun that their declining stains;
And hate the Heir, who by their fall must rise,
As grieved to hear of death, or others reigns.
My love toward Atis otherwise appeard,
Whom, whilst for him I did my cares engage,
I as a Father loved, as King not feared,
The comfort, not th'encombrance of mine age.
And had thou Son, as reason would, suruiu'd me,
Who glauncd and vanished like a lightning-flash,
Then death of life could never have deprived me,
Whilst such a Phaenix had revived my ash.

San. Let not these woes ecclypse your Virtues light.


Croes. Ah! rage and grief must once be at a hight.


San. Strive of your sorrows for to stop the source.


Croes. These salt eie-floods must flow and have their course.


San. That is not kingly.


Croes. And yet it is kindly.
Where passions do domine they govern blindly.

San. Such woeful plaints cannot repair your State:


Croes. Th'infortunate at least may wail their Fate.
The meanest comfort can to a wretch return,
Is in calamine to have leave to mourn.

San. What graue-browd Stoic void of all affections,
With teare-lesse eyes could that Youths death behold?
Though green in years, yet ripe in all perfections,
A hoarie judgment under locks of gold.
No, no man lives but must lament to see
The worlds chief hope even in his blossom choked:
But men cannot control the Heavens decree:
And mischief done, can never be revoked.
Then let not this torment your mind no more,
This cross with you alike your Country bears,
If wailing could your ruinde State restore,
Souls fraught with grief should sail in Seas of tears.
Lest all our comfort dash against one shelfe,
And his untimely end occasion yours,
Have pity of your people, spare your self,
If not to your own use, yet unto ours.

Croes. When Sandanis, I first thy faith did find,
Thou diu'd so deeply in my bosorn then,
That since thou kept the key still of my mind,
And knew what I conceald from other men.
Behold, I go to open up to you
(Dear Treasurer of all my secrets still)
A mighty enterprise I mind for now:
A Physic in some sort t'asswage my ill.
Which may unto my soul yield some relief,
And make me to forgo sad thoughts content,
Or else acquire copartners in my grief,
If not for me, yet with me to lament.

Sand. This benefit must bind me with the rest,
To love your Majesty, and wish you well,
I Will give you my advise, and I protest,
That you take friendly what I freely tell.

Croes. Since that it has not pleased the Divine powers,
That of my offspring I might comfort claim,
Yet lest the ravenous course of flying hours
Should make a prey of my respected name,
I hope t'engender such a generous brood,
That the unborn shall know how I have lived,
And this no doubt would do my ghost great good,
To be by famous Victories revived.
I Will Eagle-like so are with Fames immortal wings,
Unless my hie-bent thoughts themselves deceive,
That having acted admirable things,
I may scorn death, and triumph over the grave.
Yet have I not so settled my conceate
That all opinions are to be despisde,
Unfold your judgment touching my estate,
Take heed I Will tell you what I have deuisde.
Some Scithian Shepherd in a high disdain,
As I have heard rehearst by true discourses,
To plague some of the Medes with endless pain,
Did entertain them with Thiestes courses.
And to content their more then Tigrish wishes,
They with the infants flesh the parents fed,
Who not suspecting such polluted dishes,
Did in their bowels bury whom they bred.
Then after this abominable crime,
They come unto my fathers famous court,
And working on the advantage of the time,
Did as they pleased of what was past report.
They showed what served to help, and hid the rest,
Whilst pity pleaded for afflictions part,
He noble-minded favoring the distressed,
Was won to them by this Sinonick art.

San. Often Kings of Judges thence have parties gone,
Where both their ears were patent but to one.

Croes. Then Ciaxare Monarch of the Medes,
To prosecute those fugitives to death,
In indignation of my fathers deeds,
Did boast them both with all the words of wrath.
My father thinking that his court should be
A sanctuary for all supplicants,
Did levy men, that all the world might see
He helped the weak, and scorned the mighties vaunts.
Thus mortal wars on every side proclaimed,
With mutual damage did continue long,
Till both the armies by Bellona tamed,
Did irke t'auenge or to maintain a wrong.
It chanced whilst peace was at the highest dearth,
That all their forces furiously did fight,
A sudden darkness courtain'd up the earth,
And violently dispossessed the light.
I think for Phaeton the Sun looked sad,
And that the bloody objects that he saw
Did wound his memory, with grief gone mad,
He from the world his wagon did withdraw.
Yet Ignorance the mother of confusion,
With wresting natures course found cause of fears,
Which well edged on by wiser men's illusion,
Was cause of concord and of truce from tears.
Then straight there was a perfect peace begun,
And that it might more constantly endure,
Astiages the King of Medias son,
A marriage with my Sister did procure.
A deadly rancour reconciled again,
Must sealed with consanguinitie remain.

Croes. He since his fathers age-worne course was ended.
Has ruled his people free from blood or strife,
Till now a Viper of his loins descended,
Would by his ruin make himself a life.
I mean by Cyrus base Cambises brood,
Who by a Bitch nursed with the country swains,
Degener'd far from any princely blood,
The doggish nature of his nurse retains.
He come against his Grandfather to feeld,
And unexpected with a mighty power,
Overthrew his forces, forced himself to yield,
Who captive kept now waits for death each hour.
That you may see now what my interest is,
I made recital of this ruthful story,
Those circumstances show that shame of his
Tends to the derogation of our glory:
That any dare presume to trouble thus
One whom our kingdoms favor should defend,
In strict affinity combind with us,
Yet not respected for so great a friend.
My ioylesse soul with this will be reioyc'd,
Whilst I to war against that rebel go:
I hope that both shall know how they have choyc'd,
The One a kind friend, and the other a fearce fo.

San. Though Natures law you cared not to transgress,
And this your wronged allye would not repare,
Yet the regard t'a Monarch in distress,
Should move the mighty with a mutual care.
These terrors to that thunder in your ear,
I think the Lidians will not well allow,
For when the Cedar falls, the Oak may fear,
The Assirians ore-throw may astonish you.
And when we see our neighbors house afire,
Then we may judge our own to be in danger,
It Is better first with others to conspire,
Or we be forced our selves t'inuade that stranger.
Ah this is but the outside of your course,
A dangerous ambush by ambition planted,
There may come raging rivers from this source,
To drown your state whilst fancies are undaunted.
I know these newborn monsters of your mind,
Have armed your ravished thoughts with fair conceates,
Yet may these wonders that you have diuin'd,
Prove traitorous proiects painted for deceates.
And (pardon Sir) it is not good to be
Too rashly stout nor curiously wise,
Lest that you from that which is certain flee,
And not attain to that which you devise.

Croes. I grant indeed which very few shall know,
Though I design but to relieve my friend,
My thoughts are aimed (this unto you i will show,)
And not without great cause, t'a greater end.
You see how Fortune naught but change affects,
Some are reproached that others may be praisd,
And every age brings forth some strange effects,
Some must be ruined, others must be raisd.
I doubt not you have heard who was the first
Whom fame for warring with the world reuiues,
Who had of sovereignty so great a thirst,
That it could not be quenchd with thousands lives.
It Was he who first obtained the name of Jove,
Who was reputed for his glorious acts,
The most imperious of the powers above,
That vows and offerings of the world exacts.
He all his time could naught but terror breathe,
To make the world acquaint with war and dearth,
The chiefest sergeants deputed by death,
That made the Assirians sovereigns of the earth.
Yet since his course the worlds first plague was past,
His successors who many ages reigned,
Made shipwreck of their Empire at the last,
And by the Medes were thral'd, scorned, and disdained.
This was the cause of that great kingdoms fall,
A King who could not judge of kingly treasures,
With loss of scepter, honor, life and all,
Did buy his base delights and servile pleasures.
To that disastred Monarchies decay,
The Aspiring Persians purpose to succeed,
But I intend to cross them by the way,
And quail their courage ere that they can speed.
The Persians once the Lidians force must prove,
And, O who knows but that it is ordained
At the Tribunal of the States above,
That I should reign where famous Ninus reigned.
This all the host of heaven ofttimes foretells,
To this the gods of Greece my mind have moved,
And he that in the Arabian desert dwells,
By his response this enterprise approved.

San. Thus still in love with what we mind to do,
What we affect we fairest still conceive,
This feeds our humor whilst we labor, to
Seem full of wit our selves for to deceive.
You flatter so yourselfe, you can not spy
What secret danger this design does bear,
But whilst I look with an indifferent eye
On your intentions, I find cause of fear.
You vnaduisdlie purpose to pursue
A barbarous people that are foes to peace,
Who but by rapine to their greatness grew,
And would for each light cause the wars embrace.
No dainty silks of the Assirian dye,
Do deck their bodies to abase their minds,
But clothed with wild beasts skins they do defye
The force of Phoebus rays, and Eols winds.
They simply feed and are not grieved each day,
With stomachs cloyd decocting diverse meats,
They fare not as they would, but as they may,
Of judgment sound not carried with conceates.
These uncorrupted customs that they hold,
Make all things easy that they feel no pain,
This cooles the Summers heat, kills Winters cold,
This makes the Rivers dry, the Mountains plain.
Those whose ambition poverty did bound,
Of the delights of Lidia if they taste
Will have in hatred straight their barren ground,
And insolentlie all our treasures waste.
To govern such although that you prevail,
You shall but buy vexation with your blood,
And do your self and yours, if fortune fail,
From a possessed Sovereignty seclude.
Yea, though this rash desire your judgment leads,
I for my part must praise the gods for you,
The have not put into the Persians heads,
To war against the Lidians long ere now.

Croes. These flames that burn my breast must once burst out,
Your counsel for more quiet minds I leave,
And be you still thought wise, so I prove stout,
I Will conquer more, or lose the thing I have.

Caelia. YEt am I forced out of afflictions store,
To ease my mind a few sad words to strain,
And but unload it now to lode it more,
I empty but mine eyes to fill again.
My soul must sound even as my passions strike,
Which now are tuned to nothing but mischief,
My breast and eyes are both accursed alike,
The cabinet of care, the cells of grief.
O cruel heaven, fierce star, unhappy fate,
Too foul injustice of the divine powers,
Whose high disdain toward me with partial hate,
The comfort of the world (sad world) deuoures.
Cursed be the day in which I first was borne,
When lying toungs affirmed I come to light,
A monstrous blasphemy, a mighty scorn,
Since it was to darkness and a ioy-set night.
O happy if I then had chanced to smother,
That the first hour had been the last to me,
Then from one grave to have gone unto another,
I should have did to live, not lived to die.
What profited to me my parents joys,
That with such pomp did solemnize my birth,
When I must be the mirror of annoyes,
And all my days taste but one dram of mirth?
Which served for nothing but to make me know,
The height of horror that was to succeed,
I was but raisd up high to be brought low,
That short-liu'd joys might endless anguish breed.
That nothing might for my confusion lack,
All my best actions but betrayed my state,
My virtues too were guilty of my wrack,
And warred against me banded with my fate.
For whilst my Virgin-yeares with praise I past,
Which did (ah that it did) too much import,
My modest eye told that my mind was chaste:
This gained the warrant of the worlds report,
And Maids must have a great respect to fame,
No greater dowry then an unstained name.
Fair beauties Goddess, thou can bear record,
My offering never made thine altar rich,
All such lascivious fancies I abhord,
My freeborn thoughts no folly could bewitch.
Till happily (ah so it seemed to some)
Ah but vnhappelie the event has proved:
All this and more to Atis ears did come,
Who straightway likt, and after liking loved:
Then to our ears his purpose did impart,
Not lip-sick-louer-like with words far sought,
His tongue was but the agent of his heart,
Yet could not tell the tenth part of his thought.
And lest his trauells should have seemed to tend
To breach my honor, work my fames decay,
He brought his wishes to a lawful end,
And by the effect, the affection did bewray.
Their Juno president of wedlockes vow,
And Hymen with his saffron-colour'd cote,
Our love with sacred customs did allow,
Whilst th'ominous Owls no crosses did denote.
The blessing that this marriage did procure,
It was too great to have continued long,
A thing that is vehement can not endure:
Our joys far past th'expressing of the tongue,
Who ever did full satisfaction find,
Yet with satietie were never cloyed,
We seemed two bodies governed by one mind,
Such was the happiness that we enjoyed.
He loved me dearly, I obeyed his will,
Proud of my self because that I was his,
A harmony remaind betwixt us still,
Each in another placed their chiefest bliss.
This moved th'Immortalls to a high disdain,
That thus two worldlings who of death were heirs,
Should in a paradise of joys remain,
Which did exceed, at least did equal theirs.
But chiefly Juno did dispight it most,
Who through a jealousy still iarres with Jove,
That bodie-prison'd souls of that could boast,
Which she (although Heavens Queen) had not above.
Thus even for envy of our rare delights;
The fatal Sisters by the heavens subborn'd,
Of my souls treasure closd the lovely lights,
By which they thought the earth too much adorned.
O but he is not dead, he lives in me,
Ah but I live not, for I did in him,
The one without the other can not be,
If death have set his eyes, mine must look dim.
Since to my sight that Sun no more appeer'd,
From whom my beauties borrowed all their rays,
A long eclipse that never shall be cleared,
Has darkened all the points of my sad days.
Ay me! I live too long, he did too soon,
Thus still the worst remain, the best depart,
Of him who told how this black deed was done.
The words like swords shall ever wound my heart.
Fierce tyrant Death, that in thy wrath did take
One half of me, and left an half behind,
Take this to thee, or give me the other back,
Be altogether cruel, or all kind.
For whilst I live, thou can not wholly dye,
O! even in spite of death, yet still my choice,
Often with th'Imaginations loue-quicke eye,
I think I see thee, and I hear thy voice.
And to content my languishing desire,
Each thing to ease my mind some help affords,
I fancy whiles thy form, and then afire,
In every found I apprehend thy words.
Then with such thoughts my memory to wound,
I call to mind thy looks, thy words, thy grace,
Where thou did haunt, yet I adore the ground,
And where thou stepped, O sacred seems that place!
My solitary walks, my widowd bed,
My driery sighs, my sheets often bathd with tears,
These can record the life that I have led
Since first sad news breathed death into mine ears.
I live but with despair my sprite to dash,
Thee first I loved, with thee all love I leave;
For my chaste flames extinguishd in thy ash
Can kindle now no more but in thy grave.
By night I wish for day; by day for night;
Yet wish far more, that none of both might be;
But most of all, that banishd from the light
I were no more, their courses for to see.
At night revoluing my despaird estate,
I go to sum with sighs my wonted joys,
When in an agony, a grieved conceate
Does blot th'unperfect count with new annoyes.
When Sleep the eldest brother of pale Death,
The Child of darkness, and Father of rest,
In a free prison has confinde my breath,
That it may vent, but not with words expressed.
Then with my sprite thou enterst for to speak
With honyed speeches to appease my grief,
And my sad heart that labourd for to break,
In this fayn'd comfort finds a while relief.
Yea, it our souls remaind united so,
This late diuorcement would not vex my mind,
But when I waken, it augments my woe,
Whilst this a dream, and me a wretch I find.
O happy, if I had been happy never,
But happier, if my happiness had lasted:
Yet had I in this state chanced to persevere,
My days had with excessive joys soon wasted.
Why waste I thus, whilst vainly I lament,
The precious treasure of that swift Post Time?
Ah! pardon me, (dear Love) for I repent
My lingering here, my Fate, and not my crime.
Since first thy body did enrich the Tomb,
In this spoild world, my eye no pleasure sees,
And Atis, Atis, lo, I come, I come
To be thy Mate, amongst the Myrtle trees.

CHORUS.
Lo all our time even from our birth,
In naught but misery exceeds,
For where we find a moments mirth,
A Month of mourning still succeeds,
By all the evils that Nature breeds,
Which daily do our sprites appall,
Th'infirmities that frailty sends,
The loss of it, that fortune lends:
And such disasters as often fall:
Yet to far worse our states are thrall,
Whilst wretched man with man contends,
And every one his whole force bends,
How to procure another losses;
But this torments us most of all,
The mind of man, which many a fancy tosses,
Does forge unto it self a thousand crosses.
O how the Soul with all her might
Does all her heavenly forces strain!
How to attain unto the light
Of Natures wonders, that remain
Hid from our eyes, we strive in vain
To seek out things that are unsure:
In Sciences to seem profound,
We diue so deep we find no ground,
And the more knowledge we procure,
The more it does our minds allure,
Of mysteries the depth to sound:
Thus our desires we never bound,
Which by degrees thus drawn on still,
The memory may not endure:
But like the tubs that Danaus daughters fill,
Does drink no faster then it is forced to spill.
Yet how comes this? and O how can
Divine Knowledge the Souls chief treasure
Occasion such a cross to man?
That should afford him greatest pleasure:
O it is because we cannot measure
The limits that to it belong!
But for to tempt forbidden things,
Do soar too high with Natures wings:
Still weakest whilst we think us strong,
The Heavens that think we do them wrong,
To try what in suspense still hings,
This cross upon us justly brings:
With knowledge, knowledge is confusde,
And grows a grief ere it be long.
That which a blessing is, being rightly used,
Does grow the greatest cross, when it is abusde.
Ah! what auailes this unto us,
Who in this veil of woes abide,
With endless toil to study thus,
To learn the thing that Heaven would hide:
And trusting in too blind a guide,
To spy the Planets how they move,
And too transgressing common bars
The constellation of the stars,
And all that is decreed above,
Whereof as often the event does prove,
Th'intelligence our welfare marres,
And in our breasts breeds endless wars,
Whilst what our Horoscopes foretell,
Our expectations do disprove,
Those apprehended plagues prove such a Hell,
That we would wish t'vnknow them till they fell.
This is the pest of great Estates;
They by a thousand means devise
How to foreknow their doubtful Fates,
And like new Giants scale the Skies,
Heavens secret storehouse to surprise:
Which sacriligious skill we see
With what great pain they apprehend it,
And then how foolishly they spend it,
To learn the thing that once must be:
Why should we seek our destiny?
If it be good, we long attend it,
If it be evil, none may amend it;
Such knowledge further rest exiles,
It Is best to abide the Heavens decree,
It Is to be feared, those whom this Art beguiles,
Do change their fate and make their Fortune wheels.
And lo of late, what has our King
By his prepost'rous travels gaind,
In searching each particular thing
That Atis Horoscope containd;
But what the Heavens had once ordaind,
He could not by no means prevent,
And yet he labors to find out
Through all the Oracles about,
Of future things th'vnsure event,
This does his rauing mind torment,
Now in his age unwisely stout
To fight with Cyrus, but no doubt
The Heavens are grieved for to hear told
Long ere the time their hid intent.
Let Tantalus b'a terror to th'o're-bold
That dare Jove's cloudy secrecies unfold.
Act. V.
Scen. I.
CYRUS. HARPAGVS. Go, Let us triumph over these vnthron'd thralls,
Whose maimed greatness to confusion runs,
Who forfeited their glory by their falls;
No hand that fights is pure, but that which winnes.
The ravished world that fraught with doubts did stand,
To see the bloody end of this days toil,
Saw how the Heavens placd lightning in my hand,
To thunder on all those that sought my foil.
Now therefore let us first devoutly go
And lose our vows, the gods detest th'ingrate,
And who delight to adore their deities so,
Do never fail t'establish their estate.
Go load the Altars, smoke the sacred places
With Bullocks, Incense, Odours of all kinds,
Though none can give the gods that flow in graces
A sweeter Sacrifice then thankful minds.
Har. Though all that indenized in this Vale
Walk here confinde within this fertile Round,
And are tapestred with this azure Pale,
To Adore the gods by many means are bound.
Yet there are some particularly, I find,
Whose names are written in their dearest scrowles,
Whom extraordinary favors bind,
Even to prefer them to their very Souls.
Of which (Sir) you are one, your deeds declare,
Of you amidst innumerable broils,
Even from your cradle they have had a care,
And led you safe through all your greatest toils.
Though of the dangers of your youth I see
The thought no more with grief your mind importunes;
Yet I think on who had the hap to be
An Actor in your Tragick-Comick fortunes.

Cyr. The accidents that in our Nonage chance,
When as our years grow ripe, slide out of thought
Like fabulous dreams that Darkness does advance,
And are by Day disdaind as things of naught.
For our Conceptions are not then so strong*
As for to leave the impression long behind,
Yet mix (dear Friend) old griefs new Joys among,
And call afflicted Infancy to mind.

Har. Who would not wonder at thy wondrous Fate,
Whose ruin ere thy Birth appeard conspired?
Who vnbegun, seemd to expire that date,
Which now begun, shall never be expired.
Your Mother first her Sire with cares did sting,
While as he dreamd, which yet his soul confounds,
That from her womb there did a Vine-tree spring,
Which did o're-shadow all great Asiaes bounds.
Then to the Magies strait he gave in charge,
To try what this strange Vision did presage,
Who having studied their dark Art at large,
Gave this response with a prophetic rage.
That once his Daughter should bring forth a Son,
For glorious Acts exceedingly renownd,
By whom The Empire of Asia should be won;
By whom his Grandfather should be vncrownd.
This to Astiages a terror bredde,
Who laboring to anull the heavens decree,
Aduisde as best his Daughter for to wedde
T'a powrelesse stranger, but of base degree.
Then of Cambises he by chance made choice,
And for his barbarous Countries cause the rather,
Whom by your birth the Princess did rejoice,
And further then before affright her Father.
Thus tyranny by feeble sprites begun,
Does force the Parents in despair to fall,
A dastard to attempt, proud having won,
Which being feared of all, does still fear all.
And tyrants no security can find,
For every shadow frights a guilty mind.
This Monarch, whom scarce Armies could surprise,
Whom gallant Guards and stately Courts delighted,
Who triumphd over The Earth, threatened the Skies,
A Babe scarce borne, come of himself, affrighted.
And whilst Lucina the last help did make,
As if some ugly Monster had been borne,
A Minotoure, a Centaure or a Snake,
The worlds terror, and the Mothers scorn.
The Nephews birth, that would have seemd t'impart
Unto the Grandfather great cause of joys,
As if the naked hand had pierced his heart,
Did wind him in a maze of sad annoyes.
And to prevent a but suspected spite,
By giving an occasion of just hate,
He sought by robbing you the newfound Light,
To make your birth and burial of one date.
Soon after this he sent for me in have,
Whom at that time (and not in vain) he loved,
Then showed me all the circumstances past,
Wherewith his marble mind seemd nothing moved:
Out of the which, as he would let me know,
All complements of pity were not blotted,
He would this superficial favor show,
Not with your blood to have his own hands spotted.
Thus having lulld asleep the conscience, still
The wicked would extenuate their crimes,
Not knowing those that but allow of ill,
Are Actors in effect, guilty all times.
Yet with his fault he would have burdend me,
And willd that I an Innocent should slay,
I promisde to perform his rash decree,
Well weighing whom, but not wherein t'obay.
When I had parted from his Highness face,
And carried you (then swadled) with me too,
Through th'apprehended horror of my case,
I stood perplexed and wist not what to do.
Necessity took place, I waild with tears
Th'vntimely funerals (as I thought) or you*
My soul confounded with a swarm of fears*
Did with sad sighs my message disallow.
Yet t'him I send a servant of mine own,
Who for the time was Heards-man to the King,
To whom I made all my commission known,
But as direct to him showed every thing.
Delivering you with an unwilling breath,
Then with a mantle of pure gold arrayed,
I threatened him with many a cruel death,
If that your death were any way delayed.
Straight for to execute th'intended doom,
He from my sight did all astonished go:
Too great a charge for such a simple groom,
The show of Majesty amazed him so.
O what a wonder is it for to behold,
Th'vnfailing providence of powrefull Jove,
Whose brazen edicts can not be controld,
Firm are the statutes of the states above.
That mortal whom th'Immortalls favor shields,
No worldly force is able to confound,
He may securely walk through dangers fields,
Times and occasions are to attend him bound.
For lo before the Herds-man was come home,
His wife of a dead burden was delivered,
Who wondered so to see her Husband come,
That with a secret terror faintlie shiuered.
She straight grew curious for to know the form
How he a Babe so beawtifull obtaind,
Who did her suddenly of all inform,
And to what cruelty he was constraind.
See quickly then the occasion to embrace,
No doubt inspired by some celestial power,
Prayed him t'expose her dead child in your place,
Yet where no beasts repaired him to devour:
So shall we have (says she) a double gain,
Our offspring shall receive a stately tomb,
And we a princely infant, to remain
Still nursed with us as the issue of my womb.
The Husband likte so well his Wives intent,
That all what she affected he effected,
And soon I had one of my household sent,
To try if all were done as it was directed:
He seeing the babe dead, dead in that weed,
With that rich funeral furniture about him,
Told what the fellow told, and I indeed
Reposd on his report, for who could doubt him?
In end, Time posting with houre-feth'red wings,
Had given you strength with others of your years,
You past the time, not nephews unto Kings,
But for that time admitted for your peers.
They fail, call Fortune blind, she sight bewrayd,
And your authority by lot enlarged,
In pasturall sports who still the scepter swayd,
And as but borne for that, that best discharged.
Then with the other children as it chanced,
A noble man of Medeas son remaind,
Who swollen with envy to see you advanced,
Your childish charge with scornful words disdaind.
You spighting at that proud attempt of his,
Did punish him as it became a Prince:
I doubt now (Sir) if that you think on this,
The rest of rashness did your deed convince.

Cyr. More mighty matters now to muse upon,
My memory with the remembrance cloy,
That those are all forgot, and yet tell on,
For I delight to hear this childish toy.

Harpa. The father of the child informed the King
How such a base-borne boy abusd his son,
And causd an Esquire straightway you to bring,
To suffer for the fault that you had done.
And when the King accusd you in his sight,
As the presumptuous brat of a base clown,
You boldly did maintain that you had right
To scourge one that rebeld against your crown.
The King astonished at the imperious words
Of one so magnanimous, and so young,
Does pawse awhile, and straightway he records,
That you were you, and I had done him wrong.
The tortour to the Net-heard was presented,
Who soon for fear confessed (O sudden change)
The King as seemed exceedingly contented,
Sent one for me to hear the tidings strange.
And as he had good cause, in show delighted,
Did for a solemn Sacrifice prepare,
And me as his most special guest invited,
Who with my son did straight to Court repair.
When light was banished by nights shaddowie sable,
The candles by his forfait taking place,
They served me with my sons flesh at the table,
Then did vpbraid me with his bloodlesse face.
What anguish, or what rage ore-flow'd my soul,
A loving father may imagine best,
Yet at that time I did my rage control,
But laid it up for ever in my breast.

Cyr. Some of the wise men then I heard remained,
Who from their former sentence did recoyle,
Saying, no danger was since I had raignd,
And so dismissed me for my native soil:
Where when I had my unripe season spent,
Your Letter came to give my fire new fuel,
And told how many of the Medes were bent,
T'abandon their own Lord that proved so cruel:
And wished if to that Scepter I aspired,
That I should move the Persians to rebel,
Which did succeed even as my soul desired,
For they disdained in servitude to dwell.
I placed my gallant troops in warlike ordour,
And lest the occasion should have slipped away,
Marched with my army to my enemies bordour,
Whereas you had the conduct for that day.

Harpa. Lo how those wretches that the heavens would wrack
Are spoild of judgment: that proud Tirant offered
The charge to me not thinking I would take
A high revenge for th'iniurie I suffered,
Which was so deeply rooted in my heart,
My countries thraldom, and mine own disgrace,
And all the horrors that death could impart,
Seemed naught to me so my disdain took place.

Cyr. It Is dangerous trusting one that is wronged we see,
Just rancour unrevenged can never die.

Harpa. That was the first beginning of your glory,
Which since has been augmented by degrees,
And which by time may breed so brave a story,
As may be precious in all Princes eyes.

Cyr. Behold how Croesus with his riches blinded,
Durst come t'encounter with my warlike bands,
And through a long prosperity high-minded,
Was not affrayd to fall before my hands.
But he and his confederates have seen,
How Victory does still my troops attend,
And Persia must be once all Asiaes Queen,
Orwe shall (...) to the worlds end.
Now Croesus is ore-come rich Sardis taken,
And Lidia fraught with gold is made our spoil,
The Egiptians have th'vnprosp'rous league forsaken,
This is the happy end of all our toil.
But ah one sour vnseasons all my sweetes,
Brave Abradatus my brother in arms,
Whose praise through all the peopled circuit fleetes,
And with his love each generous courage warmes.
Whilst but ouer-bold for to be backed so badlie,
The Egiptian Chariots desperately he charged:
There with euill-fortun'd valor fighting madlie,
His soul out of the earths prison was enlarged.

Harpa. No doubt that dame this trouble hardly bears,
Who only seemed for him t'account of life:
I heard him whilst she bathed his Coach with tears,
Wish to prove worthy of so rare a wife.
When their farewell was sealed, last speeches spent,
She kissed the Coach that did contain her trust,
And with eyes big with pearl gazed where he went,
Still till her sight was choked with clouds of dust.

Cyr. I hear you have not heard how his death proved
The black beginning of a bloody scene,
His wife Panthea at the first not moved,
Seemed as she had some marble image been.
The body that had often her fancies fired
She causd bear out of sight, still dear, though dead,
But being to Pactolus banks retired,
She in her bosom did entombe his head.
And then from rage she did some respit borrow,
For sorrow by degrees a passage seeks,
Vapouring forth sighs that made a cloud of sorrow,
A tempest then of tears rained down her cheeks.
And whilst her eye the wonted object misses,
She many a languishing look does cast,
And on the senseless lips still lauish'd kiss,
As affectionedlie as in times past.
I poasted thither for to have releeu'd
This Lady of a portion of her woes,
Heaven bear me witness I was greatly grieved,
Who would, to save one friend, spare hosts of foes.
She first a space me passionatlie eyde,
Then with these words her lips did slowly move,
My husband lo has valorously did,
Well worthy of your friendship, and my love.
When I had all the flowers of comfort used.
That a sad soul o'recharg'd with grief could show,
I went away with words that were confusde,
And scarcely could my last farewell forth throw.
I was not well departed from her face,
When as she char'gd the Eunuchs out of sight,
Then prayed her nurse to bury in one place
Her and her Lord, as they deserved of right.
Then looking on his corpse she drew a sword,
And even as if her soul had flowne in him,
She stabd her self, then falling on her Lord,
Her beauties blubbered stars were waxing dim.
The faithful Eunuchs for their Sovereign sorry,
And scorning to survive so rare a date,
In emulation of their mistress glory,
Did violently partners of her fate.
O sweet Panthea rich in rarest parts!
I must admire thy ghost though thou be gone,
Who might have made a monarchy of hearts,
Yet loathed unlawful loves, and loved but one.
O wondrous wonders, wonders wondrous rare!
A woman constant, such a beauty chaste,
So pure a mind joined with a face so fair,
Beauty and Virtue in one person placde!
Both were well matched as any could devise,
Whose undivided end their choice alowes,
He valorous, she virtuous, both wise,
She worthy such a mate, he such a spouse.
And Harpagus, lest that it should be thought,
The memory of virtuous minds may dye,
Cause build a stately tomb with statues wrought,
Where their dead bodies may respected lie.

Har. I Will raise a Piramide of Croesus spoils,
Where all their famous parts shall be comprisde,
But how t'insist in these tumultuous broils,
It Is best now (Sir) that you were well aduisde.
Your adversary does attend your will,
This hautie city humbled has her crest,
And therefore go to pardon, or to kill,
To save, or sack, even as you shall think best.

Cyr. Abstract for old Croesus I am else resolved,
He with some captives which I keep in store,
Shall have their bodies by the fire dissolved,
As offrands to the Gods that I adore.
This city shall my soldiers pains defray,
Since by their force it has been brought to bow,
I yield it unto them as their just pray,
Who taste the sweetness of their travels now.
Of other things we shall so well dispose,
That our renown over all the world shall shine,
Till Cyrus name b'a terror to all those,
I That dare against his Sou'raigntie repine.

Act. V. Scen. II.
NVNTIVS. CHORUS. AH to what part shall I my steps address,
The burden of base bondage to eschew?
Lo, desolation, ruin, and distress,
With horror does my native home pursue.
And now poor country take my last farewell,
Farewell all joy, all comfort, all delight:
Chor. What heavy tidings have thou for to tell,
That tear'st thy garments thus, tell thy sad plight?

Nun. I tell the wrack of us, and all that live
Within the circuit of this wretched soil.

Cho. A hideous shout we heard the City give,
Is It in the enemies hands, is it made his spoil?

Nun. It Is made his spoil.


Cho. And is our Sovereign killed?


Nun. No, but yet nearly escaped does live in danger.


Cho. Then let our ears be with disasters filled,
And must we bear the yoke of that proud stranger?

Nun. You know how Croesus at the advantage lay,
Still seeking means t'abate the Persians pride,
And his confederates had assigned a day
When they should for th'intended war provide.
But Cyrus having heard how that they should
Against his state so great an army bring,
Straight raising all the forces that he could,
Preuents, inuades, o'recomes and takes our King.

Chor. This shows a Captain both expert and brave,
First well t'aduise, then t'execute with speed:
No circumstance (friend) vnrelated leave,
Which with our Kings did our confusion breed.

Nun. When Croesus saw that Cyrus came so soon,
He stood awhile with a distracted mind,
Yet what time would permit, left naught undone,
But made his Musters, marched his Foe to find.
Our stately Troops that glisterd all with gold,
And with vmbragious Feathers fanned the air,
They with unwary insolence grown bold,
More how to triumph, then to overcome, took care.
The Lidian Horsemen are of great account,
And are for valor through the world renownd,
Them Cyrus chiefly labourd to surmount,
And this devise for that effect was found.
Vntrussing all their baggage by the way,
Of the disburthen'd Camels each did bear
A grim-fac'd Groom, who did himself array
Even as the Persian Horsemen use to wear.
To them th'Infanterie did follow next,
A solid Squadron like a brazen wall,
But those in whom all confidence was fixed,
The brave Cauallerie came last of all.
Then Cyrus by the raynes his Courser took,
And being mounted, holding out his hands,
With an assured and Imperious look
Went breathing valor through th'vnconquer'd bands.
He willd all them that at Deaths game should strive,
To spare none of their foes in any form,
But as for Croesus, to take him alive,
And keep him captive for a greater storm.
Where famous Hellus does to Hermus post
In his broad waves t'entombe his strength and name,
Our Army ran against a greater Host
To Enrich it likewise with our force and fame.
Our Troops a time with equal valor stood,
Till giving place, at length we took the chase,
While as the River ran to hide our blood,
But still his borders blushed at our disgrace.
For so soon as the Camels once were come,
Our Horses loathing to endure their sight,
Ran raging back again, and of them some
Disordring rancks, put many to the flight.
Yet others that were of more martial minds,
Perceived the Stratagem that did deride them,
And lighting on their feet, like mighty winds,
Bare down before them all that durst abide them.
There, whilst: the world proou'd prodigal of breath,
The headless troncks lay prostrated in heaps,
This field of funerals, proper unto death,
Did paint out Horror in most hideous shapes.
There men vnhorsde, horses vnmastred, strayed,
Some called on them whom they most dearly tendered,
Some ragde, some groand, some sighed, roard, wept and prayed,
Fighting, fainting, falling, desperate, maymde, rendered.
Those that escapt, like beasts unto a Den,
Fled to a Fortress, which true valor drownes,
Walls are for women, and the fields for men,
For Towns cannot keep men, but men keep Towns.
And we were scarcely entered at the Ports,
When as the enemies did the Town enclose,
And rearing many artificial Fortes,
To the Defenders did huge pains impose.
There all the military slights werere found,
Which at the like encounters had preuaild,
Both for to use the advantage of the ground,
Or for to help with Art where Nature faild.
They ever compassing our Trench about,
Still where the Walls were weakest, made a breach,
Which being straight repaird, we threw tools out,
And killd all those that came within our reach.
There all the bolts of death edgde by disdain,
That many curious wits inclinde to ill,
Helped by the occasion, and the hope of gain,
Had power t'inuent, were put in practice still.
Yet as we see, it often times has occurrde,
Where we suspected least, we were surprisde,
Whilst fortune and the fates in one concurrde
To have our ruin in their rolls comprisde.
The side of Sardis that was least regarded,
Which lies toward Tmolus, and was thought most sure,
Through this presumption, whilst it was weakly guarded,
Th'orethrow of all Lidia did procure.
As one of ours (unhappily it chanced)
T'o're-take his helmet that had escaped his hand,
Along that steepy part his steps advanced
And was returning back unto his Band:
He was well marked by one that had not spard
No kind of danger for to make us thralles,
For Cyrus had proposde a great reward
To any one that first could scale our walls.
And this companion seeing without stay,
One in his sight that craggie passage clim,
Straight followd on his footsteps all the way,
And many a thousand followd after him.
By whom all those that durst resist were killd,
The rest were forced, and knew not where to flee:
For every street was with confusion filld,
There was no corner from some mischief free.
O what a piteous clamor did arise,
Of ravished virgins, and of widowd wives!
Who pierced the heavens with lamentable cries,
And having lost all comfort, loathd their lives.
Whilst those proud Victors did insist to have staind
Themselves with all the wrongs that such like use,
They by a charge from Cyrus were restraind,
And durst no more their captives thus abuse.

Chor. No doubt but desolation then abounded,
Whilst with disdain the Conqu'rors bosom boylde,
Some with the sword, some with disgrace confounded,
Sacred Temples, private houses, all were spoylde.
None can imagine greater misery
Then all the sufferings of a captived City.
But whilst this famous City was distressed,
What could become of the hard-fortun'd King?

Nun. He seeing the enemy of his State possessed,
And that confusion seazde on every thing,
Stood first amazd, scarce trusting his own sight,
His former fortune had him so transported,
Yet it is hard for to deny the light,
He saw a stranger that his wealth extorted.
And when that he had deeply apprehended
Th'vnbounded horrors that o'reflow'd his soul,
As one whose Joys had long before been ended,
He could no more the signs of grief control.
But bursting out in bitter sighs and tears,
Plungde in the deepest depth of black despair,
Through over great fear, leaving all kind of fears,
Did of his safety take no further care,
And never wished he so for a long life,
But he o're-wisht it, wishing for death now,
Still seeking danger in the bounds of strife,
Providing that he did, he cared not how.
Whilst thus he fostred furies in his breast,
A certain soldier by the way him meets,
As insolent as any of the rest,
That drunk with blood, ran raging through the streets:
And seeking but an object to his ire,
He made to him, and he to him again,
I wot not which of them did most desire,
The One for to slay, or the other to be slain.
But whilst so base a hand towering aloft,
Did to so great a Monarch threaten death,
His eldest Son, that as you have heard often,
Was barrd from the right function of his breath.
I cannot tell you well, nor in what fashion,
If that the destinies had so ordaind,
Or if the vehemence of his passion
Did break the strings that had his tongue restraind.
But when he saw his Sire in such a danger,
He bursted forth into those words the rather,
Hold, hold thy hand in haste thou furious stranger,
Kill not King Croesus, murder not my Father.
The other hearing this, his hand retyrde,
Then called his Kings commandment to mind,
And to no small preferment he aspyrde,
To whom this desert did his Sovereign bind.
Now, when that Croesus, who for death did languish,
Was of this fair occasion disappointed,
O're-chargd with grief, and surfeiting of anguish,
To see himself for further evils appointed.
He with sad sighs those syllables did accord,
Now cruel destiny do what thou can,
Which would not unto me the grace afford
That I might perish like a private man.
Ah! must I live to wish to have been unborn,
Charactring shame in a dejected face?
Ah! must I live to my perpetual scorn,
The finger-pointed object of disgrace?
Yet this unto his soul more sorrow bred,
He King-like as in former times arrayde,
Was with a mighty acclamation led
Strait to the Tent whereas their Emperor stayde.
So soon as Cyrus got him in his power,
He causde bring bands of iron, burd'nous chains,
And clogd him hand and foot at that same hour,
As one that was designed for grievous pains.
Then causde in haste a pile of wood to make,
And in the midst where all men might espy him,
Causde bind the captived King unto a stake,
With fourteen others of the Lydians by him.
There, as th'oblation for his Victory,
With sacred flames their bodies to combure,
Although Jove hates prepostrous piety,
And does delight in offerings that are pure.
Now whilst the fires were kindling round about,
As one that to some powrefull god had vowed,
With eyes bent up, and with his hands stretched out,
O Solon, Solon, Croesus cride alowd.
Some hearing him to utter such a voice,
And seeing Cyrus curious for to know,
Now of what Deity dying he made choice,
Did pray him liberally his mind to show.
He answered; upon one in wit profound
He called, with whom he wished, if it might be,
That all the Rulers of th'inferior round
Had had some conference as well as he.
For he had told him whilst his fortune lasted,
As one expert in good aduises giving,
That all his flowers of bliss might soon be blasted,
And could not be accomplished he being living.
Then he proceeded for to show at length
The Dialogue twixt Solon and twixt him,
Who prayed him not to trust in worldly strength,
By which unto true bliss no man could clim.
This speech moved Cyrus deeply, for to ponder
The great uncertainty of worldly things,
As thinking that himself might be brought under,
Who had no privilege more then other Kings.
Then having such a pattern placed before him,
Whose farre-changd fortune thoroughly was revolu'd,
He freely did his liberty restore him,
And willd him from the fire to be absolu'd.
O now Devotion! well appeard thy force,
Which binds the earth and opens up the Heaven,
In the celestial breasts a deep remorse
Was strangely wrought whilst Coesus prayed; for even
Whileas the flashing flames, in vain to quench,
All men did labor, but could do no good,
The clouds were opend and a shower did drench
The fiery ashes of the flaming wood.
Now whilst that Croesus coming from the fire,
Saw ruthles sould'ers sacking all the City,
To save the same he had a great desire,
And spoke to Cyrus melting all in pity.
Great Prince, for famous Victories renownd,
Who do in arms all others so surmount,
That it contents me much to be vncrownd
By one so worthy, and in such account:
And since I am constraind your thrall to be,
I must conform my self unto my fate,
And cannot hold my pace whereas I see
Ought to preiudge the greatness of your State,
Which ah! is wounded now with your own powers,
Whilst this rich City is sacked and o'rethrowne,
It is not mine no more, no, it is yours,
And therefore (Sir) have pity of your own.
Yea, though the loss of such a populous Town,
That Is rich, that is yours, your mind could nothing move,
Yet think of this that does import your Crown;
A piece of policy which time will prove.
The barbarous Persians borne with stubborn minds,
Who but for poverty first followd you,
Their matchless worth in arms all Asia finds,
Their fear is fallen upon all Nations now.
But if you suffer them in such a sort
To Enrich themselves with plenteous Lidiaes spoil,
Not able then their Conquest to support,
The Victor of the vanquished gets the foil.
For this will make them wealthy out of measure:
Wealth to confusion many a Country leads;
Whilst feebled with delights, in-vilde with pleasure,
No thought of honor harbors in their heads.
Then Cyrus strait approving what he spoke,
His soldiers from their pillage were restraind,
Pretending first the tenth part for to take,
As a rich offering for the Gods ordaind.
Of our distress, this is the ruthful story;
A stranger is possessed of this Province;
Our King has with the loss of all his glory
Bought breath a while, a poor thing for a Prince.

Chor. O woeful people! O unhappy King!
Our joys are spoyld, his happiness expyrde,
And no new chance can any comfort bring
To either now, whose fall the Fates conspyrde.
Go woeful messenger, hold on thy course,
For to have heard too much, it yrks our ears,
We ever must bewail thy sad discourse,
Accented with sighs, and poynted with tears.

Exeunt. Croesus. WHat needs me more of my mishap to pause?
Though I have tasted of afflictions cup,
Yet it may be, the gods for a good cause
Have cast me down to raise a thousand up.
And never let a Monarch after me,
Trust in betraying titles glorious bates,
Who with such borrowed feathers rashly flee,
Fall melted with the wrath of greater states.
O had this precious wit enriched my mind,
Which by experience I have dearly bought,
Whilst fortune was within my court confind,
And that I could not think a bitter thought.
Then satisfide with Soueraignties erst proved,
I had disdained new dangers to embrace,
And clothed with majesty, admired and loved,
Had lived with pleasure, and had did in peace.
Yet it is wonderful in any state,
To see a worldling prosper, and not proud;
But chiefly we whose fortunes grow so great,
It Is hard for us to have our high thoughts bowd.
What could the world afford, or man affect,
Which did not glad my soul whilst I was such?
Who now am past the compass of respect,
Plagued with prosperity, clogged with too much.
Long luld asleep with scornful fortunes lies,
A slave to pleasure, drowned in base delights,
I made a covenant with my wandering eyes,
To Have entertained them still with pleasant sights.
I held not from my heart none of her wishes,
But wallowing in vainglory this worlds toy,
Still served with dainty, but suspicious dishes,
My soul was sick with pleasure, faint for joy.
There wanted nothing that might help to ease me,
All did divine my will, aim at my though,
And strive to do that which they trow'd would please me,
Which if I but allowd, no more was sought.
What ever come of me was held of weight,
My words were balanced and my looks were marked,
Those whom I graced were had in honor straight,
All speeches in my praises were embarked.
I in magnificence excelled all Kings,
Whilst drowsy in security I slumbred,
My coffers still were full of precious things,
My treasure infinite could not be numbered.
I reard rare buildings all embost with gold,
Made ponds for fishes, forests for wild beasts,
And with transported fancies uncontrolled,
Often spent the day in sport, the night in feasts.
I seemed t'vsurp the power that erst was Jove's,
And of the Elements the course would change,
For stately fountains, artificial groves,
These were so common, they were not thought strange.
With me (what more could any Monarch crave)
In all the parts of pomp none could compare,
My minions gallant, my counselors grave,
My guards were strong, my concubines were fair:
Yea ere my state was cast upon this shelfe,
I wanted naught that could with seeming merits
Breed wonder in the world, pride in ones self,
For to puff up the flesh and spoil the spirits.
Thus pressing with delight the grapes of pleasure,
I quafft with Fortune still sense-pleasing vines,
Till drunk with wealth, and riotous out of measure,
I card not to consume all Tmolus mines.
Then weary to be well, and tired of rest,
T'engender discord I the occasion sought,
Yet for to cloak the ambition of my breast,
Did with devotion long disguise my thought.
I send of all the Oracles to inquire,
What was to come of this intended war,
Who said as seemed to second my desire,
That I a mighty Monarchy should mar.
Those doubtful words I wresting to my will,
In hope t'expugne th'impertous Persians powers,
Did ruin quite whilst all succeeded ill,
What many a age had conquered in few hours.
And this most wondrous is, because most strange,
I who disdained an equal of before,
(What cannot Fortune do, being bent to change)
Must a Superior now serve, and adore?
What eye not fraught with scorn my state surueyes?
Whom Fates have forced for to o're-liue my shame,
And in mine enemies danger for some days,
But borrowd with the intrest of my fame.
Though this sweet gale of life-bestowing winds,
Would seem a favor (so it seems to some,
Who by the baseness of their muddie minds,
Show of the ignoble multitude they come)
I scorn unlike my self for to be seen,
Though to my comfort this appeard to tend,
As if that all misfortunes past had been,
A Tragic entry to a Comicke end.
Of all that plague my state the greatest pest
It is base life, that faints from the earth to sever,
And has in one united all the rest,
To make me die each day, and yet die never.
Life in my breast no comfort can infuse,
An enemies gift could never come for good,
It but gives time of misery to muse,
And bathe my sorrows in a bitter flood.
Ah! had my breath euanish'd with my bliss,
And closde the windows that give light to life,
I had not apprehended as it is
The height of my mishaps that now are rife:
Whilst with a thousand sighs I call to mind,
The death of Atis and mine own decay,
My sprite in such perplexity I find,
That to lives passage I would feign make way.
But since I see reserved for further spite,
I with sad thoughts must burden yet my soul,
My memory t'a melancholious spright,
Of all my troubles shall present a scroule.
Of which while as the account I go to cast,
Th'enormities still numbering of my fate,
I Will whiles look back upon my pleasures part,
And by them balance my (now) hapless state.

CHORUS.
Is It not a wonder for to see
How by experience each man reeds,
In practiced volumes penned by deeds,
The Inconstant courses that there be,
Yet whilst our selves continue free,
We ponder often, but not apply,
That precious oil, which we might buy
Best with the price of others pains;
Which as what naught to us pertaines,
To use we will not condescend,
As if we might the Fates defye,
While as untouched our state remains:
But soon the heavens a change may send,
No perfect bliss before the end.
When first we fill with fruitful seed,
The apt-conceauing womb of the earth,
And seem t'expell all fear of dearth,
With the increase that it may breed,
Yet dangers do our hopes exceed,
The frosts may first with cold confound
The tender greens that dect the ground,
Whose wrath though the Aprils smiles assuage,
It has to abide th'Eolian rage,
Which t'o'repasse whilst we attend,
To Have Ceres wandering tresses bound,
The raines let from their cloudie cage,
May spoil what we expect to spend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
Lo whilst the Vine-tree great with grapes
With nectard liquor strives to kiss
Th'imbracing Elm not loved amiss:
Those clusters loose their comely shapes,
Whilst by the thunder burnd in heaps,
All Bacchus hopes fall down and perish:
Thus many a thing does fairly flourish,
That no perfection can attain,
And yet we worldlings are so vain,
That our conceats we highly bend,
If fortune but our springtime cherrish,
Though we have storms for to sustain,
Ere to the harvest our years ascend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
By all that in this world have place,
There is a course that must be run,
And let none judge himself to have won,
Till he have finished first his race,
The forests through the which we trace,
Breed ravenous beasts that do abhor us,
And lie in wait for to devour us,
Whilst brambles do our steps beguile,
The fear of which though we exile,
And to our mark with gladness tend,
Then balls of gold are laid before us,
To entertain our thoughts a while,
And our good meaning to suspend,
No perfect bliss before the end.
Behold how Croesus long has lived,
Throughout this spacious world admired,
And having all that he desired
A thousand means of joy contrived,
Yet now is suddenly deprived
Of all that wealth, and strangely falls;
For every thing his sprite appalles;
His Sons decease, his Countries loss;
And his own State which huge storms toss:
Thus he, who could not apprehend,
Whilst as he slept in marble walls,
No, nor imagine any cross,
To bear all those, his breast must lend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
And we the Lydians that designed
To reign over all that were about us,
Behold how Fortune too does flowt us,
And has us utterly resigned:
For we that had to our selves assigned
A Monarchy, but knew not how,
Yet thought to make the world to bow,
That at our forces stood afraid;
We, we, by whom these plots were laid,
To think of bondage must descend,
And bear the yoke of others now;
O it is truth, that Solon said,
While as he yet does breath extend;
No man is blessed, behold the end.
W. A.

FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF DARIUS.

By William Alexander of Menstrie.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci. LONDON Printed by G. Elde for
Edward Blount. 1604.

In praise of the Author, and his Poem.
A SONNET.
Give place all ye to dying Darius wounds
(While this great Greek him in his throne enstalles)
That fell before seven ported Thebes walls,
Or under Ilions old sky-threatning rounds.
Your sowre-sweete sighs not half so sadly sounds,
Though, I confess, most famous be your falls,
Slain, sacrifizd, transported, and made thralles;
Praecipate, burnt, bannish'd from your bounds:
Whom Sophocles, Euripides have song,
Aeschylus end in stately Tragic tune:
Yet none of all has so divinely done,
As matchless Menstrie in his native tongue.
So Darius ghost seems glad for to be so
Triumphed on twice by Alexanders two.
Io. MVRRAY.
A Sonnet
When as the Macedonian conqueror came
To great Achilles Tomb, he sighed, and said;
Well may thy ghost, brave champion, be appay'd,
That Homers Muse was trumpet of thy fame.
But if that Monarch great in deeds and name,
Now once again with mortal veil arrayed,
Came to the Tomb where Darius has been laid,
This speech more justly sighing might he frame:
My famous foe, whom I less hate, then pity,
Even I, who vanquished thee, envy thy glory,
In that such one does sing thy ruins story,
As matcheth Homer in his sweetest ditty;
Yet joy I that he Alexander hight,
And sounds in thy ore-throw my matchles might.
W. Quin.
Eiusdem in nomen Authoris GVLIELMVS ALEXANDER, Anagramma. I, LARGVS MELLE
EXVNDA. Tetrasticon.
CVm tibi det Genius, Musa, ingeniumque, P^e^sis
Floribus e varijs Attica mella lega;
I, largus melle exunda, mellitaque funde
Carmina: sic facias nomine fata iubent.
THE ARGUMENT.
DARIUS, the fourteenth from Cyrus King of Persia, being after the death of
Occhus for his singular valor from the government of Armenia aavanc'd to the
Persian empire, became so arrogant (Fortune, as it were, setting him forward to
confusion) as he sent to demand tribute of Phillip, then King of Macedonia: who
being of a hautie nature, and inferior to none of that age in courage, or
military discipline, requited this contumelius message with as disdainful an
answer; threatening that he would come and deliver it in Persepolis. But being
prevented by death he left the execution of his design to his son Alexander,
who for the great victories which thereafter he obtained was surnamed the
great. He inheriting the hatred of his Father toward Darius, and far
surmounting him in ambition, past in person to Asia with an army of thirty
thousand only.

After his arrival, Darius wrote to him in a proud and contemptible manner,
ascribing to himself the title of the King of Kings, and kinsman of the Gods,
and naming Alexander his servant. He also in vaunting manner boasted that he
would have that mad boy, the son Philip (for so in derision he termed him)
bound, and beaten with rods, and after brought to his presence apparrelled like
a Prince. For performance whereof he directed one of his Minions with forty
thousand, to make impediment to his passage at the river of Granick; where by
the wonderful valor of Alexander they were ouer-throwne. Darius being
advertised of this, came himself in proper person, accompanied with infinite,
(but evil ordered) nomhers; and encountered Alexander beside Isso, in the
straites of Cilicia: where having fought a doubtful and bloody battle, in
end by the invincible valor, and neuer-fayling Fortune of Alexander his army
was defeated, himself put to flight, and his mother, wife, and children made
captives. They were most courteously entertained by Alexander: who
notwithstanding their exceeding great beauty yet would not abuse them, or
suffer them to be abused by others: nor visited he them more often then once (and
that to comfort them) all the time of their imprisonment.

Darius, notwithstanding of all his losses (his courage being in the full,
whilst his Fortune was in the waine) wrote very proudly to Alexander, taking
still the title of a King to himself, but not giving it him, offering him as
much gold, as Macedon could contain, for ransom of the Captives. Which being
very disdainfully refused by Alexander, he having re-enforced his troops, and
coming forwarder to fight with greater force then before, was informed how his
wife had died in prison, whose death he bewaild with exceeding great sorrow.
And understanding what courtesy Alexander had used toward her, he sent to sue
for peace, not for any fear of his force, but allured (as he alleged) by his
courtesy. This suit being likewise rejected, he fought beside Arbella with no
better Fortune then before. Yet for all these misfortunes being of an
invincible courage, and dispayring of peace, he re-assembled all his forces,
which were augmented by the coming of the Bactrians, and was coming forward
with intention at last either to die, or prevail. But in the mean time two
traitorous subjects of his own, to wit, Bessus whom he had promoted to be
governor of Bactria, and Nabarzanes one in special credit with him,
conspired his death. Which danger, though it was revealed to him by Patron,
Captain of the Greeks, yet he could not, or rather would not eschew. At
length, those two traitors took and bound him with golden chains, and cast
him in an old Chariot, with purpose to present him to Alexander. But they
hearing how he would not accept their present, and how he was coming to invade
them, threw their darts at Darius, and left him for dead. In this estate he was
found by Polistratus, and after the delivery of some few words dyed. Alexander
having exceedingly lamented his miserable and undeserved end, directed his
body to his mother Sisigambis to be honorably buried.

The persons names that speaks.
Darius. Sisigambis, his mother. Statira Re. his wife. Statira Virg his
daughter. Tiriotes, their Eunuch. Nabarzanes two traitors. Bessus. two
traitors. Patron, Captain of the mercenary Greeks. Nuntius. Alexander.
Parmenio, his Lieutenant. Hephestion, his Minion. Polistratus, a soldier.
Artabazus, a noble man of Persia. Chorus, all Persians.
The Scene supposed in Babylon.

THE TRAGEDY OF DARJVS.
Actus Primus.
DARIUS. WHat thundering power grow'n jealous of my state
With such hostility my troops o're-throwes,
And armed with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with disdain, high indignation shows
Whilst soothed with self conceits ashamed to doubt,
In greatness shadow I securely slept,
Lo change-affecting Fortune wheels about,
And ruins all that me from ruin kept.
Thus I, whose only name amazed my foes,
Whom the earth adored, as Monarche, once over all,
Am so degraded now, and sunk in woes,
That who admired my might, admire my fall.
Ah then indeed I fell, when gallants stood,
And Phoenix-like renewed their life by death,
Who having sealed their force and faith with blood,
Would rather die, then draw a borrowed breath.
Yet I, but then not I, viewed not avenged,
Those monstrous mountains of my subjects slain,
Although my conscience has my courage cleng'd,
And knows what valor was employed in vain.
Through greatest dangers death I did pursue,
Till heaps of slaughtred bodies barred my way,
And changed my Chariot to a scarlet hue,
Ere wounded honor could be drawn away.
O how I envy yet their happy Ghostes,
Who died whilst hope of victory remained,
And in the presence of two famous hosts
Left bloody records that they died unstained?
Shall I survive that soule-ouerwhelming shame,
To be the eternal stain of Persians praise?
No rather let me die, and let my name,
Be quite exstinguish'd with my hateful days.
Starre-bosting Babylon blush to behold
One called thy King surmounted and abated:
How may thy Towrs but tremble, when it is told,
Thy Prince entreats, whom Princes erst entreated?
Not vassal-like; I will not yield to this:
Were all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none shall vaunt that ever I was his:
Hearts holding courage are not all o're-come.
This tongue inured still to command does scorn
To breath base words, to escape a minutes pains.
Let them obey, who to obey were borne:
For Darius this indignity disdaines.
Since I was once judged worthy to command,
Shall I return to be a base entreater?
No, whilst a sword yields homage to this hand,
I Will not acknowledge in the world a greater.
Brave spirits, who now possess the pleasant bowers,
And glorious gardens of th'Elisian plain,
(For if deserts may move the infernal powers,
That happy shade your shadows must contain)
Those fields where-as your praises are set forth
Do bury but your bodies, not your fame:
Men shall adore the relickes of your worth,
And rear immortal Trophies to your name.
I Will sacrifize as incense to your souls,
His dying sighs, and sorrowing parents tears,
Who now, while none his insolence controules,
Our conquered ensigns in his triumph bears.
For it may ease your Ghostes to hear his groans,
Whilst the earth ouer-burdend sends rebounding back
A plaintiff Echo from the woods and stones,
To sound through all the air his armies wrack.
Why spend I speeches to disturb your rest?
What idle disputations do I hold?
A mighty furour has enflamed my breast,
And burns me, till I be aueng'd seuen-fold.
Did I that strong Cadusian first affront,
Who durst advance himself to brave our bands,
Then turned applauded, and in high account,
Charged with his spoils the honor of my hands?
And could I then all kind of doubt remoouing,
Aduenter only to an Armies shame?
And should I now that ancient praise disprouing,
With squadrons compast loose that glorious name?
Blind fortune, O, thy stratagems are strange:
Thou wrak'st my greatness, wound'st mine honor to,
And having made my state the stage of change,
Have acted all inconstancy could do.
Lo I, who late of swarming troops did bost,
Am spoiled of all in whom I then reposed,
And those imprisoned, whom I fancy most,
Are to the insulting victours pride exposed.
O torment but to think, death to believe,
That any may command my dearest part,
And wretched I notable to relieve
The Jewel of mine eye, joy of my heart.
Dear object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet source of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright Image of excellencies above,
What? do thou breath, and come not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Has heaven the force me from thy face to bar?
Or are my hands grown traitors to my heart,
That they should shrink from doing what it dare?
O could my mind but distribute a space
These emulating thoughts that toss my breast,
Among those pointles Ciphers that spend place:
Then I alone might animate the rest.
Since in this great disgrace I chanced to fall,
Now nothing rests to raze my fame forlorn,
But to do desperately, and hazard all.
I Will live with praise, or by my death fly scorn.
Some prosperous issue afterward may purge
This crime, with which the event would burden me,
This crime, that carries with it self a scourge:
No greater torment than the want of thee.
But what hope rests to re-obtaine that treasure,
Which auaritious tyrants once possess?
Another now disposes at his pleasure
Of all my wealth: how can I look for less?
Now, not till now, I deem my state in danger,
When I imagine how my best beloved
Must entertain my enemy a stranger,
I being far from offering aid removed.
A host of furies in my breast I find,
Which do my soul with dreadful horrors fill,
And foster in my melancholious mind
Strange apprehensions that affright me still.
And this surmiz'd disgrace, grown thoroughly strong,
Reads hourly in my ears a hateful scroule
Of an imagined, yet recureles wrong,
Such poisoned thoughts like serpents sting my soul.
Blind love beguiles me not, sharpe-sighted fears
Find great apparances for to suspect thee:
Would God I had no heart, nor eyes, nor ears,
To think, to see, or hear thou should neglect me.
This aggrauates the wight of my despair,
When doubt objects, t'annull loves fast defense,
How he is young and feirce, she young, and fair,
He bent to offend, and she exposd t'offence,
From which I fear both cannot long abstain:
Her beauty is sufficient to allure:
His bravery is sufficient to obtain.
Captains will force, and captives must endure,
O Alexander, tender my renown,
Although thou travel to usurp my throne.
I rage to have ariuall in my Crown:
But in my love I can comport with none.
Lode her not with disgrace, and me with grief,
Least so thou rob her honor, and my life:
Spare in this point t'ouercharge me with mischief:
In all things else let arms decide our strife.
But where does fury thus transport my spirits,
With light belief my best half to mistrust?
Dear, pardon, I trespass to wrong thy merits,
Whom I have still found faithful loving just.
Pure chaistitie does then most firmly stand,
When fortified it is with wedlockes band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love:
To fear the worst it is affections part.
I Will not mistrust thy truth? yet it may prove,
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy heart.
But on thy love approou'd my hope relyes,
This does dissolve suspicions power to naught.
I will repel reports, as slanderous lies,
Which second not thy virtue, and my thought.
Though virtues foe, and worth-enuying fortune,
Has wronged my valor with an evil success;
Life of my life, yet must I thee importune,
Join not with her to double my distress.

Exit. CHORUS.
O More then miserable mind,
That of all things it self worst knows,
And being through presumption blind
Is puffed up with every wind,
Which fortune in derision blows.
Such one no stable bliss can find,
Whose heart is guided by his eye,
And trustes unto betraying shows,
Which seem not as they be.
Often short prosperity,
Breeds long adversity:
For who abuse the first, the last o're-throwes.
A dead security all care exiles:
It Is no small danger to be happy whiles.
Who on himself too much depends,
A makes an Idol of his wit,
For every favor fortune sends,
Self-flatterer himself commends,
And will no sound advise admit,
But at himself begins, and ends,
And never takes a moments leisure,
To try what fault he may commit,
But drunk with frothes of pleasure,
Thirstes for praise above measure,
Imaginary treasure,
Which slowly commes, and soon away does flit:
And what is most affected at this time,
Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A Potentate that is respected,
And by his subjects thought a God,
Thinks, as his name on high erected
Has what he list at home effected,
It may like wonders work abrod.
O how his folly is detected!
For though he sit in Royal seat,
And as he list his vassalls lod;
Yet others that are great.
Live not by his conceate,
Nor ponder what he threat,
But plague his pride often ere he fear the rod.
There are rare qualities required in Kings:
A naked name can never work great things.
They who themselves too much esteem,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Often find not fortune, as they deem,
And with their treasure would redeem
Their error past: Behold even so
From blame who can our King exeeme,
Who his adversary to scorn,
Thought he who in his name did go
The laurel should have worn,
His triumph to adorn?
But he with shame has shorn
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe.
An enemy (if it be well advised)
Though he seem weakt, should never be despised.
But what? the Minions of our Kings,
Who speak at large, and are believed,
Dare boast of many mighty things,
As they could fly, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be atcheeued,
But time at length their lies to light,
Their sovereign to confusion brings.
Yet so they gain, they are not greeue'd,
But charm their Princes sight,
And make what is wrong seem right.
Thus ruin they his might,
That when he would, he cannot be relieved.
More kings in chambers fall by flatterers charms,
Then in the field by th'aduersaries arms.
All that the success has approved
By Charidemus was foreshowne:
Yet with his words no man was moved:
For good men first must be removed,
Before their worth can well be known.
The King would hear but what he looued,
And what him pleased not did despise.
So were the beeter sort o'er-throwne,
And Sycophants unwise,
Who could the truth disguise,
Were suffered for to rise,
That him, who raised them up, they might cast down.
Thus Princes will not hear, though such deceive them,
Things as they are, but as themselves conceive them.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
ALEXANDER. PARMENTO. Behold, the heavens with a benign aspect,
To prosper this brave enterprise intend,
And with propitious stars seem to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
Who would be famous must of force aspite:
All those astonished, who my troops do view,
Doubt of those two which most they should admire;
My coming, or my conquering with so few.
So mighty minds t'atchieue great actions bent
Force Fortune often to favor them in all:
Where baser breasts deuining evil event,
Through superstitious fears procure their fall.
O how I wonder, when I call to mind
That monstrous camp, which not so much as doubted!
Dim seemed the Sun, while-as their armor shind
Men had not heard the thunder, whilst they shouted.
Th'auant-courours, that came for to examine,
When they so mean my nombers had perceau'd,
Did think them small to satisfy the famine,
That their huge host of daughter had conceau'd.
And yet in end this proved a poisoned food,
Which of their own to their confusion yeeldes
Mountains of murdered corpse, and seas of blood:
Un buried bodies buried all the fields.
So now that few, whom they contemned so far,
(See how mortality it self deceaues)
Have far ouer-match'd their multitudes in war,
And made the world waste to people the graves.
Then, dear Parmenio, since the fates afforde
So fair an entry to our first designs,
Let us go prosecute with dint of sword
That fortune, which the heavens our hopes assigns.
Parm. This high attempt, as we would wish succeeds.
What hosts have we ouerthrow'n? what cities razed?
Lo, populous Asia trembles at our deeds,
And martial Europe does remain amazed.
Proud Greece, whose spirits often preast to skorne the skies,
A prostrate supplicant before thee falls:
Rebellious Thebes, that durst thy power dispyse,
Lies now entombed within her broken walls.
That sea-impyring Tire, reposing much
In liquide Castles, and a wauing maine,
Has ratified thy forces to be such,
That nothing can resist thy just disdain.
No doubt the ancient Graecians ghosts are glad
To see the fierce Barbarians brought so low;
Yet are for envy of thy fortune sad,
And though vnbo-died blush at this overthrow.
Miltiades by all men was admired,
Who once in Greece their flying troops pursued:
And he that with a stratageme retired,
And Salaminaes straites with blood imbrued.
But yet for all the Captains of that age
The Eastern Monarckes empire was enlarged,
Who coming to their country, wars to wage,
The sea with ships, the land with armies charged.
He with more swarms of me^, then th'Autumns clusters,
Dried rivers up, and marched on Neptunes back;
By measure, not by number made his musters,
And did attempt the mountains plain to make.
Then Europe feared for to beforc'd to bow,
Wil'st the earth did groan to bear so great an host?
But thou have come, seen, and ouercom'd them now
Even in the bounds wherein their might was most.
That hautie foe, who vilipended often
Our predecessors armies, and our own,
Now laid as low, as he was once aloft,
With his disgrace must make thy valor known.
He cannot but acknowledge his distress
In laboring first to have his friends restored:
This message (potent Prince) imports no less:
By his request thy conquest is decor'd.
For the recovery of his captived Queen
He offered has innumerable gold;
And would present a treasure to be seen
More, as they say, then Macedon may hold.
My counsel is that you accept those offers,
And render her, as th'auncient custom binds;
Who would make war must not have empty coffers:
For hope of gain moves mercenarie minds.
And further, if those Princesses do tarry,
It sumptuous is to entertain their state.
Women, and babes are cumbersome to carry;
The One young in years, and the other in conceat.

Alex. If I were come to traffic in this land,
And like a greedy merchant to embrace
Before all hope of glory gain in hand,
This your inuild opinion might have place.
But soon I surfeit of such melting things,
And famish but for fame, and crowns of Kings.

Parm So, were I Alexander, would I do.


Alex. If I Parmenio were, so would I to.


Par. Their ransom would defray your soldiers fee.


Alex. I Will rather without ransom set them free.


Parm. The good is lost that is done unto a fo.


Alex. The greater glory to o'recomme him so.


Parm. Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.


Alex. True magnanimity does ravish hearts.


Parm. Rich treasures serve for th'arters of the war.


Alex. No, but courageous hearts that all things darre.


Parm. The want of wages makes a mutinous band.


Alex. But who dare disobey, when I command?


Par. Why should you, Sir, contemn so rich a treasure?


Alex. A noble spirit with praise no gain does measure.


Parm. But who delites in such an airie store?


Alex. If I be singular, I ask no more.


Parm. Although that you conceive no such suspision,
Yet I hear how your soldiers often exclame,
They sacrifize their bloods for your ambition,
And perish to perpetuate your name.
And yet, without regard what they endure,
You compass all the empire of the East,
And more within your mind: this may procure
Some sudden tumult, when you fear it least.
Retire in time, while as the heavens are clear:
You have performed, performed, and that right sone,
More the^ your own could hope, your foes could fear,
Or then the world can credit, when it is done.
Your worth in war is wonderfully shown,
And to the terror of all Asia tryde:
Now let your skill in peace be likewise known,
And for the maint'nance of your state provide.
Good government the same of Kings does raise
No less then conquest made of Realms and towns:
It Is harder far, and does deserve more praise
To guide, then get: to keep, then conquer crowns.
Your glory in her hiest sphere is placed,
And may not move except it be more low:
And if it once descend to be disgraced,
Each artizan your statues will o're-throwe,
For in the war, as you may well perceive,
No little part depends upon fame:
If we but once the least affront receive,
The world will gather to exstripe our name.
Then tempt not Fortune further then you need,
Let reason bridle this aspyring thought:
Least, whilst your hopes with trophies faind you feed,
A moment turn your travels all to naught.
Let Darius be a lively patron now
Of th'euer-changing course of states and crowns:
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
His desolation only now renounes.
He scarcely loat length become content
To call you King, though twice put in dis-order:
In dowry with his daughter does present
The famous Euphrates, to be your border.
Or otherwise he condiscends to give
Great store of Gold, or what your self desires,
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rend'red, as he often requires.
And let not vain ambition blind your eyes:
Remember what strange nations will embrace him,
Whom scarce he knows by name, or never sees,
Where if he fled, your troops would tire to chase him.

Alex. Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou make me rage,
With these words vn-worthy of our ears:
It seems the coldenesse of decaying age,
Has killed thy courage with a frost of fears.
Did I abandone thee my native soil,
And shaddow'd with my Ensigns vnknow'n coasts;
That after infinite distress and toil,
Whilst in contempt of us our foe yet boastes,
I should retire, effecting naught at last,
But sharpened a desire, t'augment my merits,
Then die in discontemment, when it is past
The time, that should have pacified my spirits?
No, I will reign, and I will reign alone:
From this desseigne my fancy never wanders,
For as the heavens can hold no Sun but one:
The earth cannot contain two Alexanders.
The ample circuit of this spacious round
Seems insufficient to confine my thought:
And o would God there could more worlds be found,
That many might t'adorne our deeds be brought.
O, I could wish that The Ocean were firm land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in striefe did stand
Against the Gods for the Etheriall seat.
These could encourage martial minds to strike,
Who being won would yield eternal praise:
I conquer men; but many did the like:
And after-ages may my equal raise.
But since none such my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are I Will to subjection bring:
And here I swear no kind of ease to embrace,
Till all the world adore me for their King.
If you or any else that live in dreede
With-drawe your selves, your Princes part despysing;
Remember always in his greatest need
Ye fly to stop his honor in the rising.
Pass home, and live like men in prison pent:
I measure not my courage by my numbers.

Parm. Your Majesty misconsters my intent:
You know what I have thold, what cares, what cumbers,
And all for you: I to your eyes appeal,
Which well can witness what my hands have wrought.
All that I spoke, proceeded of a zeal
And not of cowardice, or fear of ought.
Nor match I vile repose with honest pains:
My courage is nor yet become so cold:
That wounted vigor has not left my veins,
Which spurd my spirit in youth, though I be old.

Alex. It Is not enough that you your self be so:
To be the same you should the rest exhort.
Is he returned, who was ordained to go
And view the Captives, what does he report?

Parm. As we were since by some of them instructed,
While they as yet not of support dispair'd,
And to a tent were courteously conducted,
Which we of purpose caused to be prepared;
Even in the way one fortuned to espy
The Diadem that Darius erst had borne,
Which on the earth so abiectly did lie,
As each thing his calamine would scorn.
Then they imagined, from his royal head,
Whose dignity it some-time did decore,
None could it cast, except himself were dead:
And if so were, they longed to live no more.
When they had entered in the tent to weep,
Leonatus came and at the entry knocked:
They stood so still, he thought an yornie sleep
Had locked their eyes, or else that he was mocked.
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanced them lovingly to greet;
When lo, these dolorous Ladies prostrate lay,
And with a flood of tears bedewed his feet.
Then sobbing said, we not refuse to die:
Let us entombe first Darius like a King:
Then when that we his latter honor see,
Death cannot but a great contentment bring.
This so they urged, as he could scarce persuade
That Darius was not dead as they supposed,
But lived, in hope through dangers Seas to wade
And in the power of other Realms reposed.
And further he protested on your part,
That they might look for clemency and grace.
Thus after that I had asswag'd their smart,
It seemed they longd to see my Sovereigns face.

Alex. Of my good will they may themselves assure:
I never war'd with such as were subjected:
And if my presence may their ease procure,
Straight to their tent my steps shall be directed.

Exeunt. CHORUS.
OF all the passions that possess the soul,
None so disturbes vain mortals minds
As this Ambition, that so blindes
The sense of man, that nothing can control
Nor curb their thoughts who will aspyre.
This raging vehement desire
Of seueraignty no satisfaction finds,
But in the breasts of men does ever roll
The restless stone of Sisiph to torment them.
And as his heart, who steal'd the heu'nly fire,
The vulture gnawes, so does Ambition rent them:
Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemn the state wherein they stand,
And would all but themselves command,
As one desire is quenched another buds:
When they have trauel'd all their time,
Heaps blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is a hier power that guides their hand.
More happy he whom a poor cottage shroudes
Against the tempest of the threatening heaven,
He stands in fear of none, none envy him:
His heart is upright, and his ways are eauen,
Where others states are still twixt six and seven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blow'n,
While-as he turns the wheel about,
Whiles cast within, whiles cast without,
In striving for the top is still thrown down.
Those that delight in climbing hie
Often with a precepice do die:
So do the stars sky-climbling worldlings flout.
But this disease is fatal to a croune;
Kings, who have most strive most t'augment their bounds;
And if they be not all, they can not be:
Which to their damage commonly redounds.
Too great a state her proper weight confounds.
The Ambitious toyling to enlarge their state
Themselves exceedingly deceive,
In hazarding the hap they have
For a felicity that they conceate.
Though their dominions they incres,
Yet their desires grow never les:
For though they conquer Climats, more they crave.
This is the misery of being great.
Such eye-beguyling pomp is all but fume;
Such glorious shows disguise the minds distres;
And who to conquer all the earth presume,
A little earth shall them at last consume.
And if it fortune that they die in peace
(A wonder wondrous rarely seen)
Who conquer first; their empire cleene
Is ruined by some persons of their race:
Who coming to the crown with rest,
And having all in peace possessed,
Do straight forget what bloody broils have been
Before their Fathers could attain that place.
As The Ocean flows, and ebbes states rise and fall:
And Princes, when their actions prosper best,
For fear their greatness should oppress the small,
Are of some hated, and eny'd of all.
We know what end the mighty Cyrus made,
Whom, while he strived to conquer still,
A woman did most vildlie kill,
And in a bloody vessel rold his head;
Then said, Content thy self with blood:
Thou still did famish for such food:
Now quench thy thirst of blood with blood at will.
Some of his successors, since he was dead
Have reigned a space with pomp, and yet with pain.
Now all their glory cannot do us good.
What they so long have labored to obtain,
All in an instant must be lost again.
Lo, Darius once so magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemned overcome,
For all his bravery now made dombe,
With downe-cast eyes must signify his shame.
Who puffed vpwith pernicious pride
Think still to have fortune on their side,
They cannot escape to be a pray to some.
They spend their prosperous days as in a dream,
And as it were in fortunes bosom sleeping,
They in this dull security abide,
And of their doubtful state neglect the keeping,
Whilst gaist lie ruin comes upon them creeping.
Thus the vicissitude of worldly things
Does to our eyes it self detect,
When heavenly powers exalt, deiect,
Confirm, confound, erect and ruin Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquished world does bow.
With all submission, homage, and respect
Does fly a borrowed flight with Fortunes wings:
Nor enters he his dangerous course to ponder,
Yet, if that Fortune bend her cloudie browe:
All those, who at his sudden success wonder,
May gaze as much to see himself brought under.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
Scen. I.
SISIGAMBIS Regina, STATIRA Virgo. O Dismal day detested by the light,
And would to God (but God neglects our case)
The world were wrapped in a Cymerian night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our disgrace.
Why did the heavens reserve my feeble age,
To go to grave with infamy and grief?
Could nothing but my shame their wrath assuage
Thus offered upon the altar of mischief?
Ah, have I spent my youth in pomp and pleasure,
And had my springtime graced with pleasant flowers,
That th'Aurumne, which should reap the So^mers treasure,
Might be disastred with such stormy showers?
And did smooth calmes, and sun-shines of delight
Make all my voyage through the world a sport;
That tossed with a tempest of despite
I now might perish entering at my port?
Yet for all this, were I exposed alone
Th'accursed object of heavens plaguing-armes,
I should not think I had just cause to moan,
When I but waild mine own, not others harms.
Ay me, on those, whom more then life I love
The state-disturbing blastes of Fortune fall:
Yet each of them some several sorrows move,
But wretch I suffer ship-wracke in them all.
I suffered, when I saw Oxatres slain,
My loving son, and most entirely loved:
died in Darius, when he tried in vain,
What fates would do, yet still their hatred proved.
Ah, do the destinies extend my breath
For further evil? O extreme cruelty,
To use so many instruments of death,
Against one burthend with calamity.
Yet Jove, if this may dis-en-flame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon mine head:
To be consumed with a celestial fire
Some comfort were, since that I must be dead.
Stat. Reg. Leave mother these immoderate laments
To me the very source, and seat of sorrow,
Whose days are burdened with so sad events,
That hell it self may of my torments borrow.
Lo, the dear Lord and treasure of my thought,
Whose presence I my Paradise esteemed,
To such a headlong praecipice is brought,
That with the world his glory dead is deemed.
Ah, on what prop can I repose my trust,
When first the greatness of his state I ponder;
Next how his Diadem drencht in the dust
Was Fortunes Trophee, and all Asias wonder?
He whose imperious speech the world respected,
And as an oracle had in regard,
Now vanquished and contemptiblie neglected
Can scarcely as a supplicant be heard.
And yet I know this more his mind afflicts,
Then does the ruin of his rigall state,
That him my sight another interdicts,
Who am the sovereign of his souls conceat.
Shall he, pure quintessence of my best part,
Then only testify the love he bears?
No, by mine eyes I will distill my heart,
And for his sake dissolve my self in tears.
Would God my breast like Cristall were transparent,
That all the world might see my sinceare mind,
And that my loyal thoughts were all apparent,
Whose great affection cannot be confinde.
They have imprisoned only my poor eyes,
And banished them from th'obiect of their joy:
My fiery heart with winged fancies flies
And where thou go does still my steps conuoy.
Thy Queen is such, as whilst thou draw'st this air,
In counting ciptiues men may still accept her:
For whilst thou liust, how can thy spouse despair,
Whom thou prefer'st even to thy soul and scepter?
Yet flatter I my self that am accursed:
The apprehension, which with grief I cherish,
Of thy mishap may serve to make me burst.
Ah, ah I faint, I feel my spirits perish.

Sis. Help, help allace, allace, the Empress falls.


Sta. Virg. O doleful day of darkness; world of woes.


Sis. This grievous spectacle my spirit appalles:
Heaven, earth, and all are now become our foes.

Sta. Virg. I may more justly moan then any other,
Whose ears have heard the hard hap of my father;
Whose eyes behold the anguish of my mother,
Whom both do load with all the woes of either.

Stat. Reg. What inhumaine humanity is this,
With such a cruel pity to oppress;
To bring pale ghostes back from the fields of blis,
Yet to be plunged in The Ocean of distress?
O unkind kindness that by saving slayes,
And would with louelesse love my love control.
Ah, of this odious Sun th'unhappie rays
Do clear mine eyes but to confound my soul.

Sisi. Dear daughter, strive your passions to restrain,
Least that the torrent of your grief grow such,
That it both carry you to'agroundlesse maine,
And him o'rewhelme for whom, ye mourn so much.
No doubt but he, if we rest captives thus,
Disdaining these indignities of ours,
T'auenge himself in re-obtaining us
Will hazard all his Oriental powers.
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afforde,
Whose care-worne bread the word of woe contains?
Yet though my heart would feign impugn my word,
I hope-lesse speak of hope, to appease her pains.

Stat. Reg. Such consolations now came not in season,
Since we must hold our grief the greatest good:
Dissemble not your sorrow, we have reason
Yea to sigh out our sprites and weep our blood.

Sis. I wail my son. Stat. Reg. And I my husbands fall.


Sta. Virg. I wail my father, and in him us all.


Sis. No woe like mine, mine cannot be releeu'd.
I wail his woe, who should my woe assuage,
Who lives by me, by whom I should have lived,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.

Stat. Reg. No woe like mine, who faithful to my pheere
For love of him all others had forsaken.
But what a pheere? my self, or one more dear:
Yet from my self my self by force am taken.

Stat. Virg. No woe like mine, who borne a Monarkes child
Thought that my birth good hap should heap upon me:
Yet all my expectations are beguiled,
And what I hoped in most has most undone me.

Sis. I mourn for him who in my womb was formed.


St. Reg. I mourn for him in who^ love me transformed.


Stat. Virg. I mourn for him by whom I formed was.


Sis. Shall I not see my self in that clear glass?


St. Reg. Ah! shall I never in his joy rejoice?


St. Virg. Ah! shall I never here his cheerful voice?


Sis. Would God from death my death might him exeeme.


St. Reg. would God my life my lives life might redeem.


St. Vir. Would God the life he gave him life might give.


Sis. Must these gray hairs my sons green youth survive?


Sta. Reg. I will prevent him and not live to languishe.


Sta. Virg. Can I remain behind to live in anguishe?


Sis. But whiles our wretched state we justly moan,
We may lament this infant too a space,
Who in mishap inferior were to none,
If he could apprehend his tragic case.

Sta. Reg. O then how can my heart but burst a-sunder,
Whom nature moves most to bemone his harms?
I think I see the hosts of heaven all thunder
On me, my spouse, and this babe in my arms.
Dear image of my self, in whom I live,
Thy shape shames not the greatness of thy Sire,
But of thy birth clear evidence does give:
Thy soure-sweete sight adds coals to my desire.
Thou that should comfort most, torme^t'st thou me?
Huge hosts of passions now my soul assembles.
O how I grieve! and yet am glad to see
Thee, though not him, whom thy sweet face resembles,
Go, bear this babe from hence: a wound too deep
Makes in my breast compassion of his part:
Yet let him stay; I joy to hear him weep:
This motherly affection melts my heart.
Of many woes this last is not the least,
That vn-begun thy glory must be ended;
Thy fortunes Sun, my Son, set in the East,
While thy faire-rysing all the world attended.
Ah! must this innocent taste of mishap,
Whose tender age cannot discern his state,
And be thus plagued, yea in his nurses lap
Inherit woe by birth? Ah cruel fate.
If thou could hope, what great hopes have thou lost
That art defrauded of so fair a throne?
Ah in thy cradle must I see thee crossed,
Whom I designed so great when we were gone?
Yet happy hapless child, thou can not know
From whence the fountain of our sorrow flows,
Nor what it is for to be hie, or low,
Nor on what thorn the rose of honor grows.
Yet have thou felt the prick before the smell.
Is this the benefit thy birthright brings
Here in constrained captivity to dwell?
Then better not be borne, then come of Kings.
O what a noise is that that does affright me?
I trow to interrupt these tears of mine,
Least that such sad lamentings should delight me,
They will not let me plain, yet make me pine.
Or is it some that does condole our case,
And commes with pity moved to see us pyn'd,
And to behold how we can death embrace,
Death sovereign salve of a diseased mind?

Sis. By many signs we may our selves assure,
It Is Alexander, whom we longed not for.

Stat. Reg. What? ah I die! and must my eye endure
Th'vpbraiding object which I most abhor?

Sis. Suppress such speeches now, least all go wrong.
We are enuiron'd with outrageous hosts:
And weakness must give place unto the strong:
For Victours rage, when as the vanquished bostes.
I will entreat him to, not for my self
(Mine olde-age is become to death a debtor)
But that you may eschew this wrackfull shelfe,
Whose flower pot faded yet deserves better.

Stat. Reg. No, if you needs will sue, sue for my grave:
I will not be indebted to him living:
I rather death should once the maistrie have,
Then I should die so often with death still striving.

ACTVS TERTIVS. Scen. II.
ALEXANDER, SISIG AMBIS, STATIRA Regina, HEPHESTION. Alex. RIse mother, rise,
remove those causles fears:
I come to appease nort to procure your woe:
The honor which I owe those aged hears
Permits me not to see you prostrate so.

Sis. Most gracious Prince, forgive me if I er'd,
In taking him for you, that stands by.

Alex. I find no fault to see my friend preferred
Even to my self: this is another I.

Sis. My sorrows so confounded have my mind,
That scarce I know my self, much less another:
My soul in such an agony I find,
As if some mighty mountain did me smoother.

Alex. I pray you, mother, set those plaints apart:
They vex me more then stern Bellonaes broiles.

Sis. This tender name of mother wounds my heart,
Pronounced by him who of that name me spoils.
I was (woe that I was) a mother late
Of two fair sons, fair sons lights of my life:
Now the one is dead, and in a worse estate,
Does the other live involu'd in woe and strife,
Like th'auncient trunk of some dis-branched tree,
Which Eols rage has to confusion brought,
Dis-arm'd of all those impes that sprung from me,
Vn-profitable stock I serve for naught.

Stat. Reg. I serve for naught, since him I cannot serve,
Whose sight may only my dead joys revive.
I with the famine of all comfort sterue,
Since I want him for whom I wished to live.
I live without my half, without my whole,
Prodigious monster, whom the world admires:
I want the point, the Pilote, and the Pole,
That drew, addressed, and governed my desires,
Now tossed with storms in The Ocean of despair
By ruin only I attend relief,
Threatened above with pitchie clouds of care,
Threatened below with swelling gulfes of grief.
My soul seems to presage disastrous chances,
And varying with her self has never peace:
My hare oppressed falls into deadly trances:
My eyes must grace the ground of my disgrace.
Hell has assembled all her horrors here:
Ah, in the concaue of this cursed breast,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appear
A thousand shadows to bereave my rest.

Alex. Fair Princess, spare those passionate complaints
Which may augment, but not amend your harms:
This voice, which with your woe the world acquaints,
Does move me more, then all the Persians arms.
Madame, take courage, be affraide of none:
You may expect what help I can afforde:
I swear by Jove's inviolable throne,
And do protest by my imperial word,
That neither I, nor any wight shall wrong you.
Yea more then this, I lay my faith in paund,
You shall be honored here as does belong you:
And, as it were, in your own Court command.

Sta. Reg. Ah how can I command, whilst I am thrall?
What can I have who wanting one want all?

Alex. Though it seem glorious in some victors sight
To Abuse their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I strive for to restrain my will,
The save guard of my favor shall extend
Not only toward you, but toward all your train.
I shall have care that who on me attend
From offering wrong you, or yours refrain.
If any prease t'impugne what I appoint,
Or would in ambush for your honor lie,
Or discontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch shall die.

Sta. Reg. O what a host of evils, where ere I go,
Are still encroaching on my down-cast state?
And must I be beholden to my foe,
Who does divide me from my royal mate?
Should he help me who would extermine him?
Cursed be my heart, if it betray him thus.
Eternal shadows mot these eyes first dim,
Ere such a light be grateful unto us.
I hold not of my self; Lord, I am thine:
Thy love was sow'ne not in a barren field,
But in a fertile ground: this heart of mine
To thee, my dear, no small increase does yield.
Yet this good fortune does misfortune bring;
My constancy shall now be clearlie known:
Another might have loved a happy King:
But I will love thee though thou be ore-throwne.

Alex. Feign would I strive to comfort in some measure
This mourning Queen, and mitigate her pain;
Whose woe does make my victory no pleasure,
But has ensowr'd the sweetness of my gain.

Sis. Most mighty King, thou do deserve indeed
That, as for Darius, we should pray for thee,
Who do so far in clemency exceed,
That thou bewailst our loss no less then he.
Thou have not only by thy worth surmounted
All other Kings in dignity alone,
And benefits of Fortune most accounted,
But in all virtues worthy of a throne.
Thou do vouchsafe on me (more then I crave)
The title of a Queen, and mother still:
But I confess my self thy humble slave,
Whose life has now no limits but thy will.
I have all that imagined good forgote,
Which greatness gave: I Will look no more so sadly:
But will allow of this my present lot,
And bear the burden of my bondage gladly.
If that this wretched woman here were free,
Who has no heaven except her husbands face,
I could content my self (great Prince) to be
The meanest hand-maide that attends your grace.

Alex. You may command me, as I were your Son,
Whose duteous love shall prove no less entire.

Sis. Heavens recompense the court'sy thou have done
Which all succeeding ages shall admire.

Alex. Those captived Princesses have pierced my soul,
Who even amid'st our heaven have found a hell.

Hep. What stoic brow his passions could control,
As not to weep, if he re-marked well
The tears of these fair Ladies causing wonder,
Who need not challenge nature of her duty;
But borne to bring, although they be brought under,
Give grief a grace for to apparel beauty,
Sir, such a victory has not been seen
As you have gained, whose greatness well appears;
The largest kingdom, and the fairest Queen,
That Asia vaunted of these many years.
Durst Ledaes or Agenors brood compare
With that sweet Queen, the honor of her kind?
But as she is above all other fair,
As far her daughters make her go behind.
It seemed at first that sorrow had been sleeping
While as these Virgins in their Grand-dames bosom
With weeping beauty, and with beauties weeping
Did with a hail of pearl blast beauties blossom.
So large a power is to no Prince allotted,
As to loves Empire in their face confynd.

Alex. O how is my Hephestion thus assotted?
Dare folly seek t'assault so brave a mind?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed camp,
And Mars own minions thus presume to danton?
Must his soft seal steele-wearing stomachs stamp,
And make them tributaries to that wanton?

Hep. We dare resist (whilst many a thousand dies)
Against th'inuasion of a world of men:
Yet if in yuorie orbs two Sunnie eyes
Assault the soul at unawares, O then
Some secret sympathy, some vn-knowne motion
So charms the mind, that vain are all defenses.
The heart drunk with the eyes contagious potion
Corrupts the spirits and poisons all the senses.

Alex. But I in my conceat do skorne all such:
No, I resolve to be a thrall to none:
Yea, ere I but abase my self so much,
I Will rather die ten thousand deaths in one.
Should I be bound with vile affections chains,
As one obliuious of my former same?
This resolution still my soul retains,
To balance nothing with a noble name.
O what a great indignity is this
To see a Conqueror to his lust a slave?
Who would the title of true worth were his
A mind surmounting every vice must have.
The brauest trophee ever man obtained
Is that, which over himself himself harh gained.

Hep. I joy, my sovereign, that as you excel
Not only men, but Mars himself in arms:
So you by virtues might the power repel
Of beauty, love, and Cithereas charms.
Your virtue bright, whose rays shine in your words
And thence to hearts center are reflected;
Now over my self such power to me affords,
That with fond love I loath to he infected.

ACTVS TERTIVS. Scen. III.
BESSVS, NARBAZANES. Bes. NOw since, Narbazanes, we are come hither,
Let us accomplish what we have intended:
And join our wit, our force, and all together,
That it may be no sooner known then ended.
You see occasion call us, whilst we sleep,
And point us out the way to be advanced;
Yea blames our sluggishnesse that cannot keep
The course of things which for our weal have chanced
The heavens abhor our King, and strive t'vndo him:
Nothing does prosper that he enterprises:
Some new disaster daily falls unto him:
Some cross o'er-thwarts all things that he devises.
In no strict limits should our thoughts be bounded
Whom so great happiness seems to importune:
For since our King is like to be confounded,
Upon his fall we both may build our fortune.

Na. I shall not fail for to perform my part:
I of your words exceedingly allow:
Honor, and wealth are the idols of my heart,
Which if I may obtain, I care hot how.
And yet I would we had some fair pretense.
Our countries care must seem our souls to comber:
This seeming zeal must shadow our offense:
For such a show will satisfy a number.
Let us be well advised, ere we resolve:
And then endeavor t'execute it soon.
If we our selves once in this work involue,
And then not finishe it, we are undone.

Bes. He has sent one to Alexander late
To speak of peace, but did the same in vain:
And now involu'd in a despaired estate,
Barred from accord, he cannot wary sustain.
His purpose is his Captains to conuene,
To ask of them some counsel for his saftie:
A time more fit for us could not have been.
Who mind to compass Kings must: needs be crafty.
For to atchieue that which we think to do,
A course more fit we by no means could find,
Then crooked seeming-vpright counsel to
Disguise our practices, and mask our mind.
We will advise him to renounce a space
His state to some one, whom he may desire
But for the fashion to accept his place,
And as himself a certain time impyre.
Whose better fortune may perchance bring back
That which his ever ebbing bears away:
Then he again his Diadem shall take,
And as before the regal scepter sway.

Na. Well then amongst our selves, t'auoid, debate
Which undermines so many a mighty action.
I will prefer you to the imperial seat.
And to approve the same will frame my faction.

Bes. All that is one, which of us two receive it,
Since every thing does equally belong us:
I Will take it for the form, not that I crave it,
For we will part his Empire all among us.
But if he condescend to this we crave,
Which at the first unfolding would seem good:
Let him not think us two such fools to leave
That which so many Monarkes buy with blood.
Who once advanced would willingly go down,
And not love in authority to stand?
It Is not the custom so to quite a Crown,
When one has known how sweet it is to command.
This name of faith but to get credit feigned,
If it were balanced with a kingdom, straight
In them whose consciences are most restrained
It Would soon succumbe, a scepter has such weight.

Na. Yet to betray our King we have no reason:
When I muse on the attempt it makes me sorry:
Our name stained with this odious style of treason
Shall leave our successors more shame, then glory.
We first must end all our designs with pain,
Then reign with fear, and live securely never;
As in a dream a space with pomp remain,
Then die disgraced, infamy for ever.
The sacred title of a Sovereign King
Does strike a terror in my troubled thought,
And majesty, t'amaze my mind, does bring,
Whose aspect only has great wonders wrought.

Bes. To idle sounds, and frivolous reports
Give thou a pasporte, for they last not long:
And all that thou alledgest naught imports.
A Crown may cover any kind of wrong.
What heinous thing so odious is by nature,
That for a Kingdom has not been committed:
To be a King let me be called a traitor;
Faith, if for ought, for this may be omitted.
Those are but feeble brains, which fancies lode
With timorous dreams, that bare surmising brings.
Who fear vain shadows must not come abroad.
Too warie-wits dare never work great things.
If our brave project happily succeed,
(As now I doubt not but it shall do soon)
We straight will find enough t'applaud our deed,
And sooth us up in all that we have done.

Na. To have the time and manner then praefixt,
Command the Bactrians all themselves to arm,
And to attend till we advertise next,
Prompt for all perils at the first alarm.
Then through the Camp a rumor we will spread,
That hopeless Darius has dispairdlie gone
With violence to dwell amongst the dead,
And seem therefore excessiuelie to moan.
The Persians we with promises must feed,
So to disarme him of his native powers:
Then we will apprehend himself with speed:
For while that he is free nothing is ours.
That we may seem to use him with respect,
(As to the state of such a Prince pertaines:)
We will not this last ornament neglect;
He shall be bound, but bound with golden chains.
To Alexander after we will send,
And offer Darius in his hands to appease him;
Then crave his favor, that he will defend
Us as his friends, who have done all to please him;
If his good will we cannot thus procure,
And he us with extremity pursue;
With Darius death we will our states assure,
Then raise fresh forces, and the wars renew.

Bos. Let us henceforth for nothing be dismaide,
But strive our selves courageouslie to bear:
This dangerous action would not be delai'd,
Least time work his assurance, and our fear.

Exeunt. CHORUS.
Time, through Jove's judgment just,
Huge alterations brings:
Those are but fools that trust
In transitory things,
Whose tails bear mortal stings,
Which in the end will wound.
And let none think it strange,
Though all things earthly change
In this inferior round.
What is from ruin free?
The elements which be
At variance (as we see)
Each other do confound:
The earth and air make war:
The fire and water are
Still wrestling at debate:
All those through cold and heat,
Through drouth, and moisture iar:
No wonder though men change and fade,
Who of those changing elements are made.
How dare vain worldlings vaunt
Of fortunes goods not lasting,
Evils that our wits enchaunt,
Exposed to loss and wasting.
Lo we to death are hasting,
Whilst we these things discuss.
All things from their beginning,
Unto an end are running:
Heaven has ordained it thus.
We hear how heaven does thunder;
We see the earth burst asunder;
And yet we never ponder,
What this imports to us.
Those fearful signs do prove,
That th'angrie powers above
Are moved to indignation
Against this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a puff of breath,
Who live assured of nothing but of death?
Who was so happy yet,
As never had some cross:
Though on a Throne he sit,
And is not used with loss,
Yet fortune once will toss
Him, when that least he would.
If one had all at ones
Hydaspes precious stones,
And yellow Tagus gold,
All th'Orient all treasure,
And every earthly pleasure,
Even in the greatest measure,
It should not make him bold.
For while he lives secure,
His state is most unsure.
When it does least appear,
Some heavy plague draws near,
Destruction to procure.
We may compare the earths glory to a flower,
That flourishes and fades in an hour.
In what we most repose
We find our comfort light:
The thing we soonest lose
That Is precious in our sight.
For honor, riches, might
Our lives im paund we lay:
Yet all like flying shadows,
Or flowers enambling meadows,
Euanish and decay.
Long time we toil to find
Those idols of the mind,
Which got we cannot bind
To Abide with us one day.
Then why should we presume
On treasures that consume,
Difficile to obtain,
Difficile to retain,
A dream, a breath, a fume;
Which vex them most who them possess,
Who starve with store, and famish with excess.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
Scen. I.
DARIUS, TIRIOTES. Tir. AH, must I poison now my Princes ears
with the worst news that ever burthe^'d fame?
Had I as many tongues, as I have tears,
All would not serve my sorrows to proclaim.

Dar. Great signs of grief I in thy face discern:
Spare not for to report this heavy cross
To one, I fear, whom it does most concern.
Is It death, disgrace, destruction, treason, loss?
Tell on the sum of honor at the first:
With no ambiguous words my pain prolong:
It Is comfort to a wretch to know the worst:
And I have learned to be unhappy long.
What least I speak, and yet suspect too much,
Is It some ludibrious message of my skorne,
Which must wound me? but ah no torment such,
As this to them who that disgrace have borne.

Tir. She was not wronged, as you have misconceiu'd.
The Gods have had a care for to preserve her:
Such favor of the victour she received,
As of her subjects that were bound to serve her.
But what a vollie does my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your ears, woes full of dread?
Would God ere I the sum thereof declare,
That I might die in saying she is dead.
Cursed caitiue, was it not enough, allas,
That I beheld her die, and would have died,
But that I must armed with sad tidings pas
To wound all them that hear what I have spied?
See how he fares shot with these words of mine,
As one become the pray of grief, and death.

Dar. Yet does the Sun on my affliction shine,
And sees the air infected with my breath.
And can I live, and look them in the face,
That have my ignominious o're-throw seen?
And how I vanquished, vanquished with disgrace
Engaged at once my kingdom, and my Queen?
Heaven bruise me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remain
The object of thy wrath, and Fortunes wonder;
Spoiled of all hope; yet kept for greater pain.
Ah! art thou dead, and do I lieu behind thee?
Thy faulty husband think thou so to fly?
If it be thus, then I know where to find thee.
This only greeues me that too late I die.
O Alexander, what such heinous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'st me thus?
Whom of thy friends, or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeserved of us.
Think that thou had just causes to make war:
Yet upon women should thy wrath be wroken?
This Tirrannie shall all thy Triumph mar,
And ever shall to thy reproach be spoken.

Tir. Sir, without cause you guilty him esteem.
I know her death did grieuouslie displease him:
A wondrous thing (which few, or none would deem)
He took it so, that nothing could appease him.
Even as my Sovereign now, so then he smarted;
And when he came to ease your mothers grief,
As if that his own mother had departed;
He seemed to need, not for to give relief.

Dar. If any sparks of that respect remain,
Which should with reason move thy mind to ruth,
I pray the Tiriotes now be plain,
Or else strange torments shall exact the truth:
I loath to let this question escape my mouth,
Which both I blush to crave, and long to know,
Is It possible so insolent a youth
Did never tempt the treasure which I owe?
Could this imperious Prince in flower of age
Have such a peerless beauty in his power,
And yet not seek to quench his ardent rage
With the destruction of her honors flower?
Spare not to tell upon what deadly shelfe
My joy is perished quite, and I defaced.
The fear of evil is worse then the evil it self:
I'ts to die twice, to die, and die disgraced.

Ti. Let not those loue-bred fears abuse your thought:
By all the world no fable I contriue.
If I speak partiallie, or lie in ought,
Earth open up, and swallow me alive.
He whom your Grace so wrongfully suspects,
No, not in thought, has once your Queen abused,
But as his sister still in all respects,
As chastely, and as honorably used.
When fortune first our warlike troops had scattered,
And with great slaughter put them all to flight;
We, whom she late so lovingly had flattered,
Were made the patterns of that changlings might.
For having found a Crown troad on the ground.

Dar. O lasting shame that cannot be recur'd.


Tir. We straight imagined that some cruel wound
Had killed my Lord, and wail'd it as assured.

Dar. Would God I then had died, as I desired,
So to have prevented those ensuing harms;
Before my honor and my hap expired,
With Crown on head, and with my Queen in arms.

Tir. But Alexander having heard our cries
Sent one t'enquire the occasion of our woe;
Who finding whence our error did arise,
Gave full assurance that it was not so.
Then he himself unto our tent resorted,
And with most courteous speeches full of love
Your mother, wife, and children often exhorted
Such vain surmized terrors to remove.
With protestation that they should expect
No harm of him their courage to appale:
Each thing he did accordingly direct,
That no man might endomage them at all.
Thus having them against all dangers armed
(I think for fear, for who would not have feared
Least such an Angels graces had him charmed)
He never more before her face appeared.
Or was it virtue that would fly the sting
Of trustlesse pleasures that abuse the sense?
So continent a victour, and a king
Was never seen. He fled what caused offense.
He does his fame above all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemish find,
Nor give his eyes commodity to err,
Nor suffer impure thoughts to stain his mind.
He stayed till that fair face had lost all vigor,
And with the colors of pale death was painted.

Dar. Injurious heaven that with such hellish rigor
The purest work that nature made has tainted.

Tir. When he beheld death triumph in that face,
Which late had triumphed over a Monarcks heart,
He mon'd no less her miserable case,
Then you that lost in her your better part.
And when some days his dolor had ou'r-come,
Her funerals solemnly to decore
He used such honor, as might well become
The Persian pomp in prosperous times before.

Dar. O supreme power that of Empires disposest,
And ratifiest thy will with fearful thunder,
Who, as thou please, placest, and de-posest
Uncertain worldlings whiles above, whiles under,
I pray thy Deity in my souls distress,
If that the inhabitants of heaven can hear
The plaints of those who this low point possess,
Or that the immortal can give mortals ear,
Vouchsafe this my last suit for to fulfill:
Establish first this scepter in my hand:
But if through my deserving, or thy will
The race of Cyrus must no more command;
And if thy heavenly breast such hate contracts,
That I must needs my Diadem forgo:
Let him succeed who proves in all his acts
So just a Victour, and so mild a foe.

ACTVS QVARTVS. Scen.II.
DARIUS, ART ABAZVS, NARBAZENES PATRON, BESSVS. Dar. IF Fortune had joined me
with dastard minds,
Who to a noble death base life preferred,
I should not harrengue here unto the winds,
But be content to have my fate deferred.
O, I repent I proou'd your worth too much,
Who still have followed me in all estates.
I rather should, then doubt that you are such,
Prease to prove worthy of so worthy mates.
Ye only rest of all that I conducted,
Of whose great force and faith, which many sing,
I by two fights, and flights have been instructed:
Yet having you I think my self a King.
He has placed traitors in my towns most ample,
Not that he honors them (he hates their humor)
But to seduce you to by their example,
Then bannish all for every little rumor.
Ye have not to my Fortune had regard,
But freelie-follow'd my evil fortuned wars:
Which, though that I might not, Jove would reward,
And all the world extol you to the stars.
How long shall I a vagabond remain,
And fly a stranger who my right would reaue?
Since by one battle we may re-obtaine
All that we lost, or loose all that we have.
Like those vile traitors, whom I will arraigne
To hold me up, shall I go cast me down?
Must Darius only by entreatie reign?
No, none has power to take, or give my Crown.
I shall not my authority sur-viue,
Nor will I proffer a submissiue breath:
My hand shall hold a scepter while I live:
My head shall bear a Diadem till death.
If those frank thoughts that do possess my soul,
Such flames of virtue kindled have in you;
A Macedonian never shall control
Our noble acts, nor laugh to see us bow.
My state may testify frail Fortunes change:
May she not him o're-whelme, as well as me?
At least our hands bear death, if not revenge:
For who can stop a stout heart for to die?
Think of your ancestors, I you exhort,
Who made the Grecians tributaries ever;
And of whose wondrous acts men do report
Great things, the fame whereof shall perish never.
Shall future ages in your praise be dombe,
Whilst they your Fathers memory adore?
I am resolved, my Triumph, or my Tomb
A Laurel, ora Cipresse shall decore.

Art. What vain amazement does disturb our spirits?
Let us consult no further but go to.
He, who the Persians wonted worth inherites,
Will not rest long aduising what to do?
Come let us with our best attire and arms
Accompany our King to this last strife:
Through bloody squadrons, and through hot alarmes
By slaughter only we must look for life.
And when our host, as I hope shall prevail,
Our country shall have peace, we praise of right:
And if our Fortune, not our courage, fail,
We die with honor in our Sovereigns sight.
Let us, if vanquished, be ashamed to be.
A glorious death may greater honor give.
Do to o're-come, and yet not fear to die.
It Is needful that we fight, not that we live,

Na. My words will first your Majesty displease:
Yet duty makes me speak where silence spilles:
The fine Phisician cures a sharp disease
With some sour potion that corruption killes.
The skillful Pilote when he fears a storm,
To save the ship will cast out precious things:
Yet I persuade you not in any form
To further, but to stay what ruin brings.
We war against the Gods, we cannot speed:
To all our actions Fortune is opposed.
We must of force some other way proceed:
So have the heavens of our affairs disposed.
Dear Sir, give over the government and style
To some more happy man, not in effect?
But cloth him with your shadow for a while,
Till he your Realms half ruined re-erect.
When he has clam'd this tempest now so hot,
And settled Asia with a good success?
He will your kingdoms lost with what he got
Restore: appearance promises no less.
All Bactria yet abides at your command:
The Indians, lo, would die to do you good:
Yea many thousand thousands armed stand,
Bent for your pleasure to bestow their blood.
What? should we rush like beasts to needless strife?
Be well prepared, and then pursue that stranger:
Brave minds should death despise not lothing life.
Base cowards crave to die for fear of danger.
But virtue, to have no support over past,
Will first on all means possible be thinking:
And when that all is proou'd, death is the last,
To which it is enough to go not shrinking.
Now for the time let Bactria be our seat,
To Bessus for the form your Crown resign:
Who, when he once has re-aduanc'd you state,
Shall quite all sovereignty at the first sign.

Dar. Wretch, trauellest thou thy sovereign to betray?
Such treason dare thou to our ears impart?
Such treason under trust? Stay traitor, stay:
I Will sheath my sword even in thy traitorous heart.

Art. Sir, you must strive to have this passion broken.
Consider what they are, what is the time:
It may be they through ignorance have spoken:
In thought, and not in word, consists a crime.
Since to affront your enemy you go,
You must not stir for every little object:
But tolerate your own, to offend your foe.
For now i'ts time time to love not lose a subject.
I shall get trial upon what pretense
This ou'r-sight in advise has been committed.
If through simplicity, not for offense,
He must be pardoned and his speech remitted.

Dar. I wish that it were so. I take no pleasure
To ruin them that would my fortune cherish.

Na. Your grace will grant me mercy in some measure.
First hear, and if I fail then let me perish.
I call the Gods to witness of my case,
Who can decipher every secret thought:
If I intended treason toward your Grace,
Straight where I stand let me be turned to naught.
I counseled but according to my skill:
It was my upright mind that made me bold.
I rue my wit not answered to my will:
Yet zeal what it conceiues must needs unfold.
We should beware to speak in great affairs,
Where words are damned, or balanced by the event.
For if things fail, the fault is still thought theirs
Who gave th'aduise, though of a good intent.
I fall before your feet here for refuge:
Then let me not be without cause rejected:
At least, examine first before you judge:
I Will rather die absolu'd, then live suspected.

Dar. Your fond opinion first was to be feared,
Which seemed indeed sinistriouslie inclind:
For at the first your speech to me appeared
Th'envenom'd birth of some malicious mind.
But since you purge you so, I Will not araigne you,
Not further call your loyalty in doubt:
But in the same degree of grace retain you,
That you were in before these words brake out.
I think that Patron looks with speaking eyes,
As if his mind were mightily perplexed:
Come, Patron, tell what in thy bosom lies,
Wherewith thou seem so wonderfully vexed.

Pa. Sir, I would speak in privy, If I could,
That which the affection of my soul affordes:
It must be sealed with silence, and I would
That none were present to report my words.
Of fifty thousand Greeks four only rest,
Companions in all perils with your host:
Alike with you delighted and distressed:
As faithful now as when you florish'd most.
Where you remain we must remain with you:
All kind of fortunes have us joined together.
Appoint our tents for your Pauilion now;
And we will guard you, if that you come thither.
We have abandoned Greece, our native soil:
We have no Bactria to be our retreat:
Our hope is all in you: those that would spoil
Us of your person ruin all our state.
Would God that all your army did their due:
To use more words the occasion is not fit.
I should not urge you, if your own were true,
Your custody to strangers to commit.

Dar. What sudden accident does this dismay you
That you such inconveniences forecast?

Pa. Sir, Bessus and Narbazanes betray you*
This day to you, or them will be the last.
They feign repentance only to dissemble,
Till every thing be for the fact prepared.
Their friends in have do all their force assemble,
And once ere night mind to invade your guarde.

Dar. I credit you: but yet I cannot wrong
My subjects so, to think of them the worst:
Shall I leave them who followed me so long?
By doing so to make my self accursed.
I will awaite on what the heavens will offer,
For who can stand when fates his fall conspire?
Among mine own I willingly will suffer.
I live too long if they my death desire.

Bes. Take heed, Sir, to this subtile-witted Greek:
The Grecian faith to all the world is known.
I am enform'd he by all means does seek
To win his grace who has your state o're-throwne.
And marvel not though mercenarie men,
Who sell themselves, sell all: believe them never.
They have no God but gold, nor house: how then
Can they be constant that are changing ever?
Although that he pre-occupie you thus,
And others who themselves abuse your Grace:
Faith shall be found inuiolate in us,
When our accuser dare not show his face.

Dar. Who hope to have of Alexander gain,
Or honor to be false, they have no reason:
No man on earth does traitors more disdain,
Nor more seuearly will b'aueng'd on treason.

Bes. Well, Sir, you shall see shortly what we are:
I will go see your Ensigns all displaied.

Dar. It Is better now since things are gone so far,
Then seem for to mistrust, to be betraide.
Lo Artabazus, I have acted here
My part of greatness, and my glass is run.
Now Patrons speech does evident appear.
I see my end, yet can it no way shun.

Art. The Bactrians only meddled have with this.
Go to the Graecians camp, when that is done.
And when your danger once divulged is,
The Persians all will follow after soon.

Dar. And what if I were gone to patrons Tent,
And guarded with the Greeks as you desire:
He has but thousands four that are well bent;
They thirty thousand that my fall conspire.
And doing this I should their deed excuse,
In giving them a motion who have might.
They may indeed my lenity abuse:
But by my deed they shall pretend no right.

Art. O deplorable Prince, who can but weep
To see thee now reduced to this estate?

Dar. Retire you all, and seek your selves to keep:
I here attend the issue of my fate.
I know ye wonder all how I can stand,
Down from the top of all contentment thrown,
And not die desperately by mine own hand.
I Will die through others guilt, not through mine own.
None of you all have falsified your troath,
But with me loyal still to the end ye abide.
Now I you all disburth^n of your oath:
Leave me alone, and for your selves provide. Exeunt.

DARIUS. O Wretched Monarchy, vain mortals choice,
The glorious st^p to a disgrace-full fall:
Our power depends upon the peoples voice,
And to seem sovereign needs we must serve all.
Yet blown, like blathers, with ambitions wind,
On envied scepters weaklie we rely:
And calling not our frail estate to mind,
Not only earth, but heavens themselves defy.
This hellish hag our restless mind does toss,
While carried with a popular applause,
T'enlarge our limits with our neighbors loss,
We of our own confusions are the cause.
And when th'ecclipse comes of our glories light,
Then what auailes th'adoring of our name:
A mere illusion made to mock the sight,
Whose best was but the shadow of a dream?
Let greatness of her glascie scepters vaunt;
Not sceptours, no, but reeds, soon brus'd soon broken:
And let this worldly pomp our wits inchant.
All fades, and scarcely leaves behind a token.
Those golden Palaces, those gorgeous halles,
With fourniture superfluouslie fair:
Those stately Courts, those sky-encountring walls
Evanish all like vapors in the air.
O what affliction jealous greatness bears,
That still must travel to hold others down;
Whilst all our guardes not guard us from our fears?
So greevous is the burden of a Crown.
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
While I was made the idol of so many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Then honored of all, now scarce of any.
Our painted pleasures but apparel pain:
We spend our days in dread, our lives in dangers,
Balls to the stars, and thralles to Fortunes reign,
Known unto all, yet to our selves but strangers.
A golden Crown does cover leaden cares:
The Scepter cannot lulle their thoughts a-sleepe,
Whose breasts are fraught with infinite dispaires,
Of which the vulgar wits sounds not the deep.
The Bramble grows, although it be obscure;
While mighty Cedars feel the blustering winds:
And mild Plebeian spirits may lieu secure,
While mighty tempests toss imperial minds.
What are our days, but dreams, our reigns but tra^ces,
Whilst brainsick reaving with our Fortunes fever.
We still are vexed with changes and mischances,
Till death us both from life and scepter sever?
The vanity of greatness I have proou'd,
And been the wonder of each gazing eye:
Now that deceauing shadow is remoou'd;
And I my wretched state too late epsy.
Now bound with chains, (which though they be of gold,
Diminish not my thraldom ought the more)
When this preposterous honor I behold,
It but vpbraides me what I was before.
And what was I before (though to each eye
The form of my affliction was not known)
But fettred in effect, while I seemed free,
And in a labyrinth of labors thrown?
Was I not bound to serve then all men's humor,
Or to be censured with some Critic story;
Still clogged with cares, as slought for every rumor.
O glorious bondage, burthen-able glory.
That dignity which deified me late,
And made the world do homage to my name,
Now cannot succor my accursed state,
But has with my misfortune fethered same.
My best was but a momentarie blis,
Which leaves behind this everlasting sting,
That of all woe no woe is like to this,
To think I was, and am not now a King.
No man with me in all accomplished joys,
That satisfy the soul, could once compare:
No man may match me now in sad annoyes,
And all the miseries that breed despair.
Thrice Fortune did my gallant troops entrap,
And I to fall did desperately stand;
Yet could not be so happy in mishap,
As for to have died by some renowned hand.
But for my greater grief, disgrace, and scorn,
(The minds of men so apt are to deceive)
They whom aloft my favors wings have borne,
Even they made me their master thus a slave.
Ah, did not death in prison from me reaue
The sacred sovereign of my souls desires,
I wretch not being present to receive
The last cold kiss that might assuage my fires?
Yet o thrice happy thou, that have not lived
To bear a burden of this great disgrace.
More then a thousand deaths this had thee grieved,
To know I died, and died in such a case.
Ah, do the pledges of our mutual love
(The only comfort that the fates have left me)
Rest imprisoned yet? And may I not remove
My mother thence? then is all bliss bereft me.
My pains are more then with my pleasures even,
Since first I in authority did enter.
Was I exalted once up to the heaven,
To be cast headlong down to mischiefs center?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vain excess,
All cannot yield my mind one minutes mirth,
To ease me now in this extreme distress.
Lo here, reduced unto the worst of illes,
Past help, past hope, and only great in grief,
I wait upon two abject vassals wills,
And dare not, no, not think upon relief.
Death would I scorn (my course must once have ru^)
If I had first repaired mine honors breach,
Whose wounds so thrill my soul, as vnbegun
The life I wish that does my fame impeach.
This mortal veil I willingly resign,
Since to an end my days the destinies bring:
Nor will I so from Majesty decline,
As to do ought vn-worthie of a King. Exit.

CHORUS.
SOme new disasier day lie does for show
Our coming ruin: We have seen our best.
Now fortune bent us utterly t'ore-throw,
Throws down our King from her wheels top so low,
As by no means his state can be redrest.
And since his foes by arms have him oppressed,
His friends, and servants leave him all alone.
Few have compassion of his state distressed:
Yea, false to him them selves do many show.
So foes and f^ined friends conspire in one;
Frail Fortune, and the fates with them agree.
With axes all run on this falling tree.
This Prince in prosperous state has florish'd long,
And never dreamed of any evil success,
But was well followed while his state was strong:
Him flattering Sirens with a charming song
Strived to exalt: while-as he did possess
This earthly dross, that with a vain excess
He might reward their mercenary love.
But now when fortune drives him to distress,
His favorites whom he remained among,
With foes and fortune straight their faith remove.
And who for gain to follow him were wont,
They after gain by his destruction hunt.
O more then happy ten times were that King,
Who were unhappy but a little space,
So that it did no utter ruin bring,
But made him prove (a profitable thing)
Who of his train, did best deserve his grace;
Then could, and would of those the best embrace,
And fly such vultures as devour him living;
That these whom he found faithful might have place.
O how this does a generous stomach sting,
To see some graced for craft and lies contryuing?
This is the grief that bursts an honest heart;
Lords favor commes by chance, not by desert.
Those Minions to whom Princes do extend,
Above their worth, immoderate good will,
To the disgrace of good men, show in end
They only in prosperity depend
Not upon them, but on their Fortune still.
Which if it change, they change. the^ though they fill,
Their hopes with honor, and their chests with coin
Yet if they fall, or their affairs go ill,
Those whom they raised, will not with them descend,
But with th'ascending Sun will straight way join.
And do forget all that they gave before,
For that of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end now has the event
In Bessus, and Narbazanes approved:
On whom their Prince so prodigally spent
Affection, honor, titles, treasure, rent,
And all that might each honest mind have moved
So bountiful a Prince for to have loved,
Who so beningly tendered their estate.
Yet they to him vile traitors now have proved:
By them he is in-chain'd, disgraced and shent;
So as he well may rue, although too late,
That he such sly Camelions changing hew
Preferred to servants dutiful and true.
But though a while those traitors speed,
No doubt the heavens once vengeance will exact:
The very horror of this heinous deed
Does make the hearts of honest men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The heavens no hier choler can contract,
Then for th'invasion of a sacred King:
Who, as it were, out of the stars extract,
Should fear and reverence inferiors breed,
To whom from him both health and wealth does spring.
But though on earth men should neglect this wrong,
Heavens will those traitors plague ere it be long.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
Scen. I.
HEPHESTION, ALEXANDER, POLISTRATVS. He. WHat story or what fable can record
Of such a nombrous troop so strangely lost?
I know they quaked to know it was my Lord,
Whose name alone is worth another host.
It scarce seems credible in many parts:
But traitors fear though all the world would back the^.
They were but bodies destitute of hearts:
More prisoners they were then men to take them.
Who would believe so few durst strive to find
So great an army, and the army shrinkes
What is impossible to a brave mind?
True valor dare attempt all that it thinks

Alex. In this encounter for to have had the best
It would content more then a common thought:
But since we want the chief, what of the rest?
I would be satisfied in all, or naught.
Those traitors thought to have finished all the war
With giving me their Lord, whom they had bound:
But I distrust not mine own force so far,
As for to build upon so base a ground.
Although indeed that Darius did me wrong,
I will not suffer others to oppress him.
I keep him for my self: he does belong
To me alone: none other should distress him.
Whilst he did only in himself confide,
I labored by all means to make him bow:
But since his hard estate abates that pride,
Turned is my fury to compassion now.
Although he often contemned me by his letter,
Yet I am grieved to see him so deceived.
If he had but acknowledged me his better,
'Twas not his blood, nor kingdom that I craved.
And if those traitors have not killed him straight,
Yet his delivery shall my name renoune:
I would not loose a subject of such weight,
By which my clemency might be made known:

Po. Sir, now your coming cannot do him good.


Al. What al are fled? none have my force withstood?


Po. Yet Darius cannot be redeemed again.


Al. Why, have they set him free? or is he slain?


Po. Now has he got a liberty at last
With no less ransom then his dearest breath.

Al. Then is all Asias expectation past.
Tell on at length the manner of his death.

Po. The boiling ardour of th'ascending Sun
Had caused in me a moisture parching drouth,
Which made me from the way a little run,
To find some fountain to refresh my mouth,
Their where a source her liquors softly scatters,
Which shaddow'd was from Titans parching beams,
I coold my thirst with the cold crystal waters.
Which seemed to murmur that I forced their streams.
When lo I saw (a lamentable sight)
Two wounded horses draw a bloody coache,
All clad with skins in most uncomely plight,
Which narrowly t'espy I did approach.
One was within, who could not long escape
The doubtful passage of the infernal gates:
Yet majesty triumphing over mishap,
He seemed to threaten fortune; and the Fates,
And as not to so basse a fortune borne,
While all his blood abundantly deval'd,
Burst forth into these words in Fortunes scorn,
As one whose courage could not be appal'd,
You gaze to see, and have good cause wherefore,
A man, no man; a King, no King; what monster?
Now less then naught, who once was both, and more:
Which few now by my present state would conster.
And yet amidst my evils I must rejoice,
That this last comfort does fore-goe my end:
I speak to one that understands my voice,
And not in vain my dying-speeches spend.
I am, but how? in name, but not in power,
That wretched Darius (which I should suppress)
Once happy, as you heard, but at this hour
The very pattern of extreme distress;
Then a while pawsing after thus proceeded:
Tell Alexander these last words from me:
Although my hatred still toward him exceeded,
Yet I am forced far in his debt to die.
I thank him highly for his great good will,
My mother, wife, and children so preserving.
Pray him t'vse them that rest as gently still
For his own goodness sake, not my deserving.
They to his foe pertain, and yet he strives
To have them honored now, as in times past:
But those who held of me both lands and lives,
Of land and life have me deprived at last.
I pray you on my part entreat him thus
Not to permit that unrevenged below
My ghost do wander. By his care of us
That men his Justice, and their fault may know.
Beside the honor, which he shall acquire
In plaguing them that have betraide my trust;
Men shall his magnanimity admire,
And fear to offend him whom they find so just.
Lo, all my pomp is past, my time expired:
My wealth evanished like watrie bubbles.
Over many a mighty people I impyr'd:
Yet has my life been but a stage of troubles.
And since my glass is run, my glory gone,
And I dead to the world, the world to me;
I wish that all parts of the earths globe in one
May condescend his subjects for to be.
Then drouping down, faint, bloodles, and half dead,
He prayed to give him water that stood by.
(A small request by such a Monarcke made)
Which when that he had got: yet, ere I die,
This cross must come (said he) t'vndoe me quite:
Though most parts of the world once homage ought me;
I have not now the power for to requite
This little benefit that thou have brought me.
But Alexander shall reward thee well;
And him the heavens, who has not done amiss,
To those that have been mine: his foe must tell
That undeserved courtesy of his.
Though none have power his pleasure to control;
If he entreat them well whom he retains;
It will procure no small rest to my soul,
And make him famous, while the world remains.
When my sprit parts out of this tent of clay,
Entreat some with my burial to take order;
Least churlish Charon force me for to stray
An vn-respected ghost on Stygian border.
Let first my corpse be carried to my mother,
Who may it with my ancestors entombe:
And, as she has more cause then any other,
May wail this woeful burden of her womb.
In pledge of that affection, which I bear
Thy Sovereigns worth, whom now I must see never,
Have here a Princes hand, I hold him dear,
And recommend me to his grace for ever.
I scarce had got his hand, or touched his vesture,
When like a torch whose wax and week is spent,
Somewhat perplexed, yet with a princely gesture,
He died in peace: his sprit appeared content.

Alex. Who could refrain from tears to hear declared
The desolation of this wretched wight:
Have subjects slain their prince who^ strangers spared?
Us has he fled, that perish thus he might?
I for his fall am wonderfully sorry,
Who Nestors age was worthy to have attained:
I envy death, because it robbed the glory,
Which I in giving him his life had gained.

Hep. Since death has put a periode to his woes,
The favor that toward him you thought t'extend,
Convert to furour now against his foes.
For your designs can have no fairer end.
So shall you both attain perpetual praise,
And win their hearts who see their Lord revenged,
Then reap no little profit in your days,
To have the country of such vipers cleng'd.
If but one virtue should adorn a King,
It should be Justice: many great defects
Are vaild thereby; whereas each virtuous thing
In one that is unjust, the world suspects.

Alex. Although your counsel, or yet his request
Had not the power to penetrate my ears:
A generous stomach could not well digest
So great a wrong: my mind it hardly bears.
My spirit impatient of repose disdaines
That they so long this infamy surviue.
But I will punish with most greevous pains
The horrid treason that they did contriue.
What? do they think, deceau'd with some illusion.
That Bactria is a bulwark for my ire?
Fly where they list, they cannot escape confusion:
My wrath shall follow like consuming fire.
Heaven cannot be a sanctuary for them:
I dare to force the infernal caves adventer:
The Earth cannot keep them safe, if I abhor them:
I Will search them out though they were in the center.
And having gotten once those malefactors,
Betwixt the bending boughs of two strong trees,
Unto the eternal terror of all traitors,
They shall dismembered be before my eyes.

Pol. Sir, may it please your Grace to take some care,
That some his funeral offices perform.

Alex. Go presently and every thing prepare
According to the military form.

ACTVS QVINTVS. Scen. 2.
SISIGAMBIS, NVNTIVS, CHORUS. Sisi. THis look, alas, has fraught my soul
with fears,
Speak, for my life does on thy lips depend:
Thy countenance (ah) a doleful coppie bears
Of some sad summons to denounce my end.
Starve not my ears with famish for thy words:
That swallowed yet may make my heart to burst.

Nun. Madame the message that my'soule affordes
Must once be known, and once known still accursed,

Sis. Be not a niggard of evil news.


Nun. And why?


Sis. Fame will tell the world.


Nun. But first to you.


Sis. Tell sone.


Nun. Your son is dead.


Sis. The^ let me die.


Cho. Her joys and pleasures are all perished now.


Sis. Why opens not the earth for to devour
A cursed caitiue, that all joy has lost?
The longer that I live, my grief grows more:
Borne I am to mischief, kept to be crossed.
Would God this body in mishappes abounding
Were covered with some mountain of huge weight;
Or else that The Ocean over these fields inunding
Might make my burial in her bosom straight.
O Alexander, have thou robbed his life,
Yet entertained me still in hope to find him?
Why did thou not first kill this poor old wim
Who was not worthy to have lived behind hi?
Ah, tended all thy courtesy to this,
That I should live till thou have slain my son?

Nun. You wrong that worthy Prince: for he and his
Came him to help, who was ere then undone.

Sis. What impious hands durst one that wore a crown,
And was thereof most worthy, murder so?

Nun. Two who^ himself raised up have cast him down:
More faithful then his own he found his foe.

Sis. Tell on thy message, message of my death,
And load my mind with all mischief and horror:
That in sad sighs I may dissolve my breath,
Whilst thou relat'st these tidings full of terror.

Nun. When Alexander eftsoons back had sent
Th'Ambassadours that peace had sought in vain,
A general muster, then to try the event
Of doubtful Mars, King Darius did ordain,
And in one battle to adventure all
Intending, caused his will to be proclaimed,
While two vile traitors did conspire his fall,
Who Bessus, and Narbazanes were named.
These two in counsel did discover first
Some portion of the poison of their heart:
Which caused the King suspect, but not the worst.
Yet with a sword he sought to make them smart.
But having escaped the first brunt of his rage,
With tears of Crocodiles they so lamented,
As they his indignation did assuage,
Whilst in appearance only they repented.
They came to Artabazus, honest man,
Who judged of others by his upright mind,
And could not, or through bounty would not scan
What they with craft and malice had desing'd.

Chor. A sinceare mind is ever least suspicious:
They think all faulty who themselves are vicious.

Nun. They urged him with the King to interceede.
That in his favor he would give them place;
With promise that by some notorious deed
Of arms they would seek to deserve his grace.
He in their favor first enform'd the King,
The battle would bear witness of their truth;
Then both before his majesty did bring,
Who was by their submission moved to ruth.
Their hands streatchd up to heaven, and humbled knees,
Their tears like those the Crocodiles do shed,
Woe in their face, and pity in their eyes
Did for compassion and for mercy plead.
The king of nature mild, prompt to receive them,
While they dissembledly were thus complaning,
Not only of his lenity forgave them,
But wept in earnest too while they were faining.
Then as he used, his danger now not feeling,
He mounted to his Coach: they came behind
With a submissiue voice most humbly kneeling
To him, whom shortly they were bent to bind.
The Grecian Captain followed them with speed,
Who being called, and asked what he desired,
Solicited the King to take good heed
Of those that had against his life conspired.
He told him how he had their treason tri'de,
And seen the Bactrians to a tumult bent;
Then prayed him for his safety to provide,
In going with him to his trusty tent.
The King grow'n careless, and his safety shunning
Refused this offer on affection grounded.
Or with some powerful fate his fall fore-running,
Was carried headlong thus to be confounded.
The Greek past thence dispairing of his safety,
Who thus recur elesse help and health refused.
Then Bessus did begin with speeches crafty
To purge himself, and errors past excused.
The King then Artabazus did command
T'approch, and Patrons speech at length reported:
He then did doubt what danger was at hand,
And to go with the Greek his Grace exhorted.
But when he found this resolution placed,
Within his breast, no peril for to fly:
With mutual tears each other they embraced,
Parting like two, that living went to die,
Now silent night in pitchie vapors cled
Had mustred mists, and marched unto the West,
A shadowie horror over the earth was spread,
The Santinelles were set, and all at rest.
When a strange terror troubled all the host:
The multitudes did murmr in all parts:
They did resemble ships in storms near lost,
Whilst each to the other cause of fears imparts.
Those who their King appointed were to guarde
All shrunk away to corners none staid there:
And having to his danger no regard
His better-fortunes Minions fled else where.
The desolation then was wondrous great:
With a few Eunuchs Darius left alone
Did enter deeply to reuolue his state,
And thus be-spake them; who did for him moan.
Depart in peace and for your selves provide,
Least ye be likewise with my ruin caught:
I will the issue of my fate abide:
They hearing this, as of their wits distraught
Went howling through the host with dolorous cries:
This made the King as dead to be bewaild.
And in the army did a rumor rise,
That he had killed himself, when all hope failed.
The Persians grieved, while these things did occur,
Did first encourage all their country bands
To help their Prince: but yet they durst not stir
For fear of falling in the Bactrians hands.
Even in the time when this confusion was
The traitors, to defer the fact no more,
Did to their sovereigns own Pavilion pass,
And rooke, and bound him, whom they served before.
He, who in golden coach superbelie rode,
Was cast in one for bassest carriage used:
And who of late was honored like a God,
By servants as a bond slave was abused.
Those royal hands to bear a scepter borne
Were bound with chains: this also much did grieve him
That fortune his adversity would scorn
With golden bands, that served not to relieve him.
Then Alexander, having heard in end
That Darius came not forward to affront him,
To find him out did all his forces bend,
Not doubting but he eftsoons would surmount him.
But being at the last at length informed
How he was made a Captive to his own,
At this indignity he highly stormed,
And swore he would avenge it by his crown.
Out of his host he did select a few,
Who were best horsed, whose equipage was light:
With whom his foes he did so fast pursue,
That, ere they could suspect, he came in sight.
The traitors troubled with this he had done
Came to the Cart wherein the King was carried,
And bad him mount on horse back, and flee soon,
Least that his foe should take him if he tarried.
He looked aloft, and cried aloud: this day
The Eternal Iusticer sees through the stars:
I will not with such perjured rebels stay,
And fly from him, who moou's but honest wars.
Then those in whom impiety aboundes,
Throw'd darts at him who^ they should have defended
And hurt the horses with an hundredth wounds.
While they performed the Parricide intended.
Their hands were feeble, as their hearts untrue:
For when their foes began them once to comber,
The traitors first, then all the traitorous crew
Fled them, who were inferior far in number.
But to the confines of deaths kingdom brought
The King retired out from the way aside,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did fly the world whose follies he had tri'de.
Scarce was the lasting last diuorcement made
Twixt soul and body whilst that the eyes grew dim
When Alexander came, and found him dead,
Who long had labored for to have ruined him.
Yet with the vesture which himself then wore
He covered the dead corpse, and not eschew'd it;
But even with tears his coffin did decore,
To the great wonder of all them that viewed it.
And having waild his death above all measure,
For to have his funerals made in Princely wise
He bids you spare no cost, but use his treasure,
And them, as best becommes, to solemnise.
He has his body hither sent by me,
That the last honors you to him may do:
He thinks they so shall best accomplished be,
And who him bare shall see him buried to.

Cho. Behold how grief has her of sense berest,
And choked her breath with super-abounding groans,
No will or power to live is to her left,
Since all her weal evanish'd is at ones.

Sis. Ah shall I see (no let me first be blind)
That body breath-lesse, which I brought to light?
Where would my soul a force sufficient find
To Endure the dolor of that deadly sight.
O flintie hardened heart, that wilt not break
With the remembrance of so many woes,
Why part'st thou not, faint sprit, that whilst I speak,
In opening of my lips mine eyes might close?
This heritage of death, this withered stock
Is but a receptacle of dispaires:
A torture to it self, a stumbling block,
Whose aged furrows fertile are in cares.
What helps it now to have been made the mother
Of one who to such dignity did clim?
More miserable now then any other,
I live to wail my death, who di'd in him.
Aye me, malicious Fates have done me wrong:
Who came first to the world should first depart.
It not becommes the old t'ou'r-liue the young:
This dealing is praeposterous and ou'r-thwart.
Ah, why should death so indiscreet be found
To save a caitiue, and confound a Prince:
My halfe-dead body, weighed down to the ground,
Through grief is grow'n ripe for the grave long since.

CHORUS.
WHat makes vain worldlings so to swell with pride,
Who came of earth, and to the earth return?
So hellish furies with their fire brands burn
Proud and ambitious men, as they deui^e
Them from themselves, and so turmoile their minds,
That all their time they study still
How to content a bound-lesse will,
Which never yet a full contentment finds.
Who so this flame within his bosom smothers
Does many fantasies contriue,
And even forgets himself a-liue,
To be remembered after death by others.
Thus while he is his pains are never ended;
That while he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happiness of Kings,
So to subdue their neighbors, as they do,
And make strange nations tributaries to?
The greater state the greater trouble brings.
Their pompes and triumphs, stands them in no stead:
Their Arches, Tombs, Piramides hie,
And Statues are but vanity:
They die, and yet would live in what is dead:
And while they live, we see their glorious actions
Often wrested to the worst: and all their life
Is but a stage of endless toil and strife,
Of tumults, vprores, mutinies, and factions.
They rise with fear, and lie with danger down:
There is no burden weightier then a Crown.
And as Ambition Princes undermines;
So does it those that under them rule all.
We see in how short time they rise, and fall;
How often their light eclipsed but dimly shines.
They study by all shifts and slights to move
Their Prince of their deserts t'account:
And when they by his favor mount,
O what a danger is it to be above?
For straight exposed to hatred, and despite,
With all their skill they cannot march so even,
But some opprobrious scandal will be given:
For all men envy those that have most might.
And if the King dislike them once, then straight
The wretched Courtiers fall with their own weight.
Some of a poorer Spirit, who would be praised,
And yet have not wherefore to be esteemed,
What they are not indeed would feign be deemd,
And indirectly labor to be raised.
This crew each public place of honor haunts,
And changing garments every day
While they would hyde, do but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants.
And men of better judgment justly loath
Those, who in outward shows place all their care,
And deck their bodies, while their minds are bare,
Like to a shadow, or a painted cloth.
The multitude, who but th'apparrell notes,
Does homage not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes must be served, and with all sorts,
Some both to do, and counsel what is best:
Some serve for Ciphers to set out the rest,
Like live less pictures, that adorn the ports.
Fair palaces replenished are with fears:
Those seeming pleasures are but snares:
The Royal Robe does cover cares,
The Assyrian dye dear buyth he, that it bears.
Those dainty delicates, and far fetched food
Often through suspicion savor out of season:
Embrodered beds and tapesteries hatche treason:
The golden goblets mingled are with blood.
Such glorious gorgeous shows do serve for naught:
All cannot calm the tempest of the thought.
O happy he, who far from fame at home
Does sit securely by a quiet fire,
Who has not much, and does not much desire,
Nor curious is to learn who go, or come,
For satisfied with what his father left
His mind he measures by his store,
And is not pyn'd to gape for more;
Nor eats ought that iniquity has reft:
He has his little cleanly, and in peace,
And looks not with suspicious eye.
No poison comes in Cups of tree:
No treason harbors in so poor a place.
No troublous dream does interrupt his sleep:
A quiet conscience does his cottage keep.
He does not study often what storms may blow:
His poverty cannot be much impaired:
He fears no foreign force, and craves no guarde:
None coueteth his spoil, none looks so low:
Where as the great are commonly once crossed,
As Darius has been in his flower,
Or Sisigambis at this hour,
Who has escaped long, and now at length is lost.
But how commes this that Potentates often fall,
Forced to confess the afflictions of their soul?
There is some hier power that can control
The Monarchs of the earth, and censure all,
Who once will call their doings to account,
Their pride repressing, who t'oppresse were prompt.
W. A.

Finis.
THE ALEXANDRAEAN TRAGEDY.

By William Alexander, Gentleman of the Princes privy Chamber.

Carmine dij superi placantur, carmine manes. LONDON Printed by VALENTINE
SIMMES for ED: BLOVNT. 1607.

The Argument.
WHen Alexander the great, after all his Conquests (shining through the glory
of innumerable victories) was returned back to Babylon, where the Ambassadors
of the whole world did attend his coming, as one that was destinied to
domineere over all: there being admired by the Grecians, adored by the
Barbarians, and as it were drunken with the delights of an extraordinary
prosperity, he suffered himself to be transported with an inundation of
pleasure; till sitting at one of his feasts by the means of the sons of
Antipater his cupbearers, in the best, both of his age and fortune, he was
suddenly poisoned.

Incontinent after his death, those that were in great estimation with himself
during his life, and then with the army, assembled themselves together,
neglecting for a long time his funerals, whilst busied about the disposing of
his Empire: at last (after diverse opinions) it was concluded, that if Roxane,
the widow of their deceased sovereign (who was then at the point to be
delivered of her birth) happened to bear a son, he should succeed in his
fathers place, and till he were come to some maturitie of age, Perdiccas,
Leonatus, Craterus, and Antipater were appointed to be his Tutors: But the
foote-men in a disdain, that their advice was not required, proclaimed
Arideus, Alexanders baslard brother king, and gave him a guard, of which
Meleager procured himself to be made Captain. At this sudden alteration, the
horsemen being troubled, they following Perdiccas pitched their camp without
the city; yet in the end, this tumult being by the eloquence of Perdiccas
appeased, all the captains re-assembled themselves, and having divided the
provinces, made an agreement, which lasted not long: For such was the vehement
ambition of those great men, that with all manner of hostility, they studied
how to undermine one another, and first of all, Meleager after a pretended
reconciliation, (though having fled to a Temple for refuge) was slain by the
appointment of Perdiccas, who after aspiring to a superiority over the rest,
whilst he went to war against Ptolomie in Egypt, by a sudden mutiny of his
own soldiers was miserably murdered. Then the only captain of his faction
that remained alive, was Eumenes, a man singularly valorous, who encountering
with Craterus and Neoptolemus, by the death of themselves defeated their army,
whereby being highly advanced, he was greatly envied* and ( Leonatus having
lately before dyed in a conflict betwixt him and the Athenians,) Antigonus in
the name of the rest was sent against him with a great army, betwixt whom
there having passed diverse skirmishes with a variable success, and some
private conference without agreement: In the end, he was betrayed by his own
soldiers, and delivered bound to Antigonus, who shortly after caused him to be
put to death.

Then Antigonus (his riuals in the authority being removed out of his way) did
aspire to that himself, from which he was sent to seclude others, and having
murdered diverse of the governors, he disposed of their Provinces as he
pleased: whereof Cassander, Ptolomie, and Lisimachus, advertised by Seleucus,
who fled for fear of incrring the like danger; they entered all together in a
league against Antigonus.

Now at this time Olimpias plagued all the faction of Cassander in Macedonie,
having caused Arideus and his Queen Euridice to be put to death; by which, and
other cruelties (having lost the favor of the people) she was constrained,
when Cassander came against her, to retire herself within a Town; which (by
reason of the scarcity of victuals) not being able to defend, she rendered,
together with her self to Cassander, by whom (notwithstanding of his promise
to the contrary) she was publicly put to death, and so having proceeded so
far in wickedness, he thought it no time to retire till he had extinguished
all his masters race; he caused Roxane and her son to be murdered; and
soon after, Hercules, Alexanders bastard son, which multitude of murders,
gave to him the crown of Macedone; and to me, the Subject of this Politragicke
Tragedy.

The Actors.
The ghost of Alexander, Olimpias his mother, Roxane his wife, Aristotle his
master, Phocion his old friend, Philastrus a Chaldaean, Chorus. his greatest
Captains. Perdiccas, Meleager, Ptolomie, Antigonus, Eumenes, Lisimachus
Seleucus, Cassander.



THE Alexandraean Tragedy.
ACT. I.
The Ghost of Alexander the Great. Back from th'umbragious bounds still robbed
of rest
Must I return, where Phoebus gildes the fields,
A ghost not worthy to be Plutoes guest,
Since one to whom the world no burial yields.
O what a great disgrace is this to me,
Whose trophies the earth in every corner keeps,
That I (contemned) cannot transported be,
A passenger through the sulphurean deepes.
Dare churlish Charon, though not used to bow,
The raging torrent of my wrath gain estand?
Must I succumb amidst hells dungeons now,
Though over the world accustomed to command?
But it may be that this has wrought me harm.
What bloodlesse ghosts stray on the Stygian bancke,
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Gave terror often to many a martial rank?
Yet for a prey exposde to ravenous beasts,
Could never have the honor of a tomb.
But (though for such rude guests too precious feasts)
Were basely buried in their brutish womb.
Thus as it seems the horiour of such deeds
With like indignity attends my sprite,
What stormy breast this thirst of vengeance breeds,
T'accuse for that which valor did acquit.
Ah might Alcmenaes son (as worthy of Jove)
Once force the infernal fortes of endless night,
T'encounter Dis in the Tartarian grove,
And draw forth th'ougly Cerberus to light.
Then leading Theseus through the cauerns dark,
That would have forced the inferior regions Queen,
By violence used he th'auernall bark,
As Conqueror of the pallide Empire seen.
And may not I down in the center sit?
Their renting the earth (as thence when vapors rise)
T'inlarge the imprisoned souls, the pitchy pit,
That once the light may lighten lightlesse eyes.
What though I from th'aetheriall circles swerue,
Whom in this state it may be some mistake,
May not the voice of Alexander serve
To make the earth tremble, and the depths to shake?
Or shall I go above with new alarmes,
To spoil the princes of the peopled round?
And turn back, backed with squadrons all in arms,
T'affright the ghosts that are beneath the ground.
But (ah) what comfort can I find above,
Where those whom I advanced, lo now in the end
The titles of my offspring strive t'improue?
And to my chair by violence ascend.
Ingratitude torments my troubled sprite:
Would God therefore, that with a body stored,
I might return t'enioy the days clear light.
My back with arms, my hand charged with a sword,
As when I entered in a populous town.
To war alone with thousands in my wrath,
Whilst (prizing honor deerer than my Crown)
Each of my blows gave wounds, each wound gave death.
Then thundering vengeance on rebellious bands
I would make them redeem my grace with groans,
Where now my Ghost hedgd in with horror stands:
Less gracd then those whom I commanded once.
And yet thaduancement by those captains had,
Whom first my Ensigns did acquaint with same,
Does make my soul a thousand times more sad,
Then all the sufftings that the hels can claim.
O now I see what all my minions blindes,
My funerals to perform that none takes pain,
My state betraying me distracts their minds,
That have forgot all love, but love to reign.
But Ptholomie does yet by time intend
Back t Alexandrta to transport me once:
Not moved by love; no, for an other end,
In hope my fortune will attend my bones.
And must I then so great a trouble have,
That lately had all thearth, and all thearths store,
For some few footes of earth, to be a grave
Which mean men get: and great men get no more?
Though many a thousand at my sign did bow,
Is this the end of all my conquests then,
To be barrd from that little circuit now,
The benefit that's common unto men?
But of it all that once was thrall to me,
Lest that a little part my body bound,
I think all thearth my fatal bed should be,
That still all confines scornd but the azure round.
O blind ambition! great minds viprous brood,
The scourge of mankind, and the foe to rest,
Thou guilty art of many a millions blood,
And whilst I raignd, did reign within my breast.
This to my soul but small contentment brings,
That I some Cities reard, and others razd:
And made Kings captives, captives to be Kings:
Then whilst the wondering world did stand amazed,
All that but now torments me after death,
Which raisde my fame on pillars, that were rare.
O costly conquest of alittle breath,
Whose flattring sounds, both come and go with the air!
Can I be he that thought it a disgrace,
Once to be made with other mortals even,
That would be thought of an immortal race,
The offspring of great Jove, the heir of heaven?
I by all1 means the peoples minds did move,
To Have Altars (as a god) with offerings stored;
Till of his glory Jove did jealous prove,
All Princes should be reuerenc'd, not adored.
Ah whilst transported with a prosperous state,
I toiled t'exalt my throne above the stars,
That pride of mine, the thunderer bent t'abate,
Did wound my fame with most infamous wars.
Made I not grave Calistines to smart,
That did disdain a dying flesh to adore?
And bent t'unknow my knowledge, by vain Art
Though known a man sought to b'imagin'd more.
All feared t'incurre the danger of my wrath:
Which as a sleeping Lion, none durst wake.
Mine anger was the messenger of death,
That many a time made armies all to quake.
So much Ambition did my thoughts engage,
That I could not abide my fathers praise:
But (though my friend) killed Clitus in a rage,
That in my presence Philips fame durst raise.
Thus though that I mine enemies did abate,
I made my greatest friends become my foes,
Who did my barbarous insolences hate,
And for the like afraid, waild others woes.
Those tyrannies which thousands chanced to see
As inhumane a multitude admirde:
And feared to be familar more with me,
As from an odious tyrant stood retirde:
Yea there were many too that did conspire,
By base ambushments whiles t'entrap my life.
Of all my labors, lo this was the hire,
Those must have store of toiles, that toil for strife:
And I remember that amidst my joys,
Even whilst the chase of armies was my sport,
There wanted not a portion of annoyes
To counterpoise my pleasures in some sort.
Of those in the earth most happy that remain,
(As aged experience constantly records)
The pleasures far exceeded are by pain,
Life greater grief then comfort still affords.
What rage and sorrow seaz'd upon my soul,
Whilst big with hopes a battle bent to prove!
That sudden sickness did my course control,
Which Cidnus cold imbracings chanced to move.
From the Physician then (though deemed for ill)
I took his drink, and gave th'inuectiue lines.
Then whilst he red did drink, yet eyd him still,
And by accusing looks searched guilty signs.
Not that suspicious fears could make me sad.
This was the ground whence did proceed my pain,
Lest death that victory prevented had,
Which I was sure (if present once) t'obtaine.
But when that I extended had my state,
From learned Athens to the barbarous Indes,
Still my tumultuous troops my pride did hate,
As monstrous mutinies unmasked their minds.
I (so my name more wonderful to make)
Of Hercules and Bacchus past the bounds.
And (whilst that Memnons sun burnt bands did quake)
Did write my worth in many a Monarchs wounds,
Kings were my subjects, and my subjects kings:
Yet my contentment further did require,
For I imagind still more mighty things,
And to a greater greatnesle did aspire,
The compass of the carriere of the sun,
By many a famous victory I wan:
Yet wept that there were no more worlds to win,
As all had been to little for one man.
Was I not honored as a God by some,
Whilst what I interprizd it still preuaild?
Whom I assaild I always did ore-come,
No project of my fancies ever faild.
This made me thought immortalizd to be,
Which in all minds amazement yet contracts,
For I led Fortune, Fortune followed me,
As forced to attend the greatness of my acts.
Yet I have found it a more easy thing,
To conquer all the mansions of the wind,
Then mine own self; and of my passions king
To order the disorders of my mind.
What comfort justly could my soul receive
Of all my conquests past, if that even then
Whilst I triumphed, (to wrath and wine as slave)
I escaped not scandal more then other men.
Ah, seazing without right on every state,
I but my self too great a Monarch made:
Since all men gapt to get the golden bate,
Which by my death seemd easy to be had.
Whilst from humanity too much deuorc'd
My deeds all hearts with fear and horror filled:
I whom the force of foes yet never forced,
Was by my friends most fraudulently killed.
But now I see the troublous time draws near,
When they shall keep my obsequies with blood.
No wonder too, though such a warriors biere,
At last do swim amids a scarlet flood:
For as my life did breed huge broils over all,
My death must be the occasion of great cumbers,
And it does best become a strong man's fall,
To be renowned by ruining of numbers.
The snaky-tressed sisters shall not need
T'vse fatal firebrands, loathsome Plutoes pestes,
Or poisonous inspirations, so to bred,
A thirst of murder in transported breasts.
Yet my ambitious ashes once may shine
T'enflame my Minions minds with strange desires:
If of their spirits each keep a spark of mine,
To waste the world, their breasts may furnish fires.
The beauties once of the earth shall all look red,
Whilst my lieuetenants through that pride of theirs
With unkind arms, huge streams of blood do shed,
By murdering of mine heirs to be mine heirs.
Is this the gain of greatnesses did I pine
To be made eminent, to be overthrown,
To ruin first my self then root out mine;
As conquering others, but to lose mine own?
O happy I, but happier far my race,
If with my fathers conquests still content,
I managed had the Aemathian power in peace,
Which was made lawful by a long descent.
Then far sequestered from Bellonaes rage,
I had the true delites of nature tried,
And aged with honor; honored in my age
Had left my scepter to my son and dyed,
And he succeeded had t'a quiet state,
Which then because less great had bin more sure.
And not exposd to envy, nor to hate,
That do against the greatest States conjure.
But since they mind t'enearth mine earthly part;
Which now no badge of majesty reraines.
To roaring Phlegeton I must depart,
Far from the lightsome bounds of th'ayrie Plains.
And must I there, that did the world surmount,
(Arrested by the Monarke of the Ghosts)
To Radamanthus render an account,
Of all the deeds done by my ravenous hosts?
There whilst with Minos Aeacus sits down,
A rigorous Judge in Hells most horride court.
Though far before his Nephew in renown,
He will not with one of his race comport.
O what pale troops of ghosts are gathered here,
That were of bodies spoild by my decree!
And first the wronged Parmenio does compeere,
From whom I naught, but who did much from me,
At the tribunal of Tartarian powers:
He aggrauates a ingratitude too great.
And (whilst the infernal tyrant foming lowres)
All whom I wronged for vengeance stand t'intreat:
Yet guilty thoughts torment me most of all.
No sprite can be by plaging Furies pind,
(Though charged without with snakes, within with gall)
As by the slings of a remording mind.
If it be true that drowsy Laethes streams
Drown in obliuions deepes all things at last,
There let me bury far from Phoebus beams
The loathed remembrance of my Labors past.

Exit Chorus.
What strange adventures now
Distract distressed minds,
With such most monstrous storms?
When silence seems t'allow
The peace that Nature finds,
And that tumultuous winds
Do not disturb with storms,
An vniuer sall rest:
When Morpheus has represt,
The Impetuous course of cares,
And with a soft skepe b^ndes
Those tyrants of the breast,
That would spread forth most dangerous snares,
T'inuo'ue the afflicted in dispaires.
Huge horrors then arise,
Which the elements do mar,
With most disastrous signs;
Armed squadorns in the Skies,
With Lances thrown from far,
Do make a monstrous war,
Whilst Fury naught confines:
The Dragons vomit fire,
And make the stars retire
Out of their orbs for fear:
Some of those warriors are
To satifie their ire,
That th'azure buildings not forbear,
But seem the cristall Towers to tear.
Amidst the air fierce blasts
Do boast with blustering sounds,
T'vndoe this mighty frame,
Which (whilst the tempest lasts)
Does rent the stately roundes,
To signify what wounds
Strait t'all her of-springs shame,
Shall burst the earths veins with blood.
And this all-circkling flood
(As it were the heavens to drown)
Does pass the appointed bounds,
And all the scaly brood,
Rear roaring Neptunes foamie crown,
Whilst the earth for fear seems to sincke down.
Those that the earth chargde, what horror?
Their ashie lodgings leave,
To re-enioy the light,
Or else some panicke terror
Our judgment does bereave,
Whilst first we misconceiue,
And so preiudge the sight;
Or in the bodies stead,
The genius of the dead
Turns back from Stix again,
Which Dis will not receive,
Till it a while engendring dread;
Give whilst it does on the earth remain,
To others fear, and to it self pain.
These fearful signs foreshow,
The doubtful world t'appall,
What plagues are to succeed;
When death had laid him low,
That first had made us thrall,
We heard that strait his fall,
Our liberty would breed:
But this proves no relief
For many (O what grief)
The place of one supply;
And we must suffer all;
Thus was our comfort brief:
For rarely does th'vsurper die,
But others will his fortune try.
ACT. II.
SCENE I.
Perdiccas, Meleager, Ptolomie, Antigonus, Eumenes. WHateie not big with tears
can view this host?
Which has in one (ah) as the end does prove?
A King, a Captain, and a Brother lost:
Crowned, followed, tried, by right, for worth, in love.
I think amongst us all there is not one,
Whom diverse favors do not justly bind,
To Appease that Heroes ghost, though from us gone,
With all th'oblations of a thankful mind.
Ah, had the Fates been subject to my will,
Such clouds of sorrow had not darkened life,
But we had had great Alexander still,
And he those kingdoms that procure this strife.
Yet heavens decrees can never be recalld,
And thoughts of harms past help breed double pain:
Though being to grief a space by passions thralld,
The living must embrace the world again.
As one whose interest in his life was chief,
I of his death have cause to curse the effects:
But will not frustrate so the general grief,
To wail apart particular respects.
Though the air be plenish'd yet with plaintiue sounds
Of widdow'd hopes that wedded have despaires:
Yet Time must cicatrize our inward wounds,
And to the public weal draw private cares.
Let us give physic to the sickened state,
That at this present in great danger stands:
Whilst grudging subjects that our greatness hate,
Would enfranchize their violated lands.
Those that are thralld by force to be made free,
Praecipitate themselves in dangers still;
And this th'instinct of Nature seems to be,
What realm not scorns to attend a strangers will?
From forced obedience naught but hate proceeds,
The more we have subdude, the more our foes:
A sovereign head this states huge body needs,
That might make us securely to repose.
And who more meet t'enioy that great man's place,
Wh'of those whose states he took, received the hearts:
Then one descended from th'illustrous race,
Whose birth both worth and right to reign impartes.
If heaven enrich Roxana with a son,
That longed-for birth a lawful sovereign brings,
And till that course of doubtful hopes be done,
Let some appointed be to rule all things.
Eum. Though Macedonians tuned minds not scorn,
That to Alexander strangers should succeed,
Can men obey a babe, a babe not borne?
What fancies strange would this confusion breed?
This could not well become our grave foresight,
A doubtful birth to attend so long in vain,
That may b'abortiue, and though brought to light,
Through Natures error made not apt to reign.
But if affection carry us so far,
That of that race we must be ruled by some:
Though neither being practiced in peace nor war,
As those that have indeed by kind overcome.
Then have we Hercules the eldest son,
That to our great Prince was by Barsines borne:
Who fourteen years of age has else begun
His princely birth by virtues rare t'adorne.

Ptol. Might not the Macedonians all b'asham'd,
If rendered vassalles thus t'a barbarous brood?
What? should we bear the yoke that we have framd,
To buy disgrace have we bestowde our blood.
Our ancestors whose glory we obscured,
Would get some vantage of their Nephues thus:
They warrd that peoples wrack to have procurd,
And have we ward to make them Lords over us?
Ah, bury this as a'xecrable thing,
And let this purpose be no more pursude,
For though they were begotten by our king,
Yet were they borne of those that we subdude.
Obraue Leonides, I like thy strife,
That with so few perforrnd so glorious things:
And death preferrd before th'infamous life,
That bondage still from a Barbarian brings.
Those loathed t'accept a stranger for their Lord,
And with their blood gave flame t'an unknown field,
Yet we would honor them that they abhorrd,
And though being victors to the vanquished yield.
For where-to tended that renownd attempt,
Which makes the Persians yet abase their brow;
But even to our countries scorn in a contempt.
To take by force that which we offer now.
Was this the scope of all our conquersts then,
Of our own captives to be made the prey?
No, let us still command like valerous men,
And rule our Empire by some other way.
May we not use this policy a space,
Till better wits some better means devise?
Lest dangerous discords do disturb our peace,
Still when we would of serious things advice.
Let a maiesticke Senate gathered be,
And them amongst the Imperial chare of state:
That of the authority all signs may see,
Then whilst we compass that respected seat.
There those that were in credit with the king,
Whose merits in men's minds have reverence bred:
Shall in their judgments balance every thing,
How kingdoms should be ruld, how Armies led.
And what the greatest part has once approved,
To that the rest must obliged be t'incline:
All th'armie by this harmony being moved,
Will execute what ever we design.
This concord would prove happy for us all,
Since it each state in greatest surety renders:
And by this means our Macedony shall,
In place of one have many Alexanders.

Eum. Though silence I confess becomes me best,
That am a stranger, and the less believed:
Yet since a partner of your toils I rest,
I must unfold my mind, a mind that is greeeu'd.
And think you that a babe repaires our loss,
How are the deep est judgments thus beguild?
This in all Countries has bin thought a cross,
Woe to that soil whose sovereign is a child.
Nor would these great men as is thought agree,
They be too many bodies for one mind:
Ah, pardon Ptolomie, it can not be,
This union would all disunite I find.
Thus would all th'armie from good order swerve,
When many might forgive, all would offend:
As thinking well though they did death deserve,
There Is none so bad but some man will defend.
And when so many kings were in one court,
One court would then have many humors too:
Which fostring factions for each light report,
Would make them jar as neighboring princes do.
No, let this strange opinion be suppressd,
Whilst equals all, all would unequal be:
So that their minds by jealousy possessd,
From pale suspicion never could be free.
But ah, what needs contention at this time,
T'obscure a matter that was made so clear:
And doye now account it for no crime,
T'impugne his will that once was held so dear?
When that great Monark marched t'encounter death,
Whist all his captains were assembled there:
And did demand whilst he might use his breath,
Whom he himself adopted for his heir.
Then that such doubtful questions should not need,
As loving valor more then his own race:
He that t'a brave man, brave men might succeed,
Said, let the worthiest have the worthiest place.
Nor did he speak this in a secret part
With Sphinx his phrase, a greater doubt to have moved:
As breathing thoughts in each ambitious heart,
To have his worth in Vulcans furnace proou'd
For whilst ye hedged the fatal bed about,
With an impartial care distracted long:
Then he amongst you all did choose one out,
That for so great a burden seemed most strong.
He to Perdiccas did present the ring
That used to seal the secrets of the state:
By which it seemd that he designed him king,
Ad so would seize him of the highest seat.
Thus made this worthy man a worthy choice,
That no new troubles might the state deforme:
And all the world now justly may rejoice,
That thus prevented was a'mpetuous storm.
For if this had not been his latest will,
Ye Mars his Minions should have lived at jar:
Whilst emulation amongst equals still,
Had made the trumpet sound t'intestine wars.
What huge disorders threatened to burst forth,
If that our sovereign had no prince designd:
That often has been a witness of our worth,
And can weigh virtue in a virtuous mind.
I see consenting signs applaud my speech,
Rise, do Perdicas that which they decree,
Whilst modesty does majesty impeach,
Though thou crau'st not this crown, this crown craves thee.

Meleag. I wonder not though thus Perdicas shrink,
T'accept so mighty a charge amidst th'alarmes:
The Sun must make Nictimine to wink,
This Scepter weighes too much for so weak arms.
The Gods will never grant, nor men agree
That such a one should domineer over us.
Though vulgar minds might yield his thrales to be,
Those that his betters are scorn to how thus.
He prays us all Roxanaes birth to attend,
Which though it came to pass as some expect:
He can exchange or cause be brought t'^n end,
As bent t'allow all means when one effect.
Thus would he temporize though to our great scorn,
Till time assist t'accomplish his designs:
No kings Perdicas likes but babes unborn,
He labors well in undiscovered mines.
I need not now insist to tell at large,
What brave men be amids this martial band,
That better do deserve so great a charge,
Both for their skill and courage to command.
Yet are the best not worthy to succeed,
To that rare man that never can be matched:
Whose memory must make our minds to bleed,
Whose aduersar's for this advantage watched.
But if that great man did consent so soon,
That our obedience should be thus abused:
Of all that ever he desird to have done,
I think this only ought to be refusd.
Th'vndanted band whose worth the world often proved,
Then whilst their glory shined through silver shields:
By all that monarchs merits not being moved,
As conquered, would have left the conquered fields.
And if that they contemned a princes throne,
To whom his ancestors their scepter brought,
What reverence would they bear to such a one,
That all this time was as their equal thought?
To those that over their equalles raise their state,
Advancement envy breeds, and envy hate.
If such with all would rest familiar still,
This in contempt the authority it brings:
And if they second not their subjects will,
Men cannot bear with them as with borne kings.
Our lofty bands some lofty mind must tame,
Whose princely birth does procreate regard:
Whose country may confound each sland'rous claim,
As one with whom none else can be compared.
There Is Alexanders brother, Philips son,
That always was a partner of our pain;
Can there be any else below the sun,
Over Macedonians that deserves to reign?
And I must wonder what so strange offense,
Has forfeited his title, maimed his right:
That any now with a disguised pretense,
Dare wrong him thus, even in his peoples sight.

Ptol. None needs to wonder much though we negle
One whose election might procure our shame:
His mothers baseness Justice might object,
Whom bastardie secludes from such a claim.
But yet had nature purged the spot she made,
We with his birth the better might comport:
Whilst father-like in all affairs he had,
Given proof of parts that might the state support.
He falsifies his race of wit so weak,
That all his inward wants are soon perceiud:
All of his judgment in derision speak,
By which great things can hardly be conceiud.
And though his body might from pains be sparde,
Whose constitution is not very strong,
But with infirmities so far impairde
That it aline cannot continue long:
Yet since in state he never has bin schoold,
His ignorance would rack him still with fears:
Whiles he that ruled still needing to be ruled,
Spoke but with others tongues, heard with their ears.
A inconstant king great confusion makes,
Whom all mistrust, and most amidst a Camp:
Whilst soft like wax, he each impression takes,
And does for frivolous things still change the stamp.
Ah, should our lives depend upon his breath,
That of himself cannot discern a crime:
But doomes by informations men to death,
Then barren pity yields when out of time.
Thus whilst some always must his judgment sway,
That still does harbor in another head:
Of Sicophants this prince may be the prey,
That where they list, thauthoritie will lead.
And being but base, that they may be the best,
Such still will toil that we may be ore-throwne:
And some-time may the credulous king suggest,
To taint our fame, lest it obscure their own.
What grief were this tvs, whilst such as those,
Might make their vantage of thall-powrefull breath,
And that our actions ballancd by our foes,
Were guerdond with disdain, or else with death?

Me. Since private hopes your judgment do bewitch,
I Will leave this counsel where no good can please:
Come follow me all those that would be rich,
Few have regard (poor soldiers) of your ease

Perd. That shall prove best which first I went about,
Though some would wrest my words from what I thought
The malice of Meleager now bursts out,
Like flaming fires that burn themselves to naught.
Thus naughty minds that never dream but ill,
Do conster every thing t'a crooked sense:
What I proposde t'aduance our country still,
He would interpret it as an offense.
And this vnreuerent parting hence of his,
Has t'a1l his former wrongs yet added one,
By his seditious words incensed ere this
The soldiers arc to sack the treasures gone.

Ant. Then let us all of one accord conclude,
That Alexanders hoped for race must reign:
So shall w'establish still th'annointed blood,
Whose government both glory gave, and gain.
And let us now before we part, appoint
Who govern shall till that the Babe be borne:
And circumspectly put all things t'a point,
That the success our counsels may adorn.

Eum. I hear a tumult made amongst the tents,
And Arideus is proclaimde a King,
To which the inconstant multitude consents,
That build on all that changes best do bring.
The footmen all are t'indignation moved,
That in the assembly they got not a seat:
That our proceedings they might have approved,.
As knowing all that did concern the States.
Their Princes memory rests soon despisde,
That they dare thus revolt, and vnconstrain'd:
Save but by too much liberty entisde,
Which makes the giver still to be disdaind.
The want of discipline all things confounds,
Their deeds want order and their pride all bounds.

Perdi. And dare they then against that fortress rise,
Where Alexanders colors once are reared:
Or violate the walls where-as he lies,
May not his shadow serve to make them feared?
What, how comes this? and dare they then presume
T'encounter their commanders and in arms?
Arms, arms, just wrath these rebels must consume,
Our countenance will dash them, sound th'alarmes.

Exeunt: ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Lisimachus, Seleucus. LO here a great and a most sudden change,
All men for mirth were like to have gone mad,
So that of late it would have been thought strange,
In all this city to have seen one sad.
Each wall resounded some melodious song,
To ravish curious ears with rare delight:
Strange tapestries were stretched the streets along,
And stately objects made t'amuse the sight.
As if his conquests gloriously to crown,
Of all the world a Parliament to hold:
He came with pomp to this imperial town,
The height of all magnificence t'vnfold.
Here Glory in her richest robes aray'd,
Should have shown all that greatness could expect:
Yet were our hopes even at the height betrayed,
To death those trophes Fortune did erect.
A tragic end this triumph quite confounds.
All our applauses are turned to complaints,
Our music marred by melancholious sounds,
Spoiled by the Cypress, lo the Laurel faints.
To funeral shrikes our showts of joy we turn,
Our gorgeous garments must give place to grief:
We that so much reioyc'd, far more must mourn,
Days spent with woe are long, with pleasure brief.
This greatest anguish breeds when one compares
The time that present is, with it that is past:
And ponders the particular dispaires.
That all heroicke minds with woe do waste.
These two between what diffrence find we forth,
The rising Sun, and it that is declinde?
Where is that bright Zodiac of all worth,
From whence the light of Valor only shinde.
Now desolation spreades it self over all,
A solitary silence grief allows:
Ah as being bruisd by that great Monarkes fall,
How many malcontents abase their brows.
A strange suspicion has possessd the streets,
Whilst every man his neighbors fall conspires:
When unawares one with another meets,
As strait suspecting treason he retires.
Of rumors strange all ears are greedy grown,
Which (though all doubtful) move the mind to ruth:
And as all hearts have idols of their own,
What they conjecture all affirm for truth.
Sell. The heaven with wrathful eyes our actions views
As it toward us that high disdain does bear,
Lo all men's heads are heavy for evil news,
And though we know not what, yet still we fear.
For since the widdow'd world does want a head,
Each member now does labor to be chief:
Which whilst they diverse ways the body lead,
May a beginning give t'an endless grief.
Some like the fool that thunder feigned like Jove,
Would make their same like Alexanders sound:
And to bring others low, or t'be above,
Would either govern all, or all confound.
Then some vain wits that only would seem wise,
Whilst by prepostrous fancies being deceived,
Do every thing that is not theirs despise,
And perish would, or them another saved.
A number too that all things do content,
What each one thinks, are still resolved to do:
They make a choice, then do the choice repent,
And strait repent of that repentance too.
The public weal is spoi'ld by private hopes,
Whilst many thus the highest honor claim:
This variance gives their fancies freest scopes,
Its best to fish within a troubled stream.
See how dissension has dissolved so soon,
All kind of order and confusion brought:
This discord has our council quite undone,
Whilst one would have done all, all have done naught.
Though that Perdiccas (as it would have seemed)
As being devoted to the sacred blood:
Sought (by that means more virtuous to b'esteem'd)
His Princes honor, and his Countries good.
Yet having his companions in contempt,
He sought by subtle means himself t'aduance,
And so to shadow his disguisde attempt,
Aimed at the imperial place as but by chance.
He care pretends that none th'vnborne beguile,
As by the heavens for th'orphans weal reserved:
Yet wanting of a King naught but the style;
He would not want that when the occasion served.
And Meleager with the like respect,
To cross Perdiccas counterfets a love
To bastatd Philips right, though in effect,
His purpose is but the others to disprove.
And so providing, that his enemy fail,
He cares not much what Emperor they proclaim:
And his design with many may prevail,
The cloak of right apparrells any claim.
They whose descent their titles does disclose,
Being borne in possibility to reign,
Must be preferred by reason unto those,
That of all right without the bounds remain.
The furious footmen insolently stout,
Bent to maintain a title, brau'd our band:
And indignation thundering threatenings out,
Would with our blood have did this barbarous land.
O what indignity would this have bin,
Whilst those that we subdude with such great toiles,
Had in this sort their victors vanquished seen,
And without pain possess their spoylers spoils.
Thus darkning all that we had done before,
(Our swords being stained by ignominious wounds)
We of our conquests could have kept no more,
But burialls base (if those) in the enemies bounds.
O what excellency consists in one,
More than in many as witnesses this hour!
Some with a word or look does more alone,
Than thousands joined with policy and power.
When squadrons armed with ensigns all displaid,
As those that of their Prince all reverence lost,
His generous course to have obstinately stayed,
Did best t'abandon him when busied most.
Then of disorder yielding bitter fruits,
They boldly marched before the imperial tent,
And charged their sovereign with unlawful suits,
As t'innouations violently bent.
They by no band of duty more detaind,
First grudgde, grew factious next, then rebels plain:
Like waters by industrious means restraind,
Which if their dams once break forth floods do rain.
But of th'vntainted tipe of matchless worth,
Whom imitate none may, al must admire:
Through just disdain when fury sparkled forth,
Th'astonish'd troops all trembling did retire.
His stately countenance calmed tumultuous sounds,
Lightning forth majesty through clouds of wrath:
That even as if his words had given them wounds,
They prostrated themselves exspecting death.
Those lofty bands that were of late so proud,
That they disdained to attend their Emperors will:
Then by his sight being at an instant bowed,
Did beg for license but to tarry still.
And yet what wonder though he wanne all hearts,
That to his sacred presence did repair,
With that accomplishment of virtuous parts,
As large in him, as in all others rare.
Whiles when we come to meet as each man sees,
In this maimed state bent t'entertaine some life,
Still having in contempt all our decrees,
The soldiers are not stayed from civil strife.
And who can call that valorous Prince to mind,
That any reverence unto virtue bears:
But he must be constrained, or prove unkind,
To offer up a tribute of some tears.

Lis His death of sorrow makes my soul the prey,
Though many thought that I for it had longed:
For if by those that he rests bound to obey,
One can be wronged, then I indeed was wronged.

Sell. Fame to mine ears by diverse tongues did bring,
T'a danger huge how you were once exposde,
But specifide not each particular thing,
Which by your self I long to hear disclosde.

Lysim. When sage Calistines for no request,
With superstitious customs could comport:
But with frank words all flattery did detest,
He was abusde, and in a barbarous sort.
So plaging him (no doubt) the king did ill,
Yet to prosperity we must impute
Those fatal faults that follow Fortune still,
As being of all great minds a bastard fruit.
We should in kings, as loath their states to tuch,
Speak sparingly of vice, praise virtue much.
But I whose soul that wise man dearly loved,
Whilst spying his perfections thus injured:
To tender passions by compassion moved,
Would his relief have willingly procured.
But when my credit faild, all hope being past,
That I could purchase grace in any sort:
I gave him desperate physic at the last,
That if his life was evil, it might be short.
The king enraged that I had thus presumde,
To limite his revenge by sudden death:
That by a Lion I should be consumde,
Did throw my doom out of the depths of wrath.
But when with rolling eyes the Lion roard,
He by my strength as strengthlesse was orethrowne:
Which to the king whose mind did then remord,
My courage and my constancy made known.
So that incontinent I was set free,
By this rare proofeesteem'd amongst the strong:
And with a mind from inward rancor free;
As he his wrath, so I forgot my wrong.
For whilst alone he through a forest ranged;
If it had bin but so, to purchase fame:
Some by that means had former wrongs revenged,
Bent like Erostratus t'acquire a name.
Yet that which others did attempt in vain,
And tirde by travel, of a surffet did,
I did perform him bringing back again,
Whil^t I did run as swift as he could ride.
And of that deed my sprite rests well apaide,
For since that time my sovereign held me dear,
Which afterward he to the world bewraid,
Whilst in this form his favor did appear.
When unawares he chanced my brow to wound,
To stay my blood that strived to die his lance:
My temples with his diadem he crowned,
A happy sign, though coming but by chance.
And O! who knows but once before I die,
That the success may second the presage?

Seleue. What hinders us our fortune now to try?,
And for a diadem our cares t'engage?
Those bended minds that aim at greatness still,
Grown popular by th'armie to be praisde:
Do wind themselves in every man's good will,
And would seem humble that they may be raisde.
What counterfeited friends seal trustlesse bands,
Whilst in the general cause that each pretends,
Though never joining hearts, all join their hands,
And work one way, yet work for diverse ends?
Yea those whose thoughts intend to attend the state,
Have purchasde powers, being purposde for the fields,
With jealous minds their riualls bent t'abate,
Whilste ^^lls all, now none t'another yields.
Yet with suspended thoughts all doubtful stand,
And their designs t'accomplish do forbear,
Lest all the rest joined by a general band,
March him t'orethrow that first gives cause of fear.
But he may prosper best whom burning thirst
Of government enflames at first t'aduaunce:
Some to be second, doubting to be first,
Will make their hopes depend upon his chance.
And by a battle when that one preuailes,
There will ^ich hopes at a'easie rate be sold:
For of that faction first whose fortune fails,
Even all will strive who shall be first to fold.
All this to me great cause of fear affordes,
I est that we two protract the t^me too long:
And wounded be before we draw our swords,
If those we not prevent that would us wrong.

Lysi. No chance of late has brought me so to bow,
But I exspect a part of those great hopes:
Yet in my mind a judgment most allow,
That over a dangerous ditch aduis'dly leapes.
There are to our charge some provinces assigned,
Whose peaceful states we manage must awhile:
Till all attempt that which they have designed,
Whilst from the world each the other does exile.
Then living but like those whose force is small,
From which the world no great thing can exspect:
We shall profess a favor to them all,
And an indifferency pretend t'affect.
Yet shall not then our thoughts have leave to sleep,
But subtilties must circumspectly frame:
The mighty men at variance still to keep,
So always strengthening us, and weakening them.
And when the occasion stricter dealing claims,
We shall make war with some ere it b^^ong:
Like cunning Wrestlers at th'Olympicke games,
That exercise themselves to be more strong.
And when themselves have thus prepared the way,
Whilst that their pomp does bear a lower sail:
For at the last their force must much decay,
Since all must always loose, though one prevail.
Then prompt t'atchiue that which we now contriue,
By ruining the remnant that remains:
We may possess the state for which they strive;
Thus they the toiles, and we shall get the gains.

Exeunt. Chorus.
O happy was that guiltless age,
In which Astraea lived below:
And that Bellonaes barbarous rage
Did not all order quite orethrow.
Then whilst all did themselves content
With that thing which they did possess,
And gloried in a little rent,
As wanting means to make excess.
Those could no kind of want bemone,
For craving naught they had all things:
And since none sought th'emperious throne,
Whilst none were subjects, all were kings:
O to a true bliss their course was set,
That got to live, not lived to get.
Then Innocence naked lived,
And had no need nor thought of arms,
Whilst spightfull sprites no means contrived,
To plague th'vnprouident with harms.
Then snaring laws did not extend
The bounds of reason as they do:
Strife being begun where it should end,
Clearing one doubt t'ingender two.
Then customs but by conscience stood,
By which dark things were soon discerned,
Whilst all behoou'd there to be good;
Whereas no evil was to be learned:
And how could any then prove naught,
Whilst virtue by example's taught?
Then mortal minds all most pure,
Free from corruption lasted long:
Whilst armed with innocence sure,
When none did know how to do wrong:
Then stingd with no suspicious thought,
Men mischief did from none exspect:
For that which in themselves was not,
In others they would not suspect.
And though none did stern laws impart,
That might t'vse virtue men compel,
Each in the table of his heart
Had grau'd a law of doing well:
And all did wickedness forbear,
Through a free will, and not for fear.
The first that spoiled the public rest,
And did disturb this quiet state,
It Was Avarice the greatest pest
That ever past the infernal gate:
A monster very hard to daunt,
Lean, as dried up with inward care,
Though full of wealth for fear of want,
Still at the borders of despair.
Scarce taking food to have nature eased,
Nor for the cold sufficient clothing.
She with her riches never pleased,
Thinks all has much, she has nothing.
This daughter of stern Pluto still,
Her fathers dungeon strives to fill.
That monster-tamer most renowned,
The great Alcides, Thebes glory.
That for twelve several labors crowned,
Was famous made by many a story.
As one that all his time had toiled,
To purge the world of such like pests,
That robbers robbed, and spoilers spoiled,
Still humbling hautie tyrants crests:
He by this monster once or'e-throwne,
Did pass in Spain his strength to try:
And there took more then was his own,
What right had he to Gerions ky?
Thus avarice the world deceiues,
And makes the greatest conquerors slaves.
Ah, when to afflict the world with grief,
This poore-rich monster once was borne,
Then weakness could find no relief,
And subtlety did conscience scorn:
Yet some that labored to recall
The bliss that gilded the ancient age,
Did punishment prepare for all,
That did their thoughts to vice engage.
And yet the more they Laws did bring,
That to be good might men constrain,
The more they sought to do the things,
From which the laws did them restrain:
So that by custom alterd quite,
The world in evil does most delight.
Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Perdiccas. Eumenes. NOw fortune smyle upon my rising state,
And seems to promise more then I require:
Lo by degrees my glory does grow great,
And by their death that did my death conspire.
Proud Meleager that disdained to bow,
And my advancement always did mislike,
Has with his blood sealed my assurance now,
T'astonish those that would attempt the like.
Eum. Yet of his fall the form my mind appalls,
At the altar of the gods without regard:
We were too rash to violate those walls,
Which the most impious persons would have spared
Lascivious Ajax by Mineruaes spite,
Erst for profaning such a sacred place,
On the Capharian rocks did loose the light,
And all his navy to his great disgrace.
We should not irritate celestial powers,
Then all beginnings are considered most:
And by this sacrilegious act of ours,
I fear that we the hearts of some have lost.

Per. Let others seek t'obserue such points as those,
I Am not so scrupulous, for I protest
Over all, and by all means i will kill my foes,
And then there-after dispute of the rest.
They wrong the Gods that think their church should be
As a refuge for male-factors still:
For with their justice this can not agree,
Who guard th'euill-doers guilty are of ill.
Was he not stained with many a moonstrous crime?
And like the Salamander in the fire,
Did love to live in trouble all his time,
And alterations always did require.

Eu. One humorous head that does in braules delight,
May poison thousands with the gall of spite.

Perd. As still seditiously affecting strife,
He but abused the credit of his king.
And sent some of his slaves to take my life,
Such bitter envy did his stomach sting.

Eum. I saw, how that advanced before your band,
You first did check, then chase them in the end:
And with what mighty courage you did stand
Our Sovereigns corpse (though dead) bent to defend.

Perd. He but a dastard is t'a foe that yieldes,
And in no conflict has his fortune tried:
We (if by time not ventring to the fields)
Like beasts being sacrificed had simply dyed.
But when without we masters did remain,
Lest Babylon had straight bin barred from food:
I those rebellious squadrons did constrain,
Even to our advantage concord to conclude.
Th'agreement that gave me a great relief,
Made my competetour his mark to miss:
For when I came, though he before was chief:
The shadow of my greatness darkened his.

Eum. Yet in this treaty all the world may see,
The Opinion of the multitude prevailed:
He whom they did elect our prince must be,
And our design has altogether failed.
But how comes this? that every captain gets,
A certain realm assigned now to his charge:
And with a warlike army forward sets,
The limits of his government t'enlarge?

Perd. I by my means have every great man crowned,
That from my greatness great things might proceed:
Yet to make my authority renowned,
The doing likes me better than the deed.
I this division chiefly did procure,
To make the court from other great men free:
That so my credit might remain more sure,
And they by such great gifts engaged to me.
For him that has them thus to honor brought,
They must be bound to hold in high account:
And I have not advanced them thus for naught,
They be the means by which I mind to mount.

Eum. O but your fancies may be much deceived,
There is no bond that binds ungrateful minds:
I fear th'aduancement that they thus received,
Have shown them ways to sail by other winds.
So long of late as they had need of you,
To seem your constant friends they kindly sought:
But since their greatness gives them freedom now,
They do disdain what may abase them ought.
To those all great men frankest friends do prove,
Whom without cause they always favor still:
And can not be as it were compelled to love,
Those whose deserts do challenge their good will.
This would preiudge the freedom of their state,
That any might claim interest in their hearts:
No, kings can hold of none their kingly seat,
None must vpbraid them with so great deserts.
And in my judgment you have greatly errd,
Them thus t'exalt whose states you would surprise:
Their common custom is that are preferrd,
That they may stand, not to let others rise.

Perd. I Will make their breasts such jealous thoughts embrace,
That every one shall seek his mate t'ore-throw:
And then I purpose to supply their place,
When by such sleights the highest are brought low.
This subtle course rests by experienee tried,
The strongst else is to confusion gone:
I long to learn how Leonatus died,
Not that I mind his funerals to bemone.

Eum. That prince magnanimous whom all admire
Through his accustomed clemency proclaimed:
That banishd Graecians might to Greece retire,
Save only such whom murder had defamed.
At this, some Grecian great men were common'd,
Whose partial grudge occasioned their exile:
Lest the others restitution should have proved,
A means to have brought their state t'a lower style.
And th'indignation that they had conceived,
Did burst out in rebellion for a time:
The which the king deep in his mind engrau'd,
And thought by Athens spoils t'avenge that crime.
But since that death ministered them relief,
Grown bold to prosecute their proud attempt:
To Athenians and the Aetolians were the chief,
That brought Antipater first in contempt.
And being by them constrained to quit the field,
He in a little town enclosed at last:
Was once reduced in dangers near to yield,
And stain the glory of his actions past.
But yet by accident as whiles it falls,
It Is better to be fortunate then wise:
An unsuspected shaft thrown from the walls,
The Athenian captain happened to surprise.
Then did Antipater his courage rear,
That had almost his staggering hopes betrayed:
And yet not altogether freed from fear,
He sent to Leonatus seeking aid.
And he that seemed his friendship much t'affect,
Did careful of his countrie-men appear:
But if he had prevailed some do suspect,
Antipater had bought his succors dear.
Yet by the effect his purpose bent to show,
What ever that he was, he seemed a friend:
But when the Athenians did his coming know,
T'encounter him they did directly tend.
And though their thoughts in depths of doubts did fleet,
They, whilst alone, to match him thought it best:
Then whilst they marched aduentrous troops to meet,
Hard was the welcome of th'vnwelcome guest.
For when both th'armies were t'a battle brought,
And all the fruits of valor did afford:
Rash Leonatus like a Lion fought,
Bent to prove worthy of his wonted Lord.
But whist he bravely did his charge acquit,
He lost himself that others came to save:
And by their Captains fall discouraged quite,
His scatred troops great damage did receive.
Yet when the news to Antipater were told
Of their mishap that come for his releife:
He not one sign of sorrow did unfold,
A little gain does mitigate great grief.
For he did know, though then his foes prevailed,
That this great fight infeebled had their host:
And then he took to him which much auai'ld,
Those beaten bands that had their Captain lost.
Yet that in which he did most comfort find,
Was his delivery from a secret foe:
Which did with jealousy torment his mind,
Though outwardly not seeming to be so,

Perd. Thus we that underneath one ensign warrd,
Slept in one tent, and all one fortune proved,
And with a friendship then that never iarrd,
As Pilades and mad Orestes loved.
Since wanting now a Lord. that all be Lords,
We lo renounce all kind of kindness now:
And secret rancor budding in discords,
Even every one does the others ruin vow.
Such is the sacred famine of a crown,
That it to satisfy before we fail,
What stands within our way, all must go down,
And bands of blood or friendship naught avail.
These glory-rauish'd souls that would be great,
Will pretermit no means although unjust:
(...) of copartners in the state;
(...) there can be no trust.
(...) Well, I perceive Antipater does tend,
(...) power, t'attaine that sacred prey:
(...) of late augmented now in the end,
Through every danger once may make a way.
And Alexander sometimes spoke at large,
Then whilst Antipater with Agis strived,
That he without the limits of his charge,
More like a king than a Lieutenant lived.
Anti^onus, and Ptholomie in arms
Are ioy'nd in one, our ruin bent to breed:
I fear that friendship procreate our harms,
Unless their spite prevented be with speed.

Perd. I Will lodge you now Eumenes in my breast,
And let you see the ground of my designs:
Since that we both alike must toil or rest,
As those whose course one planet now confines.
Since at his death, I by our dying Lord
Was in his place appointed to succeed,
And that my fortune does a means afford,
How that I compass may what he decreed,
To leave that place I cannot well agree,
As if I wanted courage to command:
I Will take that which the fates do throw on me:
For if without a throne, I cannot stand.
And those that would perform difficult things,
Must not regard what way, so they prevail;
Of slight, then force a greater furtherance brings,
The Fox must help if that the Lion fail.
So for Antipater a snare to have laid,
His daughter I in marriage did require:
That so the time might but have bin delayed,
Till that I had accomplished my desire.
For with the shadow of pretended love,
And hope of that affinity to come:
I from his bounds was minded to remove,
A warrelike troop wherewith himself t'orecome.
But to deceive deceivers, it is most hard,
He quickly did mistrust th'intended wrong:
And from my messengers his ears he barred,
As did Ulysses from the Sirens song.

Eum. This to your state, I think, might much import
If to your self you chose a virtuous mate:
Whose beauty pleasure, birth might bring support,
And both concur in one to bless your state.
If you to make your high designs more sure,
By Hymen's means with some your self alie:
Thus of some Prince you may the power procure,
That will conioynd with you one fortune try.
What grief were this if you have hap t'attaine,
That fair Idea which your fancies frame:
If after you of yours none do remain,
That may enjoy your conquests, and your name.
Kings live most sure, that of their own have heirs,
Whose sacred persons none dare seek to wound:
Since though they die, yet there rest some of theirs,
That are t'auenge their death by nature bound.

Pe. Noght rests untried that might enlarge my might
I mind to match my self with such a one:
That if she have my power to prove her right,
May be thought worthy of the Aemathian throne:
I with Olympias have deuisde a thing,
That may assure her state, and make mine strong:
The which I hope shall prove a prosperous spring,
From whence may flow great things ere it belong.
By Cleopatra may a means be caught,
That our designs t'a glorious end may bring:
I mean she whom her father Philip matched,
With Alexander of the Epirots King.
He having heard great Alexanders fame,
In emulation of that monarkes praise:
Went with his troops the Etrurians bent to tame,
Which enterprise did but abridge his days.
In marriage with that widdow'd Queen combinde,
If that her mother thus our course assist;
Whilst I effect that which I have designed,
Who dare presume my purpose to resist?
For whilst this friendship does my name renown,
It may my thoughts from further fear seclude:
Since having thus a title to the Crown,
As one engraffde within the royal blood.

Eum. I fear that this your purpose to prevent,
A number now take arms all in one form:
As those that have discouerd your intent,
And by the lowering clouds foreknow a storm.
For lo how many else together run,
That for our ruin wonderfully thirst.

Per. Where do you think that we should then begin
And exercise hostility at first?

Eu. Though we our selves in strangers thrones instal,
And having Asia to subjection brought:
Make Nilus, Indus, and Euphrates thrall,
Yet all those victories would serve for naught.
Whilst martial Macedonie living free,
The spring that still will power new armies forth,
Does not acknowledge you her king to be,
Nor has not proou'd your military worth.
To those that would pursue a Prince in arms,
His chiefest realm the greatest vantage gives:
Where if the war hold out, it is with his harms,
Since that within his bowels the enemy lives.
And wars protracted with a peoples loss,
Do from their sovereign alienate their love:
They lose their hearts whom fortune once does cross,
And foild at home can no where else remove.
He that has Macedonie, has the best,
Which of our Monarchy the Mistress is:
That conquered has courageously the rest,
And but depends on Mars as only his.
If you were Lord of that undaunted soil,
And by Olympias conntenaunc'd but a while:
Strait from Antipater all would recoile,
And him as traitor to the state exile.
To you that are a Macedonian borne,
If matched with Cleopatra great in powers:
The Macedonians gladly would be sworn,
And if commanding them, then all were yours.

Perd. Yet this opinion partly I disprooue,
Which would not (as you think) our troubles end:
For if that we from hence our force remove,
And to the Aemathian bounds directly tend.
There must at first a doubtful war be proou'd,
With those brave bands whose valor is well known:
Of whom Craterus dearly is beloved,
That bound to Antipater are all his own.
And though indeed as kindly to those parts,
My friendship is affected to by some:
Yet others have preoccupi'd their hearts,
And will discredit us before we come.
Then whilst that we the Macedonians boast,
And leave those realms unarmed that else are ours:
Strait Ptolomie, when strengthened is his host,
May enter Asia and supplant our powers.
I by my judgment willingly would take,
The course that seems to make our state most sure:
It dangerous is to have foes behind our back,
That unawares our ruin may procure.
My purpose is, though yet to none made known,
That Egypt first shall burdend be with war:
For if that Ptolomie were once orethrowne,
Then that from Greece all hope of help would bar.

Eum. Hold still with you those of the sacred blood,
Whom to protect you always must pretend:
The countnance of the great may do much good,
Whom still though weak, the world delights to attend.

Exeunt. ACT. III. SCENE II.
Olympias, Roxane. LEt sorrow then even tyrannize my soul,
Whose rage with reason now no measure keeps:
What of my tears the torrent can control,
Since flowing from afflictions deepest deeps?
How can my breast but burst whilst sobs rebound?
Since once the seat of ioys now not the same:
May not huge horrors press me to the ground,
In thinking what I was, and what I am.
I was a great man's wife, a greaters mother,
Even she to whom the heavens their best did give:
Yet I, even I, more plagued than any other,
In dungeons now of desolation live.
My son that was the glory of his time,
Stain of times past, and light of times to come:
(O frail mortality, O sliderie slime,)
Though having all orecom'd, death did overcome.
And I (dejected wretch) whose dying eyes,
He was by Natures custom bound to have closde:
Was not to shut his stars with th'iuorie skies,
That tapestried where majesty reposde.
But ah! his falling in a foreign part,
Has (if it can b'enlargde) enlargde my grief:
Else I on him would melted have my heart,
And spent my self to have purchasde his relief.
Yet though I was not present at his death,
He shall not be defrauded of my tears:
But for his funeral fires my flaming breath
Does smoke, and to his ghost a tribute bears.
Rox. Ah, to what corner rolls my watery sight?
Where it not finds some matter to bemone:
O foolish eyes! why loose ye not your light?
Since that your treasure is to ruin gone.
Once of all Queens I might the fortune scorn,
To whom just love that great man did engage:
Whose match in worth the world has never borne,
Nor never shall enrich another age.
When those perfections whiles transport my mind
Which admiration only does dilate:
I Am woe that me the destinies designde,
To be the partner of his glorious state.
And I repent that to his sight I past,
Though highly gracde on a festival day:
A feast that many a time must make me fast,
And with slow woe that flying mirth defray.
Then if my fortune had not blinded me,
But ah! whose judgment had it not bereaved?
Whilst the worlds Monarke daignd to like of me,
I had the event of my high flight conceived.
He of the Asian Prince whose state did then decline,
Had both the wife and daughters at his will:
Whose beauties glory would have darkened mine,
Yet free from snares retainde his fancies still.
Then when my father chose out from the rest,
Those virgins all whom Fame affirmd for rare:
Though having viewd them all, he loved me best,
Then thought most fortunate (if not most fair.)
And when his martial nobles were dismayed,
That he himself with captives had alide:
He by that means (as love had dited) said,
Took from the vanquished shame, from victors pride.
Then me as Empress all did entertain,
Though his inferior far in all respects:
Till I from him by death diuorcde remain,
Whom with his son now all the world neglects.

Olym. Although this will but aggrauate my woe,
From whom the Fates all comfort now seclude:
Yet do I reverence his remembrance so,
That of my son to hear it does me good.
And daughter now, to double my distress,
Make me at length acquainted with his death:
That sorrow may each part of me possess,
Sad news mine ears, tears eyes, and sighs my breath.

Rox. Though grief to me scarce liberty affordes,
To Express the passions that oppress my mind:
Yet would affection wrestle out some words,
To speak of him that all my joys confind.
When he had conquered all that could resist,
A monarchy not equal with his mind:
Still in his haughty course he did insist,
And searched out The Ocean other worlds to find.
But when from it his navy was redeemde,
He stood in doubt where trophies next to rear:
For all the world for him too little seemde,
His mind could more conceive than nature bear.
Then ah this Emprour purposde was in the end,
At Babylon his glories height to show:
Where all the world his coming did attend,
As Jove above, he only raignde below.
When he drew near that then thrice Monarks seat,
All th'Astrologians by their skill foretold,
What dangers there were threatened to his state,
The which elsewhere might better be controld.
But he that was not capable of fear,
And could not muse of misaduentures then:
Causde through that town him self in triumph bear,
Backd with more kings, than other kings with men.
There as a god in all his subjects sights,
Which mirth with mourning I must still record:
He spent, or lost a time in all delights,
That a successful fortune could afford.
Till Thessalus, for mischief but reserved,
Once to his house invited him to dine:
Where false Cassander at the table served,
And as he used, with water mixed his wine.

Olym. Alas, alas, and so it proou'd in the end,
But who could fear a benefited friend?

Rox. The creatures al esteemde of greatest worth,
That either are in the earth, the sea, or the air:
In Persia, Arabia, or the Ind's brought forth,
That walk, that swim, that fly, that grow, were there.
Then when that reason drunk with pleasure slept,
Which all things did abundantly afford:
And whilst that naught save music measure kept,
With Ceres, Bacchus only was adored.
But when the King beginning was to drink,
As strangely moved he thundered forth a groan:
And from the table suddenly did shrink,
As one whose strength was at an instant gone.
Then when he softly was t'a chamber led,
That Death a title to his body claimde:
The sorrowing soldiers swarmd about his bed,
With looks, once fierce, then for compassion framde.
But he whom victory had still arrayd,
This battle with the rest bent to make even:
Did look like one whom all the world obayd,
And boasted shortly then to take the heaven.
Then that he comfort might the afflicted bands,
He stretched them out to kiss respected parts:
More by the Sword than Scepter honored hands,
On which it seemde they melted all their hearts.
Last, unto them those generous words he told,
Yet to my life my death does bring no blot:
Thus to die young in years, in glory old,
Of all our family it is the lot.
And since that no mo worlds now rest t'orecome,
It Is time to die: I did an Empire found,
And lived and raignde; it is done for which I come,
Now my great ghost must go beneath the ground.
Then having thus dischargde all debt of life,
He with a countnance constant even in death:
As too victorious of that fatal strife,
All the air perfuming spent the imperious breath.
But when that it once through the camp was known.
That from the world that world of worth was gone,
What anguish was it cannot well be shown,
I had my part, yet had not all alone.
O let that day which makes my days all night,
Be registered amongst the dismal days:
Whose inauspicious and lugubrious light,
The world with some disaster still dismayes.
And Babylon, cursed be thy fatal towers,
Once seat of Monarchs, mistress of all the earth:
But from hence-foorth a slave to foreign powers,
Still burdened be thy bounds with blood and dearth.

Olimp. You need not use those execrations more,
Though Babylon of breath that prince deprived:
Yet as an Oracle had told before,
In Macedonie was his death contrived.
TO Antipater it was told, how diverse times
The king against him had been moved to wrath:
And doomed, as guilty of opprobrious crimes,
His son in law Lincestes unto death.
And he had heard the king did strictly try,
How his Lieutenants had their places used:
Still making all as traitors strait to die,
That had the same in any sort abusde.
Then he that private was to his own misdeeds,
Had learnd by others what he might exspect:
As whose ambitious breast in pride exceeds,
And always did a sovereignty affect.
But when Craterus was named to his place,
And he in his required the wars to attend:
He thought that it was but a means to embrace,
To plague his pride with a deserved end.
Then to prevent that, which I think was still
More feared by him, then purposde by the king:
With guilty thoughts best exercisde in ill,
He sought what might to death his sovereign bring.
And this the traitor compassde at the last,
As I alas, have learnde (although too late)
When to my son, his son Cassander past,
As to congratulate his prosperous state.
Then in his company he did retain,
A poison powrefull where it was employed:
Whose violence no metal could restrain,
But in a horses hoof was still conueigh'd.
He, and his brother then the advantage watchde,
And for their prince a cup of poison made:
Thus he that never was by the enemies matchde,
Does by the treason of his friends lie dead.

Rox. And could, or durst those traitors be so bold,
The glory of the world to undermine:
But ah, Madam, Antipater of old,
Against your greatness always did repine.
And I remember on a time he sent
A Messenger, of mind to make you bow:
That to your son a letter did present,
Full of inuectiues to discredit you.
The king whilst reading what it did comprise,
Did with a scornful smile to Hephestion say:
In writing of such things he is not wise,
Which straight one mothers tear will wash away.

Olimp. My son indeed I many a time aduisde,
How that disloyal man strived to be great:
But as a woman's wit, mine was despisde,
And wrested still unto the sense of hate.
Yet of my son I thought the deeds were such,
That t'admiration com'd they past envy:
And that none durst his sacred person touch,
On which the daunted world did whole rely.
How often have I those bitter throws allowde,
By which I brought that demi-god to light?
And well I might of such a birth be proud,
That made me glorious in the peoples sight.
Though diverse too, as I have sometime known,
T'estrange his love from me did ways t'prepare:
Yet were their slights by duteous love ore-t hrowne,
And I respected with a reverent care.
His tender love toward me was much extolde,
Then when he sought t'establish a decree:
That I amongst th'Imortalls might b'enrold,
And as t'a Goddess, honors done to me.
Ah, how can I this tragic time survive,
That lost a son so great, a son so kind?
And the only means that make me now to live,
Is with revenge, hope t'entertaine my mind.

Rox. His love toward you no doubt behoou'd t'abound
(By nature parents of their own are loved)
But those toward whom he by no bond was bound,
Of his humanity the fruits have proved.
His clemency did make his state more sure,
Then all the terrors rising from his name:
Which whilst he lived did public love procure,
And after death a never dying fame.
The Unhappy Sisigambis taking heart
Of her own natural son, the death suruiu'd:
And to Alexander did that love impart,
The which was due to Darius whilst he lived.
But when the tidings wounded had her ears,
That from the world was robde that glory of men:
Then suddenly dissoulde in floods of tears,
She hated life as never spoilde till then.
And with her widdow'd-nephew at her feet,
That of Hephestion did the death bewail:
Her soul amidst a sea of woes did fleet,
Whose forces as ouer-whelmde began to fail.
Then barrde from food she groueling did abide,
Till that the course of life t'an end was run:
Thus she suruiude her son, yet with him did,
In whom she found the affections of a son.

Olimp. If but by hearing of his dolorous end,
A stranger (once his captive) did for grief.
Ah, shall his mother on new hopes depend,
As such a loss might look for some relief?
And so I will, for twere a great disgrace
To me the mother of the all conquering man:
Like other women to give fortune place,
And yield to misery as many can.
Though grief at first must molifie me once,
(Else as unnatural I might be admirde)
Yet will I not still burst my breast with groans,
Than that of me more courage is requirde.
I Will not degener from my generous kind,
(Faint-hearted hindes brought never Lion forth)
Nor yet a mother of an abject mind,
Had never borne a monarch of such worth.
And, O, who knows, but once the time may come,
That I t'auenge my self a means may have?
And may against these traitors yet move some,
That with their blood may bathe their sou'raignes grave.
Now on Perdiccas repose my trust,
That with Eumenes would our wrongs redress:
Their valor ventring in a cause so just,
Does by appearance promise good success.

Rox. Lo, now of late delivered of a son,
I to these captains scarce dare make it known:
That else to part his kingdoms have begun,
And might, by killing him, make all their own.
Ay me (Madam) this makes me most to pause,
That still the ambition of those great men fear:
Lest by pretending but a public cause,
They seek themselves the authority to bear.
Ah, they of my young babe as moved with ruth,
Would but be Tutors first, and traitors then:
Void of obedience, duty, love, or truth,
No deerer things then diadems to men.

Olimp. As those whose courage cannot be dismaide,
Let us a faction study now to find:
And whilst that pity does procure for aid,
Go tune the peoples passions now to our mind.
Unless their love have perishde with his life,
Of Alexander, in a high degree:
I think the son, the mother, and the wife,
Must of the Macedonians reuerenc'd be.
And this does with disdain my soul consume,
That Arideus amongst other wrongs:
And proud Euridice his wife presume,
To usurp those honors that but t'vs belongs.
O they shall find my fortune not so changde,
But I am able yet t'abate their pride:
What? what? Olimpias must be reuengde:
That (save her self) a Queen disdaynes to abide.

Exeunt. Chorus.
Lo how all good decayed
And evils begin t'abound,
In this skie-compasst round:
There is no kind of trust
For mankind whilst it strayes,
In pleasure-paued ways
With floods of vice is drowned,
And does far from refuge
In endless shadows lodge:
Yet strives to rise no more,
No doubt as most unjust,
The world once perish must:
And worse now to restore,
Then that it was before,
When at the last deluge,
Men by Ducalion once,
Were made again of stones.
And well this wicked race
Bewrayes a stony kind,
That bears a stubborn mind,
Still hardened unto sin.
Lo, now in every place
All virtuous motions cease.
And sacred faith we find
Now far from the earth is fled,
Whose flight huge evils has bred,
And fills the world with wars,
Whilst impious breasts, begin
Still to let treason in:
Which common concord marres,
Whilst all men live at iarres,
And nets of fraud do spread
Th'vnwarie to surprise,
Too witty, but not wise:
Yet those that in deceit
Their confidence repose,
A deerer thing do lose
Then can by guile be gained.
Which being repented late,
Brings ruin to their state,
Whilst purer spirits disclose
Wherewith their breasts are stord:
For though they would remord,
They get not trust again;
But having honor stained,
And covenants prophain'd
Are held in high disdain,
And do in end remain
Of all the world abborr'd;
Not trusty when they should,
Not trusted when they would.
But ah, our Nobles now,
Lo, like Lisander still,
So that they get their will,
Regard not by what way,
And with a shameless brow,
Do of the effect allow,
Even though the means were ill.
Which all the world may see
Disgraces their degree,
That should not learn to lowre,
But throw base sleights away.
What can brave minds dismay?
Whose worth is as a tower
Against all fortunes power,
Still from all fraud being free?
These keep their course unknown,
Whom it would shame if shown:
Who not from worth digress
T'vse sleights that fear imparts.
Do show heroicke hearts,
The which would rather far
An open hate profess,
Then secretly suppress,
Honor scorns fearful arts.
But those that do us lead,
As for dissembling made,
Even though that they intend
Amongst themselves to have war,
Seem in no sort to jar,
But friendship do pretend,
Not like their Lord that's dead,
That trusting to his worthy,
Still what he meant spoke forth.
The great men not for naught
Do seek the peoples love:
And them their deeds t'approue,
Do labor still t'allure.
But Perdiccas it is thought
Too sparingly has sought
Our minds toward him to move,
As one that still conceits
He may command the fates:
His pride so great is grown,
That none can it endure:
Yet stands his state unsure,
Since odious to his own,
He must b'at last ore-throwne
Whose humor each man hates:
Pride does her followers all,
Lead headlong to a fall.
ACT. IIII.
SCENE I.
Antigonus. Eumenes. TOugh stormy discord and tumultuous wars
Do fire the minds of men with flames of rage,
That having hautie thoughts as heaven has stars,
Their indignation nothing can assuage.
Yet lo, amongst the soldiers wauing bowres,
The Heralds cries, whiles calmes the trumpets sounds,
And peace dare inter-pose her unarmed powers,
To limit for a time Bellonaes bounds.
And whilst of fury they suspend the effects,
The seeming-friended foes have conference whiles,
And each shows the other what his soul affects,
A shadow of the bliss that Mars exiles.
Thus men magnanimous amidst the field,
Dare to the assurance of their enemies trust:
And loathing what disloyalty does yield,
Not violate their vows, nor prove unjust.
Though Love be past, yet Truth should still remain,
I virtuous parts even in my foes applaud;
A gallant mind does greater glory gain,
To die with honor than to live by fraud.
And why Eumenes as mistrusting me,
Else standing on your reputation long,
Did you disdain to come (as all men see)
T'a greater than yourselfe, and the one more strong.
Eu. Though we not come to plead our birthright here,
Let him (but warriors take not so their place)
In whom best signs of nobleness appear,
Be thought extracted of the noblest race.
Most noble he that still by virtue strives,
To leave his name in minds of men engrau'd;
And to his offspring greater glory gives,
Than of his ancestors he has received.
Erst we by birth in war not marshalld stood,
As at the table upon Iuorie beds;
A soldiers worth consists not in his blood,
But in the blood of the enemies that he sheds.
What ever others of my lineage try,
I am Eumenes, and I scorn t'accord,
That there can be a greater man than I,
While as I have a heart, a hand, a sword.

An. Lo, when prosperity too much preuailes,
Above the judgment thus of vulgar minds,
As little barges burdend with great sails,
They leap aloft being swollen with fortunes winds.
And as adversity the sprite refines,
From out the dross of pride, and passions base:
That virtue in affliction cleerest shines,
And makes one all the ways of wit to trace.
So good success does make the judgment die,
Then whilst the fortunate their ease do take:
And lulld asleep in Pleasures meadows lie,
As fatted for the slaughter, ripe to shake.
Yet this the nature is of gallant men,
To rest (being in no state too much inuolu'd)
When prospring best most wary and humble then;
If crossd, then more courageous and resolved.
What though your first attempts renowned are,
By which you in two fields victorious stood,
And did orethrow two thunderbolts of war,
That lost their lives amidst a scarlet flood?
Yet is that course of victory controlde,
And you have tried what force your force exceedes:
Then let not withered Laurels make you bold,
As still reposing on your bypast deeds.
For by the same t'an indignation moved,
The Macedonians all abhor your name;
That at that time so proud a conqueror proved,
And with their great men's slaughter winged your fame.

Eum. No fortune past so puffes up my conceit,
That it contempt of further danger brings:
Nor am I so dejected now of late,
But I intend to do far greater things.
He by prosperity made never proud,
That knows the frailty of this earthly frame,
Can hardly by adversity be bowd;
The Sun (although eclipsd) remains the same.
Think not that worth consists in the success,
As th'essence did on th'accidents depend:
The fault of fortune makes it not the less,
On which oft-times the hardest happes attend.
For Fortune bears not still the badge of worth,
Nor misery the signs of gallant minds:
Which yet still like themselves are sparkeling forth,
In every state some tokens of their kinds.
Now at this time o're-match'd by numbrous powers,
I kept my courage, though I lost the field:
And vaunt no more of it, for some few hours
May once to me the like advantage yield.
And it is not long since that to Fortune dear,
The world had never me but victor spide;
Though I protest before th'immortalls here,
Moved by Necessity, and not by Pride.
Proud Neopolemus that traitor still,
Not worthy of a Macedonians name,
Bent to betray the host, and me to kill,
Had labord long to his eternal shame.
But of Craterus I lament the fall,
Whom for his virtue I did dearly love,
And was constrained; (I Jove to witness call,)
For my defense that last refuge to prove.

Ant. How fortuned you your forces to dispose,
So well t'auoyd that storm of threatened harms?
For then you had to deal with mighty foes,
That were in war grown hoarie under arms.

Eum. When faithless Neoptolemus did spy,
That all his treason was to our knowledge brought,
To the enemies camp he suddenly did fly,
A foolish traitor that was false for naught.
There he informde, or mis-informde my foes,
That haughty through my victories of late:
I in my tent did carelessly repose,
Though not by force, yet to b'orecomd by fate.
And further then to Antipater he told,
That if the Macedonians at that time,
The countnance of Craterus might behold,
They willingly would yield themselves to him.
Now they had labord earnestly before,
That I abandon would Perdiccas part:
And did protest, that they would give me more,
Than yet I had, or hoped for in my heart.
But Love borne free, cannot be thrald, nor bought,
More than a shameful peace I likde just strife:
To generous minds more dear than honor naught,
And ere I leave my faith, I Will lose my life.
Thus being despaired that I would prove their friend,
They sought in time t'orethrow me as their foe,
Where love could not begin, that hate might end,
And came in haste bent to surprise me so.
But I that knew Neoptolemus-his slight,
Did him against the Macedonians bend:
And to conceal Craterus from their sight,
T'encounter him, causde troops of strangers tend.
This policy which none could justly blame,
I with my self in secret did conspire:
And had my shirt bin privy to the same,
It should have bin an offering to the fire.
When once that the first game of death was past,
I Neoptolemus did toil to find,
And he me too, which happned at the last,
Two will do much to meet, being of one mind.
Then whilst we met for whom both th'armies warred,
Whose fortune then depended on our hands,
All was performd that force or fury dared,
Bent by revenge t'abate each the others bands.
And yet the heavens would not betray my trust,
Foul treason never had a fairer end:
The gods smilde on my cause because it was just,
And did destruction to the traitor send.
For forcde by him whose force he did despise,
Though fighting fiercely long he lost his breath:
As one more strong than true, more stowt than wise,
Whose greatest honor was his honest death.
But weakened with huge wounds, almost I diu'd
In seas of blood, being quite from knowledge straide,
Yet by so great a victory revived,
My courage grew more than my strength decaid.
I having finished thus this fatal strife,
Came where Craterus nere his course had run:
Even in the confines placde twixt death and life,
Whilst the one was gone and the other not begun.
He with great valor had resisted long,
As all Briareus hands had moved his sword:
And did his Masters memory no wrong,
Being with his courage, not his fortune stored.
What life refusde t'obtaine by death he sought,
For life and death are but indifferent things:
And of themselves not to be shund, nor sought,
But for the good or the evil that either brings:
With endless glory bent t'exchange his breath,
Of desprate valor all the power was proved:
And for great Captains no more glorious death,
Then to die fighting with a mind unmoved.
When this days toiles were drawn unto an end,
Whilst th'armies courage with their captain fell,
That I might safely show my self a friend,
I went where death his senses did cancel.
And whilst I told how both to be betrayed,
By Neoptolemus were brought about:
My woe with tears I to the world bewraid,
Mild pity and true kindness must burst out.
Ah, if the news of this my good success,
Had comd in time unto Perdiccas ears:
He might have lived their pride now to repress,
That by his fall were first deuorcde from fears.

Ant. The humor of that man was too well known,
Could he have parted other men from pride:
That was becomd a slave unto his own,
And for the same forcde by his followers, did.

Eu. The proud must still be plagued by prowder ones,
There must be had sharp steel to smoothe rough stones.

An. No vice than pride does greater hate procure,
Which foes do scorn and friends can not endure.

Eum. Yet majesty must not it self deiect,
A lofty carriage does procure respect.

Ant. A haughty gesture shows a tyrants heart,
All love a courteous countnance void of Art.

Eume. Yet manners too submisse as much condemnd,
Do make kings scornd and captains be contemnd.

An. A humble port, kind looks, words smooth, and soft,
Are means by which great minds may mount aloft.

Eum. Those are indeed for such as raise their flight,
They may do more whose course is at the height,
A imperious form an empire must defend,

An. Thus hastened was Perdiccas to his end.

Eum, That worthy man had many fair designs,
But virtue still by envy is pursude:
Though as a candle in the night best shines,
It in a vicious age may best be viewd.
There was a man that scornd secure delights,
As prodigal of pains, attemptiue, bold:
A strict obseruer of all th'antient rites,
And th'vncorrupted discipline of old.
He loved to have the soldiers of his band,
Chusd at the musters, not in markets bought:
And would not flatter where he might command,
More meet t'enioy, than seek that which he sought.
But soldiers now in this degenerd age,
Are fawnd on by faint minds, bribde in such sort:
That having still the reins loosd to their rage,
They cannot with so straight a course comport.
For that which was misfortune known to all,
Their malice as misgouernement did cite:
All things must help the unhappy man to fall,
They thus spewd forth the poison of their spite,
For hating his frank form and naked words,
By that occasion whetting their desires:
They in their captains body sheathd their swords,
A deed which even barbaritie admires.
Those traitorous troops may spot the purest bands,
If for a fact so vile they be excusde:
This will set swords in all our soldiers hands,
Against us, and not for us to be used.

Antig. I would be glad that soldiers never thought,
But that thing which their Generals first conceived:
Much less t'attempt against their bodies ought,
The which by them as sacred should be saved.
Nor like I captains that like blustering winds
Would over their troops triumph as tyrants still,
Without regard to merits, or to minds,
As carried headlong with a blinded will.
From selfe-presumption first pride borrowes might,
Which with contempt being matchd, both do conspire,
And twixt them bring base cruelty to light,
Th'abhorred offspring of a hated sire.
Such of Perdiccas was th'excessiue pride,
The vice from which that viler vice proceeds,
That it strange ways for his advancement tried,
And did burst forth in most prodigious deeds.
The murder of Mel^ager first began
To tell what tyrants harbourd in his heart,
To whom faith given, nor yet the church he wan,
Though sacred both no safety could impart.
And being by him constraind to quite the field,
The guiltless Capadocians desprate bands,
Chose rather than to that proud victor yield,
To perish by the power of their own hands.
Yet what against his foes he did perform,
From martial minds might plead for some excuse,
Whilst vindicatiue thoughts that wronged do storm,
In th'irritated mind did fury infuse.
But yet why sought he in a servile sort
T'extend his tyranny, even toward his friends,
That could not with disdainful forms comport?
More than an enemies yoke a friends offends.
And when of late by Ptolomie constraind,
He brought his bands with disadvantage back:
How by the same his government was staind,
The world can witness by his armies wrack.
But Hate being judge, each error seems a crime,
Then whilst the present aggrauates what is gone:
His soldiers moved by fortune, and the time,
Did by his death venge all their wrongs in one.

Eum. As noughtsmells well to a distemperd taste,
So to conceits preoccupied before:
Even good seems bad in them that they detest,
Men must mislike when they can like no more.
To you that loathed Perdiccas and his state,
What came of him could never yet seem good:
And I not wonder though your soul did hate
One that had right and power to take your blood.
For fled from him to whom you once belongd,
His trumpet still breathed terror in your ear:
Then all men hate those whom they once have wronged,
And by no means can love them whom, they fear.

Antig. That which you speak of hate, in love I spy,
Love cannot find an imperfection forth:
But does excuse, extenuate, or deny
Faults where it likes, with shadows of no worth.
I left Perdiccas, but did him no wrong,
That first to take my life all means did prove:
I told to Antipater, how he so long
Had bin abusde by a pretended love.
For as I frankly love, whilst loved again,
If me the ingrate ingrately do aquite:
Straight kindling fury with a just disdain,
I by love past proportion, then my hate.
And yet Eumenes, I commend thy mind,
That to defend thy friend have proved so free;
And since in love so constantly inclinde,
I would contract a friendship firm with thee.
Then where that now thy state has bin brought low,
Since spoilde of him in whom thou did repose:
Whilst aided by our power thou great may grow,
And raise thy hopes of kingdoms to dispose.

Eum. I Will be your friend, whilst friend to right you rest,
For without virtue friendship is but vain;
Which cannot build in a polluted breast,
Whose impious thoughts do sacred things profane.
So long as th'oath is kept that once was sworn,
Both to Alexanders self, and t'all his race,
Still shall this sword for your defense be borne,
But in my heart they hold the highest place.
And do not thus as over one vanquished vaunt,
Nor think me thrall'd though once by chance ore-thrown
Whilst there is a world adventurers cannot want,
I Will toss all states t'establish once mine own.

Exeunt. ACT. IIII. SCENE II.
Cassander. Lisimachus. ANd must we buy our pomp at such a rate,
That bear the authority, or whom it bears?
O, O! how thornie are the ways of state,
With open dangers pau'd and secret fears?
Each of our steps is waited with some snare,
Whilst from our selves we all repose repel:
And through the waves of greatness tossde with care,
Do seek a haven, whose heaven is but a hell.
Lisim. Whilst Eolus and Neptune joined in all,
With winds and waves beat the earth and bost the skies:
The tumbling mountains do not rise and fall,
Though each of them another does surprise;
As do the aspiring potentates with doubt,
Tossd through the wauing world on stormy thorns,
That are as in a circle hurlde about,
Ascending and discending both at once.
Lo, some whose hope would by their birth have seemed
Within the compass of contempt confinde:
Have from the vulgar yoke themselves redeemde,
To doefarre more than such could have designed.
And some to whom the heavens mishaps will give,
Though on their breath the breath of thousands hings
Lo, whiles brought low, cannot have leave to live,
Made less then subjects, that were more than kings.

Cass. Thus some without appearance do procure,
The most respected place where greatness stays:
And some whose states seemed once t'all eyes secure,
Thrown from their fortunes height lose glorious bays.
My father, lo, t'attaine the imperial place,
Marched through impossibilities of late:
And greater then the greatest, for a space,
Was Monarch of the Macedonian state.
But I his son, that as some would suppose,
Might keep with ease, that which he got with pain:
Can by no means my restles thoughts repose,
Such raging tyrants over my fancies reign.

Lisim. And yet I think you have an easy part,
To whom your father did his state resign:
For it may make you smile that made him smart,
Some press the grape, and others drink the wine.

Cass. I Will not believe that ever any ill,
Was bred for me within my fathers breast;
Since children must suppose their parents will,
(Though seeming bad) still purposde for the best.
And yet my fathers ghost must pardon me,
Though when from us he minded to remove:
I think the tenor of his last decree,
Show lack of judgment, or at least of love.
For what base course had ever bin begun,
To make me seem unworthy of his place,
That he preferred a stranger to his son,
And sought t'obscure the glory of his race.
Thus since in such a sort he did neglect,
The son that should his name from death exempt:
As dis-regarded for some great defect,
All other men may have me in contempt.
But ere his age expirde the expected date,
He saw my brows with Laurel boughs arrai'd:
And spied my skill in war, and wit in state,
Which grew as much as the other man's decai'd.
Nor can my courage so be brought to bow,
But Polispercon shall experience soon:
That in my fathers will1, I will allow,
Not what he did, but what he should have done.
And since by him high dignities were won,
I mind to prosecute what he began:
For such a fathers greatness from his son,
Takes the security of a private man.
Lo, Polispercon by our power repeld,
From Macedonie has retirde dismaide:
And for the fear of us has bin compeld,
T'engage his glory for another aid.
Let him not think the shadow of the kings,
Can match my power with these his borrowed bands,
For his faint flight that is framed with others wings,
Will never bear him from Cassanders hands.
And though Olimpias countnanc'd once his cause,
As from Epirus brought to ruin me:
Now of her own mishap she most must pause,
Since brought by us of late t'a low degree.

Lisim. And yet Olimpias had a good success,
When first she touched the Macedonian bounds:
Whilst Polispercon prowdly did repress
All those that durst resist with words, or wounds.
Though Philip and Euridice his Queen,
T'encounter with their troops in time arriu'de:
Yet when the Macedonians had her seen,
As their own Queen to honor her they striu'de.
And hapless Philip being constrainde to yield,
There for a kings did take a captives state:
And his wretch'd mate (though flying from the field)
Was followed by their forces, and her fate.
Then thus her husband and her self gave place,
Whose brows of late the imperial badge had borne:
But then thrown down in The Ocean of disgrace,
A prey t'a woman's pride, the butt of scorn.

Cass. Those were the means that did them first entrap,
But have you heard how after they were thrall:
To plague the world with honor and mis-hap,
Th'enragde Olimpias tyrranizde over all.

Lisi. Some doubtful rumors did frequent each ear,
Such as rash fame confusedly durst unfold:
But yet conceald, by favor, or for fear,
The certainty to us has not bin told.

Cass. When thus the famished tygresse did surprise
Those miserable souls, (as in a dream)
Her heart at first seemde scarce to trust her eyes,
She surfetted her sight so with their shame.
But when she saw by reason of her power,
That she might safely let her rage burst out:
She causde about them both to build a tower,
Within whose walls they scarce could turn about.
And in that dungeon as entombed they stood,
With high disgrace t'asswage more high disdaines:
Far from all comfort whilst a little food
Their life prolonged, but to prolong their pains.
But Pity for th'vnfortunate contendes,
As Envy still prosperity controules:
The Macedonians doubtful of their ends,
Would sometime murmr for those marterd souls.
The peoples grudge Olimpias did perceive,
And to prevent what fury might effect,
She strait resolved life's remnant to bereave,
From weakened powers that did no less exspect.
And when some barbarous Thracians bent for blood,
As she appointed in the excess of spite:
Had murdered Philip and his Queen imbrude,
With purple streams that spoiled her husbands spright.
She sent to her, whose soul in grief did sink,
As messengers of death to assault her breast:
A sword, a cord, and an empoison'd drink,
A Tirants presents, yet a wretches best.
Those when the Queen perceived, unmoved she spoke
As one that had embraced some great relief:
Fit gifts for her to give, for me to take,
Since she exceeds in hate, and I in grief.
And tell the tirant that I gladly die,
That th'irritated gods t'auenge my death,
May thunder forth that judgment, which I spy
With blood must choke that bloody woman's breath.
Then looking on her Lord that there lay slain,
Once partner or his joy, then of his woe:
Whilst that his roses did her lillies stain,
She kissed his wounds as taking leave to go.
And lest her resolution were betraide,
Her snowie neck (not used with such a chain)
She binding with her belt, di'd vndismaide,
And if she sighd, she sighd but for disdain.

Lisim. This barbarous act my breast with grief does sting,
Can spite so much transport the meekest kinder?
And yet in the earth there is no more cruel thing,
Then malice raging in a woman's mind.

Cass. But yet this sacrifice could not assuage,
The boiling thoughts of her unbounded will:
For entering thus she rioted in rage,
(As dogs that once get blood would always kill.)
Each light occasion kindling still her wrath,
The sovereignty she shamefully abusde:
And put my brother Nicanor to death,
Though for no crime condemned; no, not accusde.
Yea more, her hate extended toward the dead,
Whose cruelty no flood of blood confined,
The monument that to Iolas was made,
She razed and rent his ashes with the wind.
To be Cassanders friend was such a crime,
As none could escape that ever favored me.
Thus huge disorders did abound a time,
Where nothing lawful is, all things are free.
Then when I heard of this outrageous pride,
That made my native soil contemned to be:
I those indignities could not abide,
The shame whereof redounded most to me.
So that at last, moved by my countries care,
As much as by particular respects:
I with great speed an army did prepare,
To punish, or prevent the like effects.
But when I was to Macedonie comd
To fortify a town she did dissigne:
Which by my valor quickly was ore-comd,
Whilst famine forcde the fortress to resign.
Then pride unto necessity gave place,
Her lofty courage was constraind to bow:
So that she rests depending on our grace,
To be disposde as it shall please us now.

Lisim. This chance the world to wonder may invite;
Lo, there a Queen that had (though now distressde)
The rarest fortune, and the greatest spirit,
That ever any of her sex possessd.
The widowed Empress that first warrde with the Indes,
Nor stout Tomiris, though most gallant seen:
Nor all the Amazons borne with martial minds,
Had never stouter stomakes then this Queen.
Her lives first progress did but prove too sweet,
Whom all the earths treasures once concurred to bless:
But now sad soul, trod under fortunes feet,
Her misery no creature can express.

Cass. Those were but fortunes gifts that made her great
All was without her-selfe that made her praisde:
Her imperfections did but stain the state,
To which another merits had her raisde.
For when she first with famous Philip matched,
Then her behauior was not free from blame:
But even though she with Argos eyes was watched,
As it was supposde she forfeited her fame.
At least, her husband feared for some disgrace,
From her himself had publikly deuorc'd:
And entertained another in her place,
Which, for the time, to suffer she was forced.
Yet this in the end did his destruction breed,
For which her spightfull thoughts had labored long,
She was acquainted with Pausanias deed,
And spurred him to perform th'intended wrong.
She sought, that by such means t'ambitious will,
Her husbands murder might enlarge the raines,
Whilst with authority she did all the will,
Of which too late the afflicted realm complains.
Long suffered for the greatness of her son,
She played the tirant safely as she pleased:
But by the course that I have else begun,
I hope those whom she plagued shall now b'appeasde.

Lisim. Yet of Olimpias, though abasde by you,
The sight her son, and husband will revive:
And so may make the Macedonians now,
For her relief strange courses to contriue.
Of those whose greatness does regard extort,
Th'afflictions must entender every mind:
And still the affections of the vulgar sort,
Are headlong led, too cruel, or too kind.

Cass. O, but I can precipitate her fall,
Even by the means that might support her most:
For pity shall spoil pity, whilst they all,
Sigh for their friends that through her pride was lost.

Lisim. As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life, and reign both of one date:
So private men that pass their own degree,
Can hardly turn to take their former state.
Thus you commit your fortune to the fates,
None can retire that enters in such things:
For those that ought attempt against great states,
Must die as traitors, or else live as kings.
And though you would but some disorders stay,
You deal with those that borne not to be thrall
As torrents bear away what stoppes their way,
And either must do nothing, or do all.
No, keep not such, to sigh when they are gone,
That scorn to take the thing that they should give;
For all must die, that dare but touch a throne,
Those that might take their life, they must not live.

Cas. Since in this course that I can once but err,
I shall be sure ere she herself withdraw.

Lis. And yet what surety can you have of her?
Can Laws bind them that are above the Law?
It Is hard t'establish concord twixt the two,
Where the one must hate, and the other always fear.

Cas. O but I mind to use the matter so,
That both from hence shall further strife forbear.

Lis. What can her freedom and your peace procure?


Cas. Death both can make her free, and make me sure.


Lis. And would you do such evil to shed her blood?


Cas. I, to others evil, so that it do me good.


Lis. The Macedonians will abhor this wrong.


Cas. And yet obey me if be most strong.


Lis. But who shall have the realm amidst those broils?


Cas. Who ever winnes the field must keep the spoils.


Lis. So to possess the realm you have no right.


Cas. But I have more, so long as I have might.


Lis. This state does to it self an heir afford.


Cas. All kingdoms rights are pleaded by the sword.


Lis. The people all will grudge against your state.


Cas. But dare not stir whilst fear exceeds their hate.


Lis. And in their hearts they will detest you too.


Cas. Think what they will that have not power to do.


Lis. What though Olympias in a little space,
May lose her power, together with her breath?
Yet there remains another of her race,
That is by nature bound t'auenge her death.

Cas. The Impetuous streams of a tempestuous flood,
That drownes all the old, not yeeldes the young relief?
What fool that of his foes victorious stood,
Would spoil an army, and yet spare the chief?
No, since I must my self with murder stain,
I Will by the roots raze all the royal race,
So that no power shall spring from thence again,
T'oregrow my greatness, and my plants displace.
The strength has left great Alexanders arm,
Whose mothers fatal thread is now near spunne;
And I have means to keep my self from harm,
Both of Roxane, and her tender son.
But since this course may serve our states t'aduance,
By which a ground for great designs is lay de;
I must entreat you now what ever chance,
To lend your approbation, though not aid.

Lis. I Will be your friend, yet wish you would refrain,
From doing this; but ere you be undone,
Since that I by your guiltiness may gain,
I Will suffer that which I would not have done.

Exeunt. Olimpias alone. CAn I be she whom all the world admirde?
As being the happiest Queen that raignd below?
Whom all the planets have to plague conspirde,
Of fickle fortunes course the effects to show.
No, it is not I, naught could my course control,
Nor force me thus to attend another will:
Since I despise this prison of my soul,
Where it disdains to abide in bondage still.
Ah, whilst I did on the outward pomp rely,
My state the power of higher powers did tempt,
My state that once bred reverence and envy:
Though now it breed but pity and contempt.
Olimpias once high as Olimpius stood,
The wife of Philip Alexanders mother:
That matched Alcides and Achilles blood,
T'ingender one more worth than both together.
Am I the woman whose maiestike state
Seemde once so happy to deceived conceits?
I, I am she, and never yet more great,
Than at this present, in despite of Fates.
A double bondage long did burden me,
I to my self, my self to fortune thrall:
But now captivity has set me free,
That could not rise till first I had a fall.
The sprite that's with prosperity benumbed,
Scarce like it self can to the world appear:
When Virtue has Adversity ore'com'd,
Then shines true greatness in her highest sphere.
Our glory now I see consists no more
Without our-selues in eie-betraying shows,
But in the breasts inestimable store,
That neither Time entombes, nor Power orethrowes.
O never were my thoughts enlargde till now,
To mark my self, and quintessence my mind,
For long a prey to pride, I know not how,
A mist of fancies made my iudgemcnt blind.
As those that dream sweet dreams, awakt, at last
Do find their error when their eyes find light,
Freed from the slumbring of my fortune past,
I now arise to judge of all things right.
That cloud of pomp whose smoke me shadowd once,
Lo now remoou'd vnmaskes my life too late:
And now I see, that scepters, crowns, and thrones,
Are burdnous badges of a dangerous state.
O happy woman, of true pleasure sure,
That in the country leadst a guiltless life:
From Fortunes reach retirde, obscure, secure,
Though not a Queen, yet a contented wife.
Thy mate more dear to thee than is the light,
Though low in state, loves in a high degree:
And with his presence still to bless thy sight,
Does scorn great courts whilst he lives courting thee.
And as thou woundst him not with hid disgrace,
He with no jealous thought torments thy breast:
Thus both lie down to rest, and rise in peace,
Then if they strive, they strive who should love best.
But though thou have not as the mighty ones,
Thy neck surchargde with chains (ah chains indeed)
Nor cares weighd down with oriental stones,
Nor robes, whole worth may admiration breed.
So wantst thou that which we have ever had,
Sad miscontentments, jealousy, and spite:
And though thy back be not with purple clad,
Thy thoughts are clad with innocencies quite.
As Birds, whose cage of gold the sight deceiues,
Do seem to sing whilst they but wail their state:
So with the mighty matched, made glorious slaves,
We happy seem whilst we but curse our fate.
That bliss whose show in us vain eyes do please,
Makes thee indeed a true contentment breathe,
Thou spendst thy youth in mirth, thy age in ^ase,
And know not what it is to die till death.
Ah since I lived, I have done naught but die,
Still when I seemde most blessed, then most accursed:
Since on frail greatness first I did rely,
How often has my swollen breast bin like to burst?
The Fates with Fortune from my birth conspirde,
To make my life a pattern of their might:
For both my parents from the world retirde,
When I was scarcely com'd t'inioy the light.
The world may judge how I was justly grieved,
Whilst angry Philip sought for my disgrace,
(A thing which once I scarce could have believed)
And unto Cleopatra gave my place.
Then though I long as desprate of relief,
For his offense afflicted had my mind:
Yet did his sudden death augment my grief,
He was my husband, though he was unkind.
And when my sons rare trophies, and renown,
With wonder filld the world, and me with joy:
Those as himself that strived to throw his down,
Did to supplant my state their powers employ.
Yet stood my courage when my fortune fell,
And still I toilde distracted from repose:
Those that had him betrayed from the earth t'expell,,
And with their blood to register my woes.
And my designs a time so prosperd too,
That some of them did try by torments strange,
All what a woman's just disdain could do,
Whilst spurred by jealousy, spite and revenge.
But this arch-traitor ruler of the rest,
That thirsts to drink the blood of all our race:
Even then when my design succeeded best,
Did compass me with ruin and disgrace.
Such was the tenor of my fortune past,
Whose least mis-hap had made another burst:
First orphan'd, widdow'd, and vnchilded last,
A daughter, wife, and mother all accursed.
Heavens plague Cassander, let that base wretch try,
That Jove his judgment but a while deferres,
And let his wife bewail as well as I,
I murderd for my son, and she by hers.
Even as th'incestuous. Thehans monstrous brood,
So may thy sons contend with mutual wounds:
And never let thy house be free from blood,
Till quite excluded from th'vsurped bounds.
Thus notwithstanding of my wonted power,
To me, save wishes, nothing does remain:
But though condemned to die, yet at this hour
Should I begin to curse, and to complain?
No no, that custom best becomes poor souls,
Whose resolution cannot climb more hie:
But I whose courage that base course controules,
Must still triumph what ever state I try.
Death is an open haven t'each storme-tossde mind,
Since the end of labor, th'entrie unto rest:
Death has the bounds of misery confinde,
Whose sanctuary saues the afflicted best.
To suffer whiles with a courageous heart,
It merits far more praise than deeds most known,
For in our actions Fortune has a part,
But in our sufferings, all things are our own.
Lo now I loathe the world and worldly things,
Of which I have both proou'd the best and worst:
Yea th'apprehended death great comfort brings,
And has no cross but that it should be forced.
O hear me now (dear son) if that thy ghost
May leave the Elysian fields to look on me:
Of all things else this does content me most,
That from this time I may remain with thee.
And blush not son to see thy mothers end,
My death in glory with thy life shall strive:
It Fortune as a captive shall attend,
That as thy fellow followd thee alive.

Exit. Chorus.
AH, ah, though man since the image of great Jove,
And th only creature that gives Reason place,
Made to make faith below of powers above,
Should seek his heavenly progeny to prove,
By still resembling most the immortal kind,
Yet makes the world our better part so blind,
That we the clouds of vanity embrace,
And from our first excellency decline.
This does extinguish that celestial grace,
Which should make souls to burn with virtues love,
Whose fancies vice luxuriously now feasts,
Vice is the Circe that inchaunts the mind,
And does transform her followers all in swine:
Whilst poisond pleasures so corrupt our tates,
That of halfe-gods we make our selves whole-beasts.
And yet of ruthlesse Plutoes raging host,
The vice that does transport presumptuous hearts,
And makes men from the gods to differ most.
It Is cruelty, that to the sufferers cost
And actors both, must oftentimes b'appeasd.
The gods delight to give, and to forgive,
By pardoning more than by plaging pleased.
And why should men excogitate strange arts,
T'extend their tyranny as those that strive
To feed on mischief still, though the Author smarts
Often for the deed of which himself did boast,
Whilst whence the blow first come the grief does turn,
For that by which the mind at first was easde,
May it in end the greatest burden give.
Often those whose cruelty makes many mourn,
Do by the fires that they first kindled burn:
Of the other tyrants that extort the mind,
With pleasure some delight it in such sort,
That first the honnie, then the gall we find;
And others, though from Honors court declinde
Some comfort yielde, though base by hope of gain:
And though some make us to be loathed of one,
We by their means another love obtain.
But cruelty, with which none can comport,
Makes the author hated when the deed is gone.
Often even by those whom it did most support,
As that which alienates men from kind,
And as humanity the mind inchants,
So savage souls that from the same resraine,
More fierce than fiercest beasts are loved of none.
With barbarous beasts one with less danger hants,
Than with the man whose mind all mercy wants;
Yet though the mind of man, as strong, and rude,
Be ranish'd, whiles with violent desire,
And must, if sir'd with rage, be quench with blood.
How can this tender sex whose glory stood
In having hearts iuclinde to pity still,
Delight it self by any barbarous deed?
For Nature seems in this to have used her skill,
In making women's minds, though weak, entire,
That weakness might love, and devotion breed,
To which their thoughts, if pure, might best aspire,
As aptest for the impression of all good:
But from the best to worst all things do wear,
Since cruelties from feeble minds proceed:
In breasts where courage fails, spite, shame, and fear
Make envy, hate, and rigor rule to bear.
Our Queen Olimpias, that was once so great,
And did such monstrous cruelties commit:
In plaging Philip, and his Lady of late.
Lo, now being brought to taste the like estate,
Must take such entertainment as she gave.
And it is good reason that it should be so;
Such measure as we give we must receive,
Whilst on a throne she did superblie sit,
And with disdainefull eyes looked on her foe,
As but being vanquished by her power and wit.
Not mindful of th'ineuitable fate.
O, the Imortalls that command above,
Of every state in hand the rudder have:
And as they lie, can make us stay or go:
The grief of others should us greatly move,
As those that sometime may like fortune prove.
But as experience with rare proofs has shown,
Do look on others, we have Linx- his eyes:
Whilst we would have their imperfections known,
Yet like blind Moles can never mark our own.
Such clouds of selfe-regarde do dim our sight,
Why should we be puffde up by a'cnemies fall?
Since what the day does on another light,
The same the morrow may our state surprise.
Those that on this inconstant constant ball,
Do live enuiron'd with th'all-circkling skies,
Have many means whereby to be ore-throwne,
And why should dying wordlings swollen with wroth,
So tyrranize over an afflicted wight?
Since miseries are common unto all,
Let none be proud that draws a doubtful breath;
Good hap attends but few still till their death.
ACT. V.
SCENE I.
Aristotle. Phocion. LOng have I now invr'd the eyes of my mind,
On natures labors curiously to look:
And of all creatures finding forth the kind,
Strange wonders read in th'vniuersall book.
I mark the world hy contraries maintainde,
Whose harmony does most subsist by strife:
Whilst of all things within the same containde,
The death of one still gives another life.
But as all things are subject unto change,
That partners are of th'elementall powers:
So rould about with reuolutions strange,
The state of man rests constant but few hours,
For what does fame more frequently report,
Then of our sudden rising; and our falls?
I think the world is but a tennis-court,
Where men are tossde by fortune as her balls.
Phoc. And never any age shewde more than this,
The wavering state of soule-ennobled wights;
That soar too high to seize on th'ayrie bliss,
Whilst lowest falls attend the highest flights.
The matchless Monarch that was borne it seemed,
To show how high mortality attaines:
Has not from death the adored flesh redeemed,
But pain has made an end of all his pains.
And these brave bands that furnished fame with b^eath,
Whilst all the world their valorous deeds did spy:
Rest now confounded (since their sovereigns death)
Like Poliphemus having lost his eye:
And they are like that teeth-ingendred brood,
That took their life out of a monster dead:
Whiles each of them pursues for others blood,
Since the great Drag ons death that was their head.

Ari. So change all things that subject are to our sight;
Disorder order breeds, and order it,
Next night comes darkness, and next darkness light.
This never changing change transcends our wit.
Thus poverty and riches, sickness, health:
Both honor and dishonor, life and death,
Do so depend on other, that by stealth,
All go and come as th'accidents of breath.
T'ech worldly state the heavens a height appoint,
Where when it once arriues it must descend:
And all perfections have a fatal point,
At which excellency it self must end.
But as all those that walk on the earth are crossde
With alterations, happning often and strange:
The greatest states with greatest storms are tossde,
And sought of many must make many a change.
Nor speak I this by speculation now,
As gathring credit out of ancient scroules: souls.
No, I have lived at court and I know how,
There Is naught on the earth more vexed, then great men's souls.
Thral'd to the tirant honor, whilst they moan
Their plaints to subjects ears ashamed t'empart:
They must bear all the weight of woes alone,
Where others of their grief lend friends a part.
Their rising us above to such a height,
Which seems their best is worst, whilst since being lords:
They never hear the truth that comes to light,
When frank society speaks naked words.
Whilst sadness, whiles seems majesty, time tells
How dear they buy their pomp with loss of rest:
Some feign three furies but in all the hells,
And there is three thousand in one great man's breast.

Phoc. I think all monarchies are like the Moon,
Which whiles eclipsd, whiles under cloud, whiles clear,
Grows by degrees, and is when full, undone;
Yet Aeson like renewed does re-appeare.
For so the first, but small, begin to shine,
And when they once their spherick form obtain,
Do then begin to languish and decline;
Yet fallen in other realms, do rise again.
The Assyrians once made many a nation bow;
Then next, all power was in the Persians hand:
And lo, the Macedonians monarchs now
Amongst themselves divided cannot stand.

Arist. A secret fate, alternantly all things
Does in this circle circularly lead:
Still generation from corruption springs,
To the end that some may live, some must be dead.
Each Element another strength deuours;
The Air to the fire succumbes, the fire to rain:
The water strives to drown all the earth with showers,
Which it by vapors vomites out again.
Thus with a gordian knot together bound,
All things are made, vn-made, and made again:
Whilst ruin founds, perfection does confound,
And norhing in one state does long remain.
But naught in the earth more dangerously stands
Than sovereignty, that is rated at such worth,
Which like the stormy deities blustering bands,
Does fly from East to West, from South to North.

Ph. A long experience now makes this noght strange,
Though mighty states whose reins one only leads;
Be whiles distracted and constrained to change,
As too great bodies for so little heads,
Since every Commonwealth where all men's wits
Do join in one, to increase the public ease,
Is subject often to feauers, and to fits,
Which Physic whiles, whiles poison must appease.
For (ah) the multitude more rash then wise,
A Hyhra-headed beast whilst naught it binds,
Does passionately praise, or else despise,
As some prepostrous fancies move their minds.
Often vice and virtue have like danger bred,
Whilst envy the one procured, and the other hate:
By jealousy, or emulation dred,
Those ruined are by it that raisde the state.

Arist. Whilst some their betters, others equals scorn,
The government that is popular decaies:
And when it dies the Monarchy is borne,
Whose violence disorders broiles alaies.
It from corruption does continue clean,
As freest from infirmities we find:
Still whilst it humbly high, does hold a mean,
Twixt tyranny, and too remiss a mind.
But though th'one-headed state may flourish long,
Whilst the one knows to command, the rest to obey:
Whilst guerdon follows goodness, vengeance wrong,
That virtue cherisht is, vice made decay.
Yet (if naught else) time does great states overcome,
Heavens have confinde all by some fatal hour:
And there may many misaduentures come
To dissipate the most united power.
For huge mishaps a monarchy may mar,
When once prosperity begins t'expire:
To further which, whiles strangers must make war,
And whiles seditious subjects may conspire.
As jealousy, or else ambition moves,
All Princes would suppress aspiners still:
And then a subjects course most dangerous proves,
When either fear or hope transports his will.
But though to the beginning, and to the end
Great states are guided by a secret fate:
Yet their designed destrudion does depend,
Still, either on contempt, or else on hate;
Of those the first kings lack of courage breeds,
Which makes the ambitious minds t'attempt more bold:
And the other does attend tyrannike deeds,
By violence to have violence controld.

Phoc. Yet never did so many Monarks fall,
By foreign battles, nor intestine broiles,
As by themselves, that seeming free, were thrall,
Whilst smooth-tong'd minions gloried of their spoils.
Those that have reigned by choice, by birth, or worth,
Or yet through others errors, or their crime,
Often suffer ougly vices to burst forth,
Which virtues colors gilted till that time.
Men are descipherd best then whilst they rest
Most high aduaunc'd being free from hope or fear:
That which is eminent is marked best,
And highest fortunes hardest are to bear.
Low fortunes cloak the faults that some commit,
Whilst imperfections the earth perfections deemes,
Stupiditie seems patience, fear seems wit,
Will constancy, and softness goodness seems.
But when in the worlds theater one must stand,
A public actor placed in all men's sight:
And swaies the sign of power, and in his hand
Does hold the balance both of wrong and right;
Then he for every action that is his,
The censure of a thousand tongues must have,
Not only damned for doing of things amiss,
But for not doing of all that all men crave.
O, he but undermines the sovereign state,
That cares not who be weak so he be strong:
More studious for himself then for the state,
Or if for it that he may hold it long.
For where Jove him for all men's good ordaines,
He thinks both them and theirs made him to please,
As if a charge of weight, a place of pains,
Were but a bed of rest, a haven of ease.
The worlds great weight that Atlas shoulders bear,
Is not so weighty all to weigh one down,
As that which on his head a king does wear.
There is no burden heavier than a crown.
The Aegean waves more easy are to appease,
Then are their thoughts whose mind for state prepares:
Can they have rest that toil for all men's ease?
The purple ever must be lined with cares.

Arist. Good kings are like the fire, which flaming bright
Does waste it self, to serve another turn:
And sovereignty is like fires glancing light,
Which if but viewed, delights, if touched, does burn.
I like for warmness to stand Vulcan by,
More than to burn amidst the Lemnian flame:
And rather in the Cedars shadow lie,
Than on the top to stand the wind-gods game.
All th'eie-attracting pomp, and splendrous shows
Do merit scorn, though they amazement breed:
The world them pity more then envy owes,
That to seem happy would be wrech'd indeed.
For alterations strange attend a throne;
As if the sphere of fortune were a crown,
The great still tossde, like Sisiphus his stone,
Whilst highest up, rest readiest to fall down.
Of this what greater proof can Fame afford,
Then mighty Philips memorable fall:
That daunted had the Grecians by the sword,
Though not till then t'a stranger being made thrall?
He, he, then whilst he solemnized with state,
His daughters marriage, suddenly was lost:
So that it seemed that Monarchs days to date,
That Hymen's torch gave light to Plutoes post.
Then when that I conceiude with grief of heart
The miseries that proper were to court:
I thought them happy that retired apart,
Could never know such things, but by report.
I might have lived with Alexander still,
To virtuous men, whose savors were not scarce:
Yet rather chose, though having both at will,
To Obey with Pallas, then command with Mars.
And whilst he toiled over others Lord to be,
I labored over my self to be made Lord:
Yet made as great a conquest too as he:
My pen shall be as famous as his sword.

Phoc. And had I willingly engaged my rest,
The way to trace, that to vainglory tends:
I might have lived respected with the best,
As one of Alexanders chiefest friends.
For though of him that I did merit naught,
He entertainde my friendship till his death:
And when he once our cities ore-throw sought,
At my request he pacified his wrath.
Then once to me a mass of gold he sent,
And offered too a stately Asian town
Which I refusde, pleased more with my poor rent,
Than he with all the treasures of a crown.
I told, that such a sum but served, to make
Him a corrupter, me corrupted thought:
And foul for him to give, for me to take,
If used, shamde both, vnusde, did serve for naught.
But all those baits I never daign'd to touch,
Lest I that all my life had liude so free
Might be possessed too much; possessing much,
If taking riches, it had taken me.
No, I would rather learn to live on less,
Then for superfluous furniture to strive:
Who seeks out substance t'entertaine excess,
Does live t'vse it, not it that he may live.
My fortune does afford sufficient means,
That may preserve all Natures powers in force:
And he that on a golden scepter leanes,
Can not have more, but may well use it worse.
Ah, since abundance but abuses brings,
Why seek men more then serves to have Nature easde?
And why should men toil for so many things,
Since Nature with alittle can be pleased?

Arist. Lo how the heavens, whose love toward man exceeds,
Have made his body strong, his mind divine:
And have made the earth to furnish all his needs,
Lest downe-weigh'd cares might make his thoughts decline.
So that he has a means to raise his flight,
If winged with Virtue, and may mounting hie,
Aspire t'approach to the celestial light,
And deifie himself before he die.
Yet does he strait forgo that glorious way,
To toil for things that the earth vnforc'd affords:
The which his wants first framed were to defray,
But by himself are of his life made Lords.
O how unworthy of the worth of man,
Are many labors that delight him most,
Since that corruption boldly first began,
To make men nourish vice at virtues cost.
And now what has great Alexander gained
By endless labors, and excessive cares?
Of whom lo now it is only said he reigned,
But death unto himself, worse to his heirs.
Lo, for the guiltless blood that he has spilled;
The partners of his conquests do begin
To die by the same swords by which they killed,
And all his offspring expiates his sin.

Pho. Such is the revolution of all things,
The wheel of Fortune still must slippery prove,
And chiefly when it burdend is with kings,
Whose states as weightiest most must make it move.
Yet Alexander I must say was blessed,
That over the world a victor always ranged:
And having ended all his wars, in rest,
Did die in time before his fortune changde.
And for his favor which I often did try,
Whilst earnestly he labord me t'aduaunce:
Whilst earnestly he labord me t'aduaunce:
I Am sorry that himself so soon did die,
And that his offspring has so hard a chance.
His successors have set all Greece on fire,
Of which I fear to perish by some spark:
For Polipercon does my death conspire,
And who can escape that's made a great man's marker?
But for my countries cause I Will give my blood,
Whilst safely praisde all follow virtue can:
But when with danger threatened to do good,
That's only worthy of a worthy man.
Nor do I tender so this puff of breath,
But I could be contented it t'expell:
A mind that is resolved triumphs over death,
He has lived long enough that has lived well.

ACT. V. SCINE II.
Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolomie, Seleucus. I Doubt not now (great heroes) but
ye all
What ever miscontentment ye pretend
Do rest well pleased, since those by me made thrall,
That might have made you end, have made an end.
Loathe not the means, if ye allow the effect,
For though by this I have a realm obtained:
It yields you more, whose course none can suspect,
I Am only guilty, and ye all have gained.
Yet to pursue my life they first began,
For my defense this last refuge I proved:
Naught than himself is nearer unto man,
All men with their own dangers are most moved.
And had not proud Olimpias did in time,
By offering up her blood to work my peace:
Then mine had been the harm, and hers the crime,
I but prevented her a little space.
And if her offspring had suruiu'd her death,
Whose rising could not but procure our fall:
Ye, now that naught but sovereignty do breathe,
Had breathed obedience, or not breathed at all.
Lis. You from a dangerous yoke have us relieved,
Which I suspect we had experienced soon:
And why then should we labor to seem grieved
At that thing done, which we wish not undone?
No, since that all for soueraignety do strive,
And have once tasted what it is to reign:
There Is none of us but rather die, than live
To Embrace a subjects servile state again.
And though perchance with Alexanders son,
If heir both of his fathers worth and state:
We might have most respected places won,
As special pillars of the Princes seat.
Yet though more great than others, as before,
It would have grieved us, less then one to fall:
The fall from first to second grieves one more,
Then from the second to the last of all.
Our old renown to us had ruin brought,
And would have made us odious to remain:
It Is dangerous for a subject to be thought,
One that desires, or yet deserves to reign.
When any tempest threatened had his throne,
He would have sought assurance at our cost:
For when that jealousy has seizd on one,
The greatest virtues are suspected most.
Yea though we could to quite our state consent,
Us from suspicion naught but death could purge:
Still greatness must turmoile, or then torment,
If borne, a burden, if laid down, a scourge.

Ptol. But When we have within bur bosom weighed
The ruin of all Alexanders race;
Whom without blushing we might have obeyed,
By right succeeding in our sovereigns place.
How can our souls but highly be ashamed,
That one inferior both to them and us,
Does seek by wrong that which by right they claimed,
And by their orethrow would b'exalted thus?
Nor need I more as in suspense remain,
To mask my meaning with ambiguous words:
No, no, our words may as his deeds be plain,
Which fame, (and without whispring) now records
Ye hear how that Antigonus of late,
Whose thoughts winged with ambition soar too high:
Does strive above us all t'aduaunce his state,
And on his former fortune does rely.
Since to his hands Eumenes was betraide,
Lo, quite transported by prepostrous pride,
As if in naught addicted now to our aid,
He has laid all regard of us aside.

Lis. Thus Time the truth of all things does proclaim,
Man is a crafty creature, hard to know,
That can a face for every fortune frame,
No trust in mortalles, nor no faith below.
Whiles as our own particulars do move,
We what we wish for most, seem to mislike:
And often of others do the course disprove,
Whilst we want naught but means to do the like.
Then whilst Perdiccas did attempt before
To make the rest that were his equals thrall,
Who than Antigonus detested more,
The Ambitious mind of one that would have all?
But since Perdiccas and his faction fell,
Whom he as traitors to the state pursude:
He in his place succeeding to rebel,
Has what he seemde t'vndo again renude.
And yet I many a time have musde of this,
How from the world he did Eumenes send.

Sell. How? But by treason as his custom is,
False at the first, and cruel at the end.

Lys. I know, that after diverse doubtful fights,
He has orethrowne Eumenes at the last:
But by what stratagems or treacherous slights,
I would be glad to hear how all has past

Sell. Antigonus was at the first afraid,
To match Eumenes by plain force in fight:
And the refuge that fear affordes assaide,
For valor frank bent t'vse some wary slight.
Amongst Eumenes troops, their minds to prove
He scattred letters with allurements stored:
By promisde treasures, and protested love,
To move some one that might betray his Lord.
But he being wise, his troops in time aduisde,
To clear their virtue by their enemies vice:
And gave them thanks that would not be entisde,
To sell their faith at such a bloody price.
Then said, that The Author of those scroules was he,
That when they spide such practices again,
They still would take them always but to be,
Their Captains trial, not their enemies train.
Thus by the means that should have him entrap'd,
His adversary did deluded stay:
For both he from the present danger escaped,
And to prevent the like preparde a way.
Then when this traitorous policy had failed,
And that there had some doubtful conflicts past:
Antigonus that had at one prevailed,
As having had some vantage at the last:
He with Eumenes did procure to speak,
And as the one vanquished offered him good will:
But he whose mind could not be brought to break,
Would never talk but as to his e^uall still.
For when a band between them made, did bear
That he to Antigonus should help impart,
He did reform that form, and would first swear,
With Alexanders offspring to take part.
Thus where they his submission did attend,
Imperiously conditions he imposde:
So that there after to procure his end,
Still the other by all means his mind disposde.
And shortly of his bands a vain debate,
For his confusion fit occasion brought:
Still, as small things by concord do grow great.
By discord great things are reduced to naught,
TO Eumenes whilst he fortunately lived,
That th'haugh tie Agiraspides gave place,
With him for state two of their captains strived.
And would not his authority embrace.
Such was that spite of theirs to have him spoild,
That though of valor he rare wonders proved,
And often by force Antigonus had foild,
Yet from their mind it could not be removed:
For being by them allurde all the other bands,
To get some baggage that they lost again,
Did give their captain bound to the enemies hands,
So darkening all their glory by one stain.
And though Eumenes trusting to new hopes,
By flying labored a relief to have found,
He was prevented by his traitrous troops.
And like to some base fugitive was bound,
Scarce could his stormy stomach bent to break,
Daigne then t'entreate those that had him betraide,
Yet having hardly purchasde leave to speak,
He stretched them forth his fetterd hands and said;
Lo here th'apparrell that your General wears,
Since with your faith his liberty was lost:
Yet he those bands not given by the enemy bears,
But by his own in whom he trusted most.
And must he thus be led that should you lead?
Is this the triumph that I should receive,
For all my victories thus to be made,
Of captain, captive, of a conqueror, slave?
How often (my soldiers) have ye all of late,
To me by solemn oaths sworn to be true?
But it becomes not one in a'abiect state,
With lofty words his Masters to pursue.
Nor crave I further favor at this hour,
Then strait to bathe your weapons in my breast;
Let not my life be in mine enemies power,
Lo all that your commander does request.
(...) Antigonus does take no care,
(...) get my body, so he get my head:
And he regardes not, neither when, nor where,
No* in what sort I die, so I be dead.
But if through horror of so vile a deed,
Your eyes look down, your hair erected stands,
Which in your minds this much remorce does breed,
That with your hearts ye will not stain your hands:
Then as your captain, since not force I may,
I Will as your friend entreat, that now in time
I may but have a sword, my self to slay,
So you t'excuse whilst partner of your crime.
But when he saw that words could not assuage
Their barbarous thoughts, that nothing could control:
Then having turned his courage all in rage,
He thus flamed forth the fury of his soul.
O damned rascals, that have lost all faith,
Whom neither duty nor yet merit binds:
How often was Alexander moud to wrath
By those your mutinous and malicious minds?
And, O what could I at those hands attend,
That yet were smoking with Perdiccas blood;
Of those that by like treason did intend,
With old Antipaters to have been imbrude?
Heaven thunder on you from th'aetheriall rounds,
And make you live a'abominable band;
Base vagabonds, barred from your native bounds,
Then die detested in a barbarous land.
And as ye have the world with murder filld,
So may your blood by the same swords be shed:
By which ye have more of your captains killed
Than of your foes, from whom like beasts ye fled.
But neither courteous, nor outrageous words
Could change his soldiers from their first intent,
That forward led their captain chained with cords,
A sacrifice prepared for the enemies tent;
Where being arriude, to the end he soon might end,
He asked what stayed Antigonus to go,
By setting of him free to win a friend,
Or by his death to rid him of a foe.
And straight Antigonus did haste his fall,
By this great magnanimity, not moved:
And the Agiraspides dispersde over all,
As murderers murder from the world removed.
Thus often have traitors bin dispatchde by time,
By those whom their vpbraiding looks dismay:
For the remembrance thus of The Authors crime,
Can but by th'Actors death be wiped away.
Now claims Antigonus when fame does feast,
In rank above his sovereigns self to sit:
For Alexander did subdue all the east,
And he has conquered them that conquered it.

Cass. No doubt, since he that great advantage wan,
He has within himself high things designde:
For whilst prosperity transports a man,
Naught seems difficult to the ambitious mind.

Seleuc. Of those in whom he did suspect a spirit,
Whose courage served his courses to resist,
He has himself by diverse means made quite,
In others wreakes his saftie does consist.
Thus martial Pithon that no danger sparde,
Whom Alexander held in high account:
Did at the last receive a hard reward,
For helping him Eumenes to surmount.
His spirit t'attemp and power fit to perform.
Made jealousy Antigonus torment:
And yet he feigned to love him for the form,
Till that his court he moou'de him to frequent:
Where whilst he did mistrusting naught abide,
He publicly in all the peoples sight:
(Though seeming justly) damned iniustly di'de,
No viler wrong then wrong that looks like right.
Thus diverse governors within short space,
Their government, or then their life have lost:
And others are preferred unto their place,
That did depend upon his favor most.
Often likewise me, he labored to surprise,
And policy was used, to have me ore-throwne:
But I, whom Pithons danger had made wise,
Learned by his ruin to prevent mine own.
To save my life abandoned is my state,
And I have fled with danger as ye see,
That you may know, how that man does grow great,
Whose pride may plague you all, as well as me.

Cass. Then let us be resolved, what course t'intend;
Lest out of time being wise we rue too late.

Lisim. It Is better to pursue then to defend.


Ptol. It Is good to quench a fire ere it grow great.


Cass. Then let us send to Antigonus in haste,
To redemand th'vsurped bounds again;
Since in this war we did our treasures waste,
We should be likewise partners of the gain.
But if against our suit his ears he bar,
And do with scornful words contemn our claim,
Then may our Messenger denounce the war,
And we shall shortly intimate the same.

Ptol. A mutual band must made amongst us be,
To make one fortune common to us all:
And from henceforth we must all four agree,
To stand together, or together fall.
And since the princely buds for which we cared,
How ever dead, are dead; what ere we do
T'engender so toward us the more regard,
We with the state must take the title too.
And we must both be crowned, and known forkings,
The Diadem is greatness strongest tower:
All vulgar judgments lean on the outward things,
And reverence state, where they obey but power.

Exeunt. Nuntius, Philastrus. Chorus. IS there a heaven? and are their heavenly
powers,
To whose decree terrestrial things are thrall?
Or strives the tirant that begets the hours,
To triumph over eternity and all?
Lo, nature trauells now, being big with change,
Since mortals all humanity have lost;
And in the old Chaos, or some mass more strange
To re-entombe their essence all things bost.
Can reasonable souls from reason barred,
Even strive which most in cruelty exceeds?
What eye has seen, or yet what ear has heard
Such monstrous accidents, prodigious deeds?
The Arrabian robbers, nor the Scithians wild,
That with the savage beasts (as barbarous) haunt,
With such foul facts have not themselves desil'd,
As those that of civility do vaunt.
Since Grecians are grown barbarous as we find,
Where can faith have a corner free from spot?
O careless heavens, wretch'd earth
Cho. What loads thy mind?


Nun. Amultitude of murders.


Cho. What?


Nun. What not.


Cho. We know that since our sovereign lest to breath,
The Earth has been bathde with many a scarlet flood,
Perdiccas did procure Meleagers death,
And his own soldiers drowned his breath with blood.
The Athenians prey, Leonatus did remain,
And by Eumenes subtlety dismayde,
Craterus and Neoptolemus were slain,
Then by his own Eumenes did betrayed.

Phil. Man with his skill against his knowledge strives,
Where death his way attends, that way he tends,
And to Atropos the fatal rasor gives,
To cut the thread on which his life depends.
When the Asian victour after all his wars,
To visit Babylon had bent his mind:
Both I, and others, studious of the stars,
Did show that there his ruin was designed.
To his successors too we often have shown,
The means by which their fate might be controld;
Yet was our skill contemnde, and they ore-thrown,
As we foretold, and as they now have told.

Nun. They have told much, and yet I must tell more;
Their news were evil, yet were they not the worst,

Cho. And have the heavens reserved mo plagues in store,
As if we yet were not enough accursed?

Nun. As the earth in pride, the heavens in plagues abounds,
Our highest hopes have perished but of late.

Cho. Then wound our ears by hearing others wounds,
That pity now may tread the steps of hate.

Nun. Our Queen Olimpias ravished by revenge,
All Macedony did with murders fill;
Which from her part the people did estrange,
Whilst naught but rigor limited her will.
So that when fierce Cassander sought her wreake,
She did mistrust the Macedonians minds:
And for the time the nearest strength did take,
There till the storm was past to attend fair winds.
But soon Cassander did the town enclose,
And as she held him out, did hold her in,
That like a captive guarded by her foes,
She knew not by what way a way to win.
And when their life's provision did decay,
Then did bare walls but small refuge afford:
She Scilla escaped to be Charibdis prey,
That fell on famine flying from the sword.
Strait like pale Ghosts faint soldiers did remain,
Whose bowels hunger like a Harpie tears:
And with courageous words, the Queen in vain
Did raise their spirit; (the belly has no ears.)
All then began to languish, and to fade,
As if being tir'de to bear themselves about;
Legs failed the body, and the neck the head,
Then whilst the flesh fell in, bones bursted out:
And when that th'ordinarie meats were spent,
Then horses, dogs, cats, rats, all served for food;
Of which no horror th'eater did torment,
For all that was not poison, then seemed good.
Some mouths accustomed once with dainty meats
Wished what they often had loathed, i will crumbs, foul floods
And Ladies that had lived in pompous states,
Fed, as brought up with wolves amidst the woods:
Yea, nursed by those whom they themselves had nursed,
Often then by the of springs death th'engendrer lived;
And which was worst, whilst breasts were like to burst
None comfort could, for all themselves were grieved.
Such was their state, no friend bewaild bis friend,
No wife her husband, nor no Sire his son;
For apprehending their approaching end.
All with compassion of them selves were won.
The dead men's smell empoison'd them that lived,
Whilst first made faint by a defrauded womb:
Heaps were of breath and burial both deprived,
That all the town in end was but a tomb.

Cho. Life is the subject of distress and grief
That still ministers matters to bemone;
And only but by death can have relief,
To live and to be wretch'd are both but one.
Yet foolish worldlings tossde with endless care,
Though at too dear a rate would still buy breath;
And following after feathers thrown through the air,
Like life (though wretch'd) more then a happy death.

Nun. When thus the world Olimpias plagued did spy,
All sought Cassander, though for several ends.

Cho. As from a pest all from the unhappy fly,
Th'eclipse of Fortune threatens loss of friends.

Nun. And she considering that she could not long
Hold out the siege, since vittailes were grown scant,
Did send (as weak) for peace t'intreat the strong.

Cho. What cannot time and travel sometime daunt?


Nun. Then did Cassander know that need constrained
Her so to bow as strangely being diseasde:
And though he her request not quite disdained,
Th'agreement was appointed as he pleased.
For all the favor that she could procure,
Was leave to live a private person still;
And yet of that she could not be made sure,
Which did depend upon her enemies will.
Then whilst Cassander fought his enemies ends,
There wanted not strange troops with him to abide;
Yet might have many followers, and few friends:
Friends by the touchstone of distress are tried.

Nun. But though the Queen was rendered in this sort,
With protestation to have her life preserved.
The tyrant with her spirit could not comport,
But from his faith for her confusion sweru'd.
The Macedonians were together brought,
There to consult what did concern their Queen;
But when of them a number deeply thought,
Both what she was, and what she once had been;
Even as Cassander had subborn'd them all,
Their parents came whom she had damned to death,
And did her rigor to remembrance call,
By which the multitude was moved to wrath.
Whilst from their brazen breasts all ruth was barred,
They did conclude, their Queen behou'd to die.

Cho. Durst subjects damn their sovereign, and not heard?
So still may clouds obscure the worlds bright eye.

Nun. Yet did Cassander put (all sleights t'assay)
A mask of pity on a cruel mind,
And offered her a ship to fly away,
As if to death against his will assign'de.
Nor Was this course for her deliverance framed,
But only as by chance that she might drown:
So for her death that he might not be blamed,
But only Neptune, that had thrown her down.
Yet she a princess of a mighty spright,
Whose lofty courage nothing could ore-come,
Said, ere she escaped by such a shameful flight,
That she would hear the Macedonians doom.
But when Cassanders counsel was contem'nd,
Lest that the multitude had changed their mind,
When they remembered whom they had condemned,
And warily weighed what rashly they designed.
To rid her soon from pain, and him from fear,
He sent some bands from pity most estranged;
Yet she against fortune did a banner bear,
And not her heart, no, not her countenance changed.
She constant still, though mon'd, would never moan,
Whose stately gesture scorned their foul attempt:
And did unite her virtues all in one,
To grace disgrace, and glorify contempt.
She on two Ladies shoulders leaned her arms,
And with a Majesty did march toward death:
Like Alexander once amidst th'alarmes,
As if in triumph bent t'abandon breath.
The height of virtue admiration brings,
At this great magnanimity amazed:
As spying The Image of their auncieat kings,
Or then some goddess; all the soldiers gazed.
But ah, some bosted by the tirant strived
To spoil (unnatural) natures fairest frame;
And th'Alabaster balls between they driu'd
Th'vnwilling swords, that strait grew red for shame.
Then she in worth, that would her self excel,
Would neither word, nor tear, nor sigh forth send;
But spread her garments over her whilst she fell,
As jealous of her honor still to the end.

Cho. O strange barbaritie, most monstrous deed,
Could men a woman, subjects kill their Queen?
And could her fortune past no pity breeds?
Who ever gave the wound has not her seen.
The ougly Authors of those odious evils,
Feared for deserved plagues must still be sad,
His breast t'a hell, his thoughts all turned to devils,
Through horror of himself must make him mad.

Nun. And yet the plague of these detested times.
Has wrought more mischief t'aggrauate our groans.

Chapter No end in sin, crimes are maintained by crimes
Who fall in The Ocean touch the bottom once,
The path of honor has but narrow bounds,
On which who steps attentive must remain.
It Is raisde so hie above the vulgar grounds,
That who thence fall can never rise again.

Nu. Thus now Cassander since he cannot win
True reputation, but lives tainted still,
Imbarkt in mischief sails the depths of sin,
So, if not loved as good, yet feared as ill.
Though by his means his ruthlesse eyes have seen,
Fates (as it were from Fortunes bosom) rend
His King by poison, by the sword his Queen;
In wickedness t'exceede himself in the end:
He prospring in impiety, grew proud,
And murdered both his masters son and wife:
Thus he that all the world by birthright owed,
Could hold no part of it, no not his life.
Yet could Roxanes death not ease his mind,
Nor her young son too soon made Plutoes guest:
But bent t'vndoe all Alexanders kind,
That to revenge the rest there might none rest.
By treason he (as all his deeds are done,)
Causde Hercules his brothers steps to trace:
That was great Alexanders bastard son,
And th'onelie remnant of that great man's race.
Lo thus Cassander the enemy to all good,
Whose soul so much for Macedonie longs:
Has to the Scepter swimd through seas of blood,
Yet, O weak right that's builded but on wrongs!

Chor. O how ambition does abuse the great,
That with enough not pleased still strive for more:
Lo how our Sovereign seemde to raise his state,
Yet made it but to fall whilst starved with store.
And since his trophies reard in several fields,
Both him and his have to confusion brought:
Then what is all the good that greatness yieldes,
Which makes it self seem much to be made naught?
Thus though the mountains make a mighty show,
They are but barren heaps borne up aloft,
Where plains are pleasant still, though they lie low,
And are most fertile too, though troad on often.
Greatness is like a cloud in th'ayrie bounds,
Which the earths base vapors have congeald above:
It brawles with Vulcan, thundering forth huge sounds, fear,
Yet melts, and falls there whence it first did move.

Phi. Since that worlds conq'ror then whilst free from
Weighed with his greatness down so soon was dead,
What makes each of his captains strive to bear,
The diadem that crushed so strong a head?
O when my mind is ravished through the stars,
To search the secret secrets of the fates:
What treasons, murders, mutinies and wars,
Are threatening once t'orethrow th'vsurped seats.
And false Cassander that betrayed his Lord,
And spoild the princely race in mischief chief:
A traitor, both of heaven and earth abhorrd,
Shall live but with disgrace, and die with grief.
His sons, in wickedness himself t'exceede,
Shall make the woman die that made them live:
Then when being drunk with blood, to death shall bleed
And none of theirs their funerals shall survive.
Then when ambition should be coold by age,
Lysimachus shall by Seleucus die:
Nor shall Seleucus long enjoy the stage,
But by like violence shall breathless lie.
And subtle Ptolomies degenerd race,
Long only famous for infamous things:
Shall end, and once to the enemies pride give place,
Whilst a lascivious Queen confusion brings.
Antigonus shall be in battle killd,
His son a captive perish with disgrace:
And after that it Greece with blood has filld,
In end, destruction does attend that race.
The last in power, though of their line not bred,
A niggard and a dastard beaten down:
Shall through a strangers town a captive led,
Bound of the Macedonians the old renown.

Chorus.
WHat damned furies thus toss mortals minds
With such a violent desire to reign?
That neither honor, friendship, duty, blood,
Nor yet no band so sacred is as binds
The ambitious thoughts that would a kingdom gain:
But all is buried in black Laethes flood,
That may the course of sovereignty restrain,
Which from the breast does all respects repel:
And like a torrent cannot be gainstoode:
Yea many would a Scepter so t'obtaine,
In spite of all the world, and Jove's own wrath,
March through the lowest dungeons of the helles:
And underneath a diadem would breathe,
Though every moment threatened them with death.
Yet though such restless minds attain in the end
The height to which their haughty hearts aspirde,
They never can embrace th'imagin'd bliss,
Which their deluded thoughts did apprehend,
Though by the multitude they be admirde,
That still to power do show themselves submisse;
Yet by the soul still further is requirde,
That should seal up the accomplishment of joy:
Thus does a partial judgment aim amiss,
At things that stand without our reach retired:
Which whilst not ours as treasures we define,
But not the same whilst we the same enjoy.
Some things afar do like the Glow-worme shine,
That looked to near have of that light no sign.
No charge on the earth more weighty to discharge,
Than that which of a kingdom does dispose.
O those that manage must the reins of state,
Till that their ghost b'imbarkt in Charons barge,
Do never need to attend a true repose.
How hard is it to please each man's conceat?
When gaining one they must another lose.
Thus hardly kings themselves ca^ euenly bear,
Whom if severe, as cruel subjects hate,
Contempt dare to the mild it self oppose.
In time who spare as niggardes are despisde,
Men from too frank a mind exactions fear.
Though in all shapes as Proteus being ^^sguisde,
Kings by some scandal always are surprisde,
Yet one might well with every thing comport,
That on the opinion only does depend,
If further danger followed not by deeds.
But every monarke lo in many a sort,
Death does disguisd in diverse shapes attend,
Of some by mut'nous swords the life forth bleedes,
By unsuspected poison others end,
Which whilst they always labor to prevent,
A thousand deaths within their breasts life breeds.
Lo, this is all for which the great contend.
Who (whilst their pride hemselues and others spoils)
With their dominions do their cares augment.
And O vain man, that toils to abound in toiles;
Though still the victory the victor foiles.
Thus Alexander still himself dis^asde,
Whilst he t'vndoe his state did wale prepare,
Which when made most, diminisht most remaind,
Where with his fathers bounds had he bin pleased,
He might have left our crown in peace to his heir;
That by his conquest naught but death has gaind:
Yet for no pains a number now does spare,
To work for that by which his wreake was wrought,
Which (though from it they rage to be restraind:)
Would (if possessed) their pleasures but impair:
Yet they by hurme of others seek the thing,
That by their harm of others will be sought;
To him and his, each of them death would bring,
That it might once be said he was a King.
We may securely sitting on the shore,
To see the great (as tossd on The Ocean) groan,
Learn by their toiles t'esteeme much of our rest,
For this does thousands with affliction store.
That as th'vnhappiest in the world do moan,
If they but chance to view some few more blessed,
Where if they would but mark how many a one
More wretch'd than they in misery does live;
It would strait calm the most unquiet breast.
The cottage whiles is happier than the throne,
To think our own state good, and others ill,
It could not but a great contentment given
There much consistes in the conceit and will,
Since t'vs all things are as we think them still.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF JULIUS CAESAR.

By William Alexander, Gentleman of the Princes privy Chamber.

Carmine dij superi placantur, carmine manes. LONDON Printed by VALENTINE
SIMMES for ED: BLOVNT. 1607.

The Argument.
AT that time when the Romans traveled with an insatiable ambition to subdue
all Nations, by whose overthrow they could conceive any exspectation, either of
glory, or profit: Caius Julius Caesar, a man of a lofty mind, and given to
attempt great things, ascending by several degrees to the Consullship,
procured a power to war against the Gauls: amongst whom, after a number of
admirable battles and victories (by the approbation of all the world; having
purchased a singular reputation, both for his courage and skill in Arms) he
being long accustomed to command, was so drunken with a delight of
sovereignty, that disdaining the simplicity of a private life, he was so
far from denuding himself of the authority that he had, that altogether
transported with a desire of more; he sent to the Senate, to have his
government of the Gauls, prorogated for five years which suit being repugnant
to the Laws, (as directly tending to tyrranie) was by the people publicly
repelled. By which occasion, and some others, rising from an aemulation
between him and Pompey the great, pretending a high indignation, he
incontinent crossed the Alps, with such forces (though few) as he had in
readiness, and with a great celeritie came to Rome, which he found abandoned
by Pompey, in whom the Senate had reposed their trust, whom shortly after, by a
memorable battle in the fields of Pharsalia he discomfited* and having by the
overthrow of Scipio, death of Cato, and flight of Pompeys sons, as it were,
rooted out all the contrary faction, he returned to Rome, and indirectly by
the means of Antonius, labored to be proclaimed king* which having rendered
him altogether odious; Caius Cassius, Marcus Brutus, Decius Brutus, Publius
Ca^ca, and diverse others (Noble men) conspired his death, and appo nted a day
for the some: at which time, notwi^hstanding that Caesar was dissuaded from
going forth, by many monstrous apparitions, and ominous presages; yet being
persuaded by D^cius Brutus Albinus, he went toward the fatal place, where
the Senate was assembled.

The Conspirators in like manner, had many terrors amongst others, Portia the
wife of Marcus, Brutus, although she had insinuated her self in her husbands
secret, by a notable proof of extraordinary magnanimity, yet on the day
dedicated for the execution of their design, through the apprehension of his
danger she fainted diverse times, wh^reof Brutus was advertised, yet shrinked
not, but went forward with his confederats to the appointed place, where they
accomplished their purpose, every one of them giving Caesar a wound, and me a
ground whereupon to build this present Tragedy.

The Actors Names.
IVNO. CAESAR. ANTONIUS. CICERO. DECIVS BRUTUS. CAIUS CASSIVS. MARCUS BRUTUS.
PORTIA. CALPHVRNIA. NVNTIVS.
THE Tragedy of Caesar.
ACT. I.
Juno. THough I a goddess glance through th'azure round,
Whilst the eie-feather'd birds my coach do move:
And am with radiant stars heavens Empress crowned,
The sister, and the wife of thundering Jove.
And though I banquet in the Aetheriall bowres,
Where Ambrosie and Nectar serves for meat:
And at the meeting of the immortal powers,
Am still advanced unto the highest seat:
Yet by those glorious shows of boundless bliss,
My martred mind can no way be relieved,
Since immortality affords but this,
That I may ever live being ever grieved.
In vain, vain mortals seek for help at me,
With Sacred odours on my Altars thrown:
What expectation can they have to see,
One venge their wrongs, that cannot venge her own?
Might Pallas once drown thousands in the seas.
And metamorphose Diomedes mates?
And must mine enemies always live in ease,
As me to spite, appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race that lives below,
With such indignities none could comport,
As wound my breast, whom gods and men do know
To be abusde by Jove in many a sort.
Though known to me, from others if concealde,
His faults might breed me grief, but yet not shame:
Where lo, now both through heaven and earth reuealde,
Each standerous Theater does his scorn proclaim.
If heavenly souls divinely lived aloft,
Th'inferior world would imitate them then:
But humaniz'd by hanting mortals often,
Where men should grow like gods, gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauties pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with so many hues:
As Jove in diverse shapes himself can hide,
When he poor maids by Cupid spurred pursues.
He Danae in a golden shower deceiude,
And did a Swanne in Ledaes bosom light,
Then being a Bull Agenors daughter reau'd,
And Io made a Cow to mock my sight.
But would to god that with such wanton dames,
He still to sport would as with me remain,
Not able then t'imbrace celestial flames,
All like the drunkards mother might be slain.
Then such a troop as Rhea^ bosom stores,
Would not hold him and me at endless iarres:
The heavens are pestred with my husbands whores,
Whose lights impure, do taint the purest stars.
All injuries are heavy to digest,
Yet th'actors greatness does some grief remove:
Of whom to suffer wrong it shames one least;
If I were wrongde, I would be wrongde by Jove.
But (ah) this long has tirraniz'd my breast,
A man, a boy, a shepherd, yea and worse,
The Phrygian firebrand, the adultrous guest,
That first wrought wrong by fraud and then by force.
He, he, was he whose verdict moved me most,
Whilst it on Ida wronged my beauties right;
No wonder too though one all judgment lost,
That had three naked goddesses in sight.
And yet I know were not his wandering eyes,
The Ciprian bribde by some lascivious smiles,
My pompous birds in triumph through the skies,
Had borne the gold that often her nymphs beguiles.
Am not I she whose greatness is admirde,
Whom Jove for wife, whom thousands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion once t'imbrace desirde,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove.
What needed me a matter to submit,
Where my authority might have auailde?
Whilst though I promisde wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a young man Venus gift preuaild.
But how durst he t'ones pleasure thus give place,
Where two contemnd their honor would repair?
Is not our Sex impatient of disgrace?
Of which there is none, but loves to be thought fair.
T'auenge my self no kind of pain I sparde,
And made his greatest gain his greatest loss:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greatest cross.
Nor did he long her love with joy enjoy,
Whose faithless flames his country did confound:
Whilst armies armed, for her did Troy destroy,
And leuel'd Neptunes labors with the ground.
Whilst Simois seem'de to be a burial field,
Whose streams as streets were with dead bodies pau'd
All Xanthus plain as turnde t'a sea did yield
A flood of blood, from Heroes wounds received
By brauing thousands once though much esteemed,
By dust and blood deformed, of Hector slain
(Nor like Patrocius by the sword redeemed)
The body basely was bought back again.
Then by the same man's son that killed his son,
The old Priamus surprizde sighed forth his breath:
And being most harmed where he for help had run,
Whilst taking The Altar, taken was by death;
Though wrestling long t'auoide the heavens decree,
By the enemies sword being parted from the light,
He that l^u'de Helen, and was loath de by me,
Di'd as a sacrifice to appease my spite.
Last having lived (if misery be a life)
T'entombe all hers, that high mishaps had tried
Though once being both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecub', as being barren did.
Thus by those means it would have seemed to some,
That my scornde beauty had bin highly vengde:
But whilst they were ore-com'd they did ore-come,
Since they for better states their states have changde.
I in one part, that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
Al warlike nations through the world renowned,
Now from the Phrygian ruins raise their race.
And yet two traitors that betraide the rest,
(O heavens, that treason thus should prosper whiles)
Of the Dardanian race did chance the best,
More happy then at home in their exiles.
Did not Antenor stealing through his foes,
Near to the Euganian mountains build a town,
Of which some nurslings once shall seek repose
Amidst the waves, and in the depths sit down?
Their city spousing Neptune, shall arise
The rarest commonwealth that ever was.
Whose people, if as stowt, as rich and wise,
Might boast to bring miraculous things to pass.
Then false Aeneas (though but borne to obey)
Did of a fugitive become a King:
And some of his near Tibers streams that stay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles soaring over all lands,
By violence the imperial prey have won:
That bastard brood of Mars with martial bands,
Have conquered both the mansions of the Sun.
Their course by mountains could not be controlde,
No, Neptune could not keep his bosom free.
Th'antartike heat, nor yet the artike cold,
No limits to their legions could decree.
O of that city there could come no good,
Whose rising walls with more than barbarous rage,
The builder first bathed with his brothers blood,
Which their prodigious conquests did presage.
That town has often my soul with anguish filld,
Whose newborn state often triumphed over my wrath:
Like my old foe that in his cradle killd,
The serpents that I sent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuscans often assailde,
Even in her infancy I tossde Romes state:
Yet still Laomedons false race preuailde,
And angry Juno could do naught but hate.
Then when the gallant Gauls had vanquished Rome,
That basely bought her liberty with gold:
A banished man Camillus chauncde to come,
And her imballanc'd state redeemde of old.
Great Hanniball our common cause pursude,
And made his bands within their bounds remain,
With Consuls and with Praetors bloods imbrude,
At Thrasimene and at Cannes slain.
In Romans minds strange thoughts did fear infuse
That did attend the taking of their town:
But he that vanquish could, not victory use,
Was by their brazen destiny thrown down.
O what a torrent of Barbarians once,
Inunding over the Alps their walls did bost,
Whilst Teutons and the Cimbers big of bones,
Like giants marched a more than monstrous host.
But though from unknown parts to ruin Rome,
I led those troops that all the world admirde,
Yet did the tyrant Marius them overcome,
And I in vain to venge old wrongs aspirde.
By baser means I likewise sought her harms,
Whilst Ianus church imported never peace,
I raisde up abject Spartacus in arms,
That near eclipsde Romes glory with disgrace.
Though I that all the world for help have sought,
From Europe, Affrike, and from Asia thus:
Gauls, Carthaginians, and Cimbers brought,
Yet did the damage still redound to us.
Of heaven and earth I all the powers have proved,
And for their wrack have each advantage watched:
But they by foreign force could not be moved,
By Romans, Romans only may be matched.
And I at last have kindled civil war,
That from their thoughts which now no reason bounds,
Not only laws, but Natures laws does bar,
The son the sire, the brother brother wounds.
Whilst th'Eagl^s are opposde to th'Eagles so,
O what contentment does my mind contain:
No wround is wrong bestowed, each killes a foe,
What ever side does lose I always gain.
But this my soul exceedingly annoyes,
All are not subject to the like mis-hap:
The war helps some as others it destroys,
And those that hate me most, have still best hap.
Whilst with their blood their glory thousands spend,
Ah, ones advancement aggrauates my woe:
That vaunts himself from Venus to descend,
As if he claimd by kind to be my foe.
I mean the man whose thoughts naught can appease
Whilst them too high a blind ambition bends,
Whom as her minion Fortune bent to please,
Her rarest treasures prodigally spends.
Not only has he daunted by the sword,
The Gauls, the Germans, and the Egyptians now,
But of all lords pretends to be made lord,
That who command the world to him may bow.
Thus dispossessing princes of their thrones,
Whilst his ambition nothing can assuage:
That the subjected world in bondage groans,
The prey of pride, the sacrifice of rage.
Men rail on Jove, and sigh for Saturnes time,
And to the present still The Age past prefer:
Then burden would the gods with every crime,
And damn the heavens where only the earth does err.
Though Jove as stupid still with Cupid sportes,
And not the humor of proud Caesar spies:
That may (if forcing thus the worlds chief forts)
More powrefull than the Titans scale the skies.
Yet lest he thrall him too that none free leaves,
We from the bounds above must him repel:
To brawle with Pluto in th'vmbragious caves,
There since he will be first made first in hell.
What? with that tyrant I will strait be even,
And send his soul to the Tartarian grove:
For though Ione be not jealous of his heaven,
Yet Juno must be jealous of her Jove;
And though none in the heauem would do him ill,
He raise up some in the earth to haste his death;
Yea though both heaven and earth neglect my will,
Hell can afford me ministers of wrath.
I Will cross Cocytus and the smoking lakes,
To borrow all my brothers damned bands:
The Furies armed with firebrands and with snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome so stately stands.
Whilst by my fury Furies furious made,
Do spare the dead to have the lilting pined:
O with what joy will I that army lead?
Naught than revenge more sweet t'a wronged mind.
I Will once make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance that I have conceived:
But what though thousands die to appease my rage?
So Caesar perish, let no soul be saved.

Exit. Chorus.
WE should be grieved to offend the gods,
That hold us in a balance still;
And as they will,
May weigh us up or down,
Those that by folly engender pride,
And do deride
The terror of th'eternalls rods,
In seas of sin their souls do drown.
And others but abhor them as unjust,
Those that religion want deserve no trust.
How dare frail flesh presume to rise?
Whilst it deserves heavens wrath to prove,
On th'carth to move,
Lest that it opening straight,
Give death and burial both at once:
How dare such ones
Look up unto the skies,
For fear to feel the thunders weight?
All the elements th'immortalls will attend,
And are as prompt to plague as men to offend.
None scapes some plague that gods displease:
Then whilst he Bacchus rites did scorn,
Was Pentheus torn:
The Delians high disdain
Made Niobe though turned t'a stone,
With tears still moan,
And Pallas spite to appease,
Arrachne weaues loathd webbes in vain.
Heaven has preparde or ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a punishment for sin.
Lo Juno yet does still retain,
That indignation once conceived,
For wrong received,
From Paris as we find,
And for his cause, bent to disgrace
The Troyan race,
Does hold a high disdain,
Long laid up in a lofty mind,
We should abstain from irritating those,
Whose thoughts (if wronged) not till reuengde repose:
Thus those for Paris fond desire,
That of his pleasures had no part,
For them must smart,
Such be the fruits of lust.
Can heavenly breasts so long time lodge,
A secret grudge,
Like mortals thrall to ire,
Tilll Justice whiles does seem unjust?
Of all the furies that afflict the soul,
Lust and revenge are har dest to control:
The gods give them but rarely rest,
That do against their will contend,
And plagues do spend
That fortunate in naught
Their sprites being parted from repose,
May still expose
Th'vpbraiding troubled breast,
A prey to each tyrannicke thought:
All selfe-accusing souls no rest can find,
What greater torment than a, troubled mind:
Let us adore the immortal powers,
On whose decree, of every thing
The State does hing,
That far from barbarous broiles,
We of our life this little space
May spend in peace,
Free from afflictions showers,
Or at the least from guilty toiles,
Let us of rest the treasure strive t'attaine,
Without the which naught can be had but pain.
ACT. II.
SCENE I.
Julius Caesar, Marcus Antonius. NOw have my hopes attained th'exspected haven,
In spite of partial enuies poisnous blasts:
My fortune with my courage has proou'd even,
No monument of miscontentment lasts.
Those that corriualld me, by me orethrowne,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I rather in some corner live unknown,
Than shine in glory, and not shine most bright,
What common is to two, rests no morerare,
No Phaenix is in all the world save one:
Grieved of my deeds that any claims a share,
Would God that I had acted all alone.
And yet at last I need to mourn no more,
For envy of the Macedonians praise;
Since I have equalld all that went before,
My deeds in number do exceed my days.
Some erst, (whose deeds rest registered by fame,)
Did from their conquests glorious titles bring:
But greatness to be great must have my name,
It Is more to be a Caesar than a King.
Ant. Those warlike nations that did nations spoil,
Are by thy legions now, to our laws made thrall;
What can not virtue do by time and toil,
True magnanimity triumphs over all.

Caesar. Th'outragious Gauls that in most monstrous swarms,
Went wasting Asia, thundering down all things;
And marching over the Macedonians arms,
Did insolently make and unmake kings.
Those Gauls that having the worlds conq'rors foild,
As if the world might not have matched them then,
Would sacrilegiously have Delphos spoild:
And warrd against the gods, contemning men,
Yea those whose ancestors our city burned.
The people that the Romans only feared:
By me Romes nursling matched and orematchtmurn'd,
So what they first eclipsd again they cleared.
Then as to subjects having given decrees,
I left the Gauls their rash attempts to rue:
And wounding Neptunes bosom with winged trees,
The world divided Britains did subdue.
The Germans from their birth inurde to war,
Whose martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred,
Whilst neither men nor walls my course could bar,
Masked with my banners saw their Rhene run red,
And th'orientall realms amidst of late,
My coming and orecomming was but one:
With little pain so Pompey was called great,
That warrd with those whose glorious days were gone:
But what though thousands setones praises forth,
For fields which shadows and not swords obtaind;
Yet th'easie rate but vilifies the worth,
No glory without labor can be gained.
From dangers past my comfort now proceeds,
Since all difficulties I did ore come:
And in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquered all the world, and Caesar Rome.

Anto. Lo, those that striu'de your virtue to suppress,
And were opposde to all your actions still:
Whilst laboring but too much to make you less,
Have made you to grow great against your will.
Great Pompeys pomp is past, his glory gone,
And austere Cato by himself lies killd:
Than dastard Cicero more you honors none,
Thus all your foes are with confusion filld.
The Senators whose wrath could not b'affwag'd,
Long to your prejudice their power abusde,
Till at their great ingratitude enraged,
I said our swords would grant what they refusde.
When having escaped, endangered, and despisde,
That Curio' and I did to your camp resort,
In old bare gowns like some base slaves disguisde,
All sighed to see us wronged in such a sort.

Caesar The Inhabitants of heaven that know all hearts,
They know my thoughts as pure as are their stars:
And that constrainde I came from foreign parts,
To seem uncivil in the civil wars.
I mooude that war which all the world bemones,
Being vrgde by force to free my self from fears:
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groans,
No Romans blood was shed, but I shed tears.
But how could any cleuated spright,
That had for honor hazarded his blood;
Yet yield by froward foes outrageous spite,
To be defrauded of the expected good.
When as a multitude of battles won,
Had made Romes Empire, and my glory great;
And that the Gauls (often vanquishde) had begun
To Embrace the yoke that they disdainde of late.
Then pompous Pompey, my proud son in law,
And Cato, that still crossde what I designde,
From favoring me the people did withdraw,
And unto me a successor assignde.
Not that he should succeed in dangerous broils,
But even through envy, as they had ordained,
That he might so triumph of all my toils,
And rob the glory that I dearly gained.
Could one with such indignities comport,
That values honor deerer then the light?
No, (whilst my soul rests sovereign of this fort)
None shall have power to rob me of my right.
And yet by Jove, that all the world commands,
T'vse any violence I did mislike:
And offered often t'abandon all my bands,
If that my enemies would have done the like.
But the tumultuous multitude that still
As waves with winds are carried with conceits,
With naught but my disgrace would bound their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I stood perplexed,
And weighed the horror of my high attempt,
My soul was with a thousand fancies vexed,
Which resolution buried in contempt.

Ant. Naught in a captainc more confounds his foes,
Then sudden resolutions swift effects;
For so surpised ere they their thoughts dispose,
All good advice prodigious care neglects.
Though when you marched toward Rome, your power
The sudden news so thundered in each ear: (was small,
That (as if heaven had fallen upon them all,)
They bred amazement, and th'amazement fear,
Some secret destiny as then appeared,
Does guide mensactions and their judgments bounds,
Them whom huge armies could not once have fearde:
A shadow or a rumor whiles confounds.
Is It that th'encroaching danger dulles their sprits.
And does prevent their resolutions power,
Or that some destiny distracts their wits,
When heavens determined have their fatal hour?
Pompey the great that was grown aged in arms,
And had triumphed over all the worlds three parts
(Being quite discouraged with imagined harms)
Fled Rome, though without reach of the enemies darts.
Then as t'a torrent all gave place to you,
Rome whom she called a rebel made her Lord:
Your successor Domitius forced to bow,
Did trust your favor more than fear your sword.
When in the Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There th'aduersarie that did vaihely vaunt,
Had all the advantage that the ground could give,
And wealth of vittailes that with us were scant.
Yet the celeritie that you had used
Did so discourage their disordered band,
That (as Jove in their breasts had fear infusde,)
They had no strength against our strokes to stand.
And when Romes general with brave Legions storde
Seemed to possess all that his soul requirde,
Whilst us t'ouerthrow both famine and the sword,
The sea, the land, and all in one conspirde;
Then for your offices they did contend,
As those that of the victory were sure:
And where they might the affairs of state attend
In Rome, for lodgings fondly did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remains,
When all the world was in two armies ranged:
That Mars went raging through the Aemathian plains,
And to dispaires high expectations changed.
That famous field when the Pompeyans lost,
(As Lions do their prey) you did pursue
The scattred remnant of that ruined host,
On which new heads still like to Hydra grew.
Though victory in Affricke fatal seem'de
To any army that a Scipio led;
Yet you showed there, for worth in war esteemed
That Rome a better then a Scipio bred:
And all our enemies were confounded thus,
That us in number ever did surmount;
But Caesar and his fortune were with us,
Which we did more than many thousands count.

Caes. The sweetest comfort that my conquests gave,
It was the mean how to do many good;
For every day some Romans life I save,
That in the field to fight against me stood.
Thus may my mind be judged by the event,
That (even when by my greatest foes assailde)
To win the battle never was more bent,
Then promptto pardon when I had preuailde.
Not covetous of blood of spoils nor harms,
I (though being victor) did insult over none,
But laid aside all hatred with my arms,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone.
I like the praise of clemency, more then
Of force, that with affliction the enemy lodes,
For force proves often the worst thing that is in men,
And clemency the best thing in the gods.
Stern Cato, but by Cato that would die,
And either death or life, if given disdained;
O, I envy thy death that did envy,
The glory that I saving thee had gaind'.
Yet I to rents and dignities restore
Even those that my destruction had designde:
And O, it does delight my mind far more
By benefits then by constraint to bind.

Ant. I would have all my foes brought to their ends.


Caes. I rather have my foes all made my friends.


Ant. Their blood whom I suspect'd should quench all strife.


Caes. So might one do that liked of naught but life.


An. Still life would be redeemde from dangers forth.


Caes. Not with a ransom then it self more worth.


An. Than life to man, what thing more dear succeeds?


Caes The great contentment that true glory breeds.


An. Men by all means this blast of breath prolong.


Caes. Men should strive to live well, not to live long.
And I would spend this momentarie breath,
To live by fame for ever after death*
For I aspire in spite of fates to live.

Ant. I fear that some too soon your death contriue.


Caes. Who dare but lodge such thoughts within their minds.


Ant. Those that the shadow of your greatness blindes.


Caes. The best are bound to me by gifts in store.


Ant. But to their country they are bound far more.


Caes. Then loath they me as the enemy of the state?


Ant. You as th'vsurper of the same they hate.


Caes. I by huge battles have enlarged their bounds.


An. By that they think your power to much abounds.


Caes. Yet I from doing wrong refrain my will.


Ant. They fear your power, because it may do ill.


Caes. The present state still miscontentment brings
To factious minds affecting matters strange,
That burdens to themselves irke of all things;
And so they change, regard not what they change:
In populous towns where many make repair,
(Whose confluence by conference all things touch)
They further than their bounds extend their care,
The idle that do nothing, must think much.
Lo, Rome (though wasted all with civil wars,
Whilst private grudge pretended public good;
And that equality engendring iarres,
Did prove too prodigal of Roman blood;)
Yet having through huge toils attained to rest,
That it by yielding the one may banish tears:
It if constrained disdaines t'imbrace the best,
This word necessity so wounds the ears.
And th'insolent with vile seditious words,
That trembled whilst they heard the trumpets sound:
Stir now their tongues, as we did then our swords,
And what Mars sparde, make Mercury confound.
The people thus in time of peace agree,
T'abase the greatest still, even in that form
As in calm days they do disbranch the tree,
That shrouded them of late against a storm.
But now I looked for liberty to bost,
That once my deeds triumphed had over envy:
As all dark shadows do evanish most,
Then when the Sun shines highest in the sky:
And though their hatred deeply they disguise,
Yet they conceal not so their souls desires:
But that their spite rest sparkling through their eyes,
And bosts to burst out once in open fires.

Ant. Since first (great Caesar) I discernd thy worth,
On all thy actions I did still attend:
And therefore what some whisper, I Will speak forth,
T'admonish freely it becomes a friend.
Since first men did suspect that you aspire
T'a Monarchy, the government to change;
They in their souls your ruin do conspire,
And their affections far from you estrange.
Since chaste Lucretia by proud Tarquin stained,
Washed with her blood the violated bed,
Whilst by his power supreme Rome was constrained
All things to obey, that his cursed brain had bred.
This government which some tyrranick call,
It sounds so odious in the peoples ears,
As Tyrants vild, that they detest them all
Whose greatness gives them any cause of fears.

Caes. I not affect the title of a king,
For love of glory, or desire of gain,
Nor for respect of any private thing,
But that the state may by my travels gain.
You know Sibillaes books that never fail,
In many minds have an opinion bred:
That over the Parthians Rome cannot prevail,
Till by a sovereign prince her bands be led.
For as confusion is the fruit we find
Of those affairs that diverse thoughts dispose;
So sovereignty matched with a gallant mind,
Breeds reverence in ones own, fear in his foes.
And, O it greeues me that these steps of ours,
Have trod so often on many a millions necks,
Whilst yet the Parthian vilipends our powers,
And all our victories vnuanquish'd checkes.
Ah, should a General of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians killd, and not revenged?
And should his ensigns, signs of our disgrace,
Rest in the rank of conquered relikes ranged?
No, no, wretch'd Crassus, now thy self content,
I Will pacify thy ghost with Parthians spoils:
For still my boiling fancies have bin bent
T'ore-match th'vnmatch'd, and daunt th'vndaunted soiles

Ant. With victories being cloyd, will you not then
Your saftie once, more then new wars respect?

Caes No, though I have surmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of my self at last,
Even enuiouslie I look on mine own deeds;
And bent to make the new surpass things past,
Now to my mind old praise no pleasure breeds.

Ant. The world has seen thee (great man) for Romes good,
In danger often of many a dangerous shelfe:
Whilst for her glory thou engaged thy blood,
Of others careful, careless of thy self.

Caes. Though whilst in th'April of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeemd my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of fame.
Yet since the coldness of declining years
Bosts to congeale the blood that boild of late,
Whilst else my life the sun of glory cleares,
That now of all the world remain most great.
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honor that can be requirde.
And now (as the only wanted thing) would crave,
To taste the pleasures of a life retyrde.
But only now t'aduance the state I strive,
For, O neglecting th'ecchoes of renown
I could content my self unknown to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gown.
Since (Anthony) thus for the state I care,
And all delights that nature loves disdain:
Go, and in time the peoples minds prepare,
That as the rest, I may the title gain.
Yet indirectly at the first, assay
To what their doubtful minds do most incline:
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All mark your mind, and yet not think of mine.

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCENE. II.
Cicero. Decius Brutus. DId I survive th'impetuo us Sillaes rage,
And in a torrent of destruction stood:
Whilst tyrants did make Rome a tragic stage,
Through a voluptuous appetite of blood?
Escaped I confusion in a time so bad,
Of liberty and honor once to taste,
That bondage now might make my soul more sad,
By the remembrance of my fortunes past?
What though I once (when first by same made known)
From Catilines strange treason did preserve
This town, that is still endangerd by her own,
Since first the world from equity did swerve?
A spark of that conspiracy remains,
Not yet extinguished to have our state imbroyld;
That now on Rome flames of confusion raines,
Thus one was sparde that we might all be spoild.
O worthy Cato, in whose wondrous mind,
Three rarely matched things Nature did reveal:
Wit, honesty, and courage which designde
A citizen for Platoes commonweal.
Whilst courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiseman spoke, and still foretold,
To what all Caesar's deeds would turn in the end,
If that his pride were not in time controlde.
And had we him as wisely thou aduisde,
Given to the Germans whom he had injured:
We had not now bin thus like slaves despisde,
To see Romes glory, and our own obscured.
But yet I may disbending former cares,
A space comport with that proud tyrants powers;
Age gives assurance by my witherd hairs,
That death will seal my surety in few hours.
Yet ye whose youth and sprite might have attaind
Those dignities that Caesar has undone:
O ye have lost as much as he has gaind,
Whose rising hopes must be retrenched so soon.
Dec. Though innouations at the first seem strange,
Yet often experience approbation brings:
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
On it the safety of our city hings.
As in the depths dashed with redoubling waves,
A ship by different minds rests more imbroilde,
So was our city plag'd with diverse laws,
By th'all-confounding multitude turmoilde.
As whilst the one sickness diverse drugges are used,
Whose powers repugnant in digestion jar:
The Impatient patients fancies rest confusde,
So did we long distressd with civil war.
But now great Caesar from tempestuous winds,
Romes scattred ruins recollects of late:
A Pilote meet to calm tumultuous minds,
A doctor fit for a distemperd state.

Ci. The state from storms secure by drowning proves,
Now whilst despair does doubtful fears appease:
He with the life th'infirmitie remoues,
Thus is the physic worse than the disease.
This commonweal (as whiles the world did spy)
Though some proud sprites in civil wars inuolu'd,
Yet like black clouds that would obscure the sky,
Their tumid humors suddenly dissolved.
And no disgrace to our government redounds,
But to the ambitious that had it abusde:
Who (had their power like Caesar's wanted bounds)
Had whilst they ruled a greater rigor used.
There in all parts are people of all kinds,
And as aduauncde some bad men did abide,
Of power their equals, and of better minds,
Some always virtuous were to curb their pride.
But since that sacred liberty was lost,
The public power t'a private use one turns:
And as his lawless ways did always bost,
The common weal by violence ore-turnes.

Dec. Though what you burden Caesar with were true,
Him of all crime Necessity has cleared:
That was foes force t'eschew, forcde to pursue,
Whilst by contempt t'attempt great things being cheerd:
To the enemies envy more obliged he rests,
Then to his own wit that no such courses scand,
Till by being barrd from using of requests,
Not looked for means were offered to command.
All to mount high his haughty thoughts did tempt,
True worth disdaines to suffer open wrong:
And a great courage kindled by contempt,
Must by revenge be quenched whilst rage makes strong.

Cic. O Decius, now a wrong account you cast,
The Intent; and not the event defines the mind:
Tread back the steps of all his actions past,
And at the mark he hit all aimed we find
As by some sprite inspirde proud Scilla said,
That there in Caesar many Marians were:
And Rome was warned in time to be afraid
Of the euill-girded youth, with smoothe-comb'd hair.
Then when (as still to quietness a foe,)
The memory of Marius he renewd:
By re-erecting tyrants statues so,
His thoughts all bent to tyranny were viewd.
That people-pleaser might have bin perceived,
By courteous complements beneath his rank;
That lauishing forth gifts the world deceived,
And to gain more than his, of his proou'd frank.
Though naught at all indulgent to his wife,
By prostrated pudicitie disgracde:
Yet did he save th'adultrous Clodius life,
To soothe the multitude whose steps he tracde.

Dec. These be the means by which ambition mounts,
Without most humble, when most high within:
And as it fled from that thing which it hunts,
Still wasting most, when most it minds to win.

Cic. And he that still strived tyranny to embrace,
Was thought conioynd with Catilin to be;
And had wise Catoes counsel taken place,
Had with the rest received his death by me.
Yet having suncke himself in some men's souls,
He with his partial faction suting often:
Did get the consulship which naught controules,
And matching pride with power did look aloft.
To flatter them that now must flatter him,
His power t'aduaunce unlawful laws preuaild:
And those to cross that scornd he so should clime,
He furnished was with Force, where Reason faild.
But yet because he could not well b'assur'd,
T'act all alone according to his will;
To govern France he craftily procurde,
So to be strengthened with an army still;
As Rome first warred at home till being made strong,
She thought her self of power the world t'orecome:
So Caesar warred against strange nations long,
Till that he thought his might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate assigns,
He cause of coffeehouse did pretend;
So to dissemble fore-conceiu'd designs,
One soon may find a fault that seeks to offend.
But when he first in a prodigious dream
His mother seemde incestuously to use:
It might have shown to his eternal shame,
How he the bounds that bare him went to abuse.

Dec. And yet I think avoiding threatened harms,
He was constraind t'imbarke in civil broiles:
Did he not covenant to quit his arms,
As not desirous of his countries spoils?

Cic. Durst he with those that had his charge confind,
Stand to prescribe conditions as their mate;
Where to have attended and obeyed their mind,
It was his duty, and their due of late.
What? what? durst he, whom borne to obey the law,
The people all did willingly promote;
The sword which they bad given, against them draw,
When it was sharpened first to cut their throat?
That had not com'd which all our anguish breeds,
If he vnforcde, when as his charge expirde,
Till that the Senate censurde had his deeds,
Had from his province peaceably retirde.
No, he has but betrayed his native town,
Those bands by which she did him first prefer;
T'extend her borders, and his own renown,
Those has he used to tyrannize over her.
My passions (ah transported as you see,
With an excessive love to my dear soil,)
Have made my tongue of my hearts-store too free,
By flaming forth what in my breast does boil.

Dec. That Ceasars part might justly be excusde,
Lo, with the cause alleadgd his course accords:
Of which th'humanitie that he has used,
A testimony to the world affords.
Though forcde to fight, he always had great care,
To save our Citizens as each man knows;
And bade his captains still all Romans spare,
But on Barbarians bodies spend their blows.
Of th'aduersaries after bloody strife,
When of the might have made some captives smart:
Not only was he liberal of their life,
But pardond them still to take Pompeys part.
Even at th'infortunate Pharsalian field,
When he securely might have used the sword:
He both did spare all the enemies that would yield,
And them to rents and dignities restord.
Then when th'Aegyptians so t'obtaine relief,
Brought to his sight pale Pompeys bloodlesse head;
He testified with tears his inward grief,
And gracde his statues after he was dead.
Those his proceedings might appear t'approue,
That he against his will maintained this war;
And to his country bears a tender love,
That could comport to reine his rage so far.

Cic. Those counterfeited favors which he show,
According to ones custom that aspires,
Were spent on many as the world might view,
T'insinuate himself in their desires.
But where he thus spared some, he spoild' whole hosts
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harm as he that of his goodness boasts,
Yet her best men has to confusion brought.
The great man that of no mishap could pause,
But still preuaild, whilst warring without right,
Armd for the common weal in a good cause,
With Caesar did unfortunately fight.
From Lesbos fled with his afflicted wife,
Three base-born grooms (can fortune change so soon)
Stood to consult upon great Pompeys life,
And did what thousands durst not once have done.
Then he whose knees had often been kissd by kings,
(Most highly happy, had he did in time)
By one of his own slaves with abject things,
Had his last funerals framde (O monstrous crime)
T'entombe Romes greatest captain all alone,
The Roman that arrived with reason said,
The fatal glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that last honor staid.
The tears bestowd by Caesar on his head,
Forth from a guilty mind remorce had thrown,
Or else he wept to see his enemy dead,
By any others hands than by his own.
Then constant Cato that even death did scorn,
The rare arch-tipe of an accomplished man,
That lived as not t'himselfe but t'all men borne,
Moved by his tyranny to ruin ran.
He justly whilst more just, himself more strong
Then Caesar thought, that for no Justice card,
And since discovering what he cloakd so long,
Said right, that Caesar and not he was snarde.
Thus Caesar conquered all but Catoes mind,
That would not by a tyrants tollerance breathe:
But in such sort his famous course confinde,
Than Caesar's life more glorious was his death.
Those great men thus brought to disastrous ends,
The author of their death make me despise,
That whilst t'vsurpe the authority he tendes,
By treading down all good men strives to rise.
Now made most great by lessening all the great,
He prowdly does triumph in Rome, over Rome.
And we must seem t'applaud the present state,
Whose doubtful breath depends upon his doom.
Yet had I not enlargde my griefs so long,
To you whom Caesar does pretend to love;
Were nor I know touched with the common wrong,
A just disdain all generous minds must move.

Dec. Had Caesar willingly resignd his arms,
And rendered Rome her liberty at last,
When as from foes he feared no further harms,
But had repaird his just displeasures past.
More then for all the love that's showed to me,
He should have had an Altar in my breast:
As worthy for his virtuous decdes to be
Feared by the bad, and honored by the best.
But since though conquering all the world by might,
He to himself a slave would make Rome thrall;
His benefits are loathsome in my sight,
And I am grieved that he deserves to fall.
My fancies move not in so low a sphere,
But I disdain that one over Rome impires;
Yet it is best, that with the time we bear,
And with our power proportion our desires.
Though I dissembled first your mind to try,
And told what Fame to Caesar's praise relates;
Yet was I pleased that more were grieved than I,
All mis-contented men are glad of mates.

Cic. Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We must our selves no more our selves disguise;
Then learn to mask a mourning mind with smiles,
And seem t'extoll that which we most despise.
Yet all our deeds not Caesar's humor please,
That (since mistrusted once) esteems us still
When dumb disdaineful, flatterers when we praise,
If plain, presumptuous, and in all things ill.
Yea we, whose freedom Caesar now restraines,
As his attenders all his steps must trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his disdaines,
But still pretend to have interest in his grace.
Though all my thoughts detest him as a foe,
To honor him a thousand means I move;
Yet But to save my self, and plague him so,
No hate more harms than it that looks like love.
His pride that through prepostrous honor swells,
Has by the better sort, made him abhorrd;
The gods are jealous, and men envious else,
To see a mortal man so much adord.

Dec. Well, Cicero let all means be entertaind,
That may imbarke us in his bosoms depths,
Till either willingly or then constrained,
He justly quite what he unjustly keeps.

Exeunt. Chorus.
This life of ours is like a Rose,
Which whilst it beauties rare array,
Does then enjoy the least repose
When virgin-like it blush we see:
Then is it every hand the prey,
And by each wind is blown away:
Yea though from violence escaped free,
(Whilst time triumphs, it leads all thralles)
Yet does it languish and decay.
O Whilst the courage hottest boiles,
And that our life seems best to be,
It is with dangers compast still,
Whilst it each little change appalles,
The body force without whiles foiles,
It th'owne distemprature whiles spoils:
Of which, though none it chance to kill:
As nature fails the body falls,
Of which, save death, naught bounds the toils.
What is this moving tower in which we trust?
A little wind closd in a cloud of dust.
And yet some spirits though here being pent,
In this frail prisons narrow bounds,
With what might suffice not content,
Do always bend their thoughts too hie,
And aim at all the peopled grounds,
Then whilst their breasts ambition wounds,
Though feeding as bent straight to die.
They build as they might always live,
Being famishd for fames empie sounds:
Of such no end the travels ends,
But a beginning gives whereby
They may b'imbroild worse then before,
For whilst they still new hopes contriue,
Th'exspected good more anguish sends
Then the possessde contentment lends,
Like beasts that taste not, but devour.
They swallow much, and for more strive,
Whilst still their hope new hap attends:
And how can sueh but still themselves annoy,
That know to conquer, but not how t'enioy?
Since as a ship amidst the depthes,
Or as an Eagle through the air,
Of which their way no impression keeps,
Most swift when seeming least to move:
This breath of which we take such care,
Does toss the body every where,
That it may hence with haste remove:
Life slippes and sleeps always away,
Then whence, and as it came goes bare,
Whose steps behind no trace does leave.
Why should heauen-banish'd souls thus love
The cause, and bounds of their exile,
Where they as restless strangers stray,
And with such pain why should they reaue
That which they have no right to have:
Which with them selves within short while,
As summers beauties must decay,
And can give naught except the grave,
Though all things do to harm him what they can,
No greater enemy then himself to man:
Whilst often enuiron'd with his foes
That threatened death on every side,
Great Caesar parted from repose,
As Atlas underneath the stars
Did of a world the weight abide.
But since a prey t'excessiue pride,
More then by all the former wars,
He now by it does harmde remain
And of his fortune does defide
Made rich by many a Nations wrack,
He breaking through the liquid bars,
In Neptunes arms his minion forced,
Yet still pursude new hopes in vain.
Ah, would the ambitious looking back,
Of their inferiors knowledge take,
They from huge cares might be deuorc'd,
Whilst veiwing few more wealth attain,
And many more than they to lack.
Lo, the only plague from men that rest does reaue,
Is valuing what they want, not what they have.
Since thus the great themselves inuolue
In such a laborinth of cares,
Whence none to escape can well resolve,
But by degrees is forward led
Through waves of hopes, rocks of dispaires:
Let us anoyd ambitions snares,
And far from storms by envy bred,
Still seek securely a humble rest,
With minds where no proud thought repaires,
That in vain shadows does delight:
Thus may our fancies still be fed
With that which Nature freely gives.
Let us iniquity detest,
And hold but what we owe of right,
The Eyes treasure is th'al-circling light:
Not that vain pomp for which the earth strives,
Whose glory but a poysnous pest,
T'orethrow the soul delights the sight,
Ease comes with ease where all by pain buy pain:
Rest we in peace, by war let others reign.
ACT. III.
SCENE. I.
Caius Cassius. Marcus Brutus. NOw, Brutus now, we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blind hopes our judgment to suspend:
Lo, all our exspectations are worn out,
For now it is time t'attempt, and not to attend.
The Imperious people that did the earth appall,
Ah vanquishde by their victories at last,
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their strength but serves themselves to cast.
And we that once seemd borne t'aime at great things,
Of the worlds mistress mighty minions once,
That might have labored to give laws to kings,
Laws from a king, must look for now with groans.
For such of Caesar is the monstrous pride,
That though he domineers else at this hour,
And to his clients kingdoms does divide,
With an vnlimitd tyrranicke power.
Yet of Dictator he disdaines the name,
And seeks a tyrants title with the place:
Not for his honor, no, but for our shame,
As only bent to brag of our disgrace.
Marc. Brut. I thought to see that man (as others are)
Walk reapparrel'd with a private gown,
As one that had unwillingly made war
T'hold up himself, not to cast others down.
So Silla, though more inhumane then he,
Whilst having all to what his heart aspirde,
The sovereignty resigned, and set Rome free
When all such exspectation was expirde.
By Caesar's worth we must think that he too,
Will liberty restore to our troubled state:
When first the world has viewd what he might do,
His thoughts are generous as his mind is great.
And though some insolences escape him whiles,
His dying fury sparkles but a space:
Naught th'inspirations quite of Mars exiles,
Till one be used with th'innocencie of peace.
Those that by violence did t'all things tend,
Scarce can themselves t'a quiet course conform:
Their stately carriage and frank words offend,
Whilst peace cannot comport with wars rude form.
I hope that Caesar settling civil broils,
When disaccustomde is intestin rage:
Will strive to mitigate his countries toils,
Bent all those flames that burned his breast t'asswage.

Ca Cass. Thus of his course you by your own conceived
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
Ah, honest minds are with least pain deceiu*d:
Those that themselves are good dream not of ill.
But of bad minds to sound th'vnsound device,
Their inclination must your judgment sway:
The square of virtue cannot measure vice,
Nor yet a line that is straight a crooked way.
So Caesar may prevail t'vsurpe the state,
He cares not by what violence nor slight:
O, one may soon deceive men and grow great,
That leaves religion, honesty and right,
When as the Senators (no more their own)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blinds,
And showde him by what honors they had shown,
To gratify his greatness grateful minds.
He in a chair imperiously being placed,
Not daign'd to rise nor bow in any sort:
As both of them had but their due embraced,
When he a hautie, they an humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be thoroughly thrall'd
Dare so disdainfully such great men use:
When in a regal throne by us installed
Then will he break that which he now does bruise.
Was he not first that ever yet began,
To violate the sacred Tribuns place;
And punished them for punishing a man,
That had transgressde the laws in time of peace?
The laws thar do of death all guilty hold,
Whose actions seem to tirranie inclinde:
So earnest were our ancestors of old,
To quensh the light of tyrants ere it shinde:
And shall our Nephews (heirs of bondage) blame
Us dastard parents that their hopes deceived,
That saw, that suffered, that suruiu'd such shame,
Not leaving dead, what we being borne received?
By Caesar's friends to an assembly brought,
The Senators intend to call him king.

Brut. I Will not be there.


Cass. But what if we be sought
T'assist as Praetors such a public thing?

Brut. Then i will resist that violent decree;
None of Romes crown shall long securely bost,
For ere that I live thrall'd, i will first die free:
What can be kept when liberty is lost?

Cass. O with what joy I swallow up those words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But Brutus be not fearde, this cause affords
Thee many mates in danger, few in fame.
When Anthony proud Caesar's Image crowned
The people by a silent sorrow told,
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drowned
That Comet of confusion to behold.
What do those scroules thrown in thy chair import,
Which what thou art to thy remembrance brings?
Be those the fancies of the inferior sort?
No, none but noble minds dream of great things.
Of other Pretors people look for shows,
And distributions whose remembrance dies:
Whilst bloody fencers fall with mutual blows,
And Affricks monsters made t'amaze their eyes.
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
A glory hereditarie to thy race,
And following thee their blood will frankly spend,
So thou succeed in thy great parents place;
That Romes redeemer once did Tarquin foil,
Though from his birth obeyed, and without strife,
Where thou should but the aspiring tirant spoil,
That would t'extinguish'd tyrrany give life.

Brut. I weigh thy words, with an afflicted heart,
That for compassion of my country bleedes,
And would to God that I might only smart,
So that all others escaped the evil that succeeds.
Then never man himself from death did free
With a more quiet and contented mind,
Then I would perish, if I both could be
To Caesar thankful, and to our country kind.
But though that great man's grace toward me enlargde
May challenge right in my affections store:
Yet must the greatest debt be first dischargde,
I ow him much, but to my country more.
This in my breast has great dissension bred;
I Caesar love, but yet Romes enemy hate:
And as Jove lives, I could be moved to shed
My blood for Caesar, Caesar's for the state.
I for my fathers death loathde Pompey long,
Whilst just disdain did boil within my breast,
Yet when he warred to venge the common wrong,
I ioynde with him because his cause was best.
A mind t'vsurpe if Caesar now reveal.
I will in time precipitate his end
Thus being still bent t'aduance the Commonweal,
I helped a foe, and now must hurt a friend.

Cass. Least of his favor thou the poison prove,
From swallowing of such baits (dear friend) beware:
No tyrant (trust me) can entirely love,
Nor none that for himself does only care.
He by such courtesies does but intend
T'imbase thy virtues, undermine thy mind,
And thy suspected courage to disbend,
Yea (though with silken bonds he would thee bind.)
This of all tyrants is the common tread,
To wreake all those in whom most worth he finds:
Or (whilst that terrors toss his jealous head,)
T'vse subtilties t'amuse the greatest minds:
As when we for the Pretorship did strive,
Then both were held in hope that so deceived
We others harms might study to contriue,
Through emulation and disdain conceived.
Thus subtle Caesar by such sleights has toyld
To sow dissension, that we both may pause
Of private wrongs; and by such means imbroil'd,
Still courting him, neglect the common cause.
But naught from others must our thoughts estrange,
That must in time the tyrants course restrain:
Let other men lament, we must revenge,
I scorn to bear a sword and to complain.

Brut. Though Caesar (now) I must conspire thy fall,
My heart toward thee, yet never harbor'd hate:
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus must redeem the state,
Of this my course what ever others judge,
Here I protest it is for good designed;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For reason, and not fury moves my mind.
Nor is it ambition that inflames my breast,
With a prodigious appetite to reign,
That when I have made Caesar Plutoes guest,
I in his rowme a monarch may remain.
No, if that glory did my fancies charm,
To which blind-folded tyrants do aspire;
I needed not to do, nor suffer harm,
But with less pain might compass my desire.
For if I would but temporize a space,
Till Time, or Death diminish Caesar's might.
He thinks that I deserve t'enioy his place,
And I could make my day succeed his night.
Yet do I not endeere my self so much,
That I Will seek honor by my countries shame,
But O, I would (my zeal to it is such)
To save it from reproach seem worthy of blame.
Yea so, that I may free with honored wounds,
My soil than is my soul more dear to me:
I care not strait to be barred from the bounds,
That at so dear a rate I would set free.

Cass. What man does breath of Mars his martial race,
But will with Brutus sacrifice his blood,
And chargde with arms ere tyranie take place,
Dare venture all things for his countries good?
Can any judgment be deceived so far,
But that it else most clearly may behold,
How that this change Rome greatness strait will mar,
And raze the trophies that she reared of old.
Of old in Rome all those that once had worn
The peace-importing gown, or warrelike shield,
Of dignities as capable being borne,
Durst aim at all that liberty could yield.
Those in affairs to deal that would set forth,
Were not discouraged by their birth, though base,
And poverty could not hold back true worth,
From having honor both by war and peace.
Then emulation violently driu'd
All gallant minds t'attempt great actions still;
That in the love of venue riualls lived,
Whilst Glory in their bosoms balm did still.
Fabricius first was from the plow aduauncde,
The rudder of the commonwealth to hold;
Yet by no means his private wealth enhauncde,
As rich in virtue still, as poor in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame
Forth from the vulgar dross his race removed,
And lo, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now has proved.
Each abject mind disdaind to be obscure,
When still preferrement followd lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers past procure,
Fame to himself, and honor to his heirs.
But since that state by Caesar is oreturn'd,
Whilst all our lives depend upon ones lips;
Of breasts that once with love of glory burned,
From soaring thoughts this course the feathers clips.
Advancement now attends not on desert,
But on the opinion of a flattred mind;
That to th'applauding hireling does impart,
High honors that true worth can hardly find.
To these all tyrants most addicted prove,
Whom without reason they have raisde too hie,
As thinking those that stand but by their love,
To entertain the same all means must try.
Where they whose virtue reapes a due reward,
Not building only on th'aduauncers grace,
Do by deserts not gain so great regard,
Whilst they maintain, as they obtain their place.
And if a worthy man to work great things,
Winged with th'vsurpers favors raise his flight.
The highest course to him most harm still brings,
That till he fall, can not have leave to light.
Those that by force would have the affection moved,
When willingly men hold such gallants dear.
They rage that any should be freely loved,
Whose virtue makes their vice more vile appear.
The man that now to be preferrd aspires,
Must with effronted flatteries servile form,
Still soothing Caesar, seal all his desires,
And in some shadow lurk t'auoyde a storm,
A number else of that proud rebels foes,
Grieved to behold the occasion of their grief.
Strive in obscurity t'entombe their woes,
So waiting, and not working for relief.
But we whose lofty minds disdain to lowre,
As those that seek but their own safety thus;
When shall we spend an indignations power,
That's worthy of true Romans, and of us;
Since no indignity resolved t'indure,
I see our minds do simpathize in this,
Should we by suffering seek to live secure,
Whose action must amend what is amiss?
No, no such abject thought must stain our breast,
To cure calamity but by discourse,
Whilst but like beasts, affecting food and rest,
Where men by reason should direct their course.
Like those of other parts secure from strife,
If Caesar had bin borne, or chusde our Prince,
Then those that durst attempt to take his life,
The world of treason justly might convince.
For still the states that flourish for the time,
By subjects should b'inuiolable thought;
And those no doubt commit a monstrous crime,
That lawful sovereignty profane in ought.
And we must think (though now being brought to bow,
The Senate king, a subject Caesar is,
The Authority that violating now,
The world must damn as having done amiss.
We will (dear Cassius) for our countries sake,
Our selves expose to danger, or to death;
And let us now advise what course to take,
Whilst naught bur the air can bear away our breath.

Cass. I think this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bound the common shame;
In Caesar's body we must sheathe our swords,
And by his death our liberty reclame.
But since his fortune did confound them all,
That in the fields to match him did begin;
Whilst he by thousands made their bands to fall,
With hoarie legions always used to win.
As Pompeys, Scipioes, and Petreius ghosts,
In lightlesse shades may by experience tell,
That after th'ouerthrow of their numbrous hosts,
All famous (though infortunately) fell,
And since provided for the Parthian wrarre,
His army in arms attends on his decree,
Where we sequestered from such forces far,
Would, if suspected, strait prevented be;
With some few friends, whom all things now t'assay,
A love to us, or to their country binds,
We to his wrack must walk another way,
Whilst ere our tongues, our hands do tell our minds.
Now when most high, and therefore hated most,
Th'assembled Senate seeks to make him king;
We must go give the blow before we boast,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.

Brut. In all this course I only one thing blame,
That we should steal, what we may justly take,
By clothing honor with a cloak of shame,
Which may our cause (though good) more odious make.
O, I could wish, with honorable wounds
T'affront Romes enemy in the battles dust;
No sweeter music than the Trumpets sounds,
When Right and Valor keep a consort just.
Then free if quick, else dead for naught being feared,
I always once contented might remain;
What tomb t'a man more glorious can be reared,
Than mountains made of them that he has slain?
But how are my transported thoughts grown such,
That they disdain a measure now t'admit?
As bent not what to do, but to do much,
I on the throne of Glory strived to sit.
No, to the state me from my self I give,
Free from particular respects, t'expose
My life and all for it, and whilst I live,
So that it gain, I care not what I lose.
I Will never rest till he for ever rest,
That gives my country such a cause of grief;
And that to effect no form I will detest,
Nor for my fame endanger Romes relief.
But (worthy Cassius) ere we further do,
Let us the minds of our familiars feel,
Of which I hope to have assistance too,
Who will not hazard for his countries weal.

Cass. Now whilst my soul rests ravished in a trance,
I think I see great Rome her courage raise,
Bent to beat the air with songs, the earth with a dance,
And crown thy virtues with deserved praise.

ACT. III. SCENE II.
Marcus Brutus, Portia. MY dearest half, my comfort, my delight,
That only seru'st to sweeten all my sowres,
Thou in my bosom used t'vncharge thy spright,
And in my presence sparde afflictions powers.
Still when domestike broiles disturbde thy rest,
Whilst by thy self thou labord for relief,
Thou with calm words disguisde a stormy breast,
Lest I had bin infected with thy grief:
For such of me was thy respective care,
No cause of miscontentment was made known,
But with affections colors painted fair,
All that might make me glad, was gladly shown.
What makes thee then thy courage thus to lose,
That thou can look so sad, and in my sight?
Lend me (dear love) a portion of thy woes,
A burden being divided does grow light.
I see the Roses fading in thy face,
The Lillies languish, Violets take their place.
Port. Thou have (dear Lord) prevented my design,
Which was to ask of thee, what makes me pale;
It Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe shine?
No, with the cause of force th'effed must fail.
The mirror but gives back as it receives,
A just resemblance of th'obiected form:
And such impression as th'engrauer leaves,
The wax retains still to the stamp conform.
O I Am the mirror that reflects thy mind,
According to the influence of thine eyes,
I take the state in which thy state I find,
Such is my color as thy countnance dies.
Then how can I rejoice whilst thou art sad,
Whose breast of all thy crosses is the scroule?
I am still as thou art, if grieved, or glad,
Thy bodies shadow, th'essence of thy soul.
On that great planet that diuides the years,
As the increase of the inferior fields depends;
And as it does euanish, or appears,
In the earths cold bosom life begins, or ends:
Sun of my soul, so I subsist by thee,
Whose course rests to thy secret motions thrall,
For when thou art from cloudie fortunes free,
I rise in joys, but if thou faint, I fall.

Bru. This countnance with my custom but accords,
That as you know yet never from my birth,
Light gestures used joined with lascivious words,
Nor yet ridiculous fashions that move mirth.
My melancholious nature feeds on cares,
Whilst smotherd sorrow by a habit smokes,
A thoughtfull breast that's burdend with affairs,
Does make a silent mouth, and speaking looks.
As for my palenesse it imports but good,
Th'abasing of the body mounts the mind:
Where fatness com'd from food, but serves for food,
In fattest bodies leanest sprites we find.
Ah, since I saw th'abhorr'd Thessalian bounds
All drenched with blood of Senators and kings:
(As if my soul yet smarted in their wounds,)
A secret sorrow oftentimes me stings.
But since thy famous father with strange blows,
In the most hideous form affronted death,
To him my mind a sad remembrance owes,
Which sorrow shall exact still whilst I breath.
Yet am I grieved to have given thee cause of grief,
That thought some new mis-hap did me dismay;
To such old soars it is worst to give relief,
But time in end may wear my woes away.

Por. Why should thou so from me thy thoghts conceal?
From thine own soul that in thy bosom sleeps,
To whom, though shown, thou do them not reveal,
But in thy self more inwardly them keepst?
And thou can hardly hide thy self from me,
That straight in thee each alteration spy,
I can comment on all that comes from thee,
True love still looks with a suspicious eye.
Rests not within our bosom every thought,
Tuned by a simpathy of mutual love?
Thou marrst the music if thou change in ought,
Which straight by my distemperature I prove.
Soul of my soul, unfold what is amiss,
My mind some great disaster does divine,
And even excuse my couriousnesse in this,
Since it concerns thy state, and therefore mine.

Brut. I wonder that thou do thy frailty show,
All women are by nature curious still;
And yet till now thou never craved to know,
More then I pleased t'impart of my free will.
Naught save the wife a man within the walls,
Nor naught save him without fits her to embrace:
And it is unseemly though it sometime falls,
When any sex usurps another place.
Dear, their wounted course thy cares inure;
I may have matters that import the state,
Whose opning up might my disgrace procure,
Whose weight would for thy weakness be too great.

Port. I was not (Brutus) matched with thee, to be
A partner only of thy boorde and bed,
Each servile whore in those might equal me,
That did her self to naught but pleasure wed;
No, Portia spousde thee with a mind to abide
Thy fellow in all fortunes, good, or ill.
With chains of mutual love together tide,
As those that have two breasts, one heart, two souls, one will.
With sacred bands whom holy Hymen binds,
They tweene them should communicate all things;
Yea both the bodies labors, and the minds,
Whence either pleasure or displeasure springs.
If thus thou seek thy sorrows to conceal
Through a disdain, or a mistrust of me;
Then to the world what way can I reveal,
How great a matter I would do for thee.
And though our sex too talkatiue be deemed,
As those whose tongues import our greatest powers,
For secrets still bad treasurers esteemed
Of others greedy, prodigal of ours;
Good education may reform defects,
And I this vantage have t'a virtuous life,
Which other minds do want, and mine respects:
I Am Catoes daughter, and I Am Brutus wife;
Yet would I not repose my trust in ought,
Still thinking that thy cross was great to bear,
Till that my courage was t'a trial brought,
Which suffering for thy cause can nothing fear.
For first t'experience how I could comport,
With stern afflictions spirit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would seek t'assault thee in this sort,
To whom my soul a duteous reverence owes.
Lo, here a wound, which makes me not to smart,
Though by my self being made, to make me known,
Since thy distress strikes deeper in my heart,
Thy grief (life's joy) makes me neglect mine own.

Brut. Thou must (dear love) that which thou sought receive,
Thy heart so high a sail t'a tempest bears,
That thy great courage does deserve to have
Our enterprise entrusted to thine ears.
Thy magnanimity preuailes so far,
That it my resolution must control:
And of my bosom does the depths vnbarre,
To lodge thee in the center of my soul.
Thou see in what a state the state now stands,
Of whose strong pillars Caesar spoiled the best:
Whilst by his own preventing others hands,
Our famous father fell amongst the rest.
That insolent usurper does presume
To re-erect detested Tarquines throne,
Thus the worlds mistress all-commanding Rome,
Must entertain no minion now but one.
The Old blood of Mars that marks to what he tends,
Swells with disdain, their countries scorn to see,
And I Am one of the number that intends
By his death, or mine own, to be made free.

Port. And without me can thou resolve so soon
T'assay the dangers of a doubtful strife?
As if dispair'd and always to b'vndone,
Being tired of me, yea tired of thy life.
Yet since thou thus thy rash design has shown,
Leave Portias portion, venture not her part:
Endanger naught but that which is thine own,
Go where thou like, I will hold still thy heart.
But lest by holding of thy best part back,
That the other perish t'aggrauate my groans,
That would be so thonght guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy treasure to the Seaes at once.
Like the Asian Monarks wife that with short hairs,
(Sad signs of bondage) past still where he past,
To wear away, or bear away thy cares,
I Will follow thee, and of thy fortune taste.
These hands that were with my own blood imbrued,
To strike another may more strength afford:
At least when thou by the enemy art pursu'de,
I Will set my self betwixt thee and his sword.
But if too great a privilege I claim,
Whose actions all should be disposde by thee:
Ah, pardon me (dear Brutus,) do but blame
These my excessive sorrows, and not me.

Brut. Thou ask'st what thou should give, forgive dear mate,
This ventrous course of mine, which must have place,
Though it make fortune tyrant of our state,
Whose fickle footsteps virtue grieves to trace.
And wonder not, though this toward thee I prove,
Since private passions now all power have left;
For I regard not glory, profit, love,
Nor no respect that does import me most:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may perform the work that I intend,
Let me be called unkind unto my wife:
Yea worst of all, ingrate unto my friend:
But as th'instinct of nature makes us know,
There are degrees of duty to be past:
Of which the first we to th'immortalls owe,
The next to our Country, and to our friends the last.
Proud tyrants from his native bounds to drive,
Did the author of my race with ardent zeal,
Make those to die whom he had made to live,
And spoild himself to advance the commonweal?
To raise the state which Caesar now ore-throwes,
That bred so many brave men whilst it stood,
He with the Tyrant interchanging blows,
Most gloriously did offer up his blood.
And did that man t'oppresse the common fo,
Then damn his sons to death? and with dry eyes?
And is his successor degenerd so,
That he in abject bondage basely lies?
No, his posterity his name not stains,
That t'imitate his steps does yet draw near;
Yet of his spirit in us some spark remains,
That more then life our liberty hold dear.

Port. Then prosecute thy course, for I protest,
Though with some grief, my soul the same approues:
This resolution does become thy breast,
Where in the sphere of honor virtue moves.
And do this interprise no more defer,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings;
I to my life thy saftie do prefer,
But hold thy honor dear above all things.
It would but let the world my weakness see,
If I sought my delights, not thy desires:
Though it give grief, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy fame requires.
Though nature, sex, and education breed
No power in me, that is with my purpose even;
He lend assistance to th'intended deed,
If vows and prayers may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancy finds,
Save the success naught can defray my fear:
Ah, Fortune always frowns on worthy minds,
As hating all that trust in ought save her.
Yet I despair not but thou may prevail,
And by this course to appease my present groans,
I this advantage have which cannot fail,
I Will be a freemans wife, or else be nones.
For if all prosper not as we pretend,
And that the heavens Romes bondage do decree,
Straight with thy liberty my life shall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from thee.
My father has me taught what way to die,
By which if I be barred t'encounter death,
Another means (though far more strange) I Will try,
For after Brutus none shall see me breathe.

Brut. Thou for my cause abandoned others else,
But now forsakst thy self t'adhere to me,
That of thy passions thus the power repells,
And with thy mind discords with mine t'agree.
I Will since by thee approou'd securely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life,
Heavens make my enterprise to prosper so,
That I prove worthy of so worthy a wife.
But ah! of all thy words those grieve me most,
That bost me with th'abridgement of thy days;
What? though I in so good a cause were lost,
None flies the appointed fate that for him stays.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love,
And from so fair a prison break not forth,
Till first the fates have forcde thee to remove.

Port. I fear the heavens have our confusion sworn,
Since this illage can with no good accord;
Thou and my father (ah) should have bin borne,
When Virtue was aduauncde, and Vice abhorrd.
Then ere the light of virtue was declinde,
Your worth had reueren^de bin, not thrown away,
Where now ye both have but in darkness shinde,
As stars by night, that had bin suns by day.

Brut. My treasure, strive to pacisie thy breast,
Lest sorrows but sinistrously presage,
That which thou would not wish, and hope the best,
Though virtue now must act on Fortunes stage.

Exeunt. Chorus.
THan liberty of earthly things
What more delights a generous breast?
That does receive,
And can conceive,
The matchless treasure that it brings;
It making men securely rest,
As all perceive,
Does none deceive,
Whilst weighed with doubts none balanced hings,
But feared for naught, does what seems best:
Then men are men when they are all their own,
Not but by others badges when made known.
Yet should we not mis-spending hours,
A freedom seek, as often it falls,
With an intent,
But to content
These vain delights and appetites of ours,
For then but being made greater thralles,
We might repent,
Our not being pent
In stricter bounds by others powers,
Whilst fear licentious thoughts appalles:
Of all the tyrants that the world affords,
Ones own affections are the fiercest Lords.
As Libertines those only live,
That from the bands of vice set free,
Vile thoughts cancel,
And seek t'excell
In all that does true glory give,
From which when as no tyrants be,
Them to repel,
And to compel
They deeds against their thoughts to strive,
They blestare in a high degree,
For such of same the scroules can hardly fill,
Whose wit is bounded by another will.
That Rome from Tarquins yoke redeemde,
Who first obtaind,
And then maintaind
Their liberty so dearly loved;
They from all things that odious seemd,
Though not constraind,
Themselves restraind,
And willingly all good approved,
Bent to be much, yet well esteemd;
And how could such but aim at some great end,
Whom liberty did lead, and glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
Though wanting kings, triumphed over kings,
And still aspird,
By Mars inspired
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending Fame their Eagles wings,
They all acquired,
That was required,
To make them rare for rarest things,
The world being witness of their Worth:
Thus those great minds that domineered over all.
Did make themselves first free, then others thrall:
But we that hold naught but their name,
From that to which they in times gone,
Did high ascend,
Must low descend,
And bound their glory with our shame.
Whilst on an abject tyrants throne
We basely attend,
And do intend,
Us for our fortune still to frame,
Not it for us, and all for one:
As liberty a courage does impart,
So bondage does disbend, else break the heart.
Yet O who knows but Rome to grace,
Another Brutus may arise,
That may effect
What we affect:
And Tarquins steps make Caesar trace,
Though seeming dangers to despise,
He does suspect,
What we exspect,
Which from his breast has banished peace,
Though fairly he his fears disguise:
Of tyrants th'iniurie revenge affords,
All fear but theirs, and they fear all men's swords.
ACT. IIII.
SCENE. I.
Decius Brutus Albinus, Marcus Brutus. Caius Cassius. Dear cousin, Cassius did
acquaint mine ears,
With a design that tossed my mind a space,
For when strange news a strangers breath first bears,
Then should not trust t'each rash report give place.
I would not then discover what I thought:
Lest he t'entrap my tongue a snare had framed,
Till I with thee t'a conference first was brought,
Whom he for patron of his purpose namde.
One should beware to whom his mind he leaves,
In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
Men make themselves most miserably slaves,
Of those to whom their secrets they unfold.
M. Bru. As Cassius told thee pitying Romes distress,
That to our disgrace in bondage does remain,
We straight intend what ever we profess,
With Caesar's blood to wash away this stain.
Though for this end a few sufficient are,
To whom their virtue courage does impart,
Yet were we loath to wrong thy worth so far,
As of such glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cause, and that thy name thee bind,
In this aduentrous band to be comprisde,
There needs no rhetoric to raise thy mind,
That t'execute which thou should have deuisde.

D. Bru. I thought no creature should my purpose know
But he whose intrest promisde mutual cares,
Of those to whom one would his secrets show,
No greater pledge of trust than to know theirs.
As when two meet being masked (though whiles near friends)
With them as strangers no respect takes place,
But when that friendship one of them pretends,
Then the other likewise does vncloude his face:
So as thou first, I Will now at last be bold
My breast with the same birth long great has gone,
Yet I t'another durst it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compass it alone.
But since this course, of which I long did pause,
On such great pillars now so strongly stands,
Whose countanaunce may give credit t'any cause,
It has my heart, and it shall have my hands.

C. Cass. To Our enterprise propitious signs are sent,
So that the gods would give us courage thus,
For all that ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themselves with us,
Let other men discourse of virtuous rites,
Ours but by th'action only should be shown,
Bare speculation is but for such sprites,
As want of power or courage keeps unknown,
In those that Virtue view when crowned with deeds,
Whose beauties through the glass of glory shinde,
Sh'a violent desire t'imbrace her breeds,
As th'adamant to th'yrne being to the mind.
What though a number now in darkness lies,
That are too weak for matters of such weight,
We that are eminent in all men's eyes,
Let us still hold the height of honor straight.

M. Br. Whilst that our faction might be strangthned thus
I labord much to purchase all their powers,
Whom hate toward Caesar, love to Rome, or t'vs,
Might move t'imbarke in those great hopes of ours.
By sickness being imprisoned in his bed,
Whilst I Ligarius spide whom pains did prick,
When I had said with words that anguish bred,
In what a time Ligarius art thou sick.
He answered straight as I had physic brought,
Or that he had imagined my design,
If worthy of thy self thou would do ought,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine.
Since Caesar causde him be accusde of late,
For taking Pompeys patt, yet at this hour,
He (though absolu'd) does still the tyrant hate,
For being endangerd by his lawless power.
Whilst it exasprates thus such great sprites spites,
Heaven of our course the progress does direct,
One inspiration all our souls incites,
That have aduisdly sworn this fact to effect.

D. Br. So I with Cicero did confer at length,
Who I perceive the present state detests,
And though that age deminisht have his strength,
In him a will t'auenge his country rests.

M. Br. That man whose love still toward his country shind,
Would willingly the commonwealth restore,
Then he I know, though he conceales his mind,
None Caesar more dislikes, nor likes us more.
Yet to his custody I Will not commit,
The secrets of our enterprise so soon,
Men may themselves be oftentimes not fit,
To do the things that they would wish were done,
He still being timorous, and by age grown worse,
Might chance to lay our honor in the dust,
All cowards must inconstant be of force,
With bold designs none fearful breasts can trust.
Then some of ours would hold their hands still pure,
That ere they be suspected, for a space
Amidst the tumult may remain secure,
And with the people mediate our peace.
But who than Tullius fitter for that turn,
Whose eloquence is used t'enchant their ears?
His banishment they in balcke gowns did mourn,
Whose age and merits each one reurence bears.

C. Cass. Those studious wits that have through dangers gone,
Would still be out, ere that they enter in;
Who must of many things, resolve of none,
And thinking of the end, cannot begin.
The mind that looks no further than the eye,
And more to Nature trusts, than unto Art,
Such doubtful fortunes fittest is to try,
A furious actor for a desprate part.
We have enough, and of the best degree,
Whose hands are to their hearts, their hearts t'vs true,
And if that we seek more, I fear we be
TO act close too many, if disclosde, too few.
Let us advise with an industrious care,
Now ere the tyrant intercept our minds;
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where,
That we should trust our treasure to the winds.
And since our fortunes in the balance hing,
Let every point be circumspectly weight'd,
A circumstance, or an indifferent thing,
May whiles mar all for not being well conueigh'd.

M. Br. As for the time, none could be wished more fit,
Than this that's present to perform our vow,
Since all the people must allow of it,
Moved by a recent miscontentment now.
When represented in his triumph past,
Great Catoes mangled entrails made them weep,
And desprate Scipio whilst he leaped at last,
To seek a Sanctuary amidst the depth.
Then all those great men that in several parts,
Bent for Romes freedom Caesar did overthrow,
Did by their pictures pierce the peoples hearts,
And made a pitteous (though a pompous) show.
So that they did conceive a just disdain,
To be vpbraided in so strange a sort,
Whilst he that only by their loss did gain
Of their calamity but made a sport.
But yet his purpose grieves them most of all,
Since that he strives to be proclaimd a King,
And not contents himself to make us thrall,
But to perpetual bondage would us bring.
Thus whilst the people are with him displeasde,
We best may do that which to our part belongs;
For after this they may be best appeased,
If whilst their wrath does last we venge their wrongs.
And since we naught intend but what is right,
Whilst from our country we remove disgrace:
Let all be acted in the Senates sight,
A common cause, and in a common place.
Let those whose guilty thoughts do damn their deeds
In corners like Mineruaes birds abide:
That which to our country good, t'vs glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be tryde.
The Senators by our ensample moved,
Pleased with this action that imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyrranie removed,
May at the least authorize what we do.
So all the Senators were said of old,
To have king Romulus amongst them torn:
That than to tyrranize was grown to bold,
And from his first humanity had worn.

D. Brut. Yea, what though Caesar were immortal made
As Romulus, whose deity him reuiues?
It Is easier as a God to adore him dead,
Then as a king to obey him whilst he lives.

C. Cass. That place indeed, most for our glory makes,
A Theater worthy of so great an act*
Where in their sight from whom most power he takes,
We of the tyrant vengeance may exact.
But I must recommend unto your mind,
A course (though strict) of which we must allow,
Least it ore-throw all that we have designed,
Being past recovery, if neglected now,
There is Antonius Caesar's greatest friend,
A man whose nature tyrranie affects,
Whom all the soldiers do delight to attend,
As one that naught but to command respects.
I fear that he when we have Caesar slain,
To the other faction furnish still a head:
So when we end, we must begin again,
Against one living worse then he that is dead.
And in my judgment, I would think it best,
When sacrifiz'd the proud usurper lies,
That that seditious enemy of rest,
Should fall with him with whom he first did rise,
Thus of our liberty we now may lay,
A solid ground that can be shak'd by none:
Those of their purpose that a part delay
Two labors have, that might have had but one.

M. Brut. I cannot Cassius condescend to kill
(Thus from the path of Justice to decline)
One faultlesse yet, lest after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltiness by mine.
No, no, that neither honest were, nor just,
Which rigorous form would but the world affright:
Men by this mean our meaning might mistrust,
And for a little wrong damn all that is right;
If we but only kill the common foe,
Our zeal to our country must acquire due praise:
But if like Tyrants tyrannizing so,
We will be thought that which we raze to raise.
And where we but intend t'aduance the state,
Though by endangering what we hold most dear;
If slaying him as armed e by private hate,
We to the world still partial will appear.
Ah, ah, we must but too much murder see,
That without doing evil cannot do good:
And would the gods that Rome could be made free,
Without th'effusion of one drope of blood.
Then their is hope that Anthony in end,
When first our virtue does direct the way:
Will leagued with us the liberty defend,
And being brought back will blush for going astray.

C. Cass. Well Brutus, I protest against my will,
From this black clowd, what ever tempest fall,
That mercy but most cruelly does kill.
Which thus saues one, that once may plague us all.

D. Brut. When Caesar with the Senators sits down,
In this your judgments generally accord;
That for affecting wrongfully the crown,
He lawfully may perish by the sword.
No greater harm to our purpose can be brought,
Then by protracting of the appointed time,
Least that which acted would b'a virtue thought,
Be (if prevented) consterd as a crime.
Can one thing long in many minds be pent?
No, purposes would never be delaid
That are interpreted but by the event,
If prospering reason, treason if betrayed.
There may amongst our selves some man remain,
Whom if afraid, his pardon to procure,
Or if being greedy for the hope of gain,
Time to disclose his consorts may allure.
Then ruin for our recompense we reap,
If ought our course by being abortiue mar,
For if discovered once, we cannot escape,
As Tyrants ears hear much, their hands reach far.

C. Cass. The breast in which so deep a secret dwelles,
Would not be long chargde with so weighty cares,
For I conjecture by appearance else,
Mo privy are to our minds then we to theirs:
Even but of late one Casca came to see,
That curious was to have our purpose known,
And said to him that which thou bidst from me,
To me by Brutus has at length bin showen.
Then by some things that he had learned before,
He of our course deep in discourse did fall,
Till Casca thinking that he had known more,
Scarce kept his tongue from staggering out with all.
Then Laena to us once came in like sort,
And wished that our design might prosper well;
Yet us to haste did earnestly exhort,
Since others told what we refusde to tell:
Whilst strangers rest familiar with our mind,
And ere to our knowledge thus to our counsel rise,
Make forward fast, or we will come behind.
F^^^e winged with breath most violently flies.

M. Brut. Their words but from uncertainties burst forth,
For whilst considering of their bondage thus:
Of Caesar's tyrranie, and of our worth,
They think this should be done, and done by us:
Such coniurations to confirm of old,
Some drinking others bloods; swore on their swords,
And cursing those that did their course unfold,
Used imprecations, execrable words.
And yet then this though voluntarily vowed,
Free from all bonds, save that which virtue binds,
More constantly no course was still allowed.
Till now that the end must manifest our minds.
And since so many frankly keep their faith,
Still what they first designed t'accomplish bent:
No doubt in spite of fickle fortunes wrath,
But the success shall yield our souls content.
Might some few Thebans from the Spartans pride,
By diverse tyrants deaths redeem their town?
And one Athenian that his virtue tryde,
By thirty Tyrants ruins win renown?
And to the Greeks are we inferior grown,
That where they have so many tyrants spoild,
There cannot one be by us all orethrowne,
Whose state yet brangling may be soon imbroyld?
O I Am resolved, and with my thoughts decree,
What ever fortune either sweet or sour,
I shall my soil from tyranny set free,
Or then my self free from the tyrants power.

D. Br. By Lepidus invited this last night,
Whilst Caesar went to suppe, and I with him,
Of all deaths shapes to talk we took delight,
So at the table to beguile the time.
And whilst our judgments all about were tried,
Straight Caesar (as transported) to the rest
With a most sudden exclamation cride,
O, of all deaths unlooked for death is best.
For from our selves it steals our selves so fast,
That even the mind no fearful form can see,
Then is the pain ere apprehended past,
All sowres ere tasted would disgested be.
The threatened destiny thus he diuinde,
It would appear divinely being inspirde,
For now I hope that he shall shortly find,
That form of death which he himself desirde.

C. Cass. Whilst of our band the fury flames most hot,
And that their will t'atchiue this work is such,
Lest Caesar's absence disappoint the plot,
Which would of some abate the courage much,
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addressd your way,
Him by some means to further forward soon,
Lest by some sudden chance allured to stay.

D. Br. There where the Senate minds this day to sit,
Stand all prepared t'approach where danger dwells,
And for the sacrifice when all is fit,
I Will bring an offering consecrated else.

Exeunt ACT. IIII. SCENE II.
Caesar, Calphurnia, Decius Brutus. LOng-lookt for time that should the glory
yield,
Which I through Neptunes trustlesse reign have sought,
And through the dust of many a bloody field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy coming now those lowering shadows cleares,
That did th'horizon of my hopes ore-cast,
This day defrayes the toils of many years,
And brings the haru'st of all my labors past.
The Senators a messenger have sent,
Most earnestly entreating me to come,
And hear my self discernd by their consent,
To wear a crown over all excepting Rome.
Thus they devise conditions at this hour,
For him, of whom Mars has made them the prey;
As subjects limite could their sovereigns power,
That must have mind of naught but to obey.
But having pacifide those present things,
I mind to lead my valorous legions forth,
To th'orientall realms, adoring kings
That can exhibit honors due to worth.
Than swim my thoughts in The Ocean of delight,
Whilst on the pillow of soft praise reposde,
Those eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
That envy opened, admiration closde.
Call. Ah, though your fancies great contentment find,
Whilst thus the world your virtue does advance,
Yet a prepostrous terror stings my mind,
And boasts me with I know not what mischance,
My wavering hopes oreballanc'd are with fears,
That to my soul sinistrous signs impart,
And ominous rumors so assault mine ears,
That they almost make breaches in my heart.

Caesar. What, do debattelld Pompeys followers strive
To recollect their ruins from the dust?
Dare they that only by my tollerance live,
More to their strength than to my favor trust?
Or do thou fear his sons dejected state,
That steals infamous flying through those floods,
Which his great father, Admiral of late,
Did plant with ships til all their waves seemd woods?
Then makes his brothers death his courage more,
Since by them straited in a bloody strife,
I, that in all the battles given before,
Did fight for victory, then fought for life.
Or whilst to march toward Parthia I prepare,
Does a suspicion thus afflict thy sprite,
For Crassus fortune feared that perished there,
Th'opprobrious prey of the Barbarians spite?
To those same bands that Cassius thence brought back,
A place amongst my legions I Will allow,
Whose foes shall find whilst they avenge the old wrack
Though the same sheep, another shepherd now.
Do not imagine matters to bemone,
For whilst there stands a world, can Caesar fall?
Though thousand thousands were coniurd in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.

Call. No, none of those my mind does miscontent,
That vndisguisde still like themselves remain,
Unlooked for harms are hardest to prevent,
There is no guard against concealde disdain,
But in whom further can your trust repose,
Whom danger now over all, by all attends,
Where private men but only fear their foes,
Often kings have greatest cause to fear their friends,
For since being trusted fittest to betray,
Those unto whom ones favor force affords,
May for his life the worst ambushments lay,
Whilst falsest hearts are hid with fairest words.
And some report (though privately) yet plain,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your destruction do pretend t'obtaine,
That which you keep by making all men bow.

Caesar. No corpulent sanguinians make me fear,
That with more pain their beards than th'enimies strike
And do themselves like th'epicurians bear,
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike.
Their hearts do always in their mouths remain,
As streams, whose murmuring shows the course not deep
Then still they love to sport, though gross and plain,
And never dream of ought but when they sleep.
But those high sprites that hold their bodies down,
Whose visage lean their restless thoughts records,
Whilst they their cares depth in their bosoms drown,
Their silence fears me more than the others words.
Thus Cassius now and Brutus seem to hold
Some great thing in their mind, whose fire whiles smoks
What Brutus would, he vehemently would,
Think what they like, I like not their pale looks.
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom of virtue the image seem to shine,
Can those that have received their lives from me,
Prove so ingrate again as to take mine?
Dare Cassius me pursue new hopes to have,
At the Helespont that fortune feared to try,
And like a dastard did his Galleys leave,
In all (save courage) though more strong than I?
Shall I suspect that Brutus seeks my blood,
Whose safety still I tendered with such care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me seclude,
Is only worthy to be Caesar's heir?

Call. The corners of the heart are hard to know,
Though of those two the world the best does deem,
Yet do not trust too much th'externall show,
For men may differ much from what they seem.
None often more fierce than those that look most mild,
Impiety sometime appears devout,
And that the world the more may be beguilde,
Whiles Vice can clothe it self with Virtues cote.
Though that they have long since laid hatred down,
By benefits bestowed, you might attend,
There Is no respect can counterpoise a crown,
Ambition has no bounds, nor greed no end.
Through vindicatiue hate, and emulous pride,
Since some your person, some your place pursue,
All threatened dangers to prevent provide,
Being wise in time, lest out of time you rue.

Caes. No armor is that can hold treason out.


Call. T'affright your foes with bands be backed about.


Caes. So dastard tyrants strive themselves to bear.


Call. It better is to give, than to take fear.


Caes. No stronger guard than is the peoples love.


Calp. But naught in the earth does more inconstant prove.


Caes. Guardes showing fear t'inuade me men might tempt.


Call. Guardes would put them from hope, you from contempt.


Caes. My breast from terror has bin always clear.


Call. When one fears least, often danger lurkes most near.


Caes. It Is better once to die, than still fear death.


Call. But worst of all to fall by the enemies wrath.


Caes. I Will not dis-taste my present pleasures so,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much time for woe,
Whilst crosses come contentment to overcome.
By joys in time we must embrace relief,
That when they end, we in some measure may,
By their remembrance mitigate the grief,
Which still attends all those on the earth that stay.
I think the Senate is assembled now,
And for my coming does begin to gaze,
I Will go condignely once t'adorne my brow,
And feast mine ears by drinking in due praise.

Call. Stay, stay (dear Lord) retire thy steps again,
And spare one day to prorogate whole years,
Let not this ominous day begin thy reign,
That fatal and unfortunate appears.
An Astrologian through the world renownde,
Thy horoscopes just calculation lays,
And does affirm as he by signs has found,
That th'Ides of March do boast to bound thy days.
Walk not this days where harms may be received,
Since by no great necessity being forede,
For though his judgment may be far deceived,
In things that touch thy life, suspect the worst.

Caes. Whilst I reformed the Calender by fits,
That long disordred the order of the year;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
That of the stars the mysteries make clear.
Those pregnant sprites that walk betwixt the poles,
And lodge at all the zodiackes several signs,
Do read strange wonders wrapped in th'azure scroules,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By speculation of superior powers,
Some Natures secrets curious are to know,
As how celestial bodies rule over ours,
And what their influence effects below.
Yea they sometime may strange conjectures make,
Of those whose parts they by their birth do prove,
Since naturally all inclination take,
From Planets then predominant above.
And yet no certainty can so be had,
Some virtuously against their stars have strived,
As Socrates that grew, (though borne but bad,)
The most accomplished man that ever lived.
But of the hour ordained to close our lights,
No earth-clogd soul can to the knowledge come;
For O the destinies far from our sights,
In clouds of darkness have inuolu'd our doom.
And some but only guess at great men's falls,
By bearded comets, and prodigious stars,
Whose sight-distracting shapes the world appalles,
As still denouncing terror, death, or wars.
The time uncertain is of certain death,
And that fantastike man far past his bounds,
He is too bold that with ambiguous breath,
Not speaks of things to come, whose deeps none sounds

Call. But this all day did my repose extort,
And from my breast of cares a tribute clam'd,
Now vilipend not that which I Will report,
Though but a dream, and by a woman dreamd.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breast,
Then whilst we both as those whom Morpheus weds,
Lay softly buried with a pleasant rest,
I in thy bosom, thou within the beds.
Then from my soul strange terrors did withdraw
Th'exspected peace by apprehended harms;
For I imagined, no, no doubt I saw,
And did embrace thee bloody in mine arms.
Thus whilst my soul by sorrows was surchargde,
Of which huge weight it yet some burden bears;
I big with grief two elements enlargde,
The Air with my sighs, the water with my tears.

Caesar. That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilst thou all seemd dissolved in grief at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted often by tragic groans.
The memory, but not the judgment makes
The Impression thus of passions in the brain,
For what the soul most suffers when it wakes,
With it asleep it does turmoyld remain.
From superstitious fears this care proceeds,
Which still would watch over that which thou do love,
And in thy mind melancholy thus breeds,
Which does those strange imaginations move.

Call. Ah, in so light account leave off to hold
Those fatal warnings that the heavens have made,
Which by all means most manifest unfold,
What dangers huge do hing above thy head.
He with the sacred garlands that divines,
By th'entrailes of the consecrated beast,
Sees in the sacrifice sinistrous signs,
And I entreat thee do not hence make haste.

Caes. When I in Spain against young Pompey went,
Thus the diuiner threatened me before,
Yet did I prosecute my first intent,
Which with new laurells did my brows decore.

Call. And yet you hardly there as whiles I hear,
From dangers (far engagde) redeemd your life,
But now more monstrous tokens do appear,
And I suspect far worse than open strife.

Caes. Lest I too much seem wedded to my will,
As one that others counsels scorns t'alow,
With jealous eyes I Will search about me still,
And even mistrust my self to trust thee now.
Yet if I stay the Senators deceived,
May my beginning straight begin to hate,
So might I perish seeking to be saved,
By flying, many fall upon their fate.
But here one comes that can resolve me much,
With whom I use t'aduise affairs of weight:
Whence comst thou Decius, that thy haste is such?
Is ought occurred that craves our knowledge straight?

Decius. I come to tell you how the Senate stays,
Till your exspected presence bless their sight,
And the conclusion yet of all delays,
Till that your approbation make it right.
T'accomplish your contentment they intend,
And all their thoughts seem at one object bent,
Save that they do amongst themselves contend,
Who you to please shall strangest ways invent.

Caes. Than that no treasure to my soul more dear,
Which straight t'enioy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arrests me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart.
From thee (dear friend) I never do conceal
The waightiest secrets that concern me most:
And at this time I likewise will reveal,
How heavens by signs me with destruction bost:
To superstition though not being inclinde,
My wife by dreams does now presage my fall:
It a Sooth-sayer likewise has diuin'd,
The sacrifice prodigious seems t'vs all;
So that till this disastrous day be gone,
All company I purpose to disuse.
And to the Senators I Will send some one
To paint my absence with a fair excuse.

D. Brut. Do not repose on superstitious signs,
You to suspect the people thus to bring,
Whilst soueraigne-like you limit their designs,
Seem not a tyrant seeking to be king.
How can we satisfy the worlds conceit,
Whose tongues still in all ears your praise proclames?
O! shall we bid them leave to deal in state,
Till that Calphurnia first have better dreams?
If that this day you private would remain,
The Senate to dissolve your self must go,
And then incontinent come back again,
When you have shown toward it some reverence so.

Caes. With thy advise (as powrefull) I agree,
The Senators shall have no cause to grudge:
A little space, all part apart from me,
And i will be shortly ready to dislodge.
Caesar alone. WHence come this huge and admirable change,
That in my breast has uncouth thoghts infused?
Does the earth then erst yield terrors now more strange,
Or but my mind less courage then it used?
What spiteful fate against my state contends,
That I must now t'vnlook'd for plagues give place,
By foes not moved, yet feared amongst my friends,
By war secure, endangered but by peace?
T'encounter me when strongest troops did come,
Then did my heart the highest hopes conceive:
I warred with many, many to overcome,
The greatest battles, greatest glory gave.
As the enemies number still my courage grew,
Often have I through the depths of dangers past,
Yet never did those boundless labors rue,
To have none greater first, none equal last.
When as the Gauls feared by their neighbors falls,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled,
And hid themselves with arms, their arms with walls,
Whilst I my troops t'inclose Alexia led:
Then though there swarmed forth from the bounds about,
Huge hosts to compass me, enflamed with wrath,
That the besieger being besieged about
Seemed drawn with danger in the nets of death.
Yet I that could not with the pride comport,
That those Barbarians by vain bosts bewrayd,
Did reassault th'assaulters in such sort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repayd,
Of those within the town t'asswage their toils,
Till being ore-com'd their coming was not known:
Who straight vpbrayded by the barbarous spoils,
Did yield themselves with the others as ore-throwne,
Then whilst with liquid legions tumid bosts,
The trident-bearer strived my spoils to bear:
Though threatened thrice amidst his humid hosts,
I always scorned t'acquaint my self with fear.
I used those Pirates that had me surpised,
Still as my servants thundering threatenings forth,
And gave them money more than they deuisde,
Grieved to be rated at too little worth.
Yet gathering ships, I signed not long the shore,
But traced their printles steps through th'vnpau'd way:
And taking them, as I had vowed before,
By naught but death their ransom would defray.
Then when without th'aduise of others minds,
Iventred through the hoarie waves by night,
Whilst in a little bark against great winds,
That even the Pilote looked not for the (...)
The roaring waves themselves seemed to divide,
That in their gravel I might choose a grave.
And in a crystal arch above me bide,
That I of me a tomb might worthy have.
Whilst dangers seemed to merit Caesar's death,
As Neptune raisde his head, raisde my heart;
And showing what I was with constant breath,
T'amazde Amiclas courage did impart,
Was I not once amidst large Nilus flot,
Whilst me to wound a wood of darts did fly,
Yet swim'd so careless of my enemies shot,
That in my hand I held some papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I whilst being compassed both by sea and land,
Did vndismaid look horror in the face,
As borne for naught but only to command.
But since a world of victories have filled,
With Trophies Temples, Theaters with my praise,
That bathed with balm from th'oyle of glory stilled,
With friends in peace I looked to spend my days.
The chambers music now affrights me more,
Then once the trumpets sound amids the field,
And gowns (though signs of peace) worse, then before
The pompous splendor of a flaming shield.
Those thoughts of late that had disdained to doubt,
Though I alone had marched amongst my foes,
Lo, whilst amongst my friends I Am backed about,
Do greater dangers now then th'eies disclose.
If ought t'assemble any number brings,
I insurrections fear from common wrath;
Yea, if two talk apart of private things,
Straight I suspect that they conspire my death.
When sudden rumors rise from vulgar smoke,
Whilst th'^^^^ motions roll my restless eyes;
I at each corner for ambushments look,
And start astonished least some tumult rise.
When rising Titans beams renew the earths toiles,
I still despair to re-enioy the night,
And when mine eyes th'all-couering darkness spoils,
I never look to enrich them with the light.
For when that light with darkness makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dream of rest,
What ougly Gorgons, what Chimeraes strange,
Do bost the little world within my breast?
The Appointed time to appease impetuous cares
Does double mine, that view most when being blind:
I apprehen'd huge horrors and dispaires,
Whilst the outward object not distract my mind.
What comfort of my conquests now remains?
Where is the peace pursude by many a strife?
Have I but taken pain t'abound in pains,
And sought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aspiring powers,
In promisde calmes to be most plagued by storms?
Lurk poisnous serpents under fairest flowers.
And hellish furies under heavenly forms?
It will not grieve my ghost below to go,
If circumuented in the wars I end,
As bold Marcellus by Romes greatest foe,
That gave his ashes honor as a friend.
Or like Epaminondas prosperous death,
O would to God I had amidst th'alarmes
Being chargde with recent spoils, bin spoiled of breath,
Whilst I toward Pluto might have marched in arms.
Yet t'end this life that naught but toils affords,
I Will pay to death the tribute that he owes,
Straight with my blood set some come die their swords,
My body shall be barred to embrace their blows.
But ah, how have the furies seaz'd my breast,
And poisoned thus my sprit with desperate rage:
That with their horrid serpents barred from rest,
Naught can imagined be my toiles t'asswage.
No, Atropos, yet spare my thread a space,
That ere I to the Stigian streams go down,
I may of honor have the highest place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a crown.
Whilst I would bend my ears t'applauding shoutes,
My thoughts divided are within my breast,
And my tossde soul does flote between two doubts,
Yet knows not on what ground to build her rest.
The Senators they have this day designde,
To show the world how they esteem my worth;
Yet do portentuous signs perturb my mind,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth;
The gods from me with indignation gone,
Have charactred in every thing my death,
And must both heaven and earth conspire in one,
To quench a little spark of still-tossde breath?
My saftie would that I should stay within,
Till this disastrous day give darkness place:
But honor hunts me forward to begin,
To reap the glory of my painful race:
And I Will advance in spite of threatened broils,
For though the fates effect that which we dream,
When death retires from forcing those frail spoils,
Though breathless, i will be breathed over all by fame.

Exit. Chorus.
WHat furie' is this that filles the breast,
With a prodigious rash desire,
Which banishing their souls from rest
Does make those live that high aspire,
Whilst it within their bosom boyles
As Salamanders in the fire,
Or like to serpents changing spoils
Their witherd beauties to renew:
Like Vipers with unnatural toiles,
Of such the thoughts themselves pursue,
That for all lines themselves do square,
Whilst like Camelions changing hue,
They only feed but on the air.
To pass ambition monstrous matters brings.
And (save contentment) can attain all things.
This active passion does disdain
To match with any vulgar mind,
As in base breasts where terrors reign,
To great a guest to be confinde;
It does but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a spacious field may find,
It self with honor to content,
Where reuerenc'd fame does lowdest sound:
Those at great things that t'aime are bent,
(Far lifted from this lumpish round)
Would in the sphere of glory move,
Whilst lofty thoughts which naught can bind,
All riualls live in virtues love:
On abject preyes as The Eagle never lights,
Ambition poisons but the greatest sprights.
And of this restles vultures brood,
If It grow not to too great a flame,
A little spark may whiles do good,
Which makes great minds affecting fame,
To suffer still all kind of pain:
There fortune at the bloody game,
Who hazard would for hope of gain.
Were not burned by a thrist of praise:
The learned lo, t'a higher strain,
Their wits by emulation raise,
As those that hold applauses dear:
And what great mind at which men gaze,
It self can of ambition clear,
Which is being rated at the highest price,
A generous error, a heroicke vice.
But when this frenzy flaming bright
Does so the souls of some surprise,
That they can taste of no delight
But what from sovereignty does rise;
Then huge affliction it affords,
Such must themselves so to disguise,
Prove prodigal of courteous words,
Give much to some, and promise all,
Then servile seem, to be made Lords,
Yea first being made to many thrall,
Must pity impart if not support,
T'all those that crushed by fortune fall,
And grieve themselves to please each sort:
Are not those wretch'd that over a dangerous snare
Hing but by hopes, being balanced in the aier?
Then when they have the port attainde,
That was through Seas of dangers sought,
They (lo) at last but loss have gainde,
And by great trouble, trouble bought.
There minds are married still with fears,
T'engender many a jealous thought,
With searching eyes and watching ears,
To learn that which they grieve to know.
The breast that such a burden bears,
What huge afflictions toil t'orethrow:
Thus princes are as all perceive,
No more exalted than brought low,
Of many a Lord, to many a slave.
That idol greatness which the earth does adore,
Is conquered with great pain, and kept with more
He that to this imagined good,
Did through his countries entrails tend,
Neglecting friendship, duty, blood,
And all on which trust can depend,
Or by which love could be conceived,
Does find of what he did attend,
His exspectations far deceived;
For since suspecting secret snares,
His soul has still of rest bin reau'd.
Whilst squadrons of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breast extort depth groans:
Thus Caesar now of life despaires,
Whose hap his hope exceeded once,
And who can long well keep an evil won state?
Those perish must by some whom all men hate.
ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
Marcus Brutus, Chorus, Antonius, Caius Cassius, Marcus Tullius Cicero. A
Regenerous Romans so degenerd now,
That they from honor have estrangde their hands?
And used with burdens do not blush to bow,
Yea (though being broken) shake not off their bands.
This glorious work was worthy of your pain,
Whose best ye may by others dangers have,
But what enchaunts you thus that ye abstain,
That (which ye should have taken) to receive?
Where be those inundations of delight,
That should burst out through thoughts ore-flow'd with joy,
Whilst emulous virtue may your minds incite,
That which we conquered have, at least t'enioy?
Or quite conformd unto your former state,
Do still your minds of servitude allow,
As broken by adversity of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Lo, we that by the tyrants favor stood,
And grieved but at the yoke that you outrag'd,
Have our advancement, riches, rest, and blood,
All liberally for liberty engaged.
Chor. Thou like thy great progenitour in this,
Have glory to thy self, t'vs freedom brought,
Than liberty what greater treasure is?
Small with it much, without it much seems naught.
But pardon us (heroicke man) though we
T'a high perfection hardly can aspire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus be,
That which we cannot imitate, w'admire.
At this strange course with too much light made blind
We our opinions must suspend a space,
When any sudden chance dismayes the mind,
The judgment to the passion first gives place,

Ant. What wonder now though this most barbarous deed,
Have with amazement closde your judgment in,
Which O I fear shall great confusion breed,
When Caesar's toiles did end, Romes did begin.
The most suspicious minds had not believed,
That Romans reuerenc'd for their worth by us,
Would have presumde to kill, yea, or to have grieved,
A inviolable hallowd body thus.
Who would but once have dreamd of such despite?
What strange hostility in time of peace,
To slay, though not accusde, against all right,
A sacred man, and in a sacred placed

C Cass. If Caesar as a Citizen had liu'de,
And had by law decided every strife,
Then I would grant those treason had contrived,
That went without a law to take his life.
But to pervert the laws, subvert the state,
If all his trauells did directly tend,
Then I must say, we did no wrong of late,
Why should not tyrants make a tragic end?

Chor. Since destinies did Caesar's soul enlarge,
What course can we for his recovery take?
Ah, th'vnrelenting Charons restless barge
Stands to transport all over, but brings none back.
Of life's frail glass when broken, with vain groans
What earthly power the ruins can repair?
Or who can gather up when scatterd once,
Ones blood from the earth, or yet his breath from the air?
Let us of those that pass Obliuions flood,
B'obliuious still since hope of help is gone,
And spend our cares where cares may do most good,
Lest Rome wail many, where she wailes but one.

Ant. Still concord for the commonweal were best,
To reconcile divided thoughts again,
Then discord to great towns no greater pest,
Whose violence no reverence can restrain.
Yet oftentimes those wary wits have erred,
That would buy wealth and ease at any cost,
Let honesty to profit be preferred,
And t'a vile peace, war when it wounds us most.
But seeking peace what surety can we find?
Can faithless men give faith just fears to stay?
No sacred band impiety can bind,
That swears for trust, seeks trust but to betray.
What helped it Caesar that we all had sworn,
His body still from dangers to redeem,
Those that are once perjured hold oaths in scorn,
All are most frank of what they least esteem.

M. Br. None needs in states that are from tirants free,
Loathde execrations to confirm his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might despise all ill.
All odious oaths by those are only craved,
Whose suit from reason does a warrant want,
Whilst all deceivers feared to be deceau'd,
Seek of men thralld what none being free would grant
When Caesar had preuailde in Libia and Spain,
His fortune building on his countries wrack,
Of liberty a shadow to retain,
We gave him all that he was bent to take.
The Senate had reserved naught but a show,
Whose course to it by Caesar was imposde,
That lifted up by bringing others low,
Of offices and provinces disposde.
Then that our witherd hopes might never spring,
When bent to abide the Parthians wooden shower,
He for five years disposde of every thing,
Even in his absence leaving us no power.
O how some aggrauate our deed with hate,
That durst by violence his body strain,
Though consecrated by constraint of late,
Yea but reputed holy, yet profane,
And do forget how he (a wondrous case)
Did violate the tribune ship to our scorn,
Which our forefathers (free) in time of peace,
Aduisdly had inviolable sworn.
Did he not once appropriate (swollen with wrath)
The public treasure to his private use,
And to the sacred Tribune threatened death,
That did resist, grieved at so great a'abuse?
Tweene Romans and a tyrant what auailes
A covenant whilst right rests troad on thus?
Who can build further when the ground first fails?
Could we save him that sought to ruin us?

Cic. So absolutely good no man remains,
Whose natural weakness never him beguiles,
Even virtues die from vice may take some stains,
And worthy minds foul imperfections whiles.
As in fine fruits or weeds fat earth abounds,
Even as the laborers spend or spare their pain,
The greatest sprites disdaining vulgar bounds,
Of what they seek the highest height must gain.
They, that the crown of glory may b'enioyd,
As only borne to be in action still,
Had rather be (than idle) evil employed,
Great sprites must do great good, or then great ill.
The glorious Sun that golden rays do arm,
The treasure of the world that does most good,
Whilst on a time misgouernd did much harm,
Till th'ouerbold Coachman fell amidst a flood.
Then whilst he by the rules of reason lived,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caesar were atchiu'd,
Which all the world as wonders must relate.
But when of right he buried all respects,
As blind ambition had bewitched his mind,
What harm ensude by pitiful effects.
We at the first, he at the last did find.
Whilst like Narcissus with himself in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his sight,
And for a while uncertain joys to prove,
Would sauce with all our sorrows his delight,
How could such gallant virtuous men as those,
That of their countries weal are jealous still,
But stowtly to all storms their states expose,
So th'authour of their infamy to kill?
But since our freedom flows from Caesar's blood,
Let us embrace that which too long we lack,
Peace gives to Justice power, and it t'all good,
Where war breeds wrong, and wrong al kind of wrack.
This city has experienced with great pain,
Th'all-burdning troubles of intestine strife,
Which by her ruins registered remain,
Since first the Gracchi gave contention life.
When Silla once and Marius (mad through pride)
Seemd but to strive who most tyrannicke proved,
What memorable miseries were tried
From Romans minds can never be removed.
Then last by Caesar and his son in law,
What thousands ghosts to Pluto were dispatchd?
Ah that the world those hosts divided saw,
Which joined in one no world of worlds had matchd.
Yet with this wit that we have dearly bought,
Let us abhor th'apparance of such broiles,
Lest when we have our selves to ruin brought,
In end Barbarians bear away our spoils.

Chor. Rome to those great men hardly can afford,
A recompense according to their worth,
That by a tyrants ore-throw have restord,
The light of liberty that was put forth.
Yet by due praises with their merits even,
Let us illustrate their illustrous minds,
And to their charge let provinces be given;
Still virtue grows when it preferrement finds.

Anton. Those barbarous realms by whose respective will,
Of Caesar's conquests monuments are shown,
As if they held them highly honored still,
That warrd with Caesar though they were orethrowne.
Can this disgrace by their proud minds be borne,
Whilst we dishonor whom they honor thus,
And shall we not (whilst as a tyrant torn,)
Give him a tomb that gave the world to us?
Must his decrees be all reducde again,
And those degraded whom he gracde of late,
As worthy men unworthily did gain
Their rooms of reputation in the state?
If as a tyrant we him damn so soon,
And for his murd'rers do rewards devise,
Then what he did, must likewise be undone,
For which I fear a foul confusion rise.

Chor. Ah (great Antonius) sow not seeds of war,
And if thou always do delight in arms,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praise, and us no harms.
Detest in time th'abhominable broiles,
For which no conqueror to triumph has com'd,
Whilst this wretch'd town (which still some party spoils)
Must loathe the victor, and lament th'orecomd,
And shall we still contend against all good,
To make the yoke where we should bound abide?
Must still the commons sacrifize their blood,
As only borne to serve the great men's pride.

Ant. Whilst I the depths of my affection found,
And read but th'obligations which I owe,
I find my self by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caesar's foes, or then my self t'orethrow.
But when I weigh what to the state belongs,
The which to plague no passion shall get place,
Then I with grief digesting private wrongs,
War with my self to give my country peace.
Yet whilst my thoughts of this last purpose muse,
I altogether dis-assent from this,
That we should Caesar's fame, or body abuse,
By torturing tyrants as the custom is.
Lest guilty of ingratitude we seem,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caesar's body from disgrace redeem,
And let his acts be ratified by us.
Then for the public weal of which we pause,
Toward those that have him killd t'extend regard,
Let them be pardond for their kinsmens cause,
Remission given for evil is a reward.

C. Cass. We stand not dashed like malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorcefull mind,
So in your presence supplicants t'appeare,
As who themselves of death do guilty find;
But looking boldly with a lofty brow,
Through a delight of our design conceived,
We come to challenge gratefulness of you,
That have of us so great a good received.
But if ye will suspend your thoughts a space,
Though not the giuers, entertain the gift,
Do us reject, yet liberty embrace,
To have you free, lo, that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus, and let Cassius banished live,
Thus banishment would breed us greater joy,
Than what at home a tyrants wealth could give.
Though some misconster may this course of ours,
By ignorance or then by hate deceived,
Yet truth depends not on opinions powers,
But is it self how ever misconceiu'd.
Though none themselves t'acknowledge us would daigne,
Our merit of it self is a reward,
Of doing good none should repent their pain,
Though neither getting guerdon nor regard.
I Will venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws:
And as for me, how ever others yield,
I Will naught obey but reason and the Laws.

Cicer. What fools are those that further travel take,
For that which else they past recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
At least no mortal that remains below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world still weeps,
Lies low, neglected on a barbarous shore;
Selfe-slaughtred Scipio flotes amidst the depthes,
Whom it may be sea monsters do devour.
Of Libian wolves wise Cato feasts the wombes,
Whose death of worth the world defrauded leaves:
Thus some that merited Mausolean tombs,
Not have a title grau'd upon their graves.
And yet may Caesar that procured their death,
By brave men slain be buried with his race:
All civil war being banished with his breath,
Let him now dead, and us alive have peace.
We should desist our thoughts on things to set,
That may harm some, and can give help to none,
Learn to forget that which we can not get,
And let our cares be gone, of all that is gone.
Those that would strive all crosses to ore-come,
Must to the present time conform their course:
And doing the best for that which is to come,
Not meddle with things past but by discourse.
Seek not the thing which does not good being found,
Since Caesar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our grief go with him to the ground,
For sorrow best becomes a lightlesse shade.
It Is best that reconioynde with mutual love,
We physic for this wounded state prepare:
Neglecting those that from the world remove,
All men on earth for earthly things must care.

Cho. O how those great men friendship can pretend,
By soothing others thus with painted winds,
And seem to trust, where treason they attend,
Whilst love their mouth, and malice filles their minds.
Those but to them poor simple souls appear,
Whose countnance does discover what they think,
That make their words as is their meaning clear,
And from themselves can never seem to shrink.
Lo how Anthonius faines to quench all iarres,
And kindly the conspirators t'imbrace,
Yet as he furthered first the former wars,
It Is feared he now be enemy to peace.
Now where Calphurnia stays our steps adresse,
By this last sudden chance her loss was chief:
All visit should their neighbors in distress,
To give some comfort, or to get some grief.

Exeunt. Act. V. Scene II.
Calphurnia, Nuntius, Chorus. WHen darkness last imprisond had mine eyes,
Such monstrous visions did my soul affright,
That my dejected sprite still stupid dies,
Through terrors then contracted in the night.
A melancholious cloud so dimmes my breast,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well disposde for such a guest,
Where naught of sorrow but the impression lackes.
And I imagine every man I see
(My senses so corrupted are by fears)
A Herald to denounce mishaps to me,
That should infuse confusion in mine cares.
O there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I see:
Thy message is charecter'd in thy face,
Which by thy looks directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes rest rouling for releife,
As lately frighted by some ougly sight,
Thy breath does pant as if being big with grief,
And feared to bring some monstrous birth to light.
Nun. The man of whom the world in doubt remained,
If that his mind, or fortune was more great,
Whose valor conquered, clemency retained
All nations subject to the Roman state;
Him fraud harmed more then force, friends more then, foes
Ah, must this sad discourse by me be made?

Calph. Stay; ere thou further go defray my woes,
How does my love? where is my life? Nu^. Dead. Call. dead.

Cho. Though apprehending horrors in her mind,
Now since she has a certainty received,
She by experience greater grief does find,
Till borne, the passions cannot be conceived.
When as a high disaster force affords,
O how that tyrant whom affliction bears,
Bars theares from comfort, and the mouth from words.
And being obdur'd cannot dissolve in tears.

Calph. Ah, since the lights of that great light are set,
Why does not darkness spread it self over all?
At least what further comfort can I get
Whose pleasures had no period but his fall.
O would the gods I always might confine
Aetna' in my breast, and The Ocean in mine eyes,
That t'entertaine so great a grief as mine,
Thence might sufficient furniture arise.
Yet I disdain though by distress ore-throwne,
By such external means to seek relief:
The greatest sorrows are by silence shown,
Whilst all the senses are shut up with grief:
But misery does so tyrannicke grow,
That it of sighs and tears a tribute claims:
Ah, when the cup is full it must ore-flow,
And fires that burn must offer up some flames.
Yet though that thy last words my last might be,
Which are deep sunk within a melted heart,
Of my lives death report each point to me,
That I for every circumstance may smart.

Nun. What fatal warnings did fore-go his end,
Which by his stay to frustrate some did try?
But he that scorned excuses to pretend,
Was by the Destinies drawn forth to die.
Whilst by the way he chanced t'encounter one
That had his deaths-day named, he to him said;
Now th'Ides of March be com'd, but yet not gone,
Straight tho'other answered, and still constant staide.
Another brought a letter with great speed,
Which the conspiracy at length did touch,
And gave it Caesar in his hand to read,
Protesting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where still it rests,
As do the great whom happy the earth reputes,
That grieved to be importuned by requests,
Of simple supplicants neglect the suits:
Or he of it the reading did defer,
Still troubled by attendanrs at the gate,
Whilst some to show their credit did confer
To flatter some, for something some t'entreat.
Not only did the gods by diverse signs
Give Caesar warning of his threatened harms,
But did disturb all th'aduersaries designs,
And to their troubled thoughts gave strange alarmes.
A Senator that by some words we find,
To the conspiratours (though none of theirs)
Had shown himself familiar with their mind,
Then chanced to deal with Caesar in affairs.
That sight their souls did with confusion fill,
For thinking that he told their purposde deeds;
They straight themselves, or Caesar thought to kill
A guilty conscience no accuser needs.
But marking that he used (when taking leave)
The gesture of a suter that gave thanks,
They of their course did greater hopes conceive,
And ranged themselves according to their ranks.
Then Caesar marched forth to the fatal place,
Near Pompyes theater where the Senate was,
Where when he had remained a little space,
All the confederates flocked about. Calph. Alas.

Nun. First for the form Metellus Cimber craved,
To have his brother from exile restored;
Yet with the rest a rude repulse received,
Whilst it they all too ernestly implored.
Then Cimber that in strife with him did stand,
Did draw the gown over Caesar's sacred head:
But the first blow was given by Cascaes hand,
Which on his neck a little wound but made.
Then Caesar starting whilst the stroke he spied,
By strength from further striking Casca stayde:
Whilst both the two burst out at once and cried,
The One traitor Casca, the other brother aid.
Then all the rest against him did arise
Like desperate men, whose fury force affords,
That Caesar on no side could set his eyes,
But every look r'encountred with some swords.
Yet as a Lion when by nets surprisde,
Stands struggling still so long as he has strength;
So Caesar, as he had their power dispisde,
Did with great rage resist; till at the length
He thus cried out (when spying Brutus come)
And thou mya son? then grief did back rebound,
Naught but unkindness Caesar could ore-come,
That of all things does give the deepest wound.

Cho. Ah, when unkindness is where love was thought,
A tender passion breaks the strongest heart,
For of all those that give offense in ought,
Men others hate, but for th'vnkinde they smart.

Nun. Ah, taking then no more delight in light,
As which would then his life have bitter framed:
Or then from Brutus blow t'absent his sight,
As of so great ingratitude ashamed.
He with his gown being covered first over all,
As one that neither sought, nor wished relief;
Not wronging majesty in state did fall,
No sigh consenting to betray his grief.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell,)
Even at the place whereas his statue stood,
As craving Pompcy pardon Caesar fell,
That in revenge it might exhaust his blood.
But when his corpse abandond quite by breath
Did Fortunes frailties monument remain,
That all might have like interest in his death;
And guilty alike, look for like praise or pain.
Then Cassius, Brutus, and the rest began
With that great Emperors blood t'imbrue their hands:
What beast in the earth more cruel is than man,
When over his reason passion once commands?

Calph. Whilst brutish Brutus, and proud Cassius thus
Romes greatest Captain under trust deceived,
Where was Anthonius (since a friend to us,)
That he not lost himself, or Caesar saved?

Nun. The whole conspirators remainde in doubt,
Had he and Caesar joined, to be undone;
And so causde one him t'entertaine without,
Who feigned a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in such tumultuous broils,
That the first danger always is the worst,
He fled in haste, disguisde with unknown spoils,
For rage and for disdain being like to burst.

Calph. The Senators that were assembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought t'an end,
What was their part? to what inclined their care?
I fear affliction could not find a friend.

Nun. Of those that in the Senate House did sit,
As grieved so sad an object to behold:
Or feared what further murdrers might commit,
Each toward his house a several way did hold.
This act with horror did confound their sight,
And unawares their judgment did surprise,
When any hasty harms unlooked for light,
The resolution has not time to rise.
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all being reuerenc'd, and adored by some,
Had none to attend him left, but two and I.

Cho. To what an ebb may fortunes full whiles come*
Why should men following on the smoke of pride,
Leave certain ease to seek a dreamed delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tried,
They neither can with safety keep, nor quite?
The people that by force subdude remain,
May pity those by whom oppressd they rest.
They but one tyrant have, where as there reign,
A thousand Tyrants in one tyrants breast.
What though that Caesar once commanded kings,
Whose only name whole nations did appall?
Yet now (let no man trust in worldly things)
A little earth holds him that held it all.

Calph. Ah, had he but believed my faithful cares,
That to have his state established always strived:
Then scaping this conspiracy of theirs,
He honorde still, and I had happy lived.
Did I not spend of supplications store,
That he within his house this day would waste,
As I by dreams aduertis'd was before,
Which showed that was to come, which now is past:
Whilst the soothsayers sacrifiz'd did find,
A beast without a heart their altars stain:
By that presage my soul might have diuin'd
That I without my heart would soon remain.
But all those terrors could not terrors give,
To that great mind whose thoghts could not be tamed;
But by his fortune confident did live,
As him to obey the heavens had all things framed.
Yet though he ended have his fatal race,
T'insult for this let not his murdrers strive,
For, O I hope to see within short space,
Him dead adored, and them abhorred alive.
Though now his name the multitude respects,
Since murdering one that had held him so dear,
Whilst the inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monstrous shape to Brutus must appear.
Just Nemesis must plague proud Cassius soon,
And make him kill himself from hopes estranged;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caesar done,
May by themselves be on themselves revenged.

Chor. Some for the earths sovereign Fortune strive to prove
As heavens their course confusdly did advance,
Naught comes to men below, but from above,
By providence, not by a staggering chance.
Though to the cause that last foregoes the end,
Some attribute the event of every thing,
That cause on other causes does depend,
From heaven to earth that chaind together hing.
Of those decrees that heavens for us appoint,
Who-euer them approues, or yet disprooues,
No mortal man can dissappoint a point,
But as they please here mooues, or hence remooues.
We when once com'd the worlds vain pomp to try,
Led by the fates, to our iournies end must haste,
For when first borne, we striaght begin to die,
Life's first day is a step unto the last.
And is there ought more swift than days and years,
Which wear away this breath of ours so soon?
Whilst Lachesis to no request gives ears,
But spinnes the threedes of life till they be done.
Yet foolish worldelings following that which flies,
As if they had assurance still to breathe,
To frail preferrement fondly strive to rise,
Which but a burden weighes them down to death.

Nun. There Is none of us but must remember still,
How that the gods by many a wondrous sign,
Did show as 'twere how that against their will,
The destinies would Caesar's days confine.
A monstrous star amidst the heaven has been,
Still since they first against him did conspire,
The solitary birds at noone were seen,
And men to walk enuirond all with fire.
What wonder though the heavens at such a time,
Vpbraide the earth with apparitions strange,
Then whilst intending such a monstrous crime,
Unnatural men make natures course to change.

Cho. Though all such things seem wonderful to some,
They may by reason comprehended be,
Yet if ought more than common custom come,
It th'ignorant with wondering eyes must see.
Those bastard stars not heritours of the air,
Are first conceived below, then borne above,
And when fore-knowing things sprites take most care,
And by illusions superstition move.
Yet this no doubt a great regard should breed,
When Nature has brought forth a monstrous birth,
Where men in secret characters may read,
The wrath of heaven, and wickedness of earth.
The Naturalists, and th'Astrologians skill,
May whiles r'encountring manifest like care,
Since the one looks back, and the other forward still,
The One may tell what, and the other why things are.

Nu. Shall sorrow through the waves of woes to sail
Have still your tears for seas, your sighs for winds,
T'affliction what do base complaints avail?
A higher course becomes heroicke minds.
None are orecom'd save only those that yield,
Though they from froward fortune blows have borne.
Let Virtue be t'Aduersitie a shield,
No greater grief to grief than the enemies scorn.
This makes your foes but laugh to see you weep;
At least these tears but for your self bestow,
And not for that great sprite, whose spoils heavens keep,
For he no doubt rests deified ere now.

Calp. I only wail my life, and not his death,
That now amongst th'immortalls does repose,
And shall so long as I have blood or breath,
To furnish forth those elements of woes.
I care not who rejoice, so I lament,
That do to darkness dedicate my days,
And since the light of my delight is spent,
Shall have in horror all Apolloes rays.
I will retire my self to wail alone,
As do the trusty Turtles for their mates,
And my misfortune always bent to moan,
Will spurn at pleasures, as empoisond baits.
No second guest shall press great Caesar's bed,
Warmd by the flames to which he first gave life,
I think there may be greater honor had,
Being Caesar's widow, than another wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harms,
If I (ere chancde abandond thus to be,)
Had had a little Caesar in mine arms,
That represented had his sire to me.
Yet does that idol which my thoughts adore,
With me of late most strictly match remain,
For where my arms but held him whiles before,
Now in my heart I shall him still retain.
That (though I have no precious things t'impart)
Thy deity may by me b'acknowledgde often,
Still offering up my thoughts upon my heart,
My sacred flame shall always mount aloft.

Exeunt Chorus.
WHat fools are those that do repose their trust,
On what this mass of misery affords?
And bragging but of th'excrements of dust,
Of lifelesse treasures labor to be lords:
Which like the Sirens songs, or Circes charms,
With shadows of delight hide certain harms.
Ah whilst they sport on pleasures icie ground,
Often poisond by prosperity with pride,
A sudden fall does floating joys confound,
Of those that stumble after th'eielesse guide,
That so inconstantly her self does bear,
To hope the unhappy, happy have cause to fear.
The fortunate that bathe in floods of joys,
To perish whiles amidst their pleasures chance,
And mirthlesse wretches wallowing in annoyes,
Often by adversity themselves advance:
Whilst fortune bent to mock vain worldlings ears
Does change dispaires in hopes, hopes in dispaires.
That gallant Grecian, whose great wit so soon
Th'innumerable army did overcome,
Were not he was undone, had bin undone,
And if not banished had not had a home:
To him fear courage gave (what wondrous change,)
And many doubts a resolution strange.
He that told one that then was fortunes child,
As if with horror to congeale his blood,
That Caius Marius being from Rome exilde:
Wretch'd on the ruins of great Carthage stood:
Though both being plag'd by grief, and by disgrace
The consulship regained, and di'd in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the worlds delight,)
Whom of his theater then th'applauses pleased,
Whilst praise-transported eyes endeerd his sight,
That by youths toiles should have his age then easde:
He by one blow of fortune lost far more,
Then many a battle conquered had before.
Such sudden changes so disturb the soul,
That still the judgment ballancde is by doubt,
But on around, what wonder though things roll,
And since within a circle turn about?
Whilst heaven on earth strange alterations brings,
To scorn our confidence in worldly things.
And chancde there ever accidents more strange,
Than in this stormy bounds where we remain?
A shepheardes Staff did here t'a Scepter change,
The nurceling of a woolfe over men to reign:
A little village grew a mighty town,
Which whilst it had no king, held many a crown.
Then by how many sundry sorts of men,
Has this great state bin ruled? though now by none,
Which first obeyed but one, then two, then ten,
Then by degrees returned to two, and the one,
Of which three states their ruin did abide,
Two by twoes lusts, and one by two men's pride.
What reuolutions huge have happened thus,
All by a secret violence being led,
Though seeming but by accident to us,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breasts first bred;
As arguments demonstratiue to prove,
That weakness dwells below, and power above.
Lo Caesar, though being burdend in short space,
Both with strange nations, and his countries spoils,
Even when he seemd by war to have purchasde peace,
And roses of sweet rest from thorns of toiles:
Then whilst his mind and fortune raise most hie,
Has bin constraind the last distress to try.
What warnings large were in a time so short,
Of that dark course which by his death now shines?
It speechless wonders plainly did report,
It men reueald by words, and gods by signs:
Yet by the chains of destinies being bound,
He saw the sword, but could not escape the wound.
O what a curtine over our knowledge hings!
Whiles closde, whiles opened by th'aetheriall host,
Which makes us sometime sharp to see small things,
And yet quite blind when as we should see most:
That curious brains may rest amazde at it,
Whose ignorance makes them presume of it.
Then let us live, since all things change below,
When raisde most high as those that once may fall,
And hold when by disasters brought more low,
The mind still free what ever else be thrall:
Those Lords of Fortune sweeten every state,
That can command themselves, though not their fate.
FINIS.
Some verses written to his Majesty by the Author at the time of his
Majesty's first entry into England.
SStay tragic muse with those untimely verses,
With raging accents and with dreadful sounds,
To draw dead Monarkes out of ruined herses,
T'affright th'applauding world with bloody wounds:
Raze all the monuments of horrors past,
T'aduance the public mirth our treasures wast.
And pardon (old Heroes) for O I find,
I had no reason to admire your fates:
And with rare guiftes of body and of mind,
Th'vnbounded greatness of euill-conquerd states.
More glorious acts then were atchieu'd by you,
Do make your wonders thought no wonders now.
For ye the Potentates of former times,
Making your will a right, your force a law:
Staining your conquest with a thousand crimes,
Still reigned like tyrants but obeyed for awe:
And whilst your yoke none willingly would bear,
Dyed often the sacrifice of wrath and fear.
But this age great with glory has brought forth
A matchless Monarke whom peace highly raises,
Who as th'vn'tainted Ocean of all worth
As due to him has swallowed all your praises.
Whose clear excellencies long known for such,
All men must praise, and none can praise too much.
For that which others hardly could acquire,
With loss of thousands lives and endless pain,
Is heapt on him even by their own desire,
That thrist t'enioy the fruits of his blessed reign:
And never conqueror gained so great a thing,
As those wise subjects gaining such a King.
But what a mighty state is this I see?
A little world that all true worth inherites,
Strong without art, entrenched within the sea,
Abounding in brave men full of great spirits:
It seems this I Will would boast, and so she may,
To be the sovereign of the world some day.
O generous JAMES the glory of their parts,
In large dominions equal with the best:
But the most mighty Monarke of men's hearts,
That ever yet a Diadem possessed:
Long may thou live, well loved and free from dangers,
The comfort of thine own, the terror of strangers.
Some verses written shortly thereafter by reason of an Inundation of Douen, a
water near unto the Authors house, whereupon his Majesty was sometimes wont
to Hawke.
WHat wonder though my melancholious muse,
Whose generous coursesome lucklesse star controules:
Her bold attempts to prosecute refuse,
And would feign bury my abortiue scroules.
To what perfection can my lines be raisd,
Whilst many a cross would quench my kindling fires:
Lo for Parnassus by the Poets praised,
Some savage mountains shadow my retires.
No Helicon her treasure here vnlockes,
Of all the sacred band the chief refuge:
But dangerous Douen rumbling through the rocks,
Would scorn the raine-bowe with a new deluge.
As Tiber mindful of his old renown,
Augments his floodes to wail the fair changed place:
And grieved to glide through that degener'd town,
Toils with his depthes to cover their disgrace.
So does my Douen rage grieved in like sort,
While as his wonted honor comes to mind:
To that great Prince whilst he afforded sport,
To whom his Trident Neptune has resigned.
And as the want of waters and of swains,
Had but begotten to his banks neglect:
He strives t'encroch upon the bordering plains,
Again by greatness to procure respect.
Thus all the creatures of this orphand bounds,
In their own kinds moved with the common cross:
With many a monstrous form all form confoundes,
To make us mourn more feelingly our loss.
We must our breasts to baser thoughts inure,
Since we want all that did advance our name:
For in a corner of the world obscure,
We rest vngrac'd without the bounds of fame.
And since our Sun shines in another part,
Live like th'Antipodes deprived of light:
Whilst those to whom his beams he does impart,
Begin their day whilst we begin our night.
This has discouraged my high-bended mind,
And still in doale my drouping Muse arrayes:
Which if my Phoebus once upon me shined,
Might raise her flight to build amidst his rays.
FINIS.

