JOHN BRADEFORD
portrait of John Bradford

The complaynt of Verity, made by John Bradford.

An exhortacion of Mathewe Rogers, unto his children.

The complaynt of Raufe Al^erton and others, being prisoners in Lolers tower,
and written with their blood, how god was their comfort.

A song of Caine and Abell.

The saying of master Houper, that he wrote the night before he suffered,
upon a wall with a cole, in the new In, at Gloceter, and his saying at his
death.

ANNO DOMINI. 1559.

The complaint of Verity.
O Heaven, O earth, to thee I call,
To witness what I say:
which am causeless in
England thrall,
and put to great decay.
Verity of all things the light,
I am that thus do mourn:
Sent from God to teach them right,
which in this world be borne.
And that of me none might it dout
^heron so ever I preach:
I have for me the word throughout,
^s Christ's Gospel does teach.
This truth to England have I taught
with travel and with pain.
And for my hyre now am I sought,
^ruelly to be slain.
I that from bondage did the shield,
which was before oppressed:
^m now by the as captive held,
^or prechyng to the best.
From death to life I did thee bring
that thou might live for aye:
And now my life for well doing,
to death thou seek a pray.
was there ever age so cruel.
that thus could me reward:
So soon to cast into exile,
whom they did once regard.
what unrighteousness have ye found,
on me whom thus ye spite:
Let them speak that would me confound
by reason and by write.
I seek without unfeigned clokes,
to maintain that is right:
But falsitie with her painted lokes,
will not abide that sight.
O false time of iniquity,
O season most unjust:
where exiled is Verity,
and cast down to the dust.
what though false Judges do me dam
as Susan was most chaste:
yet by a Daniell sure I am,
to be absolved at the last.
The Lord send me a judge upright
to listen to my cause:
Then dout I not to put to flight.
those that now lie and gloss.
Now whether shall I for remedy,
seek that I may it find:
Thou Lord direct my steps ready.
to some that will me friend.
The clergy say I am heresy,
with me they fight apace:
For fashed blindes them so wilfully,
they have no better grace.
Learned men which did me defend.
do now their judgment turn:
For livings sake they do intend,
like wandering stars to run.
The lawiers say they could not thrive
since Scripture came in place:
Their vauntage is when men do strive,
and not by truth and peace.
The gentlemen which once me had,
^n praise and eke in price:
Now say for them I am to sad,
and would have them be wise.
The Merchant man says he must live
and cannot with me gain:
But all to riches his mind does give,
with much danger and pain.
Women say they must needs obey,
their husbands when they list:
Therefore in them I may not say,
to have any great trust.
The common sort unlearned be,
to them I may not lean:
They know not by deuinitie,
my cause for to maintain.
Thus have all persons some pretense
from me quite to decline:
And am put to my own defense,
to keep my self from ruin.
yet in this may I glory plain,
that though with few I stand:
I am of power and strength certain
more then all my foes band.
For God so has endued my tongue,
with wisdom and with grace:
That I can show there doings wrong
which dare stand face to face.
Therefore mine enemies vilanously
put me from men's hearinges:
Least I should most manifestly,
tell them of their leasynges.
For this they would out of men's eyes
Gods word to keep so hie:
That where they preach boldly lies,
none might against them replye.
Al to maintain their pomp and pride
their belly, sloth and ease:
They force me in thraldom to bide,
for that I them displease.
Ah, England what is the trespass,
that against god thou have done?
That thou would love darkness alas
more then light of the Sun.
Ah I Will of most nobility,
why art thou become band?
To that proud harlots falsitie,
the ruin of all the land.
Woo that I must that day behold,
which came to make the free,
I would I had thee never told,
^he truth in each degree
Then were thy sin much more les
which knowledge makes great:
And of the same might seek redres,
to turn away the threate.
This dampnacion God does say,
the father of all right:
That light is come now of the day,
yet in darkness men more delight.
Thus do I weep with abounda^t tears,
with sighs and eke with groans:
Ah that men will not give their ears
unto my lawful mones.
Finis quod John Bradforde.
The instruction of a Father to his Children, which he wrote a few days before
his burning.
Give ear my Children to my words.
Whom God has dearelye bought:
Lay up his laws within your hertes
and print them in your thought.
For I your father have foresene,
the frail and fylthy way:
Which flesh and blood would follow feign
even to their own decay.
For all and every living beast,
their cribbe do know full well:
But Adams heirs above the rest,
are ready to rebel.
And all the creatures of the earth,
full well do keep their way:
But Adams heirs eue^ from their birth,
are apt to go astray.
For earth and ashes is his strength,
his glory and his gain:
And into ashes at the length,
he shall return again.
For flesh does florishe like a flower,
and grow up like a grass:
And is consumed in an hour,
as it is come to pass.
For I the image of your years,
your treasure and your trust:
Am now dyeng before your face,
and shall consume to dust,
For as you see your Fathers flesh,
consumed into clay:
Even so shall ye my children dear,
consume and wear away.
The sun, the moon, and eke the stars,
that serve the day and night:
The earth and every earthly thing,
shall be consumed quyte.
And all the worship that is wrought
that has been heard or seen:
Shall clean consume and turn to naught
as it had never been.
Therefore see that ye follow me,
your father and your friend:
And enter into the same land,
which never shall have end.
I leave you here a little book,
for you to look upon:
That you may see, your fathers face,
when he is dead and gone.
Who for the hope of heavenly things
while he did here remain:
Gave over all his golden years.
in prisone and in pain.
where I among mine iron bands,
enclosed in the dark:
A few days before my death,
did dedicate this warke.
And in example of your youth,
to whom I wish all good:
I preche you here a perfect troth,
and seal it with my blood.
To you mine heirs of erthly things
which I do leave behind:
That you may read and understand,
and keep it in your mind.
That as ye have been heirs of that
which once shall wear a way:
Even so ye may possess that part,
which never shall decay.
In folowinge of your fathers feet,
in truth and eke in love:
ye may be also heirs with him
for evermore above.
Have god always before your eyes
withal your whole intent:
Commit not sin in any wise,
keeke his commandment.
Abhor that arrant hoore of Rome
and all her blasphemies
And drink not of her decretales,
nor yet of her decrees.
Give honor to your mother dear
remember well her pain:
And recompense her in her age,
in like with love again.
Be always ayding at her hand,
and let her not decay:
Remember well your fathers fall.
who should have been her stay.
Give of your portion to the poor,
as riches does arise:
And from the needy naked soul,
turn not away your eyes.
For he that will not here the cry,
of them that stand in need:
Shall cry himself and not be hard,
when he would hope to speed.
If God have given you increase.
and blessed well your store:
Remember ye are put in trust,
to minister the more.
Beware of foul and filthy lust,
let such things have no place:
keep clean your vessels in the Lord
that he may you embrace.
ye are the temples of the Lord,
^or ye are dearly bought:
And they that do defile the same,
shall surely come to naught.
Possess not pride in any wise,
^uilde not your house to hie:
But have always before your eyes,
that ye be borne to dye.
Defraude him not that hired is,
your labor to sustain:
But give him always out of hand,
his penny for his pain.
And as you would an other man,
against you should proceed:
Do you the same to them again,
when they do stand in need.
And part your portion to the poor,
in money and in meat:
And feed the fainted feable soul,
with that which ye should eat.
(...) Farewall my true and loving wife,
my Children and my friends:
I hope in God to have you all,
when all things have their ends.
And if you do abide in God,
as you have now begone:
your course I warrant shall be short,
you have not long to run.
God grant you so to end your days
as he shall think it best:
That I may have you in the heavens
where I do hope to rest.
Finis quod Mathewe Rogers.
A lamentable complaynt of the afflicted, unto god our only healper.
Arise O Lord, why slepest thou?
set to thy hand in time of need:
That wicked men the^ selves may know
^ be but mortal men in deed.
They do exalt them selves on hie,
^r to cast down the simple sort:
^ostinge of their authority,
^et none cares for Iosephes hurt.
They rob the poor and fatherles,
^king their good by violence:
^he faithful flock they do oppres,
^herof we have intelligence.
If we to them will not agree,
^en shall we neither bye nor sell:
^ut fast in prison for to lie,
stocks and Irons the truth to tell.
^he^ they have caught us in their net
^n will they not forgo their pray:
^th shameful words they do us thret
^uenting mischief every day.
Against the truth they kick and spurn,
and breath out threats with maine and might
All Gods elect with fire they burn,
or else do put them to their flight.
They spoil and wast in every place,
the people that do fear the lord:
Like ravening wolves void of al grace
thus they suppres Gods holy word.
Locusters they are withouten fail,
rising out of the bottomless pit:
Like stinking scorpions is their tail,
throughout ye world gods flock to bite.
The very truth do they cast down,
what can the righteous do withal:
Refusyng Christ the corner stone,
and with their works build up the wall.
Thus are we killed all the day long,
for thy names sake we suffer pain:
As simple sheep bochers among,
so under tyrauntes we remain.
They feed thy flock with their decrees
mainteining them with fire and sword:
Thus they defend most wicked lies,
and kill the saints of christ our Lord.
Will thou now hide thy face O lord
the time of our tribulacion:
while the enemies of thy word,
^e set up their abhominacion.
Thy promise Lord we do believe
at thou will help us in due time:
though that tirauntes do us grieve,
death or life yet we are thine.
For this we know assuredly,
^e lords right hand can sone change all:
^herfore we pray most heartily.
^his church in general.
Help now O lord for thy names sake
^ all men's thoughts ar vain truly:
^is of my life my leave I take,
^sting for ever to dwell with thee.
^is. quod Raffe Allerton.
A brief rehearsal of part of the aucthours trouble, entitled God is my
comfort.
IN trouble and adversity,
we do find most assuredlye
As the perfyt does testify,
that God is our comfort.
We do not fear the evil days,
nor follow not the wicked ways:
Of Antechrist nor yet his laws,
for God is our comfort.
Although we have been tied in fetters
so has been some of our betters:
As Peter John and such others,
yet God was their comfort.
Both all day and night in the stocks
with pretty Irons and double locks:
Abydyng tauntes rebukes and mockes
yet God is our comfort.
If we do our Bochers displease,
then are we cast in little ease:
And often bytte with lyce and fleas,
yet God is our comfort.
Sumtime we are in lowlers tower,
or in the colehouse stinkyng flower:
Lokyng when they will us devour,
^ut God is our comfort.
With whips and rods they do us threat
^aiyng doubtless we shall you beat:
If we will not the rownd God eat.
^et God is our comfort.
we may not pray if it be hard,
unto God that is our sauegarde:
^age him say they for a reward,
though God be his comfort.
If we singe a Godly song,
^ut of the stocks we are not long:
and then they say we live wrong:
^ut God is our comfort.
Let them not have their meat say they
and their drink se you keep away:
^ut bread and water each other day,
^et God is our comfort,
They did keep us so Gentilly,
stockinge us so tenderly:
^ntill the blood in our house did lie
^et God is our comfort.
Our Bible they have taken away
and our books whereon we did pray,
with other things the truth to say
yet God is our comfort.
Although with cords they have us bound
with gibes and giuers trick and round,
yet in our troubles we have found,
that God is our comfort.
what if they burn us in the fire,
let this be only our desire:
To reign with God in his empire,
for he his our comfort.
Let all people be glad with me,
that stands to Christ's verity:
And take the cross up joyfully,
for God is our comfort.
Se that no troubles turn your ha^
nor of the flesh to fear the smart:
So shall you surely have your part
with Christ your whole comfort.
Finis. quod. R. A.
The song of the poor prisoners in Lolers tower.
CAyne will thou not withdraw
thy hand.
to cease thy froward will:
will thou lift up thy fiery brande,
and vex poor Abell still.
Though Abel have no fleshly strength
thy furious wrath to tame:
yet God will preserve him at the length
to thy rebuke and shame.
Although his flesh thou lay full low
thy wrath to satisfy:
yet by the death of Lamethes bow,
for his blood thou shall die.
Though Ismael had the greater stay
before the promis begone:
yet God bad Abraham put away,
the bond maid with her son.
Though Jacob fled his brothers ire
to cause the fury cease:
yet God gave him his whole desire,
and brough^ him home in peace.
when Israel out of Egypt fled,
from him that held them thrall:
The lord preserved the righteous sede,
and drowned their enemies all.
when that Golias in his great pride
his hie blastes out did blow:
The lord soon laid his pomp aside
and brought his boastinges low.
when king Saul sought David's life
without David's offense:
The Lord at last ended that strife,
and Saul made recompense.
when Acheor to a tree was bound.
because he truth did tell:
He was soon healed of that wound,
by the God of Israel.
when Holifernus in his rage.
against Gods flock did stand:
Then soon did his pride assuage.
even by a woman's hand.
when A man made a gallows strong,
for Mardocheus the Jew:
Himself was hanged thereon ere long,
for God is just and true.
when Susan was without refuge,
and like to suffer pain:
The Lord that is a righteous judge
did pay her foes again.
As Daniell in the Lions den,
was kept from woe and grief:
So God preserves righteous men.
and sendes them quick relief.
when that the oven was made red hot,
the children to destroy:
Gods angel the flame out swot,
and walked with them in joy.
when Peter and John in prison were,
for preaching of Gods word:
Gods angel did the door vnbarre,
as Luke does well record.
Thus by examples strong and sure,
the Scripture does witness:
The enemies power can not endure,
for God does it suppres.
when God made all things with his word,
he blessed it with increase:
But soon the devil brought Caine the sword,
and bad him break the peace.
So from that day unto this hour,
Cain has the sword in hand:
Seking still Abell to devour,
either by sea or land.
For by the devils great envy,
came death amongst mankind:
And all that his dear children be,
fulfill their fathers mind.
Dear christians be not now afraid
to do your masters will:
For he does promise to be your aid,
and your defense from ill.
His mercy is to succor those
that trust to him at need:
Fear not for God will your bands lose
as he has promised.
Therefore stick hard unto the word
the which you have professed:
And then no doubt but that the Lord
will see your cause redressed.
Now seeing we shall delivered be
as Esdras does declare:
By death or life, what cause have we
either to doubt or care.
But only in our Lord Jesus,
to put our confidence:
who in these days is unto us,
a tower and strong defense.
All praise be to the living God,
which judges righteously:
And in all ages fulfyls his word,
his name to magnify.
Finis.
The words of Master Houper at his death.
O Lord Jesus, that for whose love I leave wyllyngly this life and desire the
bitter death of the cross, with the loss of all my worldly things, then
either to abide, the blasphemy, of thy most holy name, or to abey unto
men, in breaking of thy Commandments, thou see Lord that where I might
live in wealth, to worship a false god: and to honor thine ennemy, I choose
rather the torments of my body, and the loss of this my life, and I have
counted all things but vile dust and donge, that I might wyn thee, which
death is more dear unto me then thousands of gold and silver, such love
Lord, have thou laid up in my breast, that I honger for thee as the dear that
is wounded, desires the soil, so send thy holy comforter to aid comfort, and
strengthen this weke piece of yearthe, which is of it self, empty of al
strength, thou remembrest that I am, but vile duste and donge, and of my self
able to do nothing, therefore O Lord, as thou of thine a customed love, have
bidden me to this banquet, and counted me worthi to drink of this thy cup
amongst thine elect, give me strength against this thy ellyment, that as to my
sight it is most yrkesom, and intolerable, so to mi mind it may at thy
commandment, go as an obedient servant be sweet and pleasant, and through the
strength of thy holy spirit, I may pass through the fury of this fire, into
thy bosom according to thy promise, and for this mortal life, receive an
immortality, and for this corruptible receive an incorruptibilite, accept this
bornt sacrifcie O heavenly Father, not for the sacrifice sake, but for thy dear
sons sake my savior, for whose testimoni I offer this my free will, offering
with all my heart, with all mi strength, with all my soul, Oh heauenli father,
forgive me my sins: as I forgive all the world, O sweet son of God my
savior sprede thy wings over me, O God the holy ghost, comfort strengthen
and stablish me, and as through thy mighty power thou have brought me hither to
death, so condyth me in to everlasting bliss, O Lord into thy hands I
commend my spirit, thou haste redeemed me O God of truth, Lord have mercy
upon me, Christ have mercy upon me, Lord have mercy upon me. Amen.

Finis.
These are the words that Master John Houper wrote on the wall with a cole,
in the new Inn in Gloceter, the night before he suffered.
COntent thy self with patience,
with christ to bear ye cross of pain
^ho can or will recompense,
^ thousand fold with Joys again,
^et nothing cause thy heart to fail,
^ainch out thy bote, hoise up thy sail
Put from the shore,
and be thou suer thou shall attain,
unto the port that shall remain,
For ever more.
^ere not death pas not for bands,
^nly in God put thy whole trust:
^r he will require thy blod at their hands
^ thou do know yt once die thou must,
Only for that thy life if thou give,
^eth is no death but amens for to live
Do not despair.
Of no worldly tirant see thou dreede,
^y co^pace which is gods word shall the lead
and the wind is fair.
Finis.
TWO NOTABLE Sermons, Made by that worthy Martyr of Christ, Master John
Bradford: the one of Repentance, and the other of the Lords Supper, now newly
imprinted.

Perused and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill. 1599.

To the Christian Reader, Thomas Samson wishes the felicity of speedy and full
conversion to the Lord.
GOdly learned men do write and publish books, to profit the age in which
they do live, and the posterity. This desire was in the Author of this
^reatise, Master John Bradford, who was the Prea^er and publisher of this
Sermon of Repentance. and now, to the end that we, which do live on earth ^ter
him, and are the posterity, may take as much or ^ore profit by it, then they
did, to and for whom in ^s life time he did both preach and publish it, the
same (...) labor is by new Imprinting published again. nothing is added to
this Sermon, or altered in it: ^ely to the Sermon of Repentance before printed,
^dded another Sermon of the Lords supper, which ^ also made, and was never
printed before. And aptly ^lt thou see (good Reader) these two Sermons ioy^
together. For in diligent perusing of the last, ^u shall see how necessarily
he draws the do^ne of Repentance to them all, which do with due ^paration
receive the holy Sacrament of Christ. ^e not know which of the Sermons I should
most ^se: I wish, that by reading both, thou may make ^ great profit. In both
these Sermons, thou shall ^e Bradford preaching Repentance with his ^e pen.

They are counted the most profitable Teachers, which have themselves good
experience by practice in themselves, of that which they do teach to others*
such as may safely say, Brethren, be ye followers of me, and look on them
which walk so, as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. And surely, such a
pattern was M. Bradford in his life time, of this doctrine of Repentance,
which in both these Sermons he teaches, that I which did know him familiarly,
must needs give to God this praise for him, that among men I have scarcely
known one, like unto him. I did know when and partly how it pleased God by
effectual calling to turn his heart unto the true knowledge, and obedience of
the most holy Gospel of Christ our Savior. Of which God did give him such an
heaven hold, and lively feeling, that as he did then know that many sins
were forgiven him, so surely he declared by deeds, that he loved much. For
where ^ had both gifts and calling, to have employed himse^ in civil and
worldly affairs profitably, such (...) his love of Christ, and zeal to the
promoting ^ his glorious Gospel, that he changed not only t^ course of his
former life, as the woman did, Luke but even his former study, as Paul did
change (...) former profession and study.

Touching the first, after that God touched ^ heart with that holy and
effectual calling, he s^ his Chains, Rings, Brooches, and Jewels of go^ which
before he used to wear, and did bestow the price of this his former vanity,
in the necessary relief of Christ's poor members, which he could hear of, or
find lying sick, or pyning in poverty. Touching ^he second, he so declared
his great zeal and love to promote the glory of the Lord Jesus, whose goodness
^^d saving health he had tasted, that to do the same more pithily, he changed
his study; and being in the ^nner Temple in London, at the study of the common
^awes, he went to Cambridge, to study Divinity, where he heard D. Martin
Bucer diligently, and was ^ight familiar and dear unto him. In this godly
course ^e did by Gods blessing so profit, that that blessed Martyr, D. Ridley,
then Bishop of London, did, as ^t were, inuit him and his godly companion M.
Tho. Horton, to become fellows of Penbrooke Hall in Cambridge: And afterward,
the said D. Ridley ^alled our Bradford to London, gave him a Prebe^d ^n Paul's
Church, lodged him in his own house ^here, and set him on work in preaching.
And besides often preaching in London, and at Paul's Cross, and sundry places
in the country, and specially in Lancashire, he preached before K. Ed. the 6.
in the Lent, the last year of his reign, upon the 2. Psalm; and there in one
Sermon, showing the tokens of Gods judgment at hand, for the contempt of the
Gospel, as that certain Gentlemen, upon the Sabbath day, going in a whirry to
Paris Garden, to the Bearebayting, were drowned: and that a dog was met at
Ludgate, carrying a piece of a dead child in his mouth: he with a mighty and
prophetical spirit said, I summon you all, even every mothers child of you, to
the judgment of God, for it is at hand; as it followed shortly after, in the
death of K. Edward. In which state and labor of preaching he continued, till
the cruelty of the papists cut him off, so as thou may read in the history
of his life and death, compiled by that faithful servant of the Lord Jesus, M.
John Fox.

In deed he had many pulbacks, but God still helped forward his chosen servant,
in that trade of life, to the which he had called him: in which he ran
forward so happily, that he did outrun me and other his companions. For it
pleased God, with great speed to make him ready and ripe to Martyrdom; in
which through Christ he has now gained the crown of life. But in all stops
and stays he was much helped forward by a continual meditation, and practice
of repentance and faith in Christ; in which he was kept by Gods grace, notably
exercised all the days of his life. Even in this mean time he heard a Sermon,
which that notable preacher, M. Latimer, made before K. Edward the 6. in which
he did earnestly speak of restitutio^ to be made of things falsely gotten: which
did so strike Bradford to the heart, for one dash of a pen which he had made,
without the knowledge of his master (as full often I have heard him confess
with plenty of tears) being Clarke to the Treasurer of the Kings camp beyond
the seas, and was to the deceiving of the King, that he could never be quiet,
til by the advice of the same M. Latimer, a restitution was made. Which thing
to bring to pass, he did willingly forbear and forgo all the private and
certain patrimony which he had in earth. Let all bribers and ^olling Officers,
which get to themselves great revenues in earth, by such slippery shifts,
follow this example, least in taking a contrary course, they take a ^o^trary
way, and never come where Bradford now is.

But besides this, our Bradford had his daily exercises and practices of
repentance. His manner was to make to himself a Catalogue of all the grosest and
most enorme sins, which in his life of ignorance he had committed, and to lay
the same before his eyes when he went to private prayer, that by the sight and
remembrance of the^, he might be stirred up to offer to God ^he sacrifice of a
co^trite heart, seek assurance of sal^ation in Christ by faith, thank God for
his calling from the ways of wickedness* and pray for increase of grace, to be
conducted in holy life, acceptable and ^leasing to God. Such a continual
exercise of consci^nce he had in private prayer, that he did not count himself
to have prayed to his contentation, unless ^n it he had felt inwardly some
smiting of heart for sin, and some healing of that wou^d by faith, feeling
^he saving health of Christ, with some change of mind into the detestation of
sin, and love of obeying the good will of God. Which things do require that
inward entering into the secret parlour of our hearts, of which Christ speaks,
and is that smiting of the breast, which is noted in the Publican, Matthew. 7. and
is the same to the which the Psalmist exhorts those men loose in sin, Psa.
4.5. Tremble ye and sin not: speak in your selves, that is, Enter into an
account with your selves, When you are on your couches, that is, when ye are
solitary and alone. And be quiet, or silent: that is, When ye have thus
secretly, and deeply considered of your case and dealing, ye shall cease to
think, speak, and do wickedly. Without such an inward exercise of prayer, our
Bradford did not pray to his full co^tentation, as appeared by this: He used in
the morning to go to the common prayer in the College where he was, and after
that, he used to make some prayer with his Pupils in his chamber. But not
content with this, he then repaired to his own secret prayer, and exercise in
prayer by himself, as one that had not yet prayed to his own mind: for he was
wo^t to say to his familiars, I have prayed with my Pupils, but I have not yet
prayed with my self. Let those secure me^ mark this well, which pray without
touch of breast, as the Pharisee did; and so that they have said an ordinary
prayer, or hear a common course of prayer, they think they have prayed well,
and as the term is, they have served God well, though they never feel sting for
sin, taste of groaning, or broken heart, nor of the sweet saving health of Christ,
thereby to be moved to offer the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, nor change or
renewing of mind, but as they came secure in sin, and senseless, so they do
depart without any change, or affecting of the heart; which is eue^ the cradle,
in which Satan rocketh the sins of this age asleep, who think they do
serve God in these cursory prayers, made only of custom, when their heart is
as far from God, as was the heart of the Pharise. Let us learn by Bradfords
example, to pray better, that is, with the heart, and not with the lips alone,
Quia Deus non vocis, sed cordis auditor est, as Cyprian says* that is, because
God is the hearer of the heart, and not of the voice: that is to say, not of
the voice alone, without the heart, for that is but lip labor. This conscience
of sin, and exercise in prayer had Bradford, clean contrary to that cursed
custom of those graceless me^, which do joy to make large and long accou^ts
of their leudnes, and do glory therein; so feeding their delights with their
lives passed, as the dog returns to smell to his cast gorge, and the horse to
his dou^g; such as the Prophet Esaias 39. says, They declare their sins as
Sodom, they hide them not, woe be to their souls. It goes with the^, as Jeremy
3.3. said, Thou have a whores forehead: thou would not be ashamed. God
give these men better grace; else assuredly they shall find woe, woe, to their
very souls.

Another of his exercises was this: He used to make unto himself an Ephemeris,
or a Iournall, in which he used to write all such notable things, as either he
did see or hear, each day that passed. But whatsoever he did hear or see, he
did so pen it, that a man might see in that book, the signs of his smitten
heart. For if he did hear or see any good in any man, by that sight he found
and noted the want thereof in himself, and added a short prayer, craving mercy
and grace to amend. If he did hear or see any plague, or misery, he noted it
as a thing procured by his own sins, and still added, Domine, miserere mei,
Lord, have mercy upon me. He used in the same book to note such evil thoghts
as did rise in him; as of envying the good of other men, thoghts of
unthankfulness, of not considering God in his works, of hardness and
insensibleness of heart, when he did see other moved and affected. And thus
he made to himself, and of himself, a book of daily practices of repenta^.

Besides this, they which were familiar with him, might see how he, being in
their company, used to fall often into a sudden and deep meditation, in which
he would sit with fixed countenance and spirit moved, yet speaking nothing a
good space. And sometimes in his silent sitting, plenty of tears should trickle
down his cheeks. Sometime he would sit in it, and come out ^f it with a smiling
countenance. Often times have I ^tten at dinner and supper with him, in the
house of ^at godly harbourer of many preachers and servants of the Lord Jesus,
I mean M. Elsyng, when either by occasion of talk had, or of some view of Gods
benefits present, or some inward cogitation and thought of his own, he has
fallen into these deep cogitations, and he would tell me in the end such
discourses of them, that I did perceive, that sometimes his tears trickled out
of his eyes, as well for joy as for sorrow. Neither was he only such a
practiser of repentance in himself, but a continual prouoker of others
thereunto, not only in public preaching, but also in private conference and
company: for in all companies where he did come, he would freely reprove any
sin and misbehauior which appeared in any person, especially swearers, filthy
talkers, and popish praters: such never departed out of his company unreproved;
and this he did with such a divine grace and Christian majesty, that ever he
stopped the mouths of the gainsayers: for he spoke with power; and yet so
sweetly, that they might see their evil to be evil, and hurtful unto them, and
understand that it was good in deed, to the which he labored to draw them in
God.

To be short, as his life was, such was his death: His life was a practice, an
example, and provocation to repentance. At his death, as the foresaid history
witnesses, when he was burned in Smithfield, and the flames of fire did fly
about his ears, his last speech publicly noted and heard, was this, Repent,
England. Thus was our Bradford a preacher, and an example of that repentance
which he did preach. Jonas preached to Niniue repentance; and all Niniue, the
King, Princes, people, old and young repented. To England Bradford did preach,
and yet does preach repentance: and surely England has now much more cause
to repent, then it had when Bradford lived, and preached repentance: for all
states and sorts of persons in England, are now more corrupt, then they were
then.

Let therefore now Bradfords Sermon, his life, his death, move thee, O England,
to repent all thy peril: I wish and warn, that as in Niniue, so in England,
all from the highest to the lowest, do unfeignedly repent. They which are of the
Court, they which are of the Church, they which are of the City, they which
are of the Country, Princes, Prelates, and people: let all and every one
repent and depart from that evil which he has in hand, and turn wholly to the
Lord. And I do humbly beseech thy Majesty (O glorious Lord Jesus) which did
come to bless Israel, turning every one of them from their sins, to work
now by thy Spirit in our hearts, the same sound repentance, which thy
Holiness did preach to men, when thou saydest, Repent, for the Kingdom of God
is at hand. This work in us, O gracious God our Savior. Amen.

And now, Reader, I leave thee to the reading and practicing of that
repentance, which Bradford here teaches.

FINIS.
To the Christian Reader, John Bradford wishes the true knowledge and peace of
Jesus Christ, our alone and sufficient Savior.
GReat and heavy is Gods anger against us, as the most grievous plague of the
death of our late King (a Prince of all that ever was sithen Christ's assension
into heaven in any Region peerless) now fallen upon us, does prognosticate.
For when Gods judgment has begun with his Child, this our dear darling,
let other men think as they can, I surely cannot be persuaded otherwise, but
that a grievous and bitter cup of Gods vengeance is ready to be powered out
for us English men to drink of. The whelpe God has beaten, to fray the
bandogge. Judgment is begun at Gods house. In Gods mercy to him-wards, he
is taken away, that his eyes should not see the miseries which we shall feel.

^eb. 11.
He was too good to tarry with us, so wicked, so froward, so peruers, so
obstinate, so malicious, so hipocritical, so covetous, unclean, untrue, proud,
and carnal a generation. I will not go about to paynt us out in our colors:
All the world which never saw England, by hearesay sees England: God by his
plagues and vengeance, I fear me, will paynt us out, and point us out* We have
so mocked with him and his Gospel, that we shall feel it is no bourding with
him.

Of long time we have covered our covetousness and carnality under the cloak
of his Gospel; so that all men shall see us to our shame, when he shall take
his Gospel away, and give it to a people that will bring forth the fruits of
it: then shall we appear as we be. To let his Gospel tarry with us, he
cannot; for we despise it, contemn it, are glutted with it: We disdain his
Manna: it is but a vile meat, think we: We would be again in Egypt, and sit
by the greasy fleshpottes, to eat again our garlike, onyons, and leekes.
Since Gods Gospel came amongst us, we say now, we had never plenty;
therefore again let us go and worship the Queen of heaven. Children begin
to gather sticks, Iere. 44.
the fathers kindle the fire, and the women make the cakes, to offer to the
Queen of heaven, and to provoke the Lord to anger. The earth can not abide
now the words and Sermons of Amos. The cause of all rebellion, is Amos and his
preaching. Amos 7. Act. 17.
It is Paul and his fellows, that make all out of order. Summa, the Gospel is
now, ^antonpripsica, and catharoa tou eobou, The outcast and curse of the
Realm, and ^o are the Preachers: therefore out of the doors with them. So
that I say, God cannot let his Gospel tarry with us, but must needs take it
away, to do us some pleasure therein: for so shall we think for ^ time: as
the Sodomitanes thought, when ^ot departed from them: Gene. 19. Gene. 7.
as the old world ^hought, when Noe crept into his Arc: as ^he Ierusolomitanes
thought, when the A^ostles went thence to Peltis. Then were ^hey merry, then was
al pastime. Exodus 32
When Mo^es was absent, then went they to eating and drinking, and rose again
to play: Then was ^ll peace, all was well, nothing amiss. But ^las, suddenly
came the flood, and drowned them: Gods wrath waxed hot against them. Then was
weal away, mourning and woe: then was crying out, wringing o^ hands, renting
of clothes, sobbing and sighing for the miseries fallen; out of the which they
could not escape. But, Oh ye^ mourners and criers out, ye renters of clothes,
why mourn ye? what is the cause of your misery? The Gospel is gone; Gods
word is little preached, you are not disquieted with it; Noe troubles you not;
Lot is departed; the Apostles are gone. What now is the cause of these your
miseries? Will you at the length confess, it is your sins? Nay, now it is
too late; God called upon you, and you would not hear him: therefore yell and
cry out now; for he will not hear you. You bowed your ears from hearing of
Gods law: therefore your prayer is execrable.

But to come again to us English men: I fear me (I say) for our unthankfulness
sake, for our impiety and wickedness, as God has taken away our King, so
will he take away his Gospel: yea, so we would have it, then should all be
well, think many. Well, if he take that away, for a time, perchance, we shall
be quiet, but at length we shall feel the want to our woe, at length he will
have at us, as at Sodom, at Jerusalem, and other places. And now he begins
to brew such a brewing, wherein one of us is like to ^estroy an other, and so
make an open ^appe for foreign enemies to devour us, and destroy us. The
father is against the ^nne, the brother against the brother; and ^orde, with
what conscience? O be thou ^ercifull unto us, and in thine anger remember thy
mercy, suffer thy self to be ^treated, be reconciled unto us, nay, recon^ile
us unto thee. O thou God of justice, judge justly: O thou son of God, which
^amest to destroy the works of Satan, ^estroy his furours now smoking, and
almost set on fire in this Realm. We have ^nned, we have sinned, and
therefore art ^hou angry: O be not angry for ever. Give ^s peace, peace,
peace in the Lord: set us to work against sin, against Satan, against our
carnal desires, and give us the victory ^his way. This victory we obtain by
faith. This faith is not without repentance, as her Gentleman Usher before
her. Before her I say, in discerning true faith, from false faith, lip-faith,
Englishmens faith: for else it springs out of true faith.

This Usher then, Repentance, if we truly possessed, we should be certain of
true faith, and so assured of the victory over death, hell, and Satan. His
works then which he has stirred up, would quail, God would restore us
politic peace, right should be right, and have right: Gods Gospel should
tarry with us, Religion should be cherished, Superstition suppressed: and so
we yet something happy, notwithstanding the great loss of our most gracious
Liege sovereign Lord. All these would come to pass you see, if the Gentleman
Usher I speak of, I mean, Repentance, were at Inn with us. As if he be
absent, we may be certain, that Lady Faith is absent. Wherefore, we can not
but be vanquished of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and so will Satan's
works prosper, though not in all things to bleare our eyes, yet in that
thing which he most of all desires. Therefore, to Repentance, for our selves
privately, and for the Realm and Church publicly, every one shall labor to
stir up both ourselves and others. This, to the end that for my part I might
help, I have presently put forth a Sermon of Repentance, which had lain by me
half a year at the least, for the most part of it. For the last Summer, as I
was abroad preaching in the Country, my chance was to make a Sermon of
Repentance, the which was earnestly of diverse desired of me, that I should
give it them written, or else put it forth in Print. The which thing to
grant, as I could not (for I had not written it) so I told them, that had so
earnestly desired it.

But when no nay would serve, but I must promise them to write it as I could: I
consented to their request, that they should have it at my leisure. This
leisure I prolonged so long, that as (I ween) I offended them: so did I please
my self, as one more glad to read other men's writings, then in such sort to
publish mine own, for other men to read: not that I would others not to
profit by me, but that I, knowing how slender my store is, would be loath, for
the enemies to have just occasion of evil speaking, and wresting that which
simply is spoken.

But when I considered this present time, to occasion men now to look upon
all things, in such sort as might move them to godliness, rather then to any
curious questioning: I, for the satisfying of my promise, and profiting of the
simple, ignorant, and rude, have now caused this Sermon to be printed: the
which I beseech God for his Christ's sake, to use as a mean, whereby of his
mercy, it may please him to work in me, and many others, true hearty
repentance for our sins, to the glory of his name.

Thus fare thou well in the Lord, The xii. of July. 1553.
A fruitful Sermon of Repentance, made by the constant Martyr of Christ,
Master John Bradford. 1553.
THe life we have at this present, is the gift of God, in whom we live,
move, and are, and therefore he is called Iehoua. For the which life, as we
should be thankful, so we may not in any wise use it after our own fantasy,
but to the end for the which it is given and lent us, that is: to the setting
forth of Gods praise and glory, by repentance, conversion, and obedience, to
his good will and holy laws, whereunto his long suffering does, (as it were)
even draw us, if our hearts by impenitencie were not hardened. And therefore
our life in the scripture is called a walking, for that as the body daily
draws more and more near his end, that is the earth: even so our soul
draws daily more and more near unto death, that is, salvation, or damnation,
heaven or hell.

Of which thing, in that we are most careless, and very fools, (for we alas,
are the same to day, we were yesterday, and not better or nearer to God, but
rather nearer to hell, Satan, and perdition, being covetous, idle, carnal,
secure, negligent, proud, etc.) I think my labor cannot be better bestowed,
then with the Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, to harp on this string,
which of all other is most necessary, and that in these days most specially.
What string is that, says one? Forsooth, brother, the string of Repentance,
the which Christ our Savior did use, first in his Ministry, and as his
Minister at this present I will use unto you all: Mat. 4.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

This sentence thus pronounced, and preached by our Savior Jesus Christ, as it
does command us to repent, so to the doing of the same, it shows us a
sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto, namely for that, The kingdom of
heaven (which is a kingdom of all joy, peace, riches, power and pleasure) is
at hand, to all such as do so, that is, as do repent: So that the meaning
hereof is, as though our Savior might thus speak presently: Syrs, for that I
see you all walking the wrong way, even to Satan, and unto hell fire, by
following the kingdom of Satan, which now is colored under the vain
pleasures of this life, and foolishness of the flesh most subtly, to your
utter undoing and destruction: behold, and mark well what I say unto you:
The kingdom of heaven, that is, an other manner of joy and felicity, honor,
and riches, power and pleasure, then you now perceive, or enjoy, is even at
hand, and at your backs, as if you will turn again, that is, Repent you, you
shall most truly and pleasantly feel, see, and inherit. Turn again
therefore, I say, that is, Repent, for this joy I speak of, even, The kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.

Here we may note, first the corruption of our nature, in that to this
commandment, Repent you, he adds a cause, For the kingdom of Heaven is at
hand: For by reason of the corruption and sturdines of our nature, God unto al
his commandments. commonly either adds some promise to provoke us to
obedience, or else some such sufficient cause, as cannot but tickle us up to
hearty laboring for ye doing of ye same: as here to the commandment of doing
penance, he adds this Aetimologe or cause, saying: For the kingdom of heaven
is at hand.

Again, in that he joins to the commandment the cause, saying: For the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. We may learn that of the kingdom of heaven,
none (to whom the ministry of preaching does appertain) can be partaker, but
such as repent and do penance. Therefore dearly beloved, if you regard the
kingdom of heaven, in that you cannot enter therein, except you repent: I
beseech you all of every estate, as you would your own weal, to repent and
do penance. The which thing that ye may do, I will do my best now, to help
you by Gods grace.

But first, because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through
ignorance, and for lack of knowledge, and false teaching: I will (to begin
with all) show you what repentance is. Repentance, or penance is no English
word, but we borrow it of the Latinists, to whom penance is a forethinking
in English, in Greek, a being wise afterward, in Hebrew, a conversion or
turning, the which conversion or turning, in that it cannot be true and hearty,
unto God especially, without some good hope or trust of pardon, for that which
is already done and past: I may well in this sort define it, namely, that
penance is a sorrowing or forethinking of our sins ^ast, an earnest purpose
to amend, or turning to God with a trust of pardon.

This definition may be divided into three parts: First, a sorrowing for our
^innes: Secondly, a trust of pardon, which otherwise may be called, a
persuasion of Gods mercy by the merits of Christ, for ^he forgiveness of our
sins: And thirdly, a purpose to amend, or conversion to a new life. The which
third or last part, can not be called properly a part, for it is but an effect
of penance, as toward the end ye shall see by Gods grace. But least such as
seek for occasion to speak evil, should have any occasion though they tarry
not out the end of this Sermon: I therefore divide penance into the three
foresaid parts: of sorrowing for our sin, of good hope or trust of pardon*
and of a new life. Thus you now see* what penance is: a sorrowing for sin, a
purpose to amend, with a good hope or trust of pardon.

This penance not only differs from that which men commonly have taken to
be penance, in saying and doing our enjoined Lady Psalters, seven Psalms,
fastings, Pilgrimages, Alms deeds, and such like things, but all from that
which the more learned have declared, to consist of three parts, namely,
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.

Contrition, they call a just and a full sorrow for their sin. For this word,
just and full, is one of the differences, between contrition and attrition.

Confession, they call a numbering of all their sins in the ear of their
ghostly Father: for as (say they) a Judge cannot absolve without knowledge of
the cause or matter, so cannot the Priest or ghostly father absolve from other
sins, then those which he does hear.

Satisfaction, they call amends making unto God for their sins, by their
undue works, Opera indebita, Works more then they need to do, as they term
them* This is their penance which they preach, write, and allow. But how true
this gear is, how it agreeeth with Gods word, how it is to be allowed,
taught, preached, and written, let us a little consider. If a man repent not,
until he have a just and full sorrowing for his sins (dearly beloved) when
shall he repent? For in as much as hell fire, and the punishment of the devils,
is a just punishment for sin: In as much as in all sin, there is a contempt
of God, which is all goodness, and therefore there is a desert of all ylnesse:
alas, who can bear or feel this just sorrow, this full sorrow for our sins,
this their contrition, which they ^e so discern from their attrition? Shall
^ot man by this doctrine, rather despair, ^hen come by repentance? If a man
repent ^ot until he have made confession of all his sins in the ear of his
ghostly father: if ^ man cannot have absolution of his sins ^ntill his sins
be told by tale and num^er in the Priests ear (in that, as David says) none
can understand, much ^esse then utter all his sins, Delicta quis intelligit?
Who can understand his sins? In that David of himself complayneth else
where, how that his sins are ouerflowed his head, and as a heavy burden do
oppress him, alas, shall not a man by this doctrine, be utterly driven from
repentance? Though they have gone about, something to make plaster for their
sores of confession or attrition, to assuage this gear, bidding a man to hope
well of his contrition, though it be not so full as is required, and of his
confession, though h^ have not numbered all his sins, if so be^ that he do so
much as in him lies: dearly beloved, in that there is none, but that herein
he is guilty (for who does as much as he may) trow ye that this plaster is no
like salt for sore eyes? Yes undoubtedly* when they have done all they can,
for the appeasing of consciences in these points, this is the sum, that we
yet should hope well, but yet so hope, that we must stand in a mammering and
doubting, whether our sins be forgiven. For to believe, Remissionem
peccatorum, that is: To be certain of forgiveness of sins, as our Creed
teaches us, they count it a presumption. O abomination, and that not only
herein* but in all their penance, as they paint it.

As concerning satisfaction by their Opera indebita, Undue works, that is: by
such works as they need not to do, but of their own voluntarinesse and
wilfulness (wilfulness in deed) who seeeth not monsterous abomination,
blasphemy, and even open fighting against God? For if satisfaction can be done
by man, then Christ dyed in vain, for him that so satisfies, and so reigns
he in vain, so is he a Bishop and a Priest in vain. Gods Law requires love
to God with all our heart, soul, power, Deu. 6.2 Mat 22 Mar. 20. Lu. 10.
might and strength: to that there is nothing can be done to Godward, which is
not con^yned in this commandment: nothing can be done, over and above this.
Again, John. 3.
Christ requires to manwarde, That we should love one another, as he loved
us: and trow we, that we can do any good ^ing to our neighbor ward, which
is not ^rein comprised?

Yea, let them tell me, when they do any thing so in the love of God, and their
neigh^our, but that they had need to cry: Re^itte nobis debita nostra, Mat. 6.
Forgive us our ^nnes. So far are we off from satisfying. ^oth not Christ
say: When you have done ^ll things that I have commanded you, say, Lu. 17.
that you be but unprofitable servants? Put nothing to my word, says God.
Yes, Apoc. 22 Deu. 4.1
^oorkes of Supererogation, (yea, super^bomination) say they. Whatsoever things
^re true (says the Apostle S. Paul) whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things ^re just, whatsoever things are pure, what^oeuer things pertain to
love, whatsoe^er things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if
there be any praise: have (...) For to omit the testimonies I brought out of
John and Paul, which the blind cannot but see: I pray you remember the text
out of Esai, which even now I rehearsed, being spoken to such as were then the
people of God, and had bin a long time, but yet were fallen into grievous
sins, after their adoption into the number of Gods children. It is for mine
own sake (says God) that I put away thy sins. Where is your parting of the
stake now? If it be for Gods own sake, if Christ be the propitiation^ then
recant, except you will become Idolaters, making your works God and Christ. Say
as David teaches: Not to us Lord, not to us, but to thy name be the glory.

And it is to be noted, that God does cast in their teeth, even the sin of
their first father, least they should think that yet perchance, for the
righteousness and goodness of their good fathers, their sins might be the
sooner pardoned, and so God accept their works.

If they had taken Satisfaction, for that which is done to the Congregation
publicly, by some notable punishment, as in the Primitive Church, was used to
open offenders, sparkles whereof, and some traces yet remain, when such as
have sinned in adultery, go about the Church with a Taper in their shirtes:
Or if they had made Satisfaction for restitution to manward, of such goods as
wrongfully are gotten, the which true penance cannot be without: Or if by
Satisfaction, they had meant a new life, to make amends to the Congregation
thereby, as by their evil life they did offend the Congregation, in which
sense the Apostle seems to take that which he writes in 2. Corin. 7. where
the old Interpreter calls Apologian, Satisfaction, which rather signifies a
defense or answering again. If I say, they had taken Satisfaction any of these
ways, then they had done well, so that the Satisfaction to God had been left
all only to Christ.

Again, if they had made Confession, either for that which is to God
privately, either for that which is to the Congregation publicly, either for
that which is a free consultation with some one learned in Gods book, and
appointed thereunto, as first it was used, and I wish were now used amongst us,
either for ye which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had been some
thing: yea, if they had made it for faith, because it is a true demonstration
of faith: ^om. 1.
as in Paul we may see, when he calls Christ the Captain of our Confession,
that is, of our faith (and so Confessors were called in the Primitive Church)
such as manfully did witness their faith with the peril of their lives: if, I
say, they had taken it thus, then had they done right well.

And so Contrition, if they had left out their subtle distinction, between it
and attrition, by this word just or full, making it a hearty sorrow for their
sins, then we would never have cried out against them therefore. For we say,
penance has three parts, Contrition, if you understand it for a hearty
sorrowing for sin, Confession, if you understand it for faith, of free pardon
in Gods mercy, by Jesus Christ, and Satisfaction, if you understand it not to
Godwards (for that only to Christ must be left alone) but to manward in
restitution of goods wr^ngfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindered by our
slanders, and in newness of life: although, as I said before, and anon will
show more plainly by Gods grace, that this last is no part of penance in deed,
but a plain effect or fruit of true penanes.

I might here bring in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to be
embraced: but let the example of their graund Sire Judas serve, in whom we see
all the parts of their penance, as they describe it, and yet notwithstanding
he was damned. He was sorry enough, as the effect showed: he had their
contrition fully, out of the which he confessed his fault, saying: I have
betrayed innocent blood: and thereunto he made satisfaction, restoring the
money he had received. But yet all was but lost, he hanged up himself, his
bowels burst out, and he remains a child of perdition for ever. I would wish
that this example of Judas, in whom ye see the parts of their penance,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction, would move them to penance, and to
describe it a little better, making hope or trust of Gods free mercy a piece
thereof, or else with Judas they will mar all.

Perchance these words, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, were used as
I have expounded them at the first. But in that we see so much danger and
hurt by using them without expositions, either let us join to them open
expositions always, or else let us not use them at all, but say as I write,
that penance is a hearty sorrow for our sins, a good hope or trust of pardon
through Christ, which is not without an earnest purpose to amend, or a new
life. This penance is the thing, whereto all the Scripture calls us. This
penance do I now call you all unto: this must be continually in us, and not
for a Lent season, as we have thought: this must increase daily more and more
in us: without this we cannot be saved.

Search therefore your hearts all, all swearers, blasphemers, liars,
flatterers, baudy, or idle talkers, iesters, bribers, covetous persons,
drunkardes, gluttons, whoremongers, thieves, murderers, slanderers, idle
livers, negligent in their vocation, etc. All such, and all other as lament not
their sins, as hope not in Gods mercy for pardon, and purpose not heartily
to amend, to leave their swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, covetousness,
idleness, etc. All such, I say, shall not or cannot enter into Gods kingdom,
but hell fire is prepared for them, weeping, and gnashing of teeth: whereunto,
alas, I fear me, very many will needs go, in that very many will be as they
have bin, let us even to the wearing of our tongue to the stumpes, preach and
pray never so much to the contrary, and that even in ye bowels of Jesus Christ:
as now I beseech you all, all, all, and every mothers child, to repent and
lament your sin, to trust in Gods mercy, and to amend your lives.

Now me thinks, ye are somewhat astonished: whereby I gather, that presently you
desire this Repentance, that is: this sorrow, good hope, and newness of life.
The which that you may the rather attain, and get to your comforts, as I have
gone about to be a mean to stir up in you (by Gods grace) this desire of
Repentance, so through the same grace of God, will I go about now to show you,
how you may have your desire in this behalf.

And first, concerning this part, namely, sorrow for your sins, and hearty
lamenting of the same: For this, if you desire the having of it, you must
beware, that you think not, that of your selves, or of your own free will, by
any means you can get it. You may easily deceive your selves, and mock your
selves, thinking more of your selves then is seemly. All good things, and not
pieces of good things, but all good things, ^im. 1.
says Saint James, come from God the Father of light. If therefore penance be
good (as it is good) then the parts of it be good. Reg. 2.
From God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It is the Lord that
mortifieth, that brings down, that humbles, ^erem. 31
says the Scripture in sundry places: After thou had stricken my thigh
(says Jeremy) I was ashamed. Lo, he says, After thou had stricken me:
and therefore prays he, even in the last words almost, he writes: Turn
us, O Lord, and we shall be turned. ^am. 5.
The which thing David uses very often. Wherefore first of all, if thou
would have this part of penance, as for the whole, Act. 12. Tim. 2
because it is Gods gift, so for this part go thou unto God, and make some
little prayer, as thou can, unto his mercy, for the same, in this or like
sort.

Merciful Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I have sinned and done
wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire of Repentance,
whereto this thy long sufferance does draw my hard heart, I beseech thee for
thy mercies sake in Christ, to work the same Repentance in me, and by thy
spirit, power, and grace so to humble, mortify, and fear my conscience for
my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort and quicken me
again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. Amen.

After this sort, I say, or otherwise, as thou think good, if thou will have
this first part, Contrition, or sorrow for thy sins, do thou beg it of God
through Christ. And when thou have asked it, as I have labored to drive thee
from trusting in thy self, so now I go about to move thee from flattering of
thy self, from sluggishnes and negligence, to be diligent to use these means
following. Unto prayer, which I would thou should first use as thou can:
secondly, get thee Gods Law as a glass to toot in: for in it, and by it,
comes the true knowledge of sin, without which knowledge, there can be no
sorrow. For how can a man sorrow for his sins, which knows not his sins? As
when a man is sick, the first step to health, is to know his sickness: even
so to salvation, the first step, is to know thy damnation due for thy sins.

The Law of God therefore must be gotten and well tooted in: that is, we must
look in it spiritually, and not corporally, or carnally, as the outward word
or letter does declare and utter: and so our Savior teaches us in Matthew,
expounding the sixte and seventh commandments, not only after the outward
deed, but also after the heart, making the^e the anger of the heart, a kind of
murder, lusting after an other man's wife, a kind of adultery.

And this is one of the differences between Gods Law and man's law, that of
this (man's law I mean) I am not contemnable, so long as I observe outwardly
the same. But Gods Law goes to the roof and to the heart, condemning me for
the inward motion, although outwardly I live most holily. As for example: If I
kill no man, though in my heart I hate, man's law condemns me not: but
otherwise does Gods law. And why? for it seeeth the fountain whence the evil
does spring. If hatred were taken out of the heart, then loftiness in looks,
detraction in tongue, and murder by hand, could never ensue. If lusting were
out of the heart, curiosity in countenance, wantonness in words, baudy
boldness in body would not appear.

In that therefore this outward evil springs out of the inward corruption:
seeing Gods Law also is a Law of liberty, as says saint James: and
spiritual, Iam. 2. Romans 7.
as says ^aint Paul: perfectly and spiritually it is to ^e understood, if we
will truly come to the ^nowledge of our sins. For of this ^nward corruption,
reason knows but ^ittle or nothing. I had not known (says Paul) that
lusting (which to reason, Romans 7.
and ^o them which are guided only by reason, ^s thought but a trifle:) I had
not known (says he) this lusting to have been sin, ^f the Law had not
said, Non concupisces, Thou shall not lust.

To the knowledge therefore of our sin (without which we cannot repent, or
be sort for our sin,) let us secondly get us Gods Law, as a glass to toote
in: and that not only literally, outwardly, or partly, but also spiritually,
inwardly, and thoroughly. Let us consider the heart, and so shall we see the
foul spots we are stained withal, at least inwardly, whereby we the rather
may be moved to hearty sorrow and sighing. For as Saint Austine says, it is a
glass which fears no body, but even look what a one thou art, so it
painteth thee out.

In the Law we see it is a foul spotte, not to love the Lord our God, with
all (I say) our heart, soul, power, might and strength, and that continually.

In the Law it is a foul spot, not only to make to our selves any graven
Image or similitude, to bow thereto, etc. but also no^ to frame our selves
wholly after the Image whereto we are made, not to bow to it, to worship it.

In the Law we see that it is a foul spot, not only to take Gods name in
vain, but also not earnestly, heartily, and even continually to call upon his
name only, to give thanks unto him only, to believe, to publish, and live in
his holy word.

In Gods Law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
prophaner of the Sabbath day, but also not to rest from our own words and
works, that the Lord might both speak and work in us and by us, not to
hear his holy word, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to give occasion
to others to holiness, by our example in godly works, and reverent esteeming
of the ministry of his word.

In Gods Law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
disobeyer of our Parents, Magistrates, Masters, and such as be in any
authority over us, ^at also not to honor such even in our ^earts, not to give
thanks to GOD for ^em, not to pray for them, to aid, to help, ^ relieve them,
to bear with their infir^ities, etc.

In Gods Law we see it is a foul spot in ^ur souls, not only to be a
manqueller in ^atred, malice, proud looks, brags, backe^iting, railing, or
bodily slaughter: but al^o not to love our neighbors, yea, our enemies, even
in our hearts, and to declare ^he same in all our gestures, words, and works.

In Gods law we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be a
whoremonger in lusting, in our hearts, in wanton looking, in unclean and
wanton talking, in actual doing unhonestly with our neighbors wife,
daughter, servant, etc. But also not to be chaste, sober, temperate in heart,
looks, tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others thereunto accordingly, etc.

In Gods Law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only in heart, to
covet, in look or word to flatter, lie, color, etc. in deed to take away
any thing which pertayneth to an other: but also in heart, countenance, word
and deed, not t^ keep* save, and defend that which pe^taineth to thy
neighbor, as thou woulde^ thine own.

In Gods Law, we may see it a foul^ spot, not only to lie or bear false
witness^ against any man, but also not to have as great care over thy
neighbors name, as over thine own.

Sin in Gods Law, it is we may see, and a foul spot, not only to consent to
evil lust, or carnal desires, but even the very natural or carnal lusts,
and desires themselves, for so I may call them: nature it self, being now so
corrupted, are sin, and self-love, and many such like. By reason whereof, I
trow there is none that tooteth well therein, but though he be blameless to the
world, and fair to the show, yet certainly, inwardly his face is foul arrayed,
and so shameful, saucie, mangie, pockie and scabbed, that he cannot but be
sorry at the contemplation thereof, and that so much more by how much he
continues to look in this glass accordingly.

And thus much concerning the second mean to the stirring up of sorrow for our
sin, that next unto prayer, we should ^ofe in Gods law spiritually. The
which ^ting, if we use with prayer, as I said, ^et us not doubt, but at the
length Gods ^irite will work, as now to such as be^eue, for to the unbelievers
all is in vain, their eyes are stark blind, they can see nothing) to such as
believe (I say) I trust ^eme thing is done even already. But if ^eyther by
prayer, nor by tooting in Gods ^aw spiritually, as yet thy hard vnbelee^ing
heart feels no sorrow, nor lamen^ing for thy sin: Thirdly, look upon the
^ag tied to Gods Law: for to man's law ^here is a tag tied, that is, a penalty,
and that no small one, but such a one, as cannot but make us to cast our
currish tails between our legs, if we believe it, for all is in vain, if we
be faithless, not to believe before we feel.

This tag is Gods malediction or curse. Maledictus omnis (says it) qui non
permanet in omnibus quae scripta sunt in libro legis, vt faciat eam. Lo,
accursed (says he) is all, no exception, all, says God, which continues not
in all things (for he that is guilty of one, is guilty of the whole, says S.
James:) in all things therefore, (says the holy Ghost) which are written in
the book of the law to do them. He says not, to hear them, to talk of
them, to dispute of them, but, to do them.

Who is he now that does these? Rara anis, few such Byrds, yea, none at all.
For all are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or deed, yet
inwardly at the least by default, and wanting of that which is required: so
that a child of one nights age is not pure, but (by reason of birth-sinne) in
danger of Gods malediction: then much more we, which alas, have drunken in
iniquity, as it were water, as Job says: But yet alas we quake not.

Tell me now, good brother, why do you so lightly consider Gods curse, that for
your sins past, you are so careless, as though you had made a covenant with
death and damnation, as the wicked did in Esayes time? What is Gods curse? At
the Popes curse with book, bell, and candle, O, how trembled we, which heard
it, but only though the same was not directed unto us, but unto others? For
this Gods curse, which is incomparable, more sell and importable, and is
directed to us, yea, hanging over us, all by reason of our sins: alas, how
careless are we? O faithless hard hearts. O Iezabels ghests, rocked and laid
asleep in her bed. O wicked wretches, which being come into the depth of
sin, do contemn the same. O sorrowlesse sinners, and shameless shrinking
harlottes.

Is not the anger of a King death? and is the anger of the King of all Kings, a
matter to be so lightly regarded as we do regard it, which for our sins are
so retchlesse, that we slugge and sleep it out? As wax melts away at the
heat of the fire (says David) so do the wicked perish at the face or
countenance of the Lord.

If, dearly beloved, his face be so terrible and intolerable for sinners, and
the wicked: what trow we his hand is? At the face and appearing of Gods anger,
the earth trembles: but we earth, earth, yea, stones, iron, flints, tremble
nothing at all. If we will not tremble in hearing, woe unto us, for then shall
we be crashed in pieces in feeling. If a Lion roar, the beasts quake: but
we are worse then beasts, which quake nothing at the roaring of the Lion, I
mean ye Lord of hosts. And why? because the curse of God, hardness of heart, is
already fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and tremble for our
sins: If not for the shame and foulenes thereof, yet at the least, for the
malediction and curse of God, which hangs over us for our sins.

Lord be merciful unto us for thy Christ's sake, and spare us, in thine anger
remember thy mercies toward us: Amen.

And thus much for the third thing to the moving of us to sorrow for our
sins, that is, for the tag tied to Gods Law, I mean, for the malediction and
curse of God. But if our hearts be so hard, that through these, we yet feel
not hearty sorrow for our sins: let us fourthly set before us examples past
and present, old and new, thereby the holy spirit may be effectual to work
in his time this work of sorrowing for our sin.

Look upon Gods anger for sin in Adam and Eve, for eating a piece of an
apple. Were not they, the dearest creatures of God, cast out of Paradise? Were
not they subject to mortality, travail, labor, etc. Was not the earth
accursed for their sins? Do not we all, men in labor, women in traueiling
with child, and all in death, mortality and misery, even in this life feel
the same? And was God so angry for their sin, and he being the same God,
will he say nothing to us for ours (alas) more horrible then the eating once of
one piece of an apple?

In the time of Noe and Lot, God destroyed the whole world with water, Genesis 6.
and the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra, Genesis 19
Seboim and Adamah, with fire and brimstone from heaven for their sins,
namely, for their whoredoms, pride, idleness, unmercifulness to the poor,
tyranny, etc. In which wrath of God, even the very babes, birds, fowls,
fishes, herbs, trees, and grass perished: and think we that nothing will be
spoken to us, much worse and more abominable then they? For all men may see,
if they will, that the whoredoms, pride, unmercifulness, tyranny, etc. of
England, far passes in this age, any age that ever was before. Lots wife
looking back, Genesis 19
was turned into a salt stone: and will our looking back again, yea, our
running back again to our wickedness, do us no hurt? If we were not already
more then blind Beetles, we would blush. Pharao, his heart was hardened so,
that no miracle could convert him: if ours were any thing soft, we would begin
to sob.

^ua and ^aleb.
Of six hundred thousand men, all only but twain entered into ye Land of
promise, because they had ten times sinned against the Lord, as he himself
says: and trow we, ^um. 14
that God will not swear in his wrath, that we shall never enter into his
rest, which have sinned so many ten times, as we have toes and fingers, yea,
hairs on our heads and beards (I fear me) and yet we pass not.

^euit. 24 ^um. 15
The man that swear, and he that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, were stoned
to death: but we think our swearing is no sin, our bribing, rioting, yea,
whorehunting on the Sabbath day, pleases God, or else we would something
amend our manners.

Reg. 5.
Helias negligence in correcting his sons, nipped his neck in two: but ours
which pamper up our children like puppets, will put us to no plunge? Helias
sons for disobeying their fathers admonition, brought over them Gods
vengeance: and will our stubburnesse do nothing?

^. Reg. ^1.22.
Saul's malice to David, Acabs displeasure against Naboth, brought their blood
to the ground for dogs to eat, yea, their children were hanged up and slain
for this gear: but we continue in malice, envy, 4 Reg. 4. Re. 1
and murder, as though we were able to wage war with the Lord.

David's adultery with Bethsabe, was visited on ye child borne, on David's
daughter, defiled by her brother, and on his children, one slaying another, his
wives defiled by his own son, and himself driven out of his Realm in his
old age, and otherwise also, although he most heartily repented his sin: But
we are more dear unto God then David, which yet was a man after Gods own
heart, or else we could not but tremble, and begin to repent.

The rich gluttons gay paunch filling: what did it? it brought him to hell: and
have we a placcard, that God will do nothing to us?

Achans subtle theft provoked Gods anger against all Israel: and our
subtlety, yea, open extortion, is so fine and politic, that God can not epsy
it.

Gehezi his covetousness, brought it not the Leprosy upon him, and on all his
seed? Judas also hanged himself. But the covetousness of England is of
another cloth and color. Well, if it were so, the same Tallor will cut it
accordingly.

Anania and Saphira by lying, linked to them sudden death: but ours now
prolongeth our life the longer, to last in eternal death.

The false witness of the two Judges against Susanna, lighted on their own
pates: and so will ours do at length.

But what go I about to avouch ancient examples, where daily experience does
teach? The Sweat the other year, the storms the Winter following, will us to
weigh them in the same balances. The hanging and killing of men themselves,
which are (alas) too rife in all places, require us to register the^ in the
same roules. At the least in Children, Infants, and such like, which yet cannot
utter sin by word or deed, we see Gods anger against sin, in punishing
them by sickness, death, mishappe or otherwise, so plainly, that we cannot but
groan and grunt again, in that we have gushed out this gear more abundantly
in word and deed.

And here with me a little look on Gods anger, yet so fresh, that we cannot
but smell it, although we stop our noses never so much, I pray God we smell
it not more fresh hereafter, I mean it forsooth (for I know you look for it)
in our dear late Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty. You al know he was but a
Child in years, defiled he was not with notorious offenses: Defiled, quoth he?
nay, rather adorned with so many good gifts, and wonderful qualities, as never
Prince was from the beginning of the world. Should I speak of his wisdom, of
his ripeness in judgment, of his learning, of his godly zeal, heroical
heart, fatherly care for his Commons, nurcely solicitude for Religion? etc.
Nay, so many things are to be spoken in commendation of Gods exceeding graces
in this Child: that, as Salust writes of Carthage, I had rather speak
nothing, then too little, in that, too much is too little. This gift God gave
unto us English men, before all Nations under the Sun, and that of his
exceeding love toward us. But alas, and welaway: for our unthankfulness sake,
for our sins sake, for our carnalitie and profane living, Gods anger has
touched, not only the body, but also the mind of our King, by a long
sickness, and at length has taken him away by death, death, cruel death,
fearful death. O, if Gods judgment be begun on him, which as he was the
chiefest, so I think the holiest, and godlyest in the Realm of England,
(alas) what will it be on us, whose sins are ouergrowne so our heads, that
they are climed up into heaven? I pray yo^, my good brethren, know that Gods
anger for our sin toward us, cannot but be great, yea, too fell, in that we
see it was so great, that our good King could not bear it. What followed to
Iewrie, after the death of Josias? God save England, and give us repentance: my
heart will not suffer me to tarry longer herein: I trow this will thrust out
some tears of repentance.

If therefore to prayer for Gods fear, the tooting in Gods glass, and the tag
thereto will not burst open thy blockish heart, yet, I trow, the tossing to and
fro of these examples, and specially of our late King, and this troublesome
time, will tumble some tears out of thine heart, if thou still pray for Gods
spirit accordingly. For who art thou (think always with thy self) that GOD
should spare thee, more then them whose examples thou have heard? What friends
have thou? Were not of these Kings, Prophets, Apostles, learned, and come of
holy stocks? I deceive my self, (think thou with thy self) if I believe that
God, being the same God that he was, will spare me, whose wickedness is no
less, but much more then some of theirs. He hates sin now, as much as ever
he did. The longer he spares, the greater vengeance will fall: the deeper
he draws his Bow, the sorer will the shaft pierce.

But if yet thy heart be so hardened, that all this gear will not move thee,
surely thou art in a very evil estate, and remedy now I know none. What, said
I, none? Know I none? Yes, there is one, which is suresby, as they say, to
serve, if any thing will serve. You look to know what this is. Forsooth, the
Passion and death of Jesus Christ. You know, the cause why Christ became man,
and suffered as he suffered, was the sins of his people, that he might save
them from the same. Consider the greatness of the sore, I mean sin, by the
greatness of the Surgion, and the salve. Who was the Surgion? No Angel, no
Saint, no Archangell, no power, no creature in heaven nor in earth: but only
he, by whom all things were made, all things are ruled also, even Gods own
deareling, and only beloved Son, becoming man.

Oh what a great thing is this, that could not be done by the Angels,
Archangelles, Potentates, Powers, or all the creatures of God, without his own
Son? who yet must needs be thrust out of heaven, as a man would say, to take
our nature, and become man. Here have ye the Surgion: great was the cure,
that this mighty Lord took in hand.

Now, what was the salve? Forsooth, dear gear, and of many compositions: I
cannot recite all, but rather must leave it to your hearty considerations.
Three and thirty years was he curing our sore. He sought it earnestly by
fasting, watching, praying etc. The same night that he was betrayed, I read
how busy he was about a plaster in the garden, when he lying flat on the
ground, praying with tears, and that of blood not a few, but so many as did
flow down on the ground again, crying on this sort: Father, (says he) if it
be possible, let this cup depart from me. That is, If it be possible, that
else the sins of mankind can be taken away, grant that it may be so. Thou
heardest Moses crying for the Idolaters: Thou heardest Lot for the Zoarites:
Samuel, David, and many other for the Israelites: And dear Father, I only am
thine own son, as thou have said, in whom thou art well pleased: will thou
not hear me? I have by the space of three and thirty years, done always thy
will: I have so humbled my self, that I would become an abject amongst men, to
obey thee. Therefore (dear Father) if it be possible, grant my request, save
mankind, now without any further labor, salues, or plasters. But yet (says
he) not as I will, but as thou will.

But Sir, what heard he? Though he sweat blood and water, in making his
plaster for our sore of sin, yet it framed not. Twice he cried without
comfort: yea, though to comfort him, God sent an Angel, we yet know, that this
plaster was not allowed for sufficient, until hereunto, Christ Jesus was
betrayed, forsaken of al his Disciples, forsworn of his dearly beloved, bound
like a Thief, belyed on, buffeted, whipped, scourged, crowned with thorns,
derided, crucified, racked, nailed, hanged up between two thieves, cursed and
rayled upon, mocked in misery, and had given up the ghost: then bowed down
the head of Christ, that is, God the Father, which is the head of Christ: then
allowed he the plaster, to be sufficient and good for the healing of our
sore, which is sin. Now would God abide our breath, because the stink, that
is, damnation or guiltiness, was taken away by the sweet savor of the breath
of this Lamb, thus offered once for all.

So that here, dearly beloved, we as in a glass may see, to the brusing of
our blockish hard hearts, Gods great judgment and anger against sin. The Lord
of lords, the King of kings, Genesis 6. Genesis 19.
the brightness of Gods glory, the Son of God, the Deareling of his Father,
in whom he is well pleased, hangs between two thieves, crying for thee and
me, and for us all: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh hard hearts
that we have, which make tuttes for sin. Look on this: toote in the very
heart of Christ pierced with a spear, wherein thou may see, and read Gods
horrible anger for sin. Woe to thy hard heart that pierced it.

And thus much for the first part of Repentance, I mean, for the means of
working contrition. First, use prayer: then ^ooke on Gods Law: thirdly, see his
curse: Genesis 19.
fourthly, set examples of his anger before thee: and last of all, set before
thee the death of Christ.

From this and prayer cease not, till thou feel some hearty sorrow for thy
sin. The which when thou feel, then labor for the other part, that is,
faith, on this sort.

As first, in Contrition I willed thee not to trust to thy free will, for the
attayning of it: so do I will thee in this. Faith is so far from the reach
of man's free will, that to reason it is plain foolishnes. Therefore, thou must
first go to God, whose gift it is: thou must, I say, get thee to the Father of
mercy, whose work it is, that as he has brought thee down by Contrition,
and humbled thee, so he would give thee faith, raise thee up, and exalt thee.

On this manner therefore, with the Apostles, and the poor man in the Gospel,
that cried: Lord increase our faith: Lord help my unbelief, pray thou and
say: O merciful God and dear Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in
whom as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him, for as
much as he often bids us to ask of thee, 2. Tim. 2
and thereto promises that thou will hear us, and grant us that which in his
name we shall ask of thee: lo, gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy
mercy, through thy Son Jesus Christ, one sparkle of true faith, and certain
persuasion of thy goodness and love toward me in Christ, wherethrough I
being assured of the pardon of all my sins, by the mercies of Christ thy
son, may be thankful to thee, love thee, and serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

On this sort I say, or otherwise as God shall move thee, pray thou first of
all, and look for thy request at Gods hand, without any doubting, though
forthwith thou feel not the same: for oftentimes we have things of GOD
given us, long before we feel them as we would do. Now unto this prayer, use
thou these means following.

After prayer for faith, which I would should be first, secondly, because the
same springs out of the hearing, not of Masses, Mattins, Cannons, Councels,
Doctors, Decrees, but out of the hearing of Gods ^oord, get thee Gods word,
but not that ^art which serves, specially to Contrition, that is the Law: but
the other part, which serves specially to consolation and certain persuasion
of Gods love toward thee, that is, the Gospel or publication of Gods mercy
in Christ, I mean the free promises.

But here thou must know, that there are two kinds of promises: one, which is
properly of the Law: another, which is properly of the Gospel. In the promises
of the Law, we may indeed behold Gods mercy, but so, that it hangs upon the
condition of our worthiness, as, if thou love the Lord with all thy heart, etc.
thou shall find mercy. This kind of promises, though it declare unto us Gods
love, which promises where he needs not: yet unto him that feels not
Christ, which is the end of the Law, they are so far from comforting, that
utterly with the Law they bring man to great despair: so greatly we are
corrupt, for none so loves God as he ought to do. From these therefore get
thee to the other promises of the Gospel, in which we may see such plenty and
francke liberality of Gods goodness, that we can not but be much comforted,
though we have very deeply sinned. For these promises of the Gospel do not
hang on the condition of our worthiness, as the promises of the Law do: but
they depend and hang on Gods truth, that as God is true, so they cannot but be
performed to all them which lay hold on them by faith, I had almost said,
which cast the^ not away by unbelief.

Mark in them therefore two things, namely, that as well they are free
promises, without any condition of our worthiness: as also, that they are
universal, offered to all, all (I say) which are not so stubburne, as to keep
still their hands, whereby they should receive this alms in their bosoms, by
unbelief. As concerning Infants and children, you know I now speak not, but
concerning such as be of years of discretion. And now you look that I should
give you a taste of these promises, which are both free and universal, except
none but such as except themselves. Well, you shall have one or two for a say.

In the 3. of John, says our Savior: So God the Father loved the world, that
he would give his dearling, his own only Son, that all that believe in him
should ^ot perish, but have everlasting life. Lo, ^r, he says not, that some
might have life: ^ut all, says he. And what all? All yt love ^im with all
their hearts? all yt have lived a ^odly life? Nay, all that believe in him.
Al^hough thou have lived a most wicked and hor^ible life: if now thou believe
in him, thou ^halt be saved. Is not this sweet gear?

Again says Christ: Come unto me, all ^ee that labor and are laden, and I
will re^esh you. Let us a little look on this letter: Come unto me. Who should
come? Lords, Priests, Holy men, Monks, Friars? Yea, ^oblers, Tinkers, whores,
thieves, mur^herers also, if they lament their sins. Come unto me (says he)
all ye that labor and are laden, that is, which are afraid of ^our sins. And
what will thou do, Lord? And I will refresh you (says he.)

O, what a thing is this: And I will re^esh you? Wot you who spoke this? He
that never told lie: He is the truth, there ^as never guile found in his
mouth: and ^ow will he be untrue to thee, good brother, which art sorry for thy
grievous sins? No ^rsooth: heaven and earth shall pass and pe^ish, but his
word shall never fail.

Saint Paul says, God would have al men saved: Lo, he excepteth none. And to
Titus: The grace of God brings salvation to all men. As from Adam al have
received sin to damnation: so by Christ all have grace offered to salvation,
if they reject not the same. I speak not now of Infants, I say: nor I need not
to enter into the matter of Predestination. In preaching of repentance, I would
gather where I could with Christ.

As surely as I live, (says God) I will not the death of a sinner. Art thou a
sinner? Yea. Lo, God swears, he will not thy death. How can thou now
perish? Consider with thy self what profit thou should have to believe
this to be true to others, if not, to thy self also: Satan does so. Rather
consider with Peter, that the promise of salvation pertains not only to them
which are nie, that is, to such as are fallen a little: but also to all, to
who^ the Lord has called, be they never so far off.

Lo, now by me the Lord calls thee, thou man, thou woman, that art very
far off. The promise therefore pertayneth to thee: needs must thou be saved,
except thou with Satan say, God is false: And yet if thou do so, God is
faithful, and can not deny himself: as thou shall feel by his plagues in
hell, for so dishonouring God, to think that he is not true. Will he be
found false now? The matter hangs not on thy worthiness, but it hangs on
Gods truth. Clap hold on it, and I warrant thee, Christ is the propitiation
for our sins, yea, for the sins of the whole world: believe this, man: I know
thou beleeuest it: say therefore in thy heart still, Domine audage mihi fidem:
Lord increase my faith: Lord help my unbelief. Blessed are they which see not
(by reason) this gear, but yet believe. Hope, man, past all hope, as Abraham
did.

And thus much for a taste of these promises, which are every where, not only
in the new Testament, but also in the old. Read the last end of Leuiticus 26.
The Prophet Esaias 30. Where he says: God tarrieth looking for thee, to show
thee mercy. Also the 40. and so forth to the 60. Read also ye 2. Reg. 24.
Psa. 33. Joel. 2. etc.

Howbeit, if this gear will not serve, i^ yet thou feel no faith, no
certain persuasion of Gods love: then unto prayer and diligent considering of
the free and universal promises of the Gospel: Thirdly, set before thee those
benefits which God has to foregiuen thee, and presently gives thee. Consider
how he has made thee a man or a woman, which might have made thee a Toade, or
a Dog. And why did he this? Verily, because he loved thee. And trowest thou,
that if he loved thee when thou wast not, to make thee such a one, as he most
graciously has made thee: will he not now love thee, being his handy work?
Does he hate any thing that he made? Is there unableness with him? Does he
love for a day, and so farewell? No forsooth, he loves to the end, his mercy
endures for ever. Say therefore with Job: Operi manuum tuarum, porrige
dexteram, that is: To the work of thy hands, put thy helping hand.

Again, has he not made thee a Christian man or woman, where if he would,
he might have made thee a Turk or Paynim? This thou know he did of love.
And do thou think his love is lessened, if thou lament thy sin? Is his
hand shortened for helping thee? Can a woman forget the child of her womb? And
though she should do it, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord. He has
given thee lyms, to see, hear, go, etc. He has given thee wit, reason,
discretion, etc. He has long spared thee, and borne with thee, when thou
never purposedst to repent: and now thou repenting, will he not give thee
mercy? Wherefore does he grant thee to live at this present, to hear him to
speak this, and me to speak this: but of love to us all? Oh, therefore let
us pray him, that he would add to this, that we might believe these love
tokens, that he loves us, and indeed he will do it. Lord, open our eyes, in
thy gifts, to see thy gracious goodness. Amen.

But to tarry in this I will not. Let every man consider Gods benefits, past
and present, public and private, spiritual and corporal, to the confirming of
his faith, concerning the promises of the Gospel, for the pardon of his sins.

I will now go about to show you a fourth mean to confirm your faith in this
gear, even by examples. Of these there are in the Scriptures very many, as
also daily experience does diversely teach the same, if we were diligent to
observe things accordingly: wherefore I will be more brief herein, having
respect to time, which steals fast away.

Adam in Paradise transgressed grievously, as the painful punishment, which we
all as yet do feel, proves, if nothing else. Though by reason of his sin,
he displeased God sore, and ran away from God, (for he would have hid
himself, yea, he would have made GOD the causer of his sin, in that he gave
him such a mate, so far was he from asking mercy) yet all this
notwithstanding, God turned his fierce wrath, neither upon him nor Eve, which
also required not mercy, but upon the Serpent Satan: promising unto them a
seed, Jesus Christ, by whom they at the length should be delivered. In toke^
whereof, though they were cast out of Paradise for their nurture, to serve in
sorrow, which would not serve in joy, yet he made them apparel to cover their
bodies: a visible Sacrament, and token of his invisible love and grace,
concerning their souls. If God was so merciful to Adam, which so sore brake
his commandment, and rather blamed God, then asked mercy: trowest thou, O
man, that he will not be merciful to thee, which blamest thy self, and
desire pardon?

To Cain he offered mercy, if he would have asked it. What have thou done,
says God? The voice of thy brothers blood, cries unto me out of the earth. O
merciful Lord (should Cain have said) I confess it: But alas, he did not
so, and therefore said God: Now, that is, In that thou desire not mercy:
Now, I say, be thou accursed etc. Lo, to the Reprobate he offered mercy, and
will he deny it thee, which art his Child?

Noah, did he not sin and was drunk? Good Lot also, both in Sodom
dissembled a little with the Angels, prolonging the time: and out of Sodom,
he fell very foul: as did Judas, and the Patriarchs against Joseph, but yet I
ween they found mercy. Moses, Myriam, Aaron, though they stumbled a little,
yet received they mercy: yea, the people in the wilderness often sinned and
displeased God, so that he was purposed to have destroyed them. Let me alone
(says he to Moses) that I may destroy them. But Moses did not let him alone,
for he prayed still for them, and therefore God spared them. If the people were
spared through Moses prayer, they not praying with him, but rather worshipping
their golden Calfe, eating, drinking, and making ^olly good cheer: why
should thou doubt whether God will be merciful to thee? having, as in deed
thou have, one much better then Moses to pray for thee, and with thee, even
Jesus Christ who sits on the right hand of his Father, and prays for us,
being no less faithful in his Fathers house, the Church, then Moses was in
the Synagogue. David that good King had a foul foil, when he committed
whoredom with his faithful servants wife, Bethsabe: whereunto he added also
a mischievous murder, causing her husband, his most faithful Soldier Vrie to
be slain, with an honest company of his most valiant men of war, and that
with the sword of the uncircumcised.

In this his sin, though a great while he lay asleep, (as many do now a
days, God give them good waking) thinking that by the Sacrifices he offered,
all was well, God was content: yet at length, when the Prophet by a Parable,
had opened the poke, and brought him in remembrance of his own sin, in such
sort, that he gave judgment against himself: then quaked he, his Sacrifices
had no more taken away his sins, then our Sir John's Trentals, and wagging of
his fingers over the heads of such as lie asleep in their sins (out of the
which when they are awaked, they will well see, that it is neither Mass nor
Mattins, blessing nor cursing will serve,) then I say, he cried out, saying:
Peccaui, Domine: I have sinned, says he, against my Lord and good God, which
has done so much for me. I caused indeed Vrie to be killed, I have sinned, I
have sinned. What shall I do? I have sinned, and am worthy of eternal
damnation. But what says God by his Prophet: Dominus (says he) transtuli^
peccatum tuum, non morieris: The Lord has taken away thy sins, thou shall
not die. Oh good God, he said, but, Peccaui, I have sinned: but yet from his
heart, and not from the lips only, as Pharao and Saul did, and incontinently
he hears: Thou shall not die, the Lord has taken away thy sins: Or rather
has laid them upon an other, yea, translated them upon the back of his son
Jesus Christ, who bare them, and not only them, but thine and mine also, if
that we will now cry but from our hearts, Peccauimus: We have sinned, good
Lord, we have done wickedly, enter not into judgment with us, but be
merciful unto us after thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
compassions, do away our iniquities, etc. For indeed, God is not the God of
David only: Idem Deus omnium, He is the God of all: So that, Quicunque
inuocauerit nomen Domini, saluus erit. He or she, whosoever they be that call
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In confirmation whereof, this
History is written, as are also the other which I have recited, and many mo
which I might recite. As of Manasles the wicked king, which flew Esai the
Prophet, and wrought very much wickedness: yet the Lord showed mercy upon him
being in prison, as his Prayer does teach us. Nabuchodonozor, though for a
time he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found mercy. The City of Niniue
also found favor with God, as did many other, which I will omit for times
sake, and will bring forth one or two out of the new Testament, that we may
see God to be the same God in the new Testament, that he was in the old.

I might tell you of many, if I should speak of the Lunatike, such as were
possessed with Devils, Lame, Blind, Dumb, Deaf, Lepers, etc. But time will
not suffer me: one or two therefore shall serve. Marie Magdalen had seven
devils, but yet they were cast out of her: and of all others, she was the
first that Christ appeared unto, after his resurrection. Thomas would not
believe Christ's resurrection, though many told him, which had seen and felt
him: by reason whereof, a man might have thought that his sins would have
cast him away. Except I should see and feel (says he) I will not believe. Ah
wilful Thomas: I will not, says he. But Christ appeared unto him, and would
not leese him, as he will not do thee, good brother, if that with Thomas thou will keep company with the Disciples, as Thomas did. Peter's fall was ugly, he
accursed himself, if ever he knew Christ, and that for fear of a Gyrle, and
this not once, but even three diverse times, and that in the hearing of Christ
his Master: but yet the third time Christ looked back, and cast on him his eye
of grace, so that he went out and wept bitterly. And after Christ's
resurrection, not only did the Angels will the woman to tell Peter, that
Christ was risen, but Christ himself appeared unto him severally: such a good
Lord is he.

The Thief hanging on the Cross, said but this: Lord, when thou come into
thy Kingdom, remember me: And what answer had he? This day (says Christ)
shall thou be with me in Paradise. What a comfort is this, in that he is now
the same Christ to thee and me, and to us all, if we will run unto him? for
he is the same Christ to day and to morrow, until he come to judgment. Then
indeed, he will be inexorable: but now is he more ready to give, then thou to
ask. If thou cry, he hears thee, yea before thou cry.

Cry therefore, be bold, man, he is not partial. ^ai. 31. ^et. 7.
Call, says he, and I will hear thee: Ask and thou shall have: Seek, and
thou shall find: though not at the first, yet at the length. If he tarry a
while, it is but to try thee. ^b. 10.
Nam veniens veniet, and non tardabit: He is coming, and will not be long.

Thus have you four means, which you must use to the attayning of faith, or
certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward you, which is the second part of
penance, namely, prayer, the free and universal promises of Gods graces, the
recordation of the benefits of God, past and present, the examples of Gods
mercy. Which although they might suffice, yet will I put one more to them,
which all only of it self, is full sufficient: I mean, the death of the
Son of God, Jesus Christ: which if thou set before the eyes of thy mind, it
will confirm thy placcard: for it is the great Seal of England, as they say,
yea, of all the world, for the confirmation of all patents and perpetuities of
the everlasting life, whereunto we are all called.

If I thought these, which I have before recited, were not sufficient to
confirm your faith, of Gods love toward such as do repent, I would tarry
longer herein. But because I have been both long, and also I trust, you have
some exercise of conscience in this daily (or else you are too blame) I will but
touch and go. Consider with your selves what we are, misers, wretches and
enemies to God. Consider what God is, even he, which has all power, majesty,
might, glory, riches, etc. perfectly of himself, and needs nothing, but has
all things. Consider what Christ is: concerning his Godhead, coequal with his
Father, even he by whom all things were made, are ruled and governed:
concerning his manhood, the only Dearling of his Father, in whom is all his
joy. Now Sir, what a love is this? that this God which needs nothing, would
give wholly his own self to thee his enemy, wreaking his wrath upon him
self, in this his Son: as a man may say, to spare thee, to save thee, to
win thee, to buie thee, to have thee, to enjoy thee for ever. Because thy
sin has separated thee from him, to the end thou might come eftsoons
into his company again, and therein remain: he himself became, as a man
would say, a sinner, or rather sin it self, even a malediction or curse:
that we sinners, we accursed by our sin, might by his oblation or offering
for our sins, by his curse, be delivered from sin, and from malediction.
For by sin, he destroyed sin, killing Death, Satan, and Sin, by their
own weapons, and that for thee and me (man) if we cast it not away by
unbelief. Oh wonderful love of God. Who ever heard of such a love? the Father
of Heaven for us his enemies, to give his own dear Son, Jesus Christ, and
that not only to be our Brother, to dwell among us, but also, to the death of
the Cross for us? Oh wonderful love of Christ to us all, that was content and
willing to work this feate for us. Was there any love like to this love?

God in deed has commended his charity and love to us herein, that when we
were very enemies unto him, he would give his own Son for us. That we
being men, might become, as you would say, Gods, God would become man. That
we being mortal, might become immortal, the immortal God would become
mortal man. That we earthly wretches might be Citizens of Heaven, the Lord of
Heaven would become, as a man would say, earthly. That we being accursed,
might be blessed, God would be accursed. That we, by our father Adam, being
brought out of Paradise, into the puddle of all pain, might be redeemed, and
brought into Paradise again, God would be our Father, and an Adam thereunto.
That we having nothing, might have all things, God having all things, would
have no thing. That we being vassailes, and slaves to all, even to Satan the
Fiend. might be Lords of all, and of Satan: the Lord of all would become a
vassaile, and a slave to us all, and in danger of Satan. Oh love
incomprehensible. Who can otherwise think now, but if the gracious good Lord
disdayned not to give his own Son, his own hearts joy, for us his very
enemies, before we thought to beg any such thing at his hands, yea, before
we were? who, I say, can think otherwise, but that with him, he will give us
all good things? If when we hated him, and fled away from him, he sent his
Son to seek us: who can think otherwise, then that now we loving him, and
lamenting, because we love him no more, but that he will for ever love us? He
that gives the more to his enemies, will not he give the less, trow you, to
his friends? God has given his own Son, then which thing nothing is
greater, to us his enemies: and we now being become his friends, will he deny
us faith, and pardon of our sins? which though they be great, yet in
comparison they are nothing at all. Christ Jesus would give his own self for
us, when we willed it not: and will he now deny us faith, if we will it? This
will is his earnest, that he has given us truly to look indeed, for the
thing willed. And look thou for it in deed: for as he has given thee to will,
so will he give thee to do.

Jesus Christ gave his life for our evils, and by his death he delivered us. O
then, in that he lives now, and can not die, will he forsake us? His heart
blood was not too dear for us, when we asked it not: what can then be now too
dear for us, asking it? Is he a changeling? Is he mutable as man is? Can he
repent him of his gifts? Did he not foresee our falls? Paid not he therefore
the price? Because he saw we should fall sore, therefore would he suffer
sore. Yea, if his suffering had not been enough, he would yet once more come
again. God the Father, I am sure, if the death of his Son incarnate, would
not serve, would himself and the holy Ghost also become incarnate and die for
us.

This death of Christ therefore look on, as the very pledge of Gods love
toward thee, whosoever thou art, how deep soever thou have sinned. See, Gods
hands are nailed, they cannot strike thee: his feet also, he cannot run from
thee: his arms are wide open to embrace thee: his head hangs down to kiss
thee, his very heart is open, so that therein see, toote, look, spy, peep,
and thou shall see nothing therein, but love, love, love, love to thee: hyde
thee therefore, lay thy head there with the Evangelist.

This is the clift of the Rock wherein Helias stood. This is the pillow of
down for all aching heads.

Anoint thy head with this oil: let this ointment enbaulme thy head, and wash
thy face.

Tarry thou here, and cock sure thou art, I warrant thee. Say with Paul, What
can separate me from the love of God? Can death, can poverty, sickness,
hunger or any misery, persuade thee now, that God loves thee not? Nay,
nothing can separate thee from the love wherewith God has loved thee in Christ
Jesus: whom he loves, he loves to the end. So that now where abundance of
sin has been in thee, the more is the abundance of grace. But to what end?
Forsooth, that as sin has reigned to death, as thou seeest, to the killing
of Gods Son: so now Grace must reign to Life, to the honoring of Gods
Son, who is now alive, and can not die any more.

So that they which by faith feel this, cannot any more die to God, but to
sin, whereto they are dead and buried with Christ.

As Christ therefore lives, so do they, and that to God, to righteousness
and holiness. The life which they live, is In fide Filii Dei: In the faith of
the Son of God. Whereby you see, that now I am slipped into that, which I made
the third part of penance, namely, newness of life, which I could not so have
done, if that it were a part of it self indeed, as it is an effect or fruit of
the second part, that is, of faith, or trust in Gods mercy. For he that
believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, sin to be such a thing, that it
is the cause of all misery, and of it self so greatly angereth God, that in
heaven nor in earth, nothing could appease his wrath, save alonely the death
and precious bloodshedding of the Son of GOD, in whom is all the delight and
pleasure of the Father: he, I say, that is persuaded thus of sin, the same
cannot but in heart abhor and quake, to do or say, yea, to think any thing
willingly, which Gods Law teaches him to be sin.

Again, he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, Gods love to be
so much toward him, that where through sin he was lost, and made a firebrand
of hell, the eternal father of mercy, which is the omni-sufficient God, and
needs nothing to us, or of any thing that we can do, to deliver us out of
hell, and to bring us into heaven, did send even his own most dear Son out
of his bosom, out of heaven into hell, as a man would say, to bring us, as I
said, from thence into his own bosom and mercy, we being his very enemies:
he, I say, that is thus persuaded of Gods love toward him, and of the price
of his redemption, by the dear blood of the Lamb immaculate, Jesus Christ,
the same man cannot but love God again, and of love do that, and heartily
desire to do better, the which might please God.

Trow you, that such a one, knowing this gear by faith, will willingly welter
and wallow in his wilful lusts, pleasures and fantasies? Will such a one, as
knows by faith, Christ Jesus to have given his blood to wash him from his
sins, play the Sow, to welter in his puddle of filthy sin and vice again?
Nay, rather then he will be defiled again by wilful sinning, he will wash
often the feet of his affections, watching over the vice still sticking in him,
which as a spring, continually sends out poison enough, to drown and defile
him, if the sweet water of Christ's passion in Gods sight, did not wash it,
and his blood satisfy the rigor of Gods justice, due for the same.

This blood of Christ shed for our sins, is so dear in the sight of him that
believes, that he will abhor in his heart, to stamp it, and tread it under
his feet. He knows now by his belief, that it is too much, that hitherto he
has set too little by it, and is ashamed thereof. Therefore, for the residue
of his life, he purposes to take better heed to himself, then before he
did. Because he seeeth by his faith, the grieuousnesse of GODS anger, the
foulness of sin, the greatness of Gods mercy, and of Christ's love toward
him, he will now be heedie to pray to GOD to give him his grace accordingly,
that as with his eyes, tongue, hands, feet, etc. he has displeased God, doing
his own will: even so now with the same eyes, tongue, ears, hands, feet,
etc. he may displease his own self, and do Gods will: Willingly will he not
do that which might renew the death of the Son of God. He knows he has
too much sin, unwillingly in him, so that thereto he will not add willing
offenses.

This willing and witting offending and sinning, whosoever does flatter
himself therein, does evidently demonstrate and show, that he never yet
indeed tasted of Christ truly. He was never truly persuaded, or believed,
how foul a thing sin is, how grievous a thing Gods anger is, how joyful and
precious a thing, Gods mercy in Christ is, how exceeding broad, wide, hie and
deep, Christ's love is: Perchance he can write, prate, talk, and preach of
this gear: but yet he in part by faith, never felt this gear.

For if he did once feel this gear indeed, then would he be so far from
continuing in sin, willingly and wittingly, that wholly and heartily he would
give over himself to that which is contrary, I mean, anew to life, renewing
his youth, even as the Eagle does.

For as we, being in the servitude of sin, demonstrate our service, by giving
over our members to the obeying of sin, from iniquity to iniquity: even so,
we being made free from sin, by faith in Jesus Christ, and endued with Gods
spirit, a spirit of liberty, must needs demonstrate this freedom and
liberty, by giving over our members to the obedience of the spirit: by the
which we are lead and guided from virtue to virtue, and all kind of holiness. As
the unbelievers declare their unbelief, by the woorking of the evil spirit in
them, outwardly the fruits of the flesh: even so the believers declare their
faith, by the working of Gods good spirit in them outwardly the fruits of the
spirit. For as the Devil is not dead in those which are his, but works still
to their damnation: so is not God dead in them which be his, but works still
to their salvation. The which working is not the cause of the one or the other
being in any, but only a demonstration, a sign, a fruit of the same: As the
Apple is not the cause of the Apple tree, but a fruit of it.

Thus then you see briefly, that newnes of life, is not in deed a part of
penance, but a fruit of it, a demonstration of the justifying faith, a sign of
Gods good spirit possessing the heart of the penitent: as the old life is a
fruit of impenitencie, a demonstration of a lip-faith, or unbelief, a sign
of Satan's spirit, possessing the heart of the impenitent, which all those be,
that be not penitent.

For mean I know none: He that is not penitent, the same is impenitent: he
that is not governed by Gods spirit, the same is governed by Satan's spirit.
For all that be Christians, are governed with the spirit of Christ, which
spirit has his fruits. All other that be not Christ's, are the Devils. He
that gathers not with Christ, scatters abroad.

Therefore, dearly beloved, I beseech you to consider this gear, and deceive
not your selves. If you be not Christ's, then pertayne you to the Devil: of
which thing the fruits of the flesh does assure you, as whoredom, adultery,
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, envy, strife, contention,
wrath, sedition, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy, slothfulness,
idleness, bawdy talking, slaundering, etc. If these Apples grow out of the
Apple trees of your hearts, surely, surely, the Devil is at Inn with you, you
are his birds: whom when he has well fed, he will broache you and eat you,
chaw you and champe you, world without end, in eternal woe and misery. But I
am otherwise persuaded of you all. I trust you be all Christ Jesus his people
and children, yea, brethren, and by faith.

As ye see your sins in Gods Law, and tremble, sigh, sorrow and sob for the
same: even so you see his great mercies in his Gospel and free promises, and
therefore are glad, merry and joyful, for that you are accepted into Gods
favor, have your sins pardoned, and are endued with the good spirit of God,
even the seal and sign Manuel of your election in Christ before the beginning
of the world.

The which spirit, for that he is the spirit of life, given to you, to work in
you, with you, and by you here in this life, satisfaction and holiness,
whereunto you are called, that ye might be holy, even as your heavenly Father
is holy: I beseech you all by admonition and warning of you, that you would
stir up the gifts of God, given to you generally and particularly, to the
edifying of his Church: that is, I pray you, that you would not molest the good
spirit of God, by rebelling against it, when it provoke and calls you to
go on forwards, that the which is holy, might yet be more holy, he which is
righteous, might be more righteous, as the evil spirit moves and stirs up
the filthy to be yet more filthy, the covetous, to be more covetous, the
wicked, to be more wicked.

Declare you now your repentance, by works of repentance. Bring forth fruits,
and worthy fruits.

Let your sorrowing for your evils, demonstrate it self, departing from the
evils you have used.

Let your certainty of pardon of your sins through Christ, and your joy in
him be demonstrated, by pursuing of the good things which Gods word teaches
you. You are now in Christ Jesus, Gods workmanship, to do good works which God
has prepared for you to walk in.

For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, to redeem us from al
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself, fervently
given unto good works.

Again, Titus 3. For we ourselves also were in times past unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving lusts, and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and
envy, full of hate, and hating one another. But after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior to manward appeared, not by the deeds of righteousness
which we wrought, but of his mercy he saved us by the fountain of the new
birth, and with the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our savior, yt we once justified by his
grace, should be heirs of eternal life through hope. This is a true saying.
But I will make an end, for I am too tedious.

Dearly beloved, repent your sins, that is, be sorry for that which is past,
believe in Gods mercy for pardon, how deeply soever you have sinned, and both
purpose and earnestly peruse a new life, bringing forth worthy and true fruits
of repentance. As you have given over your members from sin to sin, to
serve the Devil, your tongues to swear, to lie, to flatter, to scold, to
jest, to scoff, to baudie talk, to vain iangling, to boasting, etc. Your
hands to picking, groping, idleness, fighting, etc. Your feet to skipping,
going to evil, to dancing, etc. Your ears to hear fables, lies, vanities,
and evil things, etc. So now, give over your members to godliness, your
tongues to speak, your ears to hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to
taste, your hands to work, your feet to go about such things as may make to
Gods glory, sobriety of life, and love to your brethren, and that daily more
and more, diligently: for in a stay to stand you cannot, either better or worse
you are to day, then you were yesterday. But better I trust you be, and will
be, if you mark well my Theme, that is, Repent you. The which thing that you
would do, as before I have humbly besought you: even so now yet once more I
do again beseech you, and that for the mercies of God in Christ Jesus our
Lord: Repent you, repent you, for the kingdom of heaven (that is, a kingdom
full of all riches, pleasures, mirth, beauty, sweetness, and eternal
felicity) is at hand. The eye has not seen the like, the ear has not heard
the like, the heart of man cannot conceive the treasures and pleasures of this
kingdom, which now is at hand to such as repent, that is, to such as are sorry
for their sins, believe Gods mercy through Christ, and earnestly purpose to
lead a new life. The God of mercy, through Christ his Son, grant us his
holy spirit, and work in our hearts this sorrow, faith, and new life, which
through his grace I have spoken of, both now and for ever. Amen.

An other Sermon, made also by the said master John Bradford, upon the Lords
Supper.
THere are two Sacraments in Christ's Church: Two Sacraments in Christ's Church.
the one of imitation, that is, wherewith we be enrolled, as it were, in the
household and family of God, which Sacrament, we call Baptism: the other,
wherewith we be conserved, fed, kept and nourished, to continue in the same
family, which is called the Lords Supper, or the body and blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, broken for our sins, and shed for our transgressions.

Of the former Sacrament, that is, of Baptism, to speak now I am not
purposed, because occasion and time serve not so thereto. Of the second
therefore, Baptism is in place of Circumcision. Christian men's children ought
to be baptized.
will I speak something by Gods grace, if that first you remember this, that
Baptism in Christ's Church, now, since Christ's death, is come in place of
Circumcision, which was in the same Church before Christ's coming. Whereby we
may see, that Christian Parents seem to be no less bound to offer their
Infants and Babes to be baptized, that they may be taken and accounted of us,
as members of Christ's mystical body, whereunto they are received and sealed:
Gal. 4.
then were the Hebrews their children to be taken as pertaining to the
covenant and league with God, wherewith they were enrolled, alonely the
circumstance of the eight day, not necessary to be observed, being now
abrogated.

But to come again, of the Lords Supper, I am purposed presently to speak,
through the help of God, because we are assembled in Christ (I hope) to
celebrate the same.

Now, that the things which I shall speak, may be better observed, and carried
away of you, I will tell you how, and in what sort I will speak of it. Three
things would I have marked, as the principals and scopes, whereto I will refer
all that I shall at this time speak thereof. They be these: Who, what, and
wherefore. That is, (to make it more plain) Who did institute this thing which
we are about to celebrate, this is the first.

The second is, What the thing is, which is instituted.

And the last is, Wherefore, and to what end it was instituted: whereby we
shall be taught how to use it.

For the first, Who did institute this Sacrament and Supper. You all do know,
Who did institute this Sacrament.
that things are more esteemed sometime for the dignity and authority of the
person, sometime for the wisdom of the person, sometime for the power and
magnificence of the person, and sometime for the tender love and kindness of
the person. If need were, I could by examples set forth every one of these, but
I hope it is not necessary. Now then, how can the thing which we be about to
celebrate, but be esteemed of every one highly, in that the Author of it does
want no dignity, no authority, no wisdom, no power, no magnificence, no
holiness, no tender love and kindness? but has all dignity, authority,
wisdom, power, magnificence, holiness, tender love, mercy, glory, and all
that can be wished absolutely.

He is GOD eternal, coequall, and substantial, with the Father, and with the
holy Ghost, the Image of the substance of GOD, the wisdom of the Father, the
brightness of his glory, by whom all things were made, are ruled and
governed. He is the King of all Kings, and the Lord of all Lords. He is the
Messiah of the world, our most dear and loving brother, Savior, Mediator,
Advocate, Intercessour, Husband, Priest. So that the thing which comes from
him, cannot but be esteemed, loved, and embraced, if dignity, authority,
wisdom, power, glory, goodness, and mercy like us. Yea, if any thing that can
be wished, like us, then cannot this which our Lord did institute, but like
us, and that so much the more, by how much it is one of the last things which
he did institute and command. God open our eyes, to see these things
accordingly: so shall we come with more reverence to this Table of the Lord:
which thing he grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

And thus much for the first, who did institute this Sacrament.

What the Sacrament ^s.
If we shall ask our eyes, our nose, our mouth, our taste, our hands, and the
reason of man: they will all make a consonant answer, that it is bread and
wine. And verily, herein they speak the truth and lie not, as by many things
may be proved, although the papists prate their pleasure to the contrary.

And here, my dearly beloved, I think I shall not be either tedious or
unprofitable unto you, if that I tarry a little in showing this verity, that the
substance of bread and wine remain in the Sacrament, after the words of
consecration (as they call them) be spoken. Whereby we may learn how
shameless beasts they be, Upon transubstantiation, all popery almost i^
builded.
which would enforce men to believe Transubstantiation, which is an error,
whereupon in a manner depends all Popery. For it is the stay of their
Priesthood, which is neither after the order of Aaron, nor after ye order of
Melchisedech: but after the order of Baal, which thing is something seen by
their number. For the false Prophets and Priests of Baal were always many more
in number, when the wicked were in authority, then the true Priests and
Prophets of the Lord, as the holy Hystories of the Bible do teach. Read the
third of the Kings, the 18. Chap.

That in the Supper of the Lord, The Sacrament of the popish Mass not the
Sacrament of Christ's body.
or in the Sacrament of Christ's body (which the Papists call the Sacrament of
the Altar) as though that were Christ's Sacrament, which thing they can never
prove: For it being perverted, and used to a contrary end, as of sacrificing
propitiatorily, for the sins of the quick and of the dead, of Idolatry, by
adoring or worshipping it by godly honor, etc. is no more Christ's Sacrament,
but an horrible profanation of it, and therefore as Christ called Gods Temple,
which was called an house of prayer, for the abusing and profaning of it by
the Priests, a den of Thieves: so this which the Papists call the Sacrament
of the Altar, full truly may we call an abominable Idol: And therefore I
would all men should know that the Sacrament of the Altar, as the Papists now
do abuse it, omitting certain substantial points of the Lords institution,
and putting in the stead thereof their own dregs and dreams, is not the
Sacrament of Christ's body, nor the Lords Supper: whereof when we speak
reverently, as our duty is we would not that men should think we speak it
of the popish Mass: (that I say) in the Supper of the Lord, or in the
Sacrament of Christ's body, there remains the substance of bread and Wine, as
our senses and reasons do teach, these many things also do teach the same.

First, The first reason against Transsubstantiation.
the holy Ghost does plainly tell us, by calling it often bread, after the
words of Consecration, as 1. Corinthians 10. Is not the bread which we break,
a partaking of the body of Christ, says Paul?

Lo, plainly he says: The bread which we break, Not only calling it bread,
but adding thereto breaking, which cannot be attributed, either to Christ's
body, whereof no bone was broken, either to any accident, but must needs be of
a substance, which substance if it be not Christ's body, cannot be but bread.

As in the 11. Chapter, four times he plainly calls it: He that eats of
this bread: He that receives this bread, etc. And in the Acts of the Apostles
we read, how that (in speaking of the Communion) They met together to break
bread, etc. So that it is plain, that the substance of Bread and Wine do
remain in the Supper, after the words of Consecration: As also may appear
plainly by Christ's own words, which calls that which he gave them in the
cup, Wine, or the fruit of the Vine, as both Matthew and Mark do write.
Whereby we see that there is no Transsubstantiation of the Wine: and therefore
may we also see, that there is no Transsubstantiation of the bread.

An answer to the Papists ca^ill for ^he foresaid reason. Mat. 26 Exodus 7.
As for the Papists cauilling, how that it has the name of bread, because it
was bread: as Simon the Leper, was called still Leprous, though he was healed:
or as Moses Rod, being turned into a Serpent, was called a Rod still, it
proves nothing. For there was in the one a plain sight, and the senses
certified that Simon was no Leper: and in the other plain mention, that the
Rod was turned into a Serpent. But concerning the Sacrament, neither the senses
see any other thing then bread, neither is there any mention made of turning.
And therefore their cavil is plainly seen to be but a cavil, The second
reason against Transsubstantiation.
and of no force. But to come again, to bring more reasons against
Transsubstantiation.

Secondly, that the substance of bread remains still, the very text does
teach. For the Evangelists, and the Apostle Saint Paul do witness, Mat. 26
Mar. 14 Luke 22 1. Cor. 11
that Christ gave that to his disciples, and called it his body which he
took, on which he gave thanks, and which he brake: but he took bread, gave
thanks on bread, and broke bread, Ergo, he gave bread, and called bread his
body, as he called the Cup, the new Testament.

So that it follows by this, that there is no Transubstantiation. And this
reason I my self have promised in writing, to prove by the authority of the
Fathers, namely, Ireneus. Tertullian, Origin, Ciprian, Epiphanius, Hieronimus,
Augustinus, Theodorete, Cirill, Bid, if so be I may have the use of my books.

Thirdly, that in the Sacrament, there is no Transubstantiation of the bread,
The third reason against Transsubstantiation 1. Cor. 1^
by this reason I do prove: Like as by our savior Christ, the Spirit of
truth spoke of the bread, This is my body: So says the same spirit of truth,
of the same bread, That we many, are one body, and one bread, etc.

So that as it appears, the Sacrament not to be in the Church, by
Transubstantiation, even so is it not Christ's natural body, by
Transubstantiation.

The fourth reason against ^ransub^tanti^tion.
Fourthly, I prove that there is no Transsubstantiation by Luke and Paul's
words, spoken over the Cup. For no less are they effectual to
Transsubstantiate the Cup: then their words spoken of the bread, are
operatorious and mighty to Transsubstantiate the bread. For as they say of the
bread, This is my body, so say they of the Cup, This Cup is the new Testament:
Which thing is absurd to be spoken or thought, either of the Cup, or of the
thing in the Cup by Transsubstantiation. Yea, rather in saying these words,
This Cup is the new Testament: we are taught by their coupling this word,
Cup, to the demonstratiue, This, how we should in these words, This is my
body, know that this word, This, does there demonstrate bread.

The fifth reason.
Fifthly, that the substance of bread remains in the Sacrament, as the reasons
before brought forth do prove, so does the definition of a Sacrament. For the
Fathers do affirm it, Ireneus. Augustinus. Chrisostomus.
to consist of an earthly thing, and of an heavenly thing, of the word, and of
the element, of sensible things, and of things which be perceived by the
mind. But Tra^ssubstantiation takes clean away ye earthly thing, the
element, the sensible thing, and so makes it no Sacrament. And therefore the
definition of a Sacrament full well teatheth, that bread which is the earthly
thing, the sensible thing, and the element remains still, as saint Augustine
says: The word comes to the element, (he says not, takes away the
element,) and so it is made a Sacrament.

Sixthly, the nature, The sixth reason against Transsubstantiation. Cyprian in
Sermon de Chrismat. Augustinus a Bonifacium.
and property of a Sacrament, teaches this also which I have affirmed. For as
Cyprian writes, that Sacraments bear the names of the things which they
signify: so does saint Augustine teach, that if Sacraments have not some
signification with the things where of they be Sacraments, then are they no
Sacraments.

Now, in the Lords supper this similitude is first in nourishing, yt as bread
nourishes the body: so Christ's body broken, feeds the soul, Secondly, in
bringing together many into one, that as in ye Sacrament, many grains of Corn
are made one bread: many Grapes are made one lyquour and Wine: so the multitude
which worthily receive the Sacrament, are made one body with Christ and his
Church. Last of all, in one unlikely likelinesse or similitude, that as bread
eaten, turns into our nature: so we rightly, eating the Sacrament by faith,
turn into the nature of Christ.

So that it is plain to them that will see, that to take the substance of bread
away, is clean against the nature and property of a Sacrament.

I will speak nothing how that this their doctrine of Transubstantiation,
beside the manifold absurdities it has in it, (which to rehearse I omit) it
utterly overthrows the use of the Sacrament, and is clean contrary to the
end wherefore it was instituted, and so is no longer a Sacrament, but an Idol,
and is the cause of much Idolatry, converting the peoples hearts from an
heavenly conversation, to an earthly, and turning the Communion, into a private
action, and a matter of gazing and piping, of adoring and worshipping the work
of men's hands, for the living God, which dwells not in Temples made with men's
hands, much less, lies he in Pixes and Chests, whose true worship is in
spirit and verity, which God grant us all to render unto him continually.
Amen.

The Sacrament of Baptism does also teach us, The seventh reason against
transubstantiation.
that as the substance of the water remains there: so in the Lords Supper,
remains the substance of bread after consecration. For as by Baptism we are
engraffed into Christ, so by the Supper we are fed with Christ. These two
Sacraments, the Apostle gladly coupleth together, 1. Cor. 10. and 1. Cor. 12.
We are baptized into one body (says he) and have drunk all of one spirit:
meaning it by the Cup, as Chrysostom and other great learned men do well
interpret it. As therefore in Baptism is given unto us the holy Ghost, and
pardon of our sins, which yet lie not lurking in the water: so in the Lords
Supper, is given unto us the Communion of Christ's body and blood, that is,
grace, forgiveness of sins, innocence, life, immortality, without any
Transubstantiation, or including of the same in the bread. By Baptism, Gal. 3.
the old man is put off, and the new man put on, yea, Christ is put on, but
without Transubstantiating the water. And even so it is in the Lords Supper.
We by faith spiritually in our souls do feed on Christ's body broken, do eat
his flesh and drink his blood: do dwell in him, and he in us, but without
Transsubstantiation.

An answer to the Papists cavil for the foresaid reason.
As for the cavil they make, that we are baptized into one body, meaning
thereby the mystical body, and not the natural body of Christ, whereby they
would enforce that we are fed with the natural body of Christ, but we are
not ingraffed into it, but into the mystical body, and so put away the reason
aforesaid. As for this cavil, I say, we may soon avoid it, if so be that
we will consider how that Christ, which is the head of the mystical body, is
not separate from the body, and therefore to be ingraffed to the mystical
body, is to be ingraffed into the natural body of Christ, to be a member of
his flesh, and bones of his bones: as Pope Leo full well does witness, in
saying, that Corpus regenerati fit caro crucifixi: The body (says he) of the
regenerate, is made the flesh of Christ crucified. And heereto I could add
some reasons for ye excellency of Baptism. I tro^e it be more to be gotten,
then to be nourished. As for the excellent miracle of the patefaction of the
Trinity, and the descending of the holy Ghost in Baptism in ^visible form,
the like whereto was not seen in the Lords Supper: I will omit to speak of
^urther, then that I would you should know how it were no mastery, to set
forth the excellency of this Sacrament, as well as of the Supper.

It is a plain sign of Antichrist, The eight reason.
to deny the substance of bread and wine to be in the Lords Supper after
consecration: For in so doing and granting Transsubstantiation, the property
of the humane nature of Christ is denied. For it is not of the humane nature,
but of the divine nature, to be in many places at once As Didymus, De spiritu
sancto, does prove thereby the divinity of the holy Ghost.

Now grant Transsubstantiation, and then Christ's natural body must needs be
in many places, which is nothing else but to confound the two natures in
Christ, or to deny Christ's humane nature, which is the self same that Saint
John says, to deny Christ to be come in the flesh. And this who so does, by
the testimony of Saint John, is an Antichrist in his so doing, whatsoever
otherwise he do prate. Read Saint Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus, and
his 50. and 30. Treatise upon Saint John, and easily you shall see how that
Christ's body must needs be in one place. Oportet in vno loco esse: But his
truth is in all places.

The ninth reason.
If there be no substance of bread in the Sacrament, but Transubstantiation,
then Christ's body is received of the ungodly, and eaten with their teeth,
which is not only against S. Augustine (calling this speech, Except you eat
the flesh of the son of man, etc. A figurative speech:) but also against the
plain Scriptures, which affirm them to dwell in Christ, and Christ in them,
and they to have everlasting life that eat him, which the wicked have not,
although they eat the Sacrament. He that eats of this bread, (says Christ)
shall live for evermore. Therefore they eat not Christ's body, but (as Paul
says) they eat in judgment and damnation, which I trow be an other manner of
thing then Christ's body.

And this does saint Augustine affirm, saying: None do eat Christ's body, which
is not in the body of Christ, that is, (as he expounds it) in who^ Christ
dwells not, and he in Christ. Which thing the wicked do not, because they
want faith and the holy Spirit, which be the means whereby Christ is received.

To the things which I have brought heerefoorth, to improve Transubstantiation,
I could bring in the Fathers to confirm the same, which succeeded continually
many hundredth years after Christ. Also I could show that Transubstantiation is
but a new doctrine, not established, before Satan (which was tied for a
thousand years) was letten loose. Also I could show, that ever hitherto,
since it was established, in all times it has been resisted and spoken
against. Yea, before this doctrine, the Church was nothing so endowed with
goods, lands, and possessions, as it has been since. It has brought no
small gain, no small honor, no small ease to the Clergy: and therefore no
marvel though they strive and fight for it.

It is their Maozim, it is their Helena. GOD destroy it with the breath of his
mouth, as shortly he will for his names sake. Amen.

If time would serve, I could and would here tell you of the absurdities which
come by this doctrine: but for times sake I must omit it. Only for Gods sake
see this, that this their doctrine of Transsubstantiation is an untruth,
already I have proved, and forget not, that it is the whole stay of all
Popery, and the pillar of their Priesthood: whereby Christ's Priesthood,
Sacrifice, Ministry, and Truth is let, yea, perverted, and utterly
overthrown.

GOD our Father, in the blood of his Son Christ, open the eyes and minds of
all our Magistrates, all other that bear the name of Christ, to see to it in
time, to GODS glory, and their own salvation. Amen.

Now to return to the second matter, what the Sacrament is, you see that to
the senses and reason of man, it is bread and wine: Which is most true, as by
the scriptures, and otherwise I have already proved: and therefore away with
Transsubstantiation.

But here, least we should make it no Sacrament, for a Sacrament consists
of two things: and least a man should by this gather, that we make it none
other thing but bare bread, and a naked sign, and so rail at their pleasure
on us, saying, How can a man be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, by
unworthy receiving of it, if it be but bare bread, and so forth? For this
purpose I will now speak a little more heereabout, by GODS grace, to stop
their mouths, and to stir up your good hearts, more to the worthy estimation
and perception of this holy mystery.

When a loving friend gives to thee a thing, or sends to thee a token (as
for an example, a napkin, or such like) I think thou do not as thou
should do, if that with the thing thou considerest not the mind of thy
friend that sends or gives the thing, and according thereunto esteemest and
receyuest it.

And so of this bread think I, that if thou do not rather consider the mind
of thy lover Christ, then the thing which thou seeest: yea, if thou do not
altogether consider Christ's mind, thou dealest unhonestly, and strumpetlike
with him. For it is the property of strumpets, to consider the things given
and sent them, rather then the love and mind of the given and sender: whereas
the true lovers do not consider in any point, the things given or sent, but
the mind of the party.

So we, if we be true lovers of Christ, must not consider barely the outward
thing which we see, and our senses perceive, but rather altogether we must and
should see and consider the mind of Christ, and hereafter and accordingly to
it to esteem the Sacrament.

But how shall we know the mind of Christ? Forsooth, as a man's mind is best
known by his word: so by Christ's word shall we know his mind.

Now his words be manifest, and most plain: This (says he) is my body:
therefore accordingly should we esteem, take, and receive it. If he had spoken
nothing, or if he had spoken doubtfully, then might we have been in some
doubt. But in that he speaks so plainly, saying, This is my body: who can,
may, or dare be so bold as to doubt of it? He is the truth and can not lie,
he is omnipotent and can do all things: therefore it is his body. This I
believe, this I confess, and pray you all heartily to beware of these and such
like words, that it is but a sign or a figure of his body: Except ye will
discern betwixt signs which signify only, and signs which also do
represent, confirm and seal up (or as a man may say) give with their
signification. As for an example: An Iuie bush, is a sign of Wine to be sold:
the budding of Aarons Rod, did signify Aarons Priesthood, allowed of the Lord:
the reservation of Moses Rod, did signify the rebellion of the children of
Israel: the stones taken out of Iordane, Gedeons fleece of wool, etc. Such as
these, be signs significatiue, and show no gift. But in the other signs,
which some call exhibitiue, is there not only a signification of the thing,
but also a declaration of a gift, yea, in a certain manner, a giving also: As
Baptism signifies not only the cleansing of the conscience from sin, by
the merits of Christ's blood, but also is a very cleansing from sin. And
therefore it was said to Paul, that he should arise and wash away his sins,
and not that he should arise and take only a sign of washing away his
sins. In the Lords Supper, the bread is called a partaking of the Lords body,
and not only a bare sign of the Lords body.

This I speak not, as though the elements of these Sacraments (were
Transsubstantiate) which I have already impugned either, as though Christ's body
were in bread or wine, either were tied to the elements, otherwise then
Sacramentally, and spiritually, either that the bread and wine may not, and
must not be called Sacramental, and external signs: but that they might be
discerned from significatiue and bare signs only, and be taken for signs
exhibitiue, and representiue. By this means a Christian conscience will call
and esteem the bread of the Lord, as the body of Christ. For it will never
esteem the Sacraments of Christ after their exterior appearance, but after the
words of Christ.

Whereof it comes, that the Fathers, as Chrysostom and others do speak
with so full a mouth, when they speak of the Sacrament: for their respect was
to Christ's words. If the Schoolmen which followed, had the same spirit which
they had, then would they never have consented to Transsubstantiation. For with
great admiration some of the Fathers do say, that the bread is changed or
turned into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood: meaning it of a
mutation or change, not corporal, but spiritual, figurative, Sacramental, or
mystical. For now it is no common bread, nor common wine, being ordained to
serve for the food of the soul. The Schoolmen have understood it, as the
Papists now preach of a substantial changing, as though it were no great
miracle, that common bread should now be assumed into that dignity, that it
should be called Christ's body, and serve for a celestial food, and be made a
Sacrament of his body and blood.

As before therefore I have spoken, Christ's presence i^ the S^pper.
I would wish that this Sacrament should be esteemed and called of us Christian
men, after Christ's words, namely, Christ's body, and the wine Christ's blood,
rather then otherwise. Not that I mean any other presence of Christ's body,
then a presence of grace, a preserver to Faith, a presence spiritually, and not
corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the Papists do mean. For in
such sort Christ's body is only in heaven, on the right hand of God the Father
almighty, whither our faith in the use of the Sacrament, ascends and
receives whole Christ accordingly.

^n ob^ction.
Yea, but one will say, that to call the Sacrament on that sort, is to give an
occasion of Idolatry to the people, which will take the Sacrament which they
see, simply for Christ's body, as by experience we are well taught: and
therefore it were better to call it bread, and so less harm should be,
especially in this age.

An an^were.
To this objection I answer, that indeed great Idolatry is committed to, and
about this Sacrament, and therefore men ought, as much as they can, to avoid
from occasioning or confirming it.

But in as much as the holy Ghost is wiser then man, and had foresight of the
evils that might be, and yet notwithstanding, does call it Christ's body: I
think we should do evil, if we should take upon us to reform his speech.

If Ministers did their duties in Catechizing and Preaching, then doubtless,
to call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to esteem it accordingly, could not
give occasion to Idolatry, and confirm it.

Therefore woe unto them that preach not.

There be two evils about the Sacraments, which to avoid, the holy Ghost has
taught us For least we should with the Papists, think Christ's body present
in, or with the bread really, naturally, and corporally to be received with our
bodily mouth (where there is no other presence of Christ's body then
spiritual, and to the faith) in many places he keeps still the name of
bread, as in the Epistle to the Corinthians, the tenth and eleventh Chapters.
And least we should make too light of it, making it but a bare sign, and no
better then common bread, the holy Ghost calls it Christ's body, whose speech
I wish we would follow, and that not only as well to avoid the evil which
is now a days most to be feared, concerning the Sacrament, I mean, of
contemning it, as also for that no faithful man comes to the Sacrament to
receive bread simply, but rather, yea, altogether to communicate with Christ's
body and blood. For else to eat and drink (as Paul says) they have houses of
their own.

The contempt of the Sacrament, in the days of King Edward, has caused these
plagues upon us presently, the Lord be merciful unto us. Amen. And thus much
for the objection, of calling the Sacrament by the name of Christ's body.

Another ob^ection of Christ's presence in the Sacrament.
What (says one?) to call the Sacrament Christ's body, and to make none other
presence then by grace, or spiritually to faith, which is of things hoped for,
and of things which to the bodily senses do not appear, is to make no
presence at all, or to make him none otherwise present, then he is in his
word when it is preached: and therefore what need we to receive the
Sacrament, in as much as by this doctrine, a man may receive him daily in the
field, as well and as much as in the Church, in the celebration and use of the
Sacrament?

To this objection, I first answer, that in deed, neither the Scripture nor
Christian Faith will give us leave to make any carnal, real, natural
corporal, or any such gross presence of Christ's natural body in the
Sacrament.

For it is in Heaven, and the Heavens must have it (as says Pete^) till
Christ's coming to judgment, except we would deny the humanity of Christ,
and the verity of man's nature in him. The presence therefore which we believe
and confess, is such a presence, as reason knows not, and the world cannot
learn, nor any that looks in this matter with other eyes, or hears with
other ears, the^ with the ears and eyes of the Spirit, and of Faith.

Which Faith, though it be of things hoped for, and so of things absent to the
corporal senses, yet this absence, is not an absence in deed, but to reason,
and the old man, the nature of Faith being a possession of things hoped for.
Therefore, to grant a presence to Faith, is not to make no presence at all,
but to such as know not Faith. And this the Fathers taught, affirming Christ to
be present by grace, and therefore not only a signification, but also an
exhibition and giving of the Grace of Christ's body, that is, of life, and of
the seed of immortality, as Cyprian writes. We eat life, and drink life,
says Saint Augustine. We feel a presence of the Lord by Grace, or in Grace,
says Chrysostom. We receive the celestial food, that comes from above,
Athana^us. Hyla^ius.
says Athanasius. We receive the property of the natural conjunction, and
knitting together, says Hilarious. We receive the nature of the flesh, the
blessing that gives life in bread and Wine, Cyrillus.
says Cyrillus. And elsewhere he says, that with the bread and Wine, we eat
the virtue of Christ's proper flesh, life, grace, and the property of the body
of the only begotten son of God, which thing he himself expounds to be
life. Basilius.
Basilius says, that we by the Sacrament receive the mystical Aduent of
Christ, grace, and the very virtue of his very nature. Ambro^ius. Epiphanius.
Hieronimus. Chrisostomus.
Ambrose says, that we receive the Sacrament of the true body. Epiphanius
says, we receive the body or grace. And Hierome says, that we receive
spiritual flesh, which he calls other flesh, then that which was crucified.
Chrysostom says, that we receive influence of grace, and the grace of the
holy Ghost. Saint Augustine says, Augustinus.
that we receive grace and verity, the invisible grace and holiness of the
members of Christ's body. All the which sayings of the Fathers, do confirm
this our faith and doctrine of the Sacrament, we granting in all things
herein unto them, and they in like manner unto us. And therefore the lying
lyppes, which both belie the Doctors, as though they granted a carnal and
real presence of Christ's body, naturally and corporally after the Papists
declaration and meaning: and which belie us also, as though we denied all
presence of Christ, and so made it but a bare sign.

These lying lips the Lord will destroy, if they repent not, and with us
believe, and teach the truth, that the Sacrament is the food of the Soul a
matter of faith, and therefore spiritually and by faith, to be talked of and
understood: which faith they want, and therefore they err so grosely, in
that they would have such a presence of Christ, as is contrary to all the
Scriptures, and to our Christian Religion: whereby comes no such commodity
to the receiver, as by the Spiritual presence which we teach, and according
to GODS word do affirm.

For we teach these benefits to be had by the worthy receiving the
Sacrament, namely, that we abide in Christ, and Christ in us. Again, that we
attain by it a celestial life, or a life with GOD: moreover, that by Faith
and in Spirit, we receive not only Christ's body and blood, but also whole
Christ, GOD and man. Besides these, we grant, that by the worthy receiving
of this Sacrament, we receive remission of our sins, and confirmation of the
new Testament. Last of all, by worthy receiving, we get an increase of
incorporation with Christ, and amongst our selves which be his members: then
which things, what more can be desired? Alas, that men consider nothing at all,
how that the coupling of Christ's body and blood to the Sacrament, is a
spiritual thing, and therefore there needs no such carnal presence as the
Papists imagine. Who will deny a man's Wife, to be with her Husband, one body
and one flesh, although he be at London, and she at York? But the Papists
are carnal men, guided by carnal reason only, or else would they know how
that the holy Ghost, because of our infirmity, uses metaphorically the words
of abiding, dwelling, eating and drinking of Christ, that the unspeakable
conjunction of Christ with us, might something be known. GOD open their eyes
to see it. And thus much for this.

Now to that part of the objection, which says, that we teach Christ to be
none otherwise present in the Sacrament, then in his word: I would that the
obiectors would well consider, what a presence of Christ is in his word. I
remember that saint Augustine writes, how that Christ's body is received
sometime visible, and sometime invisible

The visible receite, he calls that which is by the Sacrament: the invisible
receite he calls that which by the exercise of our faith, with our selves,
we receive. And saint Herome, in the third book upon Ecclesiastes affirms
that we are fed with the body of Christ, and we drink his blood, not only in
mystery, but also in knowledge of holy Scripture. Wherein he plainly
shows, that the same meat is offered in the words of the Scriptures, which
is offered in the Sacrament, so that no less is Christ's body and blood
offered by the Scriptures, then by the Sacraments. Upon the 147. Psalm, he
writes also, that though these words: He that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood: may be understood in mystery, yet he says, it is more true to
take Christ's body and his blood, for the word of the Scriptures, and the
doctrine of God. Yea, upon the same Psalm he says plainly, that Christ's
flesh and blood is powered into our ears, by hearing the word, and therefore
great is the peril, if we yield to other cogitations whylste we hear it. And
therefore, I trow, Saint Augustine says, that it is no less peril to hear
GODS word negligently, then so to use the Sacrament. But here of may no man
gather, that therefore it needs not to receive the Sacrament, or to affirm
that a man may as much by himself, meditating the word in the field, receive
Christ's body, as in the Church, in the right use of the Sacrament. For Christ
ordains nothing in vain, or superstitiously, he ordains nothing whereof
we have not need: Although his authority is such, that without any
questioning, his ordinances are to be obeyed.

Again, though in the field a man may receive Christ's body by faith, in the
meditation of the word, yet deny I that a man does ordinarily receive Christ's
body, by the only meditation of Christ's death, or hearing of his word, with
so much sight, and by such sensible assurance (whereof GOD knows our
infirmity has no small need) as by the receite of the Sacrament, not that
Christ is not so much present in his word preached, as he is in, or with his
Sacrament: but because there are in the perception of the Sacrament, more
windows open for Christ to enter into us, then by his word preached or heard.
For there, I mean in the word, he has an entrance into our hearts, but only
by the ears, through the voice and sound of the words: but here in the
Sacrament, he has an entrance by all our senses, by our eyes, by our nose, by
our taste, and by our handling also.

And therefore the Sacrament full well may be called, seeable, sensible,
tasteable, and touchable words. As therefore, when many windows be opened in
an house, the more light may come in then when ^here is but one opened: even
so, by the perception of the Sacraments, a Christian man's conscience has more
help to receive Christ, then simply by the word preached, heard, or meditated.

And therefore me thinks, the Apostle full well calls the Sacraments,
obsignations, or sealings of Gods promise. Read Romans the 4. of Circumcision.
And thus much for the answer to the objection aforesaid.

Now to return from whence we came, namely, to the consideration of the
second thing, what the Sacrament is: I have told you, that it is not simply
bread and wine, but rather Christ's body, so called of Christ, and so to be
called and esteemed of us* But here let us mark what body, and what blood
Christ called it.

^hrists ^esence the ^pper.
The Papists still babble: This is my body, This is my blood. But what body it
is, what blood it is, they show not.

Look therefore my dearly beloved, on Chr^sts own words, and you shall see,
that Christ calls it his body broken, and his blood shed. Mark, I say,
that Christ calls it his body which is broken, his blood which is shed
presently, and not which was broken, or shall be broken, which was shed, or
shall be shed, as the Greek Texts do plainly show: thereby teaching us,
that as God would have the Passover called, not which was the Passover, or
which shall be the Passover, but plainly the Passover, to the end that in
the use of it, the passing over of the striking Angel, should be set before
their eyes as present: so in the celebration of the Lords Supper, the very
Passion of Christ should be as present, beholden with the eyes of faith.

For which end, Christ our Savior did specially institute this Supper, saying:
Do ye this in remembrance of me: or as Paul says: Show you the Lords death
till he come.

The Supper of the Lord then, is not simply Christ's body and blood, but Christ's
body broken, and his blood shed. Wherefore broken? Wherefore shed? Forsooth,
that teaches Christ himself, saying: Broken for you, Shed for your sins,
and for the sins of many. Here now then we have occasion in the use of the
Sacrament, to call to mind the greatness and grieuousnesse of sin, which
could not be taken away by any other means, then by the shedding of the most
precious blood, and breaking of the most pure body, of the only begotten son
of GOD, Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, all things are ruled and
governed, etc.

Who considering this gear, shall not be touched to repent? Who in receite of
this Sacrament, thinking that Christ says to him: Take, eat, this is my body,
which is broken for thee: This is my blood which is shed for thy sins: Can
but tremble at the grieuousnesse of his sins, for the which such a price was
paid? If there were no plague at all else, to admonish man of sin, how
grievous a thing it is in Gods sight, surely that one were enough. But alas,
how are our hearts bewitched through Satan's subtilties, and the custom of
sin, that we make sin, a thing of nothing? God open our eyes in time, and
give us repentance, which we see this Sacrament does, as it were, enforce us
unto, in the reverence and true use of the same.

Again, in hearing that this which we take and eat, is Christ's body broken
for our sins, and his blood shed for our iniquities, we are occasioned to
call to mind the infinite greatness of Gods mercy and truth, and of Christ's
love toward us. For what a mercy is this, that God would for man, being lost
through his wilful sins, be content, yea, desirous to give his own only
Son, The Image of his substance, the brightness of his glory, being in his
own bosom, to be made man for us, that we men by him, might be, as it were,
made Gods? What a mercy is this, that GOD the Father should so tender us, that
he would make this his Son, being equal with him in divinity, a mortal
man for us, that we might be made immortal by him? What a kindness is this,
that the almighty Lord should send to us his enemies, his dear darling to be
made poor, that we by him might be made rich? What bowels of compassion was
this, that the omnipotent Creator of Heaven and earth, would deliver his own
only beloved Son for us creatures, to be not only flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bones, that we might by him through the holy Ghost, be made one
with him, and so with the Father, by communicating the merits of his flesh,
that is, righteousness, holiness, innocence, and immortality: but also to
be a slain Sacrifice for our sins, to satisfy his justice, to convert or
turn death into life, our sin into righteousness, hell into Heaven, misery
into felicity for us? What a mercy is this, that GOD will raise up this his
son Christ, not only to justify and regenerate us? but also in his person,
to demonstrate unto us our state, which we shall have: for in his coming we
shall be like unto him.

Oh wonderful mercy of God, which would assume this his Christ, even in
humane body, into the heavens, to take and keep there possession for us, to
lead our captivity captive, to appear before him always praying for us, to
make the throne of Justice a throne of mercy, the seat of glory a seat of
grace, so that with boldness we may come and appear before God, to ask and
find grace, in time convenient. Again, what a verity and constant truth in
God, is this, that he would, according to his promise made first to Adam, and
so to Abraham, and others in his time, accomplish it, by sending his son so
graciously? Who would doubt hereafter, of any thing that he has promised?

And as for Christ's love, oh, whose heart can be able to think of it any
thing as it deserves? He being God, would become man: he being rich, would
become poor: he being Lord of all the world, became a servant to us all: he
being immortal, would become mortal, miserable, and taste of all Gods
curses, yea, even of hell it self for us. His blood was nothing too dear, his
life he nothing considered, to bring us from death to life.

But this his love needs more hearty weighing, then many words speaking: and
therefore I omit and leave it to your considerations. So that in the receiving
of this Supper, as I would, you would tremble at Gods wrath for sin: so would
I have you to couple to that terror and fear, true faith, by which ye might
be assuredly persuaded of Gods mercy toward you, and Christ's love, though all
things else preached the contrary.

Do every of you surely think, when you hear these words, Take, eat, this
is my body, broken for your sins: Drink, this is my blood shed for your
sins: That God the eternal Father embracing you, Christ calls and cleppeth
you most lovingly, making himself one with you, and you one with him, and one
with another amongst your selves.

You ought no less to be certain now that God loves you, pardons your
sins, and that Christ is all yours, then if you did hear an Angel out of
heaven speaking so unto you. And therefore rejoice and be glad, and make this
Supper Eutharichiam, a thanksgiving, as the Fathers named it. Be no less
certain, that Christ and you now are all one, then you are certain, the bread
and wine is one with your nature and substance, after you have eaten and drunk
it. Howbeit, in this it differs, that you by faith are, as it were, changed
into Christ, and not Christ into you, as the bread is: for by faith he dwells
in us, and we in him. God give us faith in the use of this Sacrament, to
receive Christ, as he gives us hands to receive the element, simbole, and
visible Sacrament. God grant us not to prepare our teeth and belly (as Saint
Augustine says) but rather of his mercy, he prepare and give us true and
lively faith, to use this and all other his ordinances to his glory and our
comforts. He sweep the houses of our hearts, and make them clean, that they
may be a worthy harborough and lodging for the Lord. Amen.

Now let us come and look on the third and last thing, namely, Wherefore the
Sacrament was instituted.
wherefore the Lord did institute this Sacrament. Our nature is very obliuious
of GOD, and of all his benefits. And again, it is very full of dubitation and
doubting of GODS love, and of his kindness. Therefore to the end these two
things might be something reformed and helped in us, the Lord has instituted
this Sacrament: I mean, that we might have in memory the principal benefit
of all benefits, that is, Christ's death, and that we might be on all parts
assured of Communion with Christ, of all kindness, the greatest that ever God
did give unto man. The former to be the end, wherefore Christ did institute
this Sacrament, he himself does teach us, saying: Do ye this in
remembrance of me. The latter, the Apostle does no less set forth, in
saying: The bread which we break, is it not the partaking, or Communion of the
body of Christ? Is not the Cup of blessing, which we bless, the partaking
or Communion of the blood of Christ? So that it appears, the end wherefore
this Sacrament was instituted, was and is, for the reformation and help of our
oblivion, of that which we should never forget, and of our dubitation of that
whereof we ought to be most certain.

Concerning the former, namely, of the memory of Christ's death, what
commodity it brings with it, I will purpesely for times sake omit. Only a
little will I speak of the commodities coming unto us, by the partaking and
Communion we have with Christ. First, it teaches us, that no man can
communicate with Christ, but the same must needs communicate with Gods grace
and favor, where through sins are forgiven. Therefore, this commodity
comes herethrough, namely, that we should be certain of the remission and
pardon of our sins. The which thing we may also perceive by the Cup, in that
it is called the Cup of the new Testament: to which Testament is properly
attributed on God behalf, oblivion or remission of our sins. First, I say,
therefore, the Supper is instituted to this end, that he which worthily
receives, should be certain of the remission and pardon of his sins and
iniquities, how many and great soever they be. How great a benefit this is,
only they know, which have felt the burden of sin, which of al heavy
things, is the most heavy. Again, no man can communicate with Christ's body
and blood, but the same must communicate with his spirit, for Christ's body is
no dead carcass. Now he that co^municateth with Christ's Spirit, communicates
as with holiness, righteousness, innocence, and immortality, and with all the
merits of Christ's body: so does he with GOD and all his glory, and with
the Church, and all the good that ever it or any member of it had, Note, though
I apply this thus: yet I would not that any man should think, that Communionem
sanctorum, in the Creed, is not set forth there for the better explication of
that which preceedeth it, namely, what the holy Catholic Church is.
has, or shall have: This is, The Communion of Saints, which we believe in our
Creed, which has waiting on it, Remission of sins, Resurrection of the
flesh, and life everlasting.

To the end that we should be most assured and certain of all these, Christ
our Savior did institute this his Supper, and therefore would have us to use
it. So that there is no man, I trow, which seeeth not great cause of giving
thanks to God, for this holy Sacrament of the Lord, whereby if we worthily
receive it, we ought to be certain, that all our sins whatsoever they be,
are pardoned clearly: that we are regenerate and borne again into a lively
hope, into an inheritance, immortal, undefiled, and which can never wither
away: that we are in the fellowship of GOD the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: that we are Gods Temples, at one with God, and God at one with us: that
we are members of Christ's Church, and fellows with the Saints in all
felicity: that we are certain of immortality, in soul and body, and so of
eternal life: then which thing, what can be more demanded? Christ is ours,
and we are Christ's, he dwells in us, and we in him. Oh happy eyes that see
these things, and most happy hearts that feel them. My dear brethren, let us
pray unto the Lord, to open our eyes to see these wonderful things, to give us
faith to feel them. Surely we ought no less to be assured of them, now in
the worthy receiving of this Sacrament: then we are assured of the exterior
symboles and Sacraments. If an Angel from Heaven should come and tell you
these things, then would you rejoice and be glad. And my dear hearts in the
Lord, I, even now, though most unworthy, am sent of the Lord to tell you no
less, but that you worthily receiving this Sacrament, shall receive remission
of all your sins, or rather certainetie that they are remitted, and that you
are even now Gods darlings, Temples, and fellow inheritours of all the good
that ever he has. Wherefore see that you give thanks unto the Lord for this
his great goodness, and praise his Name for ever.

^n ob^ection ^f vn^orthy ^ecei^ing.
Oh, says one, I could be glad in very deed, and give thanks from my very
heart, if that I did worthily receive this Sacrament. But (alas) I am a very
grievous sinner, and I feel in my self very little repentance and faith, and
therefore I am afraid that I am unworthy.

The an^were.
To the answering of this objection, I think it necessary to speak some thing
of the worthy receiving of this Sacrament, in as great brevity and playnnesse
as I can. The Apostle wills all men to prove and examine themselves, before
they eat of the bread, and drink of the Cup: for they that eat and drink
unworthily, eat and drink damnation.

Therefore this probation and examination is necessary. If men will try their
gold and silver, whether they be copper or no: is it not more necessary,
that men should try their consciences? Now, how this should be, the Papists
teach amiss, in sending us to their auricular Confession, which is impossible.
The true probation, and trial of a Christian conscience, consists altogether
in Faith and repentance. Faith has respect to the doctrine and Articles of our
Belief: repentance has respect to manners and conversation. Concerning the
former, I mean of Faith, we may see the Apostle teaches us. 2. Corinthians
11. Concerning the latter for our conversation, those sins which are commonly
called mortal, or deadly, are to be removed. These sins are discerned from
other sins, by the Apostle, Romans 6. in saying: Let not sin reign and bear
a swindge in you in your mortal bodies. For truly, then we sin deadly,
when we give over to sin, and let it have the bridle at his liberty, when
we strive not against it, but allow it, and consent to it. Howbeit, if we
strive against it, if it displease us, then truly, though sin be in us (for
we ought to obey GOD without al resistance, or unwillingness) yet our sins
be not of those sins, which separate us from God, but for Christ's sake shall
not be imputed unto us believing.

Therefore, my dearly belooued, if that your sins do now displease you, if
you purpose unfeignedly to be enemies to sin in your selves and in others, as
you may, during your whole life, if you hope in Christ for pardon, if you
believe according to the holy Scriptures and Articles of the Christian Faith,
set forth in your Creed: if I say, you now trust in GODS mercy through
Christ's merits, if you repent, and earnestly purpose before God to amend your
life, and to give over your selves to serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness all the days of your life, although before this present, you
have most grievously sinned; I publish unto you, that you are worthy ghests
for this Table, you shall be welcome to Christ, your sins shall be pardoned,
you shall be endued with his spirit, and so with Communion with him and the
Father, and the whole Church of God, Christ will dwell in you, and you shall
dwell in him for evermore.

Wherefore, behave your selves accordingly, with ioyfulnes and thanksgiving.
Do you now appear before the Lord: make clean your houses, and open the
doors of your hearts by repentance and faith, that the Lord of Hosts, the
King of glory, may enter in: and for ever hereafter beware of all such things,
as might displease the eyes of his Majesty. Fly from sin, as from a Toade,
come away from Popery, and all Antichristian Religion, be diligent in your
vocations, be diligent and earnest in prayer, harken to the voice of God in his
word with reverence, live worthy your profession. Let your light in your life
so shine, that men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is
in heaven. As you have been darkness, and followed the works of darkness,
so now hence forth be light in the Lord, and have society with the woorks of
light. Now has God renewed his covenant with you, in Gods sight now are you as
clean, and healed from all your sores of sins. Go your ways, sin no
more, least a worse thing happen unto you. See that your houses being new
swept, be furnished with godliness and virtue, and beware of idleness, least
the Devil come with seven spirits worse then himself, and so take his
lodging, and then your latter end will be worse then the first.

God our Father, for the tender mercy and merits of his son, be merciful
unto us, forgive us all our sins, and give us his holy spirit, to purge,
cleanse, and sanctify us, that we may be holy in his sight through Christ,
and that we now may be made ready, and worthy to receive this holy Sacrament,
with the fruits of the same, to the full rejoicing and strengthening of our
hearts in the Lord. To whom be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

To God be all praise for ever.


