Inventions or Devises. Very necessary for all Generalles and Captains, or
Leaders of men, as well by Sea as by Land: Written by William Bourne.

An. 1578.

At LONDON Printed for Thomas VVoodco dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the black Bear.

decorative border

To the right Honorable his singular good Lord, the Lord Charles Howard,
Baron of Effingham, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
POndering with my self (right noble and worthy Lord) how J might by some
means or ways, show my self in any respect, partly to requite your
Honorable Lo: great gentleness and good countenance always borne toward me
from time to time, I could not hold my self satisfied, until I had some
thing to present unto your Lordship, whereupon I am so bold as to dedicate
this rude and simple Treatise unto your worthynesse, hoping that you will
accept it, as a true token and a sign of my good will toward your humble
Lordship. The thing is such, as you have already seen the written copy at my
good Lord and Masters hand the Earl of Lincoln: the content thereof is, as
touching Inventions or Devises, and first of Martial affairs by Sea, and
concerning ships: and then do follow devises appertaining unto Ordinance: and
in like manner Devises of the walls of towns, Castles and Forts: and also there
are Devises as touching Martial affairs by land, with other such like, as the
Contents of the table in the beginning of the book does show. (I hoping that
your good Lordship will take these simple and rude Devises in good part)
beseech God to prosper your Honor in all your atte^pts, and to give happy
success in all your doings, with increase of Honor, and long life, in perfect
health. Amen.

By your Honors at commandment, William Bourne.

The Preface to the Reader.
Friendly Reader, it is possible that you may dislike of me, for that I am so
boulde, as to publish these hard and difficulte matters of diverse new
Inventions or Devises, the which some of them I have gathered by one mean, and
some by another, but the most part of them has been mine own invention upon
sundry causes in the affairs that I have had to do. And as it may chance at
sometime any person may be driven unto an extremity, and the thing seems
impossible to be avoided, yet by some small and slender Devise the danger
thereof may be prevented, whereas otherwise the peril thereof must needs
have happened: and yet that thing that has prevented the cause, has been
thought to be of no importance when that it has been known, and before it
has been known it has seemed most impossible: wherefore I have thought it
good for to draw them together into this rude and barbarous volume, more for
that to have them in remembrance, if that there does happen any cause to use
them, than the finesse of the writing or penning of them, for the writer
thereof is most unlearned and simple, desiring you gentle Reader, to bear with
my rudeness, considering that it is the good will that I do bear unto my
native Country, for to profit the common wealth as much as lies in me, which
is the occasion that has made me to write these rude and simple Inventions or
Devises: Although there is no doubt, but that there be a great number of most
excellent and Politic and wiser or finer heads: that I being so rude and
simple a person, to presume to be a medler in those causes, for that the first
inventions or Devises is are concerning matters by Sea and ships, both in
martial affairs and otherwise thereunto appertaining: And also there be
Inventions or Devises of Ordinance, as well for service as otherwise thereunto
appertaining: and also there be Inventions or Devises, as touching the walls
of cities, towns or castles appertaining unto Martial affairs: and in like
manner there be Inventions or Devises, as touching matters in the field, as well
meet for Generalles as for Captains or leaders of me^, with other necessary
Devises or Inventions, as in the table following it does appear, the which
Inventions or Devises are very necessary to be had in memory, although that
it is possible that those men that has bin trained of long time in Martial
affairs, perhaps may or do know a great number of better Devises than these,
yet notwithstanding I have written these, and although for their simpleness
they will do them no good, yet I am assured that they will or can do the^ no
hurt, although that they be but of a simple man's inuenting, for all Arts,
Sciences, or faculties, had a beginning before they came unto their perfection:
and yet it is possible there has bin diverse inventions that have come unto no
perfection or purpose, and yet notwithstanding they are rather to be better
commended than those persons that have great revenues or livings of their
own, yea and some have great livings of the Queens highness, and yet they do
practice no other thing, but how to live easily, to satisfy their lust and
pleasure, and some of them, if they do practice any thing, that shall be but
mischief in the common wealth, etc. For by practicing, they may attain unto
knowledge in any affairs, though it be possible that some will say that in
Martial affairs that practice is to no purpose, if that he have not seen
the service in the field. And also it may be said again, that there is a
number that have seen service in the field, and yet have no judgment at al
in those affairs, for that we may see by common experience, that some persons
have been trained up all the days of their life, to go unto the sea 20. 30.
and 40. years, and yet have no knowledge to be the Master of a ship to take
charge, for that they will practice nothing: and other some persons by practice
be able to take charge in the space of 3. or 4. years, and be as sufficient men
as those, to take charg, that have bin masters the space of 20. years, etc
Wherefore we may see the practice does much avail, for by practice he that has
seen but a little experience of service, by consideration of that service that
he has seen, may practice further: for it is not possible if a man had seen
service a hundredth years, yet at a time in service in the field there may
happen such a matter, that in all that time the like has not bin seen nor
happened: therefore in the reading of such authors as have written in any
affairs, although that he has had no great experience in the matter, yet
practice shall much avail him: so that you may conclude, that he that has
seen much and has never practiced nothing, can have no judgment in any
matter, then you must needs confess, that he that has seen little and
does practice, may have some judgment, etc. But then it must needs be
said, that he that has seen experience and does practice, must needs
become cunning, according unto the sharpness of his wit, and the valiantness
of his courage: And furthermore, if one should ask this question, and as it is
many times said, if that such a noble man came in the field, that it is no
fighting against him, but if that he does come into the field he shall have
the victory, and the question is true that it will come so to pass, then what
should be the cause thereof? Now it is possible some will allege one cause, and
some another cause, as I have heard a number of men's opinions, and yet few or
none of them the truth: for admit that there may be two men elected or
chosen, so indifferently in all respects as may be possible, both in wisdom,
stature, age, and manhood or courage, and in all other matter alike, and that
they do not differ in no respect, and those two men have been trained up in
service in the field of long time, and have seen great experiences in service
in the field, as in sieges, and in being besieged, and in the doing of other
great exploytes, and they have been both of them always in those services,
that if the one has been there, the other has been here in like manner: but
the one in the beginning being a Noble man's son, did always serve near the
General, or as one in counsel with the General, and has at more years of
age served as a General, and the other has always served but as a common
Soldier, or an inferour officer or Captain: and admit the one of them
should come into the field, the one against the other of them, and their
strength or number of men to be in manner equal: and admit that he that has
the smaller power is the Noble man, there is, no doubt, except great fortune
be, but that he that is the Noble man that has served as a General, shall
prevail and have the victory, and the cause is this, he that does serve as a
General, or has been in counsel with the General of long time, he does know
how for to provide and set forth an army: and contrariwise he that has served
but as an inferior Captain, has no other care, but to train his men: the
General and his counsel, does foresee where for to lodge and provide for the
army, and all other necessary matters, and have their spyalls abroad, and do
know what manner of men be meetest for all manner of purposes, and in like manner
do know what manner of ground is best to encounter with the enemies, and also
knowing how the enemies are prepared, and so accordingly does order and
prepare his battle, to prepare for every mischief that may happen, for that
he has seen and heard so oftentimes the experience of those matters, whereas
those that have served as inferior Captains or Soldiers, have never had any
occasion to consider of those matters, but only to train their soldiers and
to make them handsome, how to keep their order, and to handle their weapon: but
for any other order of inbattelling of themselves, if that they came for to
fight in the field, it was always at the discretion of the General and his
Counsel. And furthermore, admit that in the fighting of a field that they are
overthrown, or have given the overthrow, the General of the army and his
Counsel have perfect intelligence by what means that has happened, and what
thing stood with them, and what thing stood against them, that is to say, if
that they that were overthrown had foreseen such a cause, then they had not
been overthrown, and also they that did give the overthrow, if that these had
not done such a thing they had not prevailed: so that the General and his
Counsel does perfectly understand of the matter, what was with them, and what
was against them, for that they do hear what has happened in every place in
the army, if that it be worthy of knowing, whereas he that does serve but
as an inferior Captain, does hear nor see no other matter, but those
matters that have happened in his own band, or near unto him: and the General
and his Counsel have authority to send for, and to examine every person, that
can say any thing in any matter whatsoever that it be, etc. And furthermore,
there is a greater matter than this, whereby that those that are the Generals
or in counsel near about the General, if that they be given unto practice
and have good wits, whereby that they may have a great deal further
instructions and knowledge in those affairs, than any other common Captain or
Soldier: which is this: for what is he that is a Soldier or any other
person, but if that he does know any further matter or skill and secret than
any person does know, but that he will make means to show it unto the
General, whereby that he may have the better reward or entertainment; so
that you may conclude, that if forty or fifty thousand men were in the
field, that if that there be any person that have any knowledge or cunning,
but that it will be uttered and showed unto the General, then if the General
be valiant, liberal and wise, as it is a place for a wise man, there is no
doubts but that if he be given to practice those matters, he must needs of
force become most excellent, for that an infinite number of other men's
practices are put into their heads, so that of force they must needs exceed
all other men in Martial affairs, whereas he that is but an inferior
Captain, although that he be given unto practice, can never attain to that
which the other has, for that he has not the like instructions in those
affairs, not to be a General except great fortune be. And thus (gentle
reader) I do cease to trouble you any longer, desiring you to bear with my
rudeness, that I should take upon me to publish any new Inventions, and
especially in these affairs, considering what a number of wise and valiant
Gentlemen and Soldiers, and other learned persons there he in England. And
there is no doubt, but that they do know a number of better than these, but
yet I am assured, although that it will do them no good, yet it will do them
no hurt, and it is possible that in the reading of these rude Inventions, they
may find in some of them, that thing that may pleasure them, and they
themselves may further gather of them: for at the first Inuenting of any Art
or Science, yet they that came after them brought it unto perfection: so that
upon these rude and base Inventions, that there may be some further matter
gathered of them, and may come unto perfection, although some of them do come
unto little purpose, etc. And thus gentle Reader, I desire you to bear with my
rudenes, although that I have written any thing that you may mislike of, for
that some of them perhaps may seem to be but trifles or toys, yet it may be
possible that some of them, if that it be equally considered of, may do some
pleasure unto you.

The Table of the Contents of the Devises, and first for Martial affairs by
Seas and Ships, etc.
THe first Devise is how for to know, whether that any ship be hier of
boorde, than the ship that you are in, and also whether she does under top you
or over top you, and to know it justly a mile before that you do come at
her, etc. Fol. 1. The 2. Devise shows, how for to arm a ship for to fight
with your enemies, etc. Fol. 2. The 3. Devise shows, how for to use a plain
or open deck with hatches, that it is not possible to enter the ship without
spoiling of the enemies. Fol. 3. The 4. Devise is, what to observe in the
laying of any ship aboard. Fol. 4. and 5. The 6. Devise shows, how for to
prevent a man of war, that he shall not be able to lay you aboard, nor to
enter his men with ease, but that ten men shall be able to keep out one
hundred. Fol. 5. The 7. Devise shows, how for to sink a ship that has laid
you aboard, without shooting of Ordinance. Fol. 5. and 6. The 8. Devise
shows, how for to discomfite a whole navy of ships that do ride in any
place, for the defense thereof, although that you be not the fourth part of
their strength. Fol* 6. and 7. The 9. Devise shows, how for to discomfite an
army of ships by sea, where the principal force does stand by one or two
ships, etc. Fol. 7. and 8. The 10. Devise shows, how for to encounter with an
army of ships of war by sea, etc. Fol. 8. The 11. Devise shows, how for to
make provision that another ship shall not come aboorde of you, to put you in
ieopera die of firing, etc. Fol. 8. The 12. Devise shows, how for to pass by
any castle that does stand by the mouth of any haven or harbor, that they
must come so near that they cannot pass, but to be put in ieopardie of
sincking, etc. Fol. 9. The 13. Devise shows, how to prevent him that means
to blow your men over boorde when that you have entered your men, and also by
what means you may burn and amaze his me^, and to make the ship the easier to
be entered, etc. Fol. 9. The 14. Devise shows, how for to use a ship that she
shall not sink, but always swim and bear sail, etc. Fol. 10. The 15.
Devise shows, how for to make provision in a ship for to save your men from
being spoiled with the great Ordinance, etc. Fol. 10. and 11. The 16. Devise
shows, how for to chain a haven or river, although that it be a mile broad
over, in such sort that no ship shall pass by night nor by day, etc. Fol. 11.
The 17. Devise shows, how for to make a ship to draw or go but a little way
into the water, and yet to sail well by the wind. Fol. 12. The 18. Devise
shows, how for to make a ship or bark in that order, that you may sincke
unto the bottom with her when you list, and also how for to make her swim
above the water again at your pleasure, and being suncke unto the bottom, the
men in her to be safe from drowning. Fol. 13. 14. The 19. Devise shows, how
that you may make a boat to go without cares or sail, etc. Fol. 15 The 20.
Devise, is as touching a water mill in a boat. Fol. 15. The 21. Devise
shows, how for to make an engine or instrument to know the way or going of a
ship, that is to say, to know how fast or softly that any ship goes, to know
how many leagues that she has gone, for any time assigned, etc: Fol. 15. 16.
and 17. The 22. Devise shows, how that you may make ropes fast unto a ship
that is suncke, etc. Fol. 17. and 18. The 23. Devise shows, how for to make
such provision that a man may go down unto the bottom of the sea, and
remain there, and make ropes fast unto any thing at his pleasure, and be safe,
etc. Fol. 19. The 24. Devise shows, how to make a Grapnell in such sort, that
the more weight it has, the faster it holds. Fo. 20 The 25. Devise shows,
how to find a leake in a ship, if that it be in such a place that you cannot
see where that the water does come in. Fol. 20. The 26. Devise shows you, how
for to get up unto the top of a mast of a ship, that has never a rope fast
thereunto, etc. Fol. 21.
Devises of Ordinance.
THe 27. Devise shows, how for to keep a river by night, that is to say, to
shoot perfectly at a ship by night with a piece of Ordinance, the ship
being under sail and going. Fol. 22. The 28. Devise shows, how for to use a
battery, to shoot both night and day, and to shoot perfectly unto the mark,
etc. Fol. 22. The 29. Devise shows you for to bring Ordinance unto any place
in the night, and to give level unto the mark in the night, and to shoot
perfectly at it, if that the night be never so dark, as soon as your
Ordinance is placed, etc. Fol. 23. The 30. Devise shows, how for to shoot at
a ship that is under sail and going. Fol. 24. The 31. Devise is, how for to
use that piece that is not truly bored, to make a perfect shot. Fol. 24. The
32. Devise shows, how for to make provision to carry a Cannon over any
Marrish ground or owes, if that it be never so soft, and in like manner to
place a battery upon any ground how soft so ever it be. Fol. 25. The 33.
Devise shows, how for to clear a piece of Ordinance that is cloyed with the
shot, or over charged with powder, and the shot will not go home. Fol. 25. and
26. The 34. Devise shows, how for to vncloy the touch hole of a piece, if
that there be any spicke or nails driven into her. Fol. 26. The 35. Devise
shows, how for to carry a Cannon over a river or water without any boat.
Fol. 27. The 36. Devise shows, how for to know, whether that any piece of
Ordinance be sufficiently mettalled or not. Fol. 28 The 37. Devise shows, how
for to know whether that any piece be clear within, and without any honey
combs. Fol. 28. The 38. Devise shows, how for to break any piece of
Ordinance with his ordinary charge or loading, and the ordinary shot, etc. Fol.
28. and 29 The 39. Devise shows unto you, how if that in the giving of
level, that if you do lay the piece but an inch awry, how for to know how
much that it will be awry at the mark, etc. Fol. 29. The 40. Devise shows,
how if that a city or town be besieged, and have no Ordinance, by what means
that they may make them Ordinance to defend themselves. etc. Fol. 30. The 41.
Devise shows, how to out shoot another person with all one shot, and with
one sort, and one weight of powder. etc. Fol. 31. The 42. Devise shows, how
to shoot three times in a piece at one lading of her, etc. Fol. 31. and 32.
The 43. Devise shows, how for to make any piece of Ordinance to go off at
any hour or time appointed, by it self, and no person there. Fol. 32. The 44.
Devise shows, how for to make a piece go off when you list, and no person
there. Fol. 32. and 33. The 45. Devise shows, how that you shall know whether
that any piece of Ordinance be truly bored, that is to say, whether that the
hollownes of the piece be right in the middle of the metal, etc. Fol. 33. The
46. Devise shows, whether the piece be taperred bored, that is to say, to be
wider toward the mouth of the piece than it is at the bottom or breach, etc.
Fol. 34. The 47. Devise shows, how that you shall know the true thickness
of the metal of any piece in every place. Fol. 35. The 48. Devise shows,
how for to know how many inches, or what part of an inch will make a degree in
any piece of Ordinance, etc. Fol. 35. and 36. The 49. Devise shows, how for
to level a piece in a ship, at any mark or ship. etc. Fol. 36. The 50.
Devise, is as concerning the flancking the front of a battery, etc. Fol. 37.
The 51. Devise, is as concerning the mountant carriage for ships Ordinance.
Fol. 37. and 38 The 52. Devise is, as concerning the making of draught or field
carriage, to lade them backwards behind the men. Fol. 38 The 53. Devise is, as
touching a skrewe to coin a piece of Ordinance, to what level you list. Fol.
38. and 39. The 54. Devise shows, how for to make an engine, for to know the
strength or the weakness of powder. Fol. 39. The 55. Devise shows, how for to
make a ball of metal, and in the time of service it does exceed all other
fire works. Fol. 40. and 41. The 56. Devise is, as touching the making of a
truncke for to shoot Caliuer or Harquebuze shot. Fol. 42 The 57. Devise is, as
touching an engine for to take up the side of any piece of Ordinance. Fol. 42.
The 58. Devise is, how to make a charge to lade any piece at one time. Fol 42.
and 43. The 59. Devise shows, how for to make an engine for to way your
powder or your shot, etc. Fol. 45. The 60. Devise shows, how for to
overthrow the wall of any Town, without any shooting of Ordinance, etc. Fol.
46. The 61. Devise shows, how for to break down the walls of a town or
castle, or to break down strong and huge gates, etc. Fol. 46. and 47. The 62.
Devise shows, how for to make a skalling ladder, in such sort, that they that
are upon the ladder shall have the advantage of the fight, of them that are
upon the vamers of the walls of any town or castle, whether that it be to
stand at the push of the pike, or otherwise. Fol. 47. and 48. The 63. Devise
shows you, how that you may prevent the undermining of any town, although
that it be a town situated in a dry place. Fol. 49. The 64. Devise shows
you, how that you shall know where that underminers be in the ground. Fol. 50.
The 65. Devise shows, how for to make away or a vaut in the ground to place
powder in, to blow up any Castle or Fort, or the walls of a town, and how to
make the train to give fire, etc. Fol. 50. 51. and 52. The 66. Devise shows,
how for to direct the way in the ground for the undermining of it, to come
right under any place assigned, which is the principallest point in
undermining, etc. Fol. 52. and 53. The 67. Devise shows, how if that any
Town have a breach in a wall, and the battery is so continued that they
cannot make it up, then it does show unto you how to make it defensible, etc.
Fol. 53. The 68. Devise shows you, if that you will cast a ditch out of the
ground, and would make a wall or rampire of that stuff, and you would have the
wall so thick, then this Devise will show unto you, how hie it will be of
that stuff, and if that you would have it such a height, then you may know in
like manner how thick that it will be of that stuff, etc. Fol. 53. 54. and
55. The 69. Devise is, as touching how for to make the trenches for an army,
or the curtens of the walls of any fortifications. Fol. 56. The 70. Devise
shows, how for to make the trenches against any town that is besieged, that
the people may pass from the Camp and to the Camp, without being spoiled,
which is commonly called a rolling trench. Fol. 56. and 57. The 71. Devise
shows, by what means they may make such provision to shadow the place
whereas great Ordinance is planted, that the small shot shall not annoy them
that are occupied about the great Ordinance, if that it be upon such
platformes or places, that there is no baskets to defend them, or to shadow
them. Fol. 57. 58. The 72. Devise is, as touching the knowing of any thing
done, or for to be done speedily, etc. Fol. 58. and 59. The 73. Devise shows,
how for to convey letters secretly. Fol. 59. The 74. Devise shows you, how to
convey any great quantity of letters or books, that you would not have them
found, and to convey them secretly and not to be known. Fol. 60. The 75.
Devise shows, how that you shall know the minds of your friends, what they
will do, or what that you should do for them. Fol. 60. 61. 62. The 76. Devise
shows you, how that you may send letters unto your friends, and also receive
letters, although that you be so besieged in a town or fort, that no man
neither come unto you, nor you pass forth. Fol. 62. The 77. Devise does
show, how many men will stand upon any piece of ground, they being in their
battle or marching form, whereby that you may view what number of men that
there may be of them, etc. Fol. 62. 63. and 64. The 78. Devise shows, how for
to know how many rancks of men will be in a mile of length, whereby you may by
the view of their marching know the number of them. Fol. 64 and 65. The 79.
Devise shows, the square root or number or battle of any number of men.
Fol. 65. and 66. The 80. Devise shows, how for to imbattell your self square
upon the ground, that is to say, that the ground shall be as many foot the one
way, as it is the other way, and also there is a table made for that purpose.
Fol. 67. 68. and 69. The 81. Devise shows unto you, if that you have any
charge or battle given unto the side or flancke of the battle, then on the
sudden the side of the battle shall be as strong as the front. Fol. 70. The
82. Devise shows you a way, for to know how many men will be in arancke, and
how many ranckes that there shall be of them for any number of men assigned to
be square upon the ground, what space so ever that you would have between man
and man, both in length and breadth, and also for to know how many foot of
ground squarely they will stand upon or occupy. Fol. 70. 71. 72. and 73. The
83. Devise shows you a way for to know this, when that you have sorted your
weapons and knowing the number of weapons of every sort, and you would be so
many men in a rank, that does show unto you how many ranckes that there will
be of them of every sort of weapons. Fol. 73. 74. The 84. Devise shweth this,
if that you are imbattelled, and would take another piece of ground, which you
cannot do, except that you must pass through a straight, this Devise does
show unto you, how that you may pass through and never alter the form of your
battle. Fol. 74. and 75. The 85. Devise shows, how that you may shift your
self from one number of men in a rank. unto another number of men in aranck,
and do it with ease. Fol. 75. and 76. The 86. Devise shows, if that it were
so that in the forefronts if that the men were spoiled either with shot, or by
any other misfortune, it does show you to supply those roumes with men
presently again. Fol. 76. and 77. The 87. Devise is, touching the
considerations of things in the joining of battles, what things are to be
foreseen. Fol. 78. and 79. The 88. Devise shows you, what is to be done if
that you are too weak for your enemies. Fol. 79. and 80. The 89. Devise
shows you, what places to go unto for refuge, if that your enemies have
gotten between you and home. Fol. 80. The 90. Devise shows, how that you may
carry your match close and not be seen in the night, and also by that means
you may keep it from the wet in raynie weather. Fol. 80. and 81 The 91.
Deuisesheweth, how you shall know if that it be in the night, if that there be
any horsemen stirring, if that the night be never so dark. Fol. 81. The 92.
Devise shows, how for to travel by night or by day, in such places that you
would not be seen. Fol. 82. The 93. Devise shows, how that an armed man may
swim over a river. Fol. 82. The 94. Devise shows, how that you may make a
bridge upon a sudden, that a whole army of men, and their cariages may pass
over any river or haven, if that it be not of too great a breadth. Fol. 83.
The 95. Devise shows, how for to make such provision, that you may make as
many boats in one day, as shall be able to carry a whole army of men over a
haven or river at one time, and of that provision you shall carry with you, one
cart or Wagon shall bear as much of that stuff, as shall make as many boats,
as shall bear 5 or 6. hundred of men at once. Fol. 83. 84. and 85. The 96.
Devise does show unto you how that you may draw your Ordinance before in the
front of the army, and their mouths forwards ready to be shot off, and the
horse behind the Ordinance, etc. Fol. 85. and 86. The 97. Devise in like
manner does show how for to draw or drive the Wagons or carts, and the
horse to be behind. Fol. 86. The 98. Devise is, as concerning certain small
Ordinance, for to impale an army. Fol. 86. and 87 The 99. Devise is, as
touching pikemen against horsemen. Fol. 88. Th 100. Devise shows, how that
you shall know whether that any ground be higher or lower than the ground that
you do stand upon. Fol. 88. and 89. The 101. Devise shows, how for to know
whether that it be possible to bring water unto any place from the head of any
spring, and how hye that it may be raised. Fol. 89. The 102. Devise shows,
how for to turn a water another way, etc. Fol. 89. and 90. The 103. Devise
shows unto you, if that you have any occasion to lift or wey any thing up
from the ground, and to do it after colepresse wise, and you knowing the
weight of the thing that is to be lifted, and then you may know before hand
whether it will lift the thing or not. Fol. 90. and 91. The 104. Devise
shows, how for to lift any thing with a wheel, and you knowing the weight of
that thing that is to be lifted, then you may know what weight will lift it or
wey it up, as the less weight will wey the bigger, which is known by the
compass of the wheel, and the compass of the axeltree. Fol. 91. The 105.
Devise shows unto you, if that one wheel does turn another, then you may
know if that the one wheel be turned once about, you may know how many
times that the other wheel shall be turned about by the number of teeth. Fol.
91. 92. The 106. Devise shows in like manner if one wheel does turn another
without teeth, as with a rope or chain, then by the turning of the one you may
know the turning of the other, by the circumference of both the wheels. Fol.
92. The 107. Devise shows, how for to place a glass in a house or chamber,
for to see what things be abroad in the fields. Fol. 92. 93. and 94. The
108. Devise shows, how for to make iron, lead, or stone, or any kind of
metal to swim, without the aid of any thing to help it, or cause it to
swim. Fol. 94. The 109. Devise shows, how it may be possible to burn any
thing that is apt to take fire, as gunpowder, Ocum, or Flexe, or pitch, or such
other like, half a mile, or a mile from you, and to do it by glasses. Fol.
95. and 96. The 110. Devise shows, how it is possible to see a small thing a
great distance of, as to read a letter a quarter of a mile from you, or to see
a man four or five miles of, and to view a town or castle six or seven
miles of, and to see the windows thereof. Fol. 96. and 97. The 111. Devise
shows, how to make a crane or engine, that may lift a great weight, as 100.
to wey 100000. weight. Fol. 97. and 98. The 112. Devise is as touching the
making of engines to thrust from or to pull to you, with great force or
strength. Fo. 98. The 113. Devise is, as touching the making of strange works,
as the brazen head that did seem to speak, or birds of wood or metal made
by Art to fly, and birds made of wood or metal to sing sweetly, at
certaiue hours appointed, etc. which the common people does marvel at. Fol.
98. 99.
FINIS.
Now shall follow certain Devises as touching Martial affairs by Sea and
Ships.
FIrst this, whether any Ship be higher or lower of board than the Ship that
you be in, and also whether you do over top her, or vndertop hit; it is very
necessary for him that is a Captain of a Ship to know, for by that means
there may grow great advantage, by the knowledge of it, and in like manner
great inconvenience by not knowing of it: for when he does know before that
he does lay a Ship aboorde where for to enter his men to the most advantage,
and also it is a great likelyhoode to do most good. And this way you shall
know it most certainly: stand you upon the Poope of your own Ship, and
look you upon the other Ship, and if you do see the Horizon circle over the
top of the Poope of the other Ship, then the Ship that you are in, is higher of
boorde than the other Ship, but if you do see any part of the other Ship
higher than the line of the Horizon, then that part of the other Ship is higher
of boorde than your Ship, by so much as you do see above the line of the
Horizon, for this is general for ever, look whatsoever you do see even with
the Horizon, is just in height equal with your eye, neither higher nor lower*
so that by this means you may know what height any Ship is in every place,
comparing her by your Ship, as this. If your own Ship be higher than the other
Ship, then go you lower in your own Ship, until such time as you do see
that part of the Ship even with the Horizon, and then look upon your own
Ship, and mark where the Horizon cutteth, then that part of your Ship is just
equal in height with the other, and by this means you may view any Ship in
every place at your pleasure: and then to know whether the other Ship does
ouertop you, or vndertop you, either go up your self, or send up upon the
shroudes, and then where you do see the top of the other Ship just with the
Horizon, then your eye is in height just with the other Ships top, whether you
be under or over the top of your own Ship, and this is true without any fail,
as I do further show in the first Book of the Treasure for Travelers, the 8.
Chapter.

The 2. Devise.
AS touching this, how to arm a Ship of war, to fight with another Ship or
Ships, this must be considered, that you keep your men as close as you may,
for being spoiled with small shot, or Quarrels, and Arrows: wherefore you
must have a bonnet of a sail, or else some other Canuesse stretched and made
fast all along the wast and deckes of the Ship, and also to arm the
forecastell and the Poupe with Mantels or gowns and such other like, to
shadow your men, and then in like manner your tops to be armed, to shadow your
men: but now in these days, the topfight is unto little effect, since the use
of Caliuers or Muskets in Ships; for a man may arm the top for the Quarrels or
Arrows, but it is not possible to arm it against the Caliuers: wherefore it
is not good to have many men in the tops in these days, for they will be but
spoiled. And also, you must catharp your shroudes, and also to have a netting
to go with chains in your wast, and in like manner abaft your maine shroudes,
according to the building and contriuing of the Ship, and then you must appoint
your small shot to stand at the loupes and such other like places, to beat at
your enemies: in like manner the Gunners to use their great Ordinance, and so
consequently every person to look to his charge that the Captain has
appointed him to do.

And also, the Captain must appoint the Carpenter to go into the hold of the
Ship, with such provision as is meet for the purpose, to stop any leake if any
chance. And also, to send down the Surgion into his Caben, which ought and
must be in the hold of the Ship, and he for to have all such provisions as is
meet for his purpose in a readiness, to the end to dress the hurt men. And
these things ought the Captain of any Ship to foresee aforehand, with diverse
other causes, as the things stall require, which I for brevity do omit.

The 3. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you may make a plain Deck or Orloppe, that has but plain
hatches, and has no other fight, that it shall be in manner impossible to win
the Ship, without the sinking or spoiling of the Ship, as this, to take up two
of the hatches, one before, and another abafte, as you shall see it most
convenient for your purpose, and at the corner of the hatch make a hole with an
Auger, so that at the four corners of the hatch there be four holes, and so
right against every hole, when the hatch is laid, bore it with that Auger
down thorough the comings and the beams and all at the four corners, and
then take a piece of wood of a seven or eight inches long, and three or four
inches thick, whether it be round or square it is all one matter, and then
bore a hole with the Auger thorough the little piece of wood, thorough the
middle, beginning at the one end, and out at the other end, and so to have for
every corner of the hatch, a bolte of iron, with a good broad head, and to be
of length to go through the hatch, the chockes of wodde endlong, and the
comings of the hatch and beam, and all that it may be before locked
underneath, and this to use two of the hatches, and then when you do see
cause, you being a Merchant man, that any Ship does assail you, then set up
the two hatches in the Ship, and look that the boltes be sure locked
underneath the Deck, and then these hatches will lie seven or eight inches
higher than the rest, so by that means there can no man come upon the Deck,
but that they may either lanch a Pike at him, or shoot a Calyuer, or use a
Crossebowe, or draw a long bow, and so generally there is no weapon, but that
they may use at them round about the hatch, that it is not possible to be
unspoiled upon the Deck, and being two hatches, used thus, the one hatch
shall clear the other. And this devise is a hundred times better than the
Spardeckes, etc.

The 4. Devise.
AS touching the laying of any Ship aboorde. If your Ship be higher of boorde
than the other Ship, then view her where that the best place is for to enter
her, that is to say, where she has least force against you to defend
hirselfe, and where your men may enter with most ease: and of that the other
Ship be higher of board than your Ship, the^ you must lay her aboard, that you
may come unto the cheyne walls to enter by the shrouds, either the fore
shrouds, or the main shrouds, etc. And furthermore, this must be most
principally observed, if you have any co^sort or consorts of any other Ship,
or Ships, that does come to help you, or you come to help them, that you
do not lay them aboard the one upon the one side, and the other upon the
other side, for then the one of you shall do the other of you hurt, ten times
more than the enemies, both with your great Ordinance, and also with your small
shot, and your own Quarrels, and Arrows: wherefore if that the other Ship be
aboard already along the side, then if that you cannot have room to lay him
aboorde on that side, then lay him aboard athwart the Stem, or athwart the
Stearne, as you shall see to your most advantage, but in any wise come not
aboard on the other side, for then you shall spoil your self, and your
consort in like manner.

The 5. Devise.
IF so be any Ship has laid you aboard, and that you are too weak for him,
then if so be that you do see the wind and the tide to be all as one, or if
that it be calm, then upon a sudden put down an Ancker, and then as soon
as ever your Ship does ride, then the tide will carry the other Ship away from
you, and then if that the wind and the tide be all one, it is not possible for
the other Ship to come near you again, not until the tide does turn, to
come unto the windward again.

The 6. Devise.
AND if any Ship do give you chase, and you do know that you are too weak for
him, and also, although he sayleth better than your Ship, then when he does
come near unto you, and there is no remedy but he must needs lay you aboorde,
then go you hence before the wind between your two sheets, and then as the
other Ship does fetch upon you, and be ready to lay you aboard, always
keep your Stearne unto him, and suffer him not to come up by your side, so
shall you drive them to enter at your Stearne over your Poope, and then they
shall enter so painfully, for that they must clamber up by their own Ships
boulespret, such a narrow place as the Stearne is, that a few men shall be
able to keep them out, and this you may do with ease, as long as you have
room to go before the wind, that he shall never be able to lay you aboard,
but only at your Stearne, so that the Steeradge be well looked unto, for as
soon as you do see him preace to come up by your side, then louffe you from
him, and so by this means he shall not be able to come near any other place
but your Stearne. etc.

The 7. Devise.
IF any Ship has laid you aboard about your bows, and if you would sincke
him, then let your Ancker next unto him hang a Cockbell with a strong Painter,
or rope, that the cross or Floukes may hang a little underneath the water, and
then by the means of the heauing and setting of both the Ships with the Sea,
the Ancker will rent or pluck out the plancke of the Ships side with Ancker
Floukes, and yet it will do your own Ship no great hurt, for that still the
Ancker hangs level but at one height, and the most hurt that it may do unto
your own Ship, it will pike but a hole, but for the other Ship, she falls
down upon it with her whole weight a fadome long together, which must needs
with two or three plonges rent out the plancke of the ships side. etc.

The 8. Devise.
IF that an army of Ships do ride in any Haven or River to defend any
place, or to keep any place for receiving of any more strength or vittailes,
and that they mean to ride there still, and have placed themselves in such
order, that no ship may pass by them, either to man a place, or to vittaile
that place, thus it may be done: first this, prepare such a sufficient number
of bad or old ships as shall be convenient, and then put such kind of stuff
into them as will quickly be fiered, and then when you do see convenient time
that the wind and tide does serve your turn, send those old ships before
with a few men for to govern them under sail, and with boats to save
themselves, and then let them a little before set them on fire, and lay the
principal ships aboard cross their Halce or Stem, and then there is no
doubt but they shall drive them to let slip their Anckers, or consume them with
fire, and then the more men that there be in number aboard, the greater shall be
their terror, if that they have not boats enough to save themselves, and then
presently after that, you may come in, and do your exployte, for that they
will be in such a maze with the fire, that you may do what you list: for if
this devise had been put in practice by County Mongomery when he went unto
Rochell, there is no doubt but they had both discomfited, or spoiled all those
ships that did ride before Rochel, and also the Count Mongomery might have
landed at his pleasure.

The 9. Devise.
WHere there is any Fleet that does pass through the Sea, that does carry
either some principal person of estate, or else some great quantity of
treasure or other riches, and have certain ships of great force to waft them,
and to do such an exployte, to come by the spoil of the, it may be thus
handled, if it be not disclosed: the secrets of the matter is this. Get some
great ships of countenance that are but bad, and let them seem to be the
Admiral, and to encounter with their Admiral or principal ships of force, and
then when that they be aboard, to set the^ on fire, having such things aboard
as will burn with great terror: and this will set a Ship on fire very
suddenly, set a great Cawderne of Pitch or Tar upon the fire, and make a
great fire under it, and then let all the tackle above the head be newly
tarred, and also have such things near, as will take fire presently, and then
whilst you are aboard of them, set fire on it, and it will be at the top on a
sudden, and so shall you consume both the Ships with fire, and the men in
your Ship are already prepared to save themselves with their boats: then the
other Ships may follow the spoil or chase at their pleasure, and then when
they do see their chiefest force taken from them, then they will be discouraged
presently.

The 10. Devise.
THe principallest matter for to encounter with an army of Ships by Sea, is,
to have the weathergage of them for diverse causes, and for that those causes
are not unknown unto most men, I do cease for the saying of any thing therein:
and in like manner never go above two Ships in a rank, for if you do, the
one shall annoy the other of them, and the closer you do enforce your enemies,
the more advantage you shall have of them, for one shall hinder or hurt another
of them.

The 11. Devise.
IF you have any great principal Ship of great force of Ordinance, and for
fear of those Devises before spoken of, least any Ship do come aboard, to put
you in danger of fiering, then it is best to prepare certain strong Masts for
to put out at the ports round about the Ship, and to have pieces framed with
boults without board, twenty or thirty foot from the Ship, from one Mast
unto another, that no Ship may come between them, and those framed Masts may
lie within board, until such time as occasion shall be to use them, and to
take them in, and put them out at their pleasure, as need of service does
require.

The 12. Devise.
IF it happen so that there be any place where there is an exploit to be done,
as the ayding of any place either with men, or vittailes, or such other like,
and there is Ordinance so placed at the entrance, that it seems not possible
to pass it, for that the Channel comes so near unto the Ordinance, yet by
this means at a sudden it is possible for a whole Fleet to pass, as this.
Prepare two or three old great ships more or less, according unto the
discretion of them that have viewed the place, where the Ordinance is that you
do mean to pass with your fleet, then seeing your time convenient, run
aground with those old Ships right in the face of the Ordinance, with their
sails standing, and then they will shadow with their holds and sails all the
rest of the fleet, till such time as they shall be past the principal danger
of the Ordinance.

The 13. Devise.
IF you have laid any Ship aboard, and you do perceive that he has made a
train, to the intent that when you have entered your men, to blow them over
board, to prevent that, do this: first prepare certain earthen pots made of
purpose, that will hold two or three pound of powder more or less at your
discretion, and that the pot have three or four little ears round about the
side, that you may make a little piece of match fast thereunto upon every side
of the pot, which being filled with powder, and the mouth of the pot being
stopped, and the pieces of match set on fire, then where you do perceive that
the train is made, there throw in of these pots, and then the fall of the pot
will break the pot, and so the match that hangs by the pot side, will set
the powder on fire, and so set fire on their train, etc. And also these pots
be very necessary to be thrown whereas men do stand thick, for to burn
them, and to amaze them with the powder. And also of these pots they may throw
into the place of the chiefest fights of the ships, to amaze the men, and so
by that means they may the easilier enter the ship. etc.

The 14. Devise.
TO cause a ship that she shall not sincke: first let her be sufficiently
ballested, and then prepare as many caskes as half the ships burden comes
unto, and let all the caskes be made close and tight, that no water may come
into them, and then the caske being laid close unto the ballest, and fraped
down close, that it does not stir, then the ship will not sincke for any
leake, for the caske will make her swim, and the ballest will make her bear
sail. The like may be done by making close of the hatches, so that the Orlop
be under the water, so that the sperkets be tight.

The 15. Devise.
ANd furthermore, for to make provision in a ship that your men be not spoiled
with great Ordinance, and especially to prevent the hail shot, and Crossebarre
shot, or cheyne shot, and yet your men to stand in a readiness at all times,
then do this: first prepare Elmen planckes of 4. or 5. or 6. inches thick, or
any other plancke of such wood as will not rent or splenter, and then in such a
convenient place under the Deck, let it be strongly stanshioned all along
the middle of the ship with two rows of stantions, and to be of 4* or 5.
foot asunder between the two rows of stantions, and that will be like the
case in a Galley that the Canon lies in, and then that done, throw all the old
ropes you can get, and fill that full therewith, and then when you are in fight
with your enemies, look of what side he is of you, then those men that are not
occupied, either about the Ordinance or the tackling of the Ship sails, may go
unto the further side of those plancks, and be safe from the violence or
spoiling of them with the shot, for the ropes that are within the case, will
kill the violence of the shot, and especially the Crossebarre shot, or cheyne
shot, which is the chiefest spoiling of men, and yet notwithstanding the men
are in a readiness whenever you have any occasion to use them, whether it be
to enter the other Ship, or to defend that Ship which you are in.

The 16. Devise.
FOr the prevention of the 8. Devise, that is to say, to let them that should
pass by any Bulwark or platform, they must cheyne their Haven or harborrow,
if it be of any great breadth, then it must be done in this manner: for that
the cheyne is of such great weight, that it is almost impossible to make any
engines to stretch or wey the Cheyne above the water, therefore when the cheyne
is laid cross the water, they must prepare certain great Lighters made of
purpose, with certain engines, as Capstines, or Geares, or such other like
devises, to wey the cheyne above the water, and so to let the Lighter ride by
the said cheyne at all times, and when they would have Ships to pass too and
fro, then the Cheyne may be suncke to the bottom, and when that they would
have no Ships pass, then the Lighters may wey the Cheynes. Being near unto
any place, whereas Ordinance is planted, it is not possible to pass in. And by
this means they may cheyne a harborough that is a mile broad over, having
Lighters sufficient enough to wey the cheyne above the water. And also by this
devise, they may stop any passage upon a sudden, although they have no
cheyne, when it is so dark, that the watch of any Castle or Bulwark cannot
see them to make fast some great Cabell cross the water, and to vnder-run the
said Cabell with boats.

The 17. Devise.
FOr to make a Ship to draw or go but little into the water, and to hold a
good wind, and to sail well both by and large, were very necessary, and
especially in these our shallowe Seas, amongst such a number of sands and
banckes, and as I have showed in my third Book, called A Treasure for
Travelers, the 6. and 7. Chapter, how to alter the bigness of Ships, and to
keep that molde and proportion in all points. Wherefore if you would have a
Ship to draw but a little water, and to sail well by the wind, then do
this, she must have a flat bottom, like as the Binelanders and Plaites have on
the other side of the Sea in Flanders, and as I have showed in the 9. Chapter
in my book before mentioned, that all Ships that be slatie, will sail well
with the wind: but now to make it to sail well by the wind, then do this.
That place where as the Keele should stand, must be open into the Ship, and
made tight on both the sides, as high or deep as the Ship does go into the
water when she is laden, and in that there must be made a thing to be letten
down, and to be wound up again as need shall require, which thing must be
in this manner, to be as long as almost the length of the Keele, and to be
well plancked and made strong, according unto the bigness of the Ship, and
to be beaten down into the water four or five foot, according unto the
quantity of the Ship, and then when you would have it to hold a good wind,
cause that to be let down into the water, and then that will not suffer the
Ship to fall to Leewardes: and then when that the wind is large, and that you
are to pass any shallowe water, it may be wound up again, and by this means
you may make a Ship of a hundred Tons not to draw five foot water, having
length and breadth correspondent to bear the tonnage.

The 18. Devise.
ANd also it is possible to make a Ship or a Boat that may go under the water
unto the bottom, and so to come up again at your pleasure, as this, as I have
declared in my Book called The Treasure for travelers, in the 4. Book called
Staticke, that any thing that sinketh, is heavier than the proportion of so
much water, and if it be lighter than the magnitude of so much water, then it
swimmeth or appears above the water, according unto the proportion of weight,
and then this being true, as it is most certain, then any magnitude or body
that is in the water, if that the quantity in bigness, having always but one
weight, may be made bigger or lesser, then it shall swim when you would, and
sink when you list: and for to make any thing do so, then in the joints or
places that do make the thing bigger and lesser, must be of leather, and in
the inside to have Skrewes to wind it in and also out again: and for to have
it sink, they must wind it in to make the thing less, and then it sinketh
unto the bottom: and to have it swim, then to wind the sides out again, to
make the thing bigger, and it will swim, according unto the body of the thing
in the water. And to make a small Ship or Bark or Boat, do this, the Bark
being made of purpose, let there be good store of Balest in the bottom of her,
and over the Balest as low as may be, let there be a close Orloppe, such a
one, that no water may come into it, and then in like manner at a sufficient
height, to have another close Orlop that no water may come through it, and that
being done, then bore both the sides full of holes between the two close
Orlops: and that being done, then make a thing like the side of the Bark or
Ship that may go unto the side of the Ship, the one for the one side, and the
other for the other side, and that must be made so tight and close, that no
water may come thorough it, and that done, then take leather, such a quantity
as is sufficient for to serve your purpose, and that leather must be nailed
close, with such provision, that no water may soake thorough it, and to be of
that largeness, that the thing may go close unto the Bark or Ship side when
you would, and come in again, to let sufficient water in, that it shall not be
able to swim. And now this being done, then you must make provision of
Skrewes or other engines, to wind the two things on the insides of the Bark
or Ships, that you may wind them in or out at your pleasure and that done,
then for the hatch or Skotel, that you must go in or out, you must have
leather round about it, that you may bring that together as a pursse mouth, and
so with a small Skrewe, you may wind it so close together, that being in the
bottom of the water, there shall no water come in, and that done, then you must
have one Mast, that must be of such sufficient bigness, that it must have a
hole bored thorough the one end unto the other, as a Pomp has: and that done,
then when that you list to nnke, then you must sound the deepenesse of the
water, and foresee that the water will not rise higher than the top of the
Mast, for the hole that goes thorough the Mast must give you air, as man
cannot live without it: and now when you would sink, then with your Skrewes
wind the two sides inwards, and water will come into the holes, and so the
Ship or Bark will sink unto the bottom, and there it may rest at your
pleasure: and then when that you would have it swim, then with the Skrewes
wind out the things on both the sides, and that will thrust the water out
again at the holes, and so it will rise and come up above the water, and
swim as it did before, etc.

The 19. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you may make a Boat to go without oars or Sail, by the
placing of certain wheels on the outside of the Boat, in that sort, that the
arms of the wheels may go into the water, and so turning the wheels by some
provision, and so the wheels shall make the Boat to go.

The 20. Devise.
ANd also, they make a water Mill in a Boat, for when that it rides at an
Anchor, the tide or stream will turn the wheels with great force, and these*
Milles are used in France, etc.

The 21. Devise.
ANd in like manner, they may make an engine to know the way or going of a
Ship, for to know how fast or softly that any Ship goes, which is very
necessary for all them that goes of long voyages, in a number of causes. The
instrument is to be made in this manner. There must be made a little small
Boat, and then there must be placed a wheel in the Boat, that the arms
thereof must go in the water, and so as the Ship passes or goes in the Sea,
so the way of the Ship does turn the wheel by the arms that goes in the
water of the Sea, and from that wheel or wheels that goes on the outside of
the little Boat, there comes an Axeltree* and upon that there is a note,
with six or eight teeth more or less, as the deviser or maker shall see good,
and that note shall turn another wheel by the teeth, on the Circumference:
and the wheel work may be so framed or pitched, that when the wheel on the
outside of the little Boat has gone 50. or 100. times about, that the note on
the Axeltree shall turn the inner wheel but once about, and then the thing
being tried, that when the wheel with arms that goes in the water, has gone
once about, that the Ship has gone so many foot or inches justly, and then
when the wheel on the outside has gone such a number of times about, then the
inner wheel is turned once about* and then it may be said, that the Ship has
gone so much, when the wheel is turned once: and then that wheel shall have a
note upon the Axeltree thereof, and turn another wheel by the teeth of the
Circumference, and so you may make one wheel turn another, and to have so
many motions, that the last wheel shall not be turned about, until the Ship
has gone 500. or 1000. leagues. As for example this. The wheel that goes on
the outside of the little Boat, when that it is turned round once, the Ship
has gone just six foot, that is, one Fadome, and now the note that goes on
the Axeltree, does turn a wheel by the teeth, in such sort, that when the
outward wheel has gone 100. times about, that it is turned once, and then you
may conclude, that when the first wheel on the inside of the Boat has gone
once about, that the Ship has gone 600* foot, or 100. Fadomes: and now this
first wheel does turn another wheel in the like order, that is, for 100.
turning, to turn the other but once, and then you may conclude, that the Ship
has gone 100. times 100. Fadome, and that makes 10000. Fadomes, and that
contains four leagues, and then there is an Axeltree on that wheel with a
nut that turns a third wheel by the teeth on the Circumference, in that
order as before is showed, that when the second wheel is turned 100. times
about, that the wheel is turned once, and then you may conclude, that when the
third wheel is turned once about, that the Ship has gone 100. times four
leagues, that is 4000. leagues. And by this order, this engine or instrument
shall show unto you how much the Ship has gone, by the turning of the wheels.
And to see and know how the wheels does turn, then there must be made
certain spurs, such as the hand or the poynters of the dyalles of a Clock
has, to come from every wheel, and so to be marked round about, in such order
as the dyalles have for the hour of the day, but those divisions may be
divided but into eight parts or sixeteene parts, and so the directer that
comes from the first wheel, will show in his turnings the number of
Fadomes, and the second wheel will show the number of leagues, and the third
wheel may show you the number of skores of leagues, and so to have another to
show the number of 100. leagues, and so forth at your pleasure you may make
as many motions in it as you list, as it shall be most meetest for the purpose,
and best for continuance. And this instrument being towed in a little small
close Boat, will show unto you the way of any Ship, that is to say, how fast
or softly that the Ship goes thorough the water, etc. The deviser of this
engine or instrument was Humfrey Cole.

The 22. Devise.
AS I have declared in the fourth part of my Book called A Treasure for
Travelers, how to wey sunken Ships, so in like manner I do think it good to
show how to make their ropes fast unto any suncke Ship, if it be suncke very
deep in the water that they may come by no part thereof at a low water, then
it is very tedious and difficulte to make any ropes fast unto it, for that no
man may come at it to make any ropes fast unto any strong place thereof: yet
the Venetians and the Jtalians do use to diue under the water, which we here
in England cannot do for two causes. First, our Country is more colder than
theirs. And secondly, their Sea water is more clearer than ours for two
respects, for their water does not ebb and flow as ours does, so that the
wash of their Sea is always in one place, and our water does rife and fall,
and the water sometime beats in one place, and sometimes in another place,
which does cause our water to be always thick, and in like manner by the
means of the ebbing and flowing, it causes a tide or stream to run too and
fro, which will not suffer the water to be clear, and so forth.

And also, the Venetians and Italians have (when that they do diue under the
water) a place of refuge to take air or breath in, by some great vessel of
metal of sufficient bigness, and of weight, and let it down unto the
bottom, with the bottom of the vessel directly vpwardes, so standing upon
three or four feet upon the ground in the bottom of the Sea, and being
letten precisely down with the bottom vpwardes, it is full of air, and then
when that they cannot hold their breath no longer, then they do repair unto
the said vessel, the feet thereof being so high, that they may go easily
under it, and there under the vessel they do breath themselves in the air in
the bottom of the Sea, etc. But Englishmen be not used to do that: wherefore
in my opinion, this is a very good way, that Englishmen may use to make their
ropes fast unto any soncken Ship or vessel at a still water, that is to say,
at a low water, or a full Sea in the night, to prepare certain Glasses being
made of purpose, to be tyght, that water cannot get in, and to put lights or
Candles into them, and then let them down whereas the soncken Ship is, so
shall they see how for to take the best hold of the Ship, and then having
prepared their Gratnels and their engynes, they may catch hold of the suncken
Ship at their pleasure, for you may see any light thorough the water, and also
any thing that is near unto the light. etc.

The 23. Devise.
ANd furthermore, they may make such provision that any man may go down unto
the bottom of the water, and remain there at his pleasure, as this: first
prepare leather, and make a case of it in this manner. First for his head, and
that must be made large enough, and then there must be two holes for his
eyes, and then set in Glass, and make it tight round aboutes it, and so make
the body and the sleeves for his arms, and to be closed so close, that no
water may come into it. And that done, then there must be a long Truncke made
of Leather that must be hollow within, that must be longer than the
deepenesse of the water, and that must be tighte too, and then at the
uppermost end or top there must be a bowl, or such a thing that will swim,
that through the Truncke that is like a rope, the air may pass down unto him
that is in the bottom of the water, and so the man that is put into the case
of Leather, and that being made tyght, that no water may come in unto him, and
especially unto his Mouth and Nose, and so to have air to come down thorough
the Trunck of leather, then he having sight thorough the Glass, he shall be
able to endure to tarry in the water, and also to see in the water how for to
make ropes fast unto any thing that is sonke in the water, etc.

The 24. Devise.
ANd also for the making of a Grapnell, that shall hold fast any thing it
happens to take hold of, it must be in this manner, that is to say, that it
must be made of good iron, and very substantial and strong, of two pieces, to
go upon a very strong pin, that the ioynte may go too and fro, and then the
end that must take hold, the ends must be turned inwards, like as a pair of
Pincers does, and then above the joint or pin, then the ropes must be made
fast thereunto upon both the cheeks or ends thereof; and that done, the more
weight that this kind of Grapnell takes hold of, the faster it keeps it,
by the means that the ropes upon the upper end by the means of the weight,
does draw it togetherwards, so by that means the thing that it has taken
hold of cannot slip from it, etc.

The 25. Devise.
IF any Ship have a leake in her, and will not be found, for that you cannot
see where the water does come in, then take an earthen pot, and leave nothing
in the pot, and then a boordes end, and set the mouth of the pot upon the
boordes end, with the pot upon it in the hold of the Ship, and then lay your
ear, and hearken unto the pot, and if you be near unto the leake, you shall
hear the running in of the water, and the nearer you do come, the more
breefer you shall hear it, and the farther off you be, the less you shall
hear it, so by the removing of it tuo and fro, you shall hear in what place
it is in the Ship, etc.

The 26. Devise.
ANd if a Ship have her Masts standing, and never a rope fast unto the top of
it, and for to get up unto the top thereof, then this he must do, they must
first prepare either a green strong withie, and for that the Mast is smooth,
then there must be made a certain number of things of iron, with a hole
through them as a beadestone has, or as the Trockes for the parrell of a Mast,
but they must be three cornered and sharp, that it may take hold of the
wood, and not slip, and then they being put on the withie, or such other like,
then let that part that is about the mast, have those triangles of iron, and
the other part to go about the body of him that does go up the Mast, in such
form, that it may be so slack, that he may set his feet upon the Mast with
ease, and so he setting his feet upon the Mast, and leaning backwards, shall
raise himself, and when that his feet is as high as he can, then he must give
his body in, and then iam or lift the withie up higher with his hands at a
sudden, and so by that means he may get unto the top of the Mast, for in
leaning backwardes, and the harder that he leans, he causes that things
that are about the Mast, that they will not slip. etc. And by this order, the
Neagers in Ginny do use to go up unto the top of a tree, and if that it were
60. or 70. foot high without a bough. And if that the Mast have Treseltries at
the top thereof, then they may do this, to make a small line fast unto an
arrowe, and so to shoot it over the top of the Mast, and then with the small
line or string you may draw up a bigger, and so still from the less unto the
bigger, until that you have such a one up as will serve your turn to go up
by. etc.

The 27. Devise.
AS touching the keeping of a Hauenor River by night, in such sort, that you
would have no ship nor other vessel to pass, neither by day nor by night,
then you must devise some imagined mark or marks upon the farther side of the
water, and then you must plant your Ordinance right upon those marks, and
then in the night you must place lights in those places, and then if that there
does come any Ships in the night, they will shaddowe or take away the sight of
the light from you, and then you may be assured, that the ship is right with
the mouth of the piece, and then you shooting off your piece, you shall hit the
ship if that it be discreetly handled, as I do more at large declare in the
26. Chapter of my book, called, The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.

The 28. Devise.
FOr to continue a battery both night and day, you must do this: when that
all your Ordinance be laden and leuelled unto the breach or marks assigned,
and would continue the same day and night, then take your Quadrant, and look
at what degree that the piece lies, and then plome the middle of the mouth of
the piece down unto the ground, and there make a mark, and then plome the
middle of the tail of the piece down unto the ground, and there in like manner
make another mark, and then draw a right line from both the marks, and the
line to be longer by two yards, than the two marks, and that done, you may
continue to shoot all the night, for the degrees in the Quadrant will give the
piece the true height of the mark, and the line underneath the piece will lay
the piece right upon the mark, as I do more at large declare in the 24.
Chapter of my book, called, The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.

The 29. Devise.
FOr to plant Ordinance in the night, and to shoot presently at any mark
assigned, do this. First, seek the ground meet for your purpose, and then
take an Astrolobe, and hang that upon your thombe by the ring, and then turn
the Athilleyday or rule with the sights up and down, until that you do see
the mark that you do mean for to shoot at through both the sights of the
Athilleyday, the Astrolobe for to hang perfitely upright, and then look upon
the Astrolobe at what degree that the Athilleyday does point unto, and keep
that in remembrance, for that gives the piece the true height of the mark, and
then where that you do mean for to plant your Ordinance, there make a mark,
and then go backwards twenty foot, and then view the mark that you do mean
for to shoot at, that it be right over the mark that you have made upon the
ground, and right with that mark make another mark, and then go a little
further backwards, and then view it again, and see that the mark that you do
mean for to shoot at, and the other two marks that you have made upon the
ground, to be all three upon one right line by the the sight of your eye, and
if that they be not, then you may amend them, and set them right, and then
those two marks will rule the matter, so that you may lay the piece right upon
the mark, and then you bringing your Ordinance in the night, you may shoot
presently, as I do more at large declare in the 25. Chapter of my book,
called, The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.

The 30. Devise.
AS touching how to shoot at a Ship tha^ is under sail in a River, they must
do this, they must plant their Ordinance against some ymagined mark, upon
the farther side of the water, and then when that they do see that the ship
does begin to close the ymagined mark that their Ordinance lies right against,
then give fire unto the Ordinance, and they shall make a perfect shot, as I do
more at large declare in the 14. Chapter of my book, called, The Art of
shooting in great Ordinance.

The 31. Devise.
IF that you have a piece of Ordinance that is not truly bored, that is to
say, if the core or concauitie do not go right in the middle of the metal,
but that it does lean more the one way than it does the other way, that
piece will never shoot right upon the mark, except they do this: look
toward which side the metal of the piece is most thickest, unto that side the
piece will cast the shot, and for remedy thereof they must do this. First they
must seek where the metal is most thickest, and that being known, then
when that you do set up the dispart of the piece, you must put half the
diversity of the thickest of the metal, that it is thicker on the one side
more than it is on the other side, unto the length of the dispart, and then you
must set the dispart justly upon that side and place that the metal is most
thickest, and then when you do make any shot with that piece, you must give
your level justly upon the thicker side of the piece, that is to say, the
metal of the breech of the piece, and the dispart, and the mark, to be all
three upon one right line by the sight of your eye, as I do more plainly
show in the 12. Chapter of my book, called, The Art of shooting in great
Ordinance.

The 32. Devise.
IF that any place be to be beseeged that stands upon a marish ground, so
that it is thought impossible for to bring the Cannon unto it, yet
notwithstanding it is possible by this devise both for to bring the Cannon unto
it, and also for to place the Cannon against it, although that the ground be
never so soft. First, let them prepare a flat bottomd boat for every Cannon,
and if that it were a Cannon of 8000. weight, the boat but 20. foot long, and
8* foot broad, if that boat were in the water, the boat will swim with that
Cannon at one foot deepnesse going into the water, then it is a plain case
whether that it be marish ground or owes, it will not sink half so much to be
drawn over it, being in the boat, and the boat to be made tight, that no
water or dirt do come in: and then if that the ground be so soft, that they
can bring no horses to make the draw it, yet it may be drawn by men, and 80*
men will draw it, and if every man do draw but 100. weight, the boat to be
made at that end that goes forwards flatlong, that it may strike against
nothing. And I am of that opinion, that it is not possible to make any better
kind of platform to place their Ordinance upon in the boat, for if the
ground were never so soft, it can sink no further into it, nor so far neither,
as it will into the water. And by this means they may both bring their
Ordinance, and place their Ordinance in any ground how soft so ever it be, at
their pleasure.

The 33. Devise.
IF that it happens so that you have any piece of Ordinance, which when you
have laden her, the shot will not go home unto the powder, and that the piece
is so cloyed, that if the piece be shot off, she will break: to save the
piece, and vncloy the piece, do this: for if that it were in any place of
service, if the piece do break, there may happen three great dangers, as
this. First, the lack of the thing when they should use it. And secondly, the
loss of the value of the thing. And thirdly, the hurt that may happen by that
means. etc. And for to vncloye the piece, if that you cannot by no means,
stall the piece, and then put in clean water at the tutchhole, until that it
does stand full of water, and then koyne up the breach of the piece, that the
mouth of the piece may stand dripping downwards* and so let the water drop out
of the mouth a two or three days, and still put in more water, and keep the
tuchhole full of water, and so by that means the water will soake out all the
Peeter from out of the powder in the piece, and then that being done, you may
prime fresh powder in at the tuchhole, as much as may be sufficient to blow out
the shot that is in the piece, and in like manner you may save the Peeter, by
setting a tubbe or vessel under the mouth of the piece. etc.

The 34. Devise.
IF through treason or otherwise, the enemies have cloyed the touchholes of
your Ordinance, and that you have no Drill for to bore it out upon the
sudden, and yet you are driven to use your Ordinance, then scale your piece,
both the shot and the wadde, but not the powder, and then put in a lower or
smaller shot without a wadde, and then make a train of powder from the powder
in the piece, unto the mouth of the piece, and then give leuel unto your
enemies, and so give fire at the mouth of the piece, and then the force of the
blast of the powder will blow out the nail or spike out of the tuchhole: but
if it do not, then heat the piece there abouts the tutchhole, and then take a
quantity of wax or clay, and make it like a cop about the tutchhole, and then
take oil and heat it hot, and power it on the tutchhole, and that will so
seek by the fides of the nails, that when you do load the piece and shoot
her off (as before is declared) there is no doubt but it will blow out the
nail, and clear the tutchhole of the piece.

The 35. Devise.
IF so be it happens so, that there is in the pasing of an army a river or
water in the way, and the water to be of great deepenes, and they having no
boats, and that they can make provision to put over their men, now to carry
over their Ordinance, they may do this: first, with planck and timber let them
make a thing square like a platform, of sufficient strength, and then let them
place one of their pieces of Ordinance upon it, and then let them prepare
empty caske, and let them be made tight, and then take as many of these caske
as may be sufficient to boy or swim with the said piece of Ordinance, and then
let this caske be made fast, and fraped hard unto the said platform round
about the said platform, aloft upon the platform, for the platform must not
be upon the caske, for then the weight of the piece would overthrow the
platform, and so they may convey their Ordinance over any haven or river,
without boats, and so they may make as many of these platformes as is
sufficient to serve their turn, and you may know how many caske will boy or
swim with any piece of Ordinance, as this: five tun of caske will carry a
double Cannon, four tun will carry a demie Cannon, and three tun or less
will carry Culuering, etc. taking any thing more than a pipe or boat unto
1000. weight of the piece. etc.

The 36. Devise.
FOr to know whether any piece of Ordinance be sufficiently mettalled to bear
her charge with powder, then this is general, that in the clamber before the
tutchhole, so far as the powder does reach to the mouthwards, that the metal
is in thickness as high as the shot is round abouts, and somewhat thicker, and
if that the metal be not in thickness as much as the height of the shot,
then she is too slenderly mettalled.

The 37. Devise.
FOr to know whether that any piece of Ordinance be clear within without any
honey combs or cracks, then take a steel Glass when that the Sun shines,
and then turn the beam or shaddowe of the Sun into the piece mouth, and so
you shall see into the piece, whether there be any flawes or honey combs in the
piece by the light of the Sun upon the Glass. And also, if the Sun shine
not, then take a short Candles end, and then take a long pole stick, that may
reach unto the bottom of the piece, and make a clift in the end of the stick,
and then put that into the mouth of the piece unto bottom, if you see cause,
and so you shall see if that there be any faults in the piece in like manner.

The 38. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you may break any piece of Ordinance, although that the
piece of Ordinance be sufficiently mettalled, and without cracks, flawes, or
honey combs, and also having no more but her common charge or lading, as this.
If that it happens so that you might come by your enemies Ordinance, and they
being laden already, you might cause them to break at the next shooting of
them in this manner. Prepare certain things made of iron, made of purpose, of
a foot long or more at your pleasure, and the point to be very thin and
sharp, and smooth, and at the other end to be half an ynch thick or more, and
to be smooth and taper ground from the point unto the greater end, and then put
into the piece that thing close underneath the shot, and then the shot being
round, it is apt to run upon that, and then the piece being shot off, the shot
will be choked, or stick fast in the piece by the means of the bigger end of
the thing of iron put into the piece, for that the shot has no room for to
go by, and then the violent blast of the powder must needs break the piece.

The 39. Devise.
AS touching the giving of level with any piece of Ordinance, and for to know
if that the level be laid awry, and for to know how much awry the shot will
be at the mark, it is thus known; look how many times that the length of the
piece is unto the mark, so many times that quantity that the piece is laid
awry, so many times that quantity that the length of the piece is unto the
mark, so much it shall be awry at the mark: as for an example, the piece is
ten foot long, and it is laid one ynch awry beside the mark in the giving of
level, and the mark is twenty skore from the piece, and there is six times
the length of the piece in every skore, and the mark being twenty skore off,
the shot must be six time twenty inches beside the mark, and that is ten
foot, as I do more at large declare in the tenth Chapter of my Book called
The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.

The 40. Devise.
IF that any place be beseeged, and have no Ordinance for to defend themselves
as many times in the middle of a Country that are not near the fronters,
there may be great Cities or Towns that are well walled, that has no
Ordinance, and may many times lack diverse things meet to defend themselves, as
powder and shot, etc. and yet they have strength enough of men to defend
themselves, and yet notwithstanding they may make provision for to make both
Ordinance, and also powder and shot, etc. although that they have no other
metal, but only lead: and there is lightly no City nor Town, but that it
has lead good store, and then they may make them Ordinance of lead to serve
their turn by the good foresight in the basting thereof, that is to say, to
put in the more substance of the metal: for let them make the thickness of
the metal to be round aboutes, once and a half the height of the shot, the
piece will be able to bear the ordinary charge of powder, and then the
weight of that piece will be more than double the weight of that piece which
is of brass or yr ou: And in a Town where as is help enough, it makes no
great matter for the weight, for that they have no great cause for to transport
it very far. And also, they must not shoot in those pieces too often at a
time, for heating of them too hot, but they may shoot moderatlie, and use
them so, that they do not ouerheate them, etc. And as for powder, the use of
the making thereof is commonly known unto all men, and there is no Town, but
that the earth in some places is good for to make the Petre of. And as for shot
that may be cast of any metal therefore if that they have any persons of
experience, they may both make them Ordinance, and also powder and shot to
serve their turn, etc.

The 41. Devise.
NOw shall follow two or thee devises, which is a common question among
Gunners, although that there is no use of service in it, and that does
appertain unto Ordinance, more for pleasure in the wagering thereof, than to
any other purpose, as this to say, I will out shoot any person in one piece
with all one kind of shot, both in weight and otherwise, and with one kind of
powder, and with equal weight, and in the like kind of advantage in all
points, and that is by this means, the shot to be both fit for the piece:
then prepare a piece of linen cloth or woollen, and then wool that same round
about the shot, that the shot may go stiff into the piece, that it may go
home unto the powder, and in so doing, you shall shoot further than it would
do, if it were vnwoolled. And also, if that you do shoot in a piece both
with one kind of shot, and with one weight of powder, and like advantage in
all points, the last shoot shall over shoot the first by this means, for
that the piece is made warm, and that causes the powder to fire the better
together, etc.

The 42. Devise.
AS touching this, how to lade a piece at one time, and to make the piece to
shoot three times off at the once lading of the piece, which is done in this
manner. First prepare a piece of small match that will keep fire, or else a
piece of blew thread, and that will keep fire, and then put the one end of
that into the mouth of the piece, so that the end go unto the breeche of the
piece, and the other end to hang out, and then lade the piece but meanly, so
that she have not her full charge, and then put in a close wad, and then lade
the piece again but meanly with some less Powder than it had at the first,
and then put in another close wad, and that done, then lade her the third time,
and put up the Powder close, but you need not wad it, except you list, and
then set the end of the thread on fire, and that will fire the first, and make
the piece go off, and yet the thread burns still, and so shoots off the
middlemost, and afterward it burns unto the last, and so the piece has shot
off three times, and this you may do by handling it discreetly, and may shoot
a shoot at every time.

The 43. Devise.
FOr to make a piece go off at any hour or time appointed, although that
there be no person there to give fire unto the piece, yet this you may do, and
it will go off at any time appointed, as this. First the piece being charged,
take a match, and prove what length it will be burned in an hour, and when
you know justly how much in length will be burned in an hour, then according
unto that time that you would have the piece go off, measure out so much just
in length as will be a burning in that time, and then at that place, let it be
laid at the tutchhole, the piece being primed to lay powder upon the match, and
then the other end to be fired, then when the match is burned unto the
powder, the piece will go off, and so by this means the piece will go off at
any hour or time appointed, whether that it be in long time, or short time,
etc.

The 44. Devise.
FOr to make a piece go off when that you list, you nor no other person being
there for to give fire unto it, you must do this, the piece being laden and
primed, then in the tutchhole take a piece of small wire, of two or three
inches long, and bend it, that both the ends may come together, and then put
that into the tutchhole of the piece when that the piece is primed, and the
bought end to stand upwards, and then put the end of a long string through
it, and then lay a little powder upon the tutchhole, and there make a piece of
match fast unto it, and let the match be lighted, and then the other end of
the line you may carry unto what place you list, and then when that you would
have the piece shot off, then draw or pull the line or string, and it will
give fire unto the piece, etc. And also you may set powder on fire with a
burning glass where the Sun shines.

The 45. Devise.
FOr to know whether that any piece of Ordinance be truly bored, that is to
say, that the core or hollownesse does go right in the middle of the metal,
that it do not decline or lean more unto the one side, than it does unto the
other side, for to know the same, do this. Take two streightstaues, and make
them fast at the one end, that they be not wider asunder at the one end than
they be at the other end, and so made fast, that they do not swerve; and
then put one of the staves into the mouth of the piece near unto the
tutchhole, and then try the piece round about on every side with an ynche
rule, and so you shall know whether that the core or hollownesse does go
right in the middle of the metal, and if that it do not, you may know by
the ynch rule how much it does differ, etc. as I do more plainly show in the
second Chapter of my Book called The Art of shooting in great Ordinance.

The 46. Devise.
FOr to know whether that any piece of Ordinance be tapered bored, that is to
say, that it is wider at the mouth, than that is within toward the breech of
the pieces, that you shall know by this means, take a rammer head upon a
staff that is the true height of the mouth of the piece, which within a
quarter of an ynch, or else that it may go close, and then put that into the
piece, and if that it do go down unto the breech of the piece, then it is not
tapered bored, but if that it will not, then it is tapered in that place, and
then take a lower rammer head, and then prove again, and so by making diverse
proofs, you may know how much that the piece is tapered bored in every place,
and the piece may be so tapered bored, that it may be much the worse, and the
same may be so tapered bored, that it is never the worse, but rather the
better. They are the worse tapered bored that are wide at the mouth, and
narrower and narrower inwards, for this cause, that those that do lade the
piece, and do not know it, may put in a shot that he does think is fit for
the piece, and that may rest by the way, and not go down unto the powder, and
that may chance to break a piece. And also, if the shot be so small, that it
will go down unto the powder, then it is possible the shot being too small
for the mouth of the piece, that it may swerve in the deliverance, and also,
the shot will not fly so far as it would do if it were close for the mouth of
the piece, etc. Now those tapered bored pieces that be never the worse, as
those that are all of one height equal within a foot, or a foot and a half
of the breech, and afterward unto the tutchhole is narrower and narrower,
those pieces are not the worser, but rather the better in some respects, for
that it is stronger, so that the shot may go close unto the powder, for the
greatest fault that may happen by that means, is this, that the plate of the
ladell must be the rounder bent, and also in the sponging, there may be a
fault: for if the Sponge be too big, it will not go unto the bottom, and if
it be fit for the bottom, then it will be to low for the rest of the piece, etc.

The 47. Devise.
FOr to know how thick any piece is in metal in every place, you may know
it by the 44. devise going before, as you do try whether the piece be truly
bored: and also if the piece be truly bored, you may try the thickness of
the metal in this manner, take the thickness of the whole metal with your
Calleper Compasses upon the outside of the piece, and then try it with an ynch
rule how many inches high the mouth of the piece is, and then pull that from
the whole thickness of the metal, and then look what does remain, then
half that shall be the true thickness of the metal of the piece in that place
that you have measured, and by this means you may know the thickness of the
metal in every place, etc. And also, if that you have no Caleper Compasses,
then you may plome the piece upon both the sides with a plommet of lead upon
a string, by laying a twofoote rule cross the breech of the piece, doing
afterward as before is rehearsed* And also, if that it be a round piece, then
you may gird the piece, and so find the thickness of the whole metal, as I
do more declare in the fourth Chapter of my Book called The Art of shooting
in great Ordinance.

The 48. Devise.
FOr to know how many inches, or what part of an ynch will make a degree in
any piece of Ordinance, to be level at any mark, with an ynch rule, it is
thus known: first measure the length of the piece, how many foot it is in
length, and then double that measure, and then multiply that number of feet
into inches, that done, as 7. unto 22. seek the circumference of such a circle
(that is to say) first multiply that number of inches, double the length of the
piece by 22. and look what that comes unto, divide that again by 7. and that
will show the circumference of such a circle, and then divide that number
again by 360. and that will show unto you how many inches and parts of an ynch
will make a degree, etc. as I do show how many inches and what parts of an
ynche will make a degree, for the length of sundry pieces in the 8. Chapter of
my book called The Art of shooting in great Ordinance, etc.

The 49. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching the making of a shot by Sea out of one Ship unto
another, this is to be considered, the heauing and the setting of the two
Ships, and also the stirring, as I do more at large declare in the 14. Chapter
of my Book called The Art of shooting in great Ordinance, but to give level
unto any mark or ship for the rightnesse thereof, this is the best way in a
Ship not to stand poring at the breeche of the piece, as it is commonly used
amongst Gunners, but to give level right do this. You having given the piece
the height that she shall lie at, then as you shall see cause, bid him that is
at the helm to go aloof, or romer, and then let one stand ready with a
lintstock to give fire, and then stand you right behind the piece a two or
three yardes off, and then mark the middle of the mouth of the piece, and the
middle of the tail of the piece, that by the casting off, the Ship be right
with, the mark by the sight of one of your eyes, then give fire, and you may be
assured that the shot goes right, etc.

The 50. Devise.
ANd also in the placing of a battery against any Town, it is to be foreseen
that you may flancke the front of the battery, and also the pits or ditches
that you have laid your laborers in, that do hale the bousing tackels to bring
the Ordinance unto their places again when that they are laden. etc.

The 51. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching the Ordinance in ships, and especially that
Ordinance that is under the Decks, for that it is very troublesome to hale them
in, and lade them, and especially if that the ship does held with a
Sailbearing. And also, it is troublesome to make a shot at any mark if that
the ship does held, for that both the Trocks or wheels will always run
close unto the ships side, so that he shall never bring the piece right upon
the mark, except that he be able to coon the ship for to do it with the
Steeradge. Wherefore in my opinion the carriage of of the Ordinance that is
underneath the Deck, were much more readier and easier to be handled, to be
made in this form following, that is to say, the carriage for the lower parts
to go upon four low Trockes, as the common mountant carriage that in the
ships is now used, but the upper part that the tronions lies in, to go upon
an Axeltree or Standard, as a Windmill does, and then this piece when it is
either to be pulled in, or else to be laden, then there is no more to be
done, but to bring the piece right back upon the Trockes, and then as soon
as the mouth of the piece is within the port, then to bear the breech or tail
about, as you do the tail of a Mill, and then you may lade her, and so turn
her mouth against the port again, and so put her out without any lifting of
the Trocks of the piece about, as is now used, which is a great pain and a
trouble in a great piece of Ordinance, and also, they cannot bring the piece
unto the mark, except it be by the Steeradge (as before is declared) and if
that the ship does heeld, but if that the piece be in this kind of carriage,
then although that the ship does heeld never so much, and although that both
the forewheeles or Trockes does run close unto the ships side, yet
notwithstanding the piece lying in that kind of carriage before rehearsed, yet
nevertheless the piece may be put off from the one side of the port unto the
other at your pleasure, as far as the port will give leave, for that the
piece is to be put too and fro even as a brace that stands on a Much, for
that the piece does stand upon an Axeltree or Standard, as a mill does. etc.

The 52. Devise.
ANd also there is devised by a high Dutchman, how to make the carriage for any
small piece of Ordinance, as a Falcon, or Falconet, or a Rabnet, to lade her
backwards, and so to turn her forwards again, and so shoot her off, for that
this piece has no Axeltree, but that there is made fast unto the carriage or
stock, two stoopes, or part or ends of an Axeltree, whereon the two wheels
does go upon, so by that means the breech or tail of the piece, is to be
letten down, and the mouth of the piece to be turned topsey turuey right
backwards, for that there is neither Axeltree nor transome in the stock or
carriage, to let the turning of the piece over again. etc.

The 53. Devise.
ANd also there is devised by John Skinner, one of the Queens Majesty's men, a
certain serewe, to set underneath the tail of any piece of Ordinance: so
that you may bring her unto what level that you list, without any coins:
which is very necessary to be used for great Ordinance in a number of causes,
for that it shall take away the charge of the carrying of coins, and yet much
more better than the coins be. etc.

The 54. Devise.
ANd as touching this, how for to make an Instrument or Engine for to know the
goodness or the badnesse of powder, (that is to say) to know the strength or
weakness thereof, they may do it in this manner: first, make in metal or
iron a round box, of an ynch and a half in breadth more or less at your
discretion, and of two inches deep more or less, at your discretion, and then
let that be placed so, that it may stand upright, and have a little tuchhole at
the lower part thereof, and then let the uppermost part at the mouth thereof,
have in metal or iron a lid or cover, that may go with a joint upon the one
side thereof, and the cover or lid to be of a reasonable weight, and the other
side of the cover or lid right against the joint to have a square hole fitted
of purpose, and then upon that side that the joint of the cover or lid is of,
there must be raised a thing that must have of iron or other metal a part of
a circle, and the end of that must go through the square hole in the lid or
cover, and the other end to go with a pin or joint right over the joint of
the cover or lid, and the said crooked thing or part of a circle, to have teeth
or notches, like unto a Saw, and the teeth to stand upwards, and then it is
finished, and then, whenever that you list to prove the strength of powder,
and you having of diverse sorts of powder, then wey some small quantity of the
powder, and then put that into the Box, and then let down the cover or lidde,
and then give fire unto it at the touchhole, and then the powder will blow up
the cover or lid, and then the teeth or notches being well filed or trimmed of
purpose, will hold up the lid at the highest, and yet not staying in the
blowing of it upwards, for that the teeth stands so, to stay it that it shall
not come downwards, and then trying or proving diverse sorts of powder, you
shall know which is the best or strongest powder, or weaker powder, by the
blowing up of the lid or cover, you putting in the powder by weight. etc. And
this is the form of the engine or instrument.

Lid.

Box.

Tuchhole.



The 55. Devise.
AS diverse Gunners and other men have devised sundry sorts of fireworks for
the annoyance of their enemies, yet as far as even I have seen or heard, I
never know not heard of any good service done by it, neither by sea nor by
land, but only by powder, and that has done great service, for that the force
of it is so mighty, and comes with such a terror. But for their other
fire-workes, it is rather meetest to be used in the time of pleasure in the
night than for any service. And for to make this kind of ball, do this: Prepare
the mould of a double Culuering shot, and that is five inches high, and then
take clay, and make it round in a ball, as much as a Minion shot, that is three
inches high, and then let it be dried as the Founders do use to dry their
moulds, and then stick that clay round about with iron nails, leaving the
nails an ynch without the clay, and then put that moulde of clay into the
moulde of the Culuering shot, and look that the nails do so bear, that the
ball of clay do stand right in the middle of the mould of the Culuering shot,
and also, make the mould of clay, so that it may have a tuchhole to come into
the clay, and then take Bell mettle or other course pot brass, and then fill
the mould of the Culuering shot with that mettell, and that being done, then it
is finished, and so make as many of them as you list, and then that being done,
pick out all the clay again that is in the ball, that was cast in the
Culuering shot mould, and then fill that with good corn powder, and then that
being filled near full, then take some receite of soft fire work, that will
not burn too hastily, and fill up the rest of the ball, and then it is
perfectly finished. And then in the time of service either by sea or by land,
it is very good to throw in amongst your enemies, where they do stand thick,
as they be very good to defend a breach, or such other like causes, as this,
to take it in his hand and to fire it, and then to throw it amongst your
enemies, and as soon as the fire-worke is burned unto the powder, the ball
will break in a thousand pieces, and every piece in a manner will do as much
hurt as a Harquebuze shot, so that there is no kind of fire-worke comparable to
this kind of Ball, for service in the time of need.

The 56. Devise.
ANd also as touching the fire works, they may make a truncke that may shoot
20. or 30. or 40. Caliuer or Harquebuze shot, and deliver every shot severally
by it self, and to come out with great force, as this: let the Truncke of
fire-worke be made according unto the accustomable manner, and with the kinds
of receites, and then either the wood being thicker than of custom, or else
some pretty pipes of iron put into the sides of the Troncke, and to go through
unto the fire work in the Trunck, and then fill all those with good corn
powder, and a shot after it, and then as the fire work does burn downwards,
so it does shoot offal the Harquebuze shot that is on the outside of the
Trunck, if that there were 40. of them. etc.

The 57. Devise.
ANd also there is devised a certain Engine, that goes some with a screwe,
and some with a nut, upon teeth that you may lift up the side of a whole
double Cannon, setting it under the Axeltree, and so you may take off the
wheel of the Cannon, and these be very much used in Germany, and in Dutchland,
to lift up the side of a great Dutch wagon when that it is laden. etc.

The 58. Devise.
ANd furthermore, for that I have seen the inconvenience thereof, as touching
the lading of Ordinance in ships, and especially of those Ordinance that are
under the Decks, in the time of service, when that they do charge their
Ordinance with a ladel, it is very combersome, for that the ladle must be twice
filled, and the twice turning of the rammer head, is trouble some in a straight
room, besides the opennesse of the powder, in the doing thereof, whereby
there may grow great inconvenience, if that they be not very circumspect in the
doing thereof, and furthermore for to lade a piece with a carteredge, there is
this inconvenience in the doing thereof: for if that the piece have any honey
combs in it, that may chance to stay or let the carteredge, in such sort, that
you shall scant get the carteredge home unto the bottom of the piece: for if
by chance that the carteredge should double, or stick, or go awry by the way,
you shall have very much for to do to drive it home unto the bottom of the
piece, whereby in the time of service there might happen great inconvenience to
be so combered etc.

Wherefore I will show unto you how that you may make an Engine that you may
call a charge that shall lade a piece at one time, and shall be done as soon
as you shall do it with a carteredge, and also you may empty the carteredge
into the charge, and shall ram up tho powder all at once, and lay it more
closer than the ladle without the turning of the ladle or of the rammer head,
and shall keep the powder more closer than the lady shall, and the making
thereof follows as this: first take a ladle head, such an one as the
ordinary ladles has, and then take the plate, such a plate as you make all
ladles of, but that you must have more plate than the ladle has, and then when
that you would make this Engine or charge for a piece, then bend the plate
round, that it may go easily into the mouth of the piece, and then make it
fast unto the ^^dell head* that is fit for that piece, and let the plate of the
charge be of such length, that it may hold so much powder as is sufficient to
lade the piece, and then the hole that is in the charge head, let that be made
wider than the ordinary Ladle heads, that it may have a staff go easily
through it, to that intent that you may draw it in and out at your pleasure:
and then fitting that with a staff, then put upon that staves end a rammer
head made of purpose, that may go fit and close in and out through the plat of
the charge easily, and then let there be another smaller staff made fast unto
the charge head, and then it is finished: and then whenever that you list to
lade a piece with that charge, do this first: draw in the rammer head close
unto the bottom of the charge, and then fill the charge with powder, and then
put that into the mouth of the piece, holding that by both the staves, and so
putting it unto the bottom of the piece, and then thrust in the rammer hard
with one hand, and then draw back the charge staff with the other hand, and
so drawing back the plate of the charge, the rammer head thrusts out all the
powder, and so the rammer head does put up the powder close in the piece, and
will lade the piece clean without the spilling of any powder, and does make
but one work of all: which (in my opinion) is very necessary to beevsed in
the time of service, and is less work than to do that with a ladell, and if
that your powder be in carteredges, you may put in the carteredge into the
charge, or else you may empty it into the charge, at your discretion.

The charger.

The rammer.

The charge and rammer



The 59. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching the making of an engine or instrument, which is
very necessary for Gunners for to have to fit every piece, with his true
weight of powder, and especially for to wey the carteredges that be filled
with powder, and is less troublesome than to have a pair of Balance: neither
shall he use to have so many weightes, for that one weight of half a pound,
shall be able to weye 50. or 60. pound, which kind of things are altogether
used in south Spain, to wey all kind of Merchandise, which they do call
Statery: and it is thus made: First prepare one scale, and then let that be
stringed as a scale, or ordinary balance is, with a hook at the end of the
strings, and then make a beam of iron or wood about three quarters of a yard
long, more or less at your discretion, and then within an ynche of one of the
ends let it have a pin through, and a claue or such a thing as all other
balance have to hold it up by, that the pin may go through, and to be pliant
to go too and fro, even as all other balance has, and then to have one
weight, and that to have a ring, and then, when that you would wey any thing,
put the ring upon the longer part of the beam, to be marked with notches, and
at such a notch the ring of the weight being there, it will wey one pound, and
at another notch, two pound, and at another 3. pound, and so forth, unto 40.
or 50. pound, which is a very necessary thing for Gunners to have, to wey
their things withal, and is but of small charge.



of Martial affairs by land, as touching the walls of Towns or Fortes.
The 60. Devise
AS touching this, how for to overthrow the wall of any Town or Fort, or
Castle, it may be thus done without any Ordinance, so that it be not watered
about it, as this, take certain great timber, and vndershoare or prop the wall
in diverse places, and that done, then dig or undermine the wall, all along
the wall side as long: as you do think it sufficient for your purpose, and so
undermine it, until that you be more then half way under the foundation of
the wall, and then make fires unto every one of the shores or proppes, and
burn them asunder, and then as soon as the wall does miss the shore or
prop, and the foundation of that side dug away, the wall must needs fall
presently, etc. And by this means they may burn the parcoleses or gates of
any Castle or Forte, if that they be not of iron.

The 61. Devise.
FVrthermore, they may in like manner break down the walls of any Castle, or
Fort, or Town, with great rams made of purpose, with great heads of iron and
steel, some may be made to hang by provision, and to be drawn back by the
strength of men, and so by violence to run against the walls of a Town, and
othersome may be made to run on wheels, and to run with violence of a
number of men against the Walls, and so break them down, and also these
kinds of provision be most specialtie too break down the Gates or
Parcolleses of any Castle or town.

The 62. Devise.
HOW to make a scaling ladder in such sort that they that are upon the ladder,
shall have the advantage in the fight of them that are upon the vamer of the
walls of any Town, or Castle, or Fort, whether that it be to stand at the
pushe of the pike, or handling of any other weapon whatsoever that it be, and
this ladder that I speak off must be made in this manner. First prepare your
stuff accordingly, of sufficient strength, and then according unto the
accustomable manner, make a double ladder of three pieces of timber, and staue
it accordingly, as of custom it has been used beforetime, and then the view
of the place being taken, that is to be scaled, for to make the length of the
ladder, then make the length of the ladder accordingly, that it may stand or
rest within a foot or two, or three, of the height of the top of the Wall, and
then for the top of the ladder, do you cut three pieces of small timber of
six foot long, and then let them be made fast by some means at the upper
end of the ladder, that it may stand like a platform upon the top of the
Ladder to the wall-wards, and then let there be three braces stand, or made
fast underneath the platform upon the top of the ladder, to bear the
platform from the three ladder staves, unto the three pieces of the platform
on the top of the Ladder, and then to that purpose, that men may be able to
stand upon the platform, on the top of the Ladder there may be sawen certain
fillettes of light boordes, that are strong, such as are used to be made for
the spardeck or grating of Ships, that may lie so close together, that a man's
foot cannot go thorough, and then at the lower end of the ladder, to have
three pikes upon the three pieces of timber, that the ladder do not slip,
when that it is set unto the wall, and then the ladder is finished. And then to
raise the ladder to set it unto the wall, they must make a forke of timber that
must be as long as the ladder, and that forke does serve both for to raise
the ladder, and also to stand underneath the platform of the ladder, to be a
stay to help to bear the weight of the men upon the top of the ladder, etc.
And this ladder being raised, a number of them, they may stand on the tops of
the ladder, as firmly as they that do stand upon the vamer of the wall, and
six men may stand and fight upon the top of every one of the ladders, and
handle his weapon, for there may stand three ranckes of men upon the platform,
besides them that are coming up the ladder. And this ladder is twenty times
better than the other kinds of ladders in all these respects. If the other
plain ladders be too long, then they that do defend, may by force put them
over: and if that the ladder be to short but one foot, it will be so
painful unto them that shall rise, to recover the wall, that one man may
keep down ten men: but in this kind of ladder, if that it be three or four
or five foot too short, yet they may stand and fight, and one may help
another over the wall being armed men, they may get over with ease.

The form of the ladder does follow.



The 63. Devise.
IF any town or fort be situated in a dry ground, when that they be subject
unto undermining, then to avoid the danger thereof, they may do thus, let
them first make a vent down in some place within the town, and so dig deep
under the foundation of the town, and also under the town ditch, and then
when that they have dug without the ditch, then let them dig all about under
the ground, as they may conveniently, and so make a way round about the Town,
underneath the ground, on the outside of the town: and the soil that they do
dig out, in the digging of it, they may rampire the walls with that stuff, and
then whenever that they are besieged, and do doubt undermining them, they
may make search every day in the said place, and so it is not possible for
them to undermine, but that they shall hear them, and perceive where that they
be: and also that place will be a let unto them. And then you may use against
them what policy that you list, to annoy them at your pleasure, and prevent
them of their purpose, etc.

The 64. Devise.
AS touching this, for to know whether there be any undermining in the ground,
and where that they be, it is thus known: take a lattine basin, and go unto
the place that you do so suspect that underminers may be, and set that basin
upon the ground, and then put five or six peason into that basin, and if that
there be any underminers near hand, then at every stroke that they that are
in the ground do make with their tools, the pease will make a jar in the
basin: and also the effect will the more appear, if that you do bind a
sackefull of woll as hard as you can, then setting the basin wiith pease upon
that, you shall hear every stroke that is made in the ground, and this is one
of the best things that may be devised to be placed in any place, for to know
where that underminers be, as in the Devise going before, to place it in the
vaute under the ground, or also where that there is no such way under the
ground, yet they may make diverse ventes or deep holes in the ground: and this
being placed there, they shall hear every stroke that the underminers do
strike, etc.

The 65. Devise.
AS touching this, how for to make a cave, to the intent to place powder, and
to to give fire to blow up any fort or bulwark, or the wall of any Town, it
is thus to be done, when that you do begin for to dig, to make your vent
into the ground, let it be of some distance from the place that you do mean
to blow up, and then when that you are entered into the ground, then do not
dig right toward the place, but indent it sometimes one way, and sometimes
another way, that the way be not straight, to this end, that you may fortify
the vent of the way so strongly, that it may be able to resist the force of the
blast of the powder, and the vent of the way to be as narrow, as may be near
unto the place or vaut that the powder is placed, and in like manner to dig
as deep as you may into the ground, and so when you have dug near, until
you do come unto the place that you do mean to blow up, then you may dig
somewhat nerer upwards, that you do not place the powder too deep under the
ground, but at a reasonable distance, and then in the room that you do place
the powder in, there let it be right over the powder or vaut of 7. 8. or 9.
foot higher tha^ the barrels of powder, to this intent, that it might take his
vent upwards, for the air that is in that hollow place, will be the occasion
of the lifting, or raising, or rending of the ground right over it. And then
when that you have placed the powder in the vaut that is sufficient for to
serve your turn, and the more in quantity, the greater shall be the effect
of the raising of the thing. Then before that you do ram up, or make up the
vent of the way you must make your provision for the place to give fire unto;
which is best to be done, by making a tronke in boordes, made and sawen of
purpose, to be of length from the mouth of the entrance, unto the vaut that the
powder does stand in, and that must be placed or laid al along, that it may
be close, and the provision put into it, that must give fire unto the powder in
the vaute: and then ram up the way that was made unto the vaute that the
powder stands in, both with earth and strong timber, etc. and that troncke
of boordes shall keep the provision of the train, without any foil or
moisture to hurt it. And you may make your provision so, that you may choose
whether you will give fire by a train, with a match lying all along in it,
made of purpose, boiled in certain mixtures rolled in Serpentine powder, or
else by a small line, to go with a pulley, all along the truncke or case,
and the line to pass through a great quantity of powder, in the vaute, where
the powder stands, and then when that you would give fire unto the powder,
then to make the fire fast unto the line, and so to draw the fire unto the
powder by alyne, etc.

The 66. Devise.
AS touching this, for to dig a way in the ground, to come right under any
place assigned, the way being crooked, indenting sometimes this way, and
sometimes that way, as it may not be made straight, that is somewhat
difficulte, and asks a good consideration in the doing thereof: for if that
the powder be not placed right under that thing that is meant to be blown up,
then the thing should be of little effect: wherefore in the ordering of the way
of a mine to come right under any place assigned, it must be thus handled:
first, they must know the true distance unto the place that is meant to be
blown up, from the place that you do begin for to dig, or enter into the
ground, and that being known, then look precisely, which way that the place
does bear, and then draw or make a plat of the same, with a scale or truncke
of measure thereunto apperteining, and then according unto the distance, from
the entrance, unto the place assigned, draw out how many foot or yardes that
you will go, first on the one side, and then on the other side, indenting the
way in the ground, and not to go right upon the place assigned, and so by that
means, knowing what quantity of measure, you have gone, first one way, and
then another way, in the ground, and by that proportion in the way, both by
the direction of the way, and the quantity of measure: in the way you may go
directly unto the place assigned in the ground, and you may mark your plat
firmly, how that you will do it, before that you do enter into the ground,
according unto the distance of the places assigned. And also it may happen so,
that when that you are in undermining in the ground, and have purposed to go
so many foot one way, and so many foot an other way, and that you have made
your plat so, yet there may be such impediments or lets in the ground, that
you cannot do it according unto your first meaning, then you may mend it and
alter it in your plat, according unto the way that you may go, and so to come
unto the true place assigned, and so you may alter your plat according unto the
place that you may go, until that you do atteyne to come unto the place
assigned, to mark the vaute in the ground to place the powder in it. etc.

The 67. Devise.
IF it happen so, that those that have beseeged a Town, have made a breach in
the wall of any Town, and that they do continue to batter both night and day,
so that they cannot make up their breach in the night: then the next way is to
make that place defensible in this manner: let them cast a ditch or trench
within, on the inside of the wall all along the breach, right against it, of
a sufficient depth, and of widenes, to be defensible, and then let them place
their Ordinance against the breach, and also flankers in like manner, to scour
the ditch within on the inside of the wall. etc.

The 68. Devise.
I Do think it not unmeet to be spoken of this, for to know if any ditch
or trench be cast, that if the ditch be made so many foot broad in the
brimme, and so many foot broad in the bottom, and so many foot deep, that
if you would have a wall or rampire made of that stuff, if you would have it
so many foot broad in the bottom, and so many foot broad on the top, then
to know justly how many foot high the wall will be of that stuff, which is
hewed out of the ditch, when the earth is settled: or else for to know if that
you would have the wall made so high, then to know what thickness that would
bear, being made of that stuff which is hewed out of the ditch: and for to
know that, do this. First, according unto the wideness of the ditch in the
brimme and in the bottom, put both the numbers together, and that done, then
take half that number, and then according unto the deepnesse that you mean to
make the ditch, multiply the two numbers together, that is to say, the number
offeet of the depth of the ditch, and the breadth thereof at the brim, and the
bottom being added both together, and then look what number it comes unto,
then if you would know how high it would make the wall at such a thickness at
the bottom, and the top, then add these two numbers both together, and then
take half that, and divide that out of the number of the ditch so multiplied,
and that number that stands in the quantity line, shall be the height of
the wall. And furthermore, if you would have the wall so many foot high, and
would know how many foot thick it would be of that stuff, then divide the
height out of the number of the ditch so multiplied, and that which stands in
the quantity line, shall be the thickness of the wall in the middle, and then
you knowing that, you may use the thickness of the bottom and the top at your
discretion. And for the better understanding of the matter, you shall have this
example by a ditch that I would have made of 20. foot broad in the bottom,
and 10. foot deep, and I would have a wall made of that stuff, to be
sixteen foot at the bottom of the wall, and eight foot at the top of the
wall; now my desire is to know how many foot high it would be, of that stuff
that comes out of the aforesaid ditch when the wall is settled and dried; you
shall know it thus: first add the wideness of the brim, and the bottom of
the ditch both together, and that is twenty foot for the brimme, and twelve
foot for the bottom, and those two numbers together, makes 32. then take
half that number, and that is sixteen, and then the deepnes of the ditch
being ten foot, multiply them two numbers together, that is to say, sixteen
times ten, and that makes 160. and now I would have the wall sixteen foot
broad at the bottom, and eight foot at the top, and those two numbers added
together, makes 24. and half that is 12. foot: now my desire is, to know how
many foot the wall will be high, which to know, do this: divide the 160. by
12. which is the thickness of the wall in the middle, and that number that
stands in the quantity line, is the height of the wall, and that comes
unto thirteen foot and four inches just, so that you may conclude, that a
ditch being cast, that is twenty foot at the brimme, and 12. foot in the
bottom, and 10. foot deep, will make a wall of sixteen foot at the bottom,
and eight foot on the top, and 13. foot in height. etc. Furthermore, by the
example of the ditch, I would have the wall fifteen foot high, my desire is to
know how thick the wall would be of that stuff, then divide the aforesaid
number of 160. by 15. and then there will stand in the quantity line 10. and
10. will remain over, so that you may conclude, that the wall of 15. foot
high, will be 10. foot thick, and eight inches, and then you may at your
discretion, make it as broad in the bottom as you list, and look what you do
broad it in the bottom, it will lack the same at the top. Therefore if you
make it 15. foot at the bottom, it will be but six foot, and eight inches
at the top.

The 69. Devise.
AS touching the intrenching either of an army, or the enclosing of a Town,
they must observe this order, that they may flancke the corteyne of the
trenches, and in the more places, that they may flancke the more stronger, is
the places so entrenched, and also most specially to flank the corners, or
collyan points, and also the ways or torn pieces, where that there is vents
for people to pass in and out: and also that order is to be observed in the
building of any fortification, as the walls of Cities, or Towns, or Forts, or
Castles: for if it be so that they cannot flanck the sides of the walls, the
thing can be of no force, as commonly all those Castles and Forts that were
builded in the time of King Henry the eight, were rounds, or parts of rounds,
which are of no force, for that they cannot flancke the ditches. Wherefore I
had thought for to have showed what manner of corteyne of a wall is the best
kind of fortification, which I do omit, and you may make the number of corners
or collyans points, with the cortaines of the walls, according unto the
quantity or bigness of the City, Town, or Fort, at your discretion, as
need does require, as four square, or five square, or six square, or seven
or eight square, as need shall require, according unto the bigness of the
place. etc.

The 70. Devise.
ANd as touching the beseeging of a Town, they must devise to make a trench,
that the people may pass to the Camp and from the Camp, without being
spoiled with the shot of the Town, which is commonly called a rolling trench,
and it must be thus made, as coming nere within the shot of the Town, at some
convenient place, either coming out of some wood, or else behind the brow of a
hill, there to begin to cast the trench, first to go right out one way and
cast the earth to the townwards, and then to turn another way, and so to cast
the earth toward the townwards, and so to continue, first one way and then an
other way, until that you do come unto the Camp, and so in that trench the
people may pass too and fro with safety, and also they that are in the town
cannot know what number of men there does pass too and fro, etc.

The 71. Devise.
AS touching this, I do not think it unmeet to be spoken of how for to
shadow men on a platform, where that they are unprovided of baskets, as it
may happen in diverse places on a platform by the sea side, or on a platform
on the top of the wall of any town, or in such other like places, when there
happens to be any service on the sudden, where as great Ordinance is
placed, and that for the opennesse or bareness of the place, that they have
nothing to shaddowe them, but that the small shot does or may beat them from
their Ordinance: then to prevent that, this is the remedy, for to prepare
canuas, and set up stanchines all along, and so to shaddowe their men with
the canuas, and then when that the pieces be laden, then with a piece of a
line to draw up the nether edge of the canuas, and so to level the piece, and
shoot it off under the canuas, and so by that means the enemy shall see no
mark to shoot: for otherwise they will be shooting at the place whereas they
do see any number of men together: but if that they do not see to what place
that men do assemble together, they cannot tell where for to shoot with their
small shot. And also, I do not think this devise hurtful to be used upon
the tops of the walls of a town, whereas men have any great recovery, and
also if that any man list to look toward the enemy, he may but put up the
cloth, and see better than they may do out of any lops, for that they will
always awaite with their small shot, to see if that there be any pearing out
at the lops to shoot at them.

The 72. Devise.
AS touching this, how for to know of any things done, or to be done speedily
and in the shortest time, some have devised to do it by one means, and some by
another means, as this: by the preparing of certain swift horses, being laid
in diverse places, at the end of every eight or ten miles, to the end to have
fresh horses, etc. which is the best way. And other some have devised to do
it, by trayning up of a dog to go between two places, and then he being
beaten from the one place, will run unto the other place directly, and then
when that they would have any letters sent speedily, then they have made
provision to hang them about the dogs neck, etc. and a dog will run a
great way in a little time, if he had reason and did understand what he were
willed for to do, but the swiftest way is to be done by that means which the
Romans taught the English Britains, when they caused them to make a wall to
defend themselves against the Picts, which was by certain tronckes made of
brass laid in the wall: and at the end of every two or three mile they had a
gate, which was both watched and warded, and so by that means whenever that
they had any occasion to give any warning unto them that should defend the said
Picts, then look unto what place that the Picts did make any assault unto
them, they were certified through the said trunckes of brass, where that they
were, and what hurt they had done, and what number that there were of them,
etc. and by this means they would have word what was done, and what was to be
done twenty or thirty miles in one hour space. Wherefore in my opinion this is
a very good devise for to be used in the walls of any town of war, to be
laid all along the walls of the town from the one gate unto the other gate,
whereby there might be warning given from any one place unto another upon the
sudden. etc.

The 73. Devise.
AS touching this, how for to convey letters secretly, and not to be found and
known, whereas there is great awaite laid* and great search made upon every
person that do pass too and from for letters, you may do this: you having
some Dog or some bad Spaniell that will not be lost from you: and some Dog
that will not come unto hand to be taken up, prepare a collar for him that may
be hollow within, and let it be a collar to look unto worth nothing, and in
that collar you may convey your letters without any suspicion, for the man may
be searched, and yet the Dog will follow his master running too and fro, and
no person can tell whose Dog it is, and will as soon take the Dog to be
some of their own companies, as otherwise. etc.

Another way to convey letters secretly, is, to make up the letters and roll
them up round together, and then they may cause some kind of box to be made
of metal, with a close cover, to be round and long, so that it may go into
the mougth of a bottell, and then the letters being put into that small box,
and the box covered and made close that no licour can soake into it, then put
that box into the bottell, and then you may fill it with wine, or such other
like, and send that by any person that you would have them come unto, and it
will not lightly be suspected. etc.

The 74. Devise.
ANd furthermore, if that you have any great quantity of letters or books
that you would convey secretly, and would not neither lose them, nor have them
found, nor known, and that there is weight laid for such things, then do
this: first prepare a runlet or small barrel, that will be made tight, of
sufficient bigness to hold those letters or books, and then lap them in a
sear cloth, and then take off the head of it, and put them into the small
barrel, and then put in the head of it again and hoope it up close again,
and make it tight that no lickour may come into it, and then take a great
caske, a butte or pipe, or a hoshead at your discretion, and then take out the
head of that and put in the small barrel with letters, and so put in the head
of the great caske again, and so make it tight again, and then you may fill
that cask with wine, or with whatsoever you list, etc. And then that caske or
piece of wine lying amongst other, it may be transported from place to place at
your discretion, and never to be known what is in it, no otherwise than the
other caske, and it may be tasted at any of the heads or sides in every place,
as the other vessels are in all points, and there shall be nothing seen nor
known: and also it is very good for you to sow the little barrel in a piece of
course woollen cloth, and then it will not knock in the vessel to be heard in
the remoouing of it too and fro, and then you may transport it either by water
or byland, and it will never be suspected. etc.

The 75. Devise.
ANd furthermore, there may be such means made, that you may know the mind
of your friends, although that you may not come at them, nor send unto them,
by the form of certain lights in the night, as this, you having consulted or
talked together, that if that they do show you so many lights, and standing on
such a fashion or form, that it signifies such a thing is done by the enemy,
or else that you must do something, and in such a form, that it signifies
such a thing, etc. accordingly unto the tokens that you have agreed upon, etc.
And furthermore, you may devise by the forms of lights in the night, to cause
your friends to write a letter by, and so by that means to declare your whole
mind unto your friends: as this, you having agreed upon them, that if that
there be so many lights, and stand after such a fashion, that it signifies to
wright A, and if so many lights, and in such a form, then to write B, and so
forth unto the numbers of the letters, according unto the form and number of
the lights so showed, and then at the end of every word so written, to show
but one light for a stop, for the end of a word, etc. until that you have
finished. And furthermore, in like manner by lights in the night is the most
speediest thing to have any thing known, that may be to give warning unto any
country to be in a readiness upon the soddaine, as we here in England, do
prepare for the use thereof, by the firing of the beakons, etc. And furthermore
it is used unto a further practice underneath the king of Spaynes dominions,
upon the southe coast called Andelazia, within the straights of luberaltare the
sea being called Mare Mediterraneum, as there is small towers all along the
coast that they do keep watch in, and at the end of every league or in less
distance, there is one of those small towers: and it is so ordained amongst
them, that they can tell whether that any of the Turks, or Moors galleys has
been on the coast, and what number of Galleyes that there be of them* and
whether that they have landed or been a shore, and whether that they be gone
or remaining still, by the very form and the numbers of lights, that the one
tower does show unto the other, and by this means of those lights they will
know of things done a hundredth leagues from them all along the coast in one
night, for that the one of the towers does take of the other tower, etc.

The 76. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you being in a town, if that you do know that you shall
be besieged, you may make such provision before hand, that you may send
letters, and receive letters of your friends from time unto time, whereby that
you may declare your pleasure and your estate to your friends, and also to know
your friends mind, etc. as this, if that there is an Pigeon or Dove house in
the town, let them be well cherished before hand, and then carry a certain
number of those Pigeons unto your friends, and in like manner take a certain
number of Pigeons from your friends, and then let them be kept close in a
house that they cannot get away, and when that you are besieged that you cannot
send unto your friends nor your friends unto you, then when you list to send
any letters, take one of those Pigeons, and make the letter fast about her
neck, by some provision, that it does not trouble her wings, and so she will
repair unto those Douehouses that she has been cherished at, and has been
long using unto, and then the Douehouse being searched every night* you shall
come by the letters, etc.

The 77. Devise of Martial affairs by land.
AS touching Martial affairs, I have seen no greatexperience, therefore I am
more bold than wise, for to say any thing thereof, considering the great number
of discreet and valiant Gentlemen and Soldiers, that has been trained up of
no small time in those affairs, that I being so simple and rude, should in any
respect meddle therewith: but yet notwithstanding, they may make the less
account thereof, and not envy the rude writer of it, for that they be but
written, as slender Devises: and first this for to know, if that you have
viewed any piece of ground, to know how many men it will receive to stand in
their marching form, according unto Tartalias order that he describes, and
not according as Nicolas Machauells description, to allow for every man three
foot in breadth, and seven foot in length, but according unto the order of
Tartalia, to allow for every man three foot in breadth, and but six foot in
length. Wherefore I do think it necessary to know how many men will stand in
their marching form upon any ground, for two necessary causes, and the one is
this, if that you have vewed the ground, and do know the length and the breadth
thereof, then you may know how many men that it will receive, and by that means
you do know whether that it be big enough, or too small to serve your purpose,
etc. And the second point is this, by that means you may know upon the view of
any ground, how many men that there be of your enemies, if that they be either
in their battle form, or in their marching form, as they will be always if
that they be going, except that it be for policy sake, as if that they would
show themselves to be fewer in number than they are, then they will go
closer together than they do of custom, and if that they would show
themselves to be more in number than they are, then they will go wider
asunder than of custom. And for to know how many men will stand upon any
piece of ground, do this first, when that you do know the length and the
breadth of any piece of ground, how many foot that it is, then multiply them
together, that is to say, the number of feet of the length, with the number of
feet of the breadth, and then look what that number comes unto, and then
divide that number by 18. and that will show unto you the true number of men,
that will stand in their marching form, according unto Tartalis order, that is
to say, to allow every man three foot in breadth, and six foot in length,
etc. and now according unto our English measure, that is to say, to know how
many men will stand upon an aker of ground, as an aker of ground does contain
of our land measure 160. rodes or poles, of 16. foot and a half in length,
and that will make in square measure 208. foot and 8. inches and better every
way square, so that there will stand upon one aker of ground in their marching
form, alowing unto every man three foot in length and six in breadth. 2420.
men, and after that rate you may know how many men will stand in any piece of
ground, how big or small soever that the ground is, as a quarter of an aker
will receive 605. men, so that less then seven rods of ground, will receive
100. men, etc.

The 78. Devise.
ANd furthermore, I do think it convenient for to show how many ranckes of men
will be in the length of a mile whereby that if you do see the length of men
in their marching, you may give a very near guess of their number: as this, an
English mile does contain 5000. foot, and then (as before is declared) to
allow for every rank 6. foot, wherefore divide the 5000. foot by six, and
that will show unto you how many ranckes of men will be in a mile in length,
as it is 833. ranckes, so that you may conclude that there will be 416.
ranckes in half a mile, and 208. ranks in the length of a quarter of a mile,
and in the length 600. foot, just 10^. ranckes, and that is less than part of
a mile, and then you knowing how many men that there is in a rank, you may
know the number of men, etc.

The 97. Devise.
ANd furthermore I do think it convenient for to show unto you, how to set a
battle square, that is to say, for diverse numbers of men, and the number of
men being known, to have so many men in a rank, as the number of ranckes
comes unto, and first for 100. the square root, and so increasing by the
half hundred, unto 500. and then increasing by the 1000. until it be 40000.
the first number is the number of men, the second is the square root or
battle, and the rest is the remainder that will not be square.

The Table for the 29. Devise.
The number of men. The Square root or bat The Remainder. The number of men.
The Square root or bat The Remainder. 100 10 0 10000 100 0 150 12 6 11000 104
184 200 14 4 12000 109 119 250 15 25 13000 114 4 300 17 11 14000 118 76 350 18
26 15000 122 116 400 20 0 16000 126 62 450 21 9 17000 130 100 500 22 16 18000
134 44 600 24 24 19000 137 231 700 26 24 20000 141 119 800 28 16 21000 144 264
900 30 0 22000 148 96 1000 31 39 23000 151 199 1100 33 11 24000 154 284 1200 34
44 1 25000 158 36 1300 36 4 26000 161 79 1400 37 31 27000 164 104 1500 38 50
28000 167 111 1600 40 0 29000 170 100 1700 41 19 30000 173 71 1800 42 36 31000
176 24 1900 43 51 32000 178 316 2000 44 64 33000 181 239 3000 54 84 34000 184
144 4000 63 31 35000 187 31 5000 70 100 36000 189 279 6000 77 71 37000 192 136
7000 83 111 38000 194 304 8000 89 79 39000 197 191 9000 94 164 40000 200 0

The 87. Devise.
ANd furthermore for that the square root or battle is not the strongest way
for you to imbattell your self, for that the front is much narrower than the
side or flanck of the battle, wherefore in mine opinion, and also it is the
opinion of diverse of them that have written in Martial affairs, that the
strongest way for to imbattell himself, is to be square upon the ground, that
is to say that the side of the battle, and the front of the battle be as many
foot one way, as it is the other way, and then the number of men in the front
will be double unto the number of the ranckes, and so by that means there be
the more men occupied to fight all at one time, etc. wherefore I do think it
good to show unto you, how many men be in a rank on the front, and also how
many ranckes that there will be in the side or flancke, and also in how many
foot of ground square every way, that they may stand upon, accordingly as
before is rehearsed, allowing every man three foot in breadth and six foot
in length, beginning at 100. until that they be 2000. and then increasing by
the 1000. until that they be 40000. And the first numbers is the number of
men, and the second is the number of men in a rank for the front, and the
third numbers, is the numbers of ranckes for the side or flancke, and the
fourth numbers, is the remain that will neither come in to be a whole rank
in the front, neither will they be sufficient to serve to make one more in a
rank. Wherefore they are to be employed according unto the will of the
General or the Captains of the leaders of those men, etc. and the fifth number
is the number of the seat that those men may stand upon in their battle
form, to be square on the ground, that is to say, to be so many foot every
way, etc. And now follows the table of the things rehearsed.

The Table for the 80. Devise.
The number of men, the whole sum. The number of men in a rank. The number
of ranckes. The Remainder. The number of feet that the ground is square. 100
14 7 2 42 150 16 9 6 51 200 20 10 0 60 250 22 11 8 66 300 25 12 0 74 350 26 13
12 78 400 28 14 8 84 450 30 15 0 90 500 31 16 4 94 600 35 17 5 103 700 36 19 16
111 800 40 20 0 120 900 42 21 18 126 1000 45 22 10 133 1100 47 23 19 140 1200
48 25 0 147 1300 50 26 0 153 1400 53 26 22 158 1500 55 27 15 164 1600 57 28 4
170 1700 58 29 18 174 1800 60 30 0 180 1900 61 31 9 183 2000 62 32 16 189 3000
76 39 36 231 4000 88 45 40 267 5000 100 50 0 300 6000 109 55 5 328 7000 118 59
38 354 8000 126 63 62 378 9000 134 67 22 402

The Table for the 80. Devise.
The number of men, the whole sum. The number of men in a rank. The number
of ranckes. The Remainder. The number of feet that the ground is square.
10000 140 71 60 423 11000 148 74 48 444 12000 155 77 65 464 13000 160 81 40 483
14000 166 84 56 501 15000 172 87 36 519 16000 179 89 69 536 17000 184 92 72 552
18000 189 95 45 568 19000 195 97 85 584 20000 200 100 0 600 21000 205 102 90
614 22000 209 105 55 628 23000 214 107 102 642 24000 218 110 20 657 25000 223
112 24 670 26000 228 114 8 684 27000 232 116 88 696 28000 237 118 34 710 29000
241 120 80 722 30000 245 122 110 734 31000 248 125 0 747 32000 253 126 122 758
33000 257 128 104 770 34000 261 130 70 782 35000 265 132 20 794 36000 268 134
88 804 37000 272 136 8 816 38000 275 138 50 826 39000 278 140 80 837 40000 283
141 97 848

The 81. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as it is the strongest way for you to imbattell your self to
be square upon the ground, for that there is the more men occupied to fight, so
in like manner it is the weaker way than to be square in number, if that you
should have any charge given unto the flancke or side of the battle: wherefore
I do think it very necessary for to show unto you, how that the side of the
battle may be as strong as the front, if that the weapons be sorted
thereafter, for that they shall have as many men in a rank for the side, as
there is in the front, upon the sudden, and the battle never depart from
that ground, as this, the number of men in the front, being double unto the
number of ranckes, then if there be any charge given unto the side of the
battle, the ground being square, then it is but to turn their faces unto
their enemies, and then two ranckes will make one just: as for an example, of
one hundred men, and to be square upon the ground, there shall be fourteen
men in a rank, and seven ranckes, and the ground shall be 42. foot square:
then if that they have a charge given unto the side, then they turning their
faces unto their enemies, then they are but seven in a rank and fourteen
ranckes, and then there is six foot a sunder between every man, then let the
next rank come unto the first rank, and then there will be fourteen men
in a rank, and so every two rancks may make one rank, and then there is but
three foot as was before between every man in the front of the battle, and
six foot between every rank, etc.

The 82. Devise.
ANd furthermore, I do think it convenient for to show unto you, how for to
be square upon the ground, for any number of men, what space soever that you
would have between man and man, both in length and breadth is according unto
the order of Nicholas Machiuel, which is in length for every man 7. foot, and
in breadth 3. foot, or else if that you would have your army of men to show
bigger and to be square upon the ground, then your space between man and man
must be wider, as to allow nine foot in length for every man, and four foot
in breadth, according unto the mind or fancy of the General, etc. Although
the accustomable manner has been according unto the opinions of diverse
authors in Martial affairs, to allow but 6. foot in length and 3. foot in
breadth, called of most authors the broad square, according unto the tables in
the eighty Devise. And now to be square upon the ground, the^ what space
soever that you would have between man and man, both in length and breadth,
then do this first, look how many foot that you will allow in length of
ground for every man, then you must multiply your number of men, by the
number of feet in length, that done, then divide that number so multiplied by
the number of feet in breadth that you do allow for every man: and that
done, then extract the square root of that number, and that shall show you
how many men shall be in a rank for the front of the battle, and then to
know how many ranckes of men, do this, look how many men that you have in
the rank for the front, then divide that number by your proper or true number
of men, and that shall show unto you how many ranckes that there shall be of
them, etc. As for an example thus; I having thirty thousand men, and I would
know how many men that there will be in a rank, and how many ranckes of
them to be square upon the ground, allowing for every man 7 foot in length,
and 3. foot in breadth, according unto Nicholas Machiuels order, and to know
that, do this, first your number of men being 30000. and allowing 7. foot in
length for every man, therefore multiply 30000. by 7. and that comes unto
210000. and then divide that number again, by that number in feet that you do
allow in breadth for every man, and that is by 3. wherefore divide 21000. by 3.
and then there will stand in the quantity line 70000. then extract the square
root of 70000. and there will stand in the quantity line 264. so that you may
conclude that 264. men shall be in a rank for the front of the battle. And
now to know how many rancks of men that there shall be for the side or flanck of
the battle, then do this: your number being 264. men in a rank, and your
number of men being 30000. wherefore divide the 30000. by 264. and then there
will stand in the quantity line 113. and then remains over 168. so that you
may conclude, that 30000. men to stand square upon the ground, allowing
seven foot in length, and three foot in breadth, for every man, will be 264.
men in a rank, and 113. ranckes, and 168. men will remain over, which 168.
men you may employ at the discretion of the General: and also it will make one
man more in a rank, and then there shall be 265. men in a rank, and 113.
ranckes, and 55. men will remain over, etc. And also by this order, you may
imbattell your self square upon the ground, what space soever that you would
be between man and man in length and breadth: wherefore I will give a second
example, you having ten thousand men, and would have nine foot in length for
every man, and four foot in breadth, wherefore multiply ten thousand by
nine, and that makes 90000. then divide that 90000. by four, and then there
will stand in the quantity line 22500. then extract the square root of 22500.
and then there will stand in the quantity line one hundred and fifty: so that
you may conclude, that 150. men shall be in a rank for the front of the
battle, and then your number of men, being 10000. therefore divide the number
of men by the front, that is to say, 10000. by 150. and then there will stand
in the quantity line 66. and then there remains over 100. so that you may
conclude, that 10000. men, alowing every man 9. foot in length, and 4. foot
in breadth, to stand square on the ground, will be 150. men in a rank, and
66. ranckes, and 100. will remain over, which 100. men will make one man more
in a rank, that is 151. men in a rank, and 66. ranckes, and 34. men will
remain over, and so by this means you may inbattell your self square upon
the ground, what space soever that you would have between man and man both in
length and breadth, and then if that you would know how many foot square in
ground that they do occupy, then it is but to do this: multiply the number
of men in a rank, by the number of feet that they do occupy in breadth,
and that shall show unto you how many foot square is the ground that they do
occupy, or else you may do this: multiply the number of rancks by the space
of the number of feet, that they have in length, and that in like manner
shows the square of the ground that they do occupy in like manner. etc.

The 83. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you having any number of men, and you having so many weapons
of every sort more or less as it happens, whether that you would be square
on the ground or otherwise, you knowing how many men that you would be in a
rank, you may know how many ranckes that there will be of every sort of
weapon at your pleasure, as this, that is no more but to divide the number of
weapons of every sort, by that number of men that you would be in a rank,
and that number that stands in quantity line shall be the number of ranckes.
etc. And thus by dividing every sort of weapons by it self, by a number in a
rank, you shall perfectly know how many ranckes that there shall be of every
forte of weapon, etc. And thus I do cease to say any further, as touching the
setting of the sorts of the weapons, referring that unto them that are expert
in those causes, and also the forms of sundry battles, as triangles, double
and single battle, called the half Moon, either with the horns or corners
forwards or backwards, and the sleeves or wings of battles. I will not take
upon me to deal in those causes, but I do refer that unto those men of
experience in such affairs.

The 84. Devise.
NOw you being imbattelled in any place, where that you are near unto your
enemies, and yet for an advantage sake, you would take another piece of ground
more better for your purpose, and yet you cannot come unto it in your
battelforme by the means of some straight that you must pass through before
that you can come unto it, and for that you are imbattelled, and would not
alter them from that form of battle: then to pass through the straight do
this, the place being viewed before hand, how many men may march through in a
rank through that straight, and then appoynting your officers, as the
Captains of the hundreds, and the vintners, or the other officers for that
purpose, to march through the straight, according unto that number that you may
march through, and then when that they do come at the straight, let the whole
battle stay, and then if that it be so narrow that there may but 3. men pass
through, more or less as the place is, then begin at the side of the battle,
and then let 3. of the front begin to enter and march in, and then 3. of the
next rank, and so forth unto the last rank, and then at the end of the
last rank, let them 3. of the first rank follow again, and so forth,
until that they be all entered and gone into the straight, and then when that
the first 3. in a rank is through the straight, let them stay, and then let
the next 3. in a rank come up by them, until that he that was in the front
be with them that are in the front that first entered the straight, etc. and so
let them all stay, and the one come up by the side of the other, until that
the whole battle be in that form that it was before. etc.

The 85. Devise.
ANd furthermore, if that you in the marching have any occasion to shift the
number of men in a rank, that is to say, to be sometime more men in a rank,
and sometime fewer men in a rank, and yet would keep your weapons sorted as
they were at the first, as in the Devise next before in the passing through a
straight, where the weapons that were in the front are dispersed in every
place, according unto the often separating of the front of the battle, so that
in that form they are but weak, if that they were abroad out of the straight
where that they might have any charge or battle given unto them: wherefore for
an easy way to shift your self to be what number of men in a rank that you
list, and to keep your weapons sorted as they were before, and not to be
altered, but them that were in the front to be in the front still, and so
consequently in every place to be as they were before, etc. And now for a
speedy way for to bring your men from one number of men unto another, this is
to be noted, if that you be 3. men in a rank and would be 5. then 5. ranckes
will make 3. ranckes: and you being 3. ranckes and would be 7. in a rank,
then 7. ranckes will make three ranckes: and being three in a rank, and would
be nine in a rank, then three ranckes will make one: and being three in a
rank, and would be eleven, then eleven will make three: and being three in a
rank, and would be thirteen, then thirteen will make three: and being three
in a rank, and would be 15. then 5. ranckes will make one: and then if that
you would be 17. in a rank, then 17. ranckes will make 3: and if that you
would be 19. in a rank, then 19. will make 3: and if that you would be 21.
in a rank, then 7. will make one rank, etc. And if that you be 5. men in a
rank, and would be 7. in a rank, then 7. ranckes will make 5: and still
you being 5. in a rank, and would be 9. then 9. will make 5: and if that you
would be 11. in a rank, then 11. will make 5: and if that you would be 13.
in a rank, then 13. will make 5: and if that you would be 15. men in a rank,
then 3. ranckes will make one, etc. And furthermore, you being 7. men in a
rank, and would be 9. then 9. ranckes will make 7: and you being still 7.
and would be 11. then 11. will make 7: and if that you would be 13. in a
rank, then 13. will make 7: and if that you would be 15. then 15. will make
7: and if you would be 17. then 17. will make 7: and if that you would be 19.
then 19. will make 7: and if you would be 21. then 3. ranckes will make one,
etc. And furthermore, by that same order you being the more men in a rank and
would be fewer, then as is showed before you being 21. in a rank, and would
be but 3. then one will make 7. ranckes: and if you being 21. men in a rank,
and would be but 5. then 5. ranckes will make 21: and if that you would be but
7. in a rank, then one rank will make 3. ranckes, etc. And so by this
means you may alter your self from one number unto another, and never vnsorte
your weapons, as when that you list to alter your number of men in a rank,
then it is but to appoint your officers in every place at the end of so many
ranckes, to point them into what number that you do assign them etc. at your
pleasure.

The 86. Devise.
ANd if that it happen when that you are set in your battle form, and your
enemies at hand ready to fight with you, and by fortune either of great
Ordinance or by small got, that the front or diverse ranckes of your battle
that the men are slain or spoiled, and then if that your enemies do encounter
with you, then you must needs be overthrown, except that the front and those
ranks be new supplied or finished again with men: neither you must not be
out of order, for then in like manner you should be overthrown: and to run
away then you in like manner should be overthrown: wherefore this is to be
noted, and that those that are the officers of the bands have a diligent
foresight, that as soon as any man is stroke down by any misfortune, that
the room be supplied again forthwith: which way is this to be done, and
never to be out of order for the matter, and the ranckes before to be furnished
forthwith, and this the Soldiers must have this Instructions, that as soon as
he does see his foreman stricken down or missing, that he does step into his
place and so every one of them to step forwards until that it do come unto
the last rank, and so by that means that those men, that were taken away in
the first ranckes, that they shall be turned unto the hindermost ranckes of
all, etc. And this they may do both in their marching or going, as well as in
standing still, for in the going he must go faster than his fellows, until
that he does come so far forwards till that the ranckes be furnished
again, and if so be that it were so, that in the first ranckes that the men
were spoiled until the middle of the battle, should never cease but to over
go his fellows, until that he were in the forefronte of the battle, and so
in all the ranks, until the last rank to come forwards in like manner, and so
by that means the wantes of men should be in the hinder part of the battle,
and furnished in the forepart of the battle, etc.

The 87. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching the joining of battle, there is great policy,
and wisdom, both in the sorting of their weapons, and also in the
imbattelling of them, considering in what form that your enemies be in, and
how that they are prepared both in their weapons and otherwise, and so you to
imbattell your self against them, that you may have the advantage of them if
that it be possible, considering of every thing that may happen, as well of
things that are against you, as of things with you, that is to say, considering
of the number of men of both the sides, the furniture and the weapons on both
the sides, the form of the battles on both the sides, the advantages of the
grounds, whether that it be by hill, or by any other means, as the wind, or
the Sun or water, or such other like, etc. And also there is great matters
that may happen by the using of some kind of fight, considering of the weapons
on both the sides, for they must use the fight of any weapon, according unto
that weapon that he fights against, and so seek the advantage that ways
if that it may be: as in my opinion, if that there were two battles ready to
be joined together, the one against the other, and the number of men on both
the sides to be equal, and also in their appointment weapons and furniture to
be a like, and also in form of battle all one, and also the one to have no
advantage of the ground of the other, neither in no other thing, but to be all
alike in all points, etc. and suppose that the front of both the battles is
pikes, and the one as many men in a rank as the other, yet it is possible
that the one may overthrow the other at the first meeting of the battle
without any recovery, by the means of the order of the fighting: as this: the
one battle comes according unto the accustomable manner, thinking to to
stand at the pushe of the pyke with them, and the other battle coming in that
form in like manner, until that they are in manner hard unto them, and then
upon the sudden, they do all the fore front run in narrower and together
so close as they can, coming in shoulder unto shoulder, and then the ranckes
that are behind, for the quantity of near the half of the battle, does
the like, and so does come close unto the back of them that are before, and
so running with great violence, and the points of their pikes forwards, that
they must pearce and enter the front of the other battle, for they that are
before must needs run in unto them, for that they that are behind do force
them in: and they that are of the other battle must needs give way, or else
fall down and be trodden under feet, and then if that they be once separated,
and put out of their order, they must needs be overthrown with out any
recovery, etc.

Wherefore there is great policy to be used in fighting at the joining of
battles, and also in the sorting of their weapons, and also in the form of the
battles, as in the dividing of themselves in sundry battles, as wings and such
other like, which I pass over, referring it unto those that have seen the
experience thereof.

The 88. Devise.
ANd furthermore, if that it happen so that you do chance for to be over
matched, and that you do know that your enemies be to strong for you, by the
great strength of their horse men, and the number of men to many for you, that
if you should fight with them, that you must needs be overthrown, then to
prevent them that they shall not be able to give any charge upon you, then
inuiron or compass your self round about with your carriages, that is to say,
with your wagons or carts, and so by that means the horsemen shall not be
able to enter upon you, neither the foot men, but that you shall be able to
defend them, etc. and if that it happen so that you have not sufficient of
wagons or carts to inuiron or compass you round about, then you may go near
unto some hedge or ditch, or such other like to be your refuge for the one
side, and then you may place your carriages on the other side, etc.

The 89. Devise.
ANd furthermore, if that it happen so, that you are abroad with a band of
men, and that you are belay de between you and home, both by horsemen and by
foot men, and that it is not possible for you, but if that they do charge
upon you, but that you must be overthrown, and you having no wagons or
carriages to compass your self, then repair unto such a place that is full
of bushes, as thorns, and brambles, and there you may with ease defend your
self, for that the Horsemen shall not be able to give any charge upon you,
and also as for the footmen you may defend your self, etc.

The 90. Devise.
AS touching this, if that it does happen so, that you are driven to travel
by night, whether that it be to do any exployte or otherwise, and that you
are small shot as harquebushes or caliuers, and that you would carry your match
close, that you would not have it to be seen of the scoutes, or watch of your
enemies, then you must do this, every man must prepare a piece of a cane of
five or six inches long, and must put a string thereunto, and hang that by his
girdle, as you do the sheathe of a knife: and the piece of cane must be open
at both the ends, and then the match being light, you must put into the
hollow cane that end that is light, and so the match will burn in the cane,
and the light thereof nebee espied, etc. and this Devise is very good to carry
your match in the rainie weather, for that the wet shall not touch the fire of
the match, and you may ever, as the match burns, feed it, or put it in
further and further, etc.

The 91. Devise.
AND furthermore, if that you have any watch or scoutes abroad in the night,
and that you would know whether that there be any horsemen coming, and the
night being so dark that you cannot see if that any were coming, yet by this
means you may know if that there were any coming, as this, make a hole in
the ground with a dagger or knife, of a two or three inches deep, and a three
or four inches over, and then stoop down unto the ground, and lay your ear
thereunto, and then you harkening unto it, if that there be any horsemen
coming you shall hear them, and you shall know whether that they do come
fast or softely, and whether that there be one or two, or a number of them, by
the very noise of the ground, half a mile before that they do come near unto
you by the very noise of the ground: and also if that it be upon some kind
of ground, you may hear them more than a mile, and also upon such ground you
may hear footmen a quarter of a mile, and whether that there be but one or
two or a number of them.

The 92. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching them that do travel by night in such places,
that is, in their enemies country, and that cannot travel by day for fear of
being spied, neither dare keep the common high way for fear of being met
withal, as it may happen by them that have been taken of enemies, and have
broken prison, or otherwise to carry letters, and such other like, then it
behooves them to know which way that the place does stand from them, that is
to say, unto what quarter of the world, whether that it be East, West, North or
South, and then according as the place does bear, so to direct their way, and
according unto that to coast over the Country the nearest way, and to govern
them by night in their way, they must use the North star, and so in the night
to direct their way by that, if it be star light, and by day they may use the
needle of a Dial when they travel in such places that be out of the hye way,
as in wooddes, forests, and such other like places, and if that they have no
Dial, then they must note the place of the Sun rising and the setting, and
the place of noone, etc. until that they do come near unto the frontiers of
the Country where their friends are, etc.

The 93. Devise.
AND if an armed man be pursued, and is in danger to be taken except that he
may swim over a water, then for him to swim, he may prepare this, to make
a thing to bear about him, as a girdle made of leather and sowed tight, and
blow that full of wind by a pype that must be made fast thereunto, and so
that thing will make him swim, although he have an armor on his back.

The 94. Devise.
ANd if that an army of men and their carriages are to pass over a river or
water, and they having no provision of boats, yet they may make a bridge in
this manner, first prepare caske, as pypes, or hogsheades, and then take long
timber, and then make a frame therewith in this manner, to frame two pieces
together somewhat shorter in breadth than the length of the caske, like unto a
ladder, but much bigger and stronger, and you having prepared a sufficient
number of these, then take your caske being made tight, and then take those
timbers so made together, and then put the caske between two of these framed
timbers, the one being laid close unto the other, and then make fast those two
frames, the one being of the one side of the caske, and the other on the other
side of the caske, and then make them so fast, that the caske will not stir,
and so to make it so long that it will go over the river or water, and so to
have two ranckes of caske in those forms, and then those two ranckes of caske
being placed cross the river, then prepare plankes to lay upon those two
ranckes of caske close together, and then being made fast unto the timber that
they do not stir from the place, then the whole army may pass over, and
their carriages and all, for that the caske will not suffer the bridge for to
sincke, although that they do draw the Ordinance over it, etc.

The 95. Devise.
ANd furthermore, if that an army of men be for to pass over a broad water,
where that there does run a great tide or stream, and by the means of the
great breadth, and the swift stream, it is not possible to make any bridge to
pass over it, yet notwithstanding it is possible to carry such provision with
them, that may make so many boats within less time than a day, as will carry
the whole army over at once, although that the water were two or three mile
over it, and yet that provision that they should carry with them, should not
ask any great matter in carriage, for one wagon or cart should carry as much
provision to make boats to carry over 400. or 500. men, etc. As this, first,
prepare leather, and then let them make the mould of a boat of 20. or 30. foot
long more or less, at your discretion, and in deepenesse three or four foot
at your discretion, and of 8. foot broad more or less at your discretion, and
that done, let the leather be made like the moulde of the boat, that it may
be fit to be drawn on upon it, and the seames so sowed or closed, that it
does not leake, that it may be tight to hold out water, and that done, then
to have in sundry places certain strops or strings to make it fast, and then
it is finished, and then it may be folded up and laid in carts or wagons, and
then you may make such a number of them as shall be sufficient to serve your
turn, as a boat of 30. foot long, and eight foot broad, and four foot
deep, will carry a 40. or 50. men at ease, etc. And then whenever that you
do mean to pass the army over any river, then repair unto some place near
unto the river side, where there is some young woods, and then that shall serve
your turn, to the intent to make your boats: as this, cut down of that young
wood, and then cut one maine piece to make it for the keele of the boat, and
to cut that of that length according to the length of the moulde that was
first made, and so a piece for the stem and the stern post, accordingly unto
the first moulde made, and then certain poles to serve for the sides, and so
forth* and so consequently to every place, and then let them be framed and
nailed together in all places, and that done let the leather be drawn on over
that, and then made fast with the strops, and then it is finished: and then for
that the men may not tread upon the leather in the bottom of the boat, they
may either prepare bordes, or else to make hardels of purpose, and then these
boats being put into the water, they will swim as well as any other boats,
and may row too and fro, if that it were to go 100. miles, etc. Wherefore they
must make some provision of oars for them.

The 96. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as is before expressed in this book of Devises of Ordinance,
that in the carrying of their field Ordinance, as their Sakers, and their
Minions, and their other field pieces, that when that they do travel amongst
their enemies, or otherwise in the front of their battles, when that they do
see that their enemies be ready to give charge upon them, either with their
horsemen or footmen, they may draw or carry their field Ordinance before the
battle, and their mouths forwards and laden, and may shoot them off unto
their enemies, and yet the horses shall still draw forwards, and be behind the
Ordinance, so that their Artillery shall go forwards as fast as the army of
men, and always in the front of the battle: as this, where as the
accustomable manner is for to have the Lymers that the horses does draw in, to
be made fast unto the stock or carriage of the piece, and so to draw it with
the breech or tail forwards: this must be unto the contrary, for it shall
have no Lymers at al, but in the stead of the Lymers it must have a long piece
of timber, as of Fyrre, or such as they make masts of, and that must be made
fast unto the carriage or stock of the piece, in such sort that it does stand
fast, that it may not swerve by no means, and to stand backwardes right out
from the tail of the piece wards, and the piece of timber or mast to be of
sufficient bigness and length, according unto the piece of Ordinance, and then
they may make their provision of their horse harneys fast unto the long piece
of timber, and the horses heads to go toward the piece of Ordinance ward, the
one half of the number of horses upon the one side of the long piece of
timber, and the other half on the other side, and then the horses in their
drawing shall thrust the piece of Ordinance forwards, so that the horses shall
go behind the piece, and the mouth of the piece forwards toward their
enemies, so that they may shoot them off continually without any staying, so
that the horses will be ruled: but if that the horses will not be ruled, yet
then they may be driven forwards by the long piece of timber, with the strength
of men* etc.

The 97. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as you do see by the last Devise, for the drawing of the
Ordinance, and the piece for to go before the Ordinance, so in like manner if
that it should happen so, that you had no Ordinance with you, but had carriage
with you, as wagons or carts, then in my opinion it were very good to be set
in the front of the battle, for the preservation of them against the horsemen,
as before is said, to have a long piece of timber made fast behind the cart or
wagon, and so to draw it, and the cart or wagon to go before the horses, etc.

The 98. Devise.
IT furthermore seems unto me to be very necessary, and especially for an
army of men that should travel amongst their enemies, or also where as any
battle is to be fought, my opinion is, that this kind of provision were very
necessary both for the forefront of an army, and also for to impale them
round abouts, and that is this, for to prepare certain small Ordinance, so
that it be not too heavy, as Muskets and small single Baces, and some
Calabasses that do shoot small stones, as single and such other like. And
then let them prepare small light wheels of 4. foot hye, and so prepare an
Axeltree for two of those wheels, and place those small Ordinance upon them
in some hansome provision made of purpose, and that done, then those small
Ordinance may be driven forwards with the mouth toward their enemies by men,
for any man may draw or thrust forward 3. or 4 score pound weight, being upon
wheels, better or withmore ease than he shall be able to bear 20. pound weight,
and these small light Ordinance may be driven forwards being upon wheels, as
men do commonly drive a wheelebarrowe, and so the mouth shall be forwards, and
he behind the piece, and the piece may have a sight as the Caliuers have, so
that he may shoot as near with that piece, as they may do with a Caliuer: but
the force of that piece is six times more than the force of the Caliuer, so
that it is not possible for to make any armor of proof to keep out the force
of that shot: wherefore I am of this opinion, that being upon plain ground,
that any man may travel as far in a day with a small piece with all his
provision with him, as any man with a corselet furnished: for he that
trauelleth with that piece may hang all his provision of powder and shot upon
the Axeltree of his piece, and so travel with ease: and also any army of men
being environed round with such kind of provision, with the help of the other
Ordinance and provision before specified, that it is not possible for any
horsemen to enter in upon them, but that they may defend them for the horses
cannot run over the wheels and carriage of this kind of small Ordinance, but
that they that are within those small Ordinance, may defend them with their
pikes and Caliuers, and their other weapons, etc.

The 99. Devise.
ANd furthermore, as touching the force of horsemen, when that they do give
the charge upon any band of men, they do come with no small force, the horses
being lusty and strong: wherefore some men's opinion has been this, that if
that the pikemen, for that they are the strength of the army, and especially
to defend the horsemen, that if that every pikeman did prepare a bladder
blown, and a few peason in them, and so made fast hard unto the head of the
pike, and so shaking the pike, the pease in the bladder will make a great
noise, and so fear the horses, that the horses will skant come upon them that
have their pikes in that order, the lustier horses the more they will be
feared, except that they be the better broken unto those causes, etc.

The 100. Devise.
AS touching this, to know whether that any ground be hier or lower than the
ground that you do stand upon, that is known by that order, as in the first
Devise by the line of the Horizon, that always looking and marking, how the
furthest part that you do see, does cut upon that ground that you do desire
to know, whether that it be hier or lower, and look at what height you do
see the Horizon, that is equal in height with the sight of your eye, and then
rebating that height upon the other ground, then that is equal with your
feet, and if that you do see the Horizon circle over the other ground, then
the ground is lower than the ground that you do stand upon, etc. And also if
that you are amongst hills, and that you can not see the Horizon circle, then
you may know whether that it be hier or lower, by a square, hanging a plummet
of lead at the corner, and set the edge of the square just with the line, and
then take your sight by the upper part thereof, and so beholding the place, you
shall know whether that it be hier ground or lower. etc.

The 101. Devise.
FOr to know whether that it be possible to bring the water of any spring
unto any place assigned, it is thus known, or to know how hie that it may be
raised, it will always come unto any place that is any thing in lowness
underneath the place that the spring comes forth of, and it may in like
manner be raised in height at your pleasure, so that it be any thing lower than
the head thereof, allowing for a mile in distance to the head of the spring, to
be three inches and a half hier than the place that you would raise it up
unto, and for two miles 14. inches, etc. from the circularnesse of the earth,
etc. and for to know whether the ground be hier or lower, it is declared in
the Devise going before.

The 102. Devise.
ANd also the principallest annoyance that you can do unto any town that is
besieged, is to take away their fresh water, whether it be by any river or
Conduits: and to take away a water course or river, this must be considered:
first view the ground that the same does pass through, and that done, look
where there is any ground lower or inferior in height unto it, and also how
the passages may be led besides the town, and not to seek to the town wards
again, and then cut trenches or ditches to lead or carry the water another
way: and that done, make a damme at that place you mean to stop the water, to
turn the course, that it may go besides the town, as always water is apt to
seek unto the place any thing lower than it self: but if that it happen so
that the water course is between two hills, that there be no room to turn
the water from the town, then you may poison their water with diverse things
that the same may annoy them, but if that they have water brought unto them by
conduits, then you may but dig between the conduit head and the town, and
cut the pipes thereof, and so by that means for to take away their water. And
this is one of the principalest annoyances that you may do unto any place, etc.

The 103. Devise.
FOr that I do think it very necessary and convenient, for to show unto you
how for to know what weight that you are able for to payse or lift up from
the ground, if that is to say, to let the one end under it, and to wey or
press down the other end, that it were after the order of colepresse wise,
that is to say, to let the one end under it and to wey or press down the
other end, for that it is used many times about the lifting of great and heavy
things, as the lifting of great and heavy Ordinance, or great and heavy timber
or stones, and it is thus known, how much or what weight that it will lift or
payse up: look how much of the colepresse is more over that which bears the
thing underneath, more the one way than it is the other way, so accordingly
unto that proportion the thing will be lifted, as the thing of 100. weight,
laying the coale-presse thereafter, will wey up a 1000. weight, yea 5000. as you
do place the thing for the purpose: As for an example, this the thing that I
have for to lift up is a 1000. weight, and the piece of timber that I do make
my waving tree that it is eleauen foot long and better, wherefore I do place
the block or thing underneath at one foot, from the thing that is to be
lifted, and so I do lay the waying tree that it is 10. foot over the one way,
and but one foot the other way, and lying in that form a 100. weight will wey
up the 1000. weight, and by this order you may make your provision in that
sort, that you may lift any thing at ease. etc.

The 104. Devise.
AND furthermore, in like manner you may know what wayght will be lifted with
a wheel: as this, look how much in Deametre or in circumference that the
wheel does exceed the axeltree that the roape goes about, so much in
proportion shall the wheel lift the lesser weight, to raise or lift the
bigger: as for an example, a wheel of 12. foot in Diametre, and has an
axeltree that the roape goes about of one foot in Deametre, then a person
that wayeth a little more than 100. weight to go in the wheel, shall wey a
thing of twelve hundredth weight, and according unto the compass of the wheel,
and the compass of the axeltree, that the lesser weight will wey up the
bigger: and the like effects be in the often foldings of roapes, for to run
in pulleys, as we may see by the tackles of ships, etc.

The 105. Devise.
AND also in wheels, if that one wheel do turn an other, you may know by
the one wheel, how oftentimes that the other wheel shall turn it about,
whether that the wheels do turn or go by teeth, or as some do term them
by cogges, or by a roape or line, etc. As this, if that the one wheel does
turn the other by teeth, then it is known by the number of teeth, taking in
the other wheel, as if the number of teeth of the one wheel be double unto
the other, then for the one wheel in the going about one time, the other shall
be turned two times, etc. And if that it be so that the number of teeth be ten
times the lesser, then at the going of the bigger wheel one time the lesser
shall be turned ten times abouts: and in like manner, if the number ofteeth
were 100. times the number of the lesser, then for the once going about of the
one, the other shall be turned 100* times, always according unto the number
of the one, by the number of the other, proportion for proportion, accordingly
unto the number of the teeth in both the wheels. etc.

The 106. Devise.
ANd also in like manner you may know, how many times that one wheel does
turn the other wheel about, that the one wheel does turn the other wheel
by a rope or line, or by a chain, or such other like, as this by the
circu^ference of both the wheels; for if the one wheel be double the
circumference, or compass of the other, then for the going of the bigger
wheel once about, the lesser shall turn twice about: and furthermore, if the
bigger be ten times the compass of the lesser, then for the going of the
bigger wheel one time, the lesser shall turn ten times about, etc.
accordingly unto the circumference or compass of both the wheels, proportion
unto proportion, etc.

The 107. Devise.
ANd furthermore, it is possible for to place a glass in a chamber or a parler
in a house, for to see any thing abroad in the fields, or if that it be near
unto any haven or river where as ships or boats do pass too and fro, that
they may see in the glass within the house, the things that are abroad, as
plainly as if that they should go abroad and get them up unto some high
hill, or high tower, for to see them of purpose, the which thing is very
necessary, either for men of Honor or Gentlemen for to behold in their
chambers what is abroad in some such parts of their ground, as they have any
pleasure for to behold and see into it, what is stirruing: therefore that
quantity that it will show as their Dear in their parkes, or cattle in
their pastures, or what persons that there is stirring in their Gardens or
Orchardes: and also it is very necessary for a Captain or the General of a
Town, Forte or Castle, whether that it be in such places, that is, within the
land, or that they have any charge to look toward the sea or haven, or
river, it is very necessary for them, for that the glasses may be so placed,
that they may see if that there be any ships coming or going in the sea,
river or Haven, or any persons in the high way. But the greatest impediment
that the glasses have, you shall see no great circuit of ground in compass,
except that the glasses be very large, and also the window that the sight
comes in at, be large in like manner, etc. And furthermore* for the placing
of a glass in a chamber or parlour, to see the things abroad, it must be
thus done, first you must prepare diverse glasses of a great proportion, that
are very perfect and good looking glasses, either of steel or Crystal, and
that done, the place must be viewed where that it must stand, for it is not
possible to place a glass in some chabers to see any thing abroad, but it must
be in such a chamber as is convenient for the purpose, that has a very high
roufe, and that has windows that are of a great height from the floor, or
else some high Tower near unto it, etc. And if that the place be convenient
for that purpose, then this you must do first, the place must be assigned
that you would see in the glass, and then whether the place be far of or
nearer, then you must place the first glass alofte against a window that is
open unto that place, and that done, if that it be very high, then turn the
shadow of the glass accordingly as you do see cause for your purpose,
bringyng the beam downewardes: and against that glass place an other glass
to receive the beam or shadow, of the things abroad, and that done, you may
turn the beam or shadow of that glass downewardes unto what place that you
list, and so place an other glass against that at your discretion, and so to
place as many glasses, until that you have brought it unto the place that you
would bring it until, and then to set all the glasses fast, for if that any
of them be sturred never so little, then the beam or shadow will be turned
out of the glass, etc. And by this means you may convey the beam or shadow
of any thing by glasses made of due proportion from one place unto an other,
until that you have brought it unto what place you do desire at your
pleasure, and so by that means to see in a house what things be abroad.

The 108. Devise.
FOr to cause iron, lead, stone, or any kind of metal what soever it be, to
swim in the water, without the aid of any thing to support it or bear it,
is this to be done, to make it hollow or concaue like a boll, or boat, or a
trough, or what shape so ever that it have, until that the sides may be raised
so hie, that the water can not come over the top of the side, until that
there is the magnitude or quantity of the rate for every foot square to be in
weight under. 50. pound, and the more that it is lighter the better it
swimmeth, and then it will swim without any fail, etc.

The 109. Devise.
AS it is not unknown in respect unto all persons, that you may burn any
thing that is apt to burn with a glass at hand, which is done by the Sun
beams pearsing through the glass, for that the Sun beams be united and
knit all together in the center thereof, which is the very cause that it
burns, and as we do read that Archimedes burned the Roman Navy at
Syracusa in the Island of Sicilia, some have supposed that he did burn the^
with such kind of glasses, which is most impossible: wherefore it must needs
be, that they were burned with diverse glasses, and the reflection of the Sun
beams turned unto them. But this is to be noted, that it is possible that
fewer glasses may serve to burn any thing there in that Latitude, than that it
will do here in this Latitude, for that the Sun beams be more hoter: for
the Latitude of Syracusa is but five and thirty degrees and a half, and to
burn anything any great distance off with glasses, it requires to have some
sight in Geometry, or else it is not possible for to do it, and for to burn
any thing that is apt to burn, it must be thus handled: they must prepare a
number of glasses made of metal, such as the common people call of steel,
made of purpose, and well polished, and to place those glasses to burn, as if
that it were gunne powder, flax or towe, or occom, pitch, tar, or such like
things that will take fire quickly, the Sun shining very bright: then set the
glass against the Sun, and then turn the reflection beam or shadow to the
place assigned that you would burn, and then place another glass in the like
manner, and turn the reflection beam or shadow unto that place in like
manner, right upon the first end of the beam or shadow, and so to place
more glasses, and to be sure that all the reflected beams or shadows do
rest upon one place, and so by a great number of glasses to multiply the
heat, that in the end it will be set on fire and burn: but you must be sure
that all the reflected beams or shadows do rest in one place, or else it
will be unto no purpose, and at a great distance you shall have much to do to
decerne or see it, etc. Wherefore you must have the aid of Geometry, to use it
according unto the distance, and to place the glasses in a frame, which I do
omit at this time for brevity.

The 110. Devise.
FOr to see any small thing a great distance of from you, it requires the aid
of two glasses, and one glass must be made of purpose, and it may be made in
such sort, that you may see a small thing a great distance of, as this, to
read a letter that is set open near a quarter of a mile from you, and also to
see a man four or five miles from you, or to view a Town or Castle, or to
see any window or such like thing six or seven miles from you. And to declare
what manner of glasses that these must be, the one glass that must be made of
purpose, is like the small burning glasses of that kind of glass, and must
be round, and set in a frame as those be, but that it must be made very
large, of a foot, or 14. or 16. inches broad, and the broader the better: and
the property of this glass, is this, if that you do behold any thing through
the glass, then your eye being near unto it, it shows it self according
unto the thing, but as you do go backwardes, the thing shows bigger and
bigger, until that the thing shall seem of a monstrous bigness: but if that
you do go to far back, then it will debate and be small and turn the
fashion downwards. But now to use this glass, to see a small thing a great
distance, then do this, the thing or place that you would view and discern,
set that glass fast, and the middle of the glass to stand right with the
place assigned, and be sure that it do not stand oblique or awry by no means,
and that done, then take a very fair large looking glass that is well
polished, and set that glass directly right with the polished side against the
first glass, to the intent to receive the beam or shadow that comes through
the first placed glass, and set it at such a distance off, that the thing
shall mark the beam or shadow so large, that it may serve your turn, and so
by that means you shall see in the looking glass a small thing a great
distance, for if that the first placed glass be well made, and very large, you
may descerne and know the favor or phisnomie of a man a mile of from you:
wherefore in my opinion, this is very necessary in diverse respects, as the
viewing of an army of men, and such other like causes, which I do omit, etc.

The 111. Devise.
FOr to make a crane, engine or ginne, to wey any great weight, you may know
before hand what it will wey, as in the 109. Devise, and also you may multiply
the thing in such sort, that you may make a 100. weight to wey or lift up
20000. yea 100000. weight if that you will, as thus, the crane or engine that
has a wheel of 12 foot in Deametre, and the axeltree is a foot in Deametre,
now one person going in the wheel of any thing more than 100. weight, will way
1200. weight, and then you making another wheel of that Deametre, and the
axeltree also, and a rope to go about the circumference of the first wheel,
unto the axeltree of the next wheel, then that person to go in that wheel,
will way or lift 14400. And furthermore, if that you do make a third wheel
of that Deametre in all points, then that person going in that wheel, should
wey or lift up. 172800. and that contain. 86. tons, but then it will rise
but very slowly, and that thing that does bear or support it underneath, had
need be very strong to bear such a huge weight, and also the first wheels:
and by this order you may multiply the thing to lift wayght infinitely.

The 112. Devise.
ANd furthermore, you may make an engine to thrust from you or to pull unto
you, to lift up or to press down with great force, either to go with wheels
as before is declared, or else to go with skrewes, or to go with both, as to
thrust open huge and strong gates, or else you taking good hold, to pull them
open unto you wards, and will make but little noise in the doing thereof, but
you must be sure to set the engine fast, if to thrust from to be strongly and
well backed, and to pull to them it must be strongly bolstered before,
sufficient to be of force to serve the turn.

The 113. Devise.
AS touching the making of any strange works that the world has maruayled at,
as the brazen head that did seem for to speak: and the Serpent of brass for
to hiss: or a Dove of woodde for to fly: or an Eagle made by art of wood
and other metal to fly: and birds made of brass, tin or other metal to
sing sweetly, and such other like Devises, some have thought that it has been
done by enchantment, which is no such thing, but that it has been done by
wheels, as you may see by clockes, that do keep time, some going with
plummets, and some with springs, as those small clockes that be used in tablets
to hang about men's necks. And as the brazen head, that seem for to speak,
might be made by such* wheel work, to go either by plummets or by springs,
and might have time given unto it, that at so many hours end, then the wheels
and other engines should be set to work: and the voice that they did hear
may go withbellowes in some truncke or trunckes of brass or other metal,
with stoppes to alter the sound, may be made to seem to speak some words,
according unto the fancy of the inuenter, so that the simple people will
marvel at it. And for to make a bird or foul made of wood and metal, with
other things made by art, to fly, it is to be done to go with springs, and
so to beat the air with the wings as other birds or fowls do, being of a
reasonable lightness, it may fly: and also to make birds of metal to sing
very sweetly, and good music, it may be done with wheels, to go at any
hour or time appointed by plummets, and then to have pipes of tin or other
fine metal to go with bellows, and the pipes to have stops, and to go with a
barrel or other such like devise, and may be made to play or sing what note
that the inuenter shall think good when he does make it: and also there may
be diverse helps to make it to seem pleasant unto the ears of the hearers,
by letting the sound or wind of the pipes to pass through or into water, for
that will make a quauering as birds do. etc. And also you may make a small
puppet, either like a man or woman, to seem to go by wheels and springs, and
shall turn and go circular according unto the setting of the wheels and
springs, and also the birds made to fly by Art, to fly circularly, as it
shall please the inuenter, by the placing of the wheels and springs, and such
other like inventions, which the common people would marvel at, thinking that
it is done by Enchantment, and yet is done by no other means, but by good
Arts and lawful.

FINIS.

