THE HVRTE OF Hering Mass. Set forth by ye faithful servant of god and
constant Marter of Christ. John^ Bradforth when he was Prisoner in the Tower of
London.

3. Kings. 18. How long will ye halt between two opinions.

If ye lord be god, follow him.

But if Baal be he then goo after him.

Hering Mass
AL though at this present men call this into question whether it be lawful for
a man which knows ye truth to be present at the celebracion of the Mass or not: Or whether a man being in company with others at Mass, in body be
therwyth defiled, his spirit being absente and not consentinge, but rather
detestynge and abhorynge the the abomynacyon and naughtynes of the Mass, or not. All though (I say) this now be come into question a mongest us hear in
England, esspiciallye amongst many my good brethren and susters in London
(as I here say) yet I trust it be no further but still in question, I mean
that I trust men be not yet so persuaded as perchance the first mouers of
this question aither would have other so to think, Papists.
because they think so, or else because they yet think not so: them selves
fullye, but would be so persuaded that as in consyence they might be quyett,
week gospellers.
so in body and goods they might live in rest and sauytye. How be it in
as much as this question (if a man consider the state of the world, and
reasoning or probabilitees, which to a natural man can not but seem alowable)
may fortune to grow to an inconuenyence to a christion consciences, and to a
great offience both to god and his church, I though it my duty as I can, to
put to my helping hand, nay rather to beseech god in the bowls and blood of
his dear son Jesus christ that he would put to his helping hand and by me as
by an instrumente of his grace and mercy, he would work some thing to his
glory and to the profit of his church. In and concerning this matter,
Calvin vyrett bullinger. Houper.
not that the matter it self needs it (for it is very plain and here to fore
diverse have written of it enough if enough be enough.

But because these times full of offenses, Satan's great delygence and his
soldiers serving at a pinche on ye one part, and the in firmytes of my
brethren their ignorance and semplecytie sone seduced by the subtyle on the
other part, seems to exact of me and of al charytable hearts, Mat. xxv.
as the lord has lent his talentes so to exercise the same. The which
thing as in dyscharge of my self here in, so to occasion others to help ye
poor afflycted congregation of Christ with their lerning and consolations,
learned out of gods book. I now attempt and begin in hope of gods
grease wisdom and holy spryte, which I desire and crave of the oh merciful
^ather, in the name of thy dear child Jesus Christ our only savior and
advocate as well to gyde and teach me in wrytinge as to work in the hearts of
them, to whom this shall come unto by readinge that we may know thy truth in
all things and love the same, to live it for ever more. Amen.

Whether a man or woman may with out offense to god and his church be present
at the Mass with others in bodily presence, in spirit being absente, and not
alowyng the Mass, but rather detesting it: this is the question. Reasons to
prove yt a man may go to mass


That men or woman may be present in body at mass with such as take it for a
gods service and a great worshyppynge of god, there are many reasons made,
whereof these following as they be the most probable and effectual so be they
in manner all that can be objected by any reasonable color.

1 First because god is a spirit and requereth accordynglye that is to say in
sprite to be seruide, I^on. i^ii.
Therefore the body being at mas if the spirit be with god is not materyall,
or a thing to be greatly condemned.

2 Again as in the old testamente, when much errore and Idolatry was in the
church a monge the bishops, pristes, pharisees, scribes and people, yet did
neither the prophets, neither our savior and his apostles abstain from
cominge to the temple at Jerusalem, and using of the sacrifices accustomed: as
they would have done if they should have sinned in so doing. Even so now it is
not euel, though the mass be naught, and though they do naught which think
it a gods service if a man or woman do come to the church where mass is,
and so be at it, if that in heart and mind they consent not to the wyckednes,
and Idolatry committed.

3 Thyrdlye if when Naaman prayed ye Prophet Heliseus to pray ye god would not
be displeased with him when he should go with his lord into the temple of Remmon
in Body, iiii. kin. v
although in spirit he would worshipe the true god of Israel: if (I say) the
prophet bad him goo in peace all should be well: much more the^ it can not be
any offense to be present at mass, if so be our spirit talk with god and
allow it not.

4 Fourthly a man being at mass and not alowinge it in his heart, as he can
not but pray to god to help his brethren that their eyes might be open to se
the evil they do in worshippynge god contrary to his word (as did Assterius,
who being at the Idolatruse sacryfice the people of Cesarya vsyd, by prayer
obtained of god, to have their eyes open and to see their error) do by his
gesture he will behave him self in such sort, as rather shall make men, the
less to regard the mass, for he will not look up at the leuacion tym, hold up
his hands, nor stroke his hands on his face, but rather knele down in his
pue or form sadlye and heuelye, as one of small devotion to the mass. This
reason is thought very probable.

5 Fyftlye a man being so scrupulouse as to think that it is not enough to be
leave well in the heart, Roma. x.
and with the tongue to confess to god the Christen faith, except he rune out
of his vocasyon to reprove the mass, and them that come at it, as though all
men were preachers. ^ man thus doing can not please god, nor profit his
brother, but offend both and bring him self in great danger to lose all he
has, to be cast into preason to undo his wife and children. etc. Therefore
it can not be but well done, to go to mass so that in spirit we allow it not.

i Cor. viii
6 Syxtlye Saint Paul disaloweth them that altogether follow knowledge where
charity is the thing edyfieth, and knowledge makes proud. Therefore in this
case we ought to follow charity and not to offend our brethren till god
revele to them as he has done unto us.

Math. xv.
7 Seuenthlye our savior shows it to come from the heart that defyleth the
man: so then to come to mass in body, the heart being with god defiles not
a Christian.

8 Eightlye, It is the errore of the Anabaptists as it was of the donatistes,
and other old heretics to absteyne from the ministere because of the
wyckednes of others. i. Cor. xi. Romans xiiii
But Paul would have men to prove them selves and not to judge of other which
stand or fall to the lord, and even so in this case of goinge to mass, let
us know the pressed and peoples ylnes do not hurt us if we in heart consent not
to their evil.

9 Neinthyle, In Danuel we read that god bade him not look on the outward
show. for I have rejected that says he For man looks on that which is
outward, but god beholds the heart. i kings xii
So here if the heart be pure it makes no matter of the outward gesture of
the body.

10 Tenthlye, All the beauty and glory of the kings daughter that is of the
church and of every Christian is with in says the Psalm.45. and not without,
Psalm. xi.
so that if the heart be pure it forces not though the body be in company at
the mass with them that come to mass as to an holy thing.

These and such like are the reasons that men make to prove it lawful for a
man or woman to be present at mass, if in spirit and heart they be absente
and allow it not. But how weak and vain all these be, yea how far they make
against that they would prove, by gods grace I trust a none to show after
that I have brefely touched the mass, what it is and how great aneuell it is.
A degressyon of the mass.
For a little thereof will I speak, and that not so much that men might know
that it is evil (for I trust in GOD that very many know that if so be they
will know it) but rather that men may better consider how horrible and
monstruouse an evil it is (the which thing I fere me few do) how be it
because yet their ar some which think reueretlie of the mass, and err of
semplecitye and ignorance therein, to whose hands this my wrytinge may come
and parchaunce do them good I doubt not but that my labor in breflye
bringynge in here, what the mass is, and how great an euel it is, will not be
thought utterly out of the way.

What the mass is of the name of it.
Consernynge the Mass what it is a man would think that of the name of it,
easily it might be learned, but certainly their is here in no certeyntie. For
some call it an oblacion of meal, of Mincha. Leui. 6. Malach. 1. Psalm. 141.
Some call it a voluntary gift of Missath. Deute. 16. Some say it has the
name of sendynge away such as was called Cathe chumeni, because they were
sent out of the congregation, when the Lords supper was to be celebrated.
Some say it comes of sending gifts and alms for ye relese of ye pore, which
were accustomed to be sent and giving always to fore ye receipt of ye communion
at ye time of ye offitory, which thereof has his nam. So^ say otherwise, and
so^e say otherwise against the^: so yt their is (as I said) no certeyntye at
all to learn, what the Mass is of the name of it. And therefore I think it
best to look on the parts of the Mass, to learn there out that which we can
not out of the name. How be it by the way note this, The name of ye mass is
not autentike nor cathalike.
that this name Missa is no where read a mongest the Grecians, with whom the
prymitiue church did floryshe, and therefore is no such aunciente a relyke, as
ye papystes make it. For ye Tripartite Ecclesiastical stori which was written
in Greek, has not this word Mass in it. though the translatore thereof into
Latyne now, and then use that word. Neither Ignatius epistel if in Greek they
could show, it would help any forther the^ this ecclesiastical hystorye. And
Dionysius in his Ierarchie, not wythstandyng the latte^ translacions be
otherwise. As for the feaninge of some which would gladlye have men persuaded
of the ancience of the mass, and of the name of it, and therefore say this
word messa is a word of the Syrians spech, a man with half an eye can not
but see that therein they halte. For in that Greece is so nere to Syria, and
between us and it, surely it could not but have been known and written
amongst the greek aucthors, but to come theyther from whence I went, this
shall suffyce to note by the way that thee Maasse whereof whereof no certeintie
can be gathered out of the name of it) was never known even but in name to ye
primative church prate the papystes as please them, and I trust shortly by
the parts to demonstrate the same,

What the masseis by the parts of it
If in speakinge of the parts of the mass I observe not such an order as I
should but speak of one piece before which should be spoken of after, I must
desyer pardone as well for that (god be prased therefore) I never said mass as
also for that I have for gotten the order the prestes were wont to keep, so
long it is since I did see any.

Introyte
The Introite (for hear I wene I should begin) one Celestinus bishope of Rome
ordained about the year of our lord.430. so long this peace of the mass
was not catholic nor the grayle also. Grayle
For some say he brought it in, how be it others do say that Gelasius
ordained the grayle to be had in ye mass about the year of our Lord.490.
And others do write that pope Gregorye about the year of our lord.600. did
institute it as many other things so that of many day the grayle was
Catholyke.

Confiteor
The Confiteor pope Damasus brought brought into the mass as it is written
about the year of our lord.370. So long the Chatholyke church wanted it
and still should want it in that it co^teyneth in it Idolatrye. Invocation to
saints which is against gods word. kyreeleson


The Kerieelieson.9. times to he spoken in such a tongue as few prestes can
or do pronounce otherwise then kyreleson, that is Sow have mercy, or Pigge
show mercy, this pope Gregory) though some say it was Syluester Instetuted
about.600. years after Christ as he did also the Antiphenys, Hallaluia, the
offertorye and a peace of the canon. How be it some say that pelagyus the
second his predecessore did so first appoynte kyreeleyson, Glorya in exelses
the glorya in excelsis, pope Simmachus ordained to be song on ye sondais and
other holy days about ye year of our Lord.510. mass first brought in to order
To for this time was the mass out of order for they write yt he first
brought the mass into an order, but surely the order the^ as it was fer from
that in ye premitiue church was used, so was it further from the order now
vsyd for sythen ye time many things were found out and put to as partelye
if you note the years I write you now see but more shall se a none by gods
grace, I know that some do say that Telesphorus ordyned it about the year of
our lord.140 about which we read that Lent was commanded to be of none other
but of ye prestes, Lent commanded first to ye prestes on lie
and clergy only. Isedor Iam. i concel Gracia distincio.6. Statuimus. How be
it al most al me^ know that Hilarious which was about ye year of our Lord.340.
made this himne and song it first in his church, and therefore it can not be
attributed to Telespherus.

Collectes.
The colletes who made them there is no certeintie. Some say Gelasius, some say
Gregorius, so that ye church could well spare them at lest.490. years.

the epistle and gospel
The pestle and gospel who disposed them as they be there, there is certentie
some attributing this to saint Jerome, some to damasus, some to Telespherus a
foresaid. But this is more certain ye pope Anastasious the third ordined, ye
men should stand up at the hearing of the gospel read about the year of our
lord.405.

The creed
The Creed pope Marcus about the year of our Lord.340. did ordeyne to be song
in ye mass, i. Albes il. Corparasses. iii. prestes marriage
this pope brought in Lynen, albes, and Corparasses. And was nothing offended
that every pressed should have his own wife though now it be other wise taken.
In his time there was a council called Elliber tuum conciliu^. iiii Images
condemned
kept in Spane which damned all kind of Images, yea pictures in the temples.

The offertorye whereof now remains nothing but ye nam is attributed to
Eurichianus about ye year of our lord.280. the offortorye,
The prefaces are given to Gelasius, Prefaces
and gregorius, so that for.600. years or there about after Christ they were
not used.

The Canon which they have in such admiracion and reverence, The canon
as nothing else was made of diverse.

Pope Alexander made one piece of it about the year of our LORD. 220. qui
predie. Pope Pistus made an other piece upon a ten years after him, which he
took out of the prophet Esaye.

Pope Leo, about the year of our lord.450. made an other piece Sanctum
sacrafisium. etc. marriage of prestes
And note that this pope allowed marriage of prestes as all his predecessors
before him hade done. pope Gregory about the year of our Lord.600. made an
other piece of the canon and a great piece of the mass, as he him self
witnesses in his regyster, for before his time it was no such hoch pot as he
made it, but now it is much worse, pope gregory the third about ye year of our
Lord.732. put to this peace et eorum little memoria. Images allowed, yea
commanded
etc. And note that this pope called a counsel at Rome wherein it was decreed
that Images should not only be had in temples but also worshypped and that al
gain esayers should be counted as heretics, Innocentius the third of that
name, affyrmeth pope Gelasius which was about.490. years after Christ to have
made a great piece of the Canon, as he him self did something therein. A bout
the year of our Lord.1120. Reseruacion of the sacrament
This Innocencious ordained that the sacrament should be reseruyd in the
churches, he brought in Auriculer confession as a law. Auryculer confyssion
He did constitute that no Archebushoppe should have his pale except he were
of his relegyo^, and therefore we have less cause to marvel at the unity in
poperye.

A polace for unity in poperye
Beatus Renanus affirms that one Scolasticus which was about Gregoris time
did make Te igitur. etc. So that we may see what an hotch potche and how
anciente a relyke this Canon is, which is the holiest, nay most blasphemouse
piece of the Mass.

The leuacyon
The leuacion who ordained it I can not tell certeinlye some attrybute it to
Honorius the third about the year of our lord.1210. and not vnlykelye for in
deed he ordained that the people should kneel down and worship the
sacrament, so long a time after Christ was it a fore this gayre was
chatholike

The Agnus. etc. pope Sergius about the year of our Lord.700. brought in to
the mass. Agnus Pate Censinge, coueringe of alters.
Innocentius ordained the pare to be given to the people. Pope leo commanded
the sacrament to be censed. Bonifacius put in his foot for the covering of
the Aultars.

Pelagius brought out the comemoracion of the dead to be had in the mass
Vigilius ordained that the priest should say mass with his face toward the
East. Commemoracyon of the dead,
Platina writes how that ye first Lattine mass was song in the.6. counsel
of Constantinople, The first latin mass
which was about the year of our lord.750. And the same mass and order
was there and then allowed, and so hitherto has been with a vantage

But to make an end hereof authors do write that pope Stephanus which would
be carried, and was, on men's shulders. Pope Adrian his successor and many
others after them did put somethynge to the mass, so that by this which which
I have written of ye parts of it (and yet I spoke never a word of ye private
percepcio^ of the priest alone in ye mass which was not used in Gregoryes
time.600. years after christ, nor at this day is used in the Greek church,
nor was not Catholic as some write in Europe above.450. years past, of the
parts I say easelye you may see yt the mass is a hotche potch, and a device
of man, yea of.28. Put to the number of ^^cviii. busshoppes yt made ye for n^er
part of the cred.
Popes and moo, not fully found out and fynished of a.M. years at yt lest,
after christ. And yet ye papists brag of it as though it had been from the
Apostles time, as though Peter had song the furst Mass at Antioch, and as
though it were the most hoolye thing upon the earth, so that the church
cannot be with out it, wherein they speak truly, if by ye church they understand
ye popysh church, for else christ's churce now and should as well be without it,
as it was of.M. years, until the devil which was tied so long was letten
loose. Read the.20. chapter in the Reuelacions. How great an euel the mass is.
Now the mass being known to be the deuyce and muencio^ of man I will breifely
show you that it is ye horribliest and most detestable devise yt ever ye devil
brought out by man

Furst the Mass is a most subtle and perniciouse enemy against christ, The
mass is ageinste christ that is against his pressed hode.

heb. vii


and that double, namelye against his presthode, and against his sacrifice. His
pristhode is an everlasting pressed hode, and such an one as can not go to
another. But ye Mass utterly puttes him out of place, as though he were dead
for ever, and so god is for sworn, which said christ should be a preyst for
ever, Psalm. cx heb. vii. heb. iiii
and Paul lies which affirms Christ to live and to be on the right hand of
the father for us yt by him we may come to the throne of grace to find mercy,
to help us in our need. For if these be true as they be most true, the mass
preistes ar to be put down. For if they be of thorder of Aaron then resynne
they that which christ has abolisshed, if they be of thoder of Melchisedick,
Apoca. i. i. petre, ii Roma, xii, Heb. xiii iiii. king. x
the^ be they Christ's Other orders of preistes I read none save that which all
Christians be to ofer up them selves to god, and other spyrituall Sacrifices by
Christ. And thorder of preistes of Baall, whose successors in ded the massers
be.

For else if they were, as they would be taken of thorder of the Apostles then
should they be mynysters and not massers, Preachers and not treatours, as they
be both to god and his church. God amend them.

Christ's sacrifice once made by him self on the tree, Christ's facryfice Heb.
vli. ix x
on the mount of Caluarye is the full and perfect propycyatorye sacrifice to
the sanctification of al them that are and shall be saved never more to be
reiterated and done again, for that signifies an Imperfection. But ye mass
is called and hade for a cacrifice propiciatorie, and that such a one as
fetches pardon. A pena et a culpa, for the quick and dead, and for whom sir
Ihon will. In words or syllables the papists will deny this, but in very
deed they do other wise. And in ye latter end of their Canon playnelye they
call it a propiciatorie sacrifice. So that the mass we se is altogether against
christ a live, that is against his priest hode and against his death that is
his sacrifce, and therefore a detestable evil I trow.

The mass destroythe gods service and all godlyenes of life Roma. xii John.
iiii.
Secondly the mass is not only a let but also a destruction of the true
worshypping of god. For where the time is past to serve god now, as once he
required with gottes bullockes. etc. And the time is come to serve him,
rationali cultu, as Paul says in the offeringe up of our bodies by the
renewing of our minds and serving him in spirit and truth vnfeanedlye
fearinge his displeasure, trusting in his truth and mercy, and loving his
goodness, and out of these in external obedience as he commands. The mass
(as I say) not only lets this but also utterly destroys, it. For who
knows not that the very outward work of saying or seeing of mass is taken
for a great goods service? who knows not that the outward work of the
mass is and has been applied for the remission of sins of the quick and
ye d^de? And where did they ever teach that the mass was nothing worth either
to the doer, or to them for whom is done, without this spiritual service of
god, the true fear of god, faith, and love of god? No word at all was or yet
is spoken hereof. All men may know therefore if they will the mass to let, yea
to destroy gods true service for what needs repentance when sir John will
save me by masses even when the time of repentance is prevented by death, what
needs faith what needs godlynes of life, what needs preaching, what needs
prayenge, what needs any piety at al, when that the mass has al, and will
and can save from all. For by it comes pardone of sins, by it comes
deliverance from hell and purgatory, by it comes fair wether, by it comes
peace and plenty, by it comes health for man and beast, Summa the mass is
Mare Malorum, I should have said, Mare Bonorum, the most singular, excellent,
and incomparable Jewel that can be, so that it being gone, all is gone, the
church is lost, the people perysh, the faith fails, and god is not
worshipped. But where it is al is well, there needs no preaching there needs no
heringe of gods word, praing in spirit, repenting or godliness of life If so
be once a day men come to church to hear mass, to se the sacring he that
does this is a good catholyke a child of the church, a man of god, all
though daily after he have hard mass he al day at tavern or alehouse, at
tipplinge bybbinge. etc. All though he use whoredame, swering, dysing, theuyng,
polling, bribing. etc. If in the morrow after he come to church take holy
water hear mass deuoutlye, and take altel holybreade, he is sure enough say
the papystes. So that as I said, I say again the mass utterly destroieth al
godlynes of life, and al gods service, as by this may some thing be seen
and as by experience experyence does now teach us. For it can not away with
that which is the rote of al godlynes that is gods word and the true often
prechyng thereof, massynge and true preaching are never together
the one can not but send the other out of the way, I mean aither the mass
will put the pure preaching of gods word a part and then the people perysh.
pro. 29. pro. xxix*
or else prechi^g must put it away, as ones it did with us, and still would have
done, if we had been thankful to god for preaching and preachers, and if we
had had a lust to have lived as we have heard. Just therefore art thou oh lord
thus to pu^esh us for we have deserved it

Oh in thine anger remember thye mercy, be not angry with us for ever. Turn
to us again oh lord god of hosts, look merelye upon us and we shall be saved,
thy will be done and not mine. The mass peruerieth horrible christ's supper


Thyrdlye ye mass is not only besides Christ's institucion and ordinance, but
it is utterly against it and peruerteth it horrible I mean this as concerning
ye supper and sacrament of Christ's body and blood. i. Cor. xi


For whear he did ordeine his supper to be a memorial of his death and
passion, and therefore in the celebrasion thereof the lords death should be
preached out till he come, as Paul writes, I pray you who hears any
thing hereof in the mass? Nay they are wise enough to keep in that. For when
that is spoken of men can not but see thereby forgeuenes of sins to come to
such as believe frelye, and so falls there mart. Christ ordained his supper
to be celebrated and received of the congregation, and therefore paul wylleth
the Corinthians to tarry one for an other that they might all receive together.
But all me^ se that hear is no such thing. Chose the people whether they will
come or no, sir John is a kyn to the tide, he will tarry no man, if he have a
boy to answer him amen, or if he tarry for the people, yet get they no part
with him, all is to little for him self where christ yet byddeth them: do
this, that is distribute, and give, take and eat as he did. Mat. xxvi Mar. xi.
Luke xxii.
Christ ordained this supper to be a taki^g matter. Take eat (says he) but ye
mass is a loking matter, pepe, see, look stoop down before. etc. Christ
would the celebrators of this his supper to be assured that his body was
broken, for them and his blood shed for their sins as they are assured,
and in possession of the bread they eat, and the win they drink, but lest
they should be certain thereof, the mass and her minio^ the priest will spare
nothing to the people to eat or drink with him No at no time the people must
have their right. For the cup they may none kiss, and yet christ bad them
all drink of it, so is his will. But our papystes have an other will which
the mass mongers will more wyllinglye follow then gods will. Christ never
mente that one should receive the sacrament more for an other, then he would
one should be baptized for an other. I would wyshe the mass preistes were a
while in corporal fode so served, as they serve their brethren in spiritual
food I mean that the people should dyne and suppe for them a another while, to
see if that would feed them. Oh that men had as great a feelyng of the hunger
of the soul, as they have of the hungre of the body, surely they would not
then be thus mocked. But because herein I would but touch and goo: this shall
suffyce to the dyligente for an occasion to see ye mass to be a let, yea an
overthrow of Christ's institucion concerning his supper. For now people think
they serve god in coming to se the sacrament. But if they knew they
despleasyd god, if they gave not them selves to the often and diligente
receiving it with reverence (as diverse canons compel, and the doctors cry out
thereof) the mass which marreth all, could not be in place. The mass and the
lords supper can not be together
For it can not be but either the mass must drive away the ryghtvse of the
Lords Supper, or the lords supper ryghtlie used must drive away the mass.
For the lords supper rightly used is when the congregation gatherred together
receives the sacrament in both kinds as christ instituted? But the mass is
when one priest like a churl choppeth up all alone and blesses the
congregation with the empty chalice saying Ite missa est. After the popes
ordynance. Mat. vii ii. Petre. ii
The one of these two can not but dry away the other as experience teaches
us again hear in England a just punishmente for our unthankfulness and
horrible contempt of such an heavenly banquet: we were but swyne and therefore
not meet that such a perle should long be put before us. Exo. xvi Number. xiiii
wisdom xvi
The stynkyng mass with the garlyke and onyons of Egypt were a thousand
parts more mete for us then gods pure manna wherein was all kind of
heavenly taste. Oh lord forgive us and be merciful unto us, and when thy
good will shall be ones more, put us in trust with thy ma^na again, we will no
more murmur good lord, but with thankfulness and diligence fyl up our Gomerres
daily till we come into the land of promise thy heavenly rest and joy.

I will not now speak how that the sacrament in the mass used to an other
purpose and end then christ ordained it yea to an end clean contrary (as
alredye I have showed) is no more christ's sacrament but a deuelyshe Idol,
The sacrament in the mass is an Idol
even as if a man should carye about with him or before him the water of
baptism as though the holy ghost were there enclosed, and so now new me^ to
worship the water. This which hitherto I have spoken shall serve to give men
occasion to way with them selves how great and detestable an evil the mass
is.

We see plainlye that it is ageinste christ him self, against his preisthode
and so his kingdom, against his death and sacrifice, and so against our
redemption, against his worship and true service, against faith, against
prayer, repentance, and ye ministeri of gods word, against his ordinance
institucio^ commandment and gospel I pray you what ca^ be worse the^ such an
one? if ever there was idol who sees not this to be beelzebub, the chief of
al ydolles? If ever Antichrist had child or daughter this mass is ye most
pestilence and perniciouse, under the name of christ it destroys christ,
under the title of gods service, it destroys gods service, under the
color of the church it destroieth the church. If Christ be dear, if his
death be dear if his kingdom and presthod be dear if his service be dear,
if faith be dear if his word, commandment and mynysterye be dear: In that
this ye mass I mean is against the^ all horreblelye it can not be dear, or
tolerable in any wise, but detestable, and monstruouse unto us all that love
Christ, and be christians in deed, and that so much more horrible, execrable
monstruouslye, and utter detestablye by how much it under the color of a
frinde to Christ, and his Church is a most rank and cruel enemy, and
therefore of none should be allowed, That it is unlawful to be present at mass
no of none should be, but detested not only in spirit (for yt is well
known) but also in body as now I will prove by gods grace.

Furst out of the.2. commandment Thou shalt not make to the, etc. This
precepte forbids al kind of outward Idolatry to this end that gods true
worship inwardlye and outwardlye might be observed. But now the mass is an
outward Idol and the service of god thear used is Idolatrye. It is ydolatrye.
Therefore they which are present at the mass, honesting it with their
corporal presence (as all they do which being there do not in open and
exterior faicte publyklye dysalowe the same) theye I say are open and manifest
Idolatrers and incur the danger of Idolatrye that is gods heavy wrath and
eternal damnacyon: which thing I trow be notryfie, but to foolles which
make sin a thing of nothing, how be it I think best to make this more
plain.

That the second commandment Thou shalt not make to thy self any graue^
Image. etc. speaks of outward Idolatry, as the first. Thou shall have noone
other gods. etc. Speaks of inward and Spiritual Idolatrye, I trust all
men of any knowledge easily perceive. For when god in the furste commandment
has told us what he is unto us: even our lord and our god, with all that
ever he is and has (for he that gives him self to be ours gives all that
ever he has to be ours also) then of equitee he requires that we should be
content with him and give our selves to him to be his with all that ever we
have, what it is to have non other good El Schaddai
and therefore first we should have none other gods but he, that is we should
trust in none, love none, fear none, call upon none, worship none, but only
him which El Schaddai. an omni sufficyent god, and Jehovah unto us. Now
because man consists of.2. parts the soul and the body, in that the lord
does give him self wholye unto us to be our lord and god, he will that we
give our selfs hoolye unto him to be his people. And therforeas in the first
commandment he wholye demands the soul, will, under stangynge, and
heart, that is our faith fear, love, thankefulnes, inuocasion, and inward
adoracion, or worshippynge to be given to him only, and for his sake as he
shall appoynte. So in the second commandment. Thou shalt not make to thy
self. etc. He generallye requereth for the outward service of him, No service
pleseth god but such as he teaches
that we should follow his word in seruinge of him, and take it no less the^
Idolatrye or Image service, what soever thing is invented by man, saint or
Angel, and not by him conseruing his worship and service.

And to say the truth it is no meruell for we see that there is no acceptable
service don to man except it be according to the will of him to who^ it is to
be done and not simply according to the will of him yt does it. i. Cor. ii,


Now in as much as none knows the will of man but the spirit of man and he
to whom by his word or significacion he reuelleth it, shall not we, yea must
not we of necessite give so much to god then it is requesite that in gods
service which is acceptable to god, we must have for it the word of god, and
not simple, our good ententes, Luke. vi
the wisdom of man general counceils custom, doctors, acts of parliement or
goodlye outward shows and apparaunces.

For as christ says that which is in great estemation before men is
abomynacion before god, if it be not according to his word. But of and for the
mass whear have we gods word? Nay halas (as I have alredye showed) it is a
pitchye patchet pooke made of many a man, and that at diverse times and is
clean contrary to GOD and his word.

Therefore it being done to ye service of god (as it is done) it is
abhominacion and a great Idol in gods sight. So yt the conclusyon of my
reason is strong that such as dishoneste it not by their absence, or by there
word and faict publyklie when they be present at it, but being there only in
heart disalowe it ye same whosoever they be are grievous sinners and breakers of
the.2. commau^demente and so gyltye of the threate folowinge, Exodu. xx
namely of gods visetacion, upon their childerin for their sins, into the
third and fourth generation, for in that they dysalowe and disworshyppe it not
with their bodies, they do worship it although they how not down to it as
most men do. For in gods service their is no mean: he yt loves not
hates, he that worshippeth not, disworshippeth and so contrary wise.

But to make all as plain as a pack staff, let us note that their are.ii.
kinds of Idolatrers, one known to god only, Two kinds of ydolaters
spyrytuall and corporal.
the other to man also? To god only are they Idolatrers which serve god in the
sight of man according to his word, but their hearts are hastynge, deceyuable,
gylefull and hypocritical in gods sight. To man also ar they ydolatrers,
which worship contrary to gods word of this later sort of Idolatrers,
theye are three diverse kinds, Corporal Id^^at^ers are of three sorts.
One of them which be obstinate defenders of their Idolatry against gods
word and manifest wrytine weritee, which they seeing will not see. etc. And
therefore justly of god are blinded as ye wycke^d bushoppes and prelates of the
papisticall church be with there champions and parasites. wynchester Bonor
weston etc
These had need to take heed they sin not against the holy ghost. An other
sort is of them which are semple and ignorante, who through comen error are
seduced being persuaded that the thing they do pleases god, and is gods
true service, such are the semple souls of the country, whose eyes god I
trust will open in his time: that they may see his truth? as if they would be
so delygent to enquire there aboutes as they are in goyeng any journey which to
them is unknown of such as they mete with all, they could not but easelye and
soon perseaue, and therefore ignorance can not excuse there wylful negligence,
how be it, it is not to be doubted but that god in his time if they reject not
his grace will open to them his truth. Let us as be careful we confyrme them
not in there errore, by haltinge and bearing with them in this their evil, so
priuatelye after our vocasion and as we would be done by admonyshe them of
this arrore above all things prayeng unto god for them, that with there blind
guydes they fall not into the pit of perdicion. Math. xv.
This of Idolatrers is nothing so evil as the other, for the other do sin
against the holy ghost it is to be feared, but therrore of these is sauable.
The third and last sort is of them which in deed know the thing they use is
not allowed of god and therefore in heart they consent not unto it, although
outwardlye they seem not to disalowe it, These are unlike to the second, for
they fall of simplicite and of a zele, but not according unto knowledge but
these do it wyttinglye and for lack of zeal and yet of knowledge and therefore
surely ar much more to be blamed then the other to whom they are a greuouse
offense confirming them in there errore, that therein they should continue with
out conscience. And such be our mass gospellers and popyshe protesta^tes
which can serve both god and mammon, take Helias part, Math. vi. z Reg. 18.
and baall pristes part, carry water in ye one hand and fire in ye other

I would wyshe that inche as ^^ese be would mark with them selves ye causes
wherefore they goo to the mass which they know is evil, if they do it of
obstinacy and malice, then are they to be rekened emongst the number of the
formest sort which are to be suspected of ye sin against ye holy ghost? if
they do it to get any wordlye estimacio^ or promocio^ therbye or to keep still
that which they have got ten (as I fear me many do) let them dread that
they doing as Judas did drink not with him at the lenght. If theye do it for
companyes sake or neghborhode, i. Cor. i iii. kyn. xx^
let them consider the thing better, and mark into whose company they are
called. 1. Cor. 1. And so set the example of Iosaphat companing with Ahab to
his great perail, and diverse other mo examples, whereof the scripture is not
barreyne. If they do it for fear of loss of Goods, Name Friends, Liberty,
life. etc. may. x, xvi Luc x. xiii and. xvii
Let them consider that Jesus Christ affirms such as be not ready so to
do, in no point the same to be worthy of him read the places. And here unto
let them consider what estate they be in as whether be publyke or private
persons, learned or unlearned wyche ar pore young or old master or servant
householder. etc. these al considered and the horrible greatness of the evil
theye allow and confirm by their not disalowinge in deed with examples of
gods plagues upon such as have dyssembled so with god, and man, will help to
make away thee^ out of their securite to repent, if they be fallen, and to
take more head if they be not fallen, yt which thing god grant. Amen.

To goo to mass is a breach of ye third commau^deme^t
But now to bring more reasons to prove that to be at Mass in body and not
openly to disalow it is sin although the spirit and heart enosente not
thereto. Alredie out of the.2. commandment we see it is Idolatry. Now let
us see how nere it touches blasphemy out of the third commandment. Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain.

Here out we may well gather that to be at Mass, and not as in heart so in
word ope^lye to reprove it, it is a breach of this commandment, term ye
sin as we will. For the end of this commau^demente is not only to inform
our tongue how that we should abstene from taking gods name in vain, but
much rather how we should use the name of god in prayer, confession of gods
truth and religion, thanks giving and preaching purelye the gospel
(...)nisters) if we be none, (...) three, prayer, confession, an^ ^ gyuinge
perteine unto us of wha^ (...) soever we be.

Now what vsinge of the tongue in thankesgyuenge is in them which are
present at that which over throws utterly the true worshippinge of their
christ and god without reprouinge it? what confessing of relygion does their
tongue exercise, which hold there piece and with there presence do honest
that which sets up an other salvation, the^ that which Christ brought and
bought dearlye by the sheding and price of his preciouse blood? what use of
their tongue in trwe prayer have they, which in holding there tongue, say Ame^,
to all the blasphemouse prayers of of the Mass? if in deed their Christ be
between the preistes hands, if yt which the priest does be the self same
sacrifice which christ did on the cross him self for our redemption: then
let them hold their tongue a gods name, and do as they do. But if their Christ
be in heaven on the right hand of the father, concerning the corporal
presence of his Humanite as he is every whare by his virtue gra^^ (...)
divinity if christ's sacrifice (...) be but one, ^
and never more to be ^^^^erate in that god has given them tongues, and now
commands them not to use the same in vain lyeng then to their ^eet^b when
he would them used and exercised in confessing him before men, I would they
would tell me when they are mute and play mo^e at this horrible dishonore
done to their sovereign lord? why take they his name being called on them
as on his people in vain. The name of the lord our god is called appon all
that be his people and that not in vain but to be called upon, praised and
confessed of them all when aither his glory, or their brothers necessity
requires it. But (to omytte the necessite to our brethren in this case which
nyppeth the conscience I trow) where does gods glory more require, that we
should confess his name and true service, then in ye mass, which of all
things that ever was is most horrible aduersarye to it.

Conclude therefore I well may that it is a thorough out breach of this
commandment and a taking of gods name in vain, to be at mass and not
reprove it. And what the punishmente of this commandment is god shows when
he says, that he will not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain,
look well her^ o^ gylties though you be before the magistrates here if in
bodily presens you honest it, yet you are not gylties before god. Chose now
therefore whose hands you will fall into: if into gods hands that is
horrible and none can deliver you, Hebru, x.
if into the hand of man, math, x
suerlye they can not pull as much as one here of your heddes further the^
your good father will yt is then shall make to your eternal joy. To goo to
mass breaks yt, iiii commandment.
Let us now go to the fourth commandment of the sanctifieng of the Sabbath
day and we shall see no less occasion then we have done to gather goinge to
the mass and not dysalouynge it puplykelye in word and deed to besinne and a
breach of this commandment Also for in it the Lord requires rest from
bodily labor to the end of sanctificacyo^ (except we should put no
difference between the end of rest on the sabbothe day appointed to man from
that which is appointed to the beast) The End therefore (I say) of the rest in
the saboth to man is sanctificacion that is man is commanded to rest from
bodily labor and other exercises, that he may with diligence and reverence
hear gods word in his ministerye, learn his law use his sacraments and
ceremonies as he has ordained convent to comen prayer in the place appointed
and other holy exercises helping to the conseruacion of the ministry,
propagacion of the gospel, and encrese of love and charity one toward an
other al which things still remain to us, commanded in our resting times
from our travails, and labors for this life, although the Jews. vii day be
abrogated and taken away. This considered who can not but see the mass which
makes to the prophanacion and vnhalowing both of body and soul to be for
bydden? if the end of my rest should serve to sanctifycasion, the^ can it not
serve to the mass which is abhominacion? if I may not use my rest simply for
the pleasure of my body which god allows except I look to an other end,
namely yt I ma be more hable to endure the works of my vocacion more to gods
glory and my neghbors commodity, much more then I may not use my rest for
the pleasure of an other in that which god dysalloweth.

But to make this more evident, No man of any reding or godly consideracion of
the scriptures can not, but see ye principal thing god in this commandment
did respect was the minestere of his word and sacraments, by the which god
gathers his church, increases hit and conserueth, Number. xv. Hier. xvii
Ezech. xx,
it and therefore of all things he could wurst away with the breach of this
commandment read how he commanded the man to be stoned to death for
gathering sticks on the Sabbath day and in the prophettes how he cried out
all was marred, when this commandment was broken. Now the mass (before I
have showed) is the only weedynge worm and rooting sow of the gospel and
sacraments for being truly preached and minystred so that where soever the one
is the other can can not be. True preachinge and massing, true vsinge Christ's
supper, and sir John massers dinner be as contrary as light and darkness
wherefore as the mass is the end of Satha^s commandment and dyrectle
impugneth the end of gods commandment berre, as the mass doers greuouslye
offend, so the mass herers and seers without disalowynge it openly run into
the same perrell and vengeance of god that is to the gatheringe of stakes to
be burned in hell fire look well therefore hereon. The pope and his prelates
sayt, if thou come not to here Mass, but dysalow it thou shall frye a faggot in
smith feld. God almyghtye says if thou keep the not from the mass, or if
thou come to it and do not openly dysalowe it thou shalt frye a faggot in hell
fire. Choose now whether thou will take heed, in flyeng from the smoke thou
shall into the fire, make not man thy god but fear the lord and sanctify him
in thine heart, Psalm
pray with david: oh lord knytt and enforce my heart truly to fear thee.
To goo to mass breaks all the second table generaille and perticulerlye
etc As now out of the furste table I have showed that every
commaundemendemente their in is broken by hearing and seeing Mass (for there
is no commandment broken but the first commandment is broken to fore) so
could I show out of the second table that it is a breach of all and every
commandments there, it confyrmeth the magistrate in his evil, when he sees
men without gaynesaying obey his law as though it were good and godly, so
that they which hear mass at the commandment of the magistrate ar
partakers also of the magystrates evil, by their disobedience to god in this
point confyrmyng ye law, for if they would disalowe it and obey god more then
man giving their heads to the block, rather then to hear or see mass, it
would not be but as the wicked law would be infyrmed so the magistrates would
call the matter into a further inquiry and so the truth to take place.

Again it is a murtherynge of the soul, and the mass mungers are procurers
and a betters of other to faule into the destrution of their souls

Moreover their baudes to bring the spouses of Christ to be come Satan's
whores.

Besides this they that are masse-hunters are receyuers and concealers of
theft and spoylinge of christ and his glory, yea vndoubtelye they are
treatours and giltye of high treason ageynste god.

Last of all they are false wyttenesses againg their neighbors, against
gods church, as though the mass church were ye catholyke church, yea
ageinste Christ and his ward by their going to mass, therebye wyttenessynge
the mass to be a true service of god and a badge of his church, where there
own conciences say they lie and so condemns them.

As for the last commandment of lustinge in that the same is an inward
thing, as the furste commandment is and this which I spoke of, namelye
goinge to the mass is an outward act I can not therefore well apply it to
the^ albeit to say the truth there is no sin counted outwardlye, but these.2.
comemaundementes, the first and the last, are broken before the sin come to
the knowledge of any man.

And thus it is plain enough I trow the hearing or seeing of Mass, although
in spirit it be aborred is no small sin, but such a sin as breaks all
gods law generallye, and every commandment perticularlye oh then how
greuouse a sin is this, look well on it my dear brethren (to whom this my
semple counsel shall come) in the tender mercies of god I beseech you. If he
that contineweth not in all things written in gods law be accursed. Deuteronomy,
xxi, Galat, iii.
Halas how terriblie is he accursed that contineweth in nothing, but is a
transgresser in all things.

And such be popyshe protestauntes mass gospellers, or as they would be
called bodily mass mungers and spirytuall gospellers.

Now although this which I have occasioned to be marked out of the decaloge or
ten commandments be enough for this matter, More reasons to prove going to
mass to be sin,
yet will I hear to add some moo reasons, or at least occasion men so to do by
collectinge and gatherynge diverse sentences in such breuytie as I can.

1 He that is not with me is against me says our savior, Mat. xii. Luke,
xi,
and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad. Now in that the mass is
neither christ nor in any point with him, but of all things on earth most a
geynst him (as before I have showed) let them mark what they do by this
sentence of christ, that goo to Mass, and if they be not wylfull blind,
they shall see yt they arr against christ, that is antichrists in this point,
and gather with ye deuel.

2 Woo be to him says the truth by whom an offense does come, math xviii
that is which does or says any thing whereby any are justly occasioned to
evil, let to do good, or confirmed in there naughtye doctringe and customs:
It were better for such (if christ say truly) to have a mylstone hanged
about their neck and to be cast into the bottom of the sea. And will you yet
go to mass then to occason others to go with you, to let the godly, which
would not goo if you went not, to contyrme the papystes in their Idolatrye.

i. Cor. vi. i. cor. iii.
3. Paul wylleth us to gloryfie god in our souls and our bodies, as well
requyringe the body to be applied to the settinge fourth of gods glory as
the soul, and no meruel for god has made it is temple, that his holy spirit
should dwell therein, and gave his preciouse blood also therefore, that it might
be in eternal felycitie with the soul: yea he has coupled our flesh in him
self unto his god hedde to be one person one christ, god and man so great is
the dygnitie thereof, and therefore full worthily warns paul, that we should
keep our selves clean from all that which would stayne not the spirit only,
2. Cor. 7.
but ye flesh and body also: so that a man with half an eye may see the mass
sayers and seers in body though the spirit be absent little to consider what
they do.

^. Cor. 8.
4 Paul would not allow a christian to come to y^ table in the idolles temple
lest thereby the weak brother might perish. And would he allow coming too
mass (trow you) which is an other manner of matter. i. Cor. x.


5 If that the thing were indefferente or lawful to be present at mass in
body, in mind disalowing it: yet in that the end of our lybertye is not what
we may do, but what is best to be done, what most edyfyeth, seeing yt
goinge to mass is so far from edifyeng, that it destroieth, easily may we
se that it is not to be used.

6 But halas this is far from lawful (It is a be haven an house of
iniquity and paul wylleth that they that call on the name of the lord should
depart from iniquity, Ose. ii. Tim. 3
and how then should they com to mass, if they should depart from it. Gala. ii.


7 If I should build up again that which I pulled down, I the^ should make
my self an offe^der says the apostle and what be they then yt now by going
to mass build it up again which by goig from it, and speking against it have
helped to pull it down.

8 What agremente is there between light and darkness, what concord is with
christ and belyall with the Christen and the popes minion, 2. Cor. vi
the mass I mean with the temple of god and ydolles says paul, wherefore
come away from the mass says the lord and separate your selves from them
that come to it and I will receive you.

9 Paul would have the Corinthians to shoone the company of whoremongers, ii,
Cor, i.
and Idolatriers* and will he license now them to come and company with massers
in theer chefest Idolatry This were to make paul's preachinge not yea yea, and
nay, nay, but yea, and nay.

ii, Ihon
10 If any man come unto you says S. John and bring not this doctrine with
him you shall not so much as great him, lest you be pertakers of his evil And
what doctrine is more contrary to god and his gospel, then is the mass The
mass sayers then and approuers should not we seek to, which may not receive
them if they should seek unto us except we would comunycate with their evil.

Luk ix
11 No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back is mete for
gods kingdom, much moore then are we vnmeate therefore if we I say not look
back, but run and go back to see and hear that which iustlye we have
forsaken.

12. What happened to Core and his allowers that he should take on him the
preisthode without calling, Number. xvi.
and will nothing happen to our arrogante massers that without calling take
upon the^ Christ's preisthode, and to such as allow and seem to allow them.
Read the historye. Numery. 16

13. Ihon the Euangelyst durst not tarry in the house where Cerinthus yt
Heretic was which denied christ's manhod, Eusebius in his eccleasti histori
lib. iiii.

Cap. xiiii.


and indede the house fell and flewe him and all that ever remained in the
house with him. And shall not we fear gods vengaunce to be in company at
Mass with her mynions, which deny christ both god and man making there own
handie work as good as he, yea he him self say theye?

14 Oh deaf ears, that will not hear the blast of ye Angels trompe warning us
to come from among these whorishe Babylonians, Apocat.
belly god massemo^gers lest we peryshe with them.

15 Lothes wife looked but back and was turned in to a salt stone. Genes. xix
And so are the hearts of our popish protestau^tes I fear me hardened from
fearyng god in that that they look yea go back again to their sodomiticall
minion.

i. machab 2, chapter,
16. The good father Mathathias would in no point dissemble, as though he had
worshipped, but our Mass Gospellers are far unlike to him.

Math. vi.
17. We pray to be delivered from euel Libera nos a malo: and yet we knowing
the mass to be evil resort unto it.

roma. xiiii
18. What so ever is not of faith is sin, but to goo see or hear mass, though
but in body is not of faith: roma. x,
for faith hangs on gods word, and gods word is not herefore. Therefore it
is sin.

roma, 14,
19. Happy is he that condemns not him self in that thing which he
allows: mark by the contrary whether our mass gospellers are not unhappy
and accursed by Paul's judgment.

Hebru. 12
20. Halting says the Apostel hinders, yea brings out of the way. And
what other thing is it to go to mass in body and to be away in spirit,
math, vi.
but a plain halting, a seruinge of two masters which noone can do, if
Christ be true.

4 king. 16
21. If John were judge these bodelie Massers should drink with their brethern
the Baalites. Read the historye and see whether he judged not of their outward
coming whose servants they were.

22. Ae that denies christ before men, Math. x. 2, Tim, 2
shall be of him denied before god. But mass hearers deny christ before men in
faict and deed although in tongue they profess otherwise. Tit. i
Therefore I advise them to take better heed. read Titus. 1 and there shall you
see, ye denyeng christ is in faicte as well as in words.

23. S. Paul to the belief of the heart requires the confession of the mouth:
roma. 10.
houbeit our popish protestauntes think this needs not. But yet Christ says
he that is asshamed of me that is of my true religion and gospel before this
faith less generation, mark, 8.
I wild asshamed of him before the Angels of god in heaven. Oh heavy
sentence.

24. He that touches pitche shall be defiled there with says Salomo^. proverb
And shall not there bodies be somthyng smytted with the fylthynes of the mass
that honest it with their presence.

25. If in thold law the touching of a carrion defiled him that touched it,
Agge. ii. Leuyt. xix
at the least for a days space: In that there is no caryon so stynkynge in
gods sight as the Mass, let them that goes to it how soever he be minded
know yt he is defiled so foul that all ye holy water in Rome, Paris, and
London cannat purge him there from.

26 Unto these our Popish protesta^tes I can not but say as Helias said, 3,
ki^ng, 18
how long will you halte on both knees: if god be god follow him: if the Mass be
god and gods ordinance follow it.

iii. kings xix.
27 When Helias lamented yt all was gone a straye but he, all were defiled with
Baal although in heart there were many hated bal as they thought and would have
confessed if Iezabell had not been. God said yt he had left.7000. which had not
vowed there knee to Baal: he says not which in heart hate Baal: but which has
not bowed their knee to baall: of ye outward sign demonstratinge his
servants. And so now let us not think good brotherne, any to be his true
worshipers: but such as not only in heart but also in deed deteste the Mass.
roma. xvi..ii. It Is. 3, 2, Tim, 3


28 S. Paul wills us to seperat ourselves from such as teach other doctrine
and will not consent to the sound doctrine of our savior Jesus christ.
wherefore in that the Massers teach an other doctrine the^ christ or his
Apostles ever taught, and by their Massinge depart from the sound doctrine of
Jesus christ by godddes commandment we must separate our selves from them, as
no part of christ's catholic church, brag they thereof never so much.

29 Peter would that we being an holy people should be pure not in a piece but
in all our conversation, 1. Pet. 1, 2 1. Tessa. 5
and Paul would that we should absteiue, ab omni specie mala, from al
apparaunce of euel being as light or Lanternes in the meddest of a froward
generation and not darkness as yt be. And how may this be? Philip, ii
for south by holding fast the word of god and following it, for so he teaches
there. Read the place.

30 Azarias and his.ii. companions knew they could not but displease god,
Daniel. 3.
if with any owtwarde show they should have seemed to allow the Idol
Nabugodonozer caused to be set up, and therefore hazarded the fire: which our
Mass gospellers will not do, to altar and turn the Queen's heart, as by
theys.iii. not obeyng Nabugodonozers precept, god turned his heart.

31 The body shall not be partaker of ye sentence given to the soul in
judgment of that whereof in this lyef it is not partaker with the spirit and
soul. This is Tertullians reason, liber: de resurrrexcione earnis.

32. If thine eye be single and true faith in thine heart, then all thy body
and actions can not but be pure.

But if they be dark, it is a token thine eye and light with in thee to be
darkness. This argues says to faith in the^ which file their bodies in being
present at the mass, for as it is impossible light to be in an house and not
to show it self at the slyfiers, door, and wyndowes of the same. So is it
impossyble true says of gods gospel to be in the heart of that man which
coming to mass utters it not by some thing, wherbye men may perceive the
light of faith inwardlye in the bosom. And therefore christians are called
towns set upon Hills: candelles upon Busshell tops and commanded that
their light should shine to fore men: which these massing gospellers allow
not, but think that a man can carry faith in the heart and not utter it at the
Mass in word or deed, where it is no more possible, then a man to carye iyer
in his bosom, and not to burn his clothes.

i. John, 1.
33. Our felloushippe (says.s. John) is with the father and with his son
Jesus christ: he says not with ye mass which in mere darkness, and therefore
to signifye the same, god has suffered them to show it by the light they must
have at it. And further that theye that go to it wot not whyther they goo,
nor what they do, our fellowshyppe I say is with god ye father and with his
son Jesus christ. But yet so, that we must walk in light for else we lie and
the truth is not in us. But to make an end of collectyng any more reasons to
prove yt which all wise men see plainlye, namely, that they grevouslye do
offend which honest with their presence gods grettest enemy upon earth the
mass, and do not dysproue and disallowe it not only in heart but also in
deed and word openly, for else openly by their presence they honor it, the
priest praying especially for all that be there present and as they affirm)
receyuyng for all, and also turning him self diverse times to the congregation
with his don^s vobiscum the clarke answering in the name of al, et cu^ spu^tuo,
and other respondes, so that ye standers by, if they openly disprove it not,
are partakers with the priest of his idolatry, and false serving of god, i.
Cor. 10.
as Paul says, they which eat of ye sacrifice are pertakers of ye altar.
they which are at the Mass are partakers of the mass (...) the mass, that
is Idolatrers, false worshyppers of good, blaspemers of christ destroyers of
his death, merits sacrifice, preisthod and kingdom, destroyers of the
ministers of his gospel and sacraments, destroyers of faith, repentance and
all godlynes. Su^ma they are Antychristes, Antichrists (I say in body,
though they feane there heart to christ's) but christ and Antichrist can not
dwell to gether) and therefore if they be there and hold their tongue they cannot
but cryeon day, Esaias. 6.
ve mihi quia tacui, woe is me, because I held my tongue.

Oh that the latter end of the.1. cor. 10 were well wayed namelye how that in
wurshipping god contraie to his word, as yt massers do, we have fellowshippe
with his deuilles, then I trow his exortacion would take place, where he says,
see that you give none occasion of evil to any man, but seek to please that
way which may help to the salvation of others, and not to ye destruction of
others: as all they do, which being at mass and see their brethern take it
for a gods service, Ezeche
it being a very deuiles service, lay a Pyllow and a Cusshen under there
knees and elbowes to hold on still and so to increase gods further vengeance
as in England in England we do. Oh lord be merciful unto us, and forgive
us, open our eyes that we may see thye truth, and work in our wylles that we
may embrace, love and have lust to it to live it, confess it, and suffer
gladly loss of fre^des, name goods, and life for it. Ame^ Amen. Now let us se
how much the reasons of our popish Protestauntes are of force, First they say
that god is a spirit and therefore in spirit to be served, The Answer to ye
10. reason made too prove coming too mess lanfull

i. John, 4 i. Cor. vi. 1 Thessalonians 5


so that it forces not though ye body be at Mass if the spirit serve god
and be with him. To this I answer, yt though god be to be sirued in spirit:
yet not alone in spirit but also in body and therefore Paull wills us to
glorify god in both. and prays also that god would sanctify and make the
body perfect as well as the spirit, When our savior says. Ihon. iiii. that god
is to be served in the spirit, a man that marketh the text before and foloi^ge
can not but se how yt our savior would have it opposed and set against the
corporal and exterior service of god which was used of both the Jews and
Samaritanes with out the spirit and veri^^e

The Jews services instituted of god were void of the spirit and spiritual
exercise of faith in the promises and Messiah, so greatly was religion
corrupted and gross ignorance increased. The Samaritanes services of god were
not only void of the spirit but also of verite, for they had no word of
god for them. Therefore saeth our savior that god must be worshipped in
spirit and verity, that is to say, not in all external services but in
such, as he has appointed ones, or rather then would appoynte (for ye verity
of that figuratyue service was come) and not only in this externallye, but
also spirituallye with thexercyse of faith in his word and promises Now then I
pray you what have they wone of this sentence: why do they not rather by
serving god in the spirit understand the same to be required in his exterior
service, which else were hypocrysie, then by it excluded that which god would
not have excluded, I mean thexterior works and exercises he has commanded,
by this means take prechi^g away, vocal prayer thanksgiving, obedience to
the Magistrates. etc. and all exterior things and so they shall shewether
selves Libertines: as though whordome, Murder, and all exterior euilles were
no euelles, for this can they do outwardly, and yet there spirit is still with
god what and if any of their wives were taken in an other man's bed, think
you they would be content with this excuse, that her heart was not there though
her body was in bed: hence forwards therefore let them learn to put to the
spirit. This word veritye also, as our savior does: or else they must be
as much blamed for taking up to sone, The papistis begin to soon with hoc
est corpus mark wei
as the papists ar for beginning to soon. for still they begin at hoc est
corpus meum, where they should begin at accipite comedite, take and eat: or else
god is not bound to keep his promise this is my body because it is
condicyonal, requiryng our obedience of taki^g and eating which thing makes
agei^ste the mart, if men should know that hoc est corpus meu^ were not true
to any others but to such as do in deed take and eat the sacrament as he
commands that is in faithful remembrance how his body was broken for
their sins. etc. so I say should they do to ye worshippynge of god in
spyryte and verytye: and the^ would they use this sentence no more to cloak with all their dissimulation and hypocrysye making menn to believe to believe they
serve god as they do whe^in heart, yet these men do say they detest that kind
of serving god. Thus much for the first reason.

2. The.ii. reason is that it is no more sin for a man to be at mass, in
body so that in spirit he allow it not, then it was for the prophets,
Christ and his Apostles to be at the Idolatrouse sacryfices in the Temple of
Jerusalem with ye preistes, bushoppes, Scribes and Pharisees. This is there
second reason, which I will answer, when that they shall prove either ye
prophettes either christ and his Apostles at any time to have been present and
comu^icate with the presses in any Sacrifice or Ceremony which was not
according to gods word and commandment, how be it to say ye truth there was
never among the Jews in ye temple of Jerusalem any such ydolatrie as the
mass. The prophettes, christ and the Apostles came to the temple at Jerusalem
and there used such sacraments, Nothing in the mas after gods word
Sacrifices and Ceremonies as god had institute, but where did god institute the
mass? where allows he any service to be done in an an unknown tongue: where
taught he adoracion, eleuacion, reservation, and such horable prophanacio^ and
gasyng on his sacra^entes? where taught he praying for ye dead or to ye dead,
where ordained this sacreme^t to be eaten up of one lone? where is there
sacrifice of ye Mass ye principallest thing in ye mass, where I say is it
founded in gods word? but what go I about to reckon ye things in ye Mass
besides gods word: in ye there is no thing in it being placed and used as it
is, but ye same is contrary to gods word. even as the holy prayers in
exorcysmes and coniuringes are there placed and used not holy prayers, but
horrible blasphemies. So that the sacrificies and ceremonies used in the temple
at Jerusalem where nothing like to our mass, nor our mass like to the^: but
rather like to those sacrifices which were at Bethel and Dan. and in their
orchards Groves, woddes, Hills. etc. the Mass and the groves in tholde law
were leke
These Sacrifices had a show of gods word and in fact and apparaunce, they
were the self same, which were in the temple at Jerusalem. As in the temple
they slew and offered Rams, Lambs, Gottes Oxen. etc. so did they in Dan, in
Bethel in there groves, hills. etc. But yet ye one had gods word, and therefore
they were of them selves gods siruice not wythstanding (...) preistes
concerning them, But the other had none of gods word and therefore were
Idolatry and ye people idolatrers wherefore all good people, in the trybes of
Isarael came up to Jerusalem to the sacrifices there. and left. Bethel and Dan
to their grett peril as we read of Tobias. tobias. i.
And to I pray god that many may here of our English gospellers, yt they
will adventure their lives and goods rather then to come to Mass wherein though
there be the pistell gospel sacrament, some good prayers, giving of thanks
etc, yet in that the same be not after gods word but after the imaginacio^
of man, all and every part thereof is leuened and sowred with the little lompe,
nay? massy piece of leven papistical or Antichristian yt is, is idolatry to
speak plain english: and who so comes to it be idolatres, how so ever hearts
their seem, if outwardlye they make it not known. And thus because this reason
is sufficientlye answered, I will goo to the third.

Naaman (say they) was bydden of the prophet to goo home in peace all should
be well, 1. king, 5.
although he went in to the temple of Remmon to worship in body, his spirit
and heart being all set on the god of Israel wheruppon they gather that
although the mass be evil yet it is no offense to be at it in body, the
spiryt being absent with god.

For answer to this reason let this suffyce: furst yt this Naaman was but an
yonglyng in gods relygion a.iii. hours bird and therefore not to be conterred
with, unto us English men in this case which should be past milk I trow now
if a man have respect either to the time of our baptism, of the pure preaching
of the gospel which we have had.vi. or.vii. years. Again the syrians to Naaman
now were not so nere as we be one to a another, being Baptized into one body
besides this Naaman acknowlegeth his fact to be sin and therefore desires
the prophet to pray to god for the pardon of it, when he should committ it. but
our men excuse their going to mass, as a thing not faulti: last of all the
prophet does not excuse ye fact, nor says not that it is no sin, but vade
in pace, go in peace: as though he might safe, go this ways, trust in god, he
will teach the what to do, and guide the with his grace otherwise, than you art
aware of. And suerlie it is not to be doubted but godde did so, he knows
full well full well how to pull out his people from the peril of temptacion.
we read not yt he went into the temple of Remmo^, as soon shall we find that
god turned the heart of his master the king, aither from his Idolatry, or
from fantasieng Naama^ as he was wont. As soon shall we find yt Naama^ was
stre^ghtned to obeie god more then man, as we shall find yt Naaman went into
Remmons temple with the king. The prophet bydding him go in peace down some
way yt god would preserve his servant from evil so that we may perceive
these example of Naaman little shaddoweth the fact of the popish protesta^tes.
Suerlie this is but one of Adams aprons. In those days the knoledge of god was
nothing so much and manifest as it has been, Galat. 4.
sythe^ christ's coming especialie amongst the heathen for the good men
amongst thisraelites were but as chylchyldren (so Paul calls them) in
comparison to that we christians in time of the new testament should be. i.
Cor. xiii
Chyldes age is past and mannis state is now come. Therefore god suffered many
things with them, which he will not suffer with us: eue^ as yt father will bear
mani mo things at the hands of his son being a child then being at full
grows and ma^nis stat. Daniel. i^^
Why rather do not we set before our eyes Azarias and his fellows which
would not bow there knees to Nabugodonozers Image? why s^tt not we for our
example to follow the seven thowsande Israelites which would not bow their
knees to Baall? 3. king, 19 i. macha. 11 ii. match. 7
why does not the fact of Mattathias move us? why forgett we to look on the
example of ye woman and her.vii. sons? Read ye storye shall thexamples of one
heathen prevail against so many example of others? and that in the old
testament? what a shame is this for us that be in the new testament and in ye
last days of it. For suerlye the coming of our savior will shortly appeire in
glory with innumerable martyrs which coragiouslie aventured not goods, but
life, rather then they would be stained in soul or body, to our shame and
confusion if we play ye Laodiceans, Apocal. 3. Galat. iiii
be come mayre maids and seek to please men.

4. Their fourth reason is that they will pray to god at mass for those that
are deceived therewith. And besides this they will not knock nor hold up their
hands at the eleuacion time, as co^me^lie men do: wherbye men may be
somethynge moved, the less to set by ye mass.

And here they bring in thexample of one Asterius which was at thedolatrouse
sacryfice the Cesarians made, and by his prayer there and then obtained their
conuersyon. I answer here unto yt there prayer here is nothing as a valeable it
wants these wings, Faith and love to god and love to our neighbors. For where
is his faith or love to god that sees his own god horribly dishonored, his
good christ robbed and spoiled, and yet dissembleth as though he were
honored, christ were magnified? where is his love to his brethren, that sees
there souls murdered, and they redye to drink poison as apreseruatiue and
yet he dissembleth as though there were no peril: yea he will drink with them of
the same cupp. etc. should a man think this mannis prayer is hard of god.

If god thy master and lord be dyshonored christ thy sauyor and redeimer be
robbed, the simple people thy brethren be murdered (as in deed spiritualie at
these be done in and by the mass) why doste thou dissemble as though christ
were honored, god were served, thy brethern were edifyed? Is not this deep
dissimulation, is not this lake of love to god and his glory, is not this
lack of love to thy brethern and to there salvation, and is not this
iniquity? for every sin is iniquity. But where iniquity has ease and rest
in ye heart there god will not receive the prayer, how will he hear thy prayer
the^ thou hipocrite, dissembler with god and man, mass gospeller. But thou
kepest still thye pue and hold not up thy hands? as though none were papist
is but such as knock and hold up their hands: as though all men at the
sacring time look on thee what you only do^st, as though he did eat no part
of a pudding which eats of both thendes of it, but tastes not of the myddest
of it Is the holding up of ye hands so great a matter with you now? what I had
thought this external work or behaueour had been nothing if that the spirit
had been right? Is tholding up of the hand^ at the sacring time more then ye
presence of thy body at all ye hoole mass? is there nothing else a myse in the
mass but the adoracion of the sacrament? If you would men should know that
thou do disallowe it, why come thou to it? what do you thear? do not
you go to ye mass yt the magistrate might know that thou art of his religion,
a good obedient subsubiect to ye deuelishe laws. Thus playest thou wily
begile thy self. Tell me if thy servant should goo with thieves to rob thy
house with out gaynesaying or doing to the^, would thou have him excused? And
do thou think that god will not be angry with yt that go with thieves to
rob him of his true service and honor by the Mass? Thy servant might have
an excuse to say if he should have reproved them for their fact and denied to
have goon with them it could not have holye^, but cast him away for he had no
help. But such excuse haste thou none for god can deliver and help the out
of the hands of all thine adversaries. 3 king. 13.
Read the story of Ieroboa^, whether he was able to hurt the man of god
reproving his fact? And god is the same god now. The standing of the.iii.
young menn over threw the purposed ydolatrye of Nabugodonozer. And suerlie so
would it do the wicked mass with us, if as obedient subjects we would obey
god more then man. As for thexample of Asterius being a^ sacrifice with
idolatrers and prayenge there, helps them nothing for as he openly declared
him self to disallowe their idolatry, which our mass gospellers do not: so
did not he accoustome to resort thither as they do to the Mass, but only by
the way happened to be thear at that time. And the thing may be more
apparaunt I will hear write the story as I find it in Eusebius. At Cesarea
Philippi which the Phenicians call Paneas at the foot of an Hill named Paneas
which is ye head of ye river of Iurdane, there was a common custom emonges the
people of yt place yerelye upon a certain solemn day to offer and slaye a
sacrifice, the which sacrifice by the sleight of Satan suddenlye after the
slaughtor of it, vanished away: so that the people were persuaded it went up
in to heaven: and therefore this was no small miracle nor service of god thaught
they, and all the hoole cou^trye. Now to came to pass yt this Asterius came
by the^ in their sacrifice time who perceiving that all this was done by ye
illusion of the dewill in bewitchinge of the peoples eyes: he in his heart
lamenting the errore and misery, forth with fell down on his knees and lift
up his eyes and hands to heaven ward, and with heart and voice called upon
the blessed name of the lord Jesus christ, ye tears tricklinge down by his
chekes apace and besought christ to have mercy upon the poor people, and to
deliver the^ from this there error. As soon as he prayed thus openly before all
the people, behold the lord opened their eyes, and so they saw their
sacrifice which they thaught had been in heaven haled over the water thear in all their sight manefestlie wherapon they amended there fault, and never used
this superstition any more. This god wrought by the prayer of this one
Asterius, which you see serves nothing to this purpose. I purpose by gods
grace shortly to put some thing forth of this Assterius and other maritres and
confessores of christ's faith to conforte and confirm my afflicted brethren
and sufferers. Now will I goo to there.v. reason.

5 It is enough say theye to believe in the heart and with our mouths to
confess it to god. Roma. x
And therefore except a man were a preacher he may not reprove or disanul the
mass, yet it is but a nedeles te^ptinge of god, to lose al we have, thus
reason they, but I will breiflie answer the^. Furst you make no difference
between believing with the heart and confessinge with the mouth, where the one
that is belief is spoken in respect of god which searches yt heart, and
looks for faith Hirem. 5. and the other is spoken in reispect of the church or
men, as christ says, he that confesses me before men. etc And this
confession Paull puts as a plain demostration of faith in ye heart, so that
whersoeuer it be not, faith is not Therefore this place utterly makes agenst
you. For by your silence at that horrible idol and enemy unto christ and his
church you utterly holding your tongues declare your faythles hearts, or
else confession with the mouth could not but burst out as light in an house
cannot but burst out, at ye door and wyndowes of the sai^^, to the sight of
such as be with out.

Secondelye though we be not al public ministers and preachears of ye gospel,
we have al care one over an other.
yet we are all bysshoppes one over an other, and called to preach out and
show the virtues of him that has called us in to his light, so that our
duty is to see as much as we can that no man fall from ye grace of god
(except we will follow Cain, Heb, x, v Gene, iiii,
and say who made me keeper of my brother) and whenever occasion is offered to
set forth and show ye praises of ye lord and reprove yt which is euel as paul
says arguite potius, i, M^ter, ii Eph^, v,
but after our vocation. Inded if ye p^chers did their duty to disalowe and
reprove this mass, we should have less cause so to do. It were enough to
declare that we allow there doctrine but seeing that the preachers are lienge
praters and the true spekers are put up to preach to posts being companiles,
Bokelesse paperles and with out pen and ynke (so streitlye ar they looked unto)
it is ye duty of every christian after their vocation, to disallowe all that
he can not obey and do with good conscience.

math x. 16 mark, 8. Luke. ix. xiiii. xvii.
Last of all, as concerning the loss of life. etc. I can noone other wise
answer then with christ's own words; be yt loves father and mother better
the^ me is not worthy of me: yea be that forsakes not Father and mother, Wife
and children goods and his own self also can not be my disciple. For be that
will go about to save his life shall lose it but be that aduentureth, yea
loses his life for my sake the same shall find it eternallye One day will
we nyll were, we must forsake all and parchaunce go to ye devil: now if
willynglye for gods sake we will do that which of necessitee we must do, we can
not but be most certain to goo to god, not for ye suffringes sake but for his
mercy and promise sake.

6. Their.vi. reason is of charity and office* knowledge makes proud, but
charity edifieth: for else if we should not goo to mass, we should offend ye
simple. i. Cor. ^.
I answer ye knowledge with out charity is evil and such had the Corinthians
which abused their knowledge in ye liberty of ye Gospel to ye sorewounding of
many a poor conscience, for whom christ was crusified as our mass gospellers
puse up with knowledge of the liberty of the gospel in exterior things do,
thinkinge that they may go to mass and so lacking whereof they dragge, ar
taken tardie with there own reason for what charity call you that which not
only suffers: but also helps to hurl his blind brother headlonge into
the pit of perdicion. But s^^rlye there reasoning as there doing shows them
to want knowledge also. For that which is spoken of indifference things, they
apply to things utterly unlawful. For the Mass is not to be placed emonges
things indiffire^t But amongst the greatesse euilles for one most horible.
God send them more knowledge and charity, and then I doubt not but there will
keep the^ at whom rather that goo to mass. Offenses are ayther given or taken.
For offe^ding but brethren in not comi^g to mass a man must put a difference
between offenses, some are taken, some ar given. The precher that preaches gods
word truly, offendes the wicked or rather the wicked takes thereby offense,
so does the father offend the child if he be couetuose in geuinge, lyberallie
to the poor. But this offense comes of ye wickedness of ye evil and is taken
and not given. The man yt goes to the Mass gives an offense occasioning
others to do the like, and woe be unto such: The man yt goes not to mass, or
if he go thither does reprove it publicly, this man I say gives no offense,
but the offense is taken, for he that follows gods word to do his will can
never give offense. But he that follows his own will or reason, or the will
and reason of any man in religion or gods service, the same man gives an
offense and sins da^ynablie. Go to therefore and see with thye self in going
to mass, whether you do it to do gods will or thine own, if you look well
on it thou shalt see it is not gods will but thine own or the will of others
whom you would not displease but now se what Paul says, if I should please
men, I were not the servant of christ. Gal. i. i. Cor. 10.
And what says thy consience when thou praiest thy will be done? and do
the contrary? Every man must study to please his brother, but yet to
edification. But of these offenses much were to be spoken ageynste our
gospellers which have given great offenses in not resorting to ye communion to
receive it when they might. Also in co^^minge comen prayer in neglecting
preaching and sermons, in abusing their liberty, in meaies, in church goods.
etc.

7. There.vii. reason they gather out of christ's words that not it which
goes in to the month defyleth man, wat. xv.
but that which comes forth of ye heart, And therefore going to mass being but
an external thing, if so be the heart allow it not, can not defile a man.

Our saviors words do not exclude outward words and works contrary to his
laws, but that they defyle man, as Murder, Theft, Whordome. etc, albeit these
in deed spring out of the heart howbeit make the matter manifest. A difference as
before I have spoken there should be put always between things indifferent and
things unlawful. The mass and goi^g to it to serve god thereby is no
indifferent thing. We should discern gods creatures from man's ignorance in
ye abuse of the^. wine is gods creature Dronkenes is ma^nis error and ye
abusi^ge of gods creature, the epistel gospel supper good prayers, etc. are
gods ordinances but the mass is ma^nis ignorance, and horrible abusing of
those holy things. To sacrifce calves sheep, etc. was godds institucio^, but
to sacrifice in ye groves, woddes, at Bethel, Dan, etc. was mannis error and
plain idolatry, as one mass is, and they yt use it horrible idolatrers, so
yt this their reason apo^ this text gathered is reasonies if they used it
against ma^nis prescriptio^ of meats as though some were more holy then some,
some defiled upon frydaye more then upon thursdaye etc. then used they: ^
rightlye Now let us see their.viii. reason. It is Anabaptisticall say they to
absteyne from the ministry and temple, because of others mennis faults,
rather men should prove and try them selves then others. The priests ilnes or
the papists error can not hurt us it we in heart consent not to their evil
or allow it. This reason is lyk the rest. For the mynisterie of gods word
and the man's at two things, the one meor repugnant to the other and destroyers
the one of ye other, he does wickedlye which with ye Anabaptists or
Donatisses think yt the fault of ye minister or people should empaire
christ's ministry or sacraments and ye virtue and efficacy thereof to him
wards. In vsyng gods ordinances let us try our selfs and not others. But
sir what ordinance of god c^l yea the mass? who taught to pray publikelye in
an unknown tongue? who caught christ's supper to be a private supper? but of
this look more before. Now will I dispatch their.ix. and.x. reasons.

9.10. Because god beholds the heart and not yt outward apperau^ce.1. re. 12
because the eyes of god look for faith, Heremi.v. Because the beauty of godds
church is with in. psalm. xiv. Therefore ye outward deed of going to mass
forceith not, if so be inwardly it be not aproued. To these I answer ye
indede it is true god looks on the heart but yet so that he beholds the
words and works also Malach. His eyes look on faith. But so that he casts
his eyes on mennys factes also. psalm. And therefore the scripture says that
godd will judge after our works and sayings read. Mat. 25 and.12. of the
words thou shall be iustefyed, etc. These therefore conclude not as theye
gather, but rather teach us godds privilege which we must not meddle with
all: ^nelie we must know the tra^ by the tru^es: the which fruits if at any
time they deceive us, yet god can they never deceive, for he knows ye heart,
be knows ye fath and whether ye fruts spring thereof or not, yea this
sentence well wayed doch give us occasion to set the popish church to be no
church in gods sight, as doith the sentence they allege for their tenthe
reasons of the beauty of the Kyngges daughter, that is the church with in.
For if we be hold the face of the popish church in respect of christ's true
church whose beauty in deed is al inward being replenished with the spirit of
christ and the fruits of ye same, outwardly being but simple, for she will
add nothing to christ's commandementes in gods service and religion,
otherwise then for orders sake it I say we behold the face of the popish
church, lord how it glistereth and gorgiouse it is in co^pariso^ or christ's
true church which is deformed in these days, but by the word of god truly
preachyd, the sacraments purelye minestred, and sum discipline nothing so
much as has been, might be, and should be, where as the popish church wantes
nothing to set her self forth to the show as he that considers ye persons
Pope Cardinals, Legates, Archbisshoppes bissheppes, suffraganes, Abbores,
Priores. Deanes, Prebendarres, archedeacons, Canons, Monks, Friars, Persons,
Vicares, Paryshprystes, Mass prystes, Nonnes, susters, nonices, Deacones,
subdecones, etc. and a thousand more) the pore riches, honors, promotions,
lands, houses, fare, service (as singing, saying, ringing, playeng, sensing
etc Impelmentes (Crosses, Chalices, relykes, Jewels, Basens, copes, cruettes
Vestime^tes, Books, Belles, candelles etc. He I say that considers these
things he cannot but with Samuel thinking, Eliab had been he whom god had
chosen, Think this to be the catholic church and spouse of christ. But this
sentence says the beauty of gods paramor is within: and therefore this may
be suspected to be the rose colored whore S. Ihon speaks of in the Apocalipse.
For whom her ministers watch night and day, how to mantaine their mystres and
whore, madame with indowinge her with the riches, power, and pleasures of ye
earth: where as the ministers of christ's true church watch and labor how to
enryche and bewtifie gods people with Heavenly riches, even with the
knowledge of god and his christ and there fore they use daily preaching and
public prayeing, and using the sacrament so as may edify. They urge men to
repentau^ces to begi^ a new life, they would have men to horde by their
treasures in heaven. etc. And this gayre they world lyketh not. But murmureth
at the ministers, contemptneth the^, pilleth them that for pouertye and
lyuinges sake thee might speak to please, as experience has taught hearin
England. But to make an end of this matter I would wyshe that they which use
such sentences as theys be to hyde their manifest ydolatrie and fornication at
ye mass would know that their spouse is gelyouse and will as well be angrye with
them whoring so in their bodies, as they would be, if there wives were taken in
bodily act with others, would they take this excuse if the wife should say:
forsouth husband this is no matter for I promise you no body, but you alone
has mine heart. etc. God for his mercies sake in christ open our eyes and
hearts to se know and love his will, yt we may serve him there after: God
power into our hearts the sense of christ's sweet sacrifyce made for our sins
in his own person and by his own self. The^ suerlye we cannot but
earnestlye detest this mass wyiche is most enemy^ there ageinste, and that
not onnelye in spirit inwardelie, but also in body outwardlye: even as all
honest women can not but be sore grieved in heart or bodily act to depart
from there husbands. The gretter love in heart the wife hard to her husband,
the more pure will her body be kept from the fellowship^ of others. And so it
goes with us herein le^t us therefore pray god to engraft his love in our
hearts and then vndoubtidlie we will neither do nor say enyething that shall
displease him. Let his word be the lantern unto our feet none other way to
go then we shall see it give light before us. Psalm. lxix*
Let his word so lie and remain in our hearts, math. xiii.
that it may be as a leven in us to chaung yt favor of all our words and
works to be thereafter Let us hyde gods words in our hearts that we sin
not. psalm. cxix.
Let us keep our feet from all enyiwayes that we may keep gods laws and
testimonies. And here I will write an historye not until for this purpose as I
think.

There was in ye time of Sapores king of Persia which cruelly persecuted the
Christians a certain Archebysshoppe Selenchya and Etesiphon called Simon which
was called before ye king diverse times, but at the last bound like a thief for
christ's gospelles sake howbeit all prevailed nothing: constant he was in word
and countenance to the comfort of all the christians. On a day coming from
the king of whom he was examyned and thretned, it he would not worships the
son and make a knee to it as god but in vain as I said it fortuned that one
Vstazardes an ancient officer in ye kings court I trow great Master of his
household sat in the court gates as Simeo^ came by which Simeon so sone as
this Vstazardes did see coming forth with he arose and did reverence. But
Simeon knowinge that he had wourshipped the Son for fear of ye king, would
not look at him, but seemed to co^tempne and despise him. This gaire when
Vstazardes perceived so perced his heart, that he began to pull a sonder his
clothes and to rende his garments, with weping eyes, crieng out and halas that
ever he hade so offended god as in body to bow to the son for (says he)
here in I have denied god, although I did it a geinst my will. And how sore is
god displeased with me when mine old father and friend Simeon his dear servant
will not speak or loor toward me. Look toward me. I may by the servants
countenance perceive ye masters mind. etc. on this sort this Vstazardes
lamented. Now sir it came shortly to the kings care and therefore was he sent
for and demanded the cause of his mourning, and he out of hand told him the
cause to be his unwilling bowing to the Son, by it (oh king) (says he I
have denied god and therefore because he will deny them that deny him I have
no little cause to complain and morn. woe unto me (quod he) for I have played
the traitor to christ, and have dissimbled with the my liege lord. No death
therefore is sufficient for the less of my faults. etc. when the king herd
this it went to his stomach for he loved. Vstazardes who had been to him and his
father a faithful servant and officer, howbeit the malice of satan moved him
to causse this man to be put to death, when he saw yt by no means he would
alter his mind to worship with the body, the son yet in this point be
seemed to gratefye him, for Vstazardes desired that ye cause of his death might
be publ^sshed to be as it was, this I ask says he) for guardon and recompense
of my true service to the and thy father, Marie quod the king thou shalt have
it thinkinge therbye ye when the christians should know, how he would not spare
his chefest servants for relygion it would make them more afraid and sooner to
consent unto him: but so sone as it was publisshed and Vstazardes put to death,
lord how it comforted not only Simeon then being in prison, but also all the
christians. This history I wisshe were marked as well of us as our Popish
Gaspellers which have no more to say for the^ then Vstazardes had, for his
heart was with god, how so ever he framed his body and therefore (says he)
that vnwyllinglye be bowed to ye son we should behave our selves strongelie
agenst such brethren as simeon did and then they ye sooner would play
Vstezardes part which thing no merueile though they do not, so long as we
rock them a sleep by regardyng them and there companayes, as dailye we do, and
so are partakers of there evil and at the length shall feel of their smarte.
God guide us all with his holy spirit as his children for evermore. Amen.

Imprinted by Wyllyam Copland, for Wyllyam Martyne, and ar to be sold at his
shope ioininge to the mydle North door of Paul's, at the sign of the black
boy.


