A SERMON PREACHED At FLITTON in the County of Bedford, At the Funeral of the
Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Kent, the sixteenth of March 1614. By I. B. D.
D.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Richard Woodroffe, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Golden Key, near the
great North door. 1615.

A SERMON PREACHED AT FLITTON IN THE COVNTIE OF BEDFORD, AT THE FUNERAL OF THE
RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Earl of KENT, the sixteenth of March, 1614.
LVKE. 2. 29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy Word.
THe first words of S. John's Gospel ARE, that in the beginning was the Word,
John 1. 1.

The beginning of Saint Marks Gospel Is, that a voice went before the Word,
Mark, 1. 3.

Jesus was the Word, John was the voice. Gre. in Ho. (...) sonat vt Verbu^
possit audiri, Chrisost. sup. Matthew. Vox est sonus confusus, qua vult aliquid
dicere ille qui clamat. Verbum est sermo mysticus, quo Deus mysterium suae
voluntatis ostendit: Gloss. Verbum clamat in voce. Beda, Per vocem nunciatur,
per Verbum ostenditur.
From John's preparing and Jesus coming, the Fathers have observed that Christ
the Word of God, was in the dispensation of his Incarnation, accompanied with
the voices of man.

When he was two years old, voce lamentantis, with the voice of lamentation. A
voice of Ramah, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted,
Matthew. 2.

At his Baptism, voce proclamantis, with the voice of proclamation: And
behold, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my well-beloved Son, etc. Matthew. 3.

In his Preaching, Voce acclamantis, with the voice of acclamation. They that
went before, and that followed after, cried Hosanna, etc. Math. 21.

At his Death, Voce exclamantis, with the voice of exclamation: The Centurion
was afraid, and said, Truly this was the Son of God.

But of all the voices which accompanied the Word, Four have a prerogative:
which are not simple voices, but settled songs.

The first, the Angels song, as in Luke, the second Chapter, and fourteenth
verse.

The second, blessed Mary's song, Luke 1. 46.

The third, Zacharies song, Luke 1. 68.

The fourth Simeons song, the text of this Scripture. All of them remarkable:
For the Angels they were messengers of Heaven: Mary's song, she was the mother
of our Savior: Zacharies song, he an anointed Priest. Simeons song, he an
inspired Prophet. But above ALL, Simeons has the Prerogative.

For the Angels song was in the fields. Luke 2. 8.
Mary's song was in a Chamber, Luke 1. 41.
betwixt her and Elizabeth.

Zacharies song was at a feast, Luke 1. 39.
but a private feast, of a few mountain people.

But Simeons song was in Jerusalem Luke 2. 25.
the great City, and in the Temple, Luke 2. 27.
the most public, and most sacred place of Jerusalem.

The text then is a voice attendant upon the Word: Is a song, which is a
comfortable voice: Is a public song; A solemn song, A Church song; A song in
the Temple: All which might have been sufficient motives to warrant the choice
of this Scripture, at this mournful time, to comfort the living; at this
solemn time, to honor the dead. But these are common Inducements: For the
text is yet more fit. It is Cantus funebris: A funeral song. Martial.
Cantatur Cygnus funeris ipse sui. A white Swanne, whose Almond tree is
blossomed, sings his own Epitaph.

And of these songs we have but two in Scripture:

One of Moses in the old Testament Deuteronomy. 31. 3.
.

And this of Simeon in the new Testament.

Both Old men. Moses one hundredth and twenty Deuteronomy. 31. 2.
Simeon, says Nic^phorus, Lib. 1. Cap. 12.
Ad tantum senium prouectus, continued to a great age, that he might see
Christ.

Both Great men. Moses Ruler of the People forty years. And Simeon, says
Citatur a Kimitio, in hunc locum.
Galatinus Master of Gamaliel, an Honorable man among the people Act. 5. 34.
.

Both Good men. Moses Gods servant, Ios. 1. 2.
and Simeon, Gods servant Luke 2. 25.
.

Both Fit to honor the memorial of an old, Honorable, Religious Peer. But
Simeon the fitter; For Moses eyes only beheld Canaan Deuteronomy. 34. 4.
. But Simeons eyes beheld Christ Luke 2. 30.
. And that it may appear, that the text is fit, not only in the body and
bulk, but in every branch; It is like one of David's Psalms, which are
entitled, Ca^tica graduum, Psalms of Degrees; Arising like Jacobs Ladder, step
by step, till you come to peace.

Which peace the Scripture notes expressly to be the Complement of Abraham's
blessing: Genesis 15. 15.
And thou shall go to thy fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in a good old
age.

Peace which Saint Austen does determine to be the perfection of happiness, De
Ciuit. Dei
Finis ciuitatis huius in quo summum habebit bonum, lib. 19. cap. 11.
vel pax in vita aeterna, vel vita aeterna in pace dicendus est. The end of the
Saints in the City of God, is either peace in life eternal, or eternal life
in peace.

THe first step, (...).
is the time (I follow the Greek Original) Nunc, now.

The second is the pasport, Dimittis, let depart.

The third is the subject, Seruum tuum, thy servant.

The fourth is the Prince, Domine, O Lord.

The fifth is the promise, Secundum Verbum, according to thy Word.

The sixth is the Condition, In pace, in peace.

1 The time present. 2 The desire fervent. 3 The servant dutiful. 4 The master
powerful. 5 The promise infallible. 6 The condition comfortable.
Are like the Throne of Solomon 1. King. 10. 18
with six steps of Ivorie over laid with gold. A Throne fit for Solomon the
Prince of Peace.

Nunc.
THe first step is the Time. Now, And Now it was, that Christ was in the
Arms of Simeon. Never a better ( Now) to die, then with Christ in our arms.

( Now) Simeon prays, for death (before) Simeon prayed, for life.

( Now) let me depart, Therefore ( before) let me not depart.

This is probable by collection; but apparent by relation, verse 26. It was
revealed unto him, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord
Christ. Simeon (then) was promised to see Christ in the flesh: Simeon
(therefore) desired life till he had ( seen) Christ in the flesh. So long as
he expected the consolation Verse 25.
of Israel; so long he desired life in Israel. But when his first desire was
accomplished: his second desire (was,) to be dissolved. Both the desires of
Simeon, (both in life and death) are lawful, if lawfully desired; 1.
Hezekiah may desire life with mourning and chattering, Esaias, 38. 14 if his
desire be to plant Religion.

2.
Saint Paul may desire death with groaning, Phil. 3. 23. If it be to have
Christ in fruition: As Simeon desired ( life,) to have Christ in Contemplation;
as Simeon desired ( death) to have Christ in possession. But every man does
not so desire ( life,) does not so desire ( death.) There is a Nabal 1. Sam.
25. 2.
that desires to live to sheare his sheep, and to make a feast like a King,
And 36. 37. v.
though the next day his heart die within him, and he become like a stone.
There is a fool, Luke 12. that desires long life, to build barnes, to gather
goods, to lay up fruits, to take ease, to eat, to drink, to be merry, to be
mad: Contra Iouini.
Vt Ebrij and ructantes intrent in paradisum: That reeling and belching (says
Jerome) they may fall into an Epicures Paradise.

There is a Nebuchadnezar Dan. 4. 33.
that desires to live, to mount up his piles of wonderme^t, and his turrets of
Babel, though in the midst of his pride, he be turned into an Ox. There is an
2. Sam. 18. 9. and 14.
Absolon, who desires to live, that he may wear a Crown upon his head, though
he be hanged by the hair of the head, and he be stricken with three Darts
through the liver.

There is an Achab, that desires to live, to take possession of Naboths
vineyard, though in the place where the Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, Dogs
shall lick the blood of (Achab.) 1. King. 21. 19
There is an Haman H^st. 7. 10.
that desires to live, till he may be revenged on Mardoche, his enemy,
although a gallows of fifty foot high, an eminent place for execution, be
the end of a mischievous Courtiers promotion.

All such desires of life, ( whose ends are our corrupt passions,) are
unlawful desires. And although they have as De Paenitentia.
Tertullian calls it, Volaticum gaudium a winged pleasure in their lives: yet
they shall have Talentum Zach. 5. 7.
plumbi, as the Prophet speaks, a Talent of lead, an intolerable pressure of
their conscience in their death.

But as life may be unlawfully desired, so likewise death may be desired
unlawfully. It cannot be denied, but Elias prayed for death in a wrong (Nunc.)

In the 1. King. 19. verse 3. Elias fled from ( Iezabel) fled in the (
morning,) fled for his ( life.) Yet in the fourth verse: at ( evening) when he
was a little weary with flying, he prays for ( death.) Now, 1. Kings 19. 4
O Lord, take away my life.

A very strange passion, that one days journey should make such an alteration.

It cannot be denied, but Jonas had a wrong ( Nunc.)

In the second Chapter of Jonas, and the second verse, he cries out of the
Whales belly: he calls it the belly of hell, he cries and calls for ( life.)
But in the ^ourth Chapter of Jonas, and the third verse, some three or four
days after, he begs and sues for ( death.) Now, O Lord, take my (life.)

What was the reason of this sudden alteration? It was not reason: but passion;
because the Ninevites did not ( die) therefore he would not ( live.)

But Elias did not well, to call for death for a little affliction. Jonas did
not well, to be angry with God, and to desire to die, to despite Gods great
affection.

No affliction in our selves; no envy at others are warrantable motives to
desire death. We must not be like Elias, to die fainting: we must not be
like Jonas, to die chasing. They that desire death in passion, do desire death
only for fashion. It being long since observed by Saint Austen, Lib. de morte.
that when sickness comes, the harbenger of death, Medici adducuntur, manera
promittuntur, Physicians are requested, rewards are promised, prayers are
conceived, vows are offered, that death may be deferred.

Would you have a sanctified rule, to know a sanctified ( Nunc?) when to desire
( life,) when to desire ( death,) take Simeon for both.

In Life.
DEsire so long to live, till you may see Christ: otherwise the first death
will be terrible, the second death will be intolerable. It is the contemplation
of Bernard: Citatur a Ludolpho, in 2. Lucae.
Tu quomodo exibis, anima misera, quae ducem itineris Iesum non nosti? O
miserable soul, with what horror will thou go from a body of earth, which
know not thy Jesus the Lord of life, and the way to Heaven? If a man should
live as long as Methusalem; though his head were as white as silver; and his
skin as writheled as parchment; yet if he knew not Christ, he is not fit to
die.

It is a miserable comfort to have lived long, and to have lived little, Sen^^^.
Diu fuit, sed non diu vixit. Such a man ( was) a great while, ( lived) a
little while. Better it had been, for such a man, to have been strangled in
the womb, then to have dyed an Embrio in Religion. Let us therefore (then)
desire to leave the earth, when we know the way to Heaven.

In Death.
When you have known Christ, then desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ.

Then imagine all the honors of earth to be but Meditat.
Anselmus his Butterflyes, which children follow from bush to bush, from flower
to flower, at which they catch with childish passion: the Butterflyes sometimes
flying before them, sometimes behind them, sometimes close by their eyes,
sometimes through their fingers: and if they catch them, they are but
Butterflyes. So light a thing is (Honor,) so slight a thing is (glory,) such
a vanity, such a Butterflye.

Then conceive all earthly pleasure, to be but Consolati. Philosophica.
Boethius his gloriosa pericula, glorious perils.

Then understand all worldly riches to be but Epist. 1. ad Dom.
Cyprian his speciosa supplicia, glittering punishments.

Then suppose all things under the Moon to be but Saint Phil. 3. 8. 9.
Paul's Retrimenta and Stercora: retriment and dung, in comparison of the
fruition of Jesus Christ in Heaven.

In Sum
DEsire to live, till you are inspired with grace, desire to die, when you are
assured of glory.

This was the time wherein Simeon desired to depart. And with which time, it is
time for me to depart, and to come to Simeons departing.

(...)
LEt depart, Is the word in English, whose original imports three senses.

First, to depart out of Prison, Acts 5. 40. (...), they let the Apostles
depart out of Prison.

Secondly, to depart from a place of exile, into our native Country, Matthew.
14. 22. (...), until he let the people depart, from the Wilderness, to their
own Houses.

Thirdly, to depart from an Office, in which we were placed by Superior
Authority, Act. 13. 3. (...), they let Paul and Barnabas depart, when they had
fulfilled their Ministry.

In all these three senses, Saint Libro de bono mortis, cap. 2.
Ambrose does interpret it.

In the first sense, our soul is supposed to be in prison, and desires to
depart, Psalm. 116. 16. Dirupisti vincula mea. Thou have loosed my bonds. In the
fifteenth verse, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his
Saints: ( Death and Bonds,) but Death does loose the Soul from the Bonds of
the Body.

Psalm 142. 7. It is the prayer of David, Deduc e custodia animam meam. Bring
my soul out of Prison, that I may praise thy name.

2. Cor. 5. 1. We have (says Saint Paul) Domum subterraneam, It is translated
an earthly house, but (...), signifies a house under earth, (a very dungeon.)

By all which Scriptures, the soul seems to be manacled, imprisoned, and
cast into the dungeon of the body. Not that any man should communicate in the
error of Origin, to conceive that our souls were created in Heaven, and for
their demerits were tumbled into houses of Clay, but to express what Saint
Paul lamenteth, Luke 7. 23. That he saw another Law in his members, warring
against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the Law of
sin. But to express the complaint of Cyprian Libr^ de mortalitate.
Quae clementia est amare pressuras, and poenas, and lachrimas mundi? What a
madness is it for men, to dote upon their golden fetters, their gilded prison,
their painted dungeon, for every man to be his own Suff^nus, and like
Narcissus, to be enamored of Earth, of Dust, of Slime, of our Bodies, of
rottenness, and Corruption? When the silliest Bird that flies, is not content
with a cage of Ivorie.

In the second sense, our life is supposed an exile, and we desire to go into
our Country, Psalm 39. 12. I am a stranger with thee (says David) and a
Soiourner, as all my Fathers were. Et ideo De bono mortis, cap. 2.
tanquam peregrinus ad illam Sanctorum omnium Patriam ^estinabat. And therefore
(says Saint Ambrose) David made have to be indenized, and possessed of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Why does the fire move upward? Why do the stones fall
downward? Why do the waters glide through rocks of Flint, to pay their natural
tribute to the Ocean? Why does the Air fly from the bowels of the earth, with
shaking of the Worlds foundation? But that every thing moves impetuously to
the Center from whence it was taken.

It is the speculation of Philosophy, that Lapis cum stat, amouetur: That a
stone lying stone-still, has notwithstanding a secret motion to the Center.

It is the subtlety of the School. Aquinas was the Author, that whilst we
are in this life, we turn and change as the Moon. Quiescimus in desideriis:
We rest in the desire of rest, and yet we have restless desires. But in Heaven
there is Desideriorum quies, the very Center and quiet of desiring, where our
desires shall not be satiated, but they shall be satisfied. It is the sweet
contemplation of Saint Austen, Con^e^.
Fecisti nos Domine, ate, and inquietum est Cor nostrum, donec reuertatur ad
te: Lord, our souls they came from thee, and never are quiet till they return
unto thee.

In the third sense, Our life is supposed an Office and place of charge, and we
must not depart without the leave of our Superior. Job. 7. 1. Editio Hieroni.
Militia est vita hominis super terram: Our life (says Job) is a warfare, God
placed some in the foreward, some in the rer^ward, some in the wings, some in
the battle, every man has a station, and no man must depart without his
Dimittis, without his Pasport. Neither the light of Nature, nor the light of
Grace, directs a man in any case to put out the light of life.

In the monuments of Heathen History, Lucrecia, Cato, Cleombrotus, are honored
for their own dishonor: for if Lucrecia was unchaste, why is she honored: If
she were chaste, why was she murdered? Si Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 19.
no^ est illa impudicitia qua inuita comprimitur, non est haec iustitia qua
casta punitur. If it were not want of Chastity in her that was forced
unwillingly, it was want of justice in her that was slain unjustly.

If Cato did well to tear out his own bowels, why did he command his son,
his own bowels, to beg his life of Caesar? Tantum Iibid. cap. 23.
gloriae ipsius Caesaris invidit, he so much envied Caesar's glory, that he
was transported to unreasonable fury. Cleo^brotus read Platos Phoedo
unadvisedly, else would he not have destroyed his body, to obtain the souls
immortality. Maiori Plato in Phoedone.
supplicio afficiendus est, desertor vitae; quam desertor militiae: he is more
to be punished, that voluntarily forsakes his life, then he that flies from
his Captain and Leader. The very light of Nature teaches, that there is more
valor to endure a miserable life, then to embrace a wretched death.

But the light of grace commands us not to kill others, much less to violate
our selves. Sampson cannot be excused, except by God he was secretly inspired.
Nisi Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 21.
quia Spiritus latenter hoc iusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. Except
the Spirit of God did secretly inspire him, who did miraculously upon his
prayer at his death strengthen him.

Those sacred Virgins, who in the sack of Rome sought to prevent the barbarous
Adulterer, by a voluntary murder of themselves, committed a certain sin, to
prevent an uncertain shame. Non sit tedio vobis vita vestra, siludibrio fuit
hostibus castitas vestra. O blessed Souls (says Saint Augustine) Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 27.
Why should you be weary of life, when your Chastity was a prey to your
enemies? How could you endure the shame of the Cross of Christ, that cannot
endure the rumors of Pagans? There is no shame, no sorrow, no misery, that
should force a Christian to a desperate prevention. Consider what Saint Paul,
Phil. 1. balanced together, I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, nevertheless to abide in
the flesh is more needful for you. Quasi Ambro. de bono mortis cap. 2.
sapiens amplectitur mortis lucrum: Quasi seruus non refugit vitae obsequium.
As a wiseman he desires death, as a servant he endures life.

Will you have another rule for the act of departing, as you had for the time
of departing? Behold Simeon, patient in life, patient in death. He would not
live without a ( permittis) a promise to see Christ; he would not die without
a ( dimittis,) without a license to enjoy Christ. Saint Augustine speaks
plainly, and yet acutely.

Some men that are crowned with Roses, and enjoy the Worlds Paradise, they
desire to live. Some men who are wasted with sorrows, they desire to die. Now
says the Father, Tract. 9. in Epist. Johan.
Si habes vitam in desiderio, habe mortem in patientia; Habes vitam in
patientia, si habes mortem in desiderio: If you have life in desire, yet die
patiently; If you have death in desire, yet live contentedly.

In sum.
(WHen) God will, be not troubled to die. (Till) God will, be not troubled to
live.

To be thus prepared, Simeon thought it his duty; for he confesses that he is
a servant. And you know a servant comes, when his master bids come; goes, when
his master bids go; and therefore it is not, Dimitte me, let me depart: nor
let Simeon depart; But let thy servant depart. Speak, Lord, for thy servant
hears; give leave, O Lord, for thy servant obeys.

Seruum tuum.
I Find this title of Servant, given to them by God, which I am sure never
intended to serve God. Ier. 25. verse 9. Ier. 27. verse 6. Nebuchadnezzar my
Servant. Esaias 44. verse 28. Cyrus my Shepherd, and a Shepherd is a Servant.

I find on the contrary, that the best Saints of God have no better title,
Iosu. 1. 2. Moses my Servant is dead, Job 1. 8. Have thou not considered my
Servant Job?

This Contrariety, implie some difficulty. If Nebuchadnezzar, and Cyrus be
Gods Servants, what privilege is it for Moses and Job to be the Servants of
God? One plain distinction makes a perfect resolution. It is one thing to
serve God actiuely, and another thing to serve God passiuely. All the world are
Gods Flailes, Gods Mallets, Ier. 50. 23.
Gods Scepters Psalm. 2. 9.
of Iron, to break in pieces his enemies as a Potters vessel: but some few in
the World are his Trumpettors, Esaias 58. 1.
are his Laborers, 1. Cor. 3.
are his Ambassadors, 1. Cor. 4.
his Messengers of fire, Heb. 1.
are his Angels, 16.
his ministering 16.
Spirits.

Bears, 2. King. 2. 24.
and Lions, 1. King. 13. 25.
and Catterpillers, Joel 1. 4.
and Worms, Io. 4. 7.
are the Executioners of his Justice: But Lambs, and Doves Mat. 3. 17.
are the voluntary instruments of his mercy.

Nebuchadnezzar burnt the Temple: 2. King. vlt.
Cyrus did build the Temple: Ezra 1.
Both ( did) the will of God: Neither ( intended) to do the will of God: Both
were Gods Servants in execution: neither of both were Gods Servants in
affection. Both served him with the hand, neither with the heart.

But to be Gods Servants in affection to God, and in protection from God, is a
singular prerogative: For if the Servants of Solomon were happy, 1. King. 10.
8.
much more happy are they who serve a greater then Solomon Mat. 12. 42.
If the Angel Romans 22. 9.
in the Revelation acknowledges himself to be the Apostles fellow-Seruant:
how great an honor is that, to be entertained into such a service, where the
Angels are our fellows? You call me Master, says Christ* (and you do well;)
for surely he does very ill, that has not Christ for his Master: very ( Ill)
indeed since it is man's necessitaled condition, to be a Servant.

Ye were the Servants of sin, Romans 6. 20. Ye are the Servants of
righteousness, Romans 6. 22. In both estates, still Servants. Ye cannot serve
Mat. 6.
God and Mammon, two Masters; but you must serve God or Mammon, one Master. We
must not halt betwixt God and Baal, but we must adhere to God or 1. King. 18.
Baal. We must either serve the Devil, as Simon Magus: or we must serve
Christ, as Simon Peter. It is the percing contemplation of Basil, that he
envied the Devils happiness, Hom. Ethi.
(...), who neither made us, nor dyed for us, but seeks our bodies
destruction, and our souls perdition; yet he has more Servants then Jesus
Christ, that came down from Heaven to redeem us, and offered up his blood to
save us.

It is S. Augustines experience, that to serve God is liberty, to serve sin is
slavery. Seruus In verba Apostoli.
tot Dominorum, quot vitiorum, (says the Father) a man is a slave to so many
Masters, as he is subject to vices.

Many a great man endures Chams Genesis 9. 25.
Curse, he is Seruus Seruorum; A Slave of his Slaves. Many a wiseman could not
be abused, as Herod was by Blastus his Chamberlain, Acts 12. Verse 20. if
their own guiltiness did not make them fear their own Servants. He that
will not be the Slave of men, let him be the Servant of God. A good conscience
is far richer far safer, then the Brestplate of Aaron, or the golden shield
of Solomon.

To draw to a conclusion.

Will you have a third rule, to know when you are Gods Servants? Behold Simeon,
earnestly desiring to be with his Lord.

Simeon had a pattern of Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. He went along journey
to fetch a Wife for Isaak: he laded ten Camels; he came at evening to the
house of Bethuel, he would not eat till he had told his errand, the next
morning he would go to his Master. Send me away, verse 54. hinder me not,
verse 56. Send me away that I may go to my Master. I will not stay ten
days for the Damsel, not one day to refresh my weary Camels. I came in the
evening, I will return the next morning.

Here is a true Servant, as soon as he had Rebecca, nothing pleased him but
to return to Abraham. Here is a Simeon, as soon as he had Christ, nothing can
content him but to return to God.

Excellent is the meditation of Cyprian, Lib. de Mo^tal.
Eius est mortem timere, quinon vult ad Christumire: That man fears death,
that fe^res to come to the Tribunal of Christ.

You say, you are Gods Servants, you boast of your faith, you talk of Heaven:
let me see the Caracter of Gods Servants: show me the power of your faith.
Express the desire of Heaven.

There is a secret infidelity: our tongues and hearts are contrary: to fear
death, and to desire eternal life, are things incompatible. Volumus ab eo
praemijs honorari, ad quem venimus inuiti. How can we (says Cyprian) hope for
Heavens happiness, when we are dragged thither with a fearful unwillingness?

God is not bound to make every Saul a King, that only seeks for his Fathers
Asses.

To conclude, if we be Gods Servants, why do we fear to go to God? If we
fear to go to God, how are we Gods Servants? Simeon desired to be gone: and
we will leave him, and so pass from the Servants condition, to the Lords
Dominion.

The Servant was dutiful, and the Lord is powerful.

Lord
IS the chief word in the Text, and the chief word for the time: For we see
the Hearse of a dead Lord, and we hear the power of a living Lord.

There are many in earth, who are called Lords, but they are Lords of earth,
and those Lords are earth, and those Lords must return to earth, as you see
this day fulfilled in your eyes. He, who is the son of Joseph, Lord of Egypt;
the son of Jacob, Lord of Caaaan: who is the son of Isaak, who is the son
of Abraham, who is the son of Nachor, who is the son of Sem, who is the
son of Noah, the son of Adam, He is the son of Dust.

There is a Lord of Lords, who has the power of life and death, who rayseth
out of the dust, and sets with Princes: who powers contempt upon Princes,
and lays their honor in the dust. For none of us (says the Romans 14. 7.
Apostle) lives to himself, and no man dies unto himself. For whether we
live, we live to the Lord: and whether we die, we die to the Lord: whether we
live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords.

The very word which Simeon uses is, (...), and not (...): Lord, says
Varinus, has reference to a Freeman. Master, to a Bondsman. Intimating in the
very propriety of sillables, that man is a very Bondsman, under the
despoticall power of God.

Which principle of Religion, the light of Nature sees.

In a storm at Sea, Jonas 1.
every Idolatrous Mariner calls upon his God: In a drought at Land, Osc. 7.
every Churl howles upon his bed: even those who never think on God in their
life, will call unto the Lord for fear of death.

But by the light of grace, 1 King. 18.
Elias in his agony: Jonas Jonas 2.
in his fury, Lord, take my life; ( death they desired, but death by God
permitted.) The Apostles in their fear, Lord, save us, we perish. The thief
in his pain, upon the Cross, Luke 23.
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Stephen Act. 7.
under the stones, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Act. 9.
Saul, cast down from his Horse, but cast down lower in his soul. Lord, what
will thou have me to do?

Lord, Lord, is the Echo of misery, is the suppliant for mercy.

Saint In Psalm. 8. (...) Homi. (...)
Basil gives the reason, GOD created (...), the inward man of the soul. God
fashioned (...), the outward man of the body. And God joined soul and body
together, with an incomprehensible union.

Fire and Water are not so contrary, as flesh and spirit. Tell me then, what
are the strings? what the buckles? what are the cords of love? what slime of
Euphrates? what Gum of Arabia? what Cement and Glue do join an immortal,
incorporeall, insensible soul, in a house of Clay, in a body of earth, the
most gross, most base, most solid element? Surely, we are wonderfully made:
None but God did co^pose us; none but God can preserve us; none but God, by his
permission, or direction, ordinary, or extraordinary administration of second
causes, can dissolve us. He with a breath gave us breath: he with a word takes
away our breath: and all our thoughts perish.

Let no Asa trust in his Physician: no Naamans trust to the Rivers of Damascus:
no Absolon to the luster of Beauty: no Maximus to the strength of an Elephant:
no Herod to the flattering clamor of Idolizing People, that we are not men,
but Gods. Those, who in regard of their constitutions, communicate in the
sanguine of the Rose, and in the snowie beauty of the Lilly; their bodies are
(says Saint Chrysostom) but nidus hirundinum. A Swallows nest, composed of
dirt and straw: they are no fairer then Jonas Goord a Worm struck it at the
root, and the Goord withered. The greatest Lord that lives, may make King
Philips Fable, his Motto, and Moral.

Lucian.
Menippus, the Satyricall Philosopher, meeting Mercury in the Elizian fields:
amongst all the ghosts, would needs know, which was Philip the great King of
Macedon. He (quoth Mercury) is Philip of Macedon, that has the bald head.
Menippus. I know him not by this, for all their skuls are bald. Mercury. He
which has a flat nose, is Philip of Macedon. (Menippus.) Why, all have flat
noses, (Mercury) He with the hollow eyes, is King Philip of Macedon.
(Menippus) Why, all have hollow eyes, bare teeth, naked ribs, open pores,
disiointed members, all are carcasses. Mercury. Why then, Menippus, in death
there is no difference betwixt a King, and a Beggar.

We must say, that he that was Lord of Solomon the Prince, he was Lord of
Simeon the Prophet. We must say with Job, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away. The balance of life and death, in which the highest, and lowest are
weighed, is only turned by the imperial hand of God.

Simeon therefore, as in the rest, so in this, he is curious to die, he
asks death of him, who only has the power of life and death: So absolute a
power, that as the Psalmist speaks, Dixit, and facta sunt: he spoke the
word, and all things were made. So, Dicat, and non sunt: let him speak but a
word, and all things will be marde. Therefore Simeon, to the duty of a
servant, and the power of a Lord, adds Secundum Verbum tuum: according to thy
Word. Knowing, that it is the duty of a servant, to depart at the least word
of his Master.

Secundum Verbum tuum.
THis clause is plainly interpreted verse. 26. Simeon had a revelation by the
holy Ghost, that he should not see death, till he had seen Christ. This was
Gods word, and this was a certain word; but yet look into this word, and for
one certainety, you shall find two uncertainties.

First, the Text says, Expectabat consolationem: he expected the consolation
of Israel. To see Christ, he was certain: but when to see Christ, he was
uncertain.

Again, he was to live, till Christ came, that was certain; but whether he
should then immediately die, that also was uncertain. Nicephorus says, he
dyed presently at that instant. But the Scriptures and Apostolical Fathers are
altogether silent; therefore it is dangerous to be confident. Simeon therefore
had an absolute certainty of life, no absolute certainty of death.

No more had Moses and Aaron, they were certain to die, and never to enter
into Canaan: but they were not certain, when they should see Canaan from the
Mount, and so die.

Hezekiah that was promised fifteen years life, must so be understood, as he
was threatened a present death; both condicionall and limited to the order of
second causes, which have not in them an absolute necessity, but a voluble
contingencie. God did not make Hezekiahs body impassible against external
violence; nor incorruptible against internal corruption: But thus says the
Lord: I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears, I will add fifteen
years of strength. I will repair the defects of nature, and extend them to a
possibility of fifteen years, with an implicit condition of thy repentance,
and so of thy lives continuance. Yea, to go a little farther, that which
Christ said of the day of Judgment, is applied by the Fathers to the day of
death, that neither the Angels, nor Christ the Lord of Angels, does know that
day and hour, (...): He knows that, says Nazian, as God, but as Man, he
does not know it. I am not ignorant, that the School and some of the Fathers
do interpret those words in another sense; But Bernard, Ambrose, and
Chrysostom do concur with Nazian* affirming that Christ, as man did not
know it: not because he could not, but because he would not. Ne Bernard.
eam ignorantiam feramus molestius, quaecum Christo and Angelis, nobis est
communis: that we may bear that ignorance patiently, which is common to us
with Christ and his Angels. Many men (I confess) are sick of lingering
consumptions, the infallible harbingers of death; and yet they are not certain
of the moment of their consumption.

Many at the beginning of their sickness, feel in their hearts, a presage of
their death: and yet they languish in hope, and know not the certain hour of
their dissolution.

The general rule remains, that Simeon knew not, that no man knows the
place, the manner, the moment of death.

First, not the place: and it is no great matter, since Rachel dyed in the
highway, as well as Iezabel in the streets: since Josias and Achab both dyed in
the field: since Saul and Jonathan dyed both in one battle, and their carkases
were hung up as Trophies of a bloody Victory in a barbarous City.

Will you hear a Philosophical comfort? Earth, you know, is the Ce^ter, and
heaven is the worlds circumference. If any man shall draw a Circle with his
pen, with a point in the midst of the Circle, the Circle is equally distant
from all points of the Circle, unto the point of the Center. There is
therefore, from all parts of the point and Center of the earth, an equal
distance to the Circle and Circumference of Heaven. What matter therefore though
the bodies of the Martyrs were intombed in the entrails of wild beasts?
though their ashes were scattered upon Rhodanus? though their carkases were
made a prey to the fowls of heaven? What glory was it to Martials fly,
though it were buried in concreted Crystal? what shame to Naboth, though his
blood was licked up of Dogs? What hurt to the Virgins in the sack of Rome,
whose bodies were unburied upon earth, whose souls were received into heaven?
Nec viuorum culpa, qui non potuerunt praebere; nec mortuorum poena, qui non
potuerunt sentire: De Ciuit. Dei. l. 1.
It was neither (says S. Augustine) the fault of the living, who had no power
to bury the dead, nor the punishment of the dead, who had no sense of the
afflictions of the living.

We know not the manner of our death, 2. Manner.
and it is a very trifle.

Job compares man to a flower: Esaias to grass: John B. to a tree. Is it any
great matter whether the flower be cropped, or the grass be mowed, or the Axe be
laid to the root of the tree?

At the death of Christ there were three crosses; upon those crosses were three
persons; The Thief blaspheming, The Thief repenting, The son of God
praying. Quid similius istis crucibus? quid dissimilius istis pendentibus? What
more like, (says S. De Ciui. li. 1.
Augustine) then those crosses? what more unlike then those persons?

We do not know the time of our death, 3. Time.
and it is good for us, we do not. In nature Seneca.
peior est letho, timor ipse lethi, the fear of death is more terrible then
death. Caesar had the death he desired: and surely that he deserved, to die
suddenly by the hands of the Senators of Rome.

But Nature has only a Trumpet of lead, the Ark of God has a Trumpet of
silver. Look no farther then to another song in this Gospel.

Zacharias song agrees with Simeons song, Luke 1. 54. 55. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, all
the days of our life.

Men would serve God, as they do their servants, with reuersions. In vltimis
diebus mortis: in the last days of their death: but God will be served, In
omnibus diebus vitae: In all the days of our life.

Nature says, O ciues, ciues, quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos
first: seek gold, and then serve God: first betray Christ, and then buy a
field of blood to bury strangers. First make many beggars by usury and
oppression, and then build an Hospital, the monument of a bloody devotion.

But grace says, Mat. 6.
Quaerite primum regnum Dei: first seek Gods Kingdom, and all things else
shall be cast unto you. All the rubbish of the worlds treasure, are but
castings; adiectanea, chippings and shauings, compared to the Pearl of heaven.
Vt dum semper ignoratur, quasi proximus esse credatur. id. Bas. vt nec impij
desperarent, quasi nullum tempus relictum poenitentiae, nec boni, quasi longum
tempus patientiae.
Latet vltimus dies vt obseruetur omnis dies. Therefore (says S. Augustine) We
know not our last day, that we may observe every day. Epicures and Balaams that
have lived ill, Cyprian.
quando anima in extremis labris, when the soul sits on their lips, to take
her flight, then they send for their Minister, to teach them to dye well.

We may then give you a little Opiat divinity to benumbe you; we cannot give
a cordial to secure you.

We may tell you, that one Ser. Par. 38. Bor. vnus latro in fine been
poenituit, ille quidem vt nullus desperet, solus autem vt nullus praesumat.
thief went from the gallows to glory: but we must not conceal that God
opened the mouth of one Ass, which is no privilege for common Asses. And yet
I will be liberal on Gods part; I will promise heaven assuredly to that sinner,
that does repent but one day before he dies.

You hear this mercy with greediness; turn not the grace of God into
wantonness: be sure you repent one day before you dye, whereof you cannot be
sure, except you repent every day.

God at some times, (it may be at this time,) does touch your hearts. Ang. conf.
Deus in meloquebatur, and ego nesciebam: When good motions come into our
hearts, God speaks, and we do not know it.

If you quench the Spirit: the Spirit blows where it lists, and when it
lists: You know not therefore, whether if to day you will not hear his
voice, Aug. de verbis Domini.
to morrow you shall hear his voice. Nemo promittat sibi, quod Euangelium non
promittit: let no man promise to himself, what the Gospel has not promised.

God has promised grace to the penitent, but God has not promised grace to
morrow, or life to morrow to repent. How can there be peace in the conscience,
when the whoredoms, and witchcrafts of Iezabel remain in the Soul? There is
no peace to the wicked, says my God.

If Simeon had not repaired his soul in life, he never could have had the
settled peace of conscience in death.

But peace in death is the fruit of a sanctified life, is the end of Simeons
petition, is the end and period of the Sermon.

In Pace.
WHich peace was implicitly promised to King Hezekiah in his life: explicitly
unto Abraham in his death.

Let there be peace in my days, was Hezekiahs prayer, Esaias 39. 8.

Thou shall go to thy fathers in peace; this was Abraham's promise, Genesis 15. 15.

Not that we are to think, that Peace was only communicated to Hezekiah in
Life, to Abraham in Death. But to express in their persons, the worlds
passions.

Every man is either a Dives, dreaming of nothing but ease and peace in life:

Or a Balaam, desiring nothing but grace and peace in death.

It is a vulgarisme of note; Such a man died like a lamb, though he lived like
a Lion.

As though Consumptions may not spend our choleric humors: Apoplexyes may
not stop our vital passages: Palseys may not take away our speech: Dropseys
may not exhaust our spirits. There are many defects in nature, that may cause
men to die quietly, but not religiously.

Sisera, after a draught of milk, was no more sensible of the hammer of Iael,
then Holofernes, after a tun of wine, of the sword of Judith.

Look therefore to the Text, unto Simeons peace. Which whether you interpret
with Euthinius, pro pace cogitationum: for peace of mind, opposed to doubting:
Or with Cyprian, pro pace securitatis: for peace of security, opposed to
falling: or with Irenaeus, pro pace mortis: for peace in death, opposed to
laboring: or with Origin, pro pace conscientiae: for peace of conscience,
opposed to despairing: In all these, the rule of Bernard is certain. Vis in
pace mori, sis seruus Dei: would you die in peace, you must serve the God of
peace.

No Simeons service. No Simeons security.

We are not to doubt, but Simeon prayed for that peace, which Christ promised,
John 14 27. Pacem meam: My peace I give unto you. Christ's peace is the peace of
a Christian. But Christ's peace is joined with, Iugum meum; my yoke: crucem
meum; my cross: seruum meum; my servant: verbum meum; my word: and then pacem
meam; my peace.

He that takes upon him Christ's yoke by obedience active; Christ's Cross by
obedience passive; he that serves Christ in conscience, and according to
Christ's word, in science: let him never doubt, but that in all duties, in all
crosses, in all service, in all controversies, he shall have Gods Angel to
comfort him in a furnace of fire. Let him never doubt but that the sting of
death shall be extracted, the power of hell shall be conquered, the gates of
heaven shall be opened, the bosom of Abraham shall be prepared, and he in the
eternal peace of Saints and Angels shall be glorified: unto which peace Simeon
is long since ascended: Where it is best to leave him: It being just, that as
we found Christ in the arms of Simeon; so we should leave Simeon in the arms
of Christ: there being no better way to end, then with the peace of God, which
passes all understanding, and surpasses all commending.

But though I have done with Simeon, I have not begun with the parallel of
Simeon: it being an unreprovable custom in Gods Church, that as you read,
2. Chron. 32. 33. that all Judah and Jerusalem did honor Hezekiah at his
death: so for Ambrose to honor Valentinian; Satyrus, Theodosius; for Nazian*
to honor Basil; Gregory, Gorgonia; for Eusebius to honor Constantine; for
Augustine to honor his Monica; Hierome his Nepotian; for us to power out a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, for the religious life, and Christian death of the
Saints of God. Only we must remember, that we are Preachers, and not Orators;
we must not speak for affection, nor for faction. Praese. aduersus Haereticos.
Nullubi citius proficitur, quam in haereticorum castris: Ibi enim esse, est
magnum esse. A man (says Tertullian) is never more easily, more speedily, more
hyperbolically magnified, then among Schismatiques and heretics: to be one of
their faction, (though otherwise never so unworthy) is to be a man of
estimation. Every molehill is made a mountain, where partiality swayes the
balance.

I will seek no farther then the Text, wherein I find Dominum and Seruum,
both titles given to Princes.

I said, Ye are Psalm. 82. 6.
Gods: there is the title of a Lord; David the son of a Psalm. 186. 16.
handmaid, there is the title of Servant. These two titles shall be to me, as
Hercules Pillars; Nequid vltra: nothing beyond them, nothing but contained in
them.

First, I will consider him, as a Lord of men. Secondly, as a servant of God.
So shall we give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God, that which is
Gods.

He was a Lord whose Hearse we here attend; And a Lord, as Elizeus was a
Prophet, with a double mantle of Honor.

His Baronie of Ruthen extended from Edward the first.

His Earldom of Kent extended from Edward the fourth: yea, and so extended (
witness his arms of unstained Honor) that as his Progenitors received Honor
from the royal favor of Princes; So they continued their Honor by loyal
service to their Sovereigns.

I confess indeed, that many times, the virtues of our Progenitors, are but
fig-leaues, to cover the nakedness and worthlesnesse of our own persons. But
yet, says In Psalm. 1.
Basil, (...): A green leaf does give a beauty to a golden Orrenge. So
Antiquity, that perpetuates the silver cord of Honor, to posterity; it gives
a luster to Nobility. A luster it gives, and yet it is but a blazing Star,
and Meteor, compared with the fixed Stars of our own virtues.

Descend we therefore to the person of this Honorable Henry, and let us search
without fraud, or flattery, what Heroical virtues commended him to his King:
what Political virtues commended him to his Country; what Oeconomicall
virtues commended him to his servants.

Alas, you know that he was troubled with many infirmities; as S. Paul writes
of Timothy: (...), even in the pain and daily crudities of his stomach. He
might say with old and honorable Barzillai, 2. Sam. 19. 32. that he was a very
old man, (three score and fourteen years old) that he could not hear the
voice of singing. Deaf many years.
What then were the motives unto Queen Elizabeth of immortal memory, to
inuest him? to King James of incomparable judgment, to continue him in the
Lieutenancie of this Country? To communicate unto him the supreme image of
their own glory. If the times had been secure, the charge had not been so
honorable nor so obseruable; because goodness and virtue are not ever
respected in times of safety. 2. Sam. 18.
Cashi runs by the mountains, and Ahimaaz runs by the plains, and both
unto David. But in times of danger, when the Commonwealth was like to the
Moon, subject to alteration, and change, that in those times he should be
honored with such a charge, might seem to be no other, then to lay Pelion upon
Ossa, one burden, upon another. There can be no other reason given, then what
In obitu.
Ambrose said of Theodosius, Senior aetate, validus fide; he was feeble, but
he was faithful. He was a Barzilla, a lover of his King, a lover of his
Country. I know, you remember the times of fear and amazement in Eighty
eight. When the Bulls of Rome roared, the Cannons of Spain thundered; when
Traitors were bred in our own bowels, Horse-leeches were shipped to suck the
Countries blood; Then by the care of this Honorable Lord, your Troops were
trained, your Armorie was surueyed, your people by his presence were
encouraged, your villages and towns were guarded, your Captains and Leaders
were counseled, all things without excess of charge, without corruption and
falsehood, without partiality and hatred, were sufficiently provided: and he
and you for your mutual and faithful offices, were of the Queen and Council
most remarkeably honored.

You know that when your late great Queen was translated from a Crown of
earth, to a Crown of Stars, that there was need of a skillful Pilot to rule
and stern the ship of State, in so sudden a storm; which how well it was
governed; how carefully and loyally your peace, against all malcontents, was
preserved, your selves can best relate it, whose fears made you most sensible
of it. To conclude therefore the commendation of his Heroical and Noble
virtues, we may inuert the speech which Tacitus Verba Taciti de Galba. Omnium
iudicio indignus Imperio, nisi imper asset.
reports of Galba the Emperor, Omnium iudicio, indignus Imperio, nisi
imperasset. Such infirmity, by all men's judgment, had been unfit for
government, had he not been Governor.

For his Political virtues, which commended him to the love of this Country,
I require no other Jury, then your eyes and ears. It is the contemplation of
the Singer of Israel, that Justice and Peace have kissed each other. It is true
in many what S. Austen has paraphrased, Vnam vis, and aliam non vis: some men
are so tyrannous, that they will have nothing but extreme justice; some men so
effeminate, they would have nothing but disordered peace. It was a question of
State, recorded by Suetonius, whether it were worse to live under Nero, where a
man might do nothing; or under Claudius, where a man might do any thing? Our
Honorable Earl caused Justice and peace to kiss each other.

Just he was, a Solomon, that no harlot could deceive him: merciful he was as
David, that no injury, no, not that which concerned his Honor, his Barony, his
estate, could habituate in him an Italianate, and eternal malice. When the
Laws of the Kingdom had determined his right and title, his own heart was
Chaunceler, to quench the fire of contention.

Just he was, to keep the Country free from the sons of Belial.

A peacemaker he was to compromise, and to end unchristian controversies.

Just he was, and feared not the gratest.
Loving he was, and contemned not the least.
I can remember, that when I was brought up at the feet of this Gamaliel, that
every Thursday (which is now by Gods direction, contrary to your first
resolution, the day of his memorial) he rode to a neighbour-Towne of Amptill,
where he first frequented Gods Temple; to hear a Sermon, and to offer up a
sacrifice to God; and then consulted with the Justices, and Officers of trust,
for the peace of the Country: There might you see every Thursday as at the
Poole of Bethesda, the Orphant and the widow, the poor and afflicted, seeking
and finding of comfort: There the Rec^sant and ill-affected subject, were
conuented, examined, persuaded; and if all would not serve, restrained, from
infecting the credulous multitude.

So that Gods Religion was countenanced, the oppressed were succored, the
darnell was severed, the peace and civility of the Country, by such a solemn
and ordinary meeting, was maintained.

If I speak false, accuse me: If I speak truth, testify with me: for many of
you know the substance, when I remember only the shadow.

For his Oeconomicall virtues, as he was (...), a Lord of a Family: three
things are observed by the Philosopher.

First, the choice of a wife.

Next, the entertainment of servants.

The third, the care of our estate, that we be not hurtful, but helpefull
unto others.

The Wife is the first: for she either is our helper, or our tempter; our good,
or our evil Angel.

But before I can speak a word of her, of whom I learned first to speak, I
must make Conf. 1.
Saint Austens confession. Pudet me illius aetatis, in qua me vixisse non
memini: I am ashamed of my infancy amongst you, in which I do not remember
that ever I lived.

But could I remember, what some of you have told me, (whom I am bound to
believe) I should here give public thanks to God, that has called me to his
Ministry, upon this occasion Collater ally to honor her memory, who for her
recreation, vouchsafed to instruct me in the Alphabet and elements of learning.

I beseech you give way a little to my affectionate thankfulness, if I
interueyne our Earls honors, with his wives virtues.

Her first life's blood was derived from ancient Gentry, but her service in
Court, her excellence of body, and graces of mind, transplanted her into the
stock of more ancient Nobility.

Our Earl found her the Widow of that great Earl, Edward of Derby, found, and
a while kept her, a most beloved, loving, gracious, compassionate, religious,
and noble Lady: whose untimely death without issue, divided a pair of
honorable Turtles, divided their bodies, but not their souls; 34. years he
spent, as a mourner of her Funerals; divided their bodies, but not their loves;
for though her body lies buried at great Gaddesden, which necessity did
enforce; yet all that Jacob could do for Rachel, he has done for her, in
joining her pillar upon his own sepulcher, making one individual monument for
them both, in this Chapel; to testify to all the world that happy union, of
which, neither life nor death could make a disjunction.

Such was his Lady, such was their love.

I would to God the discontentments of great Lords and Ladies did not make it
remarkable. What a shame is it, when our honorable marriages are like that of
Pompey with Iulia, of Anthony with Octauia: which are not made to unite hearts,
but houses; nor to join affections, but factions: the issue being as fatal,
as the beginning was unfaithful? But I had rather power forth prayers to God
for reformation; then spend unregarded words of reprehension.

Let it suffice, that they there lie together in one grave, of whom you cannot
judge, whether their honor were greater, or their love.

The next thing in a family, is the entertainment of servants: which this
Honorable person knew best to choose, because himself had been a servant.
Though he was borne of a most Noble family, yet being a younger brother, (as
the unjust, yet usual custom of our Country is,) he was compelled by
necessity to serve in a Noble Family: but after, was preferred to the service
of the late Queen of happy memory. In both which he gained such experien^e,
that he knew with Jacob how to reform his household: that no Idolatrous
Baalite, no Idle-bellied Cretian, no profane Esau, no Ruffian Lamech, no
blasphemous Rabsache, no inordinate persen, should by his will and knowledge,
shroud their abominable vices under his Honorable virtues. He well knew the
sharp speech of Dioge. Laer. in V^a Arist.
Aristippus, who replied to a wonderer of a great train of servants: At plures
muscas in culina: he had not (says the Philosopher) so many servants in his
Hall, as he had flies in his Kitchen. Servants, who are fed like great horses,
only for pomp and show, are usually irreligious and unprofitable creatures.
But those servants whom he entertained, those he trusted, accounting it a
French lightness, to intertaine a few Pyes, and to change them as often as
their Liueries.

His ancient servants, fit for a settled and an Honorable house, sufficient for
their number, and extraordinary for their qualities; whereof some had
continued with him ten years, some twenty, some thirty, some forty
years, those (according to the means and measure of his estate) he rewarded
at his death. Others, who served him less time, he honored either with a
Ring of remembrance, or comforted with half a years wages for their present
maintenance. Generally he commended them all to his Honorable Brother, that
howsoever they had lost a loving Lord, yet they might find a Noble Master.

It was a great part of his care at death, that his servants might be provided
for the means of life.

I must not forget to conclude this point, with the remembrance of another
Legacy. Our Noble Earl did so remember his own servants, as he did not forget
Gods poor servants: 50. pounds he allotted by his will, to be distributed to
Christ's brethren, to feed them, to clothe them, or in such manner to comfort
them, as their necessity required, and his brothers judgment should order;
that as his soul was to be comforted by the blood of the Lamb: So, (as Job
speaks) the loins of the poor might be warmed with the fleece of his
sheep.

The third point was the care of his estate, which, as he publishes in the
Record of his Will and Testament, he found almost ruinated, by the vain
prodigality of Richard Earl of Kent. He knowing therefore that Honor without
means, is but a glorious burden, but the Tower of Babel, the seminary of
confusion, he made a careful frugalitie, the fuel of his continual
hospitality.

Great things by providence are attained, by prodigality ruinated.

You read in the 15. of Luke of a prodigal son, in the 16. of Luke, of a
prodigal servant: and prodigality brought both to beggary; the one with shame
Luke 15. 21.
came crying to his father; the other said, he was driven to Luke 16. 3. 4.
cozen his Master.

Our honorable Earl therefore professes in his Will and Testament, that he
did not build yonder Monument of stone for any vain glory, but as an Emblem to
his posterity, that their house was ruinated by Richards prodigality, was
restored by Henry's frugalitie.

Such a curse follows Absolon:

Such a blessing follows Joseph.

I call not evil good, I apparel not vice with the Livery of virtue. It was
not baseness, but providence that laid the foundation; It was not oppression,
but time, that finished this building.

You of this Parish know his voluntary contribution to public charges, whereof
he was freed by Law. You of the Country know his perpetual houskeeping, his
relieuing of the poor, his feasting of whole Towns at public times, and
solemnities.

He knew full well, that a man may better cheap keep a constant and good
house, then an unconstant and wicked harlot. In one word, Jacob provided, and
God prospered. But all these Heroical, political, Oeconomicall virtues are
common unto Traian, as well as to a Christian; all these things without grace,
are not a natural, but a painted flower of glory.

Except we can find that he was as good a servant of God, as he was a Lord of
men; omnis humana Iustitia simil^s est corpori caput non habenti: All humane
Justice (says Lactantius) is but like a body without a head; Is but the
shadow, Is not the substance of virtue.

Let us leave him therefore as a Lord of men, and consider him as a servant of
God.

To express which attribute of a servant, I find two other words in the Text;
the first does express the duty of life: the second does afford security in
death.

I Secundum verbum, according to Gods word in living. 2. In pace, according to
Gods will in dying.

His life was secundum verbum, according to Gods word, whether you consider his
public or his private devotions.

His public devotions in favoring and honoring the Lords Prophets; like
another Obadiah, he fed them at his own Table, he used them with all respect
of their calling, he accounted them as the Angels of Gods Church, and not as
many politikes do, the basest of Ieroboams Priests: He knew that those that
served at Gods Altar, were not to be accounted as the retriment of the people.
It being an infallible consequence, that he who despises Gods Ministers, does
contemn God in his Ministers. If Christ be Christ, Christians will honor the
Ambassadors of Christ.

Atheism is the mother, and contempt the daughter of profaneness.

Next, his devotion appeared in the doctrine and discipline of truth* against
superstitious Idolatry, and ignorant novelty.

Let me record what I know, what he knew and professed, ( For although Iuy
cling about the Oak, yet is not the fruit of the Oak.) It cannot be denied,
but that some that had more zeal then knowledge, and I fear (notwithstanding
their frequent lip-labor) more knowledge, then conscience, (I am sure more
sacrifice, then obedience) shrouded themselves under his protection, which
through the defect of his hearing, he could not avoid, being compelled to
entertain such, as the partiality of some about him did commend unto him; but
for his own judgment, he ever desired men of religion, void of ostentation;
men of conscience, free from faction: accounting the established Apostolical
discipline of the Church of England, to be preferred before the lunacies, and
Fancies of Consistorian confusion.

Lastly, his public frequenting of Gods Temple, (not his private Chapel)
where (through want of hearing) he was rather a Spectator, then an Actor, gave
so good example to his household, to the Inhabitants of the Town and Country,
as the good that came thereby, did testify to all the world, how much it
concerns every great person, to be either a Michael, a Leader of Angels, or a
Lucifer, a Captain of Devils: I express my self. Truth and Religion seek no
corners, no woods, no chambers, no places, no persons, of darkness. God does
give that blessing to the public Temple, that he does not give to a private
Chapel; Indeed they are Chapels of ease, more for their ease, then their
honor. As though we cannot adore the God of heaven, except we be attended like
Beronice, with pomp on earth. If at the day of Judgment we shall all stand in
the Valley of Iehosaphat: If the four and twenty Elders do cast their
Crowns at the feet of the Lamb: I beseech you, must we (for flate) contemn
the public assemblies? Our most noble, most humble Earl, knew, that in
respect of our sins, the blood of the poor Virgins Son does equally wash
the soul of a Lazar, as well as of Caesar. Therefore as there is but one common
salvation, so there ought to be a common, and a public, and a joint humble
Invocation.

His private devotions were performed without a Trumpet: I will not make them
more by Art, then they were in heart. Pray he did: pray he did every morning
and evening; pray he did in his own person; pray he did in his Chamber,
without any other witness, then the witness of a broken spirit to God. Some
one (necessarily) saw, and observed him, (as Daniel was observed to pray
toward Jerusalem,) but he did not pray to be seen, though he was seen when
he prayed. As Christ went up to Mount Oliuet, which mountain he chose for
solitariness, not for greatness.

His prayers ended, his body refreshed, his mind quieted, the rest of the day
he spent in reading the Scriptures and the Commentaries of holy writers, in
reuoluing the Histories of Church and State. In few words, the vanities of the
world did not draw him from a constant and continual course of Piety. So that
the latter part of his life, was like the daily revolution of the Sun, in a
seasonable and infallible and a certain Sphere of Virtues.

His death was the last Scene of all his labors, Death.
which (as I was informed) was like to Simeons in the comfortable peace of his
soul. Great is Gods mercy, when the earthly Tabernacle of the body does so
sensibly decay, that we find our deaths, before we feel it. His body, you
know, was ploughed with furrows of age, which caused him to keep his bed,
before any (but himself) saw his period. A Physician was sent for, whose
presence is mixed with fear and comfort; but to him, who was prepared, his
Physician brought neither comfort, nor fear.

He rejoiced, that he trusted not with Asa in his Physician, but in his God.
And according to that confidence, he exhorted his affectionate brother, with
words of grace and piety; He put his house in order like Hezekiah, and with
great patience expected the hour of his dissolution. His want of hearing
excluded all possibility of external comfort, but he felt a Comforter within,
which none can tell, but he that enioyes him; yet the inward joy of his
salvation, sent forth (as Austen speaks of the Egyptians) quasdam
eiaculationes: certain winged darts unto Heaven. His heart was like a Furnace,
and his words (though short) were as so many sparks of devotion. I have a
relation from his Chaplain, to whom in private he disclosed the burden of his
conscience.

His body being decayed with age, and wearied with sickness, our Adversary,
who is a seeking Lion, sought to devour him: His private confession showed the
particularitie of his temptation.

The Devil presents to his melancholy fancy, the power of Witches; tempting
him to conceive, that for his sins, God had forsaken him, and given him over
to the malice of Sorcerers; striving to make him think that this his weakness
and sickness, was hot a defect of nature, but an effect of Satan. Thus was our
good Earl winnowed; but he that prayed for Peter.
Peter, prayed for Henry, that his faith might not fail.

And fail it did not; Gods Spirit brought unto his memory, the mercy of God
to David repenting, the power of God against Balaams cursing; and now he found
the comfortable fruit of reading the Scriptures, in them he found Balm of
Gilea^, comfort and consolation against the power of hell and darkness. He
concluded an humble confession, with a firm resolution: that God would be
merciful (as to David,) that God would be powerful (against Balaam) that God
would not forsake him, notwithstanding his sins; that he would not forsake
God, notwithstanding his sickness.

If any man d^m^und and say, Is this the peace of Simeon, where there is such
temptation? I answer; that peace is the end of a combat; In that soul where
there is no spiritual co^bat, there is no spiritual peace.

For as we teach against the Church of Rome, that our faith is not swallowed
up of doubting: So we teach according to truth, that a true faith is troubled
with doubting. When a man considers his own demerits, then he justly doubts
of mercy: when a man considers Christ his merits, he firmly trusts in Gods
mercy. As in a battle, all the time of the skirmishing, there is doubt: But
when the enemy flies and is put to rout, then there is no doubt. So in the
soul, all the while the Devil flings his fiery darts, there is doubt: but
when he is conquered by the sword of the Spirit, then there is no doubt. As
therefore you read of the Poole of Bethesda; First, the Poole was troubled,
and then the sick were healed: so this noble Earl first felt a troubled
spirit, to try him, and then the joy of the holy Spirit to comfort him.

And surely it was the holy Spirit; for it never left him, after it had found
him. The last words that ever man heard him speak, were three Amens to his
Chapleins prayers, concluding his life as the holy Ghost does the Scripture,
Amen, Revel. 22. 20. Amen, Revel. 22. 21. As Christ concluded his Cross, Amen,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. To which Paradise, I
doubt not, but his blessed soul is gone before. God grant that ours may follow
after; That we may all depart in peace, to the fruition of eternal happiness.

Amen, Amen, Amen.

