AN EXPOSITION OF ALL THE PRINCIPAL SCRIPTVRES USED in our English Liturgy.

TOGETHER WITH A REASON why the Church did choose the same.

By JOHN BOYS Doctor of Divinity.

Proverbs 1. 8. My son hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy
mothers teaching. August. epist. 118. cap. 5. Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etiam
quae adiuuat vtilitate, perturbat nouitate. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX
KYNGSTON, and are to be sold by William Aspley, at the sign of the Parot in
Paul's Churchyard. 1610.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD BANCROFT, LORD Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, Chancellor of the
University of Oxenford, and one of his Majesty's most honorab^e privy
Counsel; my very good Lord.
AS Christ, Tertullian, vti M^ldonat. in 6. Joan. 44.
so the Church, and as the Church, so the Liturgy of the Church is crucified
between two malefactors: on the left hand Papists, on the right hand
Schismatics; the one cannot say wherein it is truly Letter of Pius 5. to Q.
Elizabeth, and Brist^w motive 34
deficient, the other will not say but that it is efficient, under which the
Gospel has so prospered, as that Dod exposit. prefac. Commandments.
England is swept from Babel, and Jerusalem situated in our own country: yet
both as at a common Turk shoot bitter arrows against it. And the reason
hereof is very plain, because every Pope is an open Schismatik, and every
Schismatic a secret Pope. These Foxes (as Prae^^t. Comment. in Gal^t.
Luther speaks) are tied together by the tails, although by their heads they
seem to be contrary; combined in faction, howsoever different in faith.
Against the Romanist I use a sword, against the Nouelist a buckler, against
both armor of proof: for these Scholiall annotations in part descrie, but my
larger expositions of the Gospels and Epistles hereafter shall more fully
describe, their malicious or ignorant misconstruing of our Church. In the mean
while and for ever I wish all happiness to your Grace: and rest your

Humble servant to be commanded in the business of God and his Church, JOHN
BOYS.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Tract ensuing.
1 The Ministers Inuitatorie. page 1 2 The Confession and absolution of sins.
2 3 An exposition of the Pater Noster. 3 4 An exposition of O Lord open our
lips. 7 5 The Hymn of Gloria Patri. 12 6 An exposition of the 95. Psalm. 13 7
Te Deum and Benedicite omnia operae. 21 8 An exposition of the Benedictus. 22 9
An exposition of the 100. Psalm. 28 10 An exposition of the Creed. 30 11
Dominus vobiscum. 48 12 Cum spiritu tuo, and other Responsories. 49 13 An
exposition of the Magnificat. 51 14 An exposition of the 98. Psalm. 62 15 An
exposition of the Song of Simeon. 66 16 An exposition of the 67. Psalm. 76 17
The Creed of Athanasius and the Letanie. 83 18 An exposition of the Decalogue.
84 19 The peoples offering. 108 20 An exposition of the words of Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11. 28. containing the sum of the Ministers exhortation before the
Communion. 109 21 Sursam corda. 118 22 Gloria in excelsis. 119 23 An exposition
of the Peace of God, etc. and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. 120 24 Amen.
124
THE MINISTERS INVITATORIE.
At what time soever a sinner does repent etc.
ALL these texts of holy writ premised, are (as it were the bells of Aaron) to
stir up devotion, and to toll all in to Gods house. The whole ring consists
of two notes especially, Man's misery. Gods mercy.



The which are two chief motives unto Luther. loc. com. tit. de Inuocat.
prayer, as we find, precept Matthew. 6. 9. Prayye after this manner; Our Father
which art in heaven. Bernard. ser. de not. B. Mariae qui inscribitur (...)
aquae ductu.
Admonens adoptionis diuinae, Pater Noster; and peregrinationis terrenae, Quies
in coelis; vt simul intelligamus egere nos auxilio, quia peregrini; and
fiduciam petendi concipiamus, quia filij dei.

And pattern Luke 15: want and woe in the leaud son, pity and plenty in the
good father, occasioned repentance, never repented. Of the one it is commonly
said; Nathan Cbytraeus in viatico.
Oration sine malis, est quasi auis, alis. Of the other; I will come into thine
house even upon the multitude of thy mercy: Psalm. 5. 7. To thee will I sing,
because thou art my refuge, and merciful God. Psalm. 59. 17. In the vulgar
Latin; Deus meus misericordia mea. Whereupon I^ l^cum Tow. 8. sol. 414. lege
plura. Dear^ly beloved.
Augustine; O nomen sub quo nemin^ desperandum est.

Wherefore the Minister out of a due consideration of both, exhorts his
people in an Apostolical style, to confess their sins humbly to the Lord,
who is able to hear, because Almighty; Almighty and most merciful Father.
and willing to help, because most merciful.

The Confession of sins.
THe matter and manner of which Confession all other Liturgies approve, both
ancient (as the Liturgies of S. Margarinus Ribl. oth^^. pat. tom. 4* col 21.
(...), of S. Ibidem col. 37.
Basil, of the Col. 65.
Syrians, of the Col. ^* 10.
Ethiopians) and modern (as the Scottish, Geneuian, Imprinted at Middleburgh
1586.
English admonitioners (...) form of common prayer, Discourse of the troubles
of Franckford, page 7.
Italian, Spanish, Dutch) all which allot Confession of sins a place, and this
place principally. The reason hereof is taken out of Gods own book, Proverbs
18. 17. Iustus in exordi^ sermonis accusator est sui. The just man in the
beginning of his speech is an accuser of himself: for so read S. Ambrose ser.
4. upon the 118. Psalm. S. Hi^^om. lib. 1. contra Pelagian. Melancthon in loc,
and from the practice of Gods own people the Jews: as that noble gentleman
Philip Mornai notes in lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 3.

The Nouelists only mislike the Ministers absolution, and therefore in the
Conference at Hampton Court, Ian. 14. 1603. they gained so much as to have it
in a more mild term called, Remission of sins. Herein resembling the people
of Pimenta de statu rei Christian. in India Orien.
Bengala, who are so much afraid of Tigers, as that they dare not call them
Tigers, but give them other gentle names. Ne si propriam nomenclatur am
tribuant, co^tinu^ dilacerentur. Concerning absolution, see the Gospel
Dominic. 19. post Trin.

The Pater Noster.
THis Prayer excels all other in Bellarmin. de bonis op^ribus in particular.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
many respects, as being the Tertull, lib. de orat. cap. 1.
Gospels Epitome, compiled by Wisdom it self, so Cyp^. ser. de orat. Dom.
large for matter, so short for phrase, so sweet for order, as that it
deserves worthily to have both the Best and the Most place in our Liturgy.
The T^rtull. vbi supra.
First, as guide to the rest: the Most, as a necessary Hooker Eccles. polit.
lib. 5.. 35.
complement to supply whatsoever is wanting in other: and therefore it is used
at the end of the Letanie, at the end of the Communion, at the end o^ Baptism,
at the end of other sacred actions: (as Durandus rational* ^iuin. ^ffie. lib.
5. cap. (...). 17.
one fitly) Tanquam sal omnium diuinorum officiorum.

It has three parts: 1. A proeme; Our Father, etc. 2. A petition; Hallowed be
thy name, etc. 3. A conclusion; For thine is kingdom, etc.

In the first note those three things required in an absolute agent: 1. Will,
because he is ours: for every one wishes well unto his own, and he that
does not is worse then an Ins^del: 1. Tim. 5. 8 2. Skill, because a father.
Your father knows whereof you stand in need: Matthew. 6. 8. 3. Power, because
in Heaven. Strength comes from heaven* 1. Macchab. 3. 19.

So that if we ask, we shall have; if seek, we shall find; if knock, it
shall be opened unto us: because God is a father, Our father, our father in
heaven.

Our] Admonishes us of Cyp. vbi supra and Ambros. lib. 5. cap. 4.
desacram^ntis.
mutual love; for without love, there is no true faith, and without true faith,
no true prayer: Romans 14. 23. As the Serpent does cast up all his poison before
he drink, so we must degorge our malice before we pray.

Father] Used here rather ^r^inus Cat. tit. de precat. and Magdcburg. cent. 1.
col. 139.
essentially, then personally. So, God is a father in creation: Deuteronomy. 32. 6.

In education, Esai. 1. 2: (...) quasi Germanus Patriarc. Constant. exposit.
oral. dom.
(...); happily more fitly, (...).

In instruction, Inwardly by his Spirit: Romans 8. 26. Outwardly by his
Preachers: Matthew. 10. 20.

In compassion: Psalm. 103. 13.

In correction: Heb. 12. 6. Glossa in loc.
Quiexcipitur e numero flagellatorum, excipitur e numero filiorum.

In years: Dan. 7. 9.

But a father in respect of his adoption Cyp. August. Ambros. etc.
more principally: Romans 8. 15. 16.

In Heaven Mystical: as Lib. ^. de s^r. dom. in monte. tom. 4. fol. 81^.
Augustine and vbi sup. coelum est ibi vbi cessat culpa.
Ambrose construe it: in holy men of heavenly conversation. Who are his proper
1. Cor. 3. 16.
temples and Heb. 3. 6.
houses in whom he will dwell: Ioh. 14. 23. Material: as other generally: for
albeit he be present euere where, yet he does manifest himself to blessed
souls and Angels in heaven, and to us in glory from heaven especially: Psalm.
19. 1. Genesis 19. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.

Petition.
THe petition in the judgments of Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 20. 35.
Maldonat and lansen. in loc.
neotericall authors has six branches: whereof three concern our love,
wherewith we love God in himself, and three wherewith we love our selves in
God: in Caictan. c^m. in 22ae. Thom. q. 83. art. 9.
sign whereof the pronowne Thy, is affixed to the three first, thy name, thy
kingdom, thy will: but the pronownes Us, and Ours, to the rest. Our bread, our
trespasses, lead us not etc.

Or (as Albertus and Gorran. in Matthew. 6.
other divide) the petition is, Precatio bonorum. Deprecatio maloru^.

A request for good things, whereof the First concerns Gods glory, Hallowed
be thy name. Rest our good, Gorran. Guido manipul. curat. vel vt alij summum,
medium, infimum.
of Glory; Thy kingdom etc. Grace; Thy will etc. Nature; Give us this day our
daily bread.


A deprecation of evil, which is of Tertull. lib. 2. cont. Marcion. cap. 14.
two sorts: Malum culpae, an evil which is sin Past, Forgive us our trespasses
etc. To come; Lead us not into temptation.
Malum poena, an evil which is a punishment, for sin, Deliver us from
Agreeable to the Churches exposition in the common Catechism: and Melanct^on
loc. com. tit. inuocat.
evil Internal, and hellish conscience. External, bodily dangers. Eternal,
everlasting death.


In one word, from all that thou see evil for us Bellarm. Cat. cap. 4.
, be it prosperity, or adversity: so we pray in the Letanie; Good Lord
deliver us in all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, etc.
August. epist. 121. cap. 11.
Nondum enim sumus in eo bono, vbinullum patiemur malum.

(...) rational. divine. lib. 4. cap. 47.. 8.
Other affirm that the first three petitions are concerning the life to come:
the last three concerning the life present: that which is in the middle, Give
us this day our daily bread, concerning both.

These seven (if we make so many petitions) are Beauxamis ^ar. Euang. tom. 2.
fol. 220.
correspondent to the seven gifts of the blessed spirit, Esai. 11. 2. and seven
beatitudes, Matthew. 5. Durandus vbi supra. 9.
against the seven capital sins: De religione Christian. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ramus has observed that this prayer answers the Decalogue.

God is our father: Ergo, we must have no other gods.

In heaven: Ergo, no graven Image, etc.

Hallowed be thy name: Ergo, not take his name in vain.

Thy kingdom come, thy will be done: Ergo, we must sanctify the Sabbath, and
worship him according to his word.

Give us this day our daily bread, that having sufficient, we may be rather
helpful, Honor thy father, etc. then hurtful, by wronging our neighbor, in
deed, Thou shall not kill, not commit adultery, not steal: In word, Thou shall
not bear false witness, etc.

Lead us not into temptation: Ergo, not covet our neighbors house, nor his
wife etc.

Forgive us our trespasses: Ergo, bound to keep the whole law: which
occasioned Loc. com. tit. de inuocat.
Luther to say, Docet oration dominica nos esse quotidianos peccatores, and
totam vitam esse poenitentiam: all our life to be nothing else but a Bernard.
ser. 3. de Ieiunio quadrages.
Lent to prepare our selves against the Sabbath of our death, and Easter of our
resurrection.

Conclusion.
SOme cavil at our Service book for omitting this clause; yet Institut. lib.
3. cap. 20.. 47.
Calvin does acknowledge that it is not extant in any Latin copies: of which
Annot. in locum.
Erasmus and Iansen. and Maldonat. in loc. D. Fulke answer to Rhem. praefa.
sect. 38.
other Divines have sundry conjectures. Howsoever, the Church is blameless,
seeing our Matthew. 6. 13.
Bible, which is Iudex quo, receives it, and the Minister, which is Iudex qui,
the speaking book, does usually repeat it: and so saying it, in their opinion
we do well: and not saying it, according to the pattern of all the Latin,
and some of the Greek Fathers, and of S. Luke himself, not ill.

It contains A Reason of our prayer; for thine is kingdom, etc. A
testification of our assurance that God will hear our prayer, Amen.

Thine is] Earthly Princes have kingdom, power, and glory from God, Dan. 2.
37. but God has all these from, and in himself: 1. Chron. 29. 11. Seeing he
has interest in all things, it is our duty to come unto him for every thing:
and as he has right to all, so power to dispose of all: and therefore we
cannot do any thing we desire, but by power received of him. And if his be
power and kingdom, then it follows necessarily, that his is all glory.
Therefore we must invoke his holy name, that hereby we may give him his
due. This one duty is Alpha, and Omega, the first thing we must beg, hallowed
be thy name: and the last we must perform, Thine is glory: for euer]
Genebrardus in ^lt. Psalm.
It is a Rabbi^icall conceit that the last Psalm has thirteen Halleluiahs
answering thirteen properties in God, specified, Exodus 34. 6. 7. Now in that
the Prophet does begin and end with Halleluiah, stirring us up in every verse
of that Psalm, and in every sentence of every verse, to praise the Lord, he
does insinuate that this one is our only service: for whereas after twelve
Halleluiahs a thirteenth is added, it does signify, that when we have done
all, we must begin again with Gods praise, that as his mercy is from
everlasting, to everlasting, from everlasting predestination, to everlasting
glorificati^n; so our praise for ever and ever: here we must begin the Psalm
of glory, but because God has appointed in this short life, that we should
not sing in Longs, but (as Musicians speak) in briefes and semibriefes, it
must be continued in the quier of heaven hereafter, or in this world for ever
and ever (...)
intentionally, though not actually. For as the wicked (...) comp^nd. lib. 7.
cap. 21.
if he could live for ever, would sin for ever; so the good man, if God
should suffer him to breathe on earth for ever and ever, he would not cease to
serve him ever and ever.

Amen.] The which word is the Hieron. in 6 Matthew.
seal of all our petitions, to make them authentical: importing Church Cat.
Musculus, Vrsinus, etc.
both assent, and assurance that our requests shall be granted. And therefore
(as Perkins upon the Lo^ds prayer.
one notes aptly) this ^men, is of more value then all the rest, by how much
our faith is more excellent then our desire: for it is a testification of our
faith, whereas all the petitions are only testifications of our desire. De vita
Christi part. 1. cap. 37.
Ludolphus has comprised all in this short paraphrase.

PAter noster: Excelsus in creatione, suauis in a more, dives in haereditate;
qui es in coelis: speculum aeternitatis, corona iucunditatis, the saurus
felicitatis. Sanctificetur nomen tuum: vt nobis sit mel in ore, melos in aure,
iubilum in cord. Adueniat regnum tuum: non illud modo potentiae, quod nunquam
euertitur, sed istud gratiae, quod saepius auertitur: adueniat ergo iucundum
sine permixtione, tranquillum sine perturbatione, securum sine amissione. Fiat
voluntas, non nostra, sed tua, sicut in Coelis ab Angelis, sic etiam in terra
ab hominibus: vt omnia quae non amas, odio habeamus; quae diligis, diligamus;
quae tibi placent, impleamus. Panem, doctrinalem, sacramentalem, victualem,
nostrum: sed ne putetur a nobis, dicimus da n^bis: quotidianum, qui sufficiat
nobis. Et dimitte nobis debita nostra. Quae cunque contra te commi^^^mus, aut
contra proximos, aut contra nosmet ipsos. Sicut and nos ^^^^ttimus debitoribus
nostris, qui nos offende^unt, vel in verbis, vel in personis, vel in rebus. Et
ne nos inducas in tentationem; mundi, carnis, Diaboli. Sed libera nos a malo,
praesenti, praeterito, futuro. Haec potes, quia tuum est regnum and potentia;
haec vis, quia tua gloria, nunc and in secula, Amen.

Psalm. 51. 15. Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise.
AS man is a little world in the great, so the tongue a great world in the
little. Hieron. poster. exposit. in Psalm. 119. (...)
Nihil habet medium, aut grande malum est, aut grande bonum. If good (as
Eunapius said of that famous Rhetorician) a walking library, a whole
University of edifying knowledge: but if bad (as Cap. 3. 6.
S. James does tell us) a world of wickedness. No Plutarch. Aesop.
better dish for Gods Pars optima digna quae sit hostia. Prudent. him. de
R^man. marty^^.
public service, when it is well seasoned: again, none worse when ill handled.

So that if we desire to be doore-keepers in Gods house, let us entreat God
first to be a doore-keeper in our house, that he would shut the wicket of our
mouth against unsavory speeches, and open the door of our lips, that our
mouth may show forth his praise. This was David's prayer, and ought to be thy
practice, wherein observe three points especially:

Who: the Lord.

What: open my lips.

Why: that my mouth may show thy praise.

For the first; man of himself cannot untie the strings of his own stammering
tongue, but it is God only which opens a Colos. 2. 3.
door of utterance. When we have a good thought it is (as the school does
speak) gratia infusa; when a good word, gratia effusa; when a good work,
gratia diffusa. Man is as a lock, the spirit of God as a key, Apocal. 3. 7.
which opens and no man shuts; again, shuts, and no man opens. He
did open the heart of Lydia to conceive well, Acts 16. the ears of the Prophet
to hear well, Esaias 50. the eyes of Elishaes servant to see well, 2. Kings 6.
and here the lips of David to speak well. And therefore whereas in the former
verse he might seem too peremptory, saying, my tongue shall sing of thy
righteousness; he does as it were correct himself by this latter edition, and
second speech: O Lord, I find my self, of my self, most unable to sing or
say, but open thou my lips, and touch thou my tongue, and then I am sure my
mouth shall show thy praise.

This doctrine shows in general our dependence on God, in Acts 17 28.
whom we live, and move, and have our being; from whom only comes James 1. 17.
every good and perfect gift.

Man is Gods image: Genesis 1. 26. Some Did^^us de la Vega. con. 7. super Psalm 4.
^^nitential. and Ol^aster in cap. 1. Genesis
translators use the word which signifies a shadow. Now as an image or a
shadow does only move as the body whereof it is a likeness; when the body
does stretch forth an arm, the shadow presently has an arm; when the body
does put forth a leg, the shadow has a leg. So man in all his actions, as
a shadow depends on God, as the sole foundation of all his Dan. 5. 23.
being.

In more particular, this overthrows all Locus contra Pelagian^s, vti
Genebrardus in loc.
workemongers, and (if I may so speak) babbling word-mongers. If a man cannot
open his own lips to praise God, much less direct his own heart to please
God: if not able to tune his tongue, let him not presume to turn his soul.

And if a man cannot open his mouth aright, let him not pick it with a false
key, but rather pray with David in the 141. Psalm: Set a watch O Lord before
my mouth, and keep the doors of my lips. As it is absurd in building to make
the porch bigger then the house; so, monstrous in nature, when we commit
burglarie, breaking the doors and pulling down the Ecclesiasticus ^8. 24.
bars of our mouth, that the narrow passage may be made wide for our big
words, and high conceits. A foul fault when our words are either too many, or
too mighty: Ecclesiastes 5. 1.

2. Point what: Open my lips.

David Psalm. 14. 5.
elsewhere thinks our mouth too much open, and S. Cap. 3. 8.
James that our tongue is too glib and unruly. Lingua facile volat, and ideo
facile violat (says Sermon. de Triplici custodia manus, linguae, cordis.
Bernard.) In old age, when all other members are dull and stiff, the Erasmus
com. de lingua* and August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 37. quotidiana ^ornax est
humana lingua.
tongue notwithstanding is quick and nimble. What need any then pray for
opening their lips? I answer with the Prophet Jeremy, chap 4. verse. 22.
They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. Men have
tongue enough to speak ill, an open mouth to blaspheme God, and slander their
neighbor; but like Plinies Astomi, no mouth, no lips, no tongue, possessed
with a dumb devil when they should speak well.

Hierome, In locum.
Basil, Euthymius, and other ancient Doctors observe, that natural
corruptions, and actual sins are the very rampires which stop this free
passage. So David himself does expound himself, verse. 14. Deliver me from
blood guiltiness, O God, and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. His
unthankfulness did cry: his adultery cry: his murder cry unto the Lord
for revenge: but alas, himself was mute, till God in exceeding great mercy
did stop the ^outhes of his clamorous adversaries, and gave him leave to speak.

Here we note the great wisdom of the Church assigning this place to this
versicle in this book: namely, before the Ps^^^es, Lessons and Collects: and
yet after the Confession and absolution of our sins, insinuating that our
mouths are silenced only by transgression, and opened only by God: and
therefore when we meet together in the Temple to be thankful unto him, and
to speak good of his name, we must crave first, that according to the
multitude of his rich mercies; he would pardon all our old sins, and then
put into our mouth a new song: that, as the service is holy, the time holy,
the place holy; so we likewise the Pulchra non est la^s in ore (...). Hieron.
in. loc.
persons holy, who sing, Holy, holy, holy, etc.

Deus faciat t^m commodum, quam Ecclesia fecit accommodum. Our fathers in this
imitated the learned Hebrew Doctors, inioyning that this verse should be said
at the beginning of every prayer, in Genebrardus in locum.
tractatu Berachoth: that is, their Liturgy, being the first part of the
Talmud, as Pet. Galatinus lib. 1. cap. 5. do Arcanis: and Saxtus Sene^sis
Bibliothec. lib. 2 page 121.

My lips] A part for the whole, sufficient ability to praise God: Ex
abundant^a Mat. 12. 34.
cordis os loquitur. He does entreat God then, as before, for a clean heart,
and a right spirit, that his M^sculus in locum.
old joys of conscience may be renewed, and all the whole man thoroughly
repaired, a good Luc^s Lossius in locum.
desire to begin, a ready will to continue, a constant resolution to end in
Gods holy service.

The key of the mouth ought not to stand in the door of the lips, but to be
kept in the cabinet of the mind.

For Ecclesiasticus 21.^6.
the heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their
heart. David therefore does desire first a new verse 10.
soul, then a new so^g. The tongue is ambassador of the mind; as often as we
speak without meditation before, so often the messenger runs without his
errand. And idle words are not little sins, of which one day we shall give
great Mat. 12. 36.
account.

The mind then and the mouth must go together: in civil communication, he
that will not speak idly, must think what he speaks; and he that will not
speak falsely, must speak what he thinks. In holy devotion, God must be
praised upon w^ll Psalm. 150. 5.
tuned Cymbals, and loud Cymbals, in his quier: first tune well, a prepared
(...)
heart, then ^ound well* a cheerful tongue like the Psalm. 45. 2.
pen of a ready writer. Albeit mental prayer at sometime, and in some place,
be sufficient: yet Thom. 22 ^. qu^st. 83. art. 12
vocal, in Gods public worship, is necessary, to stir up and blow the coals
of zeal both in our selves and others. Open lips in open service.

Why: 3. part. That my mouth may show thy praise. That as of Romans 11. 36.
thee, and through thee, and for thee are all things; so to thee may be prais^
for evermore. See Pater Noster.

God is of himself, and in himself so great, so good, as that we cannot any
way detract or add to his glory. Nec August. in Psalm. 134. Non (...)
benedictione, nec in^^uitur maledict. nostra. Id. ^ in Psalm. 66.
^elior si (...), nec deterior si vituperaueri^. I answer, though we cannot
make Gods praise greater in it self, yet we may make it s^eme greater unto
other; it is our du^ie to she^forth his praise in all our words and actions
too: for albeit we cannot make a new God, and a new Christ, (as the Papists
d^e) yet o^r good example, and gracious speech, may make l^t^le Christ a great
Christ; occasion all those with whom we converse to magnify the Lord now, who
little regarded him before. See the (...).

This annunciation of praise consists of often repetition and particular
enumeration of Gods especial goodness toward us. In locum tom. 8. fol. 339.
Augustine therefore does gloss the text thus: La^dem tuam, qu^a creatus s^m.
Laud^m t^am, quia vt consi^erer iam monitus sum. La^dem tuam. quia peccans non
derelictus sum. Laudem tuam, quia vt secur^s essem mundatus sum.

Hugo Cardinal. ^n. Luc. cap. 10. 27.
Hugo c^mprehends all, which concerns us all, in four words: God is to be
praised, qui Creator (...) esse, Conseruator in esse, Recreator in (...)
Glorificator in optimo esse: qui August. de lib. arbitrio lib. 3. cap. 15.
non reddit Deo faciendo quod debet, reddet ei, patiendo quod debet.

The whole text does teach all men generally the language of Cana^n Esaias 19. 18.
, that is, what and how to speak, that their mout^ may glorify God, and
edify their brethren. Especiall^ Pastors to Esaias 50.^.
minister a word in time to the weary; so to tune their notes, as that they may
be like apples of Prou* 25. (...).
gold (...) of ^iluer. In all their sermons to preach Jesus for Jesus. hunting
not after their own, but his glory Lord open my lips that my mouth may show
not My praise, but Thy praise, says David.

Gloria Patri.
THis Hymn is of good credit, and great antiquity. De religiare Christian.
(...) cap. 19.
Ramus acknowledges ingenuously both. It is a paraphrastticall exposition of
that excellent spe^ch, Romans 11. 36. Ex notat patrem^pe^ filium: in spir sanct.
Lombard. lib. 1. s^^t did. 36. and Augustine. de Trin. lib. 6. cap 10.
Of him* and through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever,
Amen: used in the Church to manifest our sound judgment in matter of doctrine
concerning the sacred Trinity. We must (says Epistol 78. and Melanct.
exposit. symbol, Nice^. tom. 1. fol. 403.
Basil) as we have received, even so baptize, and as we baptize, even so
believe, and as we believe, even so give glory. Baptizing we use the name of
the Father, of the Son, of the holy Ghost: confessing the Christian faith, we
declare our belief in the Father, and in the Son, and in the holy Ghost:
ascribing glory to God, we give it to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
holy Ghost. And howsoever Anabaptisticall Antipodes, out of their ambitious
humor to contradict all other, and hear themselves only speak, would have
thrust out of the Church all solemn set forms of holy service: yet Gloria
Patri stands still, and like a true Martyr does show the greatest counteuance
in lowest estate.

For antiquity, such as look lowest affirm that it was ordained first by
Alcuinus lib. de offic. divine.
Damasus, ann. Dom. Florilegus fol. 104.
376. Others, that it was enacted in that famous Council of Nice, consisting
of 318. Bishops under Constantine the Great, an. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. col. 617.
320.

^aebadius in lib. aduersus Arrian. insinuates, that it was used in the Church
long before. The curious in this point may further examine De Missa lib. 2.
cap. ^6.
Bellarmine, and that Oxenford of learning, Master Richard Ecclesiast. polit.
lib. 5. 42.
Hooker.

Venite exultemus Domino.
IT is evident, not only by August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 33. and prooe^. in
Psalm. 118. Tertullian. lib. de Velandis virginib. cap. 7.
Church history, but also by the Scripture, that Psalms have always taken up
a great room in divine service. Scaliger de emendat temp. lib. 6. page 273.
edit. 1593.
Mat. 26. 30. 1. Cor. 14. When you come together, as every one of you has a
Psalm.

Let not any then wonder at our often Psalmodie both after, and before the word
expounded, and read: and sometime interlaced between both. A custom continued
in all other reformed Churches of Scotland, France, Flanders, etc.

Above all other Psalms, Master Deering Lect. 15. upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews.
our Church has fitly chosen this, as a whetstone to set an edge upon our
devotions at the very beginning of public prayers in the Temple: teaching
plainly for what matter, and after what manner, it behooves us to serve God in
his Sanctuary. For it consists of two parts:

1. An exhortation to praise God, in the 1. 2. 6. verses. 2. An allegation of
causes why we should do this, and they be taken either from his Mercies, In
general; for creating and ruling the whole world: 3. 4. 5. In particular, for
electing his Church. 7.
Judgments, in the 8. 9. 10. 11. setting before their eyes a fearful
example, and that in their own Fathers, for, omitting this excellent duty.


In the first part two points are remarkable: Who must praise; Let us sing, let
us come, let us worship. How Where; Before his presence. Whereto; Sing to the
Lord. Wherewith; with our voice:


Let us sing: with our heart, heartily: with hands and knees, O come let us
worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker.

For the (...): For he made this Psalm.
(...) content alone to praise God, but exciteth all other about him to do the
^ame: O come let us sing. Heb. 4. 7.
Now David may be considered As a Private man. Public person, Prince. Prophet.




Here then is a threefold pattern in one: An example for Masters to stir up
their ^amilie; an example for Preachers to exhort their people; an example for
Princes to provoke their subjects unto the public worship of the Lord. It
becomes great men, especially to be good men: as being Greg. Naz^an.
unprinted statutes, and Arist.
speaking (...) unto the rest. This affection was in Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham, 1 Cor. 9. 22.
Paul, Joshua 14 15.
Joshua, and ought to be in all, Heb. 3. 13.
exhorting one another while it is called to da^.

You hold it a good rule in worldly business, not to say to your servants,
Come ye, go ye, arise ye: but, let us come, let us go, let us arise. Now,
shall the children of this world be wiser in their generation, then the
children of light? Do we commend this course in mundane affairs, and neglect
it in religious offices? Assuredly if our zeal were so great to religion, as
our love is toward the world; Masters would not come to Church (as many do)
without their servants, and servants without their masters; parents without
their children, and children without their parents; husbands without their
wives, and wives without their husbands: but all of us would call one to
another, as Esaias 2. 3.
Esaias prophesied; O come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob, he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in
his pa^hs. And, as David here practiced, O come let us sing to the Lord, let us
heartily re^oice in the strength of our salvation.

How First where; Where.
before the Lord, before his presence, verse. 2. 6. God is every where; Psalm.
139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I go from thy pre^ence?

True* God is a circle, whose Center is no where, Circumference every where:
yet is he said in holy Sc^ipture to dwell in Mat. 69.
heaven, and to be present in his Sa^ctuarie more specially; manifesting his
glory from heaven, his grace in the Church principally. For he said in the
Exodus 20. 24.
Law, In all places where I shall put the remembrance of my name, I will come
unto thee: and in the Mat. 18. 20.
Gospel, Where two or three are gathered together in my name there am I in the
midst of them. Albeit every day be a Sabbath, and every place a Sanctuary
for our private devotions, according to the particular exigence of our
occasions; yet God has allotted certain times, and certain places for his
public service: Leuit. 19. 30. Ye shall sanctify my Sabbaths, and reverence
my Sanctuary.

God is to be worshipped ever, and every where. Yet the seventh of our time*
and the tenth of our living, must more specially be consecrated to that honor
which he requires in the Temple. And therefore Comment. in locum.
Calvin is of opinion that David uttered this speech upon the Sabbath: as if
he should say, Come let us sing to the Lord, not in private only, but let us
come before his presence with thanksgiving. As in the 100. Psalm: Go your way
into his gates, and into his courts with praise.

The consideration of this one point, that God is in every place by his
general presence; in this holy place by his especial presidence, may teach
all men to pray not hypocritically for fashion, but heartily for conscience;
not only formally to satisfy the law, but also sincerely to certify our love
to the Lord our maker, giving unto Mat. 22. 21. Si Caesar in Nummo quaerit
imaginem suam Deus non quaerit in homine Imagine^ suam? Augustine. e^ar. ^uius
Psalmi.
Caesar the things which appertaeine to Caesar, and unto God the things which
belon^ to God. That we may not only praise where we should, but, as it
follows in the division Whereto: Whereto.
Let us sing to the Lord; let us rejoice in the strength of our salvation, let
us show our selves glad in him.

Every one in his merry mood will say; Come let us sing, let us heartily
rejoice: But as good never a whit as never the better. Silence is a sweeter
note then a loud, if a leaud sonnet. If we will needs rejoice, let us (says
Philip. 4. 4.
Paul) rejoice in the Lord: if sing, says David, let us sing to the Lord.

Vain toys are songs sung to the world; lascivious balads are songs sung to
the flesh; Satyricall libels are songs sung to the Devil; only Psalms and
Hymns, and spiritual songs are Coloss. 3. 16.
melody for the Lord. P^e debes Domino exultare si vis securus mundo
insultare, says Tom. 8. fol. 730.
Augustine upon this text: we may not exalt but insult over the world, the
flesh, the devil; our exaltations and exultations are due to God only.

Venite exultemus Domino.
LEt us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker: not before
a Crucifix, not before a rotten Image, not before a fair picture of a foul
Saint: these are not our makers, we made them, they made not us. Our God, unto
whom we must sing, in whom we must rejoice, before whom we must worship, is a
great King above all gods: he is no god of lead, no god of bread, no brazen
god, no wooden god; we must not fall down and worship our Lady, but our Lord;
not any Martyr, but our Maker; not any Saint, but our Savior: O come let us
sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Wherewith: Wherewith.
with voice, Let us sing; with soul, let us heartily rejoice; with hands and
knees, let us fall down and kneel, Comely gestures in the Church.
with all that is within us, with all that is without us; he that made all,
must be worshipped with all, especially when we come before his presence.

Here let us make a stand, and behold the wise choice of the Church, assigning
this place to this Psalm, which exciteth us to come to the Temple quietly and
jointly, Come let us sing; and when we are come, to demean our selves in this
holy place cheerfully, heartily, reverently. I would feign know of those who
despise our Canons, as not agreeable to the Canon of holy Bible, whether their
unmannerly sitting in the time of divine service be this kneeling; whether
their standing be this falling down; whether they give God their heart, when
as they will not afford him so much as their hat; whether their lowering upon
their brethren, be singing to the Lord; whether their duty required here, be
to come in, to go out, to stay in the Temple, without any respect of persons,
or reverence to place.

I would such as do imitate the Turks in Sum. conser. page 27.
habit, would likewise follow them in humble comportment while they pray:
Augerius Busbequius legate. Turcicae epist. 3.
Magna cum Ceremonia, and attentione sacris suis intersunt Turcae: nam si vel
digito scalpant caput, perisse sibi precationis fructum ^rbitrantur: quid e^im
si cum Bassis sermo tibi habendus, ergo multo magis si cum Deo. Think of this
ye that forget God, he will not be mocked, his truth is eternal, heaven and
earth shall pass, but not one ^ot of his word shall pass: if an Angel from
heaven, or devil on earth, if any private spirit shall deliver unto you rules
of behavior in the Church, contrary to this Canon of Gods own spirit, let
him be accursed, Anathema. Let us sing, let us worship, let us, who fear God
and honor the King, fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker.

Thus much of David's exhortation to praise God. The reasons why we should
praise, follow, Set down

First briefly, God is our Creator; therefore let us worship and fall down and
kneel before the Lord our maker, verse. 6. He is our Redeemer; therefore let us
sing unto the Lod, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation:
verse. 1.

Secondly, more at large from his Mercies in general: verse. 3. 4. 5.
Judgments.

For the Lord is a great God:] Most mighty, almighty, able to do whatsoever
he will, and more then he will too. See the Creed.

In himself so great, that the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, much
less any barren brain inwombe him: and therefore David here being not able to
set down the least piece of his greatness in the positive degree, comes to the
comparatiue, showing what he is in comparison of other: A great King above all
gods.

As being more excellent and mighty then any thing, or all things that have
the name of God,

Whether they be Gods in Title, Elo^im. Psalm. 8. 5.
Angels in heaven. Psalm. 82. 6.
Princes on earth.
Opinion, As Coloss. 3. 5.
gold is the covetous man's god, Philip. 3. 19.
bellicheere the Epicures god, an Psalm. 96. 5.
Idol the superstitious ma^s god.


Now the Lord is the King of all gods in title, for he made them: of all gods
in opinion, for he can destroy them. Heb. 1. 14.
Angels are his messengers, and Prou. 8. 15.
Princes his ministers, all Romans 13. 1.
power is of the Lord. The manner of getting kingdoms is not always of God,
because it is sometime by wicked means; yet the power it self is ever from
God, and therefore styled in Psa^m. 50. 1.
scripture, the God of gods, as the Ecclesiast. 5. 7.
Wise man says, higher then the highest: for religion and reason tell us, that
of all creatures in heaven an Angel is the greatest; of all things on earth,
an Tertullian ad Scapulam: Omnibus mayor dum solo deo minor.
Emperor is the greatest: but the Lord (as you see) is greater then the
greatest, as being absolute Creator of the one, and maker of the other:
Augustine. in locum.
Quantus Deus est qui Deos facit! How great a God is he that makes gods, yea
and marres them too at his pleasure! surely this is a great God, and a great
king above all gods. And therefore in what estate soever thou be, possess thy
soul with patience, rejoice in God, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might: fear no man, no devil, no other god, he y^ is greater the^ al
these shall be thy defense; he will perform whatsoever in his word he did
promise concerning this life and the next.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth] A reason to prove that God is a
great King above all gods: he is a great God, because a king of gods: and he is
a King of gods, because in his hand are all the corners of the world, subject
to his power and providence.

The most mighty Monarch on earth is king as it were but of a molehill, a Lord
of some one angle: but in Gods hand are all the corners of the earth, and the
strength of the hills. i. of most puissant potentates, in comparison of who^ al
other are low valleys; I say the strength and height of the hills are his.

Antichrist does extol himself 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
above all that is called God: and the Pope does make himself Lord of Lords,
usurping the Harding confut. of Jewels Apolog. part. 2. cap. 3.
whole world for his diocese: yea he has a triple kingdom, according to his
triple crown; Supernall, extended to heaven, in canonizing Saints; Infernal,
extended to hell in freeing souls out of Purgatory; Terrestrial, extended
over the whole earth, as being universal Bishop of the Catholic Church. But
alas, vain man, he is but a ^ox in an hole, many corners of the earth are not
his; England (God be praised) is not his, Scotland, Holland, Denmark not his,
a great part of France, the greatest part of Germany none of his; many
thousands in Portugal, Italy, Spain, none of his; the great Cham, the
Persian, the Turk, the least whereof is greater then himself, none of his.
And albeit all the Kings of the earth should be drunken with his abomination,
yet should he be pastor universal of the Church, but as the devil is Job.
12. 31.
prince of the world; not by his own might, but by others weakness, as Saint
Romans 6. 16.
Paul said, He is our master to whom we give our selves as servants to obey.

So likewise the gods of the superstitious Heathen have not all the corners of
the world: for, as themselves ingeniously confess, some were gods of y^ water
only, some of the wind, some of corn, some of fruit, August. de ciuit. lib.
4. cap. 8.
Nec omnia co^memoro, quia me piget quod illos non pudet. As Heretics have so
many Creeds, as heads: so the Gentiles (as Lib. 1. aduersus Symachum.
Prudentius observed) had so many things for their god, as there were things y^
were good.

Quic quid humus, pelagus, coelum, mirabile gignunt: id dux^re Deos, colles,
freta flumina, flammas. So that their god is not as our God, Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
even our enemies being Judges. Other hold some parcels of the earth under him,
and some lay claim to the whole by usurpation. But all the corners of the
world are his by right of creation, as it follows in the next verse.

The sea is his, for he made it.] An argument demonstratiue, to show that all
the world is subject to his power: and therefore in the Creed, after Almighty,
follows instantly, Maker of heaven and earth.

If any shall demand why David names here first and principally the Sea,
before all other creatures: answer may be given out of Lib. 32. not. hist. in
prooem. Ipsa se natura vincit numerosis modis.
Pliny; God, who is wonderful in all things, is most wonderfully wonderful
in the Sea. Whether we consider (as Psalm. 104.
David elsewhere:)

The 1. Situation of it. 2. Motion. 3. Innumerable creatures in it. 4.
Wonderful art of sailing on it.

Yet God in the beginning Genesis 1. 9.
made this unruly foaming fuming beast, and ever since ruled it at his beck:
for he Psalm. 65. 7.
stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waves; Job. 38. 8.
he shuts up this barking curre in the channel, as in a kennell; he lays
up the deep, as in a Psalm. 33. 7.
treasure house, saying to the waters, Job 38. 11.
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall it stay thy proud
waves.

Hitherto concerning the greatness, and goodness of God in general. Now David in
the seventh verse proceeds, intimating that the Lord of all in common, is our
God in special. He is the Lord our God, as being the people of his pasture,
and the sheep of his hands: that is, himself does feed and favor the Church
in a more particular sort, committing this charge to none other. See preface of
the Decalogue.

The last reason is from judgment: for God uses all means to win men unto
him. The sum whereof is, that we must not harden our hearts, and obstinately
settle our selves in sin, as our forefathers in the wilderness: but rather
hear the voice of the Lord speaking unto us out of his word all the day long,
the whole time of our life generally, but on the Sabbath day more specially,
le^t in his anger he swear that we shall not enter into his rest. Read this
history, Numb. 14. Exodus 17: for, as 1. Cor. 10. 11.
Paul does teach, these things are written for our ensample, upon whom the ends
of the world are come. Lege histori^m, ne fias historia. The judgments of God
are like thunder claps, poena ad vnum, terror adom^es. As in a Commonweal,
places of execution are public, ad terrorem populi, because (as Plato said)
Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. And another ancient
Philosopher to the same purpose: Malefici non pereunt vt pereant, sed vt
pereundo alios deterreant. That the Seneca lib. 1. de Ira. cap. 6.
State which had no benefit by their life, should make use of their death. In
like manner, almighty God in this huge Theater of the world, does make some
spectacles unto other, all of us being either actors, or spectators: and so by
consequence must take example by other, or else make example to other. See
Epist. Dom. 9. post Trin.

Te Deum.
THat Hymns accurately framed by devout men according to the word, may be sung
in the Church with the Psalms of David, and other spiritual songs taken out
of the word; we can allege precept, and example: Precept, Colos. 3. 16.
Admonish your selves in Psalms and Hymns, etc. In loc. and Calvin. Instit.
lib. 3. cap. 20.. 32.
Marlorat does construe this of singing in the Church: and Haymo, that Hymns
were godly songs, invented by the Christians of that age. For Gods holy Church
has used this custom from the Eus^bius hist. l^b. 2. cap. 7. D^onysius de
divine. nom. c. 4. Concilium Tolet an. 4. can. 12.
Primitive times, even unto this present day.

Concerning Te Deum in particular: it is approved by Bellarm. de bon^s o^cribus
in particular. lib. 1. cap. 12. and 14.
Luther, and held by our Fox Martyr. fol 799.
Martyrs a good Creed: (as it is thought generally) composed by those two great
lights of the Church, Ambrose Vigner answer to Barronius. page 17.
who was the most resolute Bishop, and Augustine Perkins Treat. Conscience. c.
2.
who was the most judicious Doctor of all the Fathers.

It is reported by Dacius, a reverend Bishop of Millane, that in his time, who
lived under Greg. lib. 3. Dialog. cap. 4. Magd^burg. Cent. 6. col. 702.
Justinian, Barron. tom. 7. fol. 294.
anno 538. this Hymn was received and used in the Church: which argues it of
greater antiquity, then vpstart Popery. The Nouelist (as Con. Faustum lib. 22.
cap. 34.
Augustine writes of Faustus the Manichee) Vel non intell^gend^ repre^endit,
vel reprehendendo non intelligit: Either too much passion, or else too little
knowledge.

Benedicite omnia opera.
TH^^ Canti^^e is a rapsodie, gathered here and there from diu^^s Psalms of
David, as the of the Church Bible.
marginall notes indigitate: cited often by the learned and ancient Cyp. sermon.
de lapsis and orat. Dom.
fathers, and not censured for it by the Lutheran Historiographers. Cent. 5.
colum. 219.

Imprinted at M^^elburgh with the Dauidicall Psalms in English meeter: August.
de Ci^it. lib. 11. cap. 9. and de natura boni, cap. 16. Chrysostom. hom. 4. ad
pop.
an honor denied unto the Church Psalter in prose. In a word, I find this
Hymn less martyred then the rest, and therefore dimisse it, as Christ did the
woman, John 8. Where be thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee? no more do
I: go thy way.

Benedictus. LVKE 1. 68.
THe Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, are said in the Church daily,
whereas other Psalms of David, Asaph, Moses, are read but monthly. The
reasons hereof are manifest, and manifold; I will only name two:

First, these most excellent Hymns (as Hooker Ecclesiast. pelit. lib. 5. 40.
gratulations wherewith our Lord and Savior was ioifully received at his
entrance into the world) concern us so much more then the Psalms of David, as
the Gospel more then the Law, and the new Testament more then the old. For the
one are but prophecies of Christ to come, whereas the other are plain
discoueries of Christ already present.

Secondly, these songs are proper only to Christianity, whereas other Psalms
are common to the Jews, as well as to the Christians, wherewith they praise
God in their Synagogue, so well as we praise God in our Church. A Jew will sing
with Asaph and David that the Messiah of the world shall come, but he cannot,
he will not acknowledge with Zacharias and Simeon that he is come. So that the
Nouelist herein misliking the Churches custom, does seem to play the Jew;
which I rather ascribe to the lightness of his folly, then to the weight of his
malice. Sententiam Ecclesiae non intelligit, August. co^fess. lib. 12. cap. 25.
sedamat suam, non quia vera est, sed quia sua est.

It is fitly placed after the second Lesson, as an Hymn of praise to magnify
God for the comfort we receive by the sweet tidings of the Gospel: Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, for visiting and redeeming his people.

It has two principal parts: 1. Concerning Christ and his kingdom. 2.
Touching John the Baptist and his office. verse. 76. etc.

It is very remarkable, that Zacharias who was dumb, verse. 20, does now not
only speak, but also prophecy. He was made speechless, because he was
faithless: but now believing, his lips are opened, and his mouth does show
forth Gods praise: saying, Blessed be the Lord.

Let no man in his affliction despair: for (as Lib. 2. in Luc. cap. 1.
Ambrose notes) if we change our manners, Almighty God will alter his mind.
Nec solum ablata restituit, sed etiam insperat^ concedit: He will not only
restore that which was taken a way, but also give more then we can expect. Job
24. 12.
So he blessed the last days of Job more then the first: for whereas Job 1. 3.
he had but 7000 sheep, 3000 comels, 500 yoke of oxen, and 500 she asses:
afterward the Lord gave him 1400 sheep, 6000 camels, 1000 yoke of oxen, and
1000 asses. In the second of Joel; If you will turn to me (says the Lord)
with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning, I will render unto
you the years which the grasshopper has eaten, the canker worm, and the
caterpiller. And moreover, I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. In the 9. of Matthew. when
Christ saw the faith of the palsy man, he did not only cure the sores of his
body, but also the sins of his soul; Son, be of good cheer, thy sins
are forgiven thee.

In the first part two points are to be considered especially: 1. Who to be
blessed; the Lord God of Israel. 2. Why: first for promising, then for
performing redemption unto the world.

Blessed] That is, praised, as Psalm 18. 47. Matthew. 22. 39. So that Zacharias
here remembering a great benefit, begins his Hymn with thanks, Benedictus
Dominus. Hereby signifying, that it is our first and chief duty to be
thankful, to bless God, who does so wonderfully bless us in all the changes
and chances of this mortal life, to say with Job 1. 21.
Job; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord.
God be praised, and the Lord be blessed, is the language of Canaan: whereas
unthankfulness is the devils text, and the blasphemies of wicked men are
Commentaries upon it.

The Lord] For, as Lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 12.
Aristo^le said; Praise is only virtues due: but none is good, Mark 10. 18.
except God. Other are to be praised in him, so fa^re forth as they have
received any gift or good from him, only the Lord worthy to be praised in and
for himself.

God of Israel] So called in Beauxamis in loc.
two respects: first, in regard of his love toward them, as being his peculiar
incloser out of the Commons of the wholeworld: Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Psalm 76. Esaias 5.

Secondly, in regard of their service to him, he Euthymi^s
is God of other, will they nill they. Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord is King, be the
people never so impatient; he sits between the Cherubims, be the earth
never so vn^uiet: but Israel willingly submitted her self to serve him
cheerfully with all her heart. The Devil is prince of the world, because the
wicked of the world be ready to give place to his suggestions: but the Lord is
God of Israel; that is, of all good men, because they resist Satan, and yield
to his government, desiring daily that his kingdom may come, and his will be
done in earth as it is in heaven.

He does use this title, Maldonat. in lecum.
rather then another, in general, to describe the true God, and to distinguish
him from the gods of the Gentiles, who were not gods, but Psalm. 96. 5.
(...): that is, Devils (as In Psalmum praedic.
Euthym^^s observes.) In particular* this title did best fit his occasion,
because Christ the redeemer of the world, was promised unto the Romans 9. 4. 5.
Jews, Abraham and his seed for ever: and therefore blessed be the Lord God of
Israel.

Why? First for promising: then for performing.

The promises of God touching the Messiah, are Iansenius concord. cap. 5.
twofold:

1. Made by himself, to Adam, Abraham, Isaac: verse. 72. 73.

2. Made by his servants: As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which
have been since the world began: verse. 70.

He spake] The Prophet is but the voice: God himself is the speaker, as John
Baptist said; I am the Job 1. 23.
voice of him that cries in the wilderness.

By the mouth] In the singular number: for Gorran. and Beauxamis in locum.
albeit they were many, yet they spoke but one thing, from one spirit, as it
were with one mouth.

Which have been since the world began] For Acts 3. 24.
all the Prophets have foretold of these days. Matthew. 17. 3.
In the transfiguration, Moses and Elias are said to talk with Christ:
signifying hereby, (says Hom. 6. in cap. 8. Leuit.
Origin) that the Law and the Prophets, and the Gospel agree all in one. And
therefore Peter was unwise to make three Tabernacles for one. Holy Prophets:
holy by Place, Calvin. in loc.
separated from the profane vulgar, and consecrated to this high calling.
Grace, for being hallowed and elected to this office, they

spoke by the 1. Pet. 2. 21.
holy Ghost: endued also with gifts of sanctification; in so much that
Prophets, and holy men, heretofore were voces conuertibiles, as it is Cyrillus
and Maldonat. in Joan. 9.
observed out of the old Testament, Genesis 20. 7. and new, Luke 7. 16. Ioh. 9. 17.

This may teach the Prophets in our time to be walking Sermons, Epistles and
holy Gospels in all their carriage toward the people. Praedicat viua voce, qui
praedicat vita and voce. He does preach most, that does live best.

As it is said of John the Baptist, Maldonat. in cap. 11. Mat.
Cum miraculum nullum fecerit, perpetuum fuit ipse miraculum: So a good man
does always preach, though he never comes in pulpit. Whereas such a Minister as
is no where a Minister but in the Church, is like 2. Sam. 17. 23.
Achitophel, who set his house in order, and then hanged himself. The word
preached is as Aarons rod; if in the Preachers hand, it is comely: but if he
cast it from him, it will happily prove a Serpent. That which God has joined
together, let no man put asunder, Holiness and Prophecy. O Lord indue thy
Ministers with righteousness, that thy chosen people may be joyful.

As God is merciful in making, so faithful in keeping his promise: for he
visited and redeemed his people.

Visited] In the better part: for visitation in mercy, not in judgment, as
Psalm. 8. 4. Genesis 21. 1.

If Christ did visit us in our person, let us visit him in Mat. 25. 36.
his members. All of us are his Luke 16. 1.
stewards, and the good things he has lent us are not our own, but his;
either the goods of the Church, and so we may not make them Impropriations: or
else the goods of the Commonwealth, and we may not enclose them. He is the
best subject that is highest in the Subsidy book; so he the best Christian
that is most forward in subsiaijs, in helping his brethren with such gifts as
God has bestowed upon him.

The whole world (says S. 1. Epist. 5. 19.
John) lies in wickedness, sick, very sick unto Romans 6. 23.
death. All wickedness is weakness, every sin is a sore; Covetousness an
insatiable dropsy; Pride a swelling tympanie; Lasinesse the Gentleman's gout:
Christ therefore the Gorran. in locum ex Augustino.
great Physician of the world, came to visit us in this extremity: we did not
send for him, he came of his own love to seek and save that which was lost.
It is a great kindness for one neighbor to visit another in sickness, but a
greater kindness to watch and pray with the comfortless: yet the greatest
kindness of all is to help and heal him. Even so, and much more then so
Christ loved ye world; he came not only to see it, but to save 1. Timot. 1. 15
it; not only to live among men, but also to die for men: as to visit, so to
redeem. The Lord did endure the cross, that the servant might enjoy the
crown: the Captain descended into hell, that the soldier might ascend into
heaven: the Physician did die, that the patient might live. Liber de Senten^ijs.
Bernard pithily: Triplici morbo laborabat genus humanum, principio, medio,
fine: idest, natiuitate, vita, and morte. Venit Christus, and contra triplicem
hunc morbum, attulit triplex remediu^. Natus est, vixit, mortuus est: eius
natiuitas purgauit nostram, mors eius destruxit nostram, vita eius instruxit
nostram. As S. Romans 4. 25.
Paul in two words; He died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: that is, (says Sum. 3. part. quaest. 53. art. 1.
Aquinas) he died to remove from us all that which was evil, and rose again
to give us all that which was good. All is infolded in the word Redeem, the
which (as Interpreters observe generally) does implie that we are delivered
from the hands of all our enemies, and they be principally four: The World.
Flesh. Devil. 1. cor. 15. 26.
Death.



Christ overcame the world on earth, the flesh on the Cross, the devil in
hell, death in the grave: now being the Churches head, and husband, he took
her dowry, which was sin, (for she had nothing else of her own) and endowed
her with all his goods. Cant. 6. 2.
I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine. So that Christ was borne for
us, and lived for us, and died for us, and rose again for us: and therefore
though the devil cry, ego decipiam; the world cry, ego deficiam; the flesh
cry; ego inficiam; death cry; ego interficiam: it makes no matter in that
Christ cries, Mat. 11. 28.
ego reficiam, I will ease you, I will comfort you, I will visit and redeem
you. See Gospel on whit sunday.

His people] The Jews, as sent to them Mat. 15. 24. Act. 13. 46.
first, and principally, whom he did visit in his own person, whereas all other
diocesses of the world were visited by Commissaries: I say first, for afterward
all people were hi^ ^^ople: Visita^it omnes gentes, quomam omnes egentes. In
(...) we are all one, there is neither Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free,
neither male nor female: Gal. 3. 28.

In Psalm. 148.
Augustine sweetly: The believing Gentiles are more Israel, then Israel it
self: for the Jews are the children of Abraham according to the flesh only,
but we are the children of Abraham after the spirit: they be the John 8. 39.
sons of Abraham, who do the works of Abraham. But what was Abraham's chief
work? The Genesis 15. 6.
Scripture tells us, Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. So that as Gal. 3. 29.
Paul concludes, all belieuers are true Israelites, Abraham's seed and heirs by
promise. See Nunc dimittis.

But shall we now sin because grace does abound? God forbid. He has
delivered us from the hands of all our enemies, that we might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Gorran. in loc.
Sine timore inimici, non sine timore domini. Behauing our selves in this
present Tit. 2. 12.
world religiously toward God, righteously toward our neighbor, soberly
toward our selves.

Examine these five circumstances exactly: 1. Who did redeem; The Lord God of
Israel, August. ser. 27. de temp.
factor ^errae, factus in terra, yea fractus in terra. 2. Whom: Such as sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death. His Romans 5. 10.
enemies, Ephesians. 2. 12.
aliants from his common wealth, and open traitors to his kingdom. 3. From
what: From the hands of all our enemies. 4: With what: With his own 1. Pet. 1.
19.
precious blood, the least drop whereof had bin meriti infiniti; yet his death
only, was meriti definiti. 5. For what: 1. Pet. 2. 24.
That being delivered from sin, we should live in righteousness.

Consider these points, and think not this Hymn too much used in our
Liturgy: but sing with Zacharias daily, Benedictus Dominus: and say with Psalm.
116. 11.
David; Quid retribuam domino, pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi? August. sermon.
151. de temp.
Primo nihil eram, and fecit me: per^eram, quaesiuit me: quaerens inuenit me;
captiuum redemit me, emptum liberauit me, de seruo fratrem fecit me. We owe our
souls, our selves to God for creating us, more then our selves for redeeming
us.

Concerni^g John Baptist, and his office, which is the second general part of
this excellent song; see the Gospel Dominic. 3. and 4. Aduent.

Iubilate Deo. Psalm. 100.
THe Church does adioine this Psalm to the Benedictus, as a parallel: and that
not unfitly, for as the one, so the other, is a thanksgiving unto God, enforced
with the same reasons and arguments: in so much as Zacharias is nothing else
but an expounder of David, or Moses. As Quaest. 73. super Exodus
Augustine wittily; The new Testament heth hidden in the old, and the old is
unclasped in the new.

Paulinus in 1. Leuit. vti Magdeburg. Cent. 5. col. 90.
Lex antiqua nouam firmat, veterem noua complet: in veteri spes est, in
nouitate fides. O be joyful in the Lord, (says the Prophet) blessed be the
Lord God of Israel (says our Evangelist) Why? because the Lord has made us,
and not we our selves; we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. That
is, he has visited and redeemed his people. For In locum.
Augustine, Hierome, Calvin, Turrecrematensis, other old, and new writers
interpret this of our Regeneration, rather then of our Creation. According to
that of Ephesians. 2. 10.
S. Paul: We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc.

The Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting.] That is, he promised evermore
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began, that we should be
saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us.

His truth indureth from generation to generation.] That is, he did in due
time perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, he remembered his holy
covenant, and kept that oath which he swore to our father Abraham, and his seed
for ever.

To what end? That we might serve God with gladness, as David in his text:
that is, serve him all the days of our life without fear, as Zacharias in his
gloss.

God August. lib. 2. de sermon. Dom. in mont. tom. 4. fol. 812.
insinuated himself to the Jews, as a Lord: Exodus 20. 2. but to the
Christians, as a father, Mat. 6. 9. And therefore seeing we are translated
from the Galat. 4. and 5. cap.
bondage of servants, unto the liberty of sons; Hieron. in loc.
having in stead of the Law, which was exceeding Acts 15. 10.
grievous, a burden which is Matthew. 11. 30.
light, and a yoke which is easy, let us serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song: Non in amaritudine murmurationis, sed in
iocunditate dilectionis, as Augustine upon the place.

The whole Psalm does afford many profitable doctrines and uses, in that the
Prophet does double and treble his exhortation: O be joyful in the Lord: serve
him with gladness: with a song: Go into his gates with thanksgiving: into his
courts with praise: be thankful: speak good of his name; he does insinuate
our sloth and dulnes in that behalf: and therefore it behooves all men,
especially teachers of men, in season and out of season to press this duty.

It teaches all people to praise God with a good heart cheerfully: verse. 1.

Not in private only, but in the public assembly also for public benefits
received of the Lord: verse. 3.

Our bodily generation, and ghostly regeneration, are not of our selves, but
only from God: verse. 2. See Epist. Dom. post. Pasc.

Who is always the same in his truth and goodness toward us abeit we be
variable in our loves and promises one to another; verse. 4. See Nunc Dimittis.

The Creed.
THis Apostolical Creed is pronounced after the Lessons, and the Nicene
Confession after the Gospel and Epistle: because faith (as Paul Romans 10. 17.
teaches) is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. We must first hear,
then confess* for which cause the Church^ of Scot. Liturgy praters after Sermon.
Scotlana also does usually repeat the Creed after the Sermon.

I believe in God, etc.
Albeit the Creed be not protocanonicall Scripture, yet (as Sermon. 38.
Ambrose speaks) it is the key of the Scriptures: and (as Sermon. 115. de temp.
Breuiter complexaregula fidei vt mentem instruat, nec oneret memoriam. Idem.
ser. 119. de temp.
Augustine) a plain, short, absolute sum of all holy faith. Thom. 22ae.
quaest. 1. art. 9.
Other Confessions, as the Nicene, and Athanasian are received of the Church
not as new, but rather as expositions of this old B^llarm. de Iustificat. lib.
1. cap. 9.
. For as the four Gospels are indeed but one Gospel; so the three Creeds are
in substance but one Creed. And therefore I thought good in my passage through
the whole Service book to touch upon it a little, giving you rather a brief
resolution, then a full absolution thereof.

Observe then in it the Title: The Creed of the Apostles. Text: I believe in
God, etc.

In the title note the Work: Creed. Authors: Apostles.

It is called in English, Creed, of the first word Credo: as the Pater Noster
is of the two foremost words, Our Father: in other languages, Symbolum; the
which has three significations: 1. A shot. 2. A badge. 3. A ring.


A Ruffin. exposit. Symbol. and August ser. 115. and 181. de temp.
shot: because every particular Apostle conferred his particular article to
this spiritual banquet, at least the whole does arise out of their Eusebius.
Emissen. hom. 1. de Symbol.
common writings.

2. A Ruffin. vbi sup. and Erasmus explan. Symb.
badge. For as a soldier is known in the field by his colors and coat to
what Captain he does belong: so the Christian is distinguished by this Creed
from all unbelievers, and misbeleeuers. In token hereof, by good order of the
Church, we stand up at the Creed, openly to manifest our faith and allegiance
to Christ Jesus our General.

3. A Plin. not. hist. lib. 33. cap. 1.
ring. The Angelus del Pas praeamb. ad Symb. cap. 4.
metal whereof is dug out of the rich mines of the Bible, refined with the
fire of Gods holy spirit, and accurately framed by the blessed Apostles.

It is the very wedding ring wherewith the Minister in our Baptism married us
unto Christ, when as in the public congregation Christ for his part solemnly
protested by the mouth of his Minister that he would be our God: and we
likewise vowed for our part, by Godfathers and Godmothers, that we would be
his people. The Creed then ought to be respected as the signet on our right
hand, and as the marriage Ring on our Loves finger.

Now for the authors, it is said to be the Apostles (as some think) made by
Hieron. epist. ad Pammachium, tom. 2. fol. 173. and Magd^burg. cent. 1. lib. 2.
col. 66.
themselves after they had received the holy Ghost, and that before they
departed out of Jerusalem to preach the Gospel unto all nations: Baronius
annal. tom. 1. fol. 317.
Anno Christi 44. Imperatoris Claudij, 2. Iulij 15.

Anglican. Confess. art. 8. and Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. c. 16.. 18.
Other, that it is the Apostles, as being consonant to their doctrine; theirs
for the matter, but not for the manner.

All agree that it is the Gospels abrigement, which Christ taught his Apostles,
the Apostles the Church, and the Church has delivered unto us in all ages: and
therefore though it be not the scripture of God, yet it is the Perkins exposit.
Spmbol.
word and truth of God: of greater authority then other Ecclesiastical
traditions, whether they be Confessions of particular Churches, or writings of
private men.

The Text.
The text has two parts: Articles. Assent: Amen.

Lexicon Theolog. Altenstaig. in verb. articulus.
Articulus ab arctando Passive, quia quiddam est arctatum in se. Active, quia
alios arctat ad credendu^.

In the profession, or whole body of articles, two points are remarkable: The
Act Object of faith.

Act: I believe. Where note the Personalitie: I. Formalitie of faith: believe
in.



Howsoever one must pray for another, saying Our Father; yet every one must
believe for himself: I believe: Habacuck 2. 4. See Gospel on S. Thomas day.

Formalitie: Believe in. For (as Ser. 181. de temp.
Augustine and Lib. 3. sent. did. 23.
Lombard teach) there is great difference between Credere deum, to believe
there is a God. Credere deo, to believe God. Credere in deum, to believe in God.

Multi and mali, many bad men, yea the James 2. 19.
Devil himself does believe that there is a God: but a Christian ought to
believe in John 6. 29.
God: that is, August. tract. 29. in Johan. tom. 9 fol. 167.
Credendo amare, credendo in eum ire, credendo ei adhaerere. Confessing God to
be his God, in whom he puts all his trust and confidence, manifesting his faith
in James 2. 18.
deeds, as well as in words: according to that of Lib. 4. cap. 14.
Irenaeus: To believe, is to do as God will.

The matter or object of the Creed concerns God Essentially in Name: God.
Attributes, Almighty: Maker of heaven and earth.

Personally Father. Son. Holy Ghost.
Church.


Concerning the name, De doctrine. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Augustine says it is impossible that four letters and two syllables, Deus,
should contain him, whom the heaven of heavens could not contain: Dionysius
de diuinis nom. cap. 1.
Dei nomen mirabile nomen, super omne nomen, sed sine nom^^e.

For Granat. dux p^e^^s. cap. 1.
if all the land were paper, and all the water inke^ every plant a pen, and
every other creature a ready writer: yet they could not set down the least
piece of his great greatness. De Deo cum dicitur, non potest dici. No name can
express his nature fully: yet he does vouchsafe to be praised in our words,
and by our mouths, or rather indeed by his own words, and own spirit; for he
must be called and called upon, as he has revealed himself in Scripture, where
he is known by the name Exodus 15. 3.
Iehoua, or God: and therefore this name is not properly communicable to any
creature, though 1. Cor. 8. 5.
analogically given to many.

In God.] Not gods, as the Nicene Creed, in one God. For God (as Lib. 5.
Considerat. ad Eugenium.
Bernard said) is vnissimus, the most one: Tertull. lib. 1. aduersus Marcion.
cap 3.
si non est vnus, non est, either one or none.

Attributes: Almighty. Maker of Heaven. Earth.


God is able to do whatsoever he will, and Thom. 1. part. quaest. 15. art. 5.
more then he will too: more by his absolute power, then he will by his
actual: Matthew. 3. 9. ^6. 53.

He can neither lie, nor die: Dicitur enim August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. cap.
10.
omnipotens faciendo quod vult* non patiendo quod non vult.

Creator.] His almightines does prove that he is God, and the creation of the
world that he is almighty, Ierem. 10. 11. Let any make a world (says
Augustine) and he shall be God. Angels, men, and devils can make and unmake
some things: but they cannot make them, otherwise then of some kind of matter
which was before: neither can they unmake them, but by changing them into some
other thing which remains after. Only God made all things of nothing, and can
at his good pleasure bring them again to nothing.

Du Bartas 1. day, 1. week, fol. 8.
Nothing* but nothing, had this Lord almighty, whereof, wherewith, whereby, to
build this City.

Of heaven and earth.] And all that therein is: Exodus 20. 11.

2. Cor. 12. 2.
Heaven is threefold, where Souls are, the glorious, or heaven of heavens: 1.
Kings 18. 27. Fowls are, the airy heaven: Genesis 1. 30. Stars are, the
firmament: Genesis 1. 17.

Earth contains land and sea: Psalm. 24. 1. Nam omnipotens August. Soliloqui.
cap. 9.
van eademque manus dei crea^^t in coelo angelos, and in terra vermiculos: non
superior in illis, non inferior in is it is.

Thus (as Ramus de religion. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 9.
one said) almighty God is known, ex postico tergo, lic^et non ex antica
facie: by his effects, ad extra, though not in his essence, ad intra. Seculum
est speculum: The creation of the world is a glass, wherein (says Romans 1. 20.
S. Paul) we may behold Gods eternal power and Majesty: which the divine Du
Ba^tas vbi s^p. fol. 6. 7. 58.
Poet paraphrastically:

The world is a school, where in a general story,

God always reads dumb lectures of his glory.

In Tim ^o.
Plato called it Gods epistle: the renowned Hermit Tripar^. hist. lib. 8. cap.
1.
Antonius, a book, wherein every simple man who cannot read, may
notwithstanding spell that there is a God. It is the Shepherds Calendar, and
the Ploughmans Alphabet.

This appertains essentially, and generally to the whole Trinity: for the
Father is not only Creator, and Almighty, but the Son, and holy Ghost.

The creation in the mass of the matter, is attributed to God the Father: in
the disposition of the form, to God the Son: in the preservation of both, to
God the holy Ghost.

It is said of God personally: Father. Son. Holy Ghost.

The Father is the first, not in any prioritie of nature, or honor, or time,
but Perkins upon the Creed.
order: or (as the Pater est priucipium, non de principio: filius principium a
princip. Thom. 1 parti sum. quaest. 33. art. 4.
school) Prioritate originis: according to that of Athanasius in his Creed,
The Father is of none, the Son is of the Father alone, the holy Ghost of
both. I will send (says Ioh. 15. 26.
Christ) from the Father, even the Spirit of truth. Ego mittam a Patre
spiritum, Augustine. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Ostendens quod pater est totius diuinitatis, vel si m^lius dicitur deitatis
principium. Adore simply, rather then explore subtly, this ineffable
mystery. Scrutari temeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse vitaest, Bernard,
de considerat, ad Eugenium, lib. 5.

He Durandus rationali diuinor^m, lib. 4. cap. 48.. 2.
is father of Christ by nature, singulariter. Good men, by adoption,
specialiter. All men, and all Omnipater, vt Prudentius. Hym^ de Eulalia Virgin.
things, by creation, generaliter; as y^ work is appropriated unto him in
regard of his power.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

That which concerns the second person is more largely set down then all the
rest, teaching us hereby, that as we should respect other doctrine, so this in
more special sort, as being the center of all the Creed and Scriptures
circumference: 1. Cor. 2. 2.

This person is described by his Titles: 1. Jesus. 2. Christ. 3. His only
Son. 4. Our Lord.
Estate of Humiliation, Incarnation, Passion.
Exaltation.


1. Jesus is his Tertull. lib. aduers. Prax. and Thom. 2. part. quaest. 37.
art. 2.
proper name, given him by the Luke 1. 31.
Angel. Other, if any have the Consule Pet. Galatin. de Arcanis lib. 3. cap.
20. Iansen. concord. cap. 7. Pagnin. interp. nom. Hebraic.
very name, were typical Saviors only. Jesus Naue, the figure of Christ as a
King: Jesus Sydracke, the figure of Christ as a Prophet: Jesus Iosedecke, the
figure of Christ as a Priest. Contra Faustum. lib. 12. cap. 36.
Augustine, Lib. 1. de demonstration. Euang. cap. 29.
Eusebius, and generally all expositors upon the 3. of Zucharie.

This sweet name contains in it a thousand treasuries of good things, in
delight whereof S. Paul uses it five hundred times in his Epistles, as
Genebrardus observes.

2. Christ] His appellatiue Caietan. and Aretius in 1. Matthew. Calu. Catecbis.
title of office and dignity. Concerning these two titles, Jesus and Christ,
see the Gospel Dom. 1. post Natiuit.

3. His only Son; which implies that he is God: John 1. 1. A distinct person
from the Father: Mat. 28. 19.

God, because he is a son, not as other by favor, but Ruffin. in Symbol.
by nature: whatsoever the Son receives of ye Father, he receives it by
nature, not by grace, and he receives not as other, apart, but all that the
Father has, saving the personal propriety.

Only sonne] Called the Mat. 1. 25.
first begotten, in respect of his mother and humane nature: John 3. 16.
only begotten in respect of his Father, and divine nature. For the holy
Spirit is not begotten, but proceeds (as the Scripture does distinguish)
M^lancthon exposit Symbol. Nicen. ^om. 1. fol. 403.
Nasci est a potentia intelligente, quia filius cogitatione nascitur, and est
^mago patris: at procedere est a voluntate, quia spiritus sanctus est amor,
etc. I believe: Lord help mine unbelief.

The conjunction, And, proves that the Son is equal with the Father, as
concerning his Godhead: and yet a distinct person. August. de (...) lib. 11.
cap. 10. and Lombard. 1. sent. did. 25.
Alius personaliter, nowaliud essentialiter. I believe in God the Father, And
in Jesus Christ.

Our Lord, as our Creator. Redeemer. Governor, as head of the Church: Ephesians. 4. 5.

In vita cius.
Suetonius observes that Augustus refused the name of Lord. Lib. 6. cap. 22.
vli Platina iu vita Christi.
Orosius notes that it was at that time when Christ was borne, that all
Lordship might be given unto him. See Epistle Dom. 17. post Trinit.

Christ's incarnation is Isreal's Luke 2. 25.
consolation: Incarnat.
for all sound comfort stands in happiness, all happiness in fellowship with
God, all fellowship with God is by Christ: who for this cause being very God,
became very man, that he might reconcile God to man, and man to God: he became
Tertull. lib. 2. contra Marc.
little, that we might be great; the Son of man, that we might be the Cyp.
ser. de El^^mosyna.
sons of God.

His incarnation has two parts: Conception. Birth.

Conceived by the holy Ghost.] Works of power are attributed to the Father, of
wisdom to the Son, of love to the holy Ghost. Wherefore Maldonat. in 1. Mat.
and August. Enchirid. cap. 37.
because this was a work of highest love in God toward mankind, it is ascribed
especially to the holy Spirit: Luke 1. 35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee Calvin. in loc.
. Signifying hereby that this mystery cannot be seen clearly, therefore not
to be examined curiously. S. Fides matris, non libido conceperat. Enchirid.
cap. 34.
Augustine calls it a sweet conjunction, where speech is husband, and ear
wife. Meaning, that as soon as the blessed Virgin assented to the Angels
message, she conceived.

Birth] I make Christ's incarnation a part of his humiliation, because there can
be no greater abasement, then that he, who thundered in the clouds, should cry
in the cradle; Bernard. ser. 1. in (...). Dom.
swadled in a few rags, whom the heaven of heavens could not contain; that
the eternal Word should become an August. ser. 5. de temp. Lambit vbera regens
siaera^ acet, vt verbum est. Idem de sym. lib. 4. cap. 4.
infant; that he who was the father of Mary, should be now the son of Mary.

The Scripture tells us, how man comes four Idem. ser. 20. de temp.
ways into the world.

1. By the help of man and woman, as all are usually borne.

2. Without any man or woman, and so the first man was created.

3. Of a man without a woman, and so was Eua made.

4. Of a woman without a man, and so was Christ borne.

Of the Virgin Mary.] Where the mother of Christ is described by her Name,
Mary. Surname Baronius annal. tom. 1. fol. 45. and Epipbanius Haeres. 78.
, Virgin.

The new Jesuits, and old Friars, have many wonderful extrauagant conceits of
this Lexicon Theolog. verb. Maria.
name: let it suffice that it is added in the Gospel, and Creed, to show that
Christ came of the lineage of David: and that therefore he was the true Messiah,
as God had promised and prophesied by the mouths of all his holy servants.

Virgin] A Perkins refor. Catholic. Tit. tradition, and Reza consess. cap. 3.
art. 23.
perpetual Virgin Before In After Christ's birth.

Before his birth against 1. Jews. 2. Gentiles. 3. Cerinthians.

Unto the first we say with Cyril. Hierosol. Cat. 12. Augustine. lib. 3. de
Symbol. cap. 4.
Cyril: Pariet Aaronis virga sine semine, and non pariet virgo sine semine? aut
vtrumque negate aut vtrumque concedite.

Against the second, we have Ficta: Ruffin. and Cyril. vbi supra.
Qui enim e Iouis cerebro Mineruam, and ex eiusdem femore Bacchum, falso
prognatum esse fabulamini: quomodo ex vtero virginali Christum nasci dicitis
impossible? Facta: Quoniam animalia multa Lactant. instit. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Augustine. de mirabil script. lib. 3. cap. 2. Ambros, Hexam. l. 5. cap. 20.
sine commistione generantur. And Plutarch in the life of Numa, spoke like an
Luke. 1. 35.
Angel: Incredibilo non est, vt spiritus Dei cum muliere coeat, eique sobolis
quaedam principia ingoneret.

3. The Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 25.
Cerinthians, Cl^mens Romans instit. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Ebionits, and Iremaeus lib. 1. cap. 24.
Carpocratian Heretics held that Christ was the natural son of Joseph: and
verus. and merus h^m^. Contrary to text, Mat. 1. 25. Luke 3. 23. See the
Gospel Dom. 1. post Epiphan.

In his birth against Augustine. de Haeresib. cap. 82. and contra Julian. lib.
1. cap. 2.
Iouinian. Swar^z tom. 2. in 3. Thom. disput. 5. sect. 2.
Durandus.

Unto these that of Esaias 7 is opposed: Ecce (...), and pariet filium. The which
words are to be construed in censu composito, non diuiso: scilicet integra
perman^e^^ and conceptura, and paritura: nam quale signum vel prodigium esset
vt quae fuit virgo conciperet, and corrupta pareret August. epist. 3.
? Hic si ratio quaeritur, non erit mirabile. Si poscitur exemplum, non erit
singular. Demus Deum aliquid posse, quod nos fateamur inuestigare non posse.
Idem ^pist. 146 and Enchirid. cap. 34. Si v^l per nasccutem corrumperetur eius
integritas, non iam ille de virgin nasceretur, vti tota confitetur Ecclisia.
Fides adsit, and nulla quaestio remanebit. See the Gospel of the purification.

After his birth against the Old Hieron. lib. adue^s. Heluid. and Augustine.
^aeres. 84.
Heluidians. New Antidicomarianits, holding it a point of zeal to disgrace
this holy Virgin: whereas it is our duty Master Perkins upon this article.
rather highly to reverence her, as being the Mother of our Lord; a Prophetess
on earth, a Saint in heaven, (as the August. ser. 15 de temp. Fulgent. ser. de
lau^ib. Mariae.
Fathers usually) the window of heaven, through which it pleased the light of
the world, to illuminate such as fit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.
Of such estimation in the Church, that whereas the Nicen.
first general Council was assembled against Arrius, to maintain the honor
of the Son, and so by consequence of the Father: The Constantinopolitan.
second against Macedonius, to maintain the honor of the holy Ghost: The
Ephesi^.
third was assembled against Nestorius, to Swar^z praes. disp^^, t^m ^. in 3.
Thom. Magdeburg. ce^t. 5. col. 889.
maintain the dignity of the blessed Virgin. And therefore let not us give
her too little, though the Papists have given her too much. See Gospel on the
Annunciation.

Passion.
Christ's passion is set down First summarily, Suffered under Pontius Pilat.
Then particularly, Crucified, Dead, Buried.


All which our Savior did not endure for himself, but for us. He Esaias 53 5.
was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities. In Ambros.
de fide ad Gration. lib. 2. cap. 3.
me, and pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret. O Domine Jesus
doles non tua, sed v^laera mea. He 1. Pet. 2. 21.
suffered for us, leaving us an example, August. ser. 8. de temp.
that his passion might deliver us from sin, and his actions direct us to
virtue; teaching patience, humility, obedience, charity. Greater patience
cannot be found, then for the author of life, to suffer an ignominious death
iniustly; no greater humility, then for the Lord of all Lords to submit
himself to be crucified among thieves; nor greater obedience, then to be
willing rather to die, then not to fulfill the commandment of his Father; nor
greater charity, then to lose his life, to save his enemies. For love is more
showed in deeds, then in words, and more in suffering then in doing. See
Gospel on Sunday before Easter, and Epistle 2. Sunday after Easter.

Augustine. de doctrine. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Nos immortalitate male vsi sumus, vt moreremur:

Christus mortalitate been vsus, vt viueremus.

Exaltation.
Note the Creeds order answerable to the Scripture. For Christ Luke 24. 26.
first suffered, and then entered into glory. Teaching us hereby, that we must
first bear with him the Cross, before we can wear with him the Crown.
Christianus, as Loc. Com. tit. calamit.
Luther said, is Crucianus. As a lilie among the thorns: so is my love among
the daughters: Cant. 2. 2.

Christ's exaltation has four parts: his 1. Triumph in hell. 2. Resurrection.
3. Ascension. 4. Session.

I make Christ's descending into hell a part of his advancement, rather then
abasement, because this general Creed, of the whole Church, and the particular
confession of our Art. 3.
Church, make it a distinct article following Christ's Suffering, Death,
Burial: and therefore cannot aptly be construed of his agony in the garden
before his death, nor of his tortures on the Cross at his death, nor yet of
his burial after his death: Ergo, Credendum est Christum ad inferos in genere:
credibile ad inferos damnatorum in specie, triumphandi gratia secundum animans
realiter, and localiter descendisse. That as he did overcome the world on
earth, and death in the grave: so likewise he did triumph over Satan in the
courts of hell his own kingdom. For my own part, I rest my self in the
judgment of the Church wherein I live, and hold it enough to believe that
Christ did so much, and suffered so much, as was sufficient for all: efficient
for me: praying with the Greek Fathers in their Liturgy; By thine unknown
sorrows and sufferings felt by thee: but not distinctly manifest to us: have
mercy on us, and save us. O Bonauent. diaeta salutis, cap. 26.
graceless peeuishnes, we scantly follow Christ to heaven: albeit we believe
that he went for us into hell.

Christ's resurrection is the Church Hom. for Easter day.
lock and key of all our Christian religion and faith: on which all other
articles hang. See the Gospel on S. Thomas and Easter day.

In Christ's ascension 3. points obseruable: Place: Mount Oliuet. Time: When he
had taught his Disciples, and while they beheld him. Manner: A cloud took him
up out of their sight: Act 1. 9. See the Epistle for Ascension day.

Christ's Session is set forth by the Place: Heaven: that is, Ephesians. 4. 10.
Acts 7. 56.
Heaven of heaven. Effect: Coming to Judgment.

To August. in Enchirid. cap. 55.
judge the quick and the dead Spiritually: The good which live with the
spiritual life of grace. The bad, which are spiritually dead in sin.
Corporally: Because at that day most shall be dead, and many shall be found
alive, who in the twinkling of an eye shall suddenly be changed, as S. 1. Cor.
15. 51. 52.
Paul tells us. Origin thinks that the Priest had bells in the lower part of
his roabe, to put us in mind of the end of the world. Our good God has
prepared such 1. Cor. 2. 9.
things for us, as eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came
into man's heart. August. de Symb. ad Cate^. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Si in cor hominis non ascendit, cor hominis illuc ascendat. Seeing the Judge
shall come from heaven, let us before send thither our hearts to meet him: and
in the mean while thence to look for him, Philip. 3. 20. He has said it, who
is truth it self: Surely I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

I believe in the holy Ghost.] The Ramus de Religion. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Godhead of the Father is especially manifested in the Law, the Godhead of the
Son especially manifested in the Gospel, the Godhead of the holy Ghost
especially manifested in the Creed: intimating so much in four words as the
whole Bible contains of this argument; namely, first, that the holy Ghost is
Acts 5. 3. 4.
God, otherwise we might not believe in him. Secondly, that he is a Matthew. 28.
19.
distinct person from the Father, and the Son: I believe in the Father: in
the Son: in the holy Ghost. And thirdly, that he proceeds from the John 15.
26.
Father, and the Son, infolded in the Title, holy Ghost. For albeit the
Father is holy, the Son holy, the Father a Spirit, and the Son a Spirit,
in respect of their nature: yet only the third person is the holy Spirit, in
regard of his office. The holy, because beside the holiness of nature, his
special office is to make the Church holy. The Father sanctifies by the Son
and by the holy Ghost: the Son sanctifies from the Father by the holy
Ghost: the holy Ghost sanctifies from the Father and the Son by himself
immediately. As we believe that the Father is our Creator, the Son our
Redeemer; so likewise that the holy Ghost is our Sanctifier.

Again, the third person is termed the Spirit, not only in regard of his
nature, which is spiritual, but because he is spired, or breathed from the
Father and the Son: in that he proceeds from them both. How, I cannot say,
you need not search, only believe. For as the Esaias 53. 6.
Prophet said of the Son, Who shall declare his generation? so the most
judicious Doctor Cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. ^om. 6. ^ol. 507.
Augustine, of the holy Ghost, Who shall declare his procession? Inter illam
generationem, and hanc processionem distinguere nescio, non valeo, non
sufficio. Quia and illa, and ista est ineffabilis. And therefore as the
Confess. lib. 12. cap. 5.
same Father in the like case: Dum sibi haec dicit humana cogitatio, conetur
eam vel nosse ignorando, vel ignorare noscendo. See the Gospel Dom. post
Ascension.

The holy Catholic Church.] The second part of the Creed concerns the Church:
for as Enchirid. c. 56
Augustine observes, the right order of a Confession did require, that after
the Trinity, should be joined the Church, as the house for the owner, and
city for the founder. Idem lib. 4. desymbol. ad Catech. cap. 10.
Again, the Creed does end with the Church, as it did begin with God; to put
us in mind that except we have the Church for our mother, we never shall have
God for our father.

The Church is described here by properties, and prerogatives.

Her properties are three: 1. Holy. 2. Catholic. 3. Knit in a communion.

Her prerogatives are likewise three: 1. In the soul, remission of sins. 2.
In the body, resurrection of the flesh. 3. Both in body and soul, life
euerlalasting.

The word, Credo, must be repeated in this article: but the preposition Ruffi^.
and Thomas 22^. quaest. 1. (...). 9.
(In) omitted, by which the Creator is distinguished from the creatures, and
things pertaining to God from things pertaining to men. It is said, I bel^eue
in God, in the Son, in the holy Ghost: but in all the rest, where the speech
is not of the Godhead, (In) is not added. I believe there is an holy Church, as
a company gathered to God, not in the Church as God. So the best copies and
the Cat^chis. Council. Trident. Bellarm. ledisma.
worst too, read.

Church is used in a sense Civil, for an ordinary assembly: Acts 19. 32. 39.
Ecclesiastical, for Holy places, 1. Cor. 14. 34. (...) Holy persons, Seuera^^;
for every faithful person is the Church of God, 1. Cor. 3. 16 loyntly, gathered
together.



In One house: Romans 16. 5. One eitie or country: the Church of Sardi, Ephesus:
Apocal. 3. The whole world; as in this article. (...)

For all men and Angels elected to life everlasting, and made one in Christ.

It has the name both in Greek and Latin of Ecclesia Augustine. exposit.
epist. ad Romans ^om. 4. fol. 833.
calling out and seuering from other, as being indeed a 1. Pet. 2. 9.
chosen and peculiar people: Bucanus loc. cem. tit. eccles. and Melchior. Can^s
loc. ^om. lib. 4. cap. 2.
(...), quas: (...).

Not Churches, but Church. Because all the congregations of the faithful in
the whole world make but Cant. 6. 8.
one only Church. For as a kingdom divided into many shires, and more towns,
is called one, because it has one and the same King, one and the same law: so
the Church is one, Ephesians. 4. 5.
because it lives by one and the same spirit, and is ruled by one and the same
Lord, and professes one and the same faith: not one as tied unto one place,
much less unto one person; as the Papists injuriously confine it: for as all
of them make the Catholic Church to be nothing else but the Roman Church; so
some of them have made the Roman Church nothing else but the Pope. Papa
virtualiter est tota ecclesia. says B. Jewel. 6. part. defense of apolog. fol.
610.
Haruaeus in lib. de potestate Papae, cap. 23. As the tumultuous Anabaptists
had framed a Church like Lib. 7. cap. 2. Na^. hist.
Plinies Acephali, all body and no head: so the Romish parasites have built a
Church like the Plautus in Triuum act. 4. sc. 2.
Toadestoole, all head and no body. See Epistle Dom. 17. post Trinit.

Holy.] There are many wicked in the Church, and the best men have some faults;
how then is it holy? Loc. com. tit. ecclesia.
Luther answers in a word: If I look upon my self, or my neighbor, I
cannot perceive that the Church is holy: but if I loooke upon Christ, who took
away the sins of the world, then I see it all holy. It is said well, I believe:
for we cannot see this holiness ouershadowed with manifold infirmities
outwardly, though the Kings Psalm. 45. 14.
daughter is all glorious inwardly.

Ephesians. 5. 26.
Sanctified by the washing of water through the word, that is, made clean from
all sin by the precious blood of Christ, which is daily presented unto us
both in the Word and in the Sacraments.

The Church then is holy three ways in respect: 1. Of her Romans 1^. 5. Ephesians.
1. 23.
head: which is most holy; like as one that has a fair face is said to be a
fair man, albeit he have some crooked finger, or goutie toe. 2. Of her faith:
which is holy, formaliter and effectiue: an Psalm. 19. 7.
undefiled law converting the soul, in it self holy: which forbids nothing
but that which is evil, and does not inioine any thing but that which is good,
and making other holy: being the Romans 1. 16.
power of God unto salvation. 3. In regard of her life: which is holy, Calvin.
Catechis.
free from sin 1. Epist. John 3. 9. Re^elus non facit peccatum, quia patitur
potius, vti Bernard.
reigning and condemning: even in this world made holy by sanctification
partially: by imputation of righteousness perfectly.

This must be construed of the Church invisible, the triumphant part whereof is
most holy, the militant more holy, then Infidels, Jews, Turks, Heretics,
and other out of the Church, who cannot enjoy the gift of sanctification: I say
more holy, because in this life we receive (says Romans 8 23.
Paul) but the first fruits of the spirit, not the tenths of the spirit, says
Vbi supra.
Luther: and therefore Idem ibidem tit. de profectu in Christianismo.
Christianus non est in facto, sed in fieri; not Church of Sect. in exposit. of
the Creed.
so perfect, but that he need to stoop under mercy.

Now for the Church visible: that is a field wherein are Tares as well as
wheat, and both must grow together until the great harvest, Matthew. 13.
compared to the Moon, Revel. 12. 1. sometime decreasing, sometime increasing:
but when it is in the full, it has some spots: and therefore Brownists and
Anabaptists obtrude more perfection upon the Church then God requires.

Heaven has none but good, Hell none but bad, Earth both good and bad. Calvin.
aduersus Anabaptist. art. 2.
Cum subspecie s^udij perfectionis, imperfectionem nullam tolerare possamus,
aut in corpore, aut in membris ecclesiae; tun^ di ibolum nos tumefacere
superbia, and ^^^poerisi seducere moneamur.

Catholic.] This word is used some for Orthodoxall; in which sense Baronius
annal. tom. 1. fol. 310.
Pacianus said, Christian is my name, Catholic my surname. So Rome was,
England is, a Catholic Church. But it properly signifies universal, as here:
because Chrysest. in 4. ad Ephesians.
extended to all places, and all times, and all persons, not only those who are
now living, but also those who have been from the beginning, and shall be to
the end of the world. So that to say the Roman Catholic Church, is like the
byword of Kent and Christendom: all one as to say, the particular, or the
special general Church.

From this natural acception arises that other borrowed, as in the Creed of
Athanasius: Haec est fides Catholica: that is, Vincentius ^winenis contra
haeres. cap. 3.
quod vbique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. The Catholic faith is
that which is taught Melchior Canus loc. com. lib. 4. cap. vlt.
all men: Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15. in all places, Romans 10. 18. at all
times, 2. Cor. 1. 19. And Psalm. 119. Thy word O Lord indureth for ever, and thy
truth also from generation to generation.

August. tract. 40. in Johan.
Fides est vides in us quae non vides, an Heb. 11. 1.
evidence of things not evident. So that the Church we must believe is
Catholic; not sensible, subject to view: but invisible, an object of faith.

Communion of Saints.] The Churches third property which Erasmus in Symb.
expounds the two former: I believe the Catholic Church Church of Scot.
expos. of the Creed.
, to wit, the communion of Saints. If a communion, then Catholic; if Saints,
then holy.

This communion has two parts: fellowship Of the members with the head,
because every Christian has interest in all the benefits of Christ, who is not
a garden flower private for a few, but Cant. 2. 1.
the Rose of the field common to all: and therefore S. Jude calls his grace,
the Common salvation. Of the members one with another: and it is either of the
Living with the living. Dead, with the living.


As in the natural body: so in the Church, Christ's mystical body, there is a
pe^petuall sympathy between ethe parts, 1. Cor. 12.
if one member suffer, all suffer with it; if one be had in honor, all rejoice
with it.

Martin Luther said well and witt^^y, Loc. com. tit. de Christiano.
that a Christian is a freeman, and bound unto none. And again, that he is a
diligent servant and vassal unto all. Vere vir omnium h^rarum, omnium operum,
omnium personarura: becoming all things unto all men, that he may win them
unto Christ. As that Antichristian in style, so the Christian is in deed:
Ser^us seruorum Dei.

There is a knot of fellowship also between the dead Saints and the living.
They pray to God for our good in Apocal. 6. 10.
general: and we praise God for their good in particular. I say we praise God
in his Laudate deum in sanctis. Psalm. 150. 1. vt Augustine. Hieron. etc.
Saints particularly, for giving Mary, Peter, Paul, such eminent graces on
earth: and now such unspeakable glory in heaven. In affection and heart we
Phil. 3. 20. The Churches first prerogative.
converse with them, always desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Remission of sinnes] All of us are borne in sin, orius damnati, quam nati,
(says Bernard) and after increasing we grow from evil to worse, until our
sins are remitted by Gods grace, conveyed unto us in the Church by his holy
word and Sacraments: it is a remission, not a satisfaction; a work not of our
merit, but of Gods mercy, who beholding us in Christ, reputes our sins as no
sins. I Esaias 44 22.
have put away thy transgressio^s as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, so
remitted as if they never were committed. Agaus D^i qui tollit peccata mundi,
Lomb. sent. lib. 4. did. 18.
dimittendo quae facta sunt, and adiuuando ne fiant, and perducendo ad vitam
vbi emnino fieri non possunt.

Sins in the plural, be they never so many for quantity: never so grievous
for quality. Say not with Cai^e Genesis 4. 15.
, My sin is greater then can be pardoned; but with Romans 8. 28.
Paul, All things work for the best unto them who love God. Remember (says
Loc. com. tit. de ubieribus conscien.
Luther) the speech of God to Rebecca: Mayor seruiet minori: The greater shall
serve the lesser. Our spiritual enemies are stronger, and our sins are
greater then we; yet they shall serve for our good: the greater shall serve the
lesser, I believe the r^mission of sins. A very great benefit, because this
pardon is our souls life.

Where the Romans 6. 23.
wages of sin is death of Romans ^. 12.
Body, which is the temporal T^^. 5. 6.
Soul, which is the ^^^rituall Eze^h. 33. 11.
Body and soul, which is eternal death.

See the Epistle Dom. 7. post Trinit.

Resurrection of the body.] The whole Creed in gross, and every parcel
argues a resu^rection: as In symbol.
Erasmus aptly. This one article is the Basis of all the rest: Ath^nagoras lib.
de re^ur. (...) The second prerogative.
for if there be a God almighty, then he is just; and if just, then another
reckoning in another world, where good men shall be rewarded, and evil
condignely punished. If a Jesus Christ who is our Savior, then he must 1.
Ioh. epist. 3. 8.
dissolve the works of Satan, which are sin and death: if an holy Ghost,
then all his hallowed temples, who did glorify him here, shall be glorified
of him hereafter. If a Church which is holy, then a remission of sins, a
resurrection of the body, a life everlasting, that all such as have been
subjects in his kingdom of grace, may likewise be Saints in his kingdom of
glory: Io. Combis compend. Theolog. lib. 4. cap. 1. The third prerogative.
for as God is principium effectiuum in creatione, refectiuum in redemptione:
so, perfectiuum in retributione.

Life everlasting.] The chief good, and last end which we gain by being in
the Church. All men on earth have life, but not everlasting; the damned in hell
endure that which is everlasting, yet not a life, but an eternal death, as
being perpetually tied unto torments, enforced ever to suffer that they would
not, neither can they do any thing that they would: only the Church elected by
the Father, redeemed by the Son, sanctified by the holy Ghost, shall enjoy
life everlasting; not by purchase or inheritance, but by Luke 12. 32.
donation and frank almaine. The spiritual hand which apprehends this deed
of gift is faith: and therefore begin well with I believe in God, and continue
well in being a member of his Holy Catholic Church, and thou shall be sure to
end well with everlasting life.

Amen.] Our assent to the Creed, signifying hereby that all which we have said
is 2. Cor. 1. 20.
true and certain.

O Lord increase our faith. Ruth 2. 4.
THe Nouelists have censured this, and other like Suffrages, as T. C. lib. 1.
page 138 and lib. 3. page 210.
short cuts or shreddings, rather wishes, then prayers. A rude speech, which
sauoureth of the shop, more then of the school: for our Church imitated herein
the meek Luke 18. 13.
Publicane, O God be merciful to me a sinner: and the good woman of Matthew. 15.
22
Cannan, Have mercy on me O Lord: and devout Mark. 10. 48.
Barti^^us; O son of David take pity on me. These short shreddings and lists
are of more value then their Northren broad cloth: the which (as we see)
shrinkes in the wetting: whereas our ancient custom has continued in the
Church above 1200 years: for Augustine writes, Cap. 10. ciusdem.
epist. 121, that the Christians of Egypt used in their Liturgy many prayers,
every one of the^ being very short, raptim quodammodo Huiusmodi quid Bernardus
etiam ser. 16. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
e^aculatas, as if they were darts thrown out with a kind of sudden quicknes,
lest y^ vigilant and erect attention of mind, which in devotion is very
requisite, should be wasted and dulled through continuance, if their prayers
were few, and long. Nam plerumque hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus
agitur, plus fletu quam afflatu, says the same Father in the same place.
Peruse that learned epistle, for it is a sufficient apology both for the
length of our whole service, as also for the shortness of our several prayers.
If Augustine now lived, and were made vmpire between the Nouelists and us, he
would rather approve many short prayers in England, then those two long
prayers, one before, and the other after sermon, in Scotland and Geneua.

For this particular Dominus vobiscum, it is taken out of the second chapter of
Ruth: an usual salutation among Gods people: Judge. 6. 12. Luke 1. 28.

And therefore the like among us, as God save you: God bless you: God speed,
etc. are not idle complements, or taking Gods holy name in vain: but Christian
and commendable duties. See Gospel Dom. 6. post Trinit. and Gospel on the
Annunciation.

This and the like salutations or benedictions in the time of divine service
between the Priest and people, are of great antiquity, and good use. For in
the Liturgies of S. James, Basil, Chrysostom, and that of the Bibliothec. pat.
tom. 4. col. 111.
Aethiopians, I find that the Priest was wont to say, Pax vobis: and the
people replied, Et cum spiritus tuo. In that old Liturgy of Spain, called
Ibid. col. 108.
Mozarabe, because the Christians were mingled with Arabians, it is enjoined
that the Priest should say, Dominus vobiscum, as in our book; and the people,
as ours, answered, Et cum spiritu tuo. Again, Adiuuate me fratres in
orationibus vestris, and the whole company replied, Adiuuet te Pater, filius,
spiritus sanctus. It is reported by Lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 16.
Bellarmine and Lib. de scriptor. Ecclesiast. fol. 51.
Tritenhemius, that one Petrus Damianus has written an whole book of this
argument, entitled, Dominus vobiscum: in which (as it should seem) sundry
needless questions are discussed; he lived in the days of William the
Conqueror, therefore thought probable that it was used in the Latin Church
ever since their Liturgy was composed by Damasus, about the year 376: deduced
out of the Greek Churches into the Roman, as Annot. in Tertull. de Corona
militis.
Beatus Rhenanus, and Master Acts and Monuments, fol. 1274. 1275.
Fox conjecture.

Cum spiritu tuo.
THe peoples answer, Cum spiritu tuo, is taken out of the second Cap. 4. ver.
22.
Epistle of Paul to Timothy: The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. It
answers the reapers answer to Boaz; The Lord bless thee. These mutual
salutations Durandus rational. divine. lib. 4. cap. 14.. 5
insinuate sweet agreement and love between the Pastor and parishioners: it
is the Ministers office to begin, and the peoples duty to correspond in good
affection and kindness: for love is the adamant of love. When the Minister is a
Paul, the people must be Galatians, if it were Galat. 4. 15.
possible, willing to pull out their eyes, and to give them for his good:
Calvin. in loc. ad Galat.
not only to reverence his place, but also to love his person.

A Pastor cannot use to the people a better wish then, The Lord be with you.
For Romans 8. 31.
if God be with them, who can be against them? and the people cannot make a
fitter reply, then, with thy spirit. For (as Plato divinely said) every man's
soul is himself.

Again, forasmuch as God is a spirit Job. 4. 24.
, and ought to be worshipped in spirit; it is meet we should perform this
spiritual service with all carnest contention and intention of spirit. See
Magnificat.

Christ promised, Matthew. 18. to be with us in our devotion, in the midst of
us, when we meet to pray. But, Ser. de eo, vbi duo aut tres.
as Eusebius Emissenus observes, how shall God be in the midst of thee, when
as thou art not in the midst of thy self? Quomodo erit deus in medio t^i, si
tecum ipse non fueris? If the advocate sleep, how shall the Judge awake? No
marvel if thou lose thy suite, when as in praying thou losest thy self.

Prayer is the Christians gunshot (says Loc. com. tit. inuocat.
Luther) Oration, bombardae Christianorum. As then a bullet out of a gun: so
prayers out of our mouth, can go no further then the spirit does carry them:
if they be Bernard. ser. 4. de Ieiunio and orat.
Timidae, they cannot fly far: if Tumidae, not pearce much; only fervent and
humble devotion hitteth the mark; penetrating the walls of heaven, albeit
they were brass, and the gates iron.

The Church has placed these mutual responsories at the very beginning of our
prayers after the Lessons and Confession of says: because John 15. 5.
Christ said, Without me ye can do nothing. Wherefore the Church, as I have
showed, begins her prayers at the first with, O Lord open thou our lips: and
here praying afresh, The Lord be with you; begins, I say, with, The Lord be
with you, and ends with, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Signifying hereby that
Christ is Apocal. 1. 8.
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, without whom we can neither begin
well, nor end well. And this is the reason why the Church after this
interchangeable salutation, enioynes us to pray, Lord have mercy upon us:
Christ have mercy upon us: Lord etc. using an earnest repetition (as I
conjecture) rather to press this one point, then (as Belethus lib. de Diuinis
officij^, cap. 36.
other write) to notify the three divine persons.

And it is worth observing, that we conclude these short Suffrages, as we
began: for as in the first we desire the Lord to be with us and our spirit; so
likewise in the last, that he would not take his holy spirit from us, but
accompany the whole Church unto the end and in the end.

I am occasioned in this place justly to defend the peoples answering the
Minister aloud in the Church. The beginning of which interlocutorie passages,
is ascribed by In vita Damasi.
Platina to Damasus Bishop of Rome; by Lib. 2. hist. cap. 24. Magdeburg. cent.
4. col. 897.
Theodoret to Diodorus Bishop of Antioch; by Lib. de rebus Eccles. cap. 25.
alludens forsitan ad Hexam. Amoros. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Walafridus Strabo to S. Ambrose Bishop of Millane: all which lived 1100 years
before the Church was acquainted with any French fashions: and yet Basil,
epist. 63. alleges that the Churches of Egypt, Libya, Thebes, Palestina,
Phoenicians, Syrians, Mesopotamia^s, used it long before. Ecclesiast. hist.
lib. 6. cap. 8.
Socrates and Vbi supra.
Strabo write, that Ignaetius, a scholar unto Hieron. catalog. script. Eccl.
in vita Ignat. Muscul. in Mat. 26. 30. thinks that Christ and his Apostles
used it.
Christ's own scholars, is thought to be the first author hereof. If any shall
expect greater antiquity and authority, we can fetch this order even from
the quier of heaven: I saw the Lord (said Cap 6. 3.
Esaias) set on an high Throne, the Seraphims stood upon it, and one cried to
another saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, all the world is full of
his glory.

Blessed spirits in praising God answer one another interchangeably: though
unhappy scornful spirits unmannerly term this custom, T. C. lib. 1. page
203.
Tossing of service. But it may be said of them, as Lib. contra Heluidium in
initio.
H^erome wrote of Heluidius: Existimant loquacitatem esse facundiam, and
maledicere omnibus bonae conscientiae signum arbitr^^tur.

The Magnificat.
LVKE 1. 46. My soul does magnify the Lord.
THis Hymn is nothing else, but a grace, for grace: great thanks, for great
things received of the Lord. Wherein observe the Modus and causa, Gorran. in
locum.
manner and matter of the Virgins exultation: or a thanksgiving in the two
former verses: and a reason in the rest, For he has regarded etc.

I purpose to ^ift every word of the former part severally: and because there
is (as Com. in 1. Galat. verse. 4. My.
Luther says) great Divinity in pronounes, I will first examine the pronoune
My: my soul, my spirit, my Savior. It is not enough yt other pray for us,
except our selves praise God for our selves. He that goes to Church by an
attorney, shall go to heaven also by a proxy.

There is an old Mensa philosophica sab. de mercator.
Legend of a Merchant, who never would go to Mass: but ever when he heard the
Saints bell, he said to his wife, Pray thou for thee and me. Upon a time he
dreamed that he and his wife were dead, and that they knocked at heaven gate
for entrance: S. Peter the porter (for so goes the tale) suffered his wife to
enter in, but thrust him out, saying, Illa intrauit pro se and te: as thy wife
went to Church for thee, so likewise she must go to heaven for thee. The
moral is good, howsoever the story be bad: insinuating that every one must
have both a personalitie of faith, my Savior: and a personalitie of devotion,
my soul, my spirit. Ambros. lib. 1. de officijs, cap. 8.
Officium is efficium, it is not enough that the master enjoin his family to
pray, or the father hear his child pray, or the Teacher exhort his people to
pray: but as every one has tasted of Gods bounty, so every one must perform
this duty, having oil of his Matthew. 25. 4.
own in his own lamp, saying and praying with the blessed Virgin, My soul,
my spirit.

Soul. Soul.
] As if she should thus speak, Thy benefits O Lord are so good, so great, so
manifest, so manifold, B^da in loc.
that I can not accord them with my tongue, but only record them in my heart.
It is truly said, he loves but little, who tells how much he loves: and so
surely he praises God but little, who makes it a tongue-toile and a lip-labor
only. Mark. 7. 6. This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me. God who gave all, will have all, and yet above all requires the
soul. Prou. 23. 26.
Son give me thy heart: for that alone commands all other members, as the
Matthew. 8. 9.
Centurion did his soldiers. It says to the foot, go, and it goes; unto
the hand, come, and it comes; unto the rest, do this, and they do it. It
does bend the knees, and join the hands, and lift up the eye, composeth the
countenance, disposes of the whole man: and therefore as that other Luke 10.
42.
Mary chose the better part, so this Mary bestowed upon God her best part, her
soul did magnify, her spirit rejoiced.

Some Divines expound these words jointly, some severally. The word spirit is
used in the holy Scripture sometime for the whole soul. 1. Cor. 7. 34. The
woman unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in
body and in spirit, that is, Ambros. com. in loc.
in soul.

So S. Augustine thinks that these two words here signify the same, because
the latter phrase, my spirit reioiceth in God my Savior, is nothing else but
an exegesis of the former, my soul does magnify the Lord: insinuating by this
repetition, my soul, my spirit, that her devotion was not hypocritical, but
cordial and unfeigned. It is observed in nature, that the Fox does nip the
neck, the Mastiue the throat, the Ferret the liver, but God especially cares
for the heart: being (as Ambrose speaks excellently) Non corticis, sed cordis
deus.

And therefore Mary was not content to praise the Lord from the rine of her
lips only, but also from the root of her heart. So Psalm. 103. 1.
David did pray, Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise
his holy name. So Coless. 3. 16.
Paul would have us pray: Sing to the Lord with a grace in your hearts. And so
the Church does desire that the Priest (who is the mouth of the people) should
pray, The Lord be with you, says the Minister, and the whole congregation
answers, And with thy spirit. Caroliu magnus fragment. de ritibus eccl.
veteris, Cassander Liturgica, cap. 21.
Hereby signifying, that this holy business ought to be performed with all
attention and intention of spirit.

Divines interpreting these two severally, distinguish between soul and
spirit: and so does the Scripture, 1. Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made
a living soul; the last Adam a quickening spirit. Soul is that by which we
live naturally: spirit is that, by which we live through grace supernaturally.
Or ( Calu. in loc.
as other) soul signifies the will, and spirit the understanding: as Heb. 4.
12. The word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul
and spirit: that is, Beza in loc.
of the will and understanding.

So that Mary saying here, my soul and my spirit, does intimate that she did
praise the Lord with attention in her understanding, and devotion in her
affection. They praise God with half an heart, who either having devotion,
want understanding: or else endued with understanding, want devotion: and so
while men pray with the soul without a spirit, or with the spirit, without a
soul, their heart is divided (as the Prophet Ose 10. cap. 2.
Ose: Diuisum est cor eorum:) and God has but one part, happily the least
piece.

The line then to be drawn from this example is, first that we pray with our
heart: secondly, with our whole heart, with all our soul, with all our spirit.

Doth] Does.
In the present. For as a gift to man, so glory to God, is most acceptable when
as it is seasonable: not deferred, but conferred in time. Aus^nius epigram. 84.
Gratia quae tarda est, ingrata est gratia. Seneca lib. 2. de beneficijs cap. 5.
Proprium est libenter facientis, cito facere.

Magnifie] Magnify.
The word signifies highly to commend, and extol: Magnum facere, to make
great. Now God is optimus maximus, already most great, and therefore cannot be
made more great in regard of himself: but all our vilifying and magnifying the
Lord, is in respect of others only.

When we blasheme the most holy name of God, as much as in us lies, we less^n
his greatness: when we bless his name, so much as in us is, we magnify his
glory, making that which is great in it self, to be reputed great of other. As
Lexie. Theol. verb. magnificati^.
one fitly, Magnificare nihil aliud est nisi magnum significare.

This magnifying consists in our conversation especially. Noli (says In Psalm.
133.
Augustine) gloriari quia lingua benedi^is, si vita maledicis. 1. Pet, 2. 12.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil
of you, may by your good works, which they shall see, glorify God in the day
of the visitation.

God is magnified of us (as Com. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Ambrose and Origin note) when as his image is repaired in us. Genesis 1. 26.
He created man according to his likeness: that is, as Ephesians. 4. 24.
Paul does interpret it, in righteousness and holiness. So that the more grace
we, the more glory God: he does appear greater in us, albeit he cannot be made
greater by us. He does not increase, but we grow from grace to grace, from
virtue to virtue: the which ought principally to stir us up unto this duty,
for that our selves are magnified, in magnifying him: as Mary shows here, My
soul does magnify the Lord, verse. 46. And, The Lord has magnified me, verse.
49. August. in Psalm. 66.
Qui maledicit domino, ipse minuitur, qui benedicit, angetur: prior est in
nobis benedictio domini, and consequens est, vt and nos benedicamus domino:
illa pluuia, iste fructus.

The Lord. The Lord.
] Lord is a name 1. Cor. 8. 6.
of might, Savior of mercy. Mary then (as Augustine and Maldonat. in loc.
other observe) praises him alone, who is able to help, because the Lord; and
willing, because a Savior.

And my spirit Spirit.
] Calvin. and Marlorat. i^ loc.
Such as distinguish between soul and spirit, make this a reason of the
former verse: My spirit has reioiced in God my Savior, and therefore my soul
does magnify the Lord: according to that of S. James 5. 13.
James; Is any merry? let him sing. So that this exultation of Mary, caused her
exaltation of God.

Inward re^oicing in spirit, is a great sign of a good conscience, Prou. 15.
15.
which is a continual feast. The wicked are oft^n merry, sometime mad merry:
but all is but from the t^eth outward. For (as Prou. 14. 13.
Solomon speaks) even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of
mirth is heaviness. But the good man (as the Virgin here) reioiceth in spirit:
all worldly meriments are more talked of then felt, but inward spiritual
reioicing is more felt then uttered.

It is (as the Zach. 9. 9.
Scripture calls it) a Iubilation, an exceeding great joy, which a man can
neither suppress, nor express sufficiently. Anonymus in Psalm. 46.
Nec reticere, nec recitare: for howsoever in the Court of Conscience there be
some pleading every day; yet the godly make it Hilary Term all the year. See
Gospel Dom. 1. Aduent. and Dom. 9. post. Trinit.

In God] In God.
Happily the spirit of the most wicked at sometime does rejoice, yet not in
God, nor in good: but in villainy, and vanity. Prou. 2. 14. They rejoice in
doing evil, and delight in frowardness: whereas in the good man the ioies
object is always good, goodness it self, God himself. David delights in the
Lord, Mary reioiceth in God. And this is so good a joy, that Phil. 4. 4.
Paul says, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. We may
rejoice in our friends, in our health, in our preferment, in our honest
recreation, in many other things, praeter Deum, beside God: yet in all, propter
Deum, for God, so far forth as they shall increase our spiritual reioicing
in the Lord. God forbid (says Galat. 6. 14.
Paul) that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ. In any
thing in comparison of this, in any thing which might hinder this, and yet in
all things for this. See the Epistle Dom. 4. Aduent.

Sauiour] Savior.
To consider God as a severe Judge, would make our heart to tremble: but to
consider him in Christ, in whom he is well pleased, is of all ghostly comfort
the greatest. And therefore if we desire to rejoice in spirit, let us not
behold God in the glass of the Law, which makes him a dreadful Judge: but in
the glass of the Gospel, which shows him a merciful Savior.

In every Christian there are two contrary natures; the flesh, and the spirit:
and that he may be a perfect man in Christ, he must subdue the one, and
strengthen the other: the Law is the ministry of death, and serves fitly for
the taming of our rebellious flesh: the Gospel is the power of God unto life,
containing the bountiful promises of God in Christ, and serves fitly for the
strengthening of the spirit. It is Luke 10 34. The Law as wine to search, the
Gospel as oil to supple.
oil to power into our wounds, and water of life to quench our thirsty souls.
As in name, so in nature, the Goodspell, or the Ghosts spell, that is, the word
and joy for the spirit. Mary then had good cause to Calvin. in loc.
add this epithete Savior, unto God: My spirit reioiceth in God my Savior.

My Sauiour] We note two conclusions out of this pronoune: the first against
some Papists; the second against all Papists. Swarez tom. 2. in tertia^ Thom.
disput. 3. and 4.
Some Popish writers affirm, that Mary was conceived and borne without
original sin, and that she lived and died without actual sin: contrary to
the scripture, Romans 3. 9. Gal. 3. 22. So D. Fulk annot. in Mat. 1.
that in honoring the feast of her conception and nativity, with the singular
privilege of Christ, they worship an Idol, and not her. For an Idol (as 1.
Cor. 8. 4.
Paul disputes) is nothing in the world: and so is that man or woman conceived
without sin, except Christ, who was conceived by the holy Ghost: as none
other ever was, or shall be.

Lombard. 3. sent. did. 3. Bellar. de amissione gratiae, lib. 4. cap. 15.
They ground this assertion upon a place of Augustine: De not. and gratia,
contra Pelagianos, cap. 36. tom. 7. fol. 506.
Excepta sanctae virgin Maria, de qua propter honorem domini, nullam prorsus
cum de peccatis agitur, habere volo quaestionem. Answer is made, that
Augustine elsewhere concludes all under sin (though he did in that place
forbear to rip up the faults of the mother in honor of her son) for in lib.
5. Tom. 7. fol. 742.
cap. 9. against Julian the Pelagian, he does intimate that Mary's body was
sinful flesh, concluding peremptorily; fol. 743.
Nullus est hominum praeter Christum, qui peccatum non habuerit gra^dioris
aetatis accessu: quia nullus est hominum praeter Christum, qui peccatum non
habuerit infantilis aetatis exortu. So likewise, Tom. 6. fol. 561
lib. de sancta Virginitate, cap. 3. Beatior Maria percipiendo ^idem Christi,
quam concipiendo carnem Christi: nihil enim ei materna propinquitas profuisset,
nisi foelicius Christum cord, quam carne gestasset. And in his Tom. 3. fol. 164
Treatise, De fide ad Petrum (for the Papists admit that book) Firmissime
creed, and nullatenus dubites, omnem hominem qui per concubitum viri and
mul^eris concipitur, cum peccato originali nasci, and ob hoc natura filium
irae. Thus Augustine expounds, and answers Augustine.

Now for holy Scriptures, if there were no more texts in the Bible, this one is
omnisufficient, to accuse Marie of some faults, and the Papists of much folly:
My spirit rejoices in God my Savior. He that has no sin, wants not a
Savior: but Marie rejoiced in a Savior, therefore she was sorry for her
sin. The whole need not a Physitio^, says Matthew. 9. 12.
Christ: but Marie calls for a salve, therefore surely she had some sore: and
if any sin, then she cannot be our Mediatrix, or Aduoca^e. Si peccatrix, non
deprecatrix. 1. Epist. John 2. cap.
Our Advocate is our propitiation for sin: 2. Cor. 5. 21.
but the propitiation for sin, knew no sin. Ergo, quae egebat, non agebat
aduocatum. And therefore M^ry, who needed a Savior her self, could not be a
savior of other.

Again, we gather out of this pronoune my, Mary's particular apprehension and
application of Christ's merits against all Papists; who Bellarm. lib. 1. de
Iustific. cap. 7
tea^h that a general confused implicit faith, is enough without any further
examination of Scriptures, or distinct belief. Contrary to the practice of
Christ, who prayed in our nature and name.

Matthew. 27. 46.
Deus meus, Deus meus. Of Psalm. 118. 28.
David, Thou art my God: of Thomas. Ioh. 20. 28.
My Lord: of Mary, My Savior.

The second part of this Hymn contains a reason why she did magnify the
Lord, namely for his goodness.

Toward Her self. He has regarded the lowlines of his handmaid; he has
magnified me. From henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. Other.

Regarded.] Regarded.
God is said in Scripture to regard three ways, (as Augustine notes upon this
place) secundum Cognitionem, Gratiam, Iudiciu^.

1. His eye of knowledge regards all things. Heb. 4. 13 There is not any
creature, which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open
unto him.

2. His favorable countenance and gracious eye is upon them Psalm. 33. 18.
who fear him, and upon them who trust in his mercy.

3. God in judgment will only regard his elect. For he will say to the
reprobate, Matthew. 25. 12.
Verily I know ye not. God regarded here Mary with his gracious eye,
vouchsafeing to make her both his child, and his mother. The one is a benefit
obtained of very Matthew. 7. 14.
few: the other denied unto all. It was only granted to Mary to be the mother
of Christ, Hugo Lincolniensi^ vti Surius in eius vita.
whereas it was denied unto all men, to be the father of Christ.

This was so great a grace to Mary, that as in this Hymn her self does
prophecy: From henceforth all generations shall account her blessed.

An Angel of heaven said that she was Luke 1. 28.
full of grace: Gratia plena in se, non ase; in her self, but not of her
self. And therefore her soul did magnify the Lord, and her spirit rejoiced
in God her Savior; not in regard of her own greatness, but in respect of his
goodness. For so she says, He has regarded.

The lo^linesse] Lowliness.
Marlor. in loc.
God cannot look above himself, because he has no superior: nor about
himself, for that he has no equal: he regards only such as are below him;
and therefore the lower a man is, the nearer unto God, the more exposed to his
sight who looks from above. Psalm. 113. 5, 6.
Who is like unto the Lord our God that has his dwelling so high, and yet
humbles himself to behold the things in heaven and earth? He takes up the
simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire. And Psalm. 138.
verse. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: but as
for the proud, he beholds them a far off. The most high then has especial
respect to such as are most low.

Now lowliness in holy Scripture is used both Actiuely, for humility.
Passiuely, for humiliation, baseness and affliction.

Origin, Beda, Bernard construe this of Mary's humility: but I think with the
most, and best, that she meant by lowliness, her base degree: Maldonat. in
locum.
For, Humilitas dum prod^^ur, perditur. He that brags of his humility, loses
it. It is (says Com. in cap. 1. Abdiam.
Hierome) the Christians Jewel.

Now, says Hom. 27.
Macarius, he is a foolish beggar who when he finds a Jewel, instantly
proclaims it, Inueni, inueni: for by this means he that has lost it, will
demand it again: so likewise when we boast of any good gift, the Lord who
lent, will resume it.

It is improbable then that Mary spoke this of her humility: for (as some
Iansenius, Beauxamis, Maldonat. in locum.
Popish writers observe) she did in this song ascribe all her happiness to
Gods mercy, and nothing to her own merit.

It is true, that as death is the last 1 Cor. 15. 26.
enemy: so pride the last sin that shall be destroyed in us. Innocentius de
contemptu mundi, lib. 2. cap. 31.
Inter omnia vitia tu semper es prima, semper es vltima: nam omne peccatum te
accedente commuttitur: and te recidente dimittitur. Epist. 56.
Augustine told Dioscorus, Vitia caetera in peccatis, superbia vero etiam in
benefactis timenda. When other sins die, secret pride gets strength in us: ex
Pet. Chrysolog. ser. 7.
remedijs generat morbos, even virtue is the matter of this vice: in such sort,
that a man will be proud, because he is not proud. But this was not Mary's mind
to boast, in that she did not boast: but, as the word and coher^nce more then
insinuate, she did understand by lowliness, her mean estate and ^ualitie.

Iuuencus, lib. 1. Euang. hist.
Quod me dignatus in altum, erigere ex humili, celsam. So does her self
construe the word, verse. 52. He has put down the mighty from their seat, and
has exalted the humble and meek: where humble is opposite to mighty, as in
this verse the lowliness of Mary to Gods highness. I press this point,
because some Papists (as Annot. in loc.
Erasmus affirms) have gathered out of this place, that Mary through her
modest carriage, worthily deserved to be the mother of Christ. Whereas
(besides the reasons alleged) the words of this verse, and the drift of the
whole song, confute them abundantly.

For (...), used by Luke, signifies properly baseness: whereas humility is
called (...): and albeit the vulgar Latin read, respexit humilitatem, yet
(...), is aspexit, as in our English Bibles, he looked on the poor degree of
his handmaid. And this is not only the critical Annotation of Erasmus, but
their own Iansenius, and Maldonatus observe the same: for her intent was not
to magnify her self, but to magnify the Lord.

Here then we may behold Mary's exceeding great misery, and Gods exceeding
great mercy: the good Ladies infelicitie, who descended of a noble house, yea a
royal blood, was notwithstanding a distressed silly maiden, so poor, that,
as we read Luke 2. 24. she was not able to buy a young lamb for an offering.
See the Gospel on the Purification.

Let Ierem. 9. 23.
not the wiseman glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches, nor the Nobleman of his
parentage, for one generation passes, and another comes: and 1. Sam. 2. 7.
as we have heard, so have we seen, some who came from the scepter, to hold the
plough; and other who came from the plough, to manage the scepter. And the
reason is re^dred in this Hymn; The Lord has put down the mighty from their
seat, and exalted the humble and meek: he has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away. This was his exceeding great
goodness toward Mary, to raise her out of the dust, so to magnify her, as
that all generations account her blessed.

From henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.] In the verse before
Magnificat, Elizabeth called her blessed: now the Virgin opposes all men to
Elizabeth, and all times to the present, saying; (as In loc.
Theophylact does note) that not Elizabeth only, but all men, and women, as at
this time, so for ever also shall account me blessed. All generations, that is,
all men in all generations (as the School does usually distinguish) genera
singulorum, albeit not singuligenerum, (or as In loc.
Euthymius) all people who believe aright in the Son, shall bless the
Mother; not all living, but all believing: for Jews, and Gentiles, and
Heretics, in stead of this honor, revile her. Lib. de haeresibus 56. haeres.
Augustine mentions Antidicomarianites, Heluidius in Hieromes age was (as
Lib. contra Lutherum, fol. 8 in margin.
Roffensis terms him) a Mariaemastix; and in our time some are content to give
her less, because the Papists have given her more then is due. Let us not make
the Spirit of truth a lier, which says, All generations shall call her
blessed. This shall, is officij, not necessitatis: all ought, howsoever all do
not bless this blessed Virgin.

For he that is mighty has magnified me.] Magna mihi fecit, has done
marvelous things in me. For it is wonderfully singular, and singularly
wonderful, that Mary should be both a virgin, and a mother: of such a son a
mother, as was her father: he that is mighty, and none but the Almighty
could thus magnfie Mary: she was blessed in bearing the Romans 9. 5.
most blessed, in whom Genesis 12. 3.
all nations of the earth are blessed. Unto this purpose Hom. 3. super Missus
est angelus Gabriel.
Bernard excellently, Non quia tu benedicta, ideo benedictus fructus ventris
tui: sed quia ille te praeuenit in benedictionibus dulcedinis, ideo tu
benedicta.

Hitherto concerning the goodness of God toward her self: now she remembers
his mercy toward other. His mercy is on the^ that fear him, etc. Generally,
1. In helping and comforting the^: He exalts the humbl^ and meek, filling
them with all good things. 2. In scattering and confounding their enemies: He
has scattered the proud, put do^n the mighty from their seat, and sent the
rich empty away.
More specially, 1. In promising. 2. In performing his gracious promise touching


the Messiah of the world: Remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel,
as he promised to our forefathers Abraham, and his seed for ever. These points
are Cant. 2. 5.
flagons of wine to comfort the distressed soul. For if God, who promised in
the beginning that the Genesis 3. 15.
seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, deferred his promise almost
4000. years, and yet at length accomplished the same to the very full: then no
doubt, God having promised the resurrection of the dead, and everlasting life,
will in his good time bring them to pass. That which is past, may confirm our
hope touching things to come: For he remembers his mercy toward his servant
Israel, and it is on them that fear him throughout all generations.

Cantate Domino. Psalm. 98.
THe Church has done well in joining to the Magnificat, Psalm 98: for the one
is a perfect echo to the other (all August. Hieron. Euthym. Calvin. Genebrard.
in loc.
Interpreters agreeing) that David's mystery, and Mary's history, are all one.
Whatsoever is obscurely foretold in his Psalm, is plainly told in her Song: as
he prophesied, O sing unto the Lord a new song; show your selves joyful* So
she practiced: My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit reioiceth in God
my Savior. And this ( John 4. 23.
as Christ teaches) is a new song: The hour comes, and now is when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth. The voice does say,
Magna fecit, He has done marvelous things: and the Echo: Magna mihi fecit
He has magnified, or done marvelous things in me. For it is an exceeding
wonder (as 1. Tim. 3. 16.
Paul speaks) a great mystery, that God should be manifested in the flesh,
that the father of all, should be the son of Mary. Voice: With his own
right hand, and with his holy arm has he gotten himself the victory. Echo:
He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts. Voice: The Lord declared his salvation, his
righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen. Echo: His
mercy is on them that fear him, throughout all generations: he has filled
the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Gentiles
esurientes, Iudaeos diuites, as Theophylact expounds it.

Voice: He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel.
Echo: He remembering his mercy, has helped his servant Israel.

In the whole Psalm five circumstances are to be considered especially: Who.
What. Whereto. Wherefore. Wherewith.

1. Who must sing: All men, all things For the Prophet in the latter end of the
Psalm does incite sensible men, by directing his speech unto insensible
creatures: Let the sea make a noise, let the floods clap their hands, and let
the hills be joyful. All which sing Psalms and Hymns in their kind: only
man, for whom all these were made, is unkind. Esaias 1. 3.
The ox knows his owner* and the dull a^^e his masters crib: but Israel has
not known, my people has not understood.

2. What: Sing a new song. This is man's end, to seek God in this life, to see
God in the next: to be a subject in the kingdom of grace, and Saint in the
kingdom of glory. Whatsoever in this world befalls us, we must sing: be
thankful for weal, for woe; songs ought always to be in our mouth and
sometimes a new song: for so David here, sing a new song: that is, August. in
loc.
let us put off the old man, and become new men, 2. Cor. 5. 17.
new creatures in Christ: for the old man sings old songs: only the new man
sings a new song, he speaks with a Mark. 16. 17.
new tongue, and walks in Matthew. 2. 12.
new ways: and therefore does new things, and sings new songs: his language is
not of Babylon, or Egypt, but of Canaan: his communication does edify men, his
song glorify God.

Or a new song, that is, a fresh song, Hieron. in loc.
noua res, nouum canticum; new for a new benefit. Ephesians. 5. 20. Give thanks
always for all things. It is very gross to thank God only in gross, and not
in parcel. Have thou been sick and now made whole? praise God with the Leper,
Luke 17, sing a new song, for this new salve.

Do thou hunger and thirst after righteousness; whereas heretofore thou
could not endure the words of exhortation and doctrine? sing a new song for
this new grace. Does almighty God give thee a true sense of thy sin; whereas
heretofore thou did draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it
were with cartropes, and wast given over to work all uncleanness, even with
greediness? O sing, sing, sing a new song for this new mercy.

Or new, that is, Calvin. in loc.
no common or ordinary song, but as Gods mercy toward us is exceeding
marvelous and extraordinary, so our thanks ought to be most exquisite, and
more then ordinary: not new in regard of the matter; for we may not pray to
God, or praise God, otherwise then he has prescribed in his word, which is the
old way, but new in respect of the manner and making, that as occasion is
offered, we may beat our wits after the best fashion to be thankful.

Or, because this Psalm is prophetical, a new song, that is, Augustine. and
Turre^rematensis in loc.
the song of the glorious Angels at Christ's birth, Luke 2. 14.
Glory to God on high, peace in earth, toward men good will; a song which the
world never heard before: that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents
head is an old song, the first that ever was sung: but this was no plain song;
till Christ did manifest himself in the flesh. In the old Testament there were
many old songs, but in the new Testament a new song.

That unto us is borne a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, in many respects a
new song: for whereas Christ was but shadowed in the Law, he is showed in the
Gospel: and new, because sung of new me^, of all men. Romans 10. 18.
For the sound of the Gospel is gone through all the earth, unto the ends of
the world: whereas in old time Gods old songs were sung in Jury, his name great
in Israel, at Salem his Tabernacle, and dwelling in Sion: Psalm. 76.

3. Whereto] To the Lord. See before Psalm 95.

4. Wherefore] For he has done marvelous things: he has opened his greatness
and goodness to the whole world, in his creation, and preservation, in his
redemption especially, being a work of greater might and mercy then all the
rest: for in the creation he made man like himself; but in the redemption he
made himself like man. Granatensis con. 2. Dom. 1. aduent.
Illic participes nos fecit bonorum suorum: hic particeps est factus malorum
nostrorum. In making the world, he spoke the word only and it was done: but
to redeem the world, dixit multa, and fecit mira, says the text: Passus est
dura verba, duriora verbera. The creation of the world was a work as it were
of his fingers: Psalm. 8. 3. When I consider the heaven, even the work of thy
fingers. But the redemption (as it is here called) is the work of his arm:
With his own right hand, and with his holy arm has he gotten himself the
victory.

So that if the Jews observed a Sabbath in honor of the worlds creation; how
many festiuals ought we to keep in thankful remembrance of our redemption? As
Diogenes said, every day was an holy day to a good man, so every day should be
a Sunday to the Christian man.

Aquinas excellently: Bonum gratiae vnius, maius est quam bonum naturae totius
vniuersi: The saving of one soul is a greater work, then the making of a whole
world: 12. quaest. 113. art. 9.

5. Wherewith: in a literal sense with all kind of Augustine. in Psalmum vlt.
music, Vocal: Sing to the Lord. Chordall: Praise him upon the Harp.
Pneumatical: With trumpets, etc.

In an allegorical exposition (as In locum.
Euthymius interpretes it) we must praise God in our actions, and praise him in
our contemplation: praise him in our words, praise him in our works: praise
him in our life, praise him at our death: being not only temples (as 1. Cor. 3
16.
Paul) but (as In Protreptico.
Clemens Alexandrinus calls us) Timbrels also of the holy Ghost.

Nunc dimittis, or the song of Simeon. Luke 2. 29. Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace.
Ovid epist. Hero. 7. epist.
Sic vbi f^ta vocant, vdis abiectus in herbis,
Ad vada Maeandri conci^it albus olor.
As the Swanue, so Simeon in his old age, ready ^o leave the world, did sing
more sweetly then ever he did before, Lord now let etc.

The which Hymn is a thanksgiving to God, for giving his Son to redeem his
servants.

And it has two principal parts: in the 1. He rejoices in regard of his own
particular: verse. 29. 30. 2. In regard of the general good our Savior Christ
brought to ye whole world: verse. 31. 32.

In the first note 2. things especially: 1. His willingness to die: Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace. 2. The reason of this willingness: For
mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Lord] The Papists often in their life, Lord.
specially at their death, use to commend themselves and their souls unto the
protection of the blessed Virgin: Maria matter gratiae, tu nos ab host protege,
and horamortis susc^pe. This is their doctrine, Lib. de beatitudine Sanctorum,
cap. 17.
Bellarmine auoweth it: this is their practice; Father Garnet at his execution
used this form of prayer twice publicly. But old Simeon here forgetting our
Lady, though she were present, commends his soul to the Lord, who rede^med it,
Lord now let thou etc.

Now] Simeon assuredly was not afraid to die before: but because a Luke 2. 26.
revelation was given unto him from the holy Ghost that he should not see
death, until he saw the Messiah, he was exceeding desirous to live, that he
might see the word of the Lord fulfilled. Calvin. in loc.
And therefore men abuse this example, saying they will be contented to die,
when such and such things come to pass, when all their daughters be well
married, and all their sons well placed. Old Simeon had a revelation for that
he did, whereas we have no warrant from God, for many things we fondly desire;
so that whether God grant them, or not, we must submit our selves unto his good
pleasure, Now and ever ready to depart in peace, when he does call: taking unto
us the resolution of Job; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Let thou] We may not our selves loose our souls, Let thou.
but let God let them out of prison. We must seek to mortify the flesh, and
to cast the world out of us: but to cast our selves out of the world, is an
Thomas 22 ae. quaest. 64. a^t 5.
offense against God. Our neighbor. Our selves.


Against God: who says, Thou shall not kill: if not another, much less thy
self. Luke 10. 27.
For thou must love thy neighbor as thy self: first thy self, then thy
neighbor as thy self. The nearer, the deerer. I Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
kill, and give life, says the Lord: we are not masters of our life, but only
stewards: and therefore may not spend it, or end it, as we please: but as God,
who bestowed it, will.

Against our neighbors: because men are not borne for themselves alone, but
for other also: being all members of one commonweal and politic body: so
that (as 1. Cor. 12. 26.
Paul says) if one member suffer, all suffer with it. Arist. Ethic. lib. 5.
cap. vlt.
Homo quilibet est pars communitatis: Every particular person is part of the
whole State. This is the true reason, why the King does take so precise an
account of the death even of his basest subject, because himself, and the
whole kingdom had interest in him.

Against our selves: Because by natural instinct every creature labors to
preserve it self; the fire strives with the water, the water fights with
the fire, the most silly worm does contend with the most strong man to
preserve it self: and therefore we may not butcher our selves, but expect Gods
leisure and pleasute to let us depart in peace.

Thy seruant] It is not a servile service, Thy servant.
but a perfect freedom to serve the Lord. And therefore as the good Empetour
Theodosius held it more noble to be membrum Ecclesis, q^^^^caput Imperij: so
may we resolve that it is better to be a servant of God, then Lord of all the
world. For while we serve him, all other creatures on earth and in heaven too
serve us: Heb. 1. 14.

In choosing a master, every man will shun principally three sorts of men: his
Enemy. Fellow. Servant.


He serves his greatest enemy, who serves the Devil: his fellow, who
serves the lust of his flesh: his servant, who serves the world. It is a base
service to serve the world: for that is to become a vassal unto our servant.
It is an uncertain service to serve the flesh: this master is so choleric,
so weak, so sickly, so fickle, that we may look every day to be turned out of
his doors: and that which is worst of all, he is least contented, when he is
most satisfied. Like to the Spa^^ard, a bad servant, but a worse master. It is
an unthrifty service to serve the Devil, all his wages is death: the more
service we do him, the worse is our estate. But he that serves God, has the
greatest Lord, who is most able; and the best Lord, who is most willing to
prefer his followers: and therefore let us say with Simeon, and boast with
Psalm. 116. 14.
David: O Lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant. See the Epistle on Simons
and Iudes day.

Depart] Depart.
Here first note the souls immortality: Death is not Cyprian sermon. de
mortalitate.
exitus, but transitus; not obitus, but abitus; not a dying, but a departing, a
transmigration and exodus out of our earthly pilgrimage, unto our heavenly
home. Ibidem and August. epist. 6.
Fratres mortui, non sunt amissi, sed praemissi: Tertull. lib. de patientia.
profectio est, quam p^tas mortem: A passage from the valley of death, unto the
land of the living.

2. Sam. 12. 23.
David said of his dead child, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to
me. Matthew. 22. 32.
Christ confirms this: Have you not read what is spoken of God, saying, I am
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isack, and the God of Jacob? Now God, says
Christ, is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Abraham then is alive,
Isack alive, Jacob alive; they cannot be said truly dead: but (as Simeon here)
departed.

The two receptacles of all souls after this life, Hell and Heaven, infallibly
demonstrate this point. Luke 16. 22.
Lazarus dies, and his soul is presently conveyed by blessed Angels unto the
bosom of Abraham: unhappy Dives dies and his soul is setcht and snatched away
by foul fiends unto the bottomless pit of hell.

As Gods eternal decrees have an end without a beginning: so the souls of men
have a beginning without an end. The soul and body part for a time, but they
shall meet again to receive an irr^uocable doom, either of, Come ye
blessed, or, Go ye cursed.

Secondly, note that dying is the Theophylact.
loosing of our soul from her bonds and fetters: our flesh is a sink of
sin, the prison of the mind, Plato in cratylo.
(...) quasi (...). Petrarcha de remedys, lib. 1. dialog. 5.
Qui gloriatur in viribus corporis, gloriatur in viribus carceris. And
therefore when Plato Ficinus in vita Platonis.
saw one of his school was a little too curious in pampering his body, said
wittily: What do you mean to make your prison so strong?

So that a soul departed is set at liberty: like a bird that is escaped out
of a cage.

The world is so full of evils, as that to write them all, would require
another world so great as it self. Petrarcha praefat. in lib. de remedijs
vtriusque fortunae.
Initium vitae caecitas and obliuio possidet, progressum labor, dolor exitum,
error omnia: Childhood is a foolish simplicity, youth a rash heat, manhood a
carking carfulness, old age a noisome languishing. Diu Hieron. epist.
Paulino, tom. 1. page 102.
viuendo portant funera sua, and quasi sepulchra dealbata plena sunt ossibus
mortuorum. It may be said of an old man, as Plato in Axioc^o.
Bias of the Mariner: Nec inter viuos, nec inter mortuos: (and as Plutarch of
Sardanapalus, and S. 1. Tim. 5. 6.
Paul of a widow living in pleasure) that he is dead and buried even while he
lives: and so passing from age to age, we pass from evil to evil; it is but
one wave driving another, until we arrive at the haven of death. Altercatio
cum Hadriano Imperat.
Epictetus spoke more like a Divine then a Philosopher: Homo calamitatis
fabula, infoelicitatis tabula. Though a King by war or wile should conquer
all the proud earth, yet he gets but a needles point, a mote, a mite, a nit, a
nothing. So that while we strive for things of this world, we fight as it were
like children, for pins and points. And therefore Phil. 1. 23.
Paul desired to be loosed, and to be with Christ* and (...) (as some Di^^nes
observe) prays here to be dismissed, (as Com. in Lucam lib. 2. cap. 2.
Ambrose does read) Dimitte: Lord let loose. Ser. de mort.
Cyprian and Hom. 15. in Lucam.
Origin, dim^^tes, in the future: as if he should say, Now Lord I hope thou
will suffer me to depart. Howsoever the word in the present, imports that death
is a Beauxamis in locum.
goale-deliuery: Nunc dimi^^isseruum: Now Lord thou set free thy servant:
as (...) is used, Act. 16. 35. Luke 23. 17.

Mantuan. in 1. part^enic. Marian. In peace.
Nam quid longa dies nobis, nis^ longa dolorum
Colluuies? longs patientia carceris aets.
In peace] Lexicon Theolog. verb. pax.
There are three kinds of peace: External Internal Et^rnall Peace of World.
Mind. God.


Or more plainly, peace between Man and man. God and man. Man and himself.

The last kind is meant here, though assuredly Simeon had all three: for our
peace with God, and so far as is possible love toward all men, breeds in us
a third peace, the which is the contentation of our mind and peace of
conscience: for which every man ought to labor all his life; but at his death
especially, that comfortably departing he may sing with old Simeon: Lord now
let etc.

I know many men have died discontent and rauing, without any sentiment of this
comfortable peace, to man's imagination, and yet notwithstanding were doubtless
Gods elect children. For, as De doctrina Christiana, lib. 1. cap. 14.
Augustine, many works of God concerning our salvation are done in, and by
their contraries. In the creation, all things were made, not of something, but
of nothing, clean contrary to the course of nature. In the work of
redemption, he does give life, not by life, but by death, and that a most
accursed death. Optimum fecit instrumentum vitae, quod erat pessimum mortis
genus. In our effectual vocation, he calls us by the Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 23.
unto the Jews a stumbling block, unto the world mere foolishnes, in reason
more likely to drive men from God, then to win and woo men to God. And when
it is his pleasure that any should depend upon his goodness and providence, he
makes them feel his anger, and to be nothing in themselves, that they may
rely altogether upon him. And thus happily the child of God, through Acts. 14.
22.
many tribulations, and, to our thinking, through the gulf of desperation,
enters into the kingdom of heaven. The love of God is like a Sea, into which
when a man is cast, he neither sees bank, nor feels bottom.

For there is a twofold presence of God in his children: 1. Felt and
perceived. 2. Secret and unknown.

Sometime God is not only present with his elect, but also makes them sensibly
perceive it, as Simeon here did: and therefore his mourning was turned into
mirth, and his sobs into songs.

Again, sometime God is present, but not felt: and this secret presence
sustaines us in all our troubles and temptatations: it intertaineth life in our
souls, when as to our judgment we are altogether dead, as there is life in
trees when they have cast their leaves. And therefore let no man be dismayed,
howsoever dismayed: for God does never leave those, whom he does love: but his
comfortable spirit is a secret friend, and often does us most good, when we
least perceive it: Esaias 41. 10 etc. 43. 2.

According to thy word.] According to thy word.
] If God promise, we may presume, Numb. 23. 19.
for he is not like man, that he should lie: neither as the son of man, that
he should repent. This should teach us to be hoiie, Leuit. 19. 2.
as God our Father is holy, Ephesians. 5. 1.
being followers of him as dear children. As he does ever keep his word with
us; so let us ever keep our oaths and promises one with another. It is well
observed, that aequinocation and lying is a kind of unchastity: for the mouth
and mind are coupled together in holy marriage: Matthew. 12. 34. Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And therefore when the tongue does
speak that which the heart never thought, our speech is conceived in
adultery, and he that breeds such bastard children, offends not only against
charity, but also against chastity.

Men say they must lie sometime for advantage, but it is a good conclusion both
in religion, and common experience, that honesty is the best policy, and
truth the only durable armor of proof. The shortest way commonly, the
foulest, the fairer way not much about. Psalm. 15.
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? or who shall rest upon thine holy
hill? even he that speaks the truth from his heart, he that uses no deceit
in his tongue, he that swears unto his neighbor, and disappointeth him not.

For mine eyes have seen thy saluation] I have seen the Messiah, The reason
why Simeon was willing to die.
in whom, and by whom thy salvation is wrought and brought unto us. As Simeon
saw Christ's humanity with the eyes of his body: so he saw Christ's Divinity
long before with the pearcing eyes of faith. He knew that the little babe which
he lulled in his arms, was the great God, whom the heaven of heavens could not
contain: and therefore believing in the Lord of life, he was not afraid of
death: but instantly breaks forth into this sweet song, Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have etc.

Death is unwelcome to carnal men, as Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Aristotle said, Of all Terribles the most Terrible. Philip Morney Treat. of
life and death.
They cry out upon the miseries of life, and yet when death comes, they do
as little children, who all the day complain, but when the medicine is brought
them, are nothing sick: as they who all the week run up and down the house
with pain of the teeth, and seeing the Barbor come to pull them out, feel no
more torment: as tender bodies in a pricking plurisie call, and cannot stay for
a Surgeon, and yet when they see him whetting his lancet to cut the throat of
the disease, pull in their arms and hide them in the bed. And the true reason
hereof is want of faith, because they do not unfeignedly believe that Christ
Jesus Ephesians. 4 8.
has led captivity captive, 1. Cor. 15. 54.
that he has swallowed up death in victory by his death, and opened unto us
the gates of eternal life. Luke 23. 42.
The blessed thief upon the Cross died joyfully, because he saw Christ, and
believed also that he should pass from a place of pain to a paradise of
pleasure. Acts 7. 56.
S. Stephen died joyfully, because he saw the heavens open, and Christ standing
at the right hand of the Father. Here S^meon departed joyfully, because his
eyes saw the salvation of the Lord.

As there are two degrees of faith, so two sorts of Christians; one weak,
another strong. The weak Christian is willing to live, and patient to die: but
the strong patient to live, and willing to die.

That a man may depart in peace, two things are requisite:

1. Preparation before death. 2. A right disposition at death.
Both which are procured only by faith in Christ. If a man were to fight hand
to hand with a mighty Dragon, in such wise that either he must kill or be
killed, his best course were to bereave him of his poison and sting. Death is a
Serpent, and the sting, wherewith he wounds us, is sin: so says 1. Cor.
15. 56.
S. Paul, The sting of death is sin. Now the true believer understands and
knows assuredly that Christ Jesus has satisfied the law, and then if no law,
no sin: and if no sin, death has no sting: well may death hiss, but it
cannot hurt: Psalm. 32. 1.
when our unrighteousness is forgiven, and sin covered, Christ both in life
and death is advantage: Philip. 1. 21.

Faith also procures a right disposition and behavior at death: for even as
when the children of Israel in the wilderness were stung with fiery Serpents,
and lay at the point of death, Numb. 21. 9.
they looked up to the Brazen Serpent, erected by Moses according to Gods
appointment, and were presently cured: so when any feel death draw near with
his fiery sting, to pearce the heart, they must fix the eye of a true faith
upon Christ exalted on the Cross, beholding death not in the glass of the
Law, which gives death an ugly face: but in the Gospels glass, setting
forth death, not as death, but as a 1. Cor. 11. 30.
sleep only. Faith is the spear which kills our last enemy: for when a man
is sure that his Job 19. 25.
redeemer lives, and that this 1. Cor. 15. 54.
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality; well may
he sing with old Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: and
triumph over ye grave with Paul; O death where is thy sting! O hell where is
thy victory! The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the law: but
thanks be given unto God, which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. And thus much of the reason, why Simeon was not afraid of death:
namely, for that he did hold in his arms, and behold with his eyes, the Lord
Christ, John 11. 25.
who is the resurrection and the life: he could say with a true heart unto God,
Psalm 31. 16.
thou art my God: and his soul did hear God saying unto him by his word,
Psalm. 35. 3.
I am thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.] The second part of
this Hymn, concerning the general good our Savior brought to the whole world.

Wherein two points are to be noted especially: 1. What are his benefits. 2. To
whom they belong.

The benefits are salvation, light, and glory. So that the world without
Christ, lies in damnation, darkness, and shame. Jesus is a Savior, Acts 4.
12.
neither is there salvation in any other: he is the John 1. 9. and 8. 12.
light of the world, and sun of righteousness, without whom all men sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, as Zacharias in his song: he is our
glory, without whom nothing belongs unto us but Baruch. 1. 15.
confusion and shame. These benefits are so great, that they ought to be had
in a Psalm. 111. 4.
perpetual remembrance. Christ himself commanded his last supper to be
reiterated often, and the Church inioyneth this Hymn to be sung daily, in a
thankful memorial hereof.

But unto whom appertain these benefits? Unto all. So says the text, which
thou have prepared before the face of all people. Esaias. 52. 10.
The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the sight of all the Gentiles, and
all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. Christ is set up
as a Esaias 11. 10.
sign to the people, and happily for this cause, among other, he was borne in
a Luke 2. 7.
common Inn, frequented by men of all sorts: and the first news of the
Gospel was preached in open fields, Luke 2. as prepared before the face of all
people.

But here we must observe, that albeit salvation pertaines to all, yet all
pertain not to it: none pertain to it, but such as take benefit by it: and
none take benefit by it, no more then by the brazen Serpent, but they who fix
their eyes on it. If we desire salvation, light, and glory, we must (as old
Simeon) embrace Christ ioyiully, and hold him in our arms of faith steadfastly.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles.] If any shall demand why Simeon here
calls Christ the light of the Gentiles, and glory of the Jews, rather then
the glory of Gentiles, and light of the Jews: answer is made that there is a
twofold darkness: Sin. Ignorance.


Sin is called in holy Scriptures a work of darkness for diverse respects:

1. Because it is committed against God, 1. Epist. John 1. 5.
who is light, through the suggestion of Satan, Ephesians. 6. 12.
who is the prince of darkness.

2. Because sin for the most part is committed in the dark: 1. These. 5. 7.
They that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are drunken, are drunken
in the night.

3. Because sin deserves eternal darkness: Matthew. 25. 30.
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness.

4. Because sin is committed especially through the darkness of
understanding: for Satan usually blinds our eyes of reason, and religion, and
makes sin appear not in it own name and nature, but under the name and
habit of virtue.

Now in regard of this kind of darkness, Christ was a light to the Jews, as
well as to the Gentiles: Esaias 60. 1. Arise O Jerusalem, be bright, for thy
light is come. John 1. 9. Christ does lighten every man that comes into the
world.

The second kind of darkness is ignorance: the light of the body is the eye,
so the eye of the soul is the understanding: and therefore as Christ says, if
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? The Jews in
this respect were not in such darkness as the Gentiles; having the Law, the
Prophets, the sacrifices and exercises of holy religion: In Jury was God
known, his name great in Israel, at Salem was his Tabernacle, his dwelling in
Sion: whereas the Ephesians. 2. 12.
Gentiles were strangers and aliens from the covenants of promise, without
hope, without God in the world: but now Christ Esaias 42. 6.
the light of the Gentiles, yea of the whole world, has broken down the
partition wall, and made of Ephesians. 2. 14.
Both, one; all people, Gods people. For as the Matthew. 5. 45.
natural Sun shines indifferently upon the good and evil: so the Mal. 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness shows his glorious saving light before the face of all
people; to lighten and open our eyes, that we may turn from darkness to
light, from the power of Satan unto God: Acts 26. 18.

Howsoever Christ be the light of all people, yet (as it follows) he is The
glory of his people Israel, unto whom pertained the Romans 9. 4.
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants. He was promised unto them, borne
of them, bred up them, he lived, preached, acted his great wonders among them:
in all which respects, he may be fitly called Isreal's glory.

Hence we may learn, first, that the Gospel is the greatest honor of a State.

Secondly, that all our glory depends on Christ our head, who is the King of
glory.

Thirdly, that a good man, especially a good Preacher, is a great ornament to
the Country wherein the lives: Athanaius is Nazianzen ad Herenem.
called the eye of his time; Baronius Annal. tom. 9. fol. 338.
Albinus, Englands Library; Bucanus praefat. loc. com.
Melancthon, the Phoenix of Germany; Christ, the glory of Israel.

Deus Misereatur.
THe parallel of Nunc dimittis is the 67. Psalm, being a Augustine. Hieron.
Hilar. Euthym. etc.
propecie of Christ, who is the Hieron. Euthym. Interlinearis gloss.
countenance of God: Heb. 1. 3. Coloss. 1. 15. For, Bellarm. Cat. cap. 3.
even as when one looks in a glass, presently he produces an image of
himself, so like, as no difference can be found, in so much as it is not only
like in shape, but in moving also, yet made without instruments in a moment
with one look only: so God the Father beholding himself in the glass of his
Divinity, does produce a countenance most like himself. And because he has
given unto this image all his own being, (which we cannot in beholding our
selves in a glass) therefore that image is the true Son of God, very God of
very God: whereas the Psalmist therefore: Show the light of thy countenance.
Simeon; Mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The Psalmist, That thy ways may be
known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations. Simeon; Thou have
prepared salvation before the face of all people. The Psalmist: Let the people
praise thee, that is, the Euthymius in locum.
Jews, let all the people, that is, the Genttiles: O let the nations rejoice
and be glad, etc. Simeon: A light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory
of thy people Israel.

In the whole Psalm two points are specially regardable: Affectus: A request
of the Church in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses: Effectus: A grant of God in the 6.
7. verses.

In the former observe Petitions for Our selves, in the 1. Generally: God be
merciful and bless us. Specially: Show us the light of thy countenance.
Other, in the 2. 3. 4.
Repetitions: God be merciful unto us. And again: Be merciful unto us: let
the people etc. And again: Let the people, let all the people praise thee.

God be merciful.] He is the 2. Cor. 1. 3.
father of mercies: Ergo, we must fly to him for mercy. Deus meus misericordia
mea, says David in the 59. Psalm. August. in Psalm. 58.
Si dicas salus mea, intelligo quia dat salutem: si dicas refugium meum,
intelligo quia confugis ad eum: si dicas fortitudo mea, intelligo quia dat
fortitudinem. Misericordia mea: quid est? totum quicquid sum, de misericordia
tua est. And therefore seeing Gods mercy is the fountain of all goodness, we
Hilar. and Felinus in loc.
must first desire him to be merciful, and then to bless us, he that has
enough mercy, shall never want any blessing. Musculus in locum.
The word original signifies rather favor, then pity; because pity is
showed only in adversity, not in prosperity: whereas favor in both: and
therefore the vulgar Latin, Deus misereatur, happily not so sufficient, as
Deus faueat: Be favorable O Lord, and so merciful as to bless us: that is,
not only to deliver us from evil, but also to give whatsoever is good. In more
particular, Show us the light of thy countenance.] Augustine. in locum.
Every man does desire blessing, but the good man only this blessing: Gloss.
ordinar. in locum.
all other are blessings of the left hand, common to the wicked with the godly;
but this a blessing of the right hand, which only belongs unto Gods elect.

God looks on the reprobate like an angry Judge with a cloudie countenance:
but beholds all his adopted children in Christ as a merciful father, with a
gracious aspect. Show us thy countenance, that is, indue us with true knowledge
of thy word, and a lively faith in thy Son, which is thine own image and
countenance, where we may learn to confess with Phil. 2. 8.
Paul, that all other things are but loss, in comparison of the superexcellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus: John 17. 3.
for it is eternal life to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ.

That thy way may be known.] As light, so the participation of Gods light is
communicatiue: we must not pray for our selves alone, but for all other, that
Gods way may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all nations. Thy
way, that is, thy will, thy word, thy works. Hieron. in locum.
Gods will must be known on earth, that it may be done on earth, as it is in
heaven. Except we know our Masters will, how shall we do it? Ergo, first pray
with David here: Let thy way be known upon earth: and then let all the people
praise thee. Gods will is revealed in his word, and his word is his Deuteronomy. 5.
32. 33
way wherein we must walk, turning neither to the right hand, nor to the left:
or thy way Felinus in locum.
, that is, thy works, as David elsewhere, Psalm. 25. 9. All the ways of the
Lord are mercy and truth. Aug. Hieron. Hilar.
Or as other most fitly, Thy way, that is, thy Christ, Thy saving health, that
is, thy Jesus: for I am the way, says our Savior: John 14. 6. No man comes
to the Father but by me: wherefore let thy son be known upon earth, thy
Jesus among all nations.

At this time God was known in Jury: but (says Hierome) Gods way was
unknown, his son was not as yet manifested in the flesh: this (as 1. Cor. 2.
7.
Paul speaks) was his wisdom: but now revealed, as S. John in his first Cap.
1. verse. 1.
epistle, We have heard, we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have
handled of the word of life. Blessed eyes, happy ears: for Luke 10. 24.
I tell you many Proph^^^ and Kings have desired to see the things which you
see, and have not seen them, and to hear the things which you hear, and have
not heard them.

Let the people praise thee.] Musculus in locum.
Mark the sweet order of the blessed Spirit: first mercy, then knowledge:
last of all, praising of God. We cannot see his countenance, except he be
merciful unto us: and we cannot praise him, except his way be known upon
earth: his mercy breeds knowledge, his knowledge praise. We must praise God,
always for all things, Ephesians. 5. 20. but especially for his saving health among
all nations. And this is the true reason why the Church in her Liturgy does
use so many Hymns, The reason why the Church does use so many Evangelical
Hymns in our L^turgie.
and give so much thanks unto God for the redemption of the world. Wherein
assuredly she did imitate the blessed Apostles in composing the Creed: the
greatest part whereof (as has been noted) is spent in the doctrine which
concerns our Savior Christ.

Let all the people] Some mislike the Letanie, for that it has a petition for
all men, and all people: yet we have both a precept, and a precedent out of
Gods own book: the Commandment is, 1. Tim. 2. I exhort that first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men. The practice of Gods Church is apparent in this place: let the people, let
all the people, which the Psalmographer uttered from the spirit of God, as the
mouth of God: and therefore let men construe the Church, as the Scripture, when
as the Church does speak Scripture, lest they wipe out of the Bible many good
lessons, (as Lib. 5. aduers. Marcion. Sinon spongia, lingua tamen and peruersa
interpretatione.
Tertulli in said of Marcion) if not with a sponge, yet with a peevish and
overthwart interpretation. And here let the Nouelist also remember, that both
our Book of the form of Common prayer, imprinted at M^dd^churg. 1586.
English reformers, and the Churches of Scotland, use the same petition for all
men, in their prayers after the Sermon.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad.] Calum. in loc.
It is observed to good purpose, that this clause is inserted fitly between
that doubled exclamation, Let the people praise thee: because none can praise
God well, except they do it heartily with joy and gladness. For as the Lord
loves a 2. Cor. 9. 7.
cheerful giver, so likewise a cheerful Psalm. 81. 1.
thanksgiuer. Musculus in locum.
God is terrible to the wicked, but a God of gladness to such as have seen
the light of his countenance: for being reconciled unto God, they have such
inward joy and peace, Philip. 4. 7.
that it passes all understanding.

For thou shall judge the folk righteously.] The Psalmist here may seem to
contradict himself: for if mercy make men rejoice, then judgment occasioneth
men to tremble. Answer is made, that all such as have known the ways of the
Lord, and rejoice in the strength of his salvation, all such as have the pardon
of their sins assured, and sealed, fear not that dreadful assise, because
they know the Judge is their advocate. Or, (as Hierome) let all nations
rejoice, because God does judge righteously, being the God of the Gentiles, as
well as of the Jews, Acts 10. 34. Hieron. Calu. Felinus.
Or, let all nations rejoice, because God does govern all nations; that
whereas Acts 14. 16.
heretofore they wandered in the fond imaginations of their own hearts, in wrie
ways, in by-waies; now they are directed by the spirit of truth to walk in
Gods high way which leads unto the celestial Jerusalem: now they shall know
Christ the way, the truth, and the life. For judging, is used often for ruling:
1. Sam. 7. 15. 2. Cor. 1. 10. So David here does expound himself: Thou shall
judge: that is, thou shall govern the nations.

Upon earth.] Not excluding things above, but openly meeting with their
impiety, who think God cares not for the things below: for Cicero de nature
deorum lib. ^.
Epicurus in old time so taught, and Epicures in our time so live, as if
almighty God did not mark what were done well or ill upon earth. Psalm. 94. 8.
O ye fools when will ye understand? He that planted the ear, shall he not
hear? or he that made the eye, shall he not see? August. ep. 111
Totus oculus est, quia omnia videt: totus manus est, quia omnia operatur:
totus pes est, quia vbique est: as Epist. 41. Lucilio.
Seneca like a Divine: Prope a te est Deus, tecum est, intus est. Ita dico
Lucili, sacer intra nos spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque obseruator and
custos.

Let the people.] This, and other manifest repetitions in this Psalm, may
serve for a warrant to justify the repetitions in our Liturgy: but I will
answer the Nouelist in the words of Paul, Romans 2. In that thou blamest
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that iudgest, do the same thing.

The reformers in one of their prayers after the Sermon, use repetition, and
that of the Lords prayer, and in such sort, that within a very narrow room it
is first expounded paraphrastically, then again reiterated every word
particularly. So likewise the Scottish Church in the ministration of Baptism
does enjoin that the Creed be repeated twice. First the father, or in his
absence the Godfather propounds it, and then instantly the Minister expounds
it. Wherefore that worthy Master Perkins Treat, how to apply Gods word: sect.
10.
Divine most truly, there is in England a schismatic and indiscreet
company, that would seem to cry out for discipline, their whole talk is of
it, and yet they neither know it, nor will be reformed by it.

Then shall the earth.] Literally the earth which was cursed for man's sin,
shall, through Gods blessing, give her increase. Psalm. 56. 14.
The valleys shall stand thick with corn, and our Psalm. 144. 13.
garners shall be full with all manner of store. So that if the Joel 1. 12.
vine be dried up, or the fig tree decayed, if our corn be blasted, or
grain so thin, that the Psalm. 129. 7.
mower cannot fill his hands, nor he that binds up the sheaues his bosom: we
must remember it is for our unthankfulness and sin. For if all the people praise
the Lord, then shall the earth bring forth her increase. See the two first
Chapters of Joel.

In a mystical sense: Mary Euthymius and Genebrard. in locum.
shall bring forth Christ: Augustine. in locum.
or, the blessed Apostles by preaching in all corners of the world shall bring
forth increase to God, a great harvest. This prophecy was fulfilled, Acts 2.
when S. Peter in one sermon converted about three thousand souls: Musculus in
locum.
or earth, that is, all men on earth shall bring forth fruit unto God, when
as they shall know him, and praise him. Let the people etc. let all the people
praise, then shall the earth bring forth increase.

God, even our own God.] Out of this sentence the Hieron. Euthymius etc.
Fathers, and (...) Tittelman, etc.
other Interpretors observe generally the Trinity and unity of God: the
Trinity in the threefold repetition of the word God* unity in the pronoune
him, all the ends of the world shall fear him: in the singular, not them, in
the plural. It is very remarkable that Christ the second person is called our
God: God* even our God, as being ours in many respects, as having taken upon
him our flesh, living among us, and at length also dying for us. Immanuel God
with us, Esaias 7. 14. Matthew. 1. 23. He bare Esaias 53. 4.
our infirmities, and answered for our 1. Pet. 2. 24.
iniquities, our 1. Ep. I^h. ^. 2.
reconciliuion, and our Ephesians. 2. 14.
peace, through whom and in whom God is ours, and we are his: Can. 6. 2.

All the ends of the world shall fear him.] In the 4 verse David desired
earnestly that all nations might be glad, and rejoice: now that they may fear:
teaching us hereby to serve the Lord in fear, and to rejoice unto him with
reverence: Psalm. 2. 11. So to fear him, as to serve him with Psalm. 100. 1.
gladness: and so to rejoice in him, as to work Philip. 2. 12.
out our salvation in fear and trembling: without joy we shall despair,
without fear presume.

The fear of God (as Solomon speaks) is the beginning of wisdom, not only
principium, but praecipium; not only primum, but primarium: and therefore as it
is called the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 1. 7; so likewise the end of all:
Ecclesiastes 12. 13. ^et us hear the end of all, fear God, and keep his
commandments.

This fear is not slavish, a distractiue and destructive fear, which
overthrows our assurance of says, and spiritual comfort: for such a fear
God forbids, Esaias 35 4. Luke 12. 32. but it is a filial and awful regarding
fear, Terrens a malo, tenens in bono: being an inseparable companion of a
lively faith, and therefore commanded in Gods word, and commended in his
servants: old Luke 2. 25.
Simeon a just man, and one that feared God: Acts 10. 2.
Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared God: Job. 1. 1.
Job a just man, and one that feared God: and here God is said to bless the
Church, in that all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Quicunque vult.
THe learned Athanasian Creed consists of two special parts, unfolding fully
the two chief secrets of holy belief: namely, The Unity and Trinity of God.
Incarnation and passion of Christ.



The which are called the principal mysteries of our faith, because in the
former is contained the first beginning and last end of man: in the second, the
only and most effectual mean to know the first beginning, and how to attain
unto the last end. So that Athanasius has comprehended in a very narrow room
both the beginning and middle and end of all our felicity. For this happily
called, the worlds eye, because he did see so much, and pierce so far into
these unsearchable and ineffable mysteries.

And as this excellent Confession is a key of belief; Letanie.
so the Letanie following, is as a common treasure house of all good devotion.
It may be said of the Church in composing that exquisite prayer, as it was of
Origin, writing upon the Canticles: In caeteris alios omnes vicit, in hoc
seipsam. In other parts of our Liturgy she surpasses all other: but in this
her self.

These points (I confess) come not now within the compass of my walk: but I
purpose pro Nosse and posse to justify them, and all other portions of our
Communion book in my larger expositions upon the Gospels and Epistles, as the
text shall occasion me justly. The next eminent Scripture to be considered in
this Tract is the Decalogue, recorded Exodus 20. 1.

The Decalogue.
Then God spoke all these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, etc.
THe Law was imprinted at the first in man's Romans 2. 15.
heart: the which is acknowledged even by profane Poets, as well as divine
Prophets in general.

Iuuenal. Satyr. 13.
Exemplo quodcunque malo committitur, ipsi

displicet authori: prima est haec vltio, quod se

Iudice, nemo nocens absoluitur, improba quamuis

gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit vrnam.

And Epist. 97.
Seneca notably: Prima and maxima peccantium poena peccasse: Sin is the
greatest punishment of sin in particular (as Loc. com. tit. de leg. naturae,
tom. 1. fol. 186.
Melancthon observes). Heathen authors have a pattern for every precept,
according to that of Paul, Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles having not the law, are a
law unto themselves.

But when the Albinus quaest* in Genesin. and Thom. 12 ae. quaest, 94. art. 5.
light of it through custom of sin began to wear away, it was openly
proclaimed unto the world, engraven in stone, written in a book, kept for
record in the Church, as a perfect abridgement of all law, setting down the
duties of all men, in all things, for all times.

In it observe Prefaces: One, of the Law writer: God spoke all these words,
etc. Another, of the Lawgiver: I am the Lord thy God, etc.
Precepts of the First table, concerning our love to God. Second, touching our
love to man.


In the former preface note: the Matter, all these words. Manner, When. Who.


The matter is: these words, that is, these sentences and all these: for
Almighty God spoke not the first Commandment only, nor the second, or third,
and left there; but he spoke them all: and therefore the Pope proves himself
Antigod in leaving out one, and dispensing with many. God gave so strict a
charge to keep every one, as any one: but the Vicar of God abounding with
unlimited authority, does first publish what he list, and then expound them
as he list. To leave them, who thus leave God, is our duty, because God spoke
them all, to beg of him obedience, and make conscience to keep them all, as
one wittily, Totus, Tota, Totum: The whole man, The whole law, The whole time
of his life.

In the manner, I note first the circumstance of time, when God spoke: namely,
when all the people were gathered together, and sanctified: as appears in the
former Chapter, then God spoke. Whereupon it is well observed that all men
ought to take notice of the law, whether they be Commoners, or Commanders, high
or low, none so mighty that is greater, or so mean that is less, then a
subject to God and his ordinances: and therefore Loc. com. tit. Antinomoi.
Martin Luther has worthily reprehended Antinomian preachers, who teach that
the Law need not be taught in the time of the Gospel. Indeed Christ is the
Romans 10. 4.
end of the Law but, as Contra aduersar. legis lib. 2. cap. 7.
Augustine construes it, finis perficiens, non interficiens: an end not
consuming, but consummating: for, as himself said, Matthew. 5. 17.
I came not to destroy the law, but to teach it, and do it.

Secondly, we may learn by this circumstance, due preparation when we come
before God either to speak or hear his word. Auenzoar used to say, that he
never gave purgation, but his heart did shake many days before. Let the
Physician of the soul then tremble, to think what hurt bad physic may do,
when it is administered abruptly, corruptly, without either pains in reading,
or reverence in speaking. Unto the Psalm. 50. 16.
ungodly said God; Why do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in
thy mouth, when as thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind
thee? If hearers of the Law, much more Preachers of the Gospel ought to be
thoroughly sanctified. In the Millers hand we lose but our meal: in the
Farriors hand but our mule: in the Lawyers hands but our goods: in the
Physicians hand but our life; but in the hands of a bad Divine we may lose
that which surpasses all, our soul.

Hearers also being of uncircumcised Acts 7. 51.
hearts and ears, ought to fit and prepare themselves, as Exodus 3. 5.
Moses and Joshua 5. 15.
Joshua were commanded, in disburdening their mind, when they come to Gods house
to hear God speak, not only from unlawful, but also from all lawful worldly
business; presenting themselves and their souls in the righteousness of Christ,
a Romans 12. 1.
living, holy, acceptable sacrifice to God: and it is the duty both of speaker
and hearer to desire the Lord that he would forgive our Chron. 2. 30. 18. 19.
want of preparation, and so to assist us with his holy spirit in handling of
his holy word, as that the whole business may be transacted for our good, and
his glory.

The second circumstance noted in the manner is the person, and that is God:
Then God spoke these words, in his own person, attended upon with millions of
Acts 7. 53. Gal. 3. 9.
glorious Angels, in Exodus 19. 18.
a flame of fire: so that there is never an idle word, but all full of
wonderful wisdom: so perfect a law, that it proves it self to be Gods law.
For the laws of men, albeit they fill many large volumes, are imperfect; some
statutes are added daily which were not thought upon before; many repealed,
which after experience taught not to be so profitable: but this law continues
the same for ever, comprehending in a few words all perfection of duty to God
and man, inioyning whatsoever is good, and forbidding whatsoever is evil.

God is author of all holy Scripture, but the ten Commandments are his, after
a more peculiar sort: first, because himself spoke them, and said in a sound
of words, and a distinct voice, Deuteronomy. 5. 24.
that the people both heard, and understood them: in which s^nse S. Acts 7. 38.
Stephen happily calls them oracula vina, lively oracles: not that they did
give life, for 2. Cor. 3. 7.
Paul shows that the Law was the ministration of death; but lively words, as
uttered by lively voice, not of men or Angels, as other Scripture, but
immediately thundered out by God himself.

Secondly, because God himself wrote them after a more special manner: he did
use men, and means in penning the Gospels and Epistles and other parts of
sacred writ: 1. Pet. 1. 21.
for holy men of God wrote as they were moved by the spirit of God: (as the
Theodoret praefat in Psalm. and Greg. praefat. in Job.
Fathers observe) they were the pens of Gods own finger: but in setting
down the Decalogue, Gods own finger was the pen: he made the tables also
wherein they were first written, that there might be nothing in them but only
Gods immediate work. Since then God had such special regard in delivering the
Law, we must hence learn with all humble reverence to receive the same. If
King Eglon Judges 3. 20.
a barbarous tyrant respected Ehud a man of mean quality, when he brought a
message from the Lord; how much more should we with awful respect embrace the
Decalogue, which God in his own person uttered? and it should make us
exceeding zealous also (notwithstanding the scoffs of Atheists and careless
worldlings) in observing and maintaining the same. For what need any fear to
defend that which God himself spoke: and whereof Mark. 8. 38.
Christ said, He that is ashamed of me, and my words in this world, I will be
ashamed of him before my father in the world to come. As a lively faith is the
best gloss upon the Gospel: so dutiful obedience is the best Commentary
upon the Law. To conclude with Augustine: Faciemus iubente imperatore, and non
faci^mus iubente creatore? 1. Sam. 3. 10.
Yes Lord, speak: for thy servants herare.

Thus much concerning the first preface. The second is of the Lawgiver: I am
the Lord, etc. Containing two sorts of arguments, to prove that he may give a
law; and that his people are bound to keep it. The first kind of reason is
taken from his essence and greatness in himself: I am Iehoua. The second from
his effects and goodness toward Israel.

In General: Thy God. More special: Which have brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Now whatsoever is said unto them, is said unto all. Almighty God is Heb. 13.
8.
ever the same, Apocal. 1. 4.
which is, which was, and which is to come: who being Iehoua the Lord, made us
of nothing: and therefore we being his creatures, owe obedience to his
commands in every thing; especially seeing he does not only press us with his
greatness, Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. 14
but allure us also with his goodness: being our God by covenant in holy
baptism, wherein he took us for his adopted children, and we took him for
our heavenly father: he took us for his spouse, we took him for our husband:
he took us for his people, we took him for our God: Malac. 1. 6.
A some therefore must honor his father, and a servant his master. If he be
ours, and we his, as he does provoke us in bounty: so we must answer him in
duty.

In more special, as God brought the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage: so has he delivered us from the servitude
of Satan, and sin, Calvin. vbi supra,. 15.
prefigured by that bondage of Egypt and Pharao: that being delivered out of
the hands of all our enemies, we might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

Ezech. 20. 7.
Egypt was a country given exceedingly to superstition and Idolatry,
worshipping the most base creatures, as Rats, Onyons, and Garlike: so that to
live in such a place was very dangerous to the soul, and bondage to natures
ingenuous, is an estate of all other most grievous to the body. Deliverance
then out of both, as benefits in their own nature very great, and in memory
most fresh, were good motives unto regardfull obedience.

The Lord has done so, and more then so for us, he has freed us from the
Romish Egypt, and Spanish bondage, with less difficulty and more ease: for we
are translated out of Babel and Egypt, without any travel or journey. Rome is
swept away from England, and Jerusalem is brought home to our doors. If
arguments drawn either from Gods infinite might or mercy ought to prevail;
let England show the greatest obedience: for England has had the greatest
deliverance.

The Precepts.
Love Romans 13. 10.
is the complement of the Law. Mat. ^2. 37. 39.
Christ therefore reduced all the ten Commandments unto these two: Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and thy neighbor as thy self. The
which (as Lib. 5. contra Marciou.
Tertullian observes) is not dispendium, but compendium legis: not a
curtalling, but a full abridgement of the whole law. Yet I find three sundry
partitions of the seuerals.

Antiquit lib. 3. cap. 6.
Josephus and Lib. de Decalogo.
Philo part them equally, making five Commandments in each table: the curious
and learned may peruse Sextus Senensis Bibliothec. sanct. lib. 2. page 59. and
Gallasius annot. in Irenaei, lib. 2. cap. 42.

Lombard out of Quaest. 71. in Exodus and epist. 119. cap. 11.
Augustine, and generally the school men out of Lib. 3. sent. did. 37.
Lombard, in honor of the Trinity, divide the first table into three
Commandments, and the second into seven.

But all our new writers, and most of the old Doctors, ascribe four to the
first, six to the second: among the Hebrews, Ramus de religion. lib. 2. c. 3.
Aben Esra: the Greeks, In Synopsi.
Athanasius, Hom. 8. in Exodus
Origin, Hom. 49. in Matthew.
Chrysostom: the Latins, Hierome, Ambrose in epist. ad Ephesios, cap. 6.

Wherefore being compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses, I follow the
Churches order, assigning four concerning our duty to God, and six touching
our duty to man.

The first table then is a lantern to guide us in the worship of God; as Io.
de Combis compend. lib. 5. cap. 59.
some write, The two first commandments concern God the Father as our
Creator: the third, God the Son as our redeemer: the fourth, God the holy
Ghost as our sanctifier. Yet so that we worship the Trinity in unity, and
unity in trinity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance.

Or as Herma^. Colon. Archiepis. explicat. decalog.
other: the two first Commandments intimate how we must worship God in our
heart: the third, how we must worship God in our tongue: the fourth, how we
must worship God with both, in sanctifying the Sabbath.

Or the first table does set down two points especially: 1. The having of the
true God for our God, in the first, Thou shall have no other gods but me. 2.
The worshipping of this one God, in the other three.

The first Commandment is observed in exercising the three theological
virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity.

He that unfeignedly believes in God, has God for his God: because he takes
God for the chief verity: and in this unbelievers and misbeleeuers offend.
He that hops in God, has God for his God, in that he takes him for most
faithful, most pitiful, and also most potent: as being assuredly persuaded
that he can, and will help him in all his necessity. And in this they sin
who despair of the mercies of God, or do trust more in men, then in God: or
so much in men, as in God. He that loves God above all things, has God for
his God, in holding him for the chief good: and in this they trespass who
love any creature more then God, or equal with God, and much more they that
hate God: for it is a sound conclusion in Divinity; that is our God which we
love best, and esteem most.

Concerning the worship of God, note the Manner: in the 2. Commandment. End:
in the 3. Commandment. Time and place: in the 4. Com.

The second does describe the manner of his worship: Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, etc. forbidding all strange worship, and inioyning pure
worship according to his word: Hilarious.
for to devise fantasies of God, is as horrible as to say there is no God. And
therefore though we should grant, that Images and pictures of God are as it
were the Laymans Alphabet, and the peoples Almanacke: yet forasmuch as these
books are not imprinted Cum priuilegio, but on the contrary prohibited; it is
unlawful to learn what God is by them, or to worship God in, or under them.
And lest any should presume, God has fensed in this commandment with a very
strong reason, I am the Lord, and therefore can punish: a iealo^s God, and
therefore will punish grievously such, as give that honor to another which
only belongs unto me.

The end of Gods worship is his glory, provided for in the third Commandment:
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

The which is done two ways, in our Works. Words.

In our conversation: when as our leaud life does occasion enemies of religion
to revile the Gospel, and Romans 2. 24.
blaspheme God. It is to take Christ's name in vain, when we play the Gentiles
under the name of Christians; as Paul to 1. Titus 16.
Titus: professing God in word, but denying him in our works. Saluianus de
gubernatione. dei, lib. 4.
Hoc ipso Christiani deteriores quo meliores esse deberent: 2. Tim. 2. 19.
He that calls on the name of Christ, must depart from iniquity.

Secondly, we take Gods name in vain by speech; and that without an oath, or
with an oath: without an oath, when we talk of himself, his essence, titles,
attributes, holy word, wonderful works irreuerently and unworthily without
any devotion, or awful regard of his excellent Majesty.

We blaspheme God with an oath, by swearing either Idly. Falsely,

Idly out of Weakness: when in our ordinary talk, through a Basilicon
Doron, lib. 1. page 17
custom in sin, we fill up our periods with Matthew. 5. 37.
unnecessary oaths. Wickedness: as when a wretch in his discontented humor
shall bind himself with an oath to do some notable mischief. So certain
Jews, Acts 23. swear that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed Paul: or when he shall despitefully swear to vex the good spirit of
God, and to trample the blood of Christ under his feet: if cards, or bowls,
or dice, run against him, he will make his tongue to run so fast against
God: or when he does swear by heaven, or earth, or any other creature, Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Matthew. 5. 34.
in stead of the Creator. An oath is an inuocating of God: he therefore that
swears by the light, makes light his God: he that swears by the Mass, does
make that Idol his God.

A man may forswear himself three ways, as Lib. 3. sent. did. 39.
Lombard out of De verb^ Apostoli, sermon. 28. tom. 10. fol. 264.
Augustine: when he does swear 1. That which is false, and he knows it
false. 2. That which is true, but he thought it false. 3. That which is false,
but he held it true.

The two first kinds are abominable: namely, when a man swears either that he
knows to be false, or thinks to be false: but the third in the Court of
Conscience is no sin; because it is with forswearing as with lying: Perjury
is nothing else but a lie bound with an oath. Aulus Gellius, lib. 11. cap. 11.
and Augustine. de mendat. ad Consent. cap. 11.
As then a man may tell an untruth, and yet not lie: so likewise swear that
which is false, and yet not swear falsely. Ierem 4. 2.
Thou shall swear in truth, that is, as thou shall in thy conscience and
science think to be true: August. epis^. 154.
for doubtless it is a lesser offense to swear by a false god truly, then to
swear by the true God falsely: it is a sin to lie, but a double sin to
swear and lie.

The 4. Commandment.
THe fourth Commandment does set down the time and place of Gods holy
worship: the time expressly, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day: the which
insinuates also the place; for God was publicly worshipped in his Sanctuary,
in his Tabernacle, in his Temple. Leuiticus 19. 30. Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. The Sabbath (as Ramus de relig. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
one calls it) is Gods schooleday: the Preachers are his Vshers, and the
Church is his open schoolehouse.

This Commandment is hedged in on every side, lest we should break out from
observing it: with a caveat before, Remember: and two reasons after, one drawn
from the equity of the law: Six days shall thou labor: As if God should
speak thus: If I permit thee six whole days to follow thine own business,
thou may well afford one only for my service: but six days shall thou
labor and do all thine own work: therefore hallow the seventh in doing my
work. Six days shall thou labor. B. Babington and Calvin. Cat.
A permission, or a remission of Gods right, who might challenge all, rather
then an absolute commandment: Perkins aurea Cat. cap. 23.
for the Church upon just occasion may separate some week days also, to the
service of the Lord and rest from labor. Joel 2. 15. Blow the trumpet in Sion,
sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly. Days of public fasting, for some
great judgment: days of public reioicing, for some great benefit, are not
unlawful, but exceeding commendable, yea necessary. Yet this permission is a
Perkins treat. of callings.
commission against idleness, because every man must live by the Genesis 3. 19.
sweat of his brows, or sweat of his brains: having some profession or
occupation or 1. Cor. 7. 20.
vocation, wherein he must labor faithfully.

Another argument is taken from the Law-giuers example: For in six days the
Lord made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh day. God requires no more
then himself performed, his own practice is a Commentary upon his law. This
may teach all Magistrates, all masters, all superiors who prescribe laws unto
other, to become first an unprinted law themselves. If the Prince will have his
Court religious, himself must be forward in devotion: if the father will have
his children possess their 1. Sam. 21. 5.
vessels in chastity, then himself must not Ier. 5. 8.
neigh after his neighbors wife. When Sabbath breakers are rebuked, all their
answer is, other, and that the most do so. If they will follow fashion and
example, let them follow the best: Fashion not your selves like the Romans 12. 2.
world: but be ye followers of Ephesians. 5. 1.
God: who framed the whole world in six days, and rested the seventh: he
rested from creating, not governing; from making of new kinds of creatures, not
singular things: he is not (as Epicurus imagined) idle, but always working: John
5. 17. My father works hitherto, and I work.

The Commandment it self is First, propounded briefly: Keep holy the Sabbath
day. Then expounded more largely: showing 1. What is the Sabbath day, namely,
the seventh. 2. How it must be sanctified: In it thou shall do no manner of
work.


Keep holy.] This day has no more holiness in it self then other times:
only God has appointed it to holy uses above other: and therefore we must
keep it more holy then other.

The Sabbath.] There is sabbathum Pectoris, of the mind. Temporis, of time.

The sabbath of the mind Tho^. 12^, quaest. 100. art. 5.
is double: Internal, peace of conscience in the kingdom of grace. Eternal,
rest of body and soul in the kingdom of glory.

When as Apocal. 14. 13.
we shall rest from our labors, Apoc. 7. 17.
all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and cares from our heart.

Among the Jews the sabbath of time was of Days. Years.

Days Lesser: every seventh day. John 19. 31.
Greater: as when the Passover fell on the Sabbath: as it did when Christ
suffered.

Leuit. 25.
Years: Every seventh year, a Sabbath of rest to the land. Every seuen-times
seven year: which was 49. and then followed in the 50. year the Iubile.

This Sabbath is of days, expressly, kept holy the seventh day.

There is A natural day, which is the space of 24 hours: a night and a day:
Genesis 1. 5. An artificial day: the space of 12. hours: as Christ: John 11. 9.
from the Sun rising to the Sun setting; of which I think this Commandment
is understood. For albeit the Jews counted the Sabbath from evening to
evening, yet it was but as they reckoned other days; not to sit up and watch
all night: but to spend in Gods service so much of the natural day, as may be
spared without hurting the body.

The seventh is the Sabbath.] It is the judgment of the most and best
Interpreters, that the Sabbath is M^lancthon tom. 1. fol. 6. and tom. 2. sol.
362.
morale quoad genus, but ceremoniale quoad speciem: Ceremonial for the Church
him. concerning the time and place of prayer.
manner, albeit moral for the matter. I say ceremonial it. regard of the
particular: B. Babington.
as the strict observation of the same day and same rest: precisely to keep
the Saturday, and strictly to cease from all labor, as the Jews did, was a
shadow: therefore abrogated by the coming of the body, Christ.

The blessed Apostles herein led by the spirit of truth, and (as some think)
by Christ's own Job. 20. 19. 28.
example, Acts 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Apocal. 1. 10.
altered, and so by consequence abrogated the particular day. Consentaneum est
Apostolos hanc ipsam ob causam mutassediem, vt oftenderent exemplum
abrogationis legum ceremonialium in die septimo: Melanct. tom. 2. fol. 363.

Whereas therefore the Jews observed their Sabbath on the seventh day, we
celebrate the eighth. They gave God the last day of the week: but Christians
better honor him with the first: they keep their Sabbath in honor of the
worlds creation; but Christians in memorial of the worlds redemption, a work
of greater might and mercy: and therefore good reason the greater work should
carry away the credit of the day. See the Gospel on Saint Thomas day.

The particular rest of the Jews is Caluins Cat. Perkins aurea Caten. cap. 23.
Ram. ^ereligione, lib. 2. c. 6.
ceremonial also: for it is a type of our inward resting from sin in this
life: Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. and a figure of our Caluins Instit. lib. 2.
cap. 8.. 31.
eternal Sabbath in the next: as S. D. Fulk upon Heb. 4. 4. Master Deering
lect. 19. upon Heb.
Paul disputes, Heb. 4.

Yet this Commandment is moral in the general. As for example, we must
keep one day in the seven holy to the Lord: wherein we must do no manner of
work, which may let the ministry of Gods word, and other exercises of piety.
We must leave to do our work, that the Lord may bring forth in us his work.

The duties then required on the Lords day be principally two: Rest. And a
sanctification of this rest.

A double Sabbath; rest from labor, and rest from sin: for as Vbi supra.
our Church does determine, two sorts of people transgress this Commandment
especially: 1. Such as will not rest from their ordinary labor, but drive and
carry, row and ferry on Su^day. 2. Such as will rest in ungodliness, idly
spending this holy day in pampering, pointing, painting themselves. So that God
is more dishonored, and the Devil better served upon Sunday, then on all the
days of the week beside.


Thou shall do no manner of work.] That is, no servile work of thine ordinary
calling; which may be done the day before, or left well undone till the day
after. But some works are lawful: namely, such as appertain to the public
worship of God: as painful preaching of the sacred word, reading of divine
prayers, administering of the blessed Sacraments, and every work subordinate to
these: as ringing of bells, and traveling to Church, Acts 1. 12. 2. Kings 4. 23.

And works of mercy toward Our selves: as provision of meat and drink,
Matthew. 12. 1. Other Men: our Savior healed the man with the d^ied hand on the
Sabbath, Mark. 3. 5. Beasts: in watering cattle, and helping them out of pound
and pit: Luke 14. 5.


Works of present necessity: Perkins vbi supra.
Physicians on the Lords day may visit their patients; Midwiues help women
with child, Shepherds attend their flock, Mariners their voyage, 1. Mac. 2. 41.
Soldiers may fight, and Esday ^n the 4. Commandment.
messengers ride post for the great good of the Commonwealth.

Works of honest recreations also, so far as they may rather help then
hinder our cheerful serving of the Lord: and the reason of all this is given
by Christ; Mar. 2. 27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath.

Thou.] Thy wife is not named, because she is presumed to be thy self: that
whatsoever is forbidden thy self, must also be known to be forbidden thy
second self.

Thy son and thy daughter.] Every man is a Ester 1. 21.
governor in his own house; and therefore must take charge of such as are
under him: Augustine.
Adduc eos ad domum dei tecum, qui sunt in domo tua tecum: matter Ecclesia
aliquos a te petit, aliquos repetit; petit eos quos apud te inuenit, repetit
quos per te perdidit.

Thy man servant.] This is for Thy good. Their good. The common good.

Thy good: For he that on Sunday shall learn his duty, will be more fit all
the week to do his duty: such as obey God with a good conscience, will serve
their master with an upright heart, as Genesis 30. 27.
Jacob served Laban, and Genesis 39. 5.
Joseph Pharaoh.

Again, it is for thy good often to Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
remember with thankfulness, that God has made thee master, and him servant:
whereas he might have made thee servant, and him master.

For their good: that they may John 17. 3.
know God, and whom he has sent Christ Jesus, John 14. 6.
the way, the truth, and the life. Thy servants are men of the same mold with
thee: Macrob. saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 11. and Ambros. sermon. 33.
Iisdem and constant and n^triuntur elementis, eundem spiritum ab eodem
principio carpunt, eodem fruun. ur coelo, aequa viuunt, aeque moriuntur, serui,
sunt, imo conserui. That is, in the words of scripture, Gal. 3. 28.
Thy servants are all one with thee in Christ: made of the same God, redeemed
with the same price, subject to the same law, belonging to the same master:
Ephesians. 6. 9. Pity then and piety require that thou see them observe the Lords
day, for the good as well of their bodies as souls.

For the common good: Calvin. Cat.
For every man has just cause to be ready willingly to labor all the week,
when as he is assured he shall rest on Sunday.

Thy cattle.] Hence we may gather much comfort: for if God in his mercy
provide for the welfare even of our brute beasts, of which he has made us
Lords; he will assuredly much more respect us his servants and children: he
cannot be careless for men, who is so careful for oxen.

The Commandments are so well known, and often expounded, that as Tract. 50.
in Iobannem.
Augustine speaks in the like case: Desiderant auditorem magis quam
expositorem. I pass therefore from the first table, containing all duty to
God, unto the second, teaching all duty to man: I say to man as the proper
immediate object of them. Otherwise these Commandments are done unto God also:
for he that clotheth the naked, and visits the sick, does it unto Christ:
Matthew. 25. 40.

The law then concerning our neighbor is partly Affirmative, teaching us to do
him all good: Honor thy father and mother, etc. Negative, teaching us to do
him no hurt: Thou shall not kill, etc.

This table begins with honor of our father: Herman. explicat. decalog.
First, because next unto God we must honor those who are in the place of God.

Secondly, because the neglect of this one Commandment occasioneth all
disorder against the rest: for if superiors govern well, and inferiors obey
well; how can any man be wronged in word or deed?

Bellarm. Cat.
Thirdly, because of all neighbors our parents are most near to us, as being
most bound to them, of whom we have received our life. Thy parent is Gods
instrument for thy natural being: thy Prince Gods instrument for thy civil
being: thy Pastor Gods instrument for thy spiritual being. Wherefore as thou
art a man thou must honor thy natural father; as a citizen honor thy civil
father; as a Christian honor thy ecclesiastical father.

Honor imports especially 3. things: Obedience. Reverence. Maintenance.

Obedience. Children obey your parents in all things: Coloss. 3. 20: that is,
as Paul does interpret himself, Ephesians. 6. 1 in the Lord. In all things
agreeable to the will of God: otherwise for Christ's love we must hate father
and mother, Luke 14. 26. De vita Eremit. ad Heliodorum, tom. 1* fol. 1.
Hierome notably: Licet sparso crine and scissis vestibus vbera quibus te
nutrier at m^ter oftendat, licet in lim^ne pater iaceat, per calcatum perge
patre^, siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis euola. The most eminent paternes of
obedience to father and mother are the Ierem. 35.
Rechabits, Genesis 22.
Isaac, Luke 2. 51.
Christ: Hieron, ^pist. de vitando suspecto con^^bernio, tom. 1. fol. 224.
Venerabatur matrem, cuius ipse erat pater, colebat nutritium quem nutriuerat.

Reverence: Bearing them respect in words, and outward behavior, though they
be never so mean, and we never so mighty. Proverbs 23. 22. Honor thy father
that begat thee, and thy mother that bare thee. As if he should say, Be
dutiful unto thy parents: not because they be rich and in great place, but
because they be thy parents, how base soever they be. Hieron. vbi supra.
Matris angustam domum Iudicas, cuius tibi non fuit venture angustus: Sen^cade
beneficijs, lib. 3. cap. 1.
parents non amare impietas est, non agnoscere insania est. Examples of this
virtue, recorded in holy Scriptures are Genesis 26. 27. 28. cap.
Joseph and 1. King. 2. 19.
Solomon: and in our English Chronicles, Sir Stapleton in eius vita, cap. 1.
Thomas More, who being Lord Chancellor of England, usually did ask his father
blessing in Westminster Hall publicly: the which custom of our nation is good
and godly.

Maintenance. If the parent be blind, the child must be his Job 29. 15.
eye: if lame, the child must be his foot: if in any want, the Tobit 5. 17.
staff of his decayed age. So John 19. 27.
Christ took care for his mother at his death: Arist. Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 2.
for it is great reason that children having received life of their father and
mother, should procure to preserve unto them the same life. Nature does read
this lesson. Lib. 5. cap. 4.
Valerius Maximus has a memorable history of a young woman who gave suck to
her mother in prison, and so kept her alive, who otherwise was adjudged to be
famished. A pious office, so well accepted of the Judge, that he did both
pardon the mother, and prefer the daughter. Aristophanes in ^uibus.
Aristophanes affirms also, that the young Stroke does feed the old.

There is a duty required of the parent toward the child, as well as of the
child toward the parent: yet the law speaks expressly to the one, and not to
the other. That the father being in order of nature and in wisdom superior,
might suspect his duty to be written in himself: father and mother are Hieron.
vbi supra.
nominapietatis, officiorum vocabula, naturae vincula. The duty then of
superiors is infolded in the word father: a Minister is a father, a Master a
father, a Magistrate a father: teaching them to be so well affected to their
inferiors, as parents are to their children.

Again: the love of parents toward their children is so natural and
ordinary, that there is less need to put parents in mind of their duty. But
contrariwise children are not usually so dutiful to their parents (as the
Thom. 12 ae. quaest. 26. art. 12. and Aristot. Ethic. lib. 9. c. 7.
School speaks): Amor descendit, non ascendit: benefactor plus d^ligit quam
benefici^tus: and therefore it was necessary to admonish them of their love:
neither is God content with a bare precept, but has adioined a promise, That
thy days may be long: for there is no reason he should enjoy long life, who
dishonors those of whom he received life: but if God shorten the days of
dutiful children, and in stead of long life give them everlasting life; he
does not break but keep his promise: for he does promise long life, not
absolutely, but so far forth as it is a blessing; that it may be well with
thee: and that thou may live long on earth. Ephesians. 6. 3.

The 6. Commandment.
THe negative part forbids all evil, and that is committed against our
neighbor three lo. Combis lib. ^. cap. 59. Aq^inas in 13. ad Romans lect. 2.
ways:

In Thought. Word. Deed.

But because bad deeds are worse then bad words: and bad words worse then bad
thoughts, it pleased the God of order first to forbid bad deeds: Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal. Then bad words:
Thou shall not bear false witness. Last of all, bad thoughts: Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors house, etc.

All our bad deeds against our neighbors concern his Life: Thou shall not
kill. Honor: Thou shall not commit adultery. Goods: Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not kill.] To wit, a man: for to kill other living things is not
forbidden: and the reason is plain; because they were created for man, and so
man is master of their life. But one man was not created for another man, but
for God: and therefore not man, but only God is master of our life: for a
magistrate does not put malefactors to death as master of their life, but as a
Romans 13. 4.
minister of God: and so by consequence not murder, but an act of justice:
Mat. 26. 52.
Such as strike with the sword shall perish with the sword: August. cont.
Faustum, lib. 22. cap. 70.
that is, such as take the sword upon their own authority: Dominus iusserat,
vt ferrum discipuli ferrent, non vt ferirent. But if God put a sword into their
hand, then they may, then they must strike. In a word, killing is unjust when
either it is done without authority, or by public authority upon private
grudge; non amore i^stitiae, sed libidine vindictae, Concerning inward rancour
and outward disdain, in deed, word or gesture, see the Gospel Dom. 6. post
Trin.

The 7. Commandment.
IN this Commandment are forbidden Lombard. 3. sent. did. 37. Church hom.
against adultery, part. 1.
all unchaste lusts, as well burning Mat. 5. 28. 1. Cor. 7. 9.
within, as breaking forth.

Into Allurements, Ribald talk: Ephesians. 4. 29. Wanton looks: Genesis 6. 2. 39. 7.
Lascivious attire: Esaias 3. 16.
Acts of uncleanness.

Acts of uncleanness unnatural: as Committing filthiness with A man of the
same sex: Romans 1. 27. Abeast: Leu. 18. 23. Paracelsus, iucubi, succubi.
A Devil: as witches do by their own confession.


Natural, Adultery: when both, or one of the parties are married: Deuteronomy. 22.
22. Fornication between single persons: as Deflouring of virgins: Deuteronomy. 22. 28.
Hunting of common whores: 1. Cor. 10. 8.
Incest: with such as be within the degrees of consanguinitie or affinity
prohibited in law: Leuit. 18. 6.

Sin in this kind is more dangerous, then in another, because a man can
hardly repent heartily for it. The murderer, and swearer, and these become
many times exceeding sorrowful after the fact: but the wanton (as Epist.
Amando ^om. 3 fol. 135.
Hierome notes) even in the midst of his repentance sins afresh: the very
conceit of his old pleasure does occasion a new fault: so that when his
devotion ends, he presently begins to repent that he did repent. Example hereof
Augustine: who being in the heat of his youth (as himself Confess. lib. 8.
cap. 7.
writes of himself) begged of God earnestly the gift of continency: but,
says he, to tell the truth, I was afraid lest he should hear me too soon:
Malebam enim explers concupiscentiam quam extingu^. See the Gospel Dom. 15.
post. Trin.

The 8. Commandment.
THis overthrows Melancthon Catechis. tom. 1. fol. 17. and tom. 2. fol. 369.
Anabaptisticall and Platonicall community: for if all things ought to be
common, and nothing proper in possession, how can one man steal from another?
All laws of giving, buying, selling, leaseing, letting, lending are vain, si
teneant omnes omnia, nemo suum.

A man may transgress this Commandment in being a thief. To himself, in
spending Too much. Too little.
To other.

Too much Wasting more then he should in gameing, diet, bravery; such are
arrant cutpurses unto themselves. Getting less then they should: Ignaui and
prodigi sunt fures, says Tom. 1. fol. 185
Melancthon.

As a spend-all, so a get-nothing is a thief to his estate: Poverty comes
upon him as an armed man: Proverbs 24. 34. An idle person is pouerties
prisoner: if he live without a calling, poverty has a calling to arrest him.

He that spends too little on himself, as the covetous wretch, is a robber of
himself also, Innocentius de vilit. condit. Human. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Corpus extenuat, vt lucrum extendat: He keeps his belly thin, that his purse
may be full: he Ambros. lib. de Naboth. c. 4.
cannot afford himself so much as an egg, lest he should kill a chicke:
whereas a poor man does want many things, a rich miser wants every thing:
like Tantalus up to the chin in water, and yet thirsty. The which (as Solomon
calls it) is an evil sickness: Eccles. 6. 2.

To other Openly: which is plain robbery: so little practiced, or so much
punished in King Lamberts Perambulation of Ke^t, page 27.
Alfreds reign, that if a man had let fall his purse in the high way, he might
with great leisure, and good assurance have come back and taken it up again.
Secretly: which is properly called stealing. And this offense is manifold:
for there is not only theft of the hand, but of the heart, and tongue.
Covetous greedines is theft in heart: for howsoever it be a maxim in our law,
Meteranus hist. Belgic. lib. 13. page 420.
Voluntas non reputabitur pro facto, nisi in causa prod^tionis: sed exitus in
maleficijs spectatur, and non voluntas duntaxat: yet it is a breach of this
law, couetously to desire that which is not ours: albeit we seek not to get
it wrongfully. Their hearts, says 2. Pet. 2. 14.
Peter, are exercised in covetousness: and In 1 Thessalonians. cap 5. hom. 10.
Chrysostom plainly; The covetous man is a very thief: fur and latro. The
Te^mes of the Law, page 97.
fathers of the law write that thieves are called felones, of our ancient word
fell or fierce; because they commit this sin with a cruel, fell, and
mischievous mind: teaching us hereby that a felonious intent is a principal
in theeuerie.

There is also theft of the tongue, by B. Balington.
lying, flattery, smoothing, etc. So we read that 2. Sam. 15. 6.
Absolon stole the hearts of the men of Israel: and so false 2. Sam. 16.
Ziba stole the goods of his master Mephibosheth.

So flatterers and parasites are great thieves in Court and Country: not only
dominorum suorum arrisores; sed etiam arrosores: and therefore let a flatterer
be in your Pater noster, but not in your Creed: pray for him, but trust him no
more then a thief.

Frauds in buying and selling are reduced to stealing; because he that uses
such deceits, secretly takes of his neighbor more then his due: but
oppressions and unjust extortions are reduced by Divines unto robbery; because
the cruel tyrant exacteth more then his own manifestly: not to pay debts, is
reduced unto both: unto robbery, when a man to the great hindrance of his
neighbor can and will not: unto stealing, when he partly will and cannot: I
say will partly: for if he desire wholly with all his heart to pay the utmost
farthing, God assuredly will accept of votall restitution, as well as of
actual: and it is not a sin though it be a sore.

The 9. Commandment.
NExt the prohibition of injuries in deed, follow the wrongs against our
neighbor in word: Thou shall not bear false witness: and that fitly, because
Herman explicat. huius pracept.
lying is cosen germane to stealing: Erasmus com. de lingua.
Da mihi mendacem, and ego ostendam tibi furem: If thou will show me a liar, I
will show thee a thief.

This precept condemns all manner of lying: for albeit one is worse then
another, Augustine. in Psalm. 5.
yet all are naught: The mouth that speaks lies slaieth the soul: Wi^d. 1.
11. And Psalm. 5. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing. See Gospel
Dom. 15. post Trinit.

Beside lies: every thing whereby the credit of our neighbor is impaired:
especially those three sins of the tongue: Contumely. Detractation. Cursing.

A contumely is an injurious word, spoken with an injurious mind, to the
dishonor of our neighbor: I say with an injurious intent; otherwise when it
is uttered by way of advice to direct or correct, as a father sometime speaks
to his child, or a master to his scholar, or a Pastor to his people, as Paul:
Gal. 3. 1.
Ye foolish Galathians: out of some heat, but yet not out of any hate, then it
is no contumely or sin.

Or in merriment, not in malice: There is a time to Eccles. 3. 4.
laugh: and so by consequence a time to jest: when a witty conceit may profit
and administer grace to the hearer. He that said the Duke of Guise was the
greatest usurer in France, because he turned all his estate into obligations,
hereby gave this honest advice, that if he should leave himself nothing, but
only have many followers bound to him for his large gifts, in conclusion he
should find a number of bad debtors. He that called his friend thief, because
he had stolen away his love, did not wrong, but commend him.

It is lawful also to jest at the vanities of irreligious men, enemies to God
and his Gospel: as 1. King. 18. 27.
Elia did at the soppish idolatry of Baals Priests. A friend of mine said of an
vpstart gallant in Court with a gingling spur, that he had a Church on his
back, and the bells on his heels.

Every lay Papist must believe as the Church believes, albeit he know not what
the Church believes: he must also worship the consecrated bread, and yet
knows not whether it be consecrated or no: Co^. Trident, sess. 7. can 11.
Bellarm^n. de sacramentis in genere, cap. 17.
for to the consecration of the host, the Priests intention is required, which
no man knows but God, and himself. So that if a man tell his popish
acquaintance that he is a blind buffe, to worship and believe he knows not
what, it were no contumely; because it did proceed out of zeal to God, and
love to him; only to rectify his error, and not to vilify his person.

The second fault reduced to false witness is detractation, in speaking evil of
our neighbor: and it is done by reporting that which is false, and sometime by
telling that which is true, but secret: whereby the credit of our neighbor is
lessened with those, to whom his sin was not known before: for as a man may
flatter in absence, namely, when either the virtue is absent, or the occasion,
and so the praise is not kind but forced either in truth, or in time: so
likewise a man may slander his neighbor in speaking the truth unseasonably,
without discretion out of time and place. A tale tossed from mouth to mouth in
creaseth as a snowbal, which being little at the first, grows to a great
quantity.

Now the backbiter is bound in reason and religion to restore the good name of
his neighbor, which he by detraction has taken away; and that is exceeding
hard: for a man's honest fame is like the Merchants wealth got in many years,
and lost in an hour. Wherefore speak well of all men always, if it may be
done with truth: and when it cannot, then be silent: or else interrupt evil
detractation with other mere and merry communication, as Judges 14. 12.
Sampson at his marriage feast propounded a riddle to his friends, A^b^ os.
epist. lib. 9. epist. 70.
hereby to stop the mouths of backbiters, and to occupy their wits another
way. Bernard excellently: The tale bearer has the devil in his tongue: the
receiver in his ear.

The thief does send one only to the devil, the adulterer two: but the
slanderer hurts three; himself, the party to whom, and the party of whom
he tells the tale. Ter homicide (says Lo^. com. tit. singua.
Luther) vno ictu tres occidit: Bernard ser. 24. in Cant.
v^us est qui loquitur, and vnum tantum verbam profert, and tamen illud vnum
verbum, vno in momento, mul^itudinis audientium dum aures inficit, animas
interficit.

The third fault is malediction: a grievous Coloss. 3. 8.
offense when it is spoken with hatred and a desire that such evil come upon
our neighbor: but when it is uttered upon some sudden disdain, without regard
to that we speak, it is less evil, yet for all that always evil: because
from the mouth of a Christian, who is the child of God by adoption, nothing
ought to pass but 1. Pet. 2. 1.
benediction.

The 10. Commandment.
THe former precepts intend thoughts and desires, as well as act and practice:
for the Lawgiuer is a spirit, and therefore must be worshipped in spirit: yet
lest we should pretend ignorance, God in this Commandment gives especial
order for them. Or as Melancthon, and Calvin. Cat.
other: The former precepts did condemn the settled thought to do mischief:
but this even the first inclination and motion to sin, though a man never
consent, but snub it in the beginning: Romans 7. 7. Thou shall not lust or desire.

Now we sin three ways in this kind: 1. By coveting ye goods of our
neighbor, Immovable: as his land and house. Moveable: as his ox and ass,
etc.
2. By coveting his wife. 3. By plotting treason, and murder.

To covet his goods is against his profit, which is dear to him: to covet his
wife is against his honor, which ought to be more dear: to covet his blood is
against his life, which of all wordly things is most dear.

Whereas it is objected that desire of murder is not forbidden in particular,
as the desire of theft and adultery: for the Commandment says, Thou shall
not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife: but
it is not said, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors blood: Answer is made,
that a man does not desire any thing principally but that which brings him
some Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
good, at least in appearance. And so he desires adultery, because it
brings delight: he desires theft for that it brings profit: but murder
brings no good at all: and therefore it is not desired for it self, but only
to attain to theft, or adultery, or some such designement.

So that God hauinge^ forbidd expressly the disordinate desires of delectation
and gain, comequently forbad desires of murder, which is not coueted b^t for
unlawful profit or pleasure. Thus perfect righteousness is fulfilled when we
wrong not our neighbor either in deed, or in word, or desire: but
contrariwise, do good unto all, speak well, and think charitably of all.

Now the reason why the Church appoints the Decalogue to be read at the
Communion, is evident: namely, because the law is a Gal. 3. 24.
schoolmaster unto Christ; teaching us to Romans 3. 20.
know sin, and by knowing of sin to know our selves, and knowing our selves
to renounce our selves, as of our selves unable to do any John 16. 5.
thing, and so come to Christ: who does strengthen us to do all Phil. 4. 13.
things. Almighty God (says Tom. 1. fol. 1.
Luther) has written his law not so much to forbid offenses to come, as to
make men acknowledge their sins already past, and now present: that behol^ing
themselves in the laws glass, they may discern their own imperfections, and
so fly to Christ: who has fulfilled the law, and taken away the sins of the
whole world. For (as the Com. Prayer books, tit. Lords Supper.
reformed Churches of Scotland and Geneua speak) the end of our coming to the
Lords table, is not to make protestation that we are just, and upright in our
lives: but contrariwise we come to seek our life and perfection in Jesus
Christ: being assuredly persuaded that the Lord requires on our part no other
worthiness, but unfeignedly to confess our unworthiness. So that (our enemies
being Judges) it is well ordered that the Commandments are rehearsed in the
ministration of this holy Sacrament. Let the Nouelists here blush, who For it
is inserted elsewhere both in the common Catechis. and in the BB. Bible: Exodus
20. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. 6.
calumniously censure our Church for omitting in the Ministers of Deuon. and
Cornwall reasons, part. 1. cap. 26.
proeme of the Decalogue one half line: when as themselves in their own
Communion books have left out all the whole law. This indeed occasioned me to
remember an observation of Lib. 1. cap. 4.
Cominaeus upon the battle of Montlehery, that some lost their offices for
running away, which were bestowed upon other that fled ten leagues further.
Hypocrite first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou
see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, etc.
THe Lords Supper is called a sacrifice by the learned ancient Doctors in four
respects:

First, because it is a representation and memorial of Christ's sacrifice on
the cross: 1. Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show the Lords death until he come. So Lib. 2. de Virgin.
S. Ambrose: Christ is daily sacrificed in the minds of believers, as upon an
altar: Semel in cruce, quotidie in sacramento. says Lib. 4. sent. did. 12.
Lombard.

Secondly, because in this action we offer praise and thanksgiving unto God,
for the redemption of the world: and this is the sacrifice of our lips: Heb.
13. 15.

Thirdly, because every Communicant does offer and present himself body and
soul, a living, holy, acceptable sacrifice to the Lord: Romans 12. 1. The which
excels the sacrifices of the Priests in old time: for they did offer dead
sacrifices, but we present our selves a 1. Collect after the receiving of the
bread and wine.
lively sacrifice to God.

Fourthly, because it was a Justin Martyr Apolog. 2.
custom in the Primitive Church at the receiving of this blessed Sacrament to
give large contribution unto the poor, a sacrifice well accepted of God: Heb.
13. 16. Now the Church allowing and following this good old custom, stirs up
the people to give cheerfully by repeating some one or two choice sentences of
scripture best fitting this occasion, as Matthew. 6. 19. Matthew. 7. 12, etc. 5. 10

These kinds of oblation are our Churches offertorie, and unbloody sacrifices
Collect for the whole estate of Christ's Church.
offered by the whole congregation unto the Lord: so far differing from popish
sacrificing, as S. Paul's in London is from S. Peter's in Rome.

1. Cor. 11. 28. THe sum of the Ministers exhortation before the Communion, is
contained in these words of Paul: Let a man therefore examine himself, and so
let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: wherein observe

Two points: A preparation: Let a man examine, etc. A participation: and so let
him eat, etc.

In the first note the Parties Examining: a man, that is, every man. Examined:
himself.
Parts.

Beza translates, and Paraphras. in loc.
Erasmus expounds (...), quisque: so the word is used, John 3. 27. A man can
receive nothing except it be given him from heaven: and John 7. 46. Never man
spoke like this. A man then in this place signifies every man, subject,
Sovereign, Priest, people. The which observation overthrows utterly Beza
annot. in loc.
Romish implicit faith. Every lay man ought to turn confessor, and examiner,
endued with sufficient knowledge for this heavenly business: he must look not
only through the spectacles of the Priest, but also see with his own eyes,
able to try himself.

Himself.] For that is the duty; not another, for that is a fault. We must not
be 1. Pet 4. 15.
busy Bishops in other men's Diocesses, but meddle with our 1. These* 4. 11.
own business: we must not break our neighbors head with the Pharisie, but
smite our own breast with the Publican.

S. Cousess. lib. 10. cap. 3.
Augustine complained of men in his time that they were Curiosi ad cognoscendum
vitam al^enam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam: and reverend Lib. 5. p. 263.
Hooker, of men in our time, that their virtue is nothing but to hear gladly
the reproof of others vice: like Tailors, who measure, like Barbors, who cut
all other except themselves. But Matthew. 7. 3. 5.
our Savior Christ would not have us to gaze on the mote in our brothers eye*
but rather to pull out the beam in our own sight. And his Apostle here, not
to pry into other, but to try our selves; not but that other according to their
several charge, must examine other, as parents must examine their children:
Exodus 12. 26. 27. and masters must examine their household, Genesis 18. 19. and
Pastors must examine their parishioners, as here Paul corrected and directed
the Corinthians: and for this cause the names of all Communicants are to be
sent unto the Minister, that there may be made trial of all: yet if parents
and masters and Ministers omit this examination, every one must be both able
and willing to prove himself.

The parts of examination are concerning the Manner. Matter.

For the manner a trial is to be made Uprightly. Necessarily.

The former is implied in the word Examine: which notes a diligent and exact
inquiry, such as Lapidar^es and Goldsmiths use to find out true metal from
counterfeit, good from bad. As the 2. King. 4.
Shunamite sought for Elisha, Luke 2.
Mary for Christ, the woman for her Luke 15.
lost groate: so we must search as if we would find, search until we find.
Many men examine their bad manners, as they do their bad money, seek as if they
would not see, search as if they would not understand. They decline sin
thorough all the cases (as Bigasalutis Dom 8. post Penticost.
one notes) In nominatiuo per superbiam, in genitiuo per luxuriam, in datiuo
per simoniam, in accusatiuo per detractationem, in vocatiuo per adulationem, in
ablatiuo per rapinam: and yet they will not acknowledge their sins in any
case. When other men's examination has found them out, excuses are ready:
Bernard Tract. de gradibus humilitat. grad. 8.
Non feci: si feci, non male feci: si male feci, non multum male: si multum
male, non mala intention; aut si mala intention, tamen al^ena persuasione.
Wherefore as the Esaias 21. 12. Si qu^ritis qu^rite.
Prophet said: If ye will ask a question, ask it indeed: so if ye will
examine your selves, examine earnestly, thoroughly, uprightly. For examination
must be made necessarily. This we may gather out of the word therefore:
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: Let a man therefore, etc.

Trial of our selves then is necessary, both in respect of our Duty. Danger,
if we neglect this duty.

In respect of our duty: for Christ in his first institution used a commanding
term; Do this. Luke 22. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me: so that it is not in our choice to do it, or
not to do it. If any be not fit, he must endeavor to make himself fit: and
the way to make fit, is examination: Let a man examine himself therefore etc.

Secondly, trial is necessary in regard of the danger, if we receive the
Lords Supper unworthily.

Danger in respect of The sin: verse. 27. The punishment for this sin in
General: verse. 29. Particular: verse. 30.


For this cause many are weak, and sick, and die. See Epistle for Mandie
Thursday.

Now the matters in which every Communicant must be examined, are summarily
two: Faith. Repentance.

These two (like Hippocrates twins) must go together hand in hand. For there
is no true repentance without faith; nor lively faith without repentance. Sermon.
4. before King Edward.
B. Latimer said well; Lady faith is a great state, having a Gentleman Usher
going before her, called agnitio peccatoru^, and a great train following after
her, which are the good works of our calling. He that says he does repent,
when as he does not believe, receives the Sacrament ignorantly: and he that
says he does believe, when as he does not repent, receives the Sacrament
irreuerently: both unworthily.

The parts of faith are Knowledge. Application.

Every Communicant ought to know the 3. general points of holy Religion:
namely, man's Generation: how he was created according to Genesis 1. 26.
Gods image in Ephesians. 4. 24.
holiness and righteousness. Degeneration: how he fell from that estate, and all
his Romans 5. 12.
posterity with him. Regeneration: how he was again Eph^s. 2. 5.
restored and recreated by Christ's passion, of which this Sacrament is a sign
and seal.

In more particular, every Communicant must understand the number and nature of
the Sacraments. Our Savior Christ ordained in his Church only two Sacraments,
as Com. Catechis.
generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord Baptism is a Sacrament of initiation and insition, assuring the first
receiving into the covenant of grace: whereby men are matriculated and Com.
book, tit. Public Bap. We receive this child.
admitted into the congregation, and made members of Christ. For this cause the
sacred Font is placed at the very door and entrance into the Church: but the
Communion is a sacrament of confirmation, to strengthen our faith, and cherish
grace received: and therefore the Lords table by good order is placed in the
best and highest room of the Church. Ram. de relig. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Baptism must be received of one but once: because we cannot be borne twice,
one beginning in Christianity is enough: but the Lords Supper often, because
we need daily to be nourished in the faith of Christ: once borne, fed always.

The nature of this Sacrament is made known by the names in holy writ given
unto it:

Whereof I note principally two: the Lords 1. Cor. 11. 20.
Supper. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Comm^nion.

A Supper in regard of the Matthew. 26. 20
Time: being instituted in the night that Christ was betrayed, as his far well
token. Things: because it is a holy feast (as Augustine said) Non dentis, sed
mentis: not so toothsome, as wholesome: not corporal meat, but spiritual
Manna.

The Lords Supper in three respects: 1. Because it was ordained by the Lord: 1.
Cor. 11. 23. 2. Because it was instituted in remembrance of the Lord: Luke 22.
19. 3. Because it was in the Primitive Church usually received on the Lords
day: Acts 20. 7.

It is called a Communion in respect of the common union among our selves,
having at that time more specially perfect peace with all men: or a Communion
in respect of the 1. Cori^. 11. 20. 2^. (...), quasi (...).
public participation, as being a common mess, not a private Mass proper to
one, as the Popish priests use it; or a Communion, as being a sign and seal
of our communion with Christ: for his graces are conveyed unto us by the
preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments.

Hence the Sacraments (as Lib. de corpore and sanguine Dom. cap. 3. apud
Bibliothec. Pat. Tom. 4. fol. 162.
Paschasius observes) have their name. Sacramenta dicuntur a secreto, eo quod
in re visibili diuinitas intus aliquid vl^ra secretius efficit. In the words of
our Art. 25.
Church: Sacraments are visible signs of invisible grace, ordained of God as
badges and sure witnesses of his good will toward us. It is meet every
Christian should understand these, and the like plain principles of holy
faith: but Church Hom. concerning the Sacrament, part. 1.
exact knowledge to discuss controuerted points about the Sacraments is not
required: according to that of Chrysostom: The table of the Lord is not
prepared for chattering ^ayes, but for high towering Eagles, who flei thither
where the dead body lies. It is not for subtle Sophisters, but for simple
believers ascending up to Christ upon the wings of faith: and therefore the
Communicant must not only know, but apply that in particular, which he
believes in general: as that Christ's body was crucified for him; and his
blood shed for him. He that understands, and believes, and applies these
things, examineth his faith as he should.

In our repentance we must examine two points especially: to wit, our
Contrition for sin past. Resolution to prevent, so far as we can, all sin
to come.

For the first, Poenitentia est quasi Reusnerus class. 3. symbol. page 155.
punientia. Poenitere (says De vera and fall. poenitent. cap. 19.
Augustine) is poenam tenere.

We must therefore weep with Peter, and water our couch with David, and put
on sackcloth with Nineueh: nay we must Joel 2. 13.
rent our heart. For a broken Psalm. 51. 17.
spirit is an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord. O Chrysostom. hom. De poenitent.
magnum donum, quod in poenam dedit, in salutem vertit: peccatum tristitiam
peperit, tristitia peccatum contriuit. As the worm bred in the tree deuoures
the tree: so sorrow brought into the world by sin, does overthrow sin: so
good is God to turn curses into blessings, and grief into grace. If thy heart
be not thoroughly touched for sin, become sorry because thou art no more
sorry: resolve to be more resolved. For (as one wittily) factum infectum, si
non sit cor affectum. If Joseph of Arimathea wrapped the body of Christ in
Matthew. 27 59.
clean linen; how dare thou receive it with an unclean soul? Church Hom.
c^ncerning the Sacraments, part. 2.
If thou will not kiss a Princes hand with a foul mouth, eat not the Lords
body with a foul mind. Let a man therefore examine him self. etc. And so
let him eat of this bread, and drink of this (...). Having thus examined
examination, I come now to the participation.

And so let him eat, etc.] Of which words I purpose to speak first jointly,
then severally. Considered jointly they confute three popish conclusions: as
first, the reservation, elevation, circumgestation, adoration of the bread. Our
Apostle says here plainly, that the bread must be taken and eaten: Confess.
Anglitan, art 28.
Ergo, not to be reserved, nor carried about, not lifted up, nor kept in a box
to be worshipped.

Secondly, to take to eat, to taste, to drink, to do this in remembrance of
Christ, are actions of the living, only pertaining to the living: and therefore
the Papists are deceived holding the Mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice
both for the quick and the dead. How can the dead eat or drink, taste or
take? Melancthon in confess. ^ccle. Saxon. Tom. 1. fol. 135.
Ergo, neither the duty nor the benefit belongs unto them, but only to those
alive; who first examine themselves, and after eat of this bread and drink of
this cup.

Thirdly, the conjunction of these two: Let him eat of this bread, and drink
of this cup abundantly proves, that both parts of the Lords Supper ought to be
ministered unto all: Ergo* the Papists in denying the cup unto the Laity, wrong
both God and his people, by defrauding them of this comfort. As every one must
examine, so every one both eat and drink: not only drink, and not eat, or
eat and not drink: but both eat, and drink. Christ foreseeing this
Papisticall error said in his first institution, Drink ye Matthew. 26. 26.
all of it: he took the bread and said only, take, eat, indefinitely: Calvin,
and Marl^rat in ^oc. Matthew.
but when he took the cup, he did add an universal note: Bib^^e omnes:
Drink ye, drink all ye.

We conclude therefore with Epist* lib. 1. epist. 8.
Cyprian: Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore
instituitur, vt dispositio diuina violetur. Christ is the truth, and the way to
the truth: Ergo, Cyp. epist. lib. 1. epist. 3.
non aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro nobis prior fecit. Thus much of the
words jointly. Now of every one severally.

And so] Let there be first preparation, and then participation: when a man is
thus examined, let him thus eat. Let him eat: The which are not words of
permission, only leaving it to his choice whether he will eat or not eat: but
they are words of Paul's commission, insinuating that he must eat necessarily,
not upon custom, but upon conscience. For it is not said here; let him, if he
have no let at home, or occasion of absence abroad: if he be neither displeased
with his Pastor, nor angry with the people: but let him without all let
examine, and then let him without all let eat of this bread. Eat: Mat. 26. 26.
Christ in his first institution has, take and eat. First take, then eat:
take not only into your mouths, but into your hands: Bucan. loc. com. Tit.
coena, Dom. quaest. 34. 35.
hereby representing the soul and faith: for the taking of the bread and wine
into our hand, seals our apprehension of Christ by the finger of faith: Ioh
1. 12. As many as received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God:
even to them that believed in his name. Eating of the bread and drinking of the
wine seals our application of Christ incorporated into us mystically, 1. Cor.
10. 16. For by the strength of faith we chew the cud, as it were, and make
Christ our own. Yet herein observe a great difference between corporal food
and this heavenly bread: for the one digested is made like us, but the other
received into our soul makes us Romans 8. 12. Phil. 3. 10.
like it. This action then of taking is very significant: and therefore I see
no reason why the Priest altering Christ's ordinance, should give the bread into
the peoples mouth only, not into their hand. First, the word (...) signifies
properly to take with the hand. Secondly, it is against the rules of common
civility, that men of discretion, such as Communicants ought to be, should be
fed like children, having their meat put into their mouth. Thirdly, if this
taking be not construed of the hand, but of the mouth, there is an idle
repetition and plain Tautologie in the words of Christ: for eating notes orall
receiving: and therefore taking must imply manual receiving. Fourthly, it was
the custom of the Primitive Church, as we read in Sixtus Senensis, vbi infra.
Eusebius and Hierosol. orat. 5 mystagog.
Cyril; How will thou (says Theodoret. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18.
Ambrose to Theodosius) receive the Lords body with a bloody hand?

The Sixtus Senensi^ Bibliothec. lib. 6 annot. 152.
Papists answer that the Church altered this custom, because some reserved
the bread for magical spells, and superstitious uses. A silly shift: for no
abuse can take away the use of that which is simply good. The Bible must be
read, albeit some 2. Pet. 3. 16.
pervert it to their destruction: the word of God must be preached, howsoever
it be unto some the savor of 2. Cor. 2. 16.
death unto death: and so the bread according to Christ's institution must be
taken, albeit happily some keep it to wicked and idolatrous purposes.

This bread] The nice distinguishing of the School is like the pilling of an
onyon: they pull off so many skins, until at last there is no skin. They
turn and toss the words of Christ's institution, Hoc est corpus meum, so long,
till they bring all that Christ said and did at his last Supper unto nothing.
For so we read in their De consec. did. 2.. timorem. Glossa ibidem.
Gloss, that hoc does signify nothing. Omnipotent creatures, who make of
something nothing: and again of this nothing, something; yea Christ who made
all things: for by pronouncing of these words, hoc est corpus meum, they make
their Maker, a dozen gods at once with one sentence. This, is a pronoune
demonstratiue, not indiuiduum, vagum, any thing, or a nothing. In his Marc.
A^ton. Constant.
Stephen Gardener herein forgot his Grammar and Logic too. For hoc, does
determine, and must, as Paul teaches, and the circumstances of the Gospel
import, be restrained unto the bread. Jesus took the bread, and when he had
given thanks he brake (no doubt the bread) that he took, and gave to the
Disciples the selfsame that he brake, saying, Take ye, eat ye this that I
give you, this is my body. What This could our Savior mean, but This that he
gave, This that he brake, This that he took? which by the witness of truth
it self was bread. If the Papists imagine that he took bread, but brake it
not; or brake it, but gave it not: they make the Lords Supper a D. Bilsons
answer to the Jesuit apolog. page 331.
merryiest, where the latter end starteth from the beginning, and the middle
from them both. Either they must dissent manifestly from the proposition of
Christ, and exposition of Paul, from all the Fathers, and some of their own
Gerson contra ^loret. lib. 4. and Gardner. ^o^t. diabolic. sophist. vti Bilson
vbi supra page 732.
followers: or else admit our interpretation, This bread is my body: and if we
resolve the words of Christ so, they cannot be proper, but figurative; This
bread is the sign and seal of my body.

Bread.] It pleased our Savior to make bread the outward element in this holy
Sacrament, for the manifold analogies between it and his body. First, as bread
is the Psalm. 104. 15.
strength and state of our natural life; so Christ is for our spiritual being
1. Cor. 12. 6.
all in all.

Secondly, as bread is loathed of the full stomach, but most acceptable to the
hungry soul; so Christ is most welcome unto such as Matthew. 5. 6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Thirdly, as bread is usual and daily; so Christ should be to the Christian:
feeding on that bread which came down from John 6. 33 35.
heaven, should be the souls ordinary refection. fourthly, as bread is made
one loaf of many grains; so 1. Cor. 10. 17.
we that are many are one bread, and one body, because we all are partakers of
one bread.

Paulinus vti Magdeburg. Ce^t. 5. col. 359. 395.
Vnus vbique calix domini, cibus vnus, and vna mensa, domusque de^. Lastly, as
corn is cut down with the sith, threshed in the barn with many stripes,
torn in the mil with much violence, then boulted and sifted, last of all baked
with extreme heat in the oven; and all this, that it may be fit meat for our
body: so Christ in his ripe age was cut down by cruel death, his body was
whipped, his flesh rent asunder, his soul was as it were Lament. 1. 13. Ierem.
1. 12.
melted in the fiery furnace of Gods anger: and all this, that he might become
food for our soul; that we might eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.
The like resemblances are between the wine and his blood: For as wine does make
glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104. 15. so the precious blood of Christ, as Cant.
2. 5.
flagons of wine comforts the sick soul. Magdeburg. Cent. 5. col. 393.
Paulinus sweetly: In cruce fixa caro est quo pascor, de cruce sanguis
Ille fluit, vitam quo bibo, corda lauo.


In this exhortation having S. Paul for our leader, and the Church of Scotland
for our follower: I hope we need not any further examine, why the Church does
use this scripture for this purpose. Epist. 118. cap. 5.
Augustines observation is good: insolentissimae insaniae est, disputare, an ^d
faciendum fit, quod tota facit ecclesia.

Sursum corda.
SVrsum corda Cassander liturgic. cap. 21.
seems to be taken out of the Lamentations of Jeremy: cap. 3. verse. 41.
Leuemus corda nostra cum manibus ad dominum in coelos: used in the Church at
least 300 years before Popery was known in the world. For Augustine who lived
within Baron. annal. tom. 5. fol. 13 and flores ^ist page ^45.
400 years after Christ, and the blessed Martyr Cyprian, who died Magdeburg.
cent. 3. col. 249.
an. 259. make mention of it in their writings often: Cyprian in Fol. 166.
sermon. de orat. dominic. Augustine de Tom. 1. fol. 491
vera religione, cap. 3. and epist. 156. and (as Vbi supra.
Cassander observes) epist. ad Dardan. and lib. de bono perseuerantiae* Sursum
corda then is no rag of Rome, no piece of Popery, but used in Perkins reformed
Cat. tit. ^^all presence.
all Liturgies of the ancient Church; and that which may content the Nouelist
most, it was borrowed (as Master Acts and mon. fol. 1275.
Fox thinks) not from the Latin, but from the Greek Churches. Howsoever, it
is exceeding fit: for Almighty God in his holy service requires our heart
principally; Prou. 23. 26.
Son give me thine heart: so that when we come to his Temple, specially to his
table, every one must say with Psalm. 25. 1.
David, I lift up my soul to thee. For (as the Church of Ministers exhort.
before the Com.
Scotland truly) the only way to receive worthily the Lords Supper, is to lift
up our minds by faith above all things worldly and sensible, and thereby to
enter into heaven, that we may find and receive Christ, where he dwells: a
point well urged also by our Church: Hom* concerning the worthy receiving of
the Sacrament: part the first.

The Papists entertain this clause still in the Roman Missale; but it makes
against their real presence. For if Christ's body, Io. Combis (...) Theolog. l.
b. 6. cap. 14
so large in quantity, as it was on the cross, be present, in the Sacrament;
what need any man lift up his heart, when as he holds it in his hand? Totum
hoc (says Sermon. de temp. 174.
Augustine) fide tenemus, oculis cordis intuemur; dominus ascendit in coelum,
ascendat cum illo cor nostrum: His body Acts 3. 21.
must be contained in heaven until the time that all things are restored: it
cannot descend down to us, we must ascend up to it. So Nicolaus Cabasila
writes in his exposition of the Cap. 26. apud Bibliothec. Pat. tom. 4. fol. 496.
Liturgy; the Priest after some speech to the people does erect their minds,
and lift up their thoughts, and says, Sursum corda; let us think on things
above, not on things below. They consent and say, that they lift up their
hearts thither where their treasure is, even to heaven, where Christ sits at
the right hand of his Father.

Luke 2. 14. Glory be to God on high.
THe Lords Supper is called an Eucharist, because it is a thanksgiving to God,
for giving his Son to die for us: and therefore this Hymn is so fitly sung
by men on earth at the commemoration of his death, as it was by the quier of
heaven at the celebration of his birth: for our reconciliation and peace with
God, is ascribed in holy scripture to Christ's passion especially: Romans 5. 10.
Heb. 9. 12. 15.

Some make Cai^tan. in locum.
three parts of this song (which if you please) call the Trebble: Glory to God
on high. Busse: Peace on earth. Eras. annot. in loc.
Mean: Good will toward me^.

Other have divided it into two: The first, concerning Gods glory. The second,
touching our good. Calvin. Iansen. Arboreus in loc.
For peace on earth, and good will toward men are both one: because our peace
with God is not from our good will toward him: but altogether from his good
will toward us. It is God (says Philip. 2. 13.
Paul) that makes in you both the will and the work: and therefore the
Rhemish translation, In earth peace, to men of good will: and the Romish
Gloss, that Christ brings no peace, but to such as be of goodwill, are
insufficient, and condemned even by their own mouth: as we may read in the
Commentaries of Arboreus, Caietan, Iansenius, Maldonatus upon the place.
Concerning other scholiall, or scholasticall observations upon the text, I
refer the reader unto Beauxamis, Erasmus, Calvin and other learned
expositors; especially to Iacobus Perez de Valentia, who compiled a whole
treatise on this Hymn.

It was first used in the Communion (as it is thought) by Walafridus lib. de
rebus Ecclesiast. cap. 22. and Marian. Scot. Cron. lib. 1. page 260.
Thelesphorus a good man, and a Iren^us lib. 3. cap. 3.
glorious Martyr, anno Baron, annal. tom. 2. fol. 120.
254. Ia^uar. 5. That which follows in our Communion book, We praise thee, we
bless thee, was added by that famous Bishop Cassander liturgic. cap. 21.
Hilarie: singing it first in his own Church, anno Fox, Acts and Mon. fol.
1274. and Duran^. ra^onal. lib. 4. cap. 13. 4. 5.
340: and after brought into other Churches by Pope Symmachus, a^. 510: the
Churches of Scotland use the like form of thanks at their Communion. And
therefore the Nouelist can mislike nothing in this Hymn, but that which all
other like most, Antiquity.

2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and.
THe Lut^er. com^ent. in Galat. cap. 1. verse. 3.
two fiends that torment us, are sin, and a bad conscience: grace releaseth
sin: peace does quiet the conscience. Paul therefore begins his epistles with
grace and peace: and the Church ends her devotions either with the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. or with the peace of God which passes all
understanding, etc. But because there can be no peace with God, except we
have the grace of Christ: first and chiefly Paul desires grace, then peace:
Romans 1. 7. Grace be with you and peace. Because (I say) grace comprehends in it
every good and perfect gift, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
by which only, we are whatsoever we are; Paul does not only begin, but end his
writings also with this one clause specially, Grace be with you, etc. But above
the rest, the conclusion of this excellent epistle is most full: and therefore
worthily received of our and other Churches, as the fittest close, to shut up
our public prayers. In it observe Paul's affection toward the Corinthians,
amplified With Extention: in regard of the Thing: The grace of Christ, the love
of God, the communion of the holy Ghost. Persons: With you all.
Intention: Amen.



The work of our salvation is ascribed in our Election, to the love of the
Father. Redemption, to the grace of the Son. Sanctification, to the communion
of the holy Ghost.

So Comment. in loc.
S. Ambrose does expound this text pithily: Dilectio dei misit nobis Saluatorem
Iesum, cuius gratia saluati sumus: vt possideamus hanc gratia^ communicatio
facit spiritus sancti: God the Father so Ioh. 3. 16.
loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son Romans 4. 25.
to die for our sins, and to rise again for our justification: and John 15.
26.
God the Son, from God the* Father, sent God the holy Ghost which cries in
our hearts Abba father: applying to our comfort both the love of God, and the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The word, God, is used here personally, not essentially: for the Ambrose,
Hierom, Theophylact.
Fathers on this text note the blessed Trinity, that God is Non triplex.
Augustine. de Trin. lib. 6. cap. 7 and Lombard. 1. sent. did. 19.
Trinus in numero, vnus in numine. S. Hierom thinks that Paul foreseeing the
blasphemous Arrian heresy, placed the second person in the first room, God
the Son before God the Father. Calvin. and Marlorat. in loc.
Other affirm, that the grace of Christ is named first, because it concerns
us most. For albeit the love of God in it own nature go before the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, choosing us before the foundation of the world: Ephesians. 1.
4: yet in our view the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ goes before the love of
God. Romans 5. 10 We are reconciled unto God, by the death of his Son: we feel
the mercies of the one in the merits of the other.

It is a fruitful observation of Vbi supra.
Martin Luther, that Christian religion begins not at the highest, as other
religions do, but at the lowest: it will have us to climb up to heaven by
Jacobs ladder, whose feet touch the very earth. And therefore when thou art
occupied in the matter of thy salvation, setting aside all curious speculations
of Gods unsearchable counsels, all cogitations of works, of traditions, of
Philosophy, yea and of Gods law too, run straight to the manger, embrace the
little babe Christ in thine arms, and behold him as he was borne, sucking,
growing up, conversant among men, teaching, dying, rising again, ascending
above the heavens, and having power above all things. This sight will make thee
shake off all terrors and errors, as the Sun drives away the clouds. In a
disputation with a Jew, Turk, Papist, Heretic, concerning Gods infinite
wisdom, Majesty, power; employ all thy wit and industry to be so profound
and subtle as thou can: but in the matter of Justification, wherein thou
do wrestle with the law, sin, death, and other spiritual enemies; it is
the best course to look upon no God, but Christ incarnate, and clothed with
thine own nature: to fix thine eyes upon the man Jesus only; who sets
himself forth unto thee, to be a Mediator, and says, Matthew. 11. 21.
Come unto me all ^ee that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. To behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world: and
so by the grace of Christ thou shall understand the love of God, thou shall
perceive his wisdom, power, Majesty, sweetened and tempered to thy capacity:
thou shall find the saying of Coloss. 2. 3.
Paul to be most true, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: that Christ in our justification is all in all; and therefore good
reason he should have the first, and most place in this argument; that his
grace should be named first and last.

The love of God, is the fountain of all goodness (as Divines speak) gratiarum
gratia: from which originallie proceeds every perfect gift and grace. For
almighty God has not elected us in regard of our works, or other worth: but
contrariwise, because God loved us, we do that which is acceptable in his
sight. I obtained mercy of the Lord (says 1. Cor. 7. 27.
Paul) to be faithful; Vt fidelis essem, non quia fidelis eram, as Sent. lib.
1. did. 41.
Lombard aptly.

The nature of this short treatise will not endure, that I should wade far
into this Abyssus. I remember Romans 11. 33.
Paul's exclamation; O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his wa^es past
finding out! And the gloss of De verbis Apost. sermon. 7. tom. 10. fol. 194
Augustine: Volentes disputare de de^ profundo, mersi sunt: Or, (as Lomb. vbi
supra.
other) Versi sunt in profundum. I come therefore to the Communion of the holy
Ghost: a point more comfortable, then ordinarily felt, and yet more felt then
can be disputed. It is said, Gal 4. 6. God has sent the spirit of his Son
crying in our hear^s Abba father: he said not calling, but crying: and Romans 8.
26. he calls this crying unspeakable groaning. When a man is tempted and
afflicted, he feels the strength of his enemies, and the weakness of his
flesh: he feels the fiery darts of Satan, the terrors of death, the wrath of
God, all these cry out against him horribly: so that the perplexed soul sees
nothing but sin threatening, heaven thundering, the devil roaring, the earth
trembling, hell mouth open and ready to swallow him up. But yet in the midst of
all these, Gods holy spirit cries in our hearts, Luther. com. in. Gal. 4. 6.
and this cry does outcry the clamors of the law, the bellows of hell, and
howlings of infernal fiends: it pearceth the clouds, and ascends up to the
ears of God, insomuch that the blessed Angels seem to hear nothing else but
this cry. The spirit helps our infirmities, and the 1. Cor. 12. 9.
strength of Christ is made perfect through our weakness. For Christ is most
powerful, when as we are most fearful: even when we can scarsely groan,
mark the words of Paul; The spirit makes intercession for us in our
temptation; not with many words, or long prayers, he cries not aloud with
tears, have mercy on me O God: but only gives a little sound, and a feeble
groaning, as, ah father: this is but one word, yet notwithstanding comprehends
all things. Indeed the mouth speaks not: but the good affection of the soul
cries aloud after this manner: O Lord God of compassion and father of mercies,
although I am grievously vexed on every side with affliction and anguish; yet
am I thy child, and thou art my father in Christ. This little word, or rather
no word, but a poor thought, conceived aright, passes all the flowing
eloquence of Demosthenes and Tully, yea Tertullian and all the Orators that
ever were in the world: for this matter is not expressed with words, but with
groanings, and these groanings are from the blessed Spirit. Thus you see the
large extent of Paul's affection, in regard of the thing wished unto the
Corinthians: The grace of Christ, the love of God, the communion of the holy
Ghost.

The second extension is in regard of the persons, be with you all: for the
Pastor must wish well, not only to the best, or to the worst, but this prayer
ought to be made for every one as well as for any one. There is none so bad,
but has received some grace: none so good but has need to receive more grace.
Wherefore pray we still, that the grace of Christ may be with us all.

The Church of England adds a third extension in regard of the time; for
evermore: the which is implied in the text also, for the Corinthians (as we
read in the Cap. 1. verse. 2.
former epistle) were Saints by calling, and so doubtless had received already
the grace of Christ, and had tasted of the love of God, through the fellowship
of the holy Ghost. He does therefore now desire Phil. 1. 6.
that the good work begun in them, may be perfect: Nicolaus Cabasila exposit.
liturg. cap. ^6.
that the grace received may continue with them, and increase daily unto the
end, and in the end: that the love of God which cannot be greater secundum
essentiam, may be greater secundum efficientiam, appearing, growing, abounding
in them more and more for evermore.

Amen.
Amen is used in holy Scripture three ways (as Lexicon th^oleg. verb. Amen.
Gabriel and Gerson speak) Nominaliter. Aduerbialiter. Verbaliter.

As a nowne, for truth: Apoc. 3. 14. These things says Amen, the faithful and
true witness: and so it is added in the conclusion of every Gospel, and of
the whole Bible, as a seal to confirm that which is written.

In the beginning, is the first, Amen the last word of holy writ: a stately
beginning, a strange ending. For what is more stately then antiquity? what
more strange then truth? Hereby teaching us that the Scriptures have vetera and
vera, which are not together in any other writing. For in humane learning many
things are uncertainly true, and more certainly untrue: only the word of God
is sealed with Amen.

Secondly, as an Aduerbe, for verily: so Christ often ii. the Gospel, Amen,
Amen, dico vobis:

Thirdly, as a Verb, signifying, so be it: Deuteronomy 27. 15. Dicet omnis populus,
Amen: and so it is used in Paul's prayer expounded before, and in all our
Collects: insinuating our earnest desire, that those things which we have
faithfully asked, may be effectually obtained. And this custom of answering
the Minister in the Church Amen, is ancient, as it appears in the 1. Cor. 14.
16. Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. Hieron. prolog. lib. 2. in epist. ad Galat.
Augustine. epist. 107. Vsum respondendi Amen antiquissimum esse patet, says
Bellarmine, lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 16. Here is open confession, I would the
Church of Rome would make open restitution also. For if the people must answer
the Priest Amen, then the Priest must pray to the peoples understanding: and
how shall they understand, except common prayer be said in a common tongue? A
conclusion agreeable not only to the Scriptures, as Bellarmine acknowledges,
and to the practice of the Primitive Church, (as Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr and In 1. Cor. 14. and Aquin. in cundem loc.
Lyra report) and to the paternes of other Liturgies in Eckius loc. com. tit.
37.
South India, Cassander liturgic. cap. 15.
Mosco^ia, Petrus Bellon. de moribus Armen. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Armenia, but even to their own constitutions, and Mass book: for their own
Apost. constit. lib. 8. cap. 12. ex emendat. Francisci Turriani. Oremus.
Gratias agamus. Quaesumus. Offerimus. Laudamus. Benedicamus. Adoremus.
Clement, and their own Missale give order that the people should answer the
Priest in many things: and how this can be done well, if the vulgar Liturgy be
not in a language vulgar, I cannot tell, Paul cannot tell.

All may see (saving such as the prince of darkness has blinded) that their
own pens have condemned their own prayers: even the phrases extant yet in
their service book: Let us pray, let us give thanks, we bese^ch, we offer, we
praise, we bless, we adore, specially the peoples answering Amen, ^uidently
demonstrate that their public devotions at the first institution were common
to Pastor and people: not mumbled in a corner alone by the Priest, or chaunted
only by Clerk and Priest.

Thus I have briefly surueied all our English Communion book, the which (as
Epist. Paulin. tom. 3. fol. 9.
Hierom said of John's Ap^calyps) (...) habet sacramenta, quot verb^: every
Master Deering answer of Hardings epist. to Jewel; fol. 5.
tittle is grounded upon scripture, every scripture well applied, every good
application agreeable to the most ancient and best reformed Liturgies in all
ages.

I beseech thee therefore (good reader) Romans 16. 17.
mark them diligently which cause division and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bell^es; and with fair speech and
flattering, deceu^e the hearts of the simple. So the God of peace shall shortly
tread down Satan under our feet, and in fine translate us from this iarring on
earth, unto the well agreeing Quier of Heaven, where all sing in unity and
uniformity; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
power, and might, be unto our God for evermore. Amen.

FINIS. Lege and age: viue and vale.

