A Defense Of that most Ancient, and Sacred ordinance of GODS, the SABBATH DAY.

Consequently, and together with it. 2. A Defense of the iiijth Commandment.
3. A Defense of the integrity and perfection of the Decalogue, Moral Law, or
X. Commandments. 4. A Defense also, of the whole and entire worship of God, in
all the parts thereof, as it is prescribed, in the first Table of the
Decalogue. 5. A Discovery of the Superstition, impurity and corruption of Gods
worship; yea, and Idolatry, committed by multitudes, in sanctifying the Lords
Day, for a Sabbath Day, by the iiijth Commandment.

Undertaken against all Anti-Sabbatharians, both of Protestants, Papists,
Antinomians, and Anabaptists; and by name and especially against these X
Ministers, M. Greenwod, M. Hutchinson, M. Furnace, M. Benton, M. Gallard, M.
Yates, M. Chapel, M. Stinnet, M. Johnson, and M. Ward.

The second Edition, corrected and amended; with a supply of many things
formerly omitted,

BY THEOPHILUS BRABOURNE.

Printed ANNO DOM. 1632.

Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the old
way, which is the good way, and walk therein; and ye shall find Rest for
your souls. Ierem. 6.16.

This is that old and that good way.

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy etc. The vijth day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work etc. for on the vijth
day the Lord Rested; Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed
it. Exodus xx. viij. x. xj.

Observe it, walk in it.

For verily I say unto you, until heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one
title, shall in no wise pass from the Law, until all things be fulfilled.
Mat. 5.18.

Whosoever therefore, shall break one of these least Commandments, and teach
men so; he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.19.

Whatsoever thing I command you, take heed you do it: Thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought there from. Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law, to do them. Gal. 3.10.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of
Great-Brittaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Christian faith etc.
MOST dread and renowned Sovereign, may it please your excellent Majesty:
such is the power of Truth, and specially in Religion, that they which have
once tasted it, cleave unto it, more then unto all the hopes of this life
besides: The Law of thy mouth (says David) is better unto me, then thowsands
of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.72. Yea, such is the excellency of Gods blessed
Truth, as his meekest servants, will stir in the defense of it, and the
mildest fight, before it shall be indamaged by their forbearance.

I durst not petition your Highness, nor adventure these lines unto your
Majesty's consideration, until I had by diligent study first, so settled my
conscience in the certain truth of them, as my mind gave me, that I am tied
in conscience, rather to depart with my life, then with this Truth; so
captiuated is my conscience, and inthraled to the Law of my God. Here therefore
I tender this Truth, with my life, unto your Majesty; that, unto your Godly
consideration; this, unto your clemency and mercy; and both, to the pleasure of
the Almighty.

I remember, when the Book of the Law had been lost, and was found again by
Hilkiah the Priest, in the Reign of Josiah, 2. King. 22. that Hilkiah sent it
by Shaphan the Chaunteller unto the King: which gives me to understand, that
in matters of Gods worship, in case failings and corruptions be found out, the
Supreme power, the King, is to have knowledge of it. More particularly, when
the Lords Sabbath was thought to be profaned, by the Disciples of Christ, by
plucking ears of corn, Mat. 12. to whom did the Pharisees complain, but unto
Christ, the Lord and Master of the Disciples? And when in Nehemiahs time the
Sabbath was profaned, by treading the Winepresse, and bearing of burdens,
Nehem. 13. to whom did Nehemiah turn himself, but unto the Rulers and Nobles
of Judah, for redress?

I address my self therefore unto your Majesty, humbly beseeching you, to
take it into consideration: 1. That that most ancient, and sacred ordinance of
Gods Sabbath, prescribed in the Moral Law; (and religiously practiced, by the
most anciet and primitive Churches, near 400 years after the Ascension of
Christ, even so long as they retained their brightest purity; and which ought
religiously to be sanctified, to the worlds end) it is now profaned, and
trampled under foot. 2. That the Decalogue and Law of God, is not taught and
maintained in our Church, in its fullness, integrity, and perfection; but only
partially, and by pieces. 3. That God has not his whole and entire worship and
service, prescribed in the first Table of the Decalogue; but is denied one
quarter, or fowrth part thereof weekly. 4. That by the common doctrine in our
Church, the 4th Commandment is wholly frustrate, and altogether nullified,
both root and branch. 5. That by most men in our Church, there is gross
superstition committed, Gods worship is corrupted, and by many plain idolatry
wrought, by keeping the Lords day for a Sabbath, by the 4th Com.

Amongst other things, I have (as I believe) made these five things, manifestly
appear in this Book; and now I humbly present them unto your Highness
consideration; trusting, the cause will speak for it self; and its bare
mention, will call for a Reformation.

It was the laudable and Godly care of your dear Father, to cause in his time,
a new Translation of the sacred Bible, for the correction of but here and there
a word; how much more (I trust) will his suruiuing Son and Heir, be mindful
of such weighty matters as these are? Almighty God, has honored this eternal
Law of the 10 Commandments, with such honor, as he vouchsafed not, to any one
portion of Scripture besides, in all the Sacred Bible; for he delivered it, in
most Maiesticall and terrible manner; in flaming fire, the earth trembling,
Moses and the people quaking; he spoke it and proclaimed it, with his own
voice, and wrote it with his own finger in Tables of stone. The Eternal Son
of God, whilst on earth bewraied such care of this Law, as that he ratified
it, and every jot and title of it, to the worlds end, saying, Verily, I say
unto you, that until heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title, shall in
no wise pass from the Law, till all things be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. The Church
of God, in this Christian Kingdom, honors at this day, this Law of God; for
she has inrouled it, in her Book of Common Prayers; and ordered, that it be
devoutly read, at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and at other times of
holy Assemblies. I trust therefore, your Majesty will afford this sacred and
honorable portion of Gods Word, your best protection.

The Law, it is the inheritance of the Church, as we read Deuteronomy. 33.4. and who
should defend the Churches right, if not your Majesty? King David chose this
Law, for his inheritance, as we read Psalm. 119.111. and I believe, so has
your sacred Majesty; defend it therefore: Why should the corrupt expositions
thereof, which the ignorance of former ages have hatched, be still retained?
Why should one part of this sacred Scripture, be retained, and an other part of
the same, rejected? Why should not God have his whole and entire worship,
prescribed in this Law, as well as some parts of it? you will not endure it,
that your Coin be clypped or impaired, but count him for a traitor that does
it; how the^ should you think well of him, that will clippe and impair, this
current and golden Law of God? you cannot endure it, that any part, of your
Royal inheritance of Crown Lands, should be detained from you; And how should
you endure it, that any part of your Spiritual inheritance, the Law of God,
should be withholden from you any longer? Why should we serve God by halues any
longer? The Lords Sabbathes, which are a portion of Gods Law; and a part of
your Majesty's, and the Churches inheritance, now contemned as Jewish, and
ceremonial, and now profaned and trampled under foot, I humbly beseech your
Highness, to take a care of.

As the 5th Commandment, is directed unto inferiors; so is the observation of
the Sabbath, in the 4th Commandment, directed unto Superiors, as M. Brerewood
in his Treatise on the Sabbath, has well observed; the care therefore of Gods
Sabbathes, pertains unto Kings; and the 4th Comm. does in a most eminent
sort, oblige Kings: Hence no doubt it was, that Nehemiah that Godly Gouerner,
took the reformation of the profaned Sabbath, into his care and charge: Whose
steps, may it please you to tread, having finished the great work, you may
to your eternal comfort, with him, petition Almighty God, to be mindful of
this your care and zeal for him, saying, Remember me, O my God, concerning
this etc. Nehem. 13.22. How famous unto all ages, are those Godly Kings,
Hezekiah, Josiah, and the rest, for Reformers of Religion, and for Restorers of
the worship of God! Oh that your zeal, might equal theirs; that it might be
left as a monument, unto all posterity, that you Restored the worship of God in
his Sacred Sabbaths.

If I be able to compare them, none of your Progenitors, did ever leave the
like honorable fact, to this, upon record; unless it were they, that made
the Reformation from Popish Idolatry: and that indeed, may be compared with
this: for that, concerned the 2th Com. and this, concerns the 4th Com. that,
was a Moral Law; and so is this: that was touching a part of Gods worship, in
the first Table, and so is this. Two Moral Laws, to wit, the 2th Com. and the
4th Com. have been corrupted, for many hundredth years together; the one, by
Image worshipping etc; the other by Sabbath breaking: as for the former, that
has (by the Mercy of God) been reformed, this hundredth years, and upwards,
ever since we departed from Rome; and Gods blessing, has abundantly followed
our Church, ever since. As for the latter, we still stick fast in the mire;
and remain still in ignorance and blindness, together with Rome, to this
day; and this, waits for the Reformation of our English Nehemiah, Hezekiah,
or Josiah.

As it was with the good Kings of Israel and Judah, in restoration of
Religion, still they left something undone; So our Ancestors, though they
reformed the corruptions about the 2th Com. yet they left the high places, I
mean the prophanatio^ of the Lords Sabbaths, still untouched. No doubt, God
foresaw it, that the reformation of one of his Commandments, was work enough,
for those his servants, in those gaine-saying times; the reformation of the
other, he has reserved for these later times: oh that these times, might be so
happy, as to take the Time! Let not posterity, take this Crown and glory: The
restoration, of the integrity of Gods worship, and the raising up again, of
Gods Sabbathes, call for your Majesty's help: Help O King.

It Is true, innovations are dangerouse, yet in some case necessary; as we see by
new laws daily inacted: But this is no innovation, it is but the reviving of
an old Law, a long time lain dead; and the putting into execution, Gods 4th
Comm. now, and of long time out of use. Neither can it be thought a thing
impossible, to be done, or disaduantageouse unto your Realm: for the change of
the Sabbath, from the Sunday, back again to the Saturday, that holy Day Genesis
2.3. will not prove (I suppose) one farthing loss, unto your Subjects: and
for your Majesty, it is but your pleasure; say the word only, and it is done;
your Majesty's proclamation or the like, works a present Reformation: Let me
say unto your Highness therefore, as once those servants of Naaman said unto
their Lord, when the Prophet bad him, but this small and easy thing, Go wash,
and be clean: If it were a great thing, which the Lord requires of thee,
would thou not have done it? how much rather when he says unto thee, wash
and be clean? 2. King. 5.13. I leave the application. To conclude, the
counsel of the Lord is, to inquire for the old way, Ier. 6.16. be pleased
therefore, to search the Scriptures; and to inquire of your reverend Bishops,
and learned Clergy; as they will answer it before God, if this be not the old
way, and the way wherein we must walk, to the Worlds end.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject THEOPHILUS BRABOURNE.

To the most Reverent Archbishops, and Bishops of this Kingdom.
RIGHT Reverent Fathers in God, and right graciouse and honorable Lords; I
presume to offer this Treatise of the Sabbath day, unto your grave and
judicious considerations; as unto whom it does more principally appertain, to
weigh and determine, of questions and controuercies, of such great consequence;
and whose it is, in a most eminent manner, to see that all corruptions in Gods
worship be reformed; all Truethes of God, fostered and cherished; and all the
parts of Gods worship, duly and religiously observed.

Amongst other things in this Treatise, I humbly desire your Lordshipes, to
take these five, into your best and deepest considerations: 1. That that Sacred
ordinance of Gods Sabbath (then the which, is not any in our Church more
ancient; commanded by God in his Moral Law; ratified by Christ the Son of
God; practiced by the Apostles; and also by the primitive Churches after them,
for 300 or 400 years together) is now sinfully trampled under foot, and
profaned. 2. That the Decalogue, and 10 Commandments of Almighty God, are not
wholly and fully taught and maintained in our Church, but only by parts and
by pieces. 3. That God has not his whole and entire worship and service,
prescribed in the first Table of the Decalogue, but is denied one fourth part
thereof weekly. 4. That Gods 4th commandment, is by the common doctrine in our
Church, wholly frustrate and nullified, both root and branch. 5. That by very
many in our Church, there is gross superstition committed, Gods worship
corrupted, yea plain Idolatry wrought: and that by sanctifying of the Lords
day, for a Sabbath day, by the 4th Com. These things (as I believe) you shall
find clearly proved in this Book.

Unto whose consideration should I commend these things, for redress, if not
unto your Lordshipes? has not his Majesty therefore deputed you, unto your
several charges, to ouersee, and see to the well ordering of the Church, and
worship of God? and has not the Almighty, laid it upon you, To warn some,
that they teach none other doctrine, 1. Tim. 1.3? And, To redress the things
that are amiss: Or, To set in order, the things that are wanting, Tit. 1.5?
Down then with that Idol, the Lords day Sabbath: so dealt Hezekiah with the
Brazen Serpent, when idolatrously abused: and bring into its room, and into
the Church of God again, that ancient ordinance, Gods Sacred Saturday-Sabbath;
let not an idol of man's deuiseing, stand in Gods Church, where an ordinance of
Gods, enjoined by a Moral Law, should stand.

Oh my honorable Lords, what a pity it is, to see Antiquity, true and
honorable Antiquity, I mean the Lords Sabbathes, trodden under foot! why
should not our Church, become followers of those Ancientest, and most pure
Churches, of the primitive times, that lived next after Christ, and his blessed
Apostles, in observation of the Lords Sabbath? Who, so long as they retained
their greatest purity, so long they religiously observed the Saturday-Sabbath.
Why should not your Lordshipes, exhort unto the observation of the Sabbath
day, as did that Godly Bishop Ignatius in his time? Epist. ad Magnesi. And why
should not your Lordships, defend the Sabbath day, as did that famous Bishop
Athanasius, in his time? Centur. iiij. cap. 6. page 410. This done, the Law of
God should be taught and maintained, in our Church, in its integrity and
perfection; the 4th Commandment should be in use, amongst us again; and be
accounted as Moral, as any of the other nine: and God should have his whole
and entire worship, prescribed in the first Table, as well amongst us, as ever
he had among the Jews, when they were the only people of God. If it please
not God, to inkindle your Lordshipes hearts, with more zeal for his glory, in
this behalf, then is to be found among common Ministers; Gods Sabbaths, are
like still (which God forbid) to lay waste, his Laws to be partially taught,
and his entire worship, to be still denied him.

Let none suggest unto your Lordships, that the observation of the ancient
Sabbath, is Iudaisme: for Athanasius, living in those first ages of the
Christian Churches, takes away this objection, saying, We keep the Sabbath
day, and yet we are not tainted with Iudaisme, Centur. iiij. In the Book of
Common Prayer, after the 4th Commandment (wherein the old Sabbath day, is by
name specified) is publikly rehearsed by the Minister, we are ordered to use
this devout prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law. Which prayer, and which commandment, cannot (under your Lordships
correction) be understood of the Lords day, nor of any other day, but the old
Sabbath day only: Wherefore, the observation of the old Sabbath, is no
Iudaisme; unless we be taught, to pray to God, to incline our hearts to
Iudaisme. It is not unknown unto your Lordships, that not many years since,
the Cross in Baptism, has by some been counted idolatrouse, and the holy
days, Romish, and yet has our Church freed them from such imputations; I
trust therefore, that in your grave and religiouse consultations, it will be
judged meet, that the Lords Sabbaths, shall be also freed from the slander of
Jewish, Iudaisme, and the like: If the Holy days of the Saints, may be
defended, I trust the Holy day of the Holy one of Israel, shall be protected.

I have done mine errand, I have discharged my duty; the cause is no longer
mine, then in my breast; I now commend it unto your Lordships, for protection:
the cause is Gods; and therefore youres, and the Churches; it deserves the
patronag of the greatest, and of the lernedest.

It Is true, my person is mean; I care not though it be fleited, so the cause be
honored: Judges, regard not persons; but Causes.

In Courts of Justice, if any sewe or inform for the King, if the Kings
Title, be in question, though the Informer be mean and neglected, yet the
Cause is much regarded; for it has all the honor and furtherance, that the
Judges and Court, can afford it: in special sort, the Judges, they take in
with it, and manage it, as if it were their own: Counsel shall be assigned
to plead for it; other causes shall stand by, whilst it be tried; informer and
witnesses, shall be countenanced, and encouraged to speak, and the like; so as
if possible, the Kings Title shall get the day. Let me petition your Lordships
therefore, in your Trial of this Controuercy, to have regard whose the Title
is, that is in question: it being the Lords Sabbath; a branch of the Moral
Law; a part of Gods worship; and one of the most ancient ordinances, that ever
God established in his Church; the Title is plainly Gods therefore: yea, it is
called the Sabbath of the Lord, or the Lords Sabbath, and, mine Holy Day. The
Title being Gods then, let it have that favorable and honorable trial, in
your Synods, Consistories, and Consciences, the which earthly Kings Titles
obtain, in their Courts. Who ever make squemish of it, your Lordships, as
Judges will take in with it I trust; knowing, the Title of him is now in
question; of whom you hold all you enjoy for the present, and hope to enjoy
hereafter: let the day be Gods; let judgment pass on his side, if possible;
let the Informer, have incouragment and countenance; all helps and
furtherances; if not for his own sake, yet for his Cause sake; and for Gods
sake; he, pleads the Kings broad Seal, an express precept; the 4th Com. one
of the 10 Morales; and one of the First Table too; what better, or higher
Evidence can be demanded?

Let no argument, or Text of Scripture be urged, to the abolishing of this
ordinance of Gods Sabbath; to the impairing, and ecclipsing of the Moral Law,
and 10 Commandments; and to the ouerturning of any part of Gods worship, once
established in his Church, if possible they may be salued and answered, by any
warrantable distinction, or exposition: Nor let any answer pass for orthodox,
whereby any jot or title of the Decalogue, or any part of Gods worship, should
be denied: This, I humbly beg and crave of our Lordships, and that in the name
of God, whose Title I inform for; and whose Title you are to judge for, and
defend; and that by virtue of your places, and high offices. For I hold it as
an undoubted Maxim, that it is not godly, nor Lawful, to abolish an ordinance
of Gods, being a part of Gods worship, once established in his Church, and
prescribed in his Moral Law; unless some most pregnant Text, can be brought
against it, which does necessarily and most clearly abolish it, so as it can be
no ways answered; of which kind (under your Lordships correction be it spoken)
I know there is not any one Text that can be shown, in all the New Testament:
Now God forbid, that any of his ordinances, should be thrown down, when they
may (if we pleased) be still retained.

It may easily be thought, that in so large a Treatise as this is, wherein is
handled so many arguments, and answers, passages, and particles, and that in a
new Argument, not formerly wrote of by any, that some or others of them may
savor of humane frailty; and stand in need of further study; I crave of your
Lordships, that such a thing may not be racked and dwelt upon, but that the
body of the Treatise, and maine Argument, arguments and answers may be
attended; the which are so clear and sound (to my understanding) as I am good
Confident, the cause shall obtain your Lordships Patronage.

So demean your selves, in deciding, judging, and defending Gods Title, here
on earth; that when the Lord Jesus, that chief Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls shall appear, then you may receive, an Incorruptible Crown of glory.

Your Lordships to Command THEOPHILUS BRABOURNE.

To the Godly and well affected Reader.
KNowing (dearly beloved and Christian Reader) that as there ought to be, so
there is, a propensity and Holy inclination, in all who are truly Gods, to have
a respect, generally and universally, unto all his Commandments; to one as
well as to an other, without exceptions and reseruations: To avoid all
superstition and will worship: and to give unto God, his own worship and
service, prescribed in his Laws, without baulking and abridging him, of any
part thereof; I judged therefore, that this discourse, in defense of the
Sabbath day, which is one maine thing, prescribed in Gods Commandments, and a
part of Gods worship and service, could not be unwelcome to thee, Calling to
mind also, the Parable of our Savior, how seuerly he will deal with that
servant, unto whom he delivers but one single Talent, if he hide it up in
secret, so as no proffit come thereof Mat. 25.24. Remembering also, that our
Savior, made it an essential mark, of Peter's love unto him, to feed his
Lambs, Ioh. 21.15. And, that it is given in charge unto all, To exhort one an
other, to admonish one another, and to edify one an other 1. These. 5.11.15.
These things, laid before mine eyes, I could not for love, nor durst I for
fear, but make known my mind in this point.

How could my Spirit, be but stirred within me, to see my Christian betheren,
the Church and Spowse of Christ, to lay in the weekly neglect, of Gods worship,
profanation of his Sacred Sabbathes, and transgression of the 4th Commandment;
when in the mean time, they zealously and superstitiously, tender unto God,
their will worship, of the Lords day Sabbath? how could I but discover these
things! especially when but the Alteration and chang of a day, as the
sanctification of the Saturday for the Sunday; might help all this. In the
days of Isaiah the Prophet, the Church of God, had profaned the Lords
Sabbathe; Isai. 58.13. and the Lord gave him in charge, to Cry aloude, spare
not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression,
and to the house of Iaakob their sin etc. Isai. 58, 1. It is the duty
therefore, of Gods Ministers, to tell his people of their sin; and the people
and Church of God, must with patience hear it, and with cheerfulness reform
it: for which happy Reformation, I make my prayers unto God, that when they
assemble next in Parliament, they may make this one of their maine
Consultations; to cause a search to be made, both into the Scriptures, and into
the Ecclesiastical Histories and Records of the Church; to see, what grownds
can be found, for the Lords day Sabbath; and to make also, a diligent inquiry,
after the Lords ancient Sabbathes, to see what is become of them; and when, and
upon what grownds they where first thrown down; that so, the errors of our
Fathers, may be reformed, in us their children. Th^s you have the reasons
moving me to wright.

As I had many and sufficient reasons moving me to wright, so I met with many
and sundry discouragments; for some, yea Ministers, who of all others, one
would think, should judge most charitablie of their brethren,
they enter into my heart, and say, it is pride and singularity, that sets me
on work etc: And this once broched by a Minister, it runs also from the
mouths of their people continually: now albeit, I have professed and protested
in private, unto such Ministers, the contrary; and that after a diligent search
of mine heart, as I have teld them, yet nothing will satisfy them, but pride
it must be though. Well, once again I answer them, and that in the words of S.
Paul, Though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, It Is
true indeed, The heart is deceiptfull etc. Ierem. 17. as soon therefore as I
can find this haughtiness arising, I will labor its mortification, God
assisting. But what is this to the purpose, among wise men? say he be a proud
person, and that pride creeps in, as it will to a man's best actions, too too
often; is his cause therefore stark naught? then many a learned, and elegant
sermon should be rejected; and many a zelouse Sermon, of no worth: but thus it
is with many of them, that unless a man can so Master his understanding, and
captiuate his judgment, as to say what they say for company; and out of a
reverence to their persons and gifts, to affirm with them, that all is Gods
Sacred truth, which they fancy about the Lords day Sabbath, though he can see
no such matter, but the clean contrary, yet ^ee must be branded for a proud
person: but with patience, I shall labor to bear them: selfeloue is strong;
and selfedeniall hard.

Some object to me saying, you are but one; and the Lords day Sabbath has
stood thus a long time; and the most are of a contrary judgment to you; never
think you to reform it, I never look to see it altered in my days etc. To
which carnal reasonings I answer, should a faithful Minister in his Charge,
be discouraged with such arguings, what Minister might not forbear the pulpit?
let him preach for repentance, alms deeds, chastity, sobriety, or
selfedentiall etc: and may not many in his Congregation, tell him, that he is
bat one, and they have lived otherwise a long time; and many, yea Ministers
will do as they do; and therefore never let him think to reform them etc?
who could think wise men, should argue thus unwisely? and yet these ears of
mine, have heard these arguments used by Christians, in other points, of no
ordenary understanding. But let these know, that a good cause, has not at all
times, good success: I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for
naught: but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God, says the
Prophet, Isai. 49.4. A Minister therefore, must go on with courage,
though he sees no fruit of his labors; for his reward, is with God.

Some mislike the vnceasonablesse of this motion; and they could wish in their
hearts (they say) I had tarried longer, and waited for some more ceasonable
opportunity, for the diuulging of these points. To whom I answer, Gods
truethes, may not wait attendance, till men be at leisure to receive them: and
why not now, as well as hereafter? unless these men think, these times, so
desperately evil, as there is no hope left, that they will give ear unto
wholesome Doctrine. But my fear is, that their season, is when I am out of
season, after my death, and so they hope, the point should dye with me; but I
have peuented them: I am by the mercy of God, neither so afraid, nor so ashamed
of Gods cause, as to deny it my best furtherance and countenance, in my life
time: were I ashamed of God and this, Truth before men, I might justly
susspect, that God would be ashamed of such a servant, before his Angels in
heaven.

Some say, that there are others in the Church, in many regards more fit then
I, for a matter of this weight; and therefore they could wish, that I had never
stirred in it; for now I have marred the cause quite and clean, by my
meannesse etc. It Is true indeed, and I freely confess it, there are many much
more fit then I; and I heartily wish it, that any of them had taken my place and
labor: but this we know, that the most fit and able men, to do God service
they are not ever the most ready and willing to do it: had it been a point, the
revealing whereof, might have wone credit, applause, preferment and the like, I
believe, you had heard of it long err now: but it being a point, of much and
hard labors, and the reward, like to be nothing but danger, reproach, and
heard censures; and like to meet with great enemies and many; in such a
point, wise men will take leisure, and give any body leave to go before them.
What hope could I have, that others of better, worth, would undertake this
task, when as before I published my former book, many men, of great lerning
and conscience, to whom I communicated my Notes, for confirmation or
confutation, they did neither; but rather turned my utter enemies, for this
cause sake? wherefore I was not rash, as some men count rashlinesse, but after
I had waited, as Elihu did, upon the ancient and more learned, and found no
courage in their hearts, nor word in their mouths, to speak for God; then I
spoke in my turn, and showed mine opinion: let no man blame my zeal; it was
for God.

It Is true, the meannesse of my person, will be a great block in the way, to
the progress of this cause; especially in these clyming days, wherein the
word of God, is so much received, with respect of persons; for men esteem of
the cause, just as they do of the person: hence it is, that before many will
give audience to the matter, they will first know of the man; as, whither he be
one of their side or no, and approved of by them: and whither learned, witty,
eloquent, and well red, or no: or whither honored with Titles, eminency, and
preferment or no: in so much as, if the Prophet Amos were now living, and
teaching Gods truth, it is to be feared, his book of prophecy, would not be
regarded, being he was a Neat-heard: and if S. Paul, were now to preach the new
doctrine of the gospel, it may be thought, it would not be entertained, he
being a Tailor or Tentmaker: But where are those Noble Bereanes, who serched
the Scriptures, and examined the cause, without regard had to Paul's person?
where is that Eloquent and learned Apollos, that gave heed unto the
instructions, and matter which Aquilla, and Priscilla his wife, taught him; of
whom he learned the way of God more perfectly, without respect unto their
persons? for the one was a woman that taught him; and both, were Taylers of
Tentmakers: If therefore A Truth, fares the worse, for the meannesse of the
Author, it shall be so, but at the hands only of such persons, as do not
unfeignedly desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby,
as did those Noble Bereanes; and it shall be so, but at the hands only of such
whose lerning is not sanctified, and seasoned with Humility, as Apollos his was.

Some object, that the broching of this point, will breed stirs, and
distractions in the Church etc. To whom I answer, it is a truth they say: when
ever entered any new Truth, or was, any old Truth received, but it came in
with stirs and distractions at the first? It fares in these cases, as it
does with physic, which a sikly man takes to recover his health; at first, it
makes him sicker then he was before, it causes him pains in his belly, head,
and heart etc: and albeit the pacient know all this before hand, yet will he
take this potion, in hope of a more perfect health afterward: and so I trust
will it be in this case: though for the present, it occationeth stirs,
distractions, and distempers; yet, it will be so only, in the minds of some
such, as do abound with evil humores: nevertheless, the conclusion will be
good, by the mercy of God; and a more perfect health will be obtained. When
Luther first stirred, to reform the second Commandment, there was then great
stirs and distractions in the Church, but by this time, and long agone; there
has been a sweet accord, and that upon better conditions then formerly: and
why may we not hope for like success? I mary say some scoffingly, and we
shall have an other Luther now, shall we? what will you prove an other Luther
now? such a disdainful, enuiouse, and scoffing age we now live in that, that
which should be a man's greatest honor, as to imitate the most virtuouse; it is
wrested, as a matter of his reproach and derision: in other cases, we desire to
justify our actions, by the like actions, of the godly and wise that have gone
before us, and to make use of them for our encouragement, and why should I
only be denied this benefit? I pray tell me, is it not a laudable thing, for
any to become followers of Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius? of Paul, Peter, Christ?
When ever I propound examples to my self, they shall ever be the best, and
most eminent; let these scoffers imitate the worst: for so they do, they are
the sons of scoffing Ishmael. Were it an infallible note of pride, to imitate
the most excellent, Paul would never have exhorted us, to become followers of
him as he was of Christ: Neither could Christians be accounted humble men,
because they do imitate Christ.

Some object thus, I but you do not discreetly, to publish this point, whereby
it comes to the peoples knowledge; rather should a drope of blood, have gone
from my heart, then such a point as this, unto common people: you should rather
have imparted it unto Divines in private, and discussed it with them only etc.
Hereto I answer, this objection of some Divines, it is no better then a fair
flourish, whereby under a c lour of discretion, they would have silenced, and
buried this Truth everlastingly. For if they could have tied me, by the rules
of this their discretion, to have made known this point, only unto Ministe^s,
they then know ways enough, how to smother it, so as it should never have come
to light, and so as the people, poor souls, should never have heard of it.

Indeed. I judged it discretion, first to make tender of it to Ministers,
before I printed, to the view of common people; and so I did; for I sent my
Notes a broad, to sundry Divines of the best rank, both nere and afarr off,
expecting their confutation or confirmation, but I obtained neither: In case
they had answered me, by way of confirmation, then my resolution was, to have
been further counseled by them as touching the publishing of it; as whither by
my self; or rather by some more eminent and able person of their choosing: and
touching the time, when? whither presently, or rather hereafter: and for the
persons, to whom? whither generally unto all, or rather unto some eminent
persons of the Kingdom; and the like. But expecting long their answers,
which diverse of them promised, though they performed not; and waiting 10 or 12
months, and finding nothing but delays, and foording me off still; hereby I
suspected, that this their counsel of discretion, was but a dry morsel to
stay my stomach withal for the present, and nothing else but a fained thing;
devised handsomely to make me believe on the one side, that, that they meant
seriously and faithfully, to have taken the matter into their consideration,
had not I been so rash in publishing it, which they never meant, as all
experience even to this day shows: for both my Notes then, and my Book
since, have never been answered by them by way of confutation; nor approved of
them, by way of confirmation. And on the other side, to have kept this Truth
secret, from the peoples knowledge: and this of the twain indeed, is that they
chiefly aim at: it is most grieuouse unto them, that common people, should
epsy their errors: as for their own consciences, many of them are large
enough (as I have experience, to my exceeding great sorrow of heart) to brook
the superstitiouse, and ignorant observation, of the Lords day Sabbath; and to
neglect the worship of God, in the 7th day Sabbath: they could digest these
things, and set down with them, good quietly, provided no body might see this
their blind ignorance, and halting with God; but this is that which touches to
the quick with them; that since my publication of this Truth, and discovery
of their error, now they cannot halt in secret; now common people, see there is
no grownds for the Lords day Sabbath; now their parishoners and others, can
answer their arguments; and see their folly and leu^ty; and how a long time
they have been carried in a golding dream. Well, when I saw that Ministers
sleited Gods Truth, then I resolved to turn me, and open my self unto the
people, trusting to find more fidelity and sincerity among them: if therefore
it griueth them, that the people know of it sooner then they would, let them
thank themselves, for sleiting of it, when tendered unto them; and for their
attempts to smother it etc. For some of them have said unto me, when I have
moved them in it most ceriously, what think you, we have nothing else to do,
but to listen to your toies?

Others object saying, if I would have wrote in controuercy, I should have wrote
against Papists, as Bellarmine, and the like, against a foreign enemy etc. To
whom I answer, there is more need to deal at home, then a broad: every man flies
upon A Papist: for the controuercy is made easy by the many helps of our
learned writers; and because it is applauded at all hands, so as a man may be a
gainer by the controuercy: But few or none will meddle, to redress things at
home: for these are not only hard and difficult, requiring much study and
great labors considering none have gone before to give them light; but also,
a man may easily foresee it, he shall be a loser by the bargain: whereby you
may easily gather, that homebred euiles, are more perillouse, and like to stick
long by us, without reformation: now by how much the fewer will undertake
them, by so much the better service he does unto God, that will adventure
himself in them: for this is that I aim at, not to please men, but him that
has called me, and betrusted me with one of his Talents; my chief desire now
is, that I may improve it, not which way my self may best gain credit,
wealth, and preferment, but that way whereby I may wine most glory, to my
chief Lord and Master. Let none think me so ignorant, but that I know well
enough, which is the way to rise in the world, were that the thing I short at;
and I know right well, that whilst I am in this argument, I am clean out of
that way: but with Moses, I have a respect unto the Recompense of reward.

Some of them object unto me, that by stiring in this point, I shall incense
the State, and the Byshopes will molest me etc. To whom I answer, that's the
thing indeed would much please them, that the Government of the Kingdom,
would oppose me, and so much they intimate, by their much wondering, that I am
so long suffered in quiet etc: for since they cannot defend the phantasy of the
Lords day Sabbath, by the Scriptures, and sword of the Spirit, now they long
for the aid of the sword of the Magistrate, wondering it tarrieth so long err
it will aueng them: but had I their cause in hand, I would be ashamed, to
desire aid from the sword of the Magistrate, when the word of God, and sword
of the Spirit, refuses to help: first let them soundly answer, and confute my
book, and then let them fly to the Magistrate and spare not. I know well, that
things tending to changes and alterations, are not pleasing unto Statsmen,
unless in case most weighty, and of urgent necessity, of which kind, I trust
they will Judge this to be, after they have once taken it, into their grave and
iudiciouse considerations. The soundness and cleernesse of this my cause,
gives me good hope, that God will inlighten them with it, and so incline their
hearts unto mercy; but if not, since I verily believe and know it to be a
Truth; and my duty, not to smother it, and suffer it to dye with me, I have
adventured to publish it, and to defend it, saying with Queen Aester, If I
perish, I perish: and with the Apostle Paul, I pass not at all, neither is my
life dear unto me, so that I may fulfill my course with joy, Actor. 20.24.
What a corziue would it prove to my conscience, on my deaths bed, to cale to
mind, how I knew these things full well, but would not reveal them; how could
I say with S. Paul, that I had revealed the whole Counsel of God, and have
kept nothing back, that was proffitable? Act. 20.20.27. what hope could I then
conceive, that God would open his gate of Mercy to me, who whilst I lived,
would not open my mouth for him?

Thus Gentle Reader, I have both given thee my reasons moving me to wright, and
also shown thee, the many discouragements opposing me, and how I have
encountered them; now in the last place my request unto thee, shall be 1. that
thou expectest not from me, expressions of great Schollarship, reading,
elegancy of phrase, and the like; but only soundness, plainness, and godly
simplicity; as this is all you shall find, so is it as much as I desire you
should find. Touching Method, I could wish that here and there, some things
were otherwise placed; but considering, that nothing is more tediouse unto me,
then unnecessary wrighting of one thing twice over, whereby such slipes might
have been amended, I trust I shall obtain thy patience; and the rather,
considering that after this work was first finished, it laying still by me, I
had occation to add too many and sundry things here and there, and not finding
room enough in the margent of my Notes, to inserte them were I would, was
forced to thrust them in where I could.

2. Whereas in some passages, a harsh word or two may fale from my pen, which
the temperate Reader may think, might better have been spared; In this case, I
desire him to think, that he is not yet so sensible of the foulness of the
cause, as my self, who have peradventure better weighed circumstances: for I
consider of the foulnes of the matter, seeing it most palpably; of the
obstinacy of the adversaries, after sufficient means of conviction, tendered
long a gone unto them; and of the dangerouse consequences, arising from their
great errors, in a matter of greatest weight and moment, it being about a
Moral Law, a part of Gods worship, and a most Ancient ordinance of Gods; I
see their absurd answers, distinctons, and arguments, and how by their subtilty
they corrupt, the Scriptures, and abuse the well minded people of the Land:
observe it, and you shall still find some of these things, the foregoing
occation of every tarte speech I use; now these things, my Reader at first,
cannot be possessed of, as I am: and who can speak of such foul things,
without some expressions, of a just indignation against them?

In specialll, I have often occasion to use the word Puritan^: Hereat let none
be offended; for I use it not in reproach unto sanctity and purity, or the
professors thereof, considered as truly such; for I honor purity in my heart,
and endeavor after it in my life: I use the word therefore, but only as a note
of distinction, to point at some men with whom I have to deal, rather then
others; and grieved I am at my heart and in my soul, that I must have to deal
against persons so qualified.

It Is true this cause concerns all men none excepted, whither Ministers or
people: yet in special, as cause there is for it, I direct my speech chiefly
against Ministers; of Ministers there are two sorts, puritanes, and such as
are no puritanes; these, as I find them not ready to embrace things new; so I
find them, not ready to condemn a cause, before they have heard it: wherefore,
spareing them, my speech is only against puritan Ministers: of these also
there are two sorts, some who happily never so much as have heard of this
question, or if they have, yet never raised slanders and oppositions against
it; but carrying it temperatly and discreetly, wish it a due trial, that so the
truth may be boulted out, these me^ I reverence: but there are others, and in
special those tenn Ministers named in the title lease, at the beginning of this
book, these men in special I oppose; for these after they have had my Notes,
and also my former book and conference with me, now four years past, yet
still do raise up all the oppositon, against both my person and my cause; that
they can; and that both publikly and privately. Solomon tells us, there is an
appointed time for all things, A time to laugh, and a time to weep: A time to
rend, and a time to sow: A time of war, and a time of peace: A Time to keep
silence, and a time to speak Eccl. 3. my former book was a time of silence:
for there I labored, to cover the spotes and blemishes, of these my brethrens
error, hoping a word had been enough to the wise; but they abusing it, this
book is a time to speak, and lay them forth in their cullers. My former
book, was a time of peace, for there I handled the matter meekly, mildly, and
in all frie^dlinesse, hoping these my brethren, would redly have embraced
Truth with peace; but they proclaiming open wars against me, and Gods cause
in my hand; this book is a time of war; and here I take them for Gods
enemies and mine: Let me desire my Reader therefore, to give me patience, to
prosecute these enemies of Gods Truth rowndly, not sparing them, though they
be Ministers.

Happily thou will say in their behalf, oh but these men whom you would so
prosecute, they are Ministers, whom we exceedingly reverence, and who do truly
fear God, as your self cannot deny etc. Yea, they are your brethren, etc. And
so do I reverence them too, but with this limitation, in their virtues, and
wherein they do well: And they truly fear God, as I am strongly persuaded, yet
they have not at all times, a respect unto all Gods Commandments, as the
Prophet David speaks; for they transgress the 4th Com. weekly, by profaning
of Gods Sabbathes: I may not unfitly resemble these 10 Ministers, unto that
clowd which had a light and a dark part; when I behold their light part, and
see them walking in and teaching the truth, I cannot look enough on them, I
may truly speak it: but when I look on their dark part, and see them in
their errors, I abhor their sight, as one abhors the darkness. The
Prophet David was to be exceedingly reverenced, yet not in his sins of
murder and adultery, against the 6th and 7th com. He truly feared God, yet at
this time, he had not a respect unto these two Commandments, of murder and
adultery. The Apostle Peter, being a Minister, was to be highly reverenced, yet
not in his denial of Christ: He truly feared God, yet when he forswore his
Lord and Master, therein he bewraied it not. Let good men therefore, and Holy,
be defended, no further, then their goodness and holiness will extend; and
suffer them to be prosecuted and discovered, in their erroures and sins, that
they may reform them. I confess they are my brethren, and so I acknowledge
them; but what then, may not their erroures therefore be discovered and
reproved? Peter was Paul's brother, did Paul therefore cloak Peter's error? no;
Paul discovered it, and reproved it to his face, and that publikly before all
men Gal. 2.11.14: shall the sins of the people be reproved, and not the
sins of Ministers? shall Ministers, have a patent to sin without reprofe?
our Savior, reproved Peter, saying, get thee behind me Satan. I hold, sin is
less to be borne withal in a Minister, then in a private person; especially
if it be, both in their life and doctrine, as that is, for which I shall
reprove them: for when they not only practice it, but also erroniously teach
it, hereby they draw whole multitudes after them; and therefore sinful
error, would be snibed in them, as a river would be stopped in the fountain.

Perhapes thou will further say for them, but what is it you have against them?
it seems by these words, that you have some great matter against them, which
we cannot believe, since we know them to be men so Holy, so learned, and every
way so qualified, as we cannot say, black is their eye etc. Why amongst others,
these things I have against them; In general I challeng them, for their false
and erroniouse doctrine, where with all they have now a long time deceived, and
seduced the people of God, and wherein they still stiffly persist, he
particulars whereof are these; by their ungodly and abominable rejecting, of
that most ancient ordinance, of Gods Sabbath, by name commanded in the Moral
Law. 1. They are become companiones to those wicked. Priests, who were partial
in Gods Law, Mal. 2.9: for they deny the Integrity and perfection of the Law,
and teach it only by halues and by parceles and pieces, and so make Gods Law,
a lame and defective Law. 2. They deny God, a part of his holy worship and
service, prescribed in the first Table of the Decalogue, and this they neglect
and omit weekly. 3. They have utterly abolished, and by their doctrine
nullified, the whole 4th Commandment, both root and branch. 4. They have most
shamefully abused the 4th Commandment, by their most gross, false, and
erroniouse expositions of it; so as I never saw, any one portion of scripture,
more corruptly and falsely expounded, by any Popish Jesuit. Whereby they
worthily deserve the Title, to be called, The corrupters of Gods Law. 5. They
do shamefully abuse certain Textes, and portions of Scripture; and that by
setting Scriptures together by the ears: for they wrest certain Scriptures of
the New Testament, to the unnecessary contradicting and overthrowing, of things
commanded in the Decalogue and 10 Commandments of the Old Testament. 6. They
have and do, most vnschollarlike, abuse the 4th Com. by applying it, to the
Lords day, the which God directed properly unto the Saturday, or 7th day of the
week. 7. They teach and maintain, that the Lords day is the Sabbath day, by
Christ his institution; and to this purpose, they have most vnlernedly and
dishonestly, wrested and abused, diverse and sundry portiones of sacred
Scripture, a thing which one day they must account to God for: and hereby they
have shamefully abused, many of the well affected people of the land, nursing
them up in Superstition, will worship, and idolatry: If I shall make these 7
things good, against these 10 Ministers, as in this book I shall, then I trust
you will pardon me, if now and then, I let fale an harsh word or two, against
them; and then I trust you will not blame me, for taking up the bucklers
against them, as Gods enemies, in these cases: I could not have taken these
things so euilly, at the hands of any as of puritans, nor of any puritans as of
puritan Ministers: for at their hands I looked for better.

As for them, these 10 Ministers, I require and charge them, as they will
answer it before the Tribunal of Almighty God, at the general day of
Judgment, that they study the 4th Commandment better, and other the
Scriptures now in controuercy; so that they may deliver nothing to the people,
but the pure word of God, in their exposition; and that they forbear these
erroniouse doctrines, in pulpit and in private; yea and revoke these their
foul erroures, making a mends to the people of God, whom they have wronged, by
acknowledging the same unto them, before either they, or any of their people
depart this present life: it is no dallying with men's souls, and Gods
matters. Or else, let them answer this my book, and so honestly acquit
themselves, of these things I charge them withal: it is but equal that I
demand, that they should either confirm my book, or confute it: some of them
say they will give their lives for the Lords day Sabbath, I trust then, they
will give their labors, which is less, to defend it. I doubt not, but you
shall hear them make many shifts, and friuolouse excuses, that they may not
answer me, as hitherto they have done, when moved to answer my former book;
but this is but still to maintain their credit, among the people, as if they
could easily answer all, but they will not wast their time forsooth. Happily
the combination of these 10 Ministers, will agree, every man to preach an
invectiue sermon or two, every man in his own parish, against this book, and
so raise a great cry against me; picking partially some few things in my
book, to cavil at; as it is no hard matter, for a Rhetoricean, to delude the
people with words; and for a Sophister, to beguile them with seeming arguments
and answers; but my request unto them is, that they would answer my book, and
that punctually, from point to point; not snaching and catching here and there
at things; and that they would print it, as I have done, and so they shall
stand to what they say, without alterationes, and after minceings and
extenuationes: An Author, may be much wronged and abused in pulpit, as I have
been already by M. Chapel, reporting to the people, things out of my former
book, falsely, which I never wrote there; and so confuting their own
fantasies, in stead of my book; and the Author has no remedy, but patience.
To avoid the like, I desire them to forbear pulpit confutations, and come to
printed confutations, that so they may be answered again.

What remains Christian Reader, but that in the last place, I crave thy
single eye and impartial censure; and that you carry a mind, void of all
prejudice, and evil will, either to the person or the cause, whereabouts thou
art ready to be employed in reading: Remember, we are not to receive the word of
God, with respect of persons; nor yet to stop the ear, and wink with the eye,
least we should see and understand: for so thou shall both wrong thy self, and
thy Author. Remember, thou art now in the place of a Judge: for thou must read
the Controuercy of the Lords Sabbathes, pleaded pro and con, betwixt these 10
Ministers and me: they against Gods Title, and I for Gods Title; they against
Gods Sabbaths, and I for them: and betwixt them and me, thou must Judge and
pass sentence, now a Judge must not be carried away with partiality, and
respect to persons; nor suffer his mind to be prepossessed, with an ill will
to the cause, before he hears it: these things are but equal and right,
which I crave of thee, wherefore I trust I shall obtain with thee. This only
note, that if thou wi^t suffer thy self to be swaied, rather on the one side,
then on the other, thou ought rather to take in with me, then with them:
for the Sabbath day, it being an ancient ordinance of Gods, a long time in use
in his Church, therefore the cause and Title it is Gods; and since I stand in
defense of this Sabbath day, therefore I stand in defense of Gods cause, and
Gods Title, and so side it with God: but they, setting themselves against Gods
Sabbath, set themselves not only against me, but also against Gods cause, and
Gods Title: wherefore judge thou, whither it were better for thee, to take in
with them, or with me; against Gods cause and Title, or with Gods cause and
Title. And so I commend thee to the grace of him, who is able, to build us up
further in the knowledge and love of his Truth.

Thine in Christ Jesus THEOPHILUS BRABOURNE.

The Contents of this Book.
Chapt. I.
This Chapter contains A defense of the Moral Law, or 10 Commandments of
Almighty God: wherein for the defense of Gods Sabbathes, it is proved, that
this Law is in force unto Christianes: and here Libertines, Anabaptists, and
Antinomians are confuted; who deny that the Law of God, and consequently his
Sabbaths, do belong unto Christians: and their obiectones to the contrary are
answered.

Chapt. II.
This Chapter contains an Exposition of the 4th Commandment, together with a
discovery, of the manifould shameful corruptiones and abuses of this divine
Law, by many Divines of these times; who do wrest it, mancle it, and corrupt
it by their idle answers and distinctions, false glosses, and most absurd
Expositiones: from all which, this Holy Law is vindicated by the Author, and
restored to its proper genuine, and ancient sense again. Here also, it is made
apparent, that the whole 4th Commandment is abolisbed and nullified, by the
common doctrine of these times.

Furthermore, and by the way, here it is shown, how long a Sabbath day is, as
namely, that it is but the time of Day light only: and here is discovered the
error of such divines, as hold and teach, that the Sabbath day is to begine at
midnight, or in the Evening before, or to last from morning to morning. 2. By
the way also, here it is shown, that there is no such preparation to the
Sabbath, to be made on the evening before, by a cessation from the works of
our callings, and the like, as some Ministers do wright, and call for. Lastly
this Chapter is concluded, with an Exhortation to the love of Gods Law, and the
Integrity and perfection thereof.

Chapt. III.
This Chapter contains A discovery of the vanity, of all their Arguments,
brought for the maintenance of the Lords day to be a Sabbath day: and of their
abuse of sundry Scriptures, to that end. This is handled in two questions: the
one, showing that it can never be proved, that the Lords day, was in the
Apostles days, constantly and weekly obs^rued week by week, as we now
observe it. The other, That it cannot be proved, that so much as any one Lords
day, was ever kept in the Apostles days, for a Sabbath day: and that therefore
it is no sin against God, but Lawful for Husbandmen to make Hay, in Hay
seile, to sow corn in wheat seile, to reap corn in Harvest; and for all
sorts of Tradsmen, Taylers. Shomakers, Brewares, Bakers, Weauers, and the
rest, to do the ordenary works of their callings, as well upon the Lords day,
as upon any other day of the week. Yet further, here it is proved, that the
Lords day is but an indifferent thing, and that by the Testimony of the best
writers, some learned and Godly Martyrs, and the State, and Church of England
assembled in Parliament. Here also, the Lords day is discovered to be but A
Popish Tradition: and so all Romish relics are not yet removed. Finally it
concludes with an Admonition, and Dehortation from Superstition,
voluntary-religion, and will worship.

Chapt. IV.
This Chapter contains an Answer. unto all those Textes of Scripture,
reasons, and arguments, profanly and impiously brought against the 7th day
Sabbath, commanded in the Moral Law. It shows the absurdeties, which the
undertakers against Gods Sabbath do fale into. And, it wipeth off that
slander of rigorousnesse, of the Jewish Sabbath; and shows, that God
required no more stricktnesse, of Jews then, then the patrones of the Lords
day, do require of Christians, on the Lords day now.

Chapt. V.
This Chapter contains, sundry Substanciall Arguments, proving undeniably,
that the 7th day Sabbath, mentioned in the Moral Law, is still in force, and
ought to be, to the worlds end. This is proved, both out of the Old Testament
and out of the New Testament; and also, out of the ancient Records of the
Church. For 1. God Commanded it. 2. Christ, the Son of God, ratified it. 3.
The Apostles after Christ, practiced it. 4. The Primitive Churchs, religiously
observed it: And in this last passage, by the way it is shown 1. when the
Lords day first sprang up, to be a sole Sabbath day; and who were the founders
thereof. 2. When the Lords ancient Sabbath was first thrown down, and who
were the wicked Authors thereof. Occationally in this Chapter, the observation
of the old Sabbath is freed from the unjust slander, of being Jewish and
Iudasme, with the like.

Here also are confuted, the vain Euasions and distinctions, which are usually
framed against the ancient Sabbath day. Lastly, here is a discourse of the
Antiquity of the Sabbath: where it is proved, that the Sabbath day it from the
Creation, and so as ancient as the world.

Chapt. VI.
This Chapter contains A dispensation; showing that Christians, who desire
the Ancient Sabbath, are not necessarily bound in conscience, to make A rent
from our Church, in their present observation of it; but that they may wait,
for the opportunity of a public Reformation, by the Magistrate; provided they
keep the Lords day for the Sabbath day, by way of a change in the mean
season. 2. It concludes with an Exhortation, to use all possible and lawful
means for a speedy public and general Reformation: amongst other Motives
thereunto, these are touched, that until A Reformation. 1. The Decalogue is
defaced of its Integrity. 2. The 4th Com. is but a Cipher. 3. An holy prayer of
our Church is frustrate. 4. A gate is set open to Anabaptistry. 5. The worship
of God will languish and decay. 6. An old Tradition is kept in the place, where
the old Sabbath should stand. 7. Men live in the weekly sin of Sabbath
breaking. 8. God is denied a part of his worship. Yea and corruptly worshipped.
9. Idolatry is committed by thousand thowsands in the Kingdom. And these are
the Contents of this book.

A Defense of the Moral LAW.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
THE scope, and principal drift of this Treatise (Christian Reader) is the
defense of the Lords Sabbathes; to wit, his ancient Sabbathes, the Saturday and
seventh days Sabbathes, the which are expressly enjoined us in the fourth Com.
in these words, Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it etc. But the seventh
day, is the Sabbath of the Lord etc. Exodus 20.8.10.

Against this ancient and most sacred ordinance of Gods, I find two professed
enemies, against whom I must bend my forces: the one, are they who deny the Law
of God, the Moral Law, or 10 Commandments, to belong unto Christians: and so
consequently they deny Gods Sabbathes also, commanded in the Law: and these are
our Anabaptists and our late sprung up Antinomianes: the other, are they who
deny the Integrity and perfection of the Law: they embrace the Law of God
indeed, but not the whole law: and these are both Protestants and Papists;
for these reject that ancient ordinance of Gods Sabbath day, properly so
called, and expressly commanded in the moral law, counting it for a ceremony
and abolished; by reiection whereof, they reject some thing commanded in the
Law; and so consequently they are partial in the law, and do deny it in its
integrity and perfection: urge an Anabaptist or Antinomian to the observation
of the Sabbath day, and he will answer you, that the law is abolished at the
coming of Christ, as all those legal Ceremonies were: urge a Protestant or a
Papist to sanctify the Sabbath day, and your answer shall be, that this part
of the law touching the Sabbath day, is a ceremony and abolished at the coming
of Christ: thus Anabaptists and Antinomians renounce the whole law;
Protestants and Papists renounce the wholenesse of the law; the one would have
no law, the other would have no perfect law: Against both these this book is
penned.

The parts of this book are six, divided into so many Chapters also. The
first part or chapter is in defense of the Moral Law, and consequently of
Gods Sabbathes, against Anabaptists and Antinomianes. (The other five parts
or Chapters, are in defense of the integrity and perfection of the Law, and
consequently of Gods Sabbathes, against Protestants and Papists: for this
purpose) the second part or Chapter, gives the true sense and Exposition of
the fourth Command. and vindicateth it from the common and corrupt glosses and
expositions of it. The third Chapter, shows the weakness and insufficiency
of all those Scriptures and arguments, which are usually produced to prove the
Lords day to be a Sabbath day. The fourth Chapter, shows the insufficiency
and feebleness of all those Scriptures and arguments, which are usually
alleged against the Lords Sabbath of the seventh day, or Saturday, to make it
an abolished ceremony. The fifth Chapter, contains sundry forcible and
undeniable arguments and Scriptures, proving the morallity and perpetuity of
the ancient Sabbath day. The sixte and last Chapter, contains a Dispensation
for a season, touching the present practice, and observation of the seventh day
Sabbath: together with an Exhortation, to a speedy reformation. Thus you see my
task what it is; my adversaries who they are; and the parts of this Book.

One thing more would be premised; for so much as we shall often have occasion
to use these two words Moral and Ceremonial, it is sit that I here show in
what sense I understand them. 1. I would use these words but for distinction
sake; for whereas there are two sorts of Sabbathes; the wekly Sabbath and the
yearly Sabbathes: the Sabbath which God wrote, and the Sabbathes which Moses
wrote: the Sabbath which God spoke, and the Sabbathes which Moses spoke: the
Sabbath written in the Moral law Exodus 20.8. and the Sabbathes written in the
Ceremonial law Levit. 23.32. etc. for the distinguishing of these two sorts
of Sabbathes one from the other, I do use these two words, calling the weekly
Sabbath recorded in the Moral law, the Moral Sabbath; and the yearly
Sabbathes recorded in the Ceremonial law, the Ceremonial Sabbathes: these
Sabbathes were also distinguished in respect of time, the Moral Sabbath was
first delivered Exodus 20.8. yea, Genesis 2.2.3. the ceremonial Sabbathes were
afterward delivered Levit. 23.32. etc. neither did these ceremonial Sabbathes
ever come within the pale of the Moral law, or were written in the Tables of
stone. 2. I see not but that I may call the weekly Sabbath, the Moral Sabbath
properly: for 1. the seventh day or weekly Sabbath, it conserneth practice and
manners, which is signified by the word Moral. 2. Since God spoke all those
words Exodus 20.1. why should not every thing he spoke be called moral, as well
as any thing he spoke? and since the Sabbath day or seventh day, is a thing
that is expressly commanded in the Moral law, and which may, I say which may be
retained in the Church with great profit, why should it be denied the name of
moral? 3. Give me a reason why the seventh day Sabbath should not be called a
Moral, as well as the doctrine of the Trinity in the first Com? or as the
doctrine of original sin, or lust Romans 7.7. in the tenth Comm? 4. Since the
duties of the Sabbath, to wit, Rest, and Holy exercises, are accounted Moral,
why should not the time or seventh day also be accounted moral; for the time
is a furtherance unto these moral duties: now that which furthereth a moral
should me think be also called a moral. 5. Hereunto agrees Doctor Ames in
his Theological Thesis page 499. and also affirms it to be the judgment of
the best divines, saying, It is received by all best divines, that the Morales
were differenced from the Ceremoniales, by this, that all (and only) the
Morales, were wrote by God, in the Tables of stones etc. The Saturday and
weekly Sabbath then, must needs be termed a moral Sabbath. In a word, why
should this be strange? for as there is a ceremonial law and a moral law, why
may there not be likewise ceremonial Sabbathes, and moral Sabbathes? and
since God placed the seventh day Sabbath in the moral law, among the morales,
why should it not be termed moral, and called the moral Sabbath?

The moral Sabbathes, together with whatsoever else is commanded in the moral
law, I do defend; the Ceremonial Sabbathes, with all other Ceremonies, I do
reject: It is the Decalogue, and nothing else, which I defend; and this I stand
to maintain, in the integrity and perfection thereof, unto a iott and title.
These things premised, I come unto the first thing propounded, namely the
Defense of the Moral law, against Anabaptists, Libertines, and Antinomianes.

SECT. II.
TOuching the defense of the moral law, and consequently of Gods Sabbathes
therein contained, be pleased to note, that both Anabaptists beyond the sea,
and Antinomians on this side the sea, all of them that ever I have spoke
withal, do freely confess it, that if any day must be a Sabbath day, it must
be, not the Lords day, but Saturday the old Sabbath day: now, that this
Sabbath day is now in force they deny; because they suppose the whole law to be
abolished, and so the Sabbath day therein also: wherefore, if I shall prove
unto these, that the law is still in force, I have obtained my desire with
them, to wit, that the seventh day Sabbath is still in force.

First then, as touching these who deny the moral law, I can but wonder, how
any heart that has the fear of God in it, can without trembling and
astonishment admit so blasphemous a thought as this, to enter it; as to think,
that that most holy and righteouse Law of God, has nothing to do with him, to
command him, and to direct him how to order his liefe: Moses speaks thus in
commendation of this Law, saying, And what Nation is so great, that has
ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law, which I set before you this
day? Deuteru. 4.8. and is it so righteous a law? how is it then that these men
will attempt to abolish it? and deny obedience unto it? our Savior tells us,
that the sum of this Law, is to love the Lord our God with all our hearts,
souls, and might: and to love our neighbor as our selves, Matt. 22.37. Can
they show us any other law in stead of this, that is better, more holy, or
more just? Love, is the sum of this law; and love, is the law we shall walk
by in the kingdom of heaven, 1. Corint. 13.8.13. and will they reject that
law on earth, which we shall walk by in the kingdom of heaven?

It may be they will say for themselves, but the Moral law it is Moses law,
now we have forsaken Moses, we cleave unto Christ, and unto his Laws in
the New Testament etc. But, 1. the ceremonial law being written by Moses,
it may be termed Moses law, but the Moral Law being written by the finger
of God, it must be called Gods Law. 2. Make they a difference betwixt the
law written in Exodus 20.1. etc. and the same law ratified by Christ in the
New Testament? let them then show me a difference betwixt these two; Honor
thy father and thy mother etc. Ex. 20.12. and, Children obey your parents etc.
Ephesians. 6.1. and betwixt these two: Ex. 20.13, and Thou shall not kill To. 13.9.
If there then be no difference of the Moral law, vvhither in the old or new
Testament, in vain do they reject the one to embrace the other.

Happily they will say again, I but the law is of a compulsiue nature,
compelling men to obedience: but Christianes are endued with a free spirit,
doing things of love: the love of Christ constrains them etc. it is true
indeed, Christians are set at liberty, and are endued with a free spirit, but
not with such a freedom, as freeth them from being the Lords servants, and
exempteth them from obedience unto his Commandments, Romans 6.18.22. nor are we
so perfectly free here, but that we stand in need of the spurr, to quicken
our dullness, see for this purpose Matt. 10.28. Matt. 6.15. Ierem. 32.40. Phil.
2.12.

But they will have no commandments: No? why then did Christ give
Commandments? see Ioh. 13.34. 1. Cor. 7.19. Ioh. 14.15. Matthew. 6.9.15.

Furthermore, they say, the love of Christ constrains them 2. Corin. 5.14.
and this love may and does compel them to the obedience of the commandments
of Christ, Ioh. 14.15. Joh. 13.34. well, and why then may not the love of God
likewise constrain them, to obey his commandments in Exodus 20.1. etc.? will
they love Christ, and will they not love God? if constraint in respect of
Christ's comma^dements, will stand with the liberty and freedom of
Christianes, why may it not stand also in respect of Gods commandments?

One thing I would add more, and it is an admonition unto any fearing God, and
honoring his Sabbathes, who be leaning and but somewhat inclining unto this
wicked opinion, that as they love and reverence Gods Sabbathes, so they would
beware of and shune this dangerous opinion, of abolishing the law of God: for
this I dare confidently affirm, take away this moral law, and away goes all
Sabbathes also: now take away Gods Sabbathes, and what a flood of iniquity and
prophannesse will forth with flow in upon us, I leave to be considered of by
all the Godly wise: happily they may think to find ground and warrant enough
in the New Testament, for a Sabbath, as namely for the Lords day, though the
fourth comman. were abollshed; but, that herein they are much mistaken, and
that no day can be urged to be sanctified for a Sabbath, unless it be by and
from the fourth comm. shall abundantly appear hereafter. Unless therefore you
intend to turn Anabaptists, and keep no Sabbath, avoid this pestilent
opinion.

I come now to the proof of the point: but first for the state of the question:
These Anabaptisticall-Antinomianes hold, that the law is not in force to
believers, and such as are in Christ: And we hold, that the law is in force
to believers, and men in Christ. Furthermore, whereas the law may be considered
two ways, either with respect unto Justification, or unto observation; we
do not defend the law to be in force unto Justification: for, by the works
of the law shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3.20. we defend the law to be in
force only unto observation, and for direction of us how to walk, and to
please God. Now then, that the law is in force unto believers, as a rule of
observation and direction, I prove it by these ensuing arguments and Scriptures.

1.
For verily I say unto you, until heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one
title, shall in no wise pass from the law, until all things be fulfilled,
Matt. 5.18. In which words, our Savior prophecieth of the duration and
continuance of the law, even unto the worlds end. 2. By the law here he
understands the moral law: for the same it is which he expounds in the
following verses, as the sixth comm. in v. 22. the seventh comm. in v. 27. the
third comm. in v. 33. lastly, note that all this is pressed upon believers for
observation, as you may see v. 14.20.45.48. where our Savior directs his
speech unto those which were the light of the world: and to those whom God is
called their father: and therefore these were believers. We see then, that the
law belongs unto Christians, as well as anciently unto Jews: yea, our
Savior testifies in an other place, that it is more easy for heaven and
earth to pass away, then that one title of the law should fall, Luke 16.17.
sooner then shall the earth be removed, and the sun fall from heaven, then
this law be abolished.

2.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord etc. Honor thy father and thy Mother;
which is the first commandment with promise etc. Ephesians. 6.1.2. Here we have one
branch of the law, urged, to wit, the fifth comm. and it is urged with respect
to observation and obedience: yea, it is also urged upon the Children of
Christians, or Christians Children: for as this whole Epistle to the Ephesians,
was directed unto the Saints, Ephesians. 1.1. so this whole sixth chapter is
likewise. I know they are ready to say, that these exhortations were sent unto
the multitude, as Sermons are preached unto a mixed company of good and bad:
but this precept is urged upon the good, to wit, believers; for as the duty of
children, is a branch of the fifth comm. so is the duty of servants: now the
Apostle in v. 5. speaks unto believing servants; for he urges them to
obedience to their masters as unto Christ: implying thereby, that they did obey
Christ; and now he exhorts them to like obedience unto their masters, as they
did perform unto Christ (Ephesians. 5.24.) now if they did obey Christ, then surely
they were believers, and did believe in Christ: and such as these servants
were, on whom this fifth command, was urged, such we are to think the
children were, to whom the same comm. was urged, at the same time, in the same
place, and all in one breath as it were.

3.
Do we then make the law of none effect through faith? God forbid; yea, we
establish the law, Romans 3.31. In the former part of this chapter, the Apostle
had disputed of faith, and the faith of Jesus, and of remission of sins, and
justification by faith in Christ; for these he stood a maine; but as for the
law, and justification by the works of the law, these he stood against
stiffly: these things being laid down, the Apostle, foreseeing some
Anabaptisticall spirit, ready to snach and to abuse this his doctrine, to the
subuertion of the law, he vvisely preuenteth it, by a God forbid. As if he had
said, do you think that because I deny justification by the law, and affirm
it to be by faith, that I intend thereby to abolish the law utterly? no; God
forbid: for I establish the law; the law must stand still in force etc. that
is, for observation, though not for justification; for Paul must be understood
so to abolish the law in some sense, as for all that he ratifieth the law in
another sense. Hereby we see then, that the doctrine of faith, and
justification by faith, do not abolish the law: yea, so much the Apostle says
expressly; do we then, says he, make the law of none effect through faith?
Whence I thus argue, that if faith does not make void the law, what should make
it void? for our Antinomians say, that it is faith, and being in Christ, that
freeth us from the law: the law (say they) is a scholemaster to bring us unto
Christ, and being in Christ once, which is by faith, then we are no longer
under this schoolmaster of the law in any respect; we are freed from the law
wholly and altogether: but the clean contrary S. Paul affirms here, namely,
that faith does not abolish the law, that is, in all respects. Furthermore, if
faith does not abolish the law, then the faithful man is not freed from the
law. So the^, when the Apostle says that he established the law, it
follows, that he established it to the faithful; yea, they were the persons
of whom Paul spoke, as you may see by Romans 3.30. for there circumcision of
faith, is put for the circumcised and faithful.

4.
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another: for he that loves another
has fulfilled the law: for this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou
shall not covet: and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Romans
13.8.9. Behold, how the Apostle presses the observation of the law; and how
that he repeateth 5 or 6 of the several commandments thereof, one after an
other: yea further, that all this is urged upon believers, is plain in v. 11.
where the Apostle uses a reason, to move to the observation of these
commandments, saying, for now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed
it: therefore he spoke to them which believed: unless absurdely you will
say, the question was concerning one sort of people, and the argument
concerned an other.

5.
For brethren, ye have been called unto liberty: only use not your liberty as
an occasion unto the flesh, but by love serve one an other: for all the law is
fulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Gal. 5.13.14. In these words, the Apostle presses the duty of love,
which is the sum of the law: and he presses it for observation: and that
he does by this reason, because in so doing the law shall be fulfilled: now
why should the Apostle move the Galatians to the duty of love, because of or
in respect of the law, if the law did not at all appertain to these
believing Galatians? Furthermore the Apostle presses the law here upon
believers: for he calls them brethren: and such brethren also, as had
obtained a liberty by Christ: stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, Gal. 5.1. of this liberty by Christ, he speaks
again in v. 13. saying, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty etc.
Wherefore, since they to whom the Apostle spoke, had abtained, and were
called unto a liberty by Christ, it is more then manifest, that they were
believers to whom he spoke (here then it is plain, that they that had
obtained liberty by Christ, from the ceremonial law, stood yet bound still
unto the Moral law.) In a word, it is manifest that Paul spoke here unto
believers: for he spoke unto them that did run well v. 7. and who were they
that did run well, but the believers: and he spoke unto them that did wait
for the hope of righteousness, by faith, v. 5. and who were they but
believers? and he spoke unto them, in whom was the combat betwixt the flesh
and the spirit v. 17. and were not these believers?

6.
But if ye fulfill the royal law according to the scriptures, which says,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well, Iam. 2.8. So speak
ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty, Iam.
2.12. Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered
Isaac his son, etc. ye see then, how that of works a man is justified, and
not of faith only, Iam^ 2.21.24. But will thou understand, O thou vain man,
that the faith which is without works, is dead, Iam. 2.20. The law which S.
James urges here, it is the moral law, as is plain by his instances in the
seventh and eigth commandments, v. 11. and by laying done the sum of the
second Table in v. 8. Moreover, that this law is urged upon believers is
plain by these reasons, 1. Because the Apostle styles them Brethren to whom
he spoke, v. 1. yea, and his beloved Brethren, v. 5. secondly S. James urges
the law upon such as shall be justified by faith: for he affirms, and that
by the example of Abraham, that a man that has faith, he must also have
works, for his justification: Ye see then how that of works a man is
justified, and not of faith only. By works here, the Apostle means the
works of the law, and of that law before spoken of in the former part of
the chapter v. 8.11. now choose what sense of this text to fly unto you
please, either of Protestants or Papists, both, or either of them will make
strongly for us, and against Anabaptists, who deny the law: for if such as
have faith, must also bring works with them unto justification, be they as
causes, or as signs and fruits of justification, either vvayes the believer
is bound to do the works of the law: for works are as well required of
him unto justification, as faith is: so says S. James; finally, since the
faith that has not works, to wit, the works of the law, v. 8.11. is a
dead faith, hence it follows, that the believer is bound to the observation
of the law, and to do the works of the law, or else his faith, his
Anabaptisticall faith will prove but a dead faith; as many therefore, as
renounce the law, and the works of the law, and will live by faith only,
S. James counts those men's faith but a dead faith.

7.
And that thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus: for
the whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reprofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that
the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works, 2 Timothy
3.15.16.17. In these words, the Apostle declares unto Timothy, the use of
the Scriptures of the old Testament; and in special, that some of them are fit
to reprove, and to correct, etc. now of all the Scriptures in the old
Testament, which do reprove, correct, and instruct, are they not the laws
of God, both affirmative and negative? and of all Gods laws in the old
Testament, which are either moral or ceremonial, noue can think S. Paul
sent Timothy unto the ceremonial law: it must therefore be the moral law,
which Paul does here commend unto Timothy. In the last place, that this law
belongs unto believers, is plain enough (it being made by Paul a direction
unto Timothy) unless you will suppose Timothy no believer.

8.
Speak not evil one of an other, Brethren: he thath speaks evil of his
brother, or he that condemns his brother, speaks evil of the law, and
condemns the law; and if thou condemnest the law, thou art no obseruer of the
law, but a judge, Jam. 4.11. In these words, the Apostle S. James, reproves
the sins against the ninth comm. to wit, slanderouse speeches: this sin he
dissvvadeth from by these reasons. 1. He that speaks evil of his brother, he
speaks evil of the Law of God, and he that condemns his brother, he
condemns the Law of God. 2. Hence follovveth an other mischief, to wit, that
if a man condemns the law, then he is no obseruer of the law, but is become
a judge; where we see, the Apostle counts it as a mischief and a vice, for
a man to be no obseruer of the law: of this vice are our Antinomians guilty:
for they will be no obseruers or doers of the law: and here we have the very
word in question betwixt us rarefied, to wit, the word observe, and
observation: for we urge the law unto observation.

9.
Thus I reason against them; they that hold and say, that the moral law is
abolished, they must hold this absurd and wicked opinion, that no part of the
Old Testament is now in force, but that it is wholly abolished in all the
parts thereof, unto believers: the reason hereof is, 1. because all the laws
and precepts in the old Testament, and all the directions to lead a godly
liefe, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of Malachie, are referred to
one of these laws, the Moral, Iudicall, or Ceremonial: if then they reject
the moral law, much more will they reject the Iudicall and Ceremonial laws:
and if they reject the moral law, then will they reject all the expositions
and branches thereof, delivered by the Prophets; and so they reject the whole
old Testament, the law and the Prophets: for they reject all the three laws,
the Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial, with all their appurtenances. 2. So
much they do imply by saying, they are not under Moses, but under Christ: not
to be governed by the law, but by the Gospel; and the like. Now that it is a
most absurd and wicked opinion, to hold that all the parts of the old
Testament are abolished, and no rule of our lives, shall appear by this, that
the Apostles do every where send us for direction; into the old Testament: see
these places Romans 14.11. Romans 15.4. 1. Cor. 9.8.9.10. 1. Cor. 10.11. 1. Cor.
14.21. Heb. 13.5. Iam. 2.8.10. Iam. 5.10.11. 1. Pet. 1.16. 1. Pet. 3.5.6.

10.
An other absurdety let me add, to show the vanity of their destinction,
holding the law to belong unto, and to bind such as are yet unregenerated and
want faith, but not to belong unto, nor to bind such as are regenerated and
have faith: this distinction is very absurd; for it produces great confusion
and disorder in the Church; and no less inconvenience in the family; for if it
be so, that believers are not bound to the observance of the law, then when the
Sabbath day comes, these men are not bound to sanctify it, it being a part of
that law, from which they are freed; but others, that do not yet believe, they
are bound to keep the Sabbath day, it being enjoined in that law unto which
they are still bound: suppose we then, the master and the mistress of the family
be believers, the children and the servants as yet unbelievers; why then, the
master and the mistress may go to their works private or public; the servants
and children must then go to the Church: what disorder will this be, to have
families thus rent and divided? some goeing to church, other some of the same
body going to work? yea, what a poor Sabbath (think you) will be kept by the
inferiors, when they shall see so bade an example before their eyes, as their
superiors, either idle doing nothing, or following their servile labors?
yea, what an advantage may Satan get upon younglings by this distinction, to
hold them still fast in his clavves; for may they say with themselves, so long
as we believe not, not remain in our unregeneracy, it goes well with us: for
now we have an holy day allowed us once a week, wherein we are freed from our
toilesome labors, but did we believe as do our Master and Mistress, then shall
we have no holy day at all, then shall we moile and toil day by day
incessantly, like horse in a carte: who would be a believer? who would be
regenerated? Furthermore, if on the Sabbath day, it pleases the Master or
Mistress to set upon any work wherein they cannot proceed, without the
help of some of their servants or children, they must in such case keep holy
day too of necessity: For they may not command their servants to help them:
but in case, they will set upon some works, which themselves can do alone,
then lo what a disordered family is here! the Master and Dame vvorking, the
servants and children siting by, without any work in their hands, this makes
me call to mind that we read of Eccl. 10.7. I have seen servants on horses,
and Princes walking, as servants on the ground. Furthermore, whereas the
servants and children, must sanctify the day vvhilest they are at home, by
reading, conference, singing of Psalms, calling to mind what they were
taught in the Chureh, and meditating divine things, they shall not only see
and behold their gouerners, exercised about servile labors, to their great
distraction, but also hear them talking in the house of worldly affairs,
asking for this, calling for that; how poorly shall these younglings
sanctify the Sabbath, when they have such disturbances? and when they that
should go before them in example to dravv them on, are their only hinderers
and pulbackes? Surely, God is not the author of this confusion, nor of their
distinction, the ground of it: God would as well have believers as unbelievers
to sanctify his Sabbath.

Thus having bewraied the absurdety of this Antinomian opinion, and also firmly
proved it, that the law belongs unto believers, as touching observation; I
come now to answer to their obiectiones brought against this truth; and here I
will not spend time in answering unto all their objections, I will only cull
out the chief, and those wherein they place the most confidence, and answer
them.

OBJECT. I.
It is objected that we are freed from the law: because the Apostle says
plainly, ye are not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. And again, If
ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5.18.

How ever many answers might be given to these textes, yet I will content my
self with one: ye err (said our Savior Christ) because you know not the
Scriptures, the same I might apply unto those who thus abuse these Textes: did
they but understand the Apostles scope, and use of this phrase (to be under the
law) they might have spared us this labor: who so will but observe the scope
and drifte of S. Paul, shall easily find it, that he disputed only against
justification by the law, Romans 3.20. Romans 9.31.32. Gal. 5.4. And that he might
the better disswad his adversaries, from seeking justification by the Law, and
so from being under the law in that respect, he shows the danger of being
under the law, and seeking righteousness by the law: for, by the law (says
he) comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. and, the law causes wrath, Romans
4.15. and, as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse, Gal.
3.10. and this is the condition of all such as will be under the Law, and will
be justified by the Law, where as they seek for justification by it, they shall
find the clean contrary, namely wrath, the curse, and condemnation: On the
contrary, when the Apostle speaks to the faithful, who sought justification
by grace and by Christ, and renounced the law, he speaks unto them, as unto
men set at liberty, saying, ye are not under the law: that is, ye believers
are not under the law now, as once ye were before ye believed, and as those
unbelieving Jews are, that is, you are not under the law for justification,
and consequently, you are not under the law, as causing wrath, and as being
under the carse: thus you see, the Apostle freeth the faithful, from being
under the law; as those unbelieving Jews were, that is, as touching the curse
of the law; but hers not a word of freeing the faithful, from the observation
of the law, and from being under the law in this respect.

2. This may further appear, by that other phrase joined with it and opposed
to it, (under grace) whereby is no thing else signified, but the free
justification of a believer by the mercy of God, for the merit of Christ; as
you may see, Romans 3.24. Romans 5.15.17.21. Romans 6.1. Gal. 2.21. Gal. 5.4.
wherefore, as this phrase (to be under grace) has respect only unto
justification, so its opposite (not to be under the law) has only respect unto
justification; the one phrase expressing how believers are justified; the
other how they are not justified: believers are justified by the grace of God,
not by the works of the law; by being under grace, not by being under the law:
as if the Apostle had said, ye believers are not under the law for
Justification, but are under grace for Justification. So still the Apostle
freeth not the faithful from being under the Law, for observation, but only
for justification.

3. That by this Phrase, under the law, S. Paul meante a being under the law
for justification, I prove it in his Epistle to the Galatians; for in Gal.
4.21. he uses this phrase saying tell me, ye that will be under the law,
etc. The which Phrase, him self by and by in the next chapter expounds, by
expresing, the same thing, in other and more perspicuouse words, saying, ye are
abolished from Christ: whosoever are justified by the law, Gal. 5.4. so then to
be under the law, is nothing else then to be justified by the law: for the
Apostle speaks against the law, in one and the same sense, in the fourth and
fifth chapters, his discourse being continued as about one and the same matter:
so then, this phrase being rightly understood, it makes against the use of the
law for justification, but not at all for observation.

I remember I have heard some of them reply against this distinction, and say,
that the law was not made to justify any; neither did God ever intend to
justify any by the law. Where to I answer, that God propounded the law, either
for justification or for condemnation, see Luke 10.28.27. Gal. 3.12. Romans 10.5.
but admit that God never intended to justify any man by the law, yet many men
there were, that sought justification by the law, see Mat. 19.16, 17. Romans
9.31.32. Gal. 4.21. Gal. 5.4. And therefore, there is ground enough for us to
say, that S. Paul disputed against the law, as urged by some unto justification.

OBJECT. II.
It is further objected, the law is abolished; for S. Paul says of it, if that
which is done away, was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious, 2
Cor. 3.11. here the Apostle speaks of the Moral Law, for he speaks of that
law, which was engraven in stones, v. 7. and of this law he says, that it is
abolished or done away.

Hereunto I answer. 1. That howbeit the text speaks, as if the law were quite
abolished in all respects, yet that the Apostle must be understood here, to
abolish the law only in some respect, and to let it stand still in some other
respect, our adversaries them selves do and must hold: for they say, that the
law is abolished in deed to a believer, but it stands still to an unbeliever
and one unregenerated: for the law serves still to be a scholemaster, to bring
men to Christ, Gal. 3.24. yea, they have no other evasion from all our
Scriptures, whereby we prove the law to be still in force, save this, to answer
that those Textes were spoken to a mixed congregation of believers and
unbelievers, and so the Textes are say they to be understood of the
unbelievers: ^t is plain therefore, that they urge not this Text for the utter
abolishing of the law; wherefore, since them selves do distinguish of the law,
in what sense it stands still, and in what sense it is abolished, they must
give us leave to distinguish also.

I answer then unto this text, the law is to be considered, either as it
(through our weakness) tends unto condemnation, or as it shows us light
for observation: now the Apostle speaks of the law in the former sense: and
that this is so, is manifest, in that the Apostle terms the law a killing
letter, v. 6. and, the ministration of death, v. 7. and, the ministration of
condemnation, v. 9. so then, the Apostle speaks of the law as abolished, only
as it is a killing letter, the ministration of death, and the ministration of
condemnation; but not a word here against the law for observation, and as a
rule for our lives.

OBJECT. III.
Yet further they object to us the text, Gal. 5.22.23. But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, against such there is no law: here the Apostle freeth
the faithful from the law.

For answer hereto, we must know that as in the poenall laws of men there are
two things, the matter of the law, and the poenalty of the law, so may we
consider also two things in Gods law, the matter, and the poenalty: if we
respect the matter of the law, it is against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and against all ungodly and unrighteous men, for it
forbids all sin, and so is against all sinners, and against none but
sinners: wherefore, the Apostle considering the faithful here, as righteous
men, walking in love, peace, meekness and temperance, might well say, there is
no law against such: for the law does not forbid such things, but command them
rather; the law is not against such persons but for them rather. Now in all
this, the Apostle does not free these faithful ones, from the observation of
the law as a rule of liefe; he speaks of no such matter, he says only, that
the law does not set it self against, or forbid men love, peace, meekness,
and temperance, etc. 2. The Law may be taken, for the poenalty of the law,
Ioh. 19.7. 2 Cor. 3.6.7.9. Gal. 3.10.12.21. For it threateneth death: and so is
called a killing letter and the ministration of condemnation: now in this
sense, as the law is considered in respect unto the poenalty thereof, so the
faithful are freed from the law indeed; and in this sense there is no law
against the faithful: for, there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans 8.1:
so still here is nothing brought against the Law, for observation as a rule of
liefe, and as a light unto our feet, and lantern to our paths, Ps. 119.105.

OBJECT. IV.
Again they object that text, 1 Timothy 1.9. The law was not made for a righteous
man, but for the lawless and disobedient, etc.

For answer unto this text, first me must know who is a righteous man in S.
Paul's account: this we shall find in his Epistle to the Romans, Abraham
believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness, Romans 4.3. Romans
5.1. so then, a believer is accounted for a righteous man: and this righteous
man is freed from condemnation by Christ: now then there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. These things premised, I answer to
this text by the former distinction, to wit, that by the law, is sometime
meant the matter of the law, and sometime the poenalty of the law, as has been
proved: now in this place, the Apostle may be understood, to speak only of the
law in respect of the poenaltie thereof, as it causes wrath, as it is a
killing letter, and as it is the ministratio^ of condemnation; now in this
sense, the law is not given to a righteous man: for he is freed from the
poenalty and curse of the law by Christ, who is made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
and in this sense, the law is given only to the lawless and disobedient, to
the ungodly and to sinners, to murderers of fathers and mothers, etc. as the
Apostle speaks.

Or, if by the law you will understand the matter of the law, then I answer,
that the Apostle speaks of the law with respect unto iustifiation by it, and
not with respect of observation of it: for the law is not given to a righteous
man to justify him: because he is justified an other way, that is by faith, in
Christ, and so he is become to a righteous man, not by the law, but by faith.
Thus, this text rightly understood, it makes nothing at all against a
righteous man's observation of the law: it only freeth him from condemnation by
the Law; or shows, that he obtains not his justification and
righteousness by the Law.

OBJECT. V.
Again they object an other text, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, unto every one that believes: Here (say they) is an end put
unto the law, by Christ, unto all beleueers.

I answer, it is true indeed, there is an end put unto the law, for believers;
but note withal, in what respect S. Paul says an end is put there to: for he
says not absolutely', an end is put to the law, but respectively, an end is
put unto the law, for righteousness: that is, for justification: for,
believers are not to seek for righteousness and justification, by the law any
more, but by Christ: this text then puts an end to the law, for
justification, but not for observation.

OBJECT. VI.
One text more they object Romans 7.6. But now we are delivered from the law,
etc. as a woman is from her husband who is dead etc.

I shall give none other answer unto this text, then unto the former, to wit,
that by the law is understood the penalty of the law, and the curse of the law;
or the law in respect of the penalty and curse thereof: that this is the
Apostles meaning, I make it appear by two reasons from the context. 1. See v.
4. So ye my brethren, are dead to the law, by the body of Christ: by the body
of Christ, that is by the sufferings of Christ in his body: now if Christ has
freed us from the law, by his suffering of death, what can this intimate, but
that the law, from which he freed us by death, was considered, in respect of
the penalty and curse, and as holding us in bondage unto death. For by death,
Christ freed us from death: wherefore, when the Apostle says, we are dead to
the law, or freed from the law, he considered the law as a killing letter, and
as it held us in bondage unto death. 2. See v. 5. When we were in the flesh,
the affections of sins which were by the law, had force in our members to
bring forth fruit unto death: To bring forth fruit unto death: here the
Apostle, speaks of the law, not simply, but of the law, as (together with our
corruption) fructifying unto death: wherefore, seeing the Apostle spoke of the
law, as tending unto death, it follovveth, that when in the very next words,
he said, We are delivered from the law, v. 6. he meant, that we are delivered
from the poenalty and curse of the law, or from the law as it respects the
curse, to wit, eternal death and destruction: so then, here is nothing yet
proved, against the law, for observation as a rule of liefe.

It was not for nothing, that S. Paul added these words for righteousness;
saying, Christ is the end of the law (to wit) for righteousness etc. Romans
10.4. Shevving thereby, that he disputed against the law, not simply, but
considered as the means of justification and obtaining righteousness. Neither
is it to be passed by without special observation, that S. Paul disputing in
another place against the law, does it not against the law simply, but against
the law considered as tending to the curse to those who sought righteousness
thereby, and therefore he said not, Christ has redeemed us from the law, Gal.
3.13. but Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law. Yea, it is
remarkable, that every where, where S. Paul disputes against the law, his
maine question is about justification by the law: denying justification by the
law, saying, By the works of the law, shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3.20.
Gal. 2.16. So that S. Paul disputes against the law, only with respect had
unto obtaining righteousness and justification thereby, and in respect of the
curse of the law. But it is no where found, that Christ is the end of the
law, for observation and for a rule of an holy liefe: nor is it any where
found, that Christ has redeemed us, from observation of or obedience to the
law: nor yet is it any where said, By the law, shall no flesh be directed,
or guided in their lives and conversation: wherefore, for time to come, if
Anabaptists and Antinomians will object against the law, by way of opposition
to us, let them not prove that the law is abolished in respect of
justification, and as a curse etc. For all this, we steadfastly believe and
teach; but let them remember to prove unto us, that the law is abolished as a
rule of liefe, and for observation; for this is that which we deny only;
that Christ has abolished the poenalty of the law, we believe it, but that
he has abolished the matter of the law, this we deny, and this as yet they
have not proved, nor ever shall be able: if we will be S. Paul's scholars, we
must learn of him, so to dispute against the law, as that we do not for all
that make it of none effect: and so to abolish the law, as yet for all that we
do establish it: For so he says, Do we make the law of none effect etc? God
forbid; yea, we establish the law, Romans 3.31. but our adversaries have learned
of Paul to abolish the law, but not to establish the law.

We have now made answer unto the most and chiefest of their Scriptures, which
they allege against the law, others they have also, but they are such as will
admit of the same answer given to some of these, or else are so triuiall, as
they deserve no answer: to conclud then, since I have firmly proved it, that
the law is still in force, and that to all men, believers and unbelievers for
observation; and since they can neither answer our Textes, nor yet prove the
contrary, it remains, that the Moral law is still in force; which being so,
Gods ancient Sabbath commanded in this law is still in force also: for both
Anabaptists and Antinomians have confessed this unto me, that if it can be
proved, that the Moral law is still in force, then it must and does
undeniably follow, that the Saturday Sabbath is still in force, as well as any
other thing commanded in the law. Thus we have vindicated Gods Sabbathes, from
Anabaptists and Antinomians, in the next place we must vindicate them, from
Protestants and Papists.

CHAP. II.
An exposition of the fourth Commandment; together with a discovery of the
manifold, lamentable, shamfull, and abominable corruptions and abuses, of this
divine Law of God, by many Ministers of these times, through their false
glosses, idle answers, and absurd expositions of it.

SECT. I.
IN the former Chapter, to the end that we might vindicate the Lords Sabbaths,
we have defended the Moral Law, against Anabaptists and Antinomians: and
now in this, and the follovving Chapters of this Book, for the same end,
namely to vindicate the Lords Sabbaths, we vvil defend the Integrity and
perfection of the Moral Law, against Protestants and Papists: for
Anabaptists and Antinomians deny the whole law; Protestants and Papists deny
the vvholnesse of the law: they, will yield no obedience at all to the Law;
these, vvil yield obedience but by halues: and of this number are those ten
Ministers, my professed enemies in this point, who in special sort, I do
oppose, by name Mr. Grenewod, Mr. Benton, Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Furnace, Mr.
Gallard, Mr. Yates, Mr. Chapel, Mr. Stinnet, M. Johnson, and Mr. Ward,
dwelling in and about Norwich.

As for Papists, tell them of their sin of Idolatry in worshipping of
Images, etc. against the second Commandment of this Law, and among other
answers this vvil be one, that the second Command, is Ceremonial, and
pertains to the Jews only: tell them again of their sin of
Sabbath-breaking, that they profane Gods ancient Sabbath, against the fourth
Comm. of this Law, and this shall be their answer, that the fourth Comm. is
partly Ceremonial, and that the old Sabbathday is Jewish, and pertains to
the Jews only: As for Protestants, we tread in their steps up and down,
save that we are not so impudently audacious as they: for we acknovvledge the
second Comm. for Moral; but come unto the fourth Comm. and here we iumpe
with them, saying the fourth Comm. is partly Moral partly Ceremonial, and
the old Sabbath enjoined in the fourth Com. is Jewish, etc. In respect
therefore of Gods Sabbathes, which both they and we deny, we yield
obedience to Gods Law but by halues: and saying the fourth Comm. is partly
Ceremonial, thereby we are partial in Gods Law: against therefore this
partial dealing with God, in his Laws and ordinances, shall the following
parts of this book be spent.

SECT. II.
The thing which Almighty God intends generally in this Com. is how all
the time and days of our lives, should be spent and employed in his service:
the which, is backed with an effectual reason (for my purpose is first to
handle the commandment generally, as in this second Section: and then more
particularly, as in the thirth Section, etc.) As for the time, we have a
distribution of it in the comm. and that into the Six days, and into the
seventh day: touching both of these, God has ordered it, in this comm. how he
would be served; to wit, on the seventh day, by Sanctifying and Hallovving of
it, in the parts of his worship and service, and a cessation from all servile
works; on the sixth days, by following some lavvfull calling or other, which
may redovvnd to the glory of God; according to that, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whither
therefore, ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God. As for the reason, it is a lively and moving one, it being fetched from
God him self, and from his own ensample.

In this reason, contained in Exodus 20.11. we have also a distribution of
time, in to the six days, and into the seventh day; wherein it pleases God,
to declare unto us, how he spent and employed his time, to wit, the first
week, or seventh days, that ever the world savv or heard of: the six
days, that is those six days, which for order of number, and order of
nature, went immediately before the first seventh day, or first Saturday that
ever was; these God spent in vvorking and in making the heavens and the earth,
and all the host of them. This God has revealed unto us, unto this end for
one, that we should in imitation of him, make choice of those same six days
vvherin God wrought, that in them and none other, we should work as God
wrought and in them, we should finish all our works, as God in them
finished all his works. The seventh day, that is, the seventh day from the
Creation, or the first Saturday that ever was, this day God spent in an holy
cessation and resting, from the works of creation; and therefore this time,
this day, above and before all other times and days, God blessed and
sanctified: and this has revealed unto us, to this end and purpose, that we
should in an holy imitation of God, cease from the works of the six days
before, and rest from all seruil labor; and that we should make choice of this
very day, to Sanctify it and to hallow it like as God blessed it, and
hallowed it.

Now that we are not left to our liberty, in this employment of the time and
days of our liefe appears here by, first because God has commanded it: and
secondly, God has backed his commandment, by a strong and forcible reason,
drawn from his own ensample; that we should so employ the days of the week,
as God him self at the Creation employed them; and this is noted by that
rational particle (for) Exodus 20.11. And this is that which God aims at in
this com. generally namely, that we should spend and employ every day, and all
the days of the week, after the ensample of God; or as God himself spent
them.

The thing which Almighty God intends in this com. specially and
principally, is the hallowing of that sacred time and day, called the Sabbath
day, and the Seventh day, as in the third Comm. God enjoined the hallowing of
his Sacred Name, so in this fourth com. God enjoined the hallowing of his
Sacred day, to wit, the seventh day, the which him self had made holy, above
all days, by his blessing of it, and Sanctifying of it, as we read, Genes.
2.3. like as the king might say to his subjects, Remember my Coronation day,
to keep it an holy day; or Remember the Gunpowder Treason day, to Keep it an
holy day; so says the king of kings, Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy, Exodus 20.8.

Secondly, the Sanctification of this day, it is enjoined, both affirmatively,
and negatiuely; affirmatively, in these words, Remember the Sabbath day, to
Sanctify it: Negatiuely, in these words, In it, thou sholt not do any work:
the affirmative part of the precept, requires sanctity, and the parformance
of holy duties; the Negative part of the precept, requires a resting from
labors in our ordenary callings, which hinder and thrust out those holy
duties.

Thirdly, the Lord God inioyneth us in this comm. two things; the one is the
duty of the day; the other is the duties of rest from labors, and the
perfermance of sundry the parts of Gods worship and service, in the day.

I call it the duty of the day, because we are no less bound in duty to God,
to that day, then to the duties of rest and holiness in the day; or, we are
no less bound, to perform the duties of rest and holiness on that day, then
we are tied to perform the duties of rest and holiness them selves. I clear
the point by these examples, as in a bond you have two essential parts; the
one, is the some of money to be paid; the other is the day and time when it is
to be paid; and a man is equally and alike bound to both of these; that is, as
well to the day, as to the some of money; as appears by this, that al though a
man bring the full some of money, yet if he omit the day, and come the day
after, his bond is forfeited. And as in circumcision, there was two things
enjoined, the one was the cutting off of the foreskine, the other was the time
and day when it was to be done, namely upon the 8th. day, Genes. 17.12. and as
in that other Sacrament of the passover, there was two things commanded, the
one was the slaying and eating of the passover lamb, the other was the time
and day when to bedone, namely upon the 14th. day of the month, Exodus 12.6.8.
in both which Sacraments of circumcision and passover, the day and time was no
less a duty, then were the actions to be performed in those times and days:
for it was death to omit these days, Genes. 17.14. Numb. 9.13. Just so, in this
fourth com. God inioyneth us expressly two things, as essential parts of this
comm. the one, is the duty of the day, in these words Remember the Sabbath
day, Exodus 20.8. and, the seventh day, is the Sabbath, verse. 10. the other is
the duties in the day, in these words, To keep it holy, verse. 8. and, in it
thou shall not do any work, verse. 10. and here the time and day as you see,
is no less commanded, and that both affirmatively and negatiuely, then are the
duties in the day.

The thing which Almighty God intends in this com. less principally, is
the duty of laboring six days, serving God in some honest calling; for
which God has given a commandment also saying, Six days shall thou labor,
and do all thy work. Now this commandment (as I conceive it) is subordinate
to the former, made for the Sanctification of the Sabbath day; and made to
back it and to support it: for because God would have his people, to Sanctify
his Sabbath day, and to rest therein from labors, that so a vacancy may be for
holy duties, therefore has God added an other precept, commanding us, to do
all the works we have to do, with in the compass of the six days, that so
no work may be left to do in the seventh day Sabbath: So then, these two
Commandments, to wit, to Sanctify the seventh day, and to labor in the Six
days, may well go in account but for one, and be both called the fourth Comm.
because they tend both to one thing, that is, to the sanctification of the
seventh day Sabbath, a like case you have in the 10th. command. in which are
many commandments, but because they agree all in this one, of coveting,
therefore are they all counted but for one.

Thus much be spoken, touching the general survey, of the seuerales and
particulares, contained in the fourth com. In which passages, for matter of
use, we may note first: what manner of computation of time God makes, when he
speaks of his Moral Sabbathes: this may easily be gathered out of this
fourth com. for here God divides all the days of the world into seauenes; or
weeks; as thus, Six days thou shall labor, etc; but the seventh day, is the
Sabbath: and again, In Six days, the Lord made heaven and earth, etc. and
rested the seventh day, etc: And this account has been Kept in the Church, all
along from age to age, both in the times of the Old Testament, and of the New
Testament; see Genes. 1.31. with Genes. 2.2. see Exodus 16.22.23.26. Exodus
20.9.10. Mark. 16.1.2. Act. 20.7. Luke 13.14. Yet further, because we are to be
imitatores of God, in this poinct; it is needful that we diligently Mark
which are those days, the which in Gods account, do make up a week; or which
of all the days in the year, are those days, which belong unto this or that
Number of Gods seven: the which if it be not well observed, we may make a
confusion of the account of Gods weeks and seauens; and whereas he says, six
days thou shall labor; if this be not observed, we may so rekon our six
days, as we may count the day peculiarly appointed for the Sabbath day, for
one of our six days, and so make it a vvorking day, quit against the mind of
God, and many drifte and scope of his fourth comm. yea, if we have no certain
rule, where to begine our account, then may we skipp over as many days as we
please, before we begine to rekon our six days, and so God shall have a
Sabbath or seventh day, but once a month, or once a quarter, or once a year;
it is very needful therefore that we learn this point of God, to know which
day he counted for the first day of the week, and which for the seventh day
of the week, that so we may know, which are those days wherein we must
labor; and which for certain is that day, in which must rest from labor:
least the ignorant do mistak one for an other; and least the Cuning Sophisters
of our times, do bequile the simple.

In this point we may be instructed, from the reason in the fourth comm. Exodus
20.11. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth etc. and rested the
seventh day; if now you will know which days in the month or year those
were, which here God called the six days, and the seventh day; look but into
the history of the Creation of heaven and earth, whereof God speaks in this
reason, and there you shall be satisfied, see Genesis 1. That day, God counted for
the first day of the week, or of the seven, wherein he created the light v.
4.5. and which was the first day that ever was; this day is our Sunday, or
Lords day, and called constantly by all the Evangelists, and so by all Churches
to this day, the first day of the week, it being the first day of the worlds
creation, see Matt. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1. Act. 20.7. That day
God counted for the second day of the week, or of the seven, wherein he made
the firmament, v. 7.8. and this was the second day that ever was, this day is
our Monday: That day, God called the third day of the week, or of the seven
days, wherein he made the Earth to appear, and the Seas, v. 10.13. and this
was the third day from the Creation: and this day is our Tewsday: That day God
called the fourth day of the week, wherein he made the Sun, Moon and
Stars, v. 16.19. and this was the fourth day from the creation, and this day
is our Wednesday. That day wherein God made the fish in the Sea, and the foul
in the air, he called the fifth day, v. 21.23. and that day, is our Thursday.
That day God called the sixth day of the week, wherein he made man, v. 26.31.
and this was the sixth day from the creation, and this day is our Friday. And
that day God called and counted the seventh day of the week, wherein he
rested from the works of Creation, and which he blessed and sanctified, Genesis
2.1.2.3. and this day is our saturday.

Forsomuh then as we have found out, which are those days, which in the
fourth comm. God called the six days, and which day he called the seventh day,
it teaches all ministres, in expounding this fourth com. to speak as God
spoke; and to call and count unto the people, the days of the week, by those
numerall names, which God has put upon them: and therefore they must call our
Sunday or Lords day, the first day, and our Saturday, the Seventh day. And
also, as touching practice, that they exhort and persuade the people to be
imitatours of God, laboring on the first six days of the worlds creation, and
resting for the Sabbath day, on the seventh day from the creation, which is
Saturday; because God himself did so, for in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and rested the seventh day, which is our Saturday, Exo. 20.11. It
is as you see, the very reason and president, which God himself has set
before our eyes; and if we like to do as God did, and to tread in his
steps, then must we speak as God spoke, in our account, and do as God did,
in our practice; This is that which Musculus has, in his exposition upon the
fourth comm. fol. 66. The imitation of the example of God (says he) stands
in this, that in the same six days, in which God wrought all his works, we
work ours: and in the seventh day, when he rested from his, we do rest also
from our works, according to his example. It is to be noted, that he says,
that our imitation of God stands in this, that we work on the same six
days, in which God wrought: and that we Rest, on the same seventh day, in
which God himself rested. This is the true exposition of this fourth comm.

Here then is discovered the error of many, who thus plead for themselves;
Do not we according to the Commandment, work six days, and rest the
seventh day? this is a truth they say indeed, but it is not Gods truth, they
labor six days indeed, but they labor not on those same six days, which God
spoke of, and which God set them a sample of in his own person: nay they
profanely labor upon that day for one, which God set them a pattern to rest
on, and that is upon the Saturday. It Is true as they say also, they rest the
seventh day, but not on that seventh day, which God counted for the seventh
day; but on that seventh day, which God ever counted for the first day of the
week, which is our Sunday. Now no marvel God set himself out for our
pattern, that we should imitate him; see how nere we follovv him; on our
Saturday God rested from work, and sanctified it, and we in imitation of
him, work on that day, and profane it: again, on our Sunday, God wrought,
as upon the first of his six working days; and we in imitation of God, do
cease from work, and sanctify it: thus when God rest, we work; and when
he works, then we rest: is this to imitate God? or can we oppose, and
thvvart him more? and yet these men would think we do them vvrong, to say
they do not imitate God, but rather mock God; pretending indeed, to imitate
him, according to his fourth comm. when in very truth, we cold not devise on
the sudden, how to thvvart and cross Gods example more then we do.

Now whence comes this erroneous practice among the people, but from the
erroneous doctrine of some Ministers, who besides other errors, touching the
Sabbath, do falsely expound the fourth command. to the people, by nicknaming of
days, as if the six days mentioned in the Comm. might be understood of other
six days, then God ever spoke of, or wrought in; or then the Church for
thousands of years understood the fourth comm. to speak of; and as if the
seventh day, might be attributed to some other day, then the seventh day from
the creation, wherein God rested: and for this purpose they have invented a
distinction of a seventh day, and the seventh day, making the ignorant people
believe, that the fourth com. speaks not of the seventh day, but of a seventh
day, that is of any day of the seven: whereby God is plainly defeated of his
purpose: which was to have that one seventh day, sanctified, which he had
therefore blessed and sanctified; and which himself rested on, and left us for
a pattern; and hereby an other day is foisted in, and intruded into its room.
This idle distinction, gives us to learn now, that there is a first day of
the week, and the first day of the week: that there is a Lords day, and the
Lords day: and that there might have been in the Church of the Jews, had they
been so skillfull as we are become, a eigth day, for circumcision, and the
eigth day: and a fourteenth day of the month for the passover, and the
fourteenth day: and these understood, not of one and the same day, but of
diverse days: and why not all these as well as a seventh day and the seventh
day? and if they please too, we may have a Christ, and the Christ: a Matthew,
and the Matthew: a John, and the John: a Paul, and the Paul: and sometimes
these shall be expounded in one of these senses, and afterward, at an other
time, in the other of these senses. Distinctions they be, more fit for
children, then for men of years; for Jesuits, then Protestants; for Iuglers,
then honest meaning men.

A second thing out of our general survey of the parts of this com. is that
we have proved, that the time and day, specified in the fourth com. is no
less commanded by God, then the duties of rest and holiness: which being so,
here comes to be reproved an other error of our Ministers: they use to Answer
it thus, when the duty of the very day and time is urged upon them: oh say
they, the time, that's but an adiunct, but an accident, but a circumstance; and
it is not the circumstance so much which God looks at, but it is the substance
which God regards: now see, how these men have learned an art to extenuate
Gods commandments, by calling them lightly and regardlesly, but an accident,
but a circumstance: who could think that Ministers, yea Puritan Ministers,
who should back Gods commandments, and reverence the things commanded, should
but at them; and as it were push at them with a but, saying it is but a
circumstance, etc? is not this a contempt offered to the Holy one of Israel,
thus to slight him in his ordinance? durst ever the Church of the Jews, thus
but at the eigth day, appointed of God for circumcision, saying the strict day
is but time, but a circumstance, what if we neglect it, and circumcise on the
nineth day, the day after? it is the Substance, of cutting off the foreskine,
which God looks at: and might they then have thus slighted the time ordained
of God for the passover, to be eaten on the 14th. day of the month, by saying
the precise time, was but a circumstance, and so be we eat the passover, it
matters not, if we eat it on the 15th. or 16th. day of the month? were any of
us, bound in a bond, to pay unto his Majesty, a certain some of money, upon
the seventh day of May, durst we adventure it, to sleyght the precise day of
payment, upon this idle pretense, that the day and time in the bond, it is but
an adiunct, but a circumstance: all will be well enough therefore if I tender
the some of money upon the eigth day or ninth day of May? were this but a
common bond betwixt subject and subject: sure I am no Lawyer, no Judge, no nor
any common man. but would say this were a plain forfeiture of the bond; and
that the debtor his calling the time but a circumstance, was but a pore
shifte; this were a silly plea before the Judge of Assizes, to say the time my
Lord, it was but a circumstance, etc. well how ever men dare not dally thus
before an earthly Judge and with an earthly king, yet men dare palter thus with
the king of kings: were a man summoned to appear at a day apponinted, but in
an inferior court, who durst slight that day? They are only Gods days, and
Gods times then, that may besleighted: this bewraies that God is not reverenced
as is a mortal king or Judge, men dare not slight the precise day of
appearance in the Courts of men; but men dare slight the precise day of
appearance before the Lord chief Justice of heaven and earth, in the Courts
of his fanctuary: nor are men so afraid to make a forfeiture of the bond of
Gods fourth comm. by neglect of the day, as they are a fraid to forfeite abond
of 10. or 20. to a man by neglect of the day. Thus much for the time and day,
in general, we shall hereafter come to the particularity of the time, to show
how more specially what day it is which God requires.

SECT. III.
Having laid forth the several parts of this Com. in the foregoing Section,
and detected some of the errors of our time, in abusing the sense and meaning
of the Spirit of God, in this Com. it now remains, that I come to the
Exposition of the same: and whereas the com. is laid down partly
affirmatively, and partly negatiuely, we will in the former place, speak of
the affirmative part, the which is contained in these words, Remember the
Sabbath day, to sanctify it: Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work. In this affirmative part, first we will speak of the word day:
secondly of these words, Sabbath day: thirdly, of the Commandment, in this
word Remember, etc.

For the word Day, to give an Exposition of it according to the mind of the
holy ghost, we must search how the holy Ghost uses this word in Scripture: for
this purpose see Genes. 1.5. And God called the light, day, but no where has
he called the darkness day; wherefore the light only is the day, in Gods
accounte: see also 1 Cor. 3.13. every man's work shall be made manifest, for the
day shall declare it. Where, by the word Day, the holy Ghost means the light:
see 1 These. 5.8. But let us who are of the day be sober. Where by day, is meant
light, as appears by the Opposition of, the word night, in the former verse:
se Joh. 11.9. are there not 12 hours in the day, if any man walk in the day,
he stumbleth not, because he sees the light: the day therefore is the time of
light, by Scriptures account: wherefore by the word day; in the fourth Com. I
understand the time of light, and of light only.

A second querie may be to know, how long this day is, and when it begins,
and when it ends. For the beginning of it, we are to give it the largest
extent, as to begin early in the morning by day break, or day peep, even
whilst it is but a little light, and much darkness, see Ioh. 20.1. and Mark.
1.35. this last text is to be read as Chemnitius well observes thus; In the
morning, whilst it was very much night, etc. (...), and so Beza reads it
also. Now as the day begins, with the least light appearing in the sky, so
we are to think, it lasts so long, as there is any sun light in the sky,
or until the day be quite off the sky: thus much be spoken of the word day
showing 1. what is meant by it, to wit, the time of light. 2. How long this day
is, to wit, from the first approach of the sun light, unto the last departure
of its light.

The consideration of these two Points discovers unto us a threefold error
of our times; the one is of such as hold that the Sabbath day, begins at
midnight, and lasts to the next midnight: the other, is of those who hold
the Sabbath day begins in the morning, and lasts to the next morning: the
other, of such as hold it begins on the Evening of Saturday night: al which
opinions in they hold as well a night, as a day, to be a part of the sabbath
day: but these are all erroniouse, because growndlesse; for the word day, in
the com. signifies the time of light, and this is the frequent use of the word
in scriptures; and that the word day, must signify darkness; as well as light,
I think cannot be shown in the Scriptures. Wherefore, as to give God less
then the wholl time of light, is to give God not a day, but a piece of a day,
so to give God more then the wholl time of light, it to give God more then a
wholl day, and so more then God has commanded.

But against this it may be said, that there it a day natural, and a day
artificial, the one consisting of 24 hours, the other of 12 hours, now we
must give God the largest day, of 24. hovvres: But for this point, how ever
this distinction may have its use in civil affairs, yet is it not founded in
Scripture: the Scriptures indeed mention a day of 12. hours, Ioh. 11.9. but of
a day of 24. hovvres, I no where read: it is not safe therefore, to expound
the word day, in the fourth Comm. of a day of 24: hovvres.

Further it may be said, that by the word day, we must understand, the night
and darkness also, even the wholl time of 24. hours: for so it is taken,
Genes. 1.5. And the evening and morning were the first day: where the evening
is put for the darkness; and the morning is put for the light, and both these
are called the first day. Where to I answer, that this exposition is
growndlesse, to say that the Evening is put for the night or darkness; for it
cannot be shovvne in Scripture, that any where the word Evening, is put for the
night or darkness: Hereunto assenteth Mr. Perkins in his cases of conscience,
at the end of the second book. Secondly I answer, to give such an exposition
of the Text, Genes. 1.5. as makes a confusion of things, is not safe, for to
understand by the Evening the darkness, and so making the word day, to
signify or comprize both light and darkness is to make a woeful confusion;
for so one and the same word shall signify things quite contrary; as well
might one suppose hell to be signified under the word heaven, as night under
the word day: God has distinguished the light from the darkness as in
nature, so by sundry proper names, calling the light day, and the darkness he
called night, Genes. 1.5. let not us then confound them: a better exposition of
the word Evening, is therefore to be sought; for this end it is to be noted,
that the word Evening in Scripture, is used for the afternoon, and so until
day light befully ended, according to our Engelish speech, saying, good Even to
you Sir, when it is past noone; and calling them Evening prayers used in the
Church about 2. or 3. a clock in the afternoon; and so their Evening
Sacrifice in the Temple, in the afternoon; and in this sense see these
Scriptures, Genes. 24.11. Mark. 15.42. Exodus 29.38.39. Deuteronomy. 23.11. Josh. 8.29.
Ezra. 9.4.5. Ierem. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 16.6. Wherefore, according to the constant use
of the word Evening, both amongst us to this day, and also in the Scriptures,
I would interpret the word of the afternoon; and so whereas it is said, the
Evening and the morning made the first day, that is, the afternoon and the
forenoone made the first day; understanding by morning the fore noone, as by
evening the afternoon.

I know nothing against this interpretation, unless it be, that some may
object and say, this is to make God put down things misorderly; for it had
been better to have said, so the forenoone and the afternoon made the first
day, rather then, so the afternoon and the forenoone made the first day.
Whereto I answer, 1. The darkness was for order before the light, and yet God
put the light before the darkness, in this very fifth verse, and God called
the light day, and the darkness, he called night: and why might he not also
put the afternoon before the forenoone? 2. Why might not God set the
afternoon, which is the latter, before the forenoone, which is the former, as
well as Christ our Savior sets forth the Lord of the vineyard, commanding
his steward, to call the laborers, and give them their hier, beginning from
the last unto the first, Matt. 20.8? and thus much touching the two foremost
erroures, holding the Sabbath day to begin at midnight, and in the morning,
so as they will have a night, added to the day, or light.

Now, touching the third error of those who would have the Sabhath day, to
begin on the Evening before the day, and so to contain all that night that
goes before the day; and these seem to have many Scriptures to back them, as
first Leuit. 23.32 from Even to Even, shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. Hereunto
I answer, this is a peculiar law, for one of the annual ceremonial Sabbaths;
and it therefore concerns not the weekly moral Sabbath in the fourth comm.
now we must not draw the law of this ceremonial Sabbath, upon the moral
Sabbath: for then 1. must the moral Sabbath be annual only. 2. It must be
upon the teenth day of the month, without regard had to the day of the week;
for so it was with this ceremonial Sabbath. 3 It must last one wholl day, and
a part of the day before it also, for so it was with that ceremonial
Sabbath, it was to hold upon the teenth day, and upon a part of the nineth
day also Leuit. 23.27.32.

An other text they produce out of Nehem. 13.19. And it came to pass, that
when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded
that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened, till
after the Sabbath etc. Here say they Nehemiah took order for the Sabbath to
begin, when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, and this is on the
evening. Whereto I answer, it follovveth not that because the gates were
commanded to be shut, when it began to be dark, that this was done, least
that evening should be profaned by buying and selling; for it may be very
likely, that such as came into the city with their packes of wares, and pedds
of fish, (as v. 16.) so late in the evening, when it was almost dark, would
not open their packes that night, nor go into the fish stales in the market
place, at that time of the day, but rather Nehemiah foreseeing, that if he
permitted them to come into the city laden, so late in the evening, that they
minded to be at their marketing early the next morning; wherefore to prevent
that, he shut them out of the city over night, but not because the Sabbath
began over night, in the evening. 2. I answer, if the Sabbath day began in the
evening, at what time Nehemiah caused the gates to be shut in, then these
absurdeties will follovv, 1. that they began the Sabbath, before it was
Sabbath; and they kept the Sabbath, till after it was Sabbath; for so says
the text, that the gates were shut in before the Sabbath, and that they were
not opened again, till after the Sabbath. 2. If the shutting in of the gates,
do declare unto us the beginning of the Sabbath, so must it declare unto us by
like reason, the end of the Sabbath: and then this absurdety follovveth, that
we must keep one day, and two nights, for our Sabbath; for so long were
their gates shut in: for if they shut the gates in, on fry day toward night,
they opened them not again, on Saturday, the Sabbath day, toward night, nor
in all likely hoode, until our Sunday morning; so their gates remained shut
one day and two nights.

A third text they produce, is Mark. 15.42. And now when the even was come,
because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath: Hence they
collect that the Sabbath began in the evening, and that then was the
preparation of the Sabbath: for answer hereto, we must know, that on
Saturday the Sabbath day, wherein Christ lay in the grave, there was two
Sabbaths met together upon that one day, to wit, the moral Saturday and
weekly Sabbath day, and also an annual ceremonial Sabbath day, as Beza,
Piscator and others affirm; this ceremonial Sabbath day, it was the 15th day
of the month, the day after the Passover, and by the law it was a Sabbath
day: for on it, they had an holy convocation and assembly, wherein they did no
seruill work, Leuit. 23.6.7. Now the Jews keeping their Passover on good
friday, it was the 14th day of the month and consequently Saturday, wherein
Christ lay in the grave, must be the 15th day of the month, and so it was
this annual ceremonial Sabbath day: Now then here being two Sabbaths on
this one day, to wit, the moral Sabbath, and a ceremonial Sabbath, hence it
is, that the text may be understood of the ceremonial Sabbath, not of the
moral Sabbath; and so the preparation spoken of on the evening before, may
concern the ceremonial Sabbath, which was called the first day of unleavened
bread: and indeed we read of a preparation, that was ever upon the day before
this ceremonial Sabbath, and it was the making ready of a lamb, it must be
slain, and dressed, and roasted, before it could be eaten, and a convenient
place must be provided for it to be eaten in, Exodus 12.6.8. Luke 22.8.9.11.
yea, that this preparation, had respect of the two Sabbaths, only unto the
ceremonial Sabbath, is plain, in that it is called the preparation of the
Passover, Joan. 19.14. rather then the preparation of the Sabbath: so this
text it concerns neither the moral Sabbath, nor any moral preparation.

By the way, the clearing of this text Mark. 15.44. wherein is mention of a
preparation before the Sabbath: may be useful unto us, to discover their
error, who urge a preparation on the Eueuing before the Sabbath, from this or
the like textes; as if the Church were bound on the evening before the Sabbath
day, to make a preparation, as they call it, and to refrain all seruill
labors, and begin then the sanctification of the Sabbath in holy exercises;
but this is groundless. 1. For albeit we read of a preparation to the
ceremonial Sabbath, which stood as has been shown, in dressing of the lamb
for the Passover etc. yet we read not of any preparation to the moral
Sabbath enjoined, or used: they err therefore who would from this, and the
like textes collect any such preparation for the Sabbath, as to begin it on
Saturday at even: all the preparation, which God requires for the moral
Sabbath, is no more but this, to remember it before it comes, and that so, as
all our seruill works may be compassed and finished by the end of the sixth
day, that so nothing may hinder us from Sanctification of the seventh day,
when it comes.

Yet further I answer to the text Mark. 15.42. suppose we that by Sabbath
there mentioned, be understood the moral Sabbath, why then by preparation
there spoken of, may nothing else be understood, but a preparation by finishing
of the works of the sixth day in the sixth day, that so no work be left for
the seventh day; and for this the context gives some light, by the example of
Joseph of Arimathea, v. 43. who upon the sixth day, at even, bought fine
linen, and took Christ from the cross, and embalmed him with spices, and
wrapped him in linen clothes, and laid him into the sepulcher, and finally
rouled a stone upon the sepulcher, v. 46. Ioh. 19.40. all these works Joseph
fin sh^d on the sixth day, and so prepared himself for the seventh day, the
Sabbath day. So in which sense soever you take it, here is no place for any such
preparation as they urge. Yet further, this is to be noted, that it is one
thing to make a preparation for the Sabbath, and an other to begin the Sabbath:
this difference they note not who urge the Sabbath to begin on the evening
before the Sabbath day: for, we may make provision and preparation on the day
before the Sabbath, for the Sabbath, by hasting on, and contriuing of our
works so the day before, as no work may be left to be done on the Sabbath
day, and yet not begin the Sabbath until the next morning.

Thus we have done with the confutation of those 3 errors, which urge from the
fourth com. more then a day for the Sabbath; as either all the night foregoing
the Sabbath day; or all the night coming after the Sabbath day; or else half
of the night foregoing the Sabbath day, and half of the night following the
Sabbath day.

Before we can conclud this point, a case of conscience would be scanned, it is
this, if it be so (may some say) that the Sabbath day is but the time of light
only, what shall become of the night then, or of that part of the night, to
wit, an hour, two, or three before day in the depht of winter, in case a man
rise so soon? and of that part of the night, to wit, two, or three hours
after candles lighted; may men safely employ these times, in the ordenary
works of their callings? Where unto I answer, in such a case as this, wherein
God has left no express order, Christian prudency and discretion must
determine the matter; as then in the longest days of summer, we give God no
more of the time of light, then we can well refrain from rest and sleep, so
in the shortest days of winter, we should in reason and equity, as it were by
way of requital, give God all that time, of the night or darkness, the which
we can well spare from rest and sleep: for in the longest days, we sleep 2,
3 or 4. hours after day light, and again go to rest one or two hours before
day light bedone. 2. It is fit we should deal by God in his Sabbath days, as
we deal by our selves, on the six working days; if in any of these we be
disposed to rise before day light, or to set up after day be done, we spend
those times, in actiones or works of the same for kind, which we do in the
day which belongs unto those times, to wit, in common labors: and so let us
deal by God in his Sabbaths, if we rise before day, and set up after day, let
those times be spent in works suitable to the day, to wit, in holy exercises.

But more specially, for the time in the morning, before it be day, since that
we must serve God, with all our heart, and with all our strength, in the
duties of his worship and service on the Sabbath day, it undeniably
follovveth, that a man may not fall to the labors of his calling, 2. or 3.
hovvres before the Sabbath does begin; for so the strength of his body is
weakened, and the liulinesse and fresh cheerfulness of his mind is abated
and dulled, and the edge of his affections is before hand taken off and
blunted: and it cannot be doubted, buth that God would be served in his
Sabbathes, with as much liulinesse and cherfulness, and strength of body
and mind as may or can be: the which cannot be, if a man spend up and wast
his strength and vigor, before hand by labors: Wherefore let us with the
Prophet David, when waking or up before day, seek God by prayer, and the
like: I prevented (says he) the dawning of the morning, and cried: J hoped in
thy word, Psalm. 119.147. It is then, a fit time, for a Christian to exercise
his faith, and hope in God, and to pray unto him, namely, in the morning erly.

And for the time in the Evening, or after the evening, after the day, besides
what has been said before in general, this also maybe added in special, that
since there is a time for meditation upon the word of God, Psalm. 119.15. I
will meditate in thy precepts. Psalm. 119.55. I have remembered thy name, O
Lord, in the night. Psalm. 119.148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I
might meditate in thy word. And Psalm. 42.8. the Lord will grant his loving
kindness in the day, and in the night will I sing of him etc. Since I say
there is a time for meditation of Gods word, and for singing of Psalms in
private, what time can be more fit, then that time of the night, which
immediately follows the hearing of Gods word in public? for then things are
fresh in memory: we are to prove and try all things, which we hear, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. and to search the Scriptures with those Bereans, to see whither the things
taught us, be so or no, Act. 17.11. Now what time can be more fit for this
duty, then the time presently follovving the hearing of the word? There is a
precept unto parents Deuteronomy. 6.7. And these words which I command thee, shall be
in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou laiest
down, and when thou risist up: Now what time is more fit, for parents and
masters, to whet the word of God upon their children and servants, then
presently after they have heard it in the Congregation? but this cannot be, if
all sorts may fall to their several works, so soon as the public assembly
is dismissed. And so much be spoken of the word Day.

SECT. IV.
We are now to speak of these words, Sabbath day: that we may give a true
exposition whereof, and that we may also discover the false glosses, and
horrible abuses of this our time, touching these words of the Commandment, we
thus begin: Of Sabbaths, we must know that there were sundry sorts, prescribed
of God; there were Sabbathes of years, and Sabbathes of days; the Sabbaths of
years, were such as lasted a wholl year, of these we read in Leuit.
25.2.3.4. but of these we have not to speak, partly because they were
ceremonial, never commanded in the moral law; partly because the 4th com.
treats of Sabbaths of days, not of Sabbaths of years. Again, Sabbaths of
days, are of two sorts, for there were Annual Sabbaths; and there were
weekly Sabbaths: of the annual Sabbaths we read in Leuit.
23.7.21.24.32.35.39. these Sabbaths came but once in a year only: of the
weekly Sabbaths, which came every 7th day, or every week, of these we
read in the 4th com. Exodus 20.8.10.11. As touching the Annual and yearly
Sabbaths, we have not to do; partly because they were ceremonial, and never
vvrote in the moral law, in Tables of stone; partly because they came but
once a year, but the 4th comm. with which we have to do, treats of
Sabbaths which come once a week; this weekly moral Sabbath, written in
the moral law, is that with which we have to do: and thus much of the
several sorts of Sabbaths.

This moral Sabbath may in general be thus described, The Sabbath day, is a
certain sacred time sanctified by God, and appointed to be sanctified by man.
A more particular description hereof, you shall have by and by, after that we
have by search found out, which day of the week, this Sabbath day is.

For the word Sabbath, joined with the word Day, thus (Sabbath day) it is
agreed on all sides, that it signifies Rest: so then, when the Lord said,
Remember the Sabbath day; it is as much as if he had said, Remember the
Rest-day. Furthermore, it is to be noted, that hovveuer here be two words, to
wit, Sabbath, and, Day: or Rest, and Day; yet here is but one thing, but one
time, and one day signified; like as we say, the Virgin Mary, these two
words signify but one woman: and the Apostle Paul, these signify but one
man: and the Lords Supper, signify but one thing, or one meal.

It is true, when Divines in expounding these words, have gone thus far,
namely to have shown that the word Sabbath signifies a Rest; here they leave
the point, without any further search, to know which is the Sabbath day, or
Rest day, least they should find it: but we not being afraid to find it, but
desirous to find it, will proceed further: As when God commanded us, saying,
Honor the King, 1. Pet. 2.17. Remember ye the law of Moses etc. Mal. 4.4.
And, Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out of
Egypt, Exodus 13.3. It is not here enough, to enquire what the word King, or
Law, or Day, signifies; but a further search ought to be made also, and that is
to know who, and which is the King, that we may honor him: and to know
what, and which is the law of Moses, that we may obey it: and those
Israelites, to know which was the day, in which they came out of Egypt, that
they might observe it: Even so, it is not enough, to enquire what the word
Sabbath signifies, but also which is the day, that we might sanctify it: the
which, unless we be acquainted with it, we shall be ignorant of the very
subject of the Com. The name Jesus, it signifies a Savior; but if now in the
expounding of Scripture, when we meet with the word Jesus, we have
respect only unto the signification of the word, never enquiring further unto
the person, to know which Jesus the text speaks of, may we not commit a
foul mistake, taking a common man, for Christ Jesus, our Savior? For there is
in the scripture a Jesus, which is Ioshuah, who brought the Israelites into
Canaan, Act. 7.45. Heb. 4.8. And there is a Jesus, who is called Iustus, Col.
4.11. As it is needful then, after we have sought out the signification of
the name Jesus, in the next place, to search to know which Jesus? so is it
with the word Sabbath day, we must search which day?

To this query then, which day of all the week, or of all the seven days, is
the Sabbath day? I answer, it may be known 1. by this name of it, which God
has imposed, Sabbath day: for the name of a thing, does give light to the
thing named; and by men's names, their persons are found ont. As John, and
Thomas, are proper names to two of Christ's Apostles, so Sabbath day, is a
proper name, to one certain day of the week, to wit, to Saturday, the
seventh and last day of the week, that these words Sabbath day, are a proper
name for Saturday, I thus prove it, 1. because none other day of the week,
was constantly called by the name Sabbath day, but the seventh or last day of
the week, which is Saturday: see for this purpose these Scriptures, Exodus
16.22.23.26. Exodus 20.9.10. Exodus 23.12. Exodus 35.2. Leuit. 23.3. Mat. 28.1.
Luke 13.14. I prove it secondly, by the testimony of all Jews, now living, at
Amsterdam, or else where, who call Saturday, the Sabbath day: where unto I may
add, the Jews rekoning of their days of the week; Saturday, they called
Sabbath day: Sunday, they called, the first of the Sabbath, (...), Ioh. 20.1.
monday, they called the second of the Sabbath: Tevvsday, the third of the
Sabbath, etc. In which their account, as you see, no day was called Sabbath
day, but Saturday. 3. I prove it by the testimony of the Lattines, who to this
very day call our Saturday, the Sabbath day, Sabbathum and dies Sabbathi: se
the word Sabbathum so translated in all Lattine Dictionaries; sinally I
appeal to all Divines, if the word Sabbathum be not used in all ancient
Histories of the Church for Saturday, the 7th. day. Thus it is evident, that
Sabbath day, is a proper name, signifying our Saturday: and Saturday then, is
the day, which God meant, and spoke of in those words, Remember the Sabbath
day.

Secondly, we may know that Saturday, is the day which God meant, by these
words, Sabbath day, because God has in his 4th: com. plainly deciphred out
the day, which he called Sabbath day, and that in these words, But the 7th.
day, is the Sabbath, etc. And see Exodus 35.2. and Exodus 23.12. Leu. 23.3. so
then, the 7th day of the week, is the very day, which God understands by
Sabbath day; now the 7th day of the week, is our saturday: for our Lords
day, or Sunday, is called by all the 4 Evangelists, the first day of the week
Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1. well then, rekon on, and Saturday
after will be your 7th. day. Furthermore, it is not obscurly declared, in the
reason to the 4th. com. Exodus 20.11. Where Almighty God sets out his own
ensample for us to imitate; and he Rested on the seventh day, and he blessed
and Sanctified the seventh day for Sabbath; vuhich seventh day, from the
creation, is our Saturday. Finally, the Sabbath day, and the 7th day, are used
in the 4th com. promiscuously the one for the other: for it is said, Ex. 20.11.
that God rested the 7th day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, etc.
where he should have said, thus Wherefore, the Lord blessed the Sabbath day,
etc. unless the Sabbath day, and the seventh day, be both one and the same,
and here I might ad the Testimony of Walaeus de Sabbatho page 61. who
affitmeth, and also proves it that the word Sabbath in the 4th. com. is not
used indefinitly and indeterminatly, but for the seventh day from the Creation.

Thirdly that our Saturday, was the Sabbath day, which was once commanded to
the Jews, by the 4th com. I prove by the Testimony of all Divines; for do not
all, both Protestants and Papists, acknowledge that our Savior was crucified on
Good Friday, and that he lay in his grave, al our saturday, being the Jews
Sabbath day, and rose on our Sunday? whereby they confess, that our Saturday,
was the Sabbath day: Further more, do not all Divines affirm, that Saturday,
the old Sabbath day, was abolished by Christ, etc? In which words they
confess, that Saturday, was the Sabbath day mentioned in the 4th com. what
need of further proofs?

Having found out particularly, which is the day of the week, to which the 4th
com. had respect, namely Saturday: Now we may be bold to make a more
particular description of the Sabbath day and thus it may be desribed; The
Sabbath day, is that sacred time, called Saturday, counted the seventh day from
the Creation, which was sanctified and hollowed by God, and appointed to be
Sanctisied by man. I call it, a sacred time, and that in a double respect, 1.
by destination: 2. By consecration: the Sabbath day is holy by destination, it
being set a part for holiness, and for the worship of God to be celebrated in
it, like as the Temple once was: Remember the Sabbath day, to Sanctify it,
Exodus 20.8. The Sabbath day is Holy by consecration, because at the Creation
God consecrated it and made it an Holy day: and this he did two ways: 1. By
his personal and exemplary Rest upon this day: And the 7th. day he rested
from all his work, which he had made, Genes. 2.2. For if the grovvnd whereon
Moses stood became holy grownd, because of Gods presence there, Exodus 3.5. what
should hinder it, but that in like sort, the day wherein God him self rested,
should forthwith become an Holy day? 2. By his hallowing and sanctifying of this
day: So God blessed the 7th. day and sanctified it, etc. Genes. 2.3. other
Sabbathes were holy but by destination only, but saturday Sabbath was holy,
both by destination and by consecration also.

Having finished this point it remains that we make some use and application
of it; the first use then shall be for information: and thus I reason, if
Saturday be the day and time, which God aimed at in his 4th. com. by those
words Sabbath day, then may our Translatores, in translating of the 4th. com.
safly translate it Saturday: for Sabbath day, they may put Saturday, saying,
Remember Saturday, to Sanctify it. For Saturday is that day properly meant by
the words Sabbath day; neither have we any day of the week, which will answer
to the Sabbath day, but our saturday only: and if it be objected, that the name
Saturday, does not fully express the name Sabbath day, because Sabbath
signifies a Rest: I answer, it is no more then but this, that to the name
Saturday, we add the word Rest, and so we shall have the full sense, thus,
Saturday-Rest; Remember the Saturday-Rest, to sanctify it.

It is objected against this, that so doing, we should bring an heathenish name,
as Saturday is, into the Scriptures, etc. Hereto I answer, I trust that as our
holy use of our Temples and Churches, has purged that abuse of them, unto
which many of them were first erected; so our Christiaen use of the name
Saturday, may sanctify and purge it, from heathenish abuse: 2. We use the name
but for distinction sake only, void of all heathenish vanities: now why may
not the name Saturday, be brought into the scripture of the 10 commandments,
as well as that heathenish name Mars into the scripture of the Acts of the
Apostles? Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars hill, and said, etc.

But I mean not to contend for this, I leave it unto the wisdom and
discretion, of our learned Translatores, all that I aim at hereby, is only
this, that I desire all means and helps may be afforded, whereby the true and
proper sense of the scriptures, may be easily understood, and that in as much
as may be, by the ignorant and unlearned: This one sore evil I find, that
whilst we retain the word Sabbath in the Com. it being an Hebrew word, it is
in our Church, as it was in those days, where in the scriptures, were in
Lattine; because the people understood not the Lattine tongue, the priests might
make what Expositions they would; and so it is here, because the word
Sabbath, an Hebrew word, is not translated into English, but redd in our
Bibles and retained still; our Ministers, many of them, give what fained and
fabulouse Expositions of the word Sabbath they please, as a Sabbath, and the
Sabbath, and a Rest; and all to this end, that they might dravv the 4th. Com.
unto the Lords day, and expound it of the Lords day, or Sunday; as if the name
Sabbath day, might be given indifferently unto any day of the week: none of
which corrupt glosses could delud the people, if they had the words Sabbath
day translated into English words; for so they need not, so wholy rely upon
the Ministers fidelity in Exposition as now they must: for they might see by
their own eyes plainly.

For example, suppose we the 4th. Com. were thus translated, Remember the
Saturday-Rest, to sanctify it: if now any doubt could be, which should be the
day, appointed of God for Sabbath day, it would easily be decided, and that by
an unlearned man: if any should offer to corrupt the text, by distinguishing of
a Saturday, and the saturday (as they do of a Sabbath: and the Sabbath: and of
a 7th. day, and the 7th. day) as if there were more saturdayes in a week then
one, he would be laughed at for his pains. Again, if any would go about to
turn Gods Commandment, from the Saturday to the Sunday, by this devise;
because the word Sabbath signifies a Rest, and we do Rest now from labors
on the Sunday, he would presently be ansvvered, that that's a friuolouse reason,
for the 4th. Com. inioyneth not a Sunday-Rest, but a Saturday-Rest: lastly, if
any would be so idle, as to apply the 4th com. to the Lords day, and expound
it, of the Lords day; why every child would see his gross abuse of the 4th
com. for it directly speaks not of the Lords day, but of Saturday: For it is
not the name Lords day, that God has put into the 4th com. but the name
Sabbath day, or Saturday.

Thus I have shown, what light would come unto Gods commandment, by the
translation of the Hebrew word Sabbath, and what fruit would come unto every
one in the Church of God thereby; if this I cannot obtain, yet this at least
let me prevail in, that Ministers would be pleased hereafter in exposition of
those words Sabbathday, to signify unto the people, that thereby is meant our
Saturday: For this I have proved abundantly and undeniably both by Scriptures,
and by the Testimonies of both Jews, and Christians of all sorts, Protestants
and Papists: this duty therefore, in the true and faithful exposition of Gods
word unto the people, I require of them, as they will answer the contrary
before Almighty God, at that Day: let them bevvare of Sophisticating with Gods
laws, when they expound them; In the 4th comm. God said, Remember the Sabbath
day: but he said not, Remember the Sunday, or the Lords day; nor remember the
Monday, the Tewsday, or the Wednesday etc. but remember the Sabbath day: Now
look which day of the week was ever in ancient time named and called Sabbath
day, that is the day commanded in the 4th com. If then they can show me, that
either Sunday, Lords day, Monday, Tewsday, Wednesday etc. or any day besides
Saturday, was wont to be named and called Sabbath day, then may they have some
culler for their error, but now have they none.

A second use, shall be against sueh Ministers, as do either expound the 4th
com. to belong to the Lords day, or Sunday, because then we Rest: or else, when
the 4th com. is urged upon them, as requiring the seventh day rest, or
Saturday-Rest; they turn it off thus, the word Sabbath signifies in English,
a Rest, now upon the Lords day, or Sunday we rest: whereunto I reply, 1. that
thus when God appointed the 7th day, for his Sabbath day, in his 4th com. the
people of the Jews might thus have answered God, that the word Sabbath in his
4th com. signifies a Rest, now when they keep any one of those yearly
Sabbaths in Leuit. 23. they might say, this week we have kept one of those
annual Sabbaths, (suppose it fell upon Tewsday or Wensday) and in this day we
had a Rest: by this fair gloose, might not God loose in that week, his
moral weekly Sabbath, enjoined by the 4th com. which fell upon Saturday? and
that because they kept a ceremonial yearly Sabbath, that week, upon the
Tevvsday or Wensday? for upon this Tevvsday or Wensday, they did Rest. What
iugling tricks are these? would a man believe it, that Puritan Ministers,
professing the fear of God, would use such dissimulation, and handle the
word of God so craftily? pardon me good Reader, how ever I reverence their
holy profession, yet I cannot speak of this their vile abuse, of Gods sacred
word, without indignation of spirit: who that sincerly loves God, and his
sacred Scriptures, can pass it over in silence, to see his holy word thus
wrested, and basely abused!

Christmas day, when it falls upon some one of the six working days; and so
the Coronation day; and so those common holy days, S. Mathews day, S. John's
day, and the rest; it is true, we Rest upon these days from our labors, and
that by an ordinance of our Church; but will any be so absurd as to say, that
these holy days stand by virtue of the 4th comm. because we Rest on these
days? or suppose the patrones of the Lords day, who press the 4th comm. upon
it, should urge me, to sanctify the Lords day, by the 4th com. might not I
answer them in their own answer, that the word Sabbath in the 4th com. it
signifies a Rest; now on Christmas day, and on Coronation day, and on S.
Matthews day etc. we Rest? Secondly I reply, be it that on the Lords day, we
rest, why this is not the rest, spoken of in the 4th com. for this is a
Lords-day-Rest, but the com. calls for a Saturday-Rest: this is a
first-day-rest, but the com. calls for a Seuenth-day-rest: this difference is
big enough to be seen. Finally, if such answers be lavvfull, then when we
meet with the name Jesus, in a text wherein it is manifestly meant, of Christ
our Lord; yet then may we say, why Jesus, it signifies a Savior, now Joshua
was a Savior, for he saved the Israelits from the Canaanites etc. but shall
such cauilles go for current? as by these tricks, some men turn off the
Lords Sabbathes, so by the like, may they turn off also, the Lord Jesus, their
Savior: it is but to play the fool a little, with the name Jesus, as they do
with the name Sabbath.

A third use shall be against such Ministers, as do not only in private, but
also in public, in their Pulpites, call, or miscall rather, the Lords day,
Sabbath day, in reference to the 4th com. by reason of whose error, the people
also have learned to nickname the Lords day, calling it, the Sabbath day: But
what an horrible confusion of times, and the proper names of days, is this?
If this may go on, err long we shall scarce know one day of the week, from
another: may not we, as well call our Saturday, Sunday; or our Sunday,
Saturday; as call our Sunday, Sabbath day, which is Saturday? if we shall make
proper names of things, common names, what an intolerable confusion do we
bring in to the world? Yet further, if we may call the Lords day, which is
holden to be a new institution, Sabbath day, by an old name; why may we not
call Baptism, which is a new institution, Circumcision, by an old name? and
why may we not call the Lords Supper, which is a new institution, the
Passover, by an old name? For as Baptism and the Lords Supper, are come in
the room of Circumcision, and the Passover, so it is said, that the Lords
day, is come in the room of the Sabbath day? Nevertheless, this nicknaming of
days, as full of confusion as it is; and as improper as the speech is; yet it
might be borne, if it were not of evil consequence; for hereby the poor
ignorant people are deluded; and hereby they are brought off the more assuredly
to believe, that the 4th comm. does bind them to rest from their labors on the
Lords day: but to the contrary, we have proved, that the 4th com. does bind
only to the 7th day, or Saturday. Yea, I add, that men may as well say, they
eat Sacramental bread at their common Tables, and that they celebrate the
Lords Supper, when they eat bread and drink wine at their common Tables, as
to say, they sanctify the Sabbath day, when on the Lords day they hear a
Sermon, pray, and sing (...): for the difference betwixt the Sabbath day, and
the Lords day, is as great, as is the difference betwixt the Lords Supper, and
our common Suppers, betwixt Sacramental bread and wine, and common bread and
wine, as shall be shown.

The name Sabbath day, may be considered as diuinly imposed, by God him self
upon a certain day, or as humanly imposed by man; now of all the days in the
week, God imposed the name Sabbath day, only upon saturday, the seventh day
of the week: if therefore we will take God for our guide, we are to call no
day Sabbath day, in reverence to his 4th. com. but that day which God himself
has named Sabbath day: but as for the Lords day, it is no where in all the
scriptures called Sabbath day; let the patrones of this day, show where in all
the New Testament, the first day of the week, or Sunday, is called Sabbath
day: the which since they cannot do, it is altogether grovvndlesse so to name
it, yet further, whereas it is supposed that the Lords day, was set up for a new
Sabbath, at Christ his resurrection, yet, as it is to be noted, this day, had
no new name put upon it, of many years after that, but it was still called by
its old name, to wit, the first day of the week, as we read in all the 4.
Evangelists, yea and when it was named Lords day, in Reu. 1.10. yet it was not
named Sabbath day, then nor at any time else: this name then Sabbath day, being
put upon our sunday, it is not of Gods imposition, but of man's imposition; and
so it is but humane; it were to be wished then, that men would rater conform
their speech unto God then unto man; calling Saturday, the Sabbath day, as God
did; and not Sunday the Sabbath day, as man does.

It were the more tolerable I confess, if there were such a penury of words,
and scarcety of names, as we had no other name for our Sunday: but we have 3
several names for it, to wit, 1. Sunday, 2. the Lords day. 3. the first day of
the week: here are names enough for one day; there is no necessity therefore to
robb the seventh day, of its name, that so we might have 4. names for one day:
no no, it is not penury of names, but there is an other matter in it: the name
Sabbath day it is an ancient name, and it is an honorable name, and God had
made his promises to such as kept his Sabbathes? if thou turn away thy foore
from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on mine Holy day. etc. Then I will
cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed the with the
Heritag of Jacob, etc. Isa. 58.13.14. And the violation of this Sabbath day.
God had seuerly punished, as we read, Numb: 15.32.35. and Nehem. 13.18.
Whereby God from heaven has shovvne in what esteem he had this day. yea this
Sabbath day, God him self kept it, and also he Sanctified it, and blessed is,
Genes. 2.3. yet further, God has given a special commandment for this day,
and put it in Tables of stone, uttered it with his own voice, and vvrote it
with his own singer, Exodus 20. thus has God honored this day; wherefore
the name of it, is also honorable: now the Patrones of our Lords day, seeing
all this, and finding no such honor put upon their Lords day hence it is, that
they might advance the Lords day, in the minds of the multitude, they have
robbed the Saturday of all its honorable ornaments, that there with all they
might deck up and trim up the Lords day; and hence it is, that our Sunday,
must needs be called the Sabbath day; and so by this means, all those
Scriptures which mention any thing of the Lords Sabbathes any where, they are
together with the name, translated unto the Lords day; what is this, but to
robb the Mistress of her Jewels, to bestow them upon the handmaide? to take the
honor due unto the Master, and give it unto the servant? or to take the
Crown from off the head of the King, to set it upon a common subject? for,
as for the Lords day, it is but a common working day, in Gods account, it being
one of those six days, vvherin God said, Six days shall thou labor, Exodus
20.9.

It Is true, we received a great blessing on that day, because our Lord rose
then from the dead, and it is as true also that we received a great blessing on
friday because on that day, our Lord laid down his liefe for us, and suffered
upon the Cross, and yet for all that, friday is accounted but for a common
vvorking day, for one of the six days, vvherin we must labor: yet further,
the Lords day is but a common day, in respect of Saturday, as touching all those
particulares mentioned before; for the name Lords day, it is but new, and put
upon Sunday, but since Christ and that many yeerers too since Christ: but the
name Sabbath day, it is ancient, and put upon the Saturday thovvsands of
years before Christ: again, you no where read of any blessings promised by
God, in all the New Testament, to those which Keep the Lords day Holy: nor of
any judgments inflicted, or threatened upon any, that work on the Lords day:
further you no where in all the New Testament, find any commandment, to keep
the Lords day Holy. No nor can it be shown that Christ ever Kept it: In a
word, God never hallowed the Lords day, nor blessed and sanctified it,
whereby it should become an holy day; but all these and more, God did to the
Saturday; therefore is the Saturday, as the King or Mistrise, to the Lords day:
as then the King and all good subjects, would think amiss of him, that takes
the crown off the King, and set it upon the head of a common subject, yea
though he were above a common subject, as is a knight, or a Noble man, and as
Friday, and Sunday in some sense are above the other of the six days: So no
doubt will God, and so should every Godly man, think amiss of it, to hear
Ministers take that name of honor, from off the head of Saturday, to set it
upon the head of Sunday.

By this translating of the name Sabbath day, from Saturday to Sunday, common
people, when they read in the Scriptures, of any thing of note, touching the
Sabbath day, presently they cast that in their minds upon the Lords day,
thinking that to be meant of it: thus being merely deluded, they honor the
subject for the king, the maid for her Mistress, and misapply and abuse all
those Textes of Scripture; is it not high time then, that this abuse were
Looked unto? and the rather also, because by their carrynig of the name
Sabbath day, from the Saturday, unto the Sunday; they hereby do subtly carry
also, the 4th commandment from the Saturday, unto the Sunday: and thus they
robb the Saturday, both of its divine name, and also of its Commandment; for
now, no man cales the Saturday, Sabbath day; nor applies the fourth com. unto
it at all: by this robbery God and his Sabbathes are leesers, but they are
great gainers, for now they have not only got that divine name, Sabbath day,
for their Sunday, but also they have got (though but by usurpation) a
Commandment too for their Lords day, the which had no commandment before. It
bewraieth their beggarlynesse in ornaments for the Lords day, when they must
thus robb and pull from an other day, to clothe and attire it with all:
neither has the Lords day, any thing in the new Testament, to tie men's
consciences with all, but only what the patrones there of, have unjustly taken
out of the Old Testament, from the Saturday Sabbath, and out of whose ruins,
they have erected a new day. For conclusion, let me exhort Ministers, and
people, to refrain putting the name Sabbath day, upon the Lords day, for
hereafter; we have names enough besides, we may call it, Sunday, Lords day, or
First day of the week; do not mock God, and deceive the world any longer,
with use of the name Sabbath day, unless you meant to give God his proper
Sabbath day, the Saturday; why should you retain the name with out the thing?
this is to mock God, with a shaddovv for the Substance.

And here I cannot but speak of that common fault of Ministers in the pulpit,
whose very words, and works are at iarr, the more is the pity: for in
application of their doctrines, they are frequent, in pressing the observation
of the Sabbath day, amongst other virtues, and holy duties; and on the
contrary, in many of there uses of reprofe, they are very zealouse, in
reproving the breach of the Lords Sabbaths, together with other sins of
drunkenness, Swearing, lying, oppression, pride, and the like; wherein they
do very well, if their words and their works went together; if their words,
and their mind did agree, for ask them in private, what day of the week,
they meant by the name Sabbath day, and they will tell you Sunday or Lords
day: so then, with their toungs, they call for the Sabbath day, which is
Saturday in Gods account, as has been proved; but they mean an other thing
then they speak of; for they mean it of Sunday or Lords day: like as if a man
should talk much and ernestly of Saturday, but means it of friday: or, of
Sunday, and means it of Moneday. Nay their own mouths shall condemn them,
for they call for the Lords Sabbaths in the pulpit, when they profane them in
their families, and teach men so to do; nay the Lords Sabbathes, find no
greater enemies, then these who call so much for them; for they at other times,
will bear the people in hand that they are abolished; and they will and dare
undertake to prove, that that Sabbath day, once commanded in the 4th com. is a
ceremony, and abolished; and yet these men, I will have the Sabbath of the
Lord, still in their mouths, and make a great clamor for it: the Prophet
Jeremiah reproved those of his time, saying, Trust ye not in lying words,
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Ierem. 7.4. And may not
I say, of our time, forbear your homonymiouse and double meaning speeches;
refrain your words of aequiuocation, and of mental reservation, saying, the
Sabbaths of the Lord, the Sabbaths of the Lord: either be right down for the
Lords Sabbaths, before the people; or else let them be no more heard in your
mouths: do not abuse that proper name Sabbath day, divinely imposed by God,
upon our Saturday; and by your aequiuocations, and mental reseruations, mean
it of Sunday.

Happily, I shall prevail with some, to forsake the abuse of this name, and
in stead of it, they will call our Sunday, the Lords day, and so press the
sanctification of it under that name. To such I say, let them do so then, if
they can find any grounds out of Gods word, to vvarrant them to press the
Lords day, to be kept as the Sabbath day; but this let them take with it, that
they must with the forbearing of the name Sabbath day, refrain the use of the
4th com. also; for these go inseparably together; they must not press the
4th com. upon the Lords day; for the 4th com. speaks of a day, which by
divine imposition, is called the Sabbath day, and not of a day which by humane
imposition is called so, as hitherto many of their own brains do; or not of
a day, called the Lords day: the com. runs thus, Remember the Sabbath day
etc. not thus, Remember the Lords day, etc. Some there are, who allredy, of
their own accord, do call our Sunday, Lords day, and not Sabbath day: but I
marvel of all the rest, with what face, these men can press the 4th comm.
upon that day, which themselves confess is named Lords day, and not Sabbath
day: when as the 4th comm. does expressly mention a day, which is named Sabbath
day, and not Lords day. The name Sabbath day therefore, and the 4th com. must
go inseperably together; hold the one and hold the other, renownce the one and
renownce the other also.

A fourth use, shall be for the confutation of a common, but very friuolouse
answer; let a man urge the 4th com. for the 7th day, or Saturday Sabbath; and
presently their answer will be, that the com. may be understood not of the
Sabbath day, but of a Sabbath day. But that I may discover the idleness of
this did inction, and such as use it; first we must understand what they
mean by it; by the Sabbath day, they mean that certain known day, called
the 7th day from the creation, which is our Saturday: and by a Sabbath day,
they mean, some uncertain day, as one or other of the 7 days, but not
determined which, whither this or that: now say they, the com. may be
understood either of these ways, for the word Sabbath, it may be translated
either a Sabbath, or the Sabbath: either of a day certain, or of a day
uncertain. Hereunto I reply, admit we should grant them, that the com. may be
understood of a Sabbath, uncertain which; yet by Sabbath, they must mean a
Sabbath day, whose name is of divine imposition; well, can they now show us any
day of the week, save Saturday, that is named by God in holy Scripture,
Sabbath day? sure I am they cannot: If then, they cannot show us, any day in
the week, called in Scripture Sabbath day but Saturday, must they not be
enforced then to apply the 4th com. to the Saturday, and to it alone?

2. By the like licentiouse liberty in expounding of Scriptures, we may make
most things that are certain, and well known which, to become uncertain,
and unknown which: for example, the name Jesus, when the text declares that
it is spoken of Christ our Savior, might not a vvrangler shift it off also, by
this answer, that the name Jesus, it may be translated a Jesus, or the Jesus
etc. and so say that that text may be meant of a Jesus, as Joshua, or
uncertainly which Jesus; and not of the Jesus, which is Christ? Again, whereas
it is said, I was in the Spirit on (the) Lords day: that is, on Sunday, say they:
well, may not I answer them, as they answer me, saying, it may be translated a
Lords day, or the Lords day; and so it may be meant of some other day besides
Sunday? let a man read over 3 or 4 verses in the beginning of the first chapter
of Genesis, and let him in stead of the where he find it, put a, and he will be
ashamed of his soreading it; yet further, why might not the Jews, have the
distinction of a Passover, and of the Passover? and of a Pentecost, and the
Pentecost? as well as a Sabbath, and the Sabbath? And why may not we have a
Lords day, and the Lords day; a Christmas day, and the Christmas day; an Easter
day, and the Easter day; as well as a Sabbath day and the Sabbath day? To
conclude, suppose we that Christ had left an express commandment in the New
Testament for the Lords day, in these words, Remember the Lords day to
sanctify it: how would the patrones of the Lords day Sabbath rage and storm,
to hear any go about to wrest this commandment of Christ's, from Sunday the
first day of the week, unto some other day, as to Saturday, or to Monday etc?
and yet in a sense every day of the week is the Lords day: I desire them but
to deal with Gods 4th com. which mentions the Sabbath day, like as they
would have others deal with the Lords day, if it were commanded.

I come now to show that by Sabbath day, in the 4th comm. is meant not an
unknown and vncortaine day, but a certain and well known day: not a Sabbath
day, but the Sabbath day; (now this has been sufficiently proved before,
nevertheless I will prove it furrher, because some think, that the name
Sabbath day may as well be applied unto Sunday as to Saturday, and so the 4th
comm. may hold its morallity in binding unto Sunday:) and first I will begin
with the Testimony of all Translators, both new and old; look into all our
English Bibles, both old and newly translated, and you shall find that not
only in the 4th com. but also constantly, in all other places of Scriptute,
where is any mention of this name Sabbath day, and you shall find them
translating it, not a Sabbath, but the Sabbath: which shows clearly, that
how ever the word may be rendered a Sabbath, yet that translation is not the
best, and therefore they have rejected it, and have unanimously translated it
the Sabbath: neither is this done by any that favored the 7th day Sabbath, but
by those who rather favored the Lords day, and therefore no doubt, but they
would have made some way for the Lords day, by this their translation, if it
could have been.

2. The Lord has in the very com. it self, limited the Sabbath unto a
certain and known day, and that 1. by its proper name Sabbath day, which
belonged properly unto our Saturday, not indefinitly and in common to any day;
as has been shovvne. 2. By deciphering it out most plainly, to be the 7th and
last day of the week, in these words, But the 7th day, is the Sabbath etc.
Now the 7th day, is not uncertain which day of the week it is; but well
known to be Saturday the last day of the week. 3. It is that very day,
which must be sanctified by man, which God himself sanctified, and set us
for a pattern, to wit, the 7th day from the creation; as we have it in the
reason assizmed to the com. Exodus 20.11. Now the day which God rested on, and
the day which God blessed and sanctified, is a certain and known day, see
Genesis 2.3. it was the 7th day, not a 7th day.

3. I prove that the Sabbath spoke of in the Comm. was a certain known day,
and not an uncertain day, partly by the Testimony of Moses, Exo. 16.23. where
upon the sixth day of the week, v. 22. Moses teld the people thus, saying, To
morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath, etc. so then the time of the Sabbath it
was a certain known time, and so certain and so known, that Moses could
say of it, the day before it came, To morrow, it shall be, etc. so much also
may be collected out of, Luke 13.14. and Act. 13.42.44. Finally, I prove it by
the Testimony of all divines, who affirm that our Saturday, was the Jews
Sabbath day, which they Kept by virtue of the 4th com. until Christ came, as
else where I have already, proved more largly: Now if Saturday were the day
which they kept for the Sabbath day, then by the practice of all the Church of
the Jews until Christ, the Sabbath day was a certain known day, even as
our Saturday, is a certain day.

Thus I have proved undeniably, that the Sabbath day, enjoined in the 4th com.
it was the Sabbath not a Sabbath; it was a day certain, and not uncertain,
it was not understood of some one day of the week indistinctly, but of one
certain well known day of the week; which being so, how fondly, yea
wickedly and profanly have they done, who by their false glosses and idle
distinctions, do labor to make people believe, that Gods certain and known
times for his worship and service, are uncertain, and undetermined: that so
they might alter and change Gods times, and make way for their humane
inventiones, that is, to set the Lords day into the 4th com. you have seen it
sufficiently proved, that Saturday was the Sabbath day for thovvsands of
years, until Christ; and that by the name Sabbath day, was no other day known
nor understood but only Saturday, until Christ: how vain then are those men,
who would now a days have a new sense of the name Sabbath day? for until
Christ, these words Sabbath day, signified the Sabbath day, but now since
Christ, they must signify a Sabbath day: then they signified the Saturday, but
now they must signify the Sunday, or Lords day: was ever such madness heard
of before? must words be mutable, and chang their sense, with the chang of
times? that one word, in diverse Textes, may signify diversely is not strange;
but that one word or name, in one and the same Text, should for thovvsands of
years, signify one thing; and the self same word or name, after thowsands of
years, then should have an other sense, it is matchless; this may be the
queen of all absurdeties: and yet thus absurd are all they, who would by their
distinction of a and the Sabbath, and the like, bring the Sunday or Lords day,
now into the 4th. com. and turn away the 7th. day: The approach of the
gospel, has not altered the sense of words in the law: for these words,
passover, Circumcision, and Sacrifice, though they be abolished, and we have
others in their room, yet those words, in the same Textes, do signify now
none other thing, then they were wont to do: must only the word Sabbath be
changed in its sense? If words in the Old Testament shall have one sense before
Christ came, and an other sense after his coming, there vvil be no certainty of
the sense of any of the Scriptures of the Old Testament. This is quite to
ouerturne all certainty of Exposition. Were a man but to construe a piece of
lattine, out of some profane Author, Terence, or the like, and should Engelish
a word in a different sense, from that sense which was used in that Authors
time, and diverse from all Dictionaries and the like, would it be borne with
all think we? and yet many of our divines, will deal worse with Gods sacred
Scriptures, then with a profane Author, for albeit the word Sabbath, was ever
used in the Scriptures, for Saturday, and so in our Dictionaries also, yet they
will have one foolish answer, or distinction or other, whereby they will
turn off the Saturday, to bring in the Sunday, into the name Sabbath day, and
into the 4th. com. yea, and never so much as blush at it neither: judge good
Reader, if the Scriptures be not foully and shamfully abused by these men, when
they will by their corrupt Expositions of the 4th com. offer that violence
unto it, that all men are a shamed to offer unto A profane Author, as Terence
or the like: But have you no more care of the souls of those God has
committed to your charge, then thus to use your vvites, to blind their eyes,
least they should se the truth, and walk in the way of Gods 4th com? se to
it in time, if Sabbath day, did once signify the Saturday, it must so signify
to the worlds end.

Thus far I have labored, to vindicate Gods 4th com. from the corruptiones of
the time: but before I pass this point, I desire to lay before the eyes of our
Ministers, two notoriouse abuses; the one is the abuse of their flocks, the
people of God: the other is the abuse of Gods sacred word: for the former, by
their corrupt pressing the 4th com. so hard upon the consciences of their
people, for the Sanctifying of the Lords day, they have drawn many well
affected people, to a great deal of zeal in keeping it holy, in so much as
many do, in conscience of the 4th com. hear two Sermones in a day, if not in
some places 3 or 4: they read the scriptures privately at home, they refrain
all servile labor all the day long, they refrain so much as to talk of
vvorldly businesses, they neglect their gain and proffites, which else they
might have; yea often they sustain loss, and all in conscience of the day and
time, and of the 4th com. and in hope and expectation, that they perform a
good work, and acceptable unto Almighty God, and such as shall one day, be
unto their praise and glory: but what now if this, even all this be in vain
and to no purpose, in respect of their ends and grownds, by reason it is a
service which God requires not, have not then such Ministers lamentably abused
their people? for this end, consider what has formely been proved, to wit,
that God in his 4. com. requires the Sabbath day, not the Lords day; the
Saturday Rest, not the Sunday-Rest; the 7th day for Sabbath day, not the 8th
day, or first day, for Sabbath day; so then to Sanctify the Sunday, or Lords
day, in conscience of the day, and of the 4th Com. is mere superstition, and
needless religion: because this Sunday or Lords day, is no where commanded in
the 4th com. now to do any thing in conscience of the 4th com. the which is
not commanded in the same commandment, it is mere superstition; so all that
care and zeal of good people, yea all their pains, and zealouse deuotiones
are lost labor; oh what a pity it is? so that, unless as we may (if we
may) in the deepest and greatest of our charity, hope that God will accept of
those good meanings, and good intensions, of ignorant, misled, and deluded
Papists; we can not hope that God will accept of the good meanings and
intensions, of our best people in their zealouse sanctifying of the Lords day:
but that rather, when at that day, they shall expect the praise of their piety,
God may say unto them, and who has requires this at your hand? Isa. 1.12. for
because this day, stands not by Gods Com. all our performances in conscience of
the day, becomes a limme of that voluntary religion and will worship, condemned
by S. Paul, Col. 2.23. it has as he says indeed a show of wisdom, but it is
but a show, not the substance, we may a swell Sanctify Friday, as Sunday.

But it will be objected, we have the duties, as Rest, and holiness, though
we have not the day. Where to I answer that many indeed do sooth and flatter
themselves much with this answer; but I say, you have not the duties, to wit,
the duties of the Sabbathday, but all you have is, that you have like duties to
those of the Sabbath, you have not the same: for none can properly be called
Sabbath day duties, but such as are done in the Sabbath day, and by virtue of
the 4th com. when you keep a fastday, or a day of public thanksgiving to
God, or an holly day, on these you Rest, and perform holy actions, as upon the
Sabbath day; but will you call these Sabbath duties? if you will, then may
you keep these holy days also, in obedience to Gods 4th com. for Sabbathes;
and then may you also say of these holy days, though we have not the day, yet
have we the duties of the day, and so you may erect yet more Sabbaths, and so
stand by the 4th com. wherefore this objection, which is very common in the
mouths of Ministers and people, is of no moment, it will not free them of
superstition and vvill-vvorship.

When Saul offered Sacrifice, and Samuel should have done it, why Saul might
have answered, why I gane God a Burnt offering, and a peace offering, it was as
much, and the same, which Samuel would have offered, here lacked nothing but
the circumstance of the person, it was Saul instead of Samuel: I, but this
excuse could not serve the turn, Samuel teld him he had done foolish for all
that, and God would deprive him of his kingdom for it, 1. Sam. 13.9.10. etc.
so it is here, they do foolishly that alter Gods days and times, and they
shall leese their share of those blessings, which God has promised unto them
that keep his Sabbathes, Isa. 58.13.14. because they keep not his Sabbaths
but their Lords days: and they do foolishly, because they think as Saul did,
to please God with an half service, doing somthings which God commanded, and
leaving out and undone othersome thing which God commanded: Saul's obedience
came short in the circumstance of the person, and therefore rejected: and these
men that keep the Lords day, but not the Sabbath day, their obedience faleth
short in the circumstance of the time, Gods Sacred day, and therefore will be
rejected of God. Let them look too it, and receive admonition. And further
whereas they please them selves saying, they have the duties of the Sabbath,
though they have not the time: they must know, that for so much as the day and
precise time, is as expressly commanded in the 4th com. as are Rest and holy
exercises, therefore the day and precise time, is no less a duty, then are
other things commanded in the same Com. so then when they please themselves
saying, they have the duties of the Sabbath and neglect that day and time,
they have but one half or some parts of the Sabbathes duties: for they want
the set time, which is a part of the Sabbathes duty: yea, and such a part
too, as being vvanting, the duties of rest and holy excercises, become no
better then common holy days duties: for on every common holy day they do
such Sabbath duties, that is, they Rest, and hear Sermones, etc. Now to
return, if through the false Exposition of Gods 4th com. Gods people be led
into such an error, by keeping a vvrong day, as they shall leese the revvard
of their expected hopes; and their religion in respect of this day, become a
superstition; and their conscience of the 4th Com. prove a non-obedience unto
it, is it not high time that this matter be looked unto? and have not Ministers
lamentably abused the people?

Yet further, when people in their private family prayers, on Sunday morning,
before they go into the Congregation, pray to God to assist them and help
them in the sanctification of that day Sabbath, do they not babble before God,
making him believe that that present Sunday, is his sacred Sabbath day, the
which God knows is most false? the same is true also of the Minister, using
such prayers, in his pulpit publicly. Again, when night comes, do not such
as use to call upon God morning and Evening, make an humble confesssion to God,
in their private families, of their sins, among which they rekone up their
failings in the sanctification of that Sabbath day now past, for one: thus
they ignorantly confess sins unto God, which are no sins; and fear
where no fear is; for, if a sin, it must be a transgression of some law;
but show me a law, for the sanctifying of the Lords day; there is one indeed for
the Sabbath day, but none at all for the Lords day, neither in the old nor new
Testaments: Now do not such Ministers lamentably abuse their people, who by
abusiue expsitions of Gods commandment, do put a needless conscientie into
men? and cause them to think that to be sin, which is no sin: and which
is worse, cause them to acknowledge unto God, more sins then God himself
knows; and to ask pardon, where they have committed no offense: is it not
high time, that God should raise up some man, to detect these errors? yis
doubtless; and the times will in an irefull displeasure at him, for his
honest pains, woefully reward him, in body, goods, and good name. Thus far of
Ministers abusing of the people of God, committed to their charge.

I come now to Ministers abuse of the sacred, word of God, a thing to be
thought on: let a man travail upon the Lords day: or do any common work,
presently they charg him with a breach of the 4th com. and with a profanation
of the Lords Sabbath day: a gain, in their pulpites, to dravv men to a
conscience of the Lords day, they vrg hard the 4th com. upon the Lords day;
yea, they apply also to the Lords day, all those Scriptures, which any where
mention the Sabbath day, and were made properly and solely, for it; as Numb.
15.32. etc. and Nehem. 13.18. where is mention made, of Gods judgments, for
profanation of the Sabbath day: and Isa. 58.13.14. where is mention made of the
holy manner of keeping the Sabbath day; and of blessings promised there unto:
now they making no difference, between the Sabbath day, and the Lords day, do
apply all these Scriptures with others, unto the Lords day, which are proper
unto the Sabbath day: but thus doing, they abuse these Scriptures, and profane
the word of God; and thus I make it good; as for the Lords day, it is but a
common working day; for it is one of those six days, wherein God has
commanded us in the 4th com. to do our works in; and it is the first of those
six days, called in Scripture, not Sabbath day, but by an old name constantly,
to wit, the first day of the weke and be it, that we received a great blessing
on this day, to wit, Christ from the dead: so we received also on Friday, an
other great blessing, to wit, the Remission of our sins, by Christ his
passion and sufferance that day upon the Cross for us; and yet Friday
remains a common working day, for all that; and so may, and does Sunday, or
the Lords day also: if then the Lords day, be but a common day, and Ministers
will apply Gods sacred word, which was destinated and ordained for sacred and
holy time, unto common and profane time, is not this to abuse and profane the
holy and sacred word of God?

If any shall object, that the time of the Sabbath day, is not an holy time and
the like I answer, that as the Temple was an holy place, so the 7th day, or
the Sabbath day, is an holy time, and an holy day; for God himself made it
holy, when he blessed the 7th day, and sanctified it, Genes. 2.3. like as then,
it is counted an insufferable profanation of Gods word, for any Minister, to
pronounce the words of holy Baptism, I Baptize thee in the name of the father,
etc. upon a child, when he washes his hands in common water: or to pronounce
those words of the other Sacrament, Take eat this is my body, etc. to a man,
to whom the Minister gives common bread, at his Table in is private house: so
I judge it, an horrible profanation of Gods Sacred word, for any Minister, to
take that part of Gods word, to wit, the 4th com. with those other
Scriptures, which were peculiarly destinated of God, for his sacred
Sabbathes, and to apply them profanly to the Lords day, which is and common and
vvorking day, as Friday is, in a right account.

Thus I have out of that zeal I be are to Gods Law, and to Gods Sabbathes,
declared unto Ministers, how they do a buse the people of God, on the one
side; and profane the Sacred word of God, on the other side; and this I have
done, not to aggrauate their past sin, but (God knovveth) that they may
prevent the like in time to come: but what shall be done to the man, that has
discovered all this? will these Ministers love him for it? no they will hate
him for it, and revile him for it, and persecute him, and say all manner of
evil against him falsely, saying he is of a provvd spirit, to discover any
erroures in them, and the like: if it prove better, it is more then I look for;
and better then I have found hither to: but I pass not for their displesure,
so be I may keep a good conscience to wards God: Ministers must hear of their
sins as well as common people. And so much for the Exposition of these
words (Sabbath day) and for detection of the errors about them.

SECT. V.
Having in the former Section, expounded the thing commanded, to wit, the time
of Gods worship, in these words (Sabbath day) we are now to come unto the
Commandment it self: and this is delivered in diverse words, as in Exodus
20.8. Remember the Sabbath day: in Exodus 31.16. Wherefore the children of
Israel shall Keep the Sabbath, etc. and in Deuteronomy. 5.12. Keep the Sabbath day,
to sanctify it, etc.

Wherefore the observation of the Sabbath day, is not at liberty, but it is
necessary, for it is stronghly Commanded, and that under these two words
Remember: and Keep.

For matter of use, since this time, is commanded in the first Table, a among
our duties to wards God, and not in the second Table, we learn, that as to
hallovv and sanctify Gods Name, in the third Com. so to Sanctify Gods Time, in
the 4th Com. is a part of Gods worship; and therefore this time, is not to be
sleited, as it is by many, saying the 7th day you stand so for, it is but a
matter of time, and God regards not time so much, etc. but say I then, why
did God please so expressly to give a Commandment for it, saying Keep it, and
Remember it? and why did God place it, in so high a rank, as to set it into the
first Table? they do well therefore, who honor this time, this sacred and
sanctified time, and who stand for it, and speak for it. For my part, I know
no reason, why we should not stand for the Sanctification of Gods Time, as
well as for the Sanctification of God Name, they being both Commanded, and
both Commanded in the first Table.

An other use of this point, is it so, that God has charged us to Remember
his Sabbath day, what will become of such preachers the^, as are so far off
from a remembrance of it as that they teach men publikly to forget it? and to
this evil end and sinful, they labor to be blurr Gods day, by calling it
odiously Jewish and Ceremonial: and to this end, they have coined many
distinctions, whereby they would pervert the straight way of the Lord, and put
a stumbling block before the people, that so this thing commanded by God might
be slighted; yea, they have so handled the matter, and blered the eyes of the
people, that they are so far off now from Remembering the Sabbath day, as
that, (poor people as they are) they know not which day of the week should be
called Sabbath day.

As these Minister shall undoubtedly answer to God, for the sin of the
people, in profanation of the Lords Sabbath weekly; so do I vvish and advise
all people, to lay the weight and peril of their souls, upon these their
Ministers, who tach them thus: telling them plainly thus, we see a plain and
express commandment of Almighty God for the Sabbath day, but we see none
for the Lords day; wherefore we dare not in our consciences, speak against
the Sabbath day, no nor profane it, by that common light of understanding and
conscience which God has given us to judge by: if we durst trust our own
judgments, we durst not but sanctify the Sabbath day; and God knows, if you
our Ministers, were as vvilling as we are, we would keep it holy;
wherefore, the fault is not in us, nor the sin ours, if it be profaned; see
you to it therefore, our blood be upon you, if we perish in this sin
eternally, or be plagued of God for it here temporally; for, it is only the
r^uerent regard, which we have of you, and your lerning, and honesty, which
makes us to disregard this thing commanded of God: this we shall be able to
plead before Almighty God, at that great day of Assizes, that we are innocent
in this matter; and if for all this, it then go ill with us, we shall curse
the day, that ever we knevv you, and believed you: thus I advise people, to
disclaim and abandon the having any hand in this sin, and to lay the burden
of it, wholy upon such their Ministers, as do persist in enmity to the Lords
Sabbathes, or to any thing commanded in the 4th Com. now the reason of this my
advise is, because I find the people generally, indifferently affected, and
ready enough to embrace Gods ancient Sabbath in conscience of Gods 4th Com.
and the only bridle, that causes them to refrain consent, is the reverent
opinion they have of their Ministers, who are contrarily minded, and teach
them otherwise, etc. Whereby it appears, that the whole fault is in their
Ministers; and therefore have I advised the people, to lay the weight and whole
burden of this matter, upon their Ministers, to provoke them to reform and
cale back their erroniouse Doctrines touching God Sabbathes, least they have
the blood of many souls an other day laid to their charge.

An other use of this point, is against Ministers also, and it is of exceeding
great consequence, enough to cause the hair upon their heads to stand right
up, and their hearts to tremble again if there be any love and fear of God
left in them: it is this; Is it so, that Almighty God has charged and
commanded us to Remember his Sabbath day, to sanctify it; and to this end has
given us his 4th com. how dangerouse then, is the case of such Ministers, as
have by their vain distinctiones, and fond objections, not only abolished the
Lords Sabbath day it self, but also by abolishing it, have quite and clean
for ever, over thrown all the 4th commandment also; so as the 4th com. shall
now stand among the 10 commandments, but as a Cipher of no use; behold what
havoc some Puritan Ministers have made, that so they might make a way to
bring in, and uphold their Lords day Sabbath.

That it may appear to the world, that I tax them not causlesly, I proceed to
prove what I have said; and that partly from their distinctions, and partly
from their objections: First for their distinctions; they do distinguish of
the time in the 4th com. and of the duties of rest and holiness, in the time:
Now for the time, the 7th day, and the Sabbath day, these are Jewish (say they)
ceremonial and abolished: but the duties in the time, they only are moral
and perpetual: and to this head come all their other distinctions, and from
hence they are derived: upon this distinction, thus I argue; If that time, that
is, all that time which was commanded to the Jews, and comprised in these
words (the 7th day) and (the Sabbath day) be a ceremony and abolished as
Jewish, then is there no time left in the 4th com. for any Sabbath day: But
that time, that is, all that time, once commanded to the Jews, and comprised
in these words (the 7th day, and, (the Sabbath day) is a ceremony and abolished
as Jew sh: Therefore there is no time left in the 4th. com. for any Sabbath
day: and, by consequence, no 4th com. For the Minor, they cannot deny it; for
it is a limme of their own distinction; for they say (the 7th day) is
abolished, and (the Sabbath day) to wit, that ancient Sabbath day, commanded to
the Jews in the 4th com. that they say also, is, Jewish and abolished:
Wherefore unless they can show us some new Scripture, or some other parts of
the 4th com. which have hitherto lain hidden and unknown, where there is
mention made of any other 7th day then one, and of any other Sabbath day the^
one, it must necessarily follow, that when they say, that that one 7th day, and
that one Sabbath day, once commanded to the Jews in the 4th com. is abolished,
that then all the time once commanded, is abolished; for, all the time then
commanded, was that one 7th day time only; and that one 7th day time, was all
the time, that was commanded: take away then one, and you take away all. For
the Major its consequence, it is clear of it self, That if all the commanded
time, in the commandment, be abolished; then there is no commanded time, left
in the commandment, for a Sabbath day: for example, suppose a man has a
garden, wherein are sundry bedes of herbs, among the which he has one bed
of Time: If now the gardener come and cut up by the roots, or root out, and
dig up all that bed of Time; may not a man soundly argue thus, that if all
the Time in the garden be rooted up, that then there is no Time left in the
garden? Why so it is in our case, take away that time, that was commanded, and
there is no time, that is, no commanded time. Thus you see, that by their
abolishing of that very day and time, which the Jews kept, to wit, that
Sabbath day, and that 7th day, they have abolished all time out of the 4th com.
so as now it commands not any day, nor any time to be sanctified.

In the last place, I am to prove, that if there be no time left in the 4th
com. that is, no commanded time; that then by consequence, there is no 4th com.
in use, but that it is a mere Cipher. For this purpose, remember, they
distinguished of the things commanded, to be the time, and the duties in the
time: the time then being abolished, as has been proved, and as they every
where profess to hold, there remains nothing in the commandment, as
commanded, but the duties in the time, to wit, Rest and holy actions, and for
these duties, there is no commanded time left now, so that either the duties,
must fall to the ground, and be abolished together with the time, as common
reason would teach a man; for, the proper time or proper place for any thing
being taken away, the action to be done in that time, or in that place, must
needs be taken away also, and so the duties must come to naught and be
nullified, for want of a fit and proper time to do them in: or, if any time
be to be allotted for these duties, (in case me may absurdly suppose the
duties to surviue the time) it is not a commanded time; for that's gone and
abolisht, as they say; wherefore it must be an indifferent time, and at the
will and pleasure of men only: or, at most, it must be no more time, then can
by force of necessary consequence, be collected for the performance of those
duties, Rest, and holiness: well then to proceed, let us see what time it
is which they can collect: sure I am, that from the consideration of the
duties of Rest and holiness, as they stand in the 4th com. they can collect
no more but this, that if God has commanded, these duties of Rest and
holiness, to be performed; then there must be a time, or some time allotted
out by man, for the performance thereof.

Now be it granted, that some time must be allowed for these duties; the
question then is 1. when that time must be? 2. How often that time must be? 3.
How long that time must be? For so much as now by their opinions, the time of
the 4th com. is utterly abolished, therefore these questions cannot be satisfied
by the 4th com. the Church therefore must determine them. To the first then I
answer, when must the time, or Sabbath be? why even then, when men please it
should be, as they can agree upon the matter: This age may appoint it, at one
time, an other age may appoint it at an other time. To the second question I
answer for them, how often must that time be, for performance of these duties
of the Sabbath? why, since those words the 7th day is the Sabbath, Exodus
20.10. be abolished which taught us how often to keep a Sabbath day, to
wit, every 7th day; why now we are left to our choice and liberty; for
now, we are not by Gods commandment, nor by any necessity of consequence in
respect of the duties, urged to give God a Sabbath day, frequently, but the
Commandment may be thoroughly fulfilled, if we give God a day, either once in
every 7 days, or once in every 14 days, or once in every 21 days; or once in
a month, or once in a year, or once in 7 year, or once in a man's liefe: so
be that once in a man's liefe, a man does Rest and perform holy exercises, a
whole day long, he has fulfilled the Commandment; for it requires by their
doctrine, now no more, but Rest and holiness a day long, with out any
mention how often. To the third question, I answer for them, how long must
that time be, when it comes? why, not a day long; for the time, and the
word Day in the 4th Com. is abolished (say they) so then, now the Com.
requires not a day to begiuen God, vvhither a day of 12 or of 24 hovvres: it
only requires the duties of Rest and holiness: well then, if the Church give
God but one hour in a day, when the day comes, in the duties of Rest and
holiness, the com. is fulfilled; and thus the Church, needs not, unless
they will, give God any other Sabbath, but one hour upon some one day by
hearing a Sermon; for all that hour they perform the duties of the Sabbath,
to wit, Rest, and holiness: so then to sum up the Sabbath which these
Ministers must have; It is a Rest from labors, and an holy exercise of prayer
with the Minister, and harkening unto Gods word preached, an vvholl hour
long; and that once in a week, or once in a month, or once in 7 years; or
once in a man's lief time, behold your Sabbath? One thing I must remember you
of, which is this, that Gods time being abolished, this time of an hour or
the like, which comes now by force of collection, it is not a Divine time, but
an Humane time; so the com. is embased, by the chang of a Divine time, for an
Humane time. Judge now Christian reader, if by their distinctions, houlding
the time in the com. ceremonial, they have not nullified with the time, the
vvholl 4th Comm. also: for, 1. whereas the time, should be at Gods
appointement, when? now they have brought it to be at manes appointement, when
he will. 2. vvheras the Sabbath day was frequent, once in 7 days; now it
needs not be once in 7 years. 3. vvheras the Sabbath was a day long; now
it needs not by the 4th com. be above an hour long: vvheras then the
Commandment was, Remember the Sabbath day: now it may rune thus, Remember the
Sabbath hour. I may now with David turn my speech from men, unto God. and
say, It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have destroyed thy Law.

Yet further I prove against them, that they have abolished the whole 4th Com.
and that by their abolishing of the proper time in the 4th Comm. vvheras they
say there are two things in the 4th Com. the one is the time, and this is
abolished; the other is the duties in the time, as rest and holiness, and these
they hold Moral; if then I shall prove that these duties, are nullified and
abolished then you will say with me, that they have abolished the 4th Com.
indeed: for both the time, and the duties also will be abolished. For this
purpose we must know, that there are Sabbath day duties, and 4th Com. duties,
properly so called; and there are duties very like unto them; as one egg is
like an other; but the like is not the same; or as a counterfeit shilling is
like a true and current shilling; but yet it is not a true shilling and paiable
by the Kings authority: thus Samuels Sacrificing, and Saul's Sacrificing, where
alike, but Samuels Sacrificing, was properly a Sacrificing, Saul's was but an
Apish imitation, and a counterfeit: for he was not the person that should do
it: So to rest from labor an vvholle day, and to sanctify it, in Holy
proformances: this day being the 7th day, which is properly called Sabbath day,
thus these duties, are properly called Sabbath day, and 4th Com. duties: but on
the other side, to rest an whole day, from labor, and to sanctify it by holy
proformances, and this day not being the 7th day, but some other day: these
duties now are very like the other indeed, as one egg to an other, as a
counterfeit, is to a current shilling? and as Saul's Sacrificing was to Samuels;
but they are not the same duties, nor can they be properly called Sabbath day
duties, nor 4th Com. duties; no more then a counterfeit can be called a true
shilling, or Saul's Sacrificing be counted Samuels Sacrificing; be cause this
was not the day vvhereon these should be done.

For example, the Jews had yearly Sabbathes; and weckly Sabbathes; now albeit
the rest, and the holy actions, done on the yearly Sabbath day, were a like,
and all one for kind, with those done on the weekly Sabbath day, yet no man
will say they were the weekly Sabbath day duties, or the 4th Com. duties;
for they were done by virtue of an other special Com. Again the Jews, had
Sabbath days; and they had fast days, and also days of public thanksgiving,
as we have on Coronation and Gunpovvder treason days and the like: Now
albeit they did rest upon these days, and perform like duties, as upon
their Sabbath day, yet no man will say these were Sabbath day duties
properly, and 4th Com. duties: I trust no man thinks that those are Sabbath
day duties, and 4th Com. duties, which we do on Christmas day when it
falls on a week day, or on Coronation day, and the like: no these are but
like them: Thus it is for our Lords day, albeit we do the like duties on this
day, which ought to be done on the Saturday Sabbath yet are they not the same:
for they differ much, as 1. they differ in the day; those were done on the 7th
day, properiy called Sabbath day, and so Sabbath day duties: these, on the 8th
day, called Lords day, and so Lords day duties: 2. those were done in memory
of the Creation; these in memory of the Redemption. 3. those were done by the
appointement of God in the Law; these, are supposed to be done, by the
appointment of Christ in the gospel. 4. those were done in imitation of God,
at the Creation; who then rested on the 7th day, and hallowed the 7th day,
Genes. 2.2.3. But these duties of Rest and holiness on the Lords day, are not
done in imitation of God at all, for it is the 8th day. Now were there no
more but the first difference, in that these duties were done on a wrong day, it
were enough to show that these are no Sabbath day duties, nor 4th Com.
duties, no more then Saul's Sactificing was Samuels Sacrificing or a true and
commanded Sacrificie: but all the 4. differences put together, it is manifest,
that the duties of rest and holiness which we perform on the Lords day, are
not Sabbath day duties, nor 4th com. duties, though they be never so like
them: wherefore since these be not the duties commanded in the 4th com. which
we perform, it followth that the proper duties of the 4th Com. are nullified
and abolished, as well as the time and day; and so the time, and the duties
in the time, being both abolished, the whole 4th Com. is abolished.

Thus having proved from their distinctiones, that they have abolished not
only the Lords Sabbaths, but also the 4th Com. it self: I am now also to
prove the same, from their objections, vvherby there profane abuse of Scripture
shall appear, in that they so expound Scripture, as thereby they ouerturne one
of the Tenn Moral Laws, the 4th Com. and by that time this be made apparent,
I trust all that love God, will hate their doings; and they that love Gods
Commandments, will contemn their Expositiones: for this purpose I will
produce you two of there strongest and maine Textes, whence they collect their
objections: the one is, Col. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in meat, or drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths: where
by the word Sabbaths, they will needs understand the weekly Sabbath commanded
in the 4th Com. and so that shall be abolished in this text, as a Shaddovv of
Christ, The other Text is, Exodus 31.13. verily, my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for
it is a sign between me and you, etc. Where say they, the weekly Sabbath,
mentioned in the 4th comm. is made a Sign, and so it is abolished. Now from
these two textes and objections of theirs, I gather two arguments as necessarily
follovving, for the utter abolition of the 4th com.

The first is this, that if these two textes do (as they say) abolish that
very Sabbath day, where of God spoke in his 4th com. then are these words in
the com. to wit, the Sabbath day: a ceremony and abolished: the reason of this
consequence is, because these words Sabbath day, in their two textes, are in
their nature the same, and of the same extent, with the like or same words
(Sabbath day) in the 4th com. and it must be so, for they oppose these words
(Sabbath day) in their two textes, unto the like words (Sabbath day) in the
4th com. the one to abolish the other. This being so, I proceed, if that these
words in the 4th com, to wit, Sabbath day, be a ceremony and abolished, then
is the 4th com. nullified, and utterly overthrown: that this is so, I pray
look the text, Exodus 20.8. Remember (the Sabbath day) to sanctify it: I have
put the words in controversy, in a parenthesis as you see; now let these
Ministers take a way those words in the parenthesis, and you take quiet away,
the very subject matter of the Lords speech: you leave a roof with out a
foundation: God says, Remember the Sabbathday: but if now there be no Sabbath
day, for that it is abolished, as they say, how then shall a man Remember it?
God commands to keep the Sabbath day, Deuteronomy. 5.12. but if there be no Sabbath
day, how shall a man keep it? Again, God says, sanctify it: but how shall
we sanctify it, if it be not? what can we Remember to sanctify a nothing? so
thus I have shown, that the very commandment, the 4th com. is utterly
nullified by their obiectiones, and made to speak nonsense, or a nothing;
this is my first argument.

My 2d argument, is taken from the word Sabbath in their own sense and use of
it; for when I urge the^ with the name Sabbath in the 4th com. they turn me
off with this, that the Hebrew word Sabbath, signifies a Rest, in English:
well be it so, a Rest let it signify: from these two textes then, I argue
again, thus, If the Rest in the 4th com. be abolished, the^ is the 4th com. it
self, utterly abolished: but that the Rest in the 4th com. is abolished; them
selves confess it in their objected two Textes: for in these Textes, is the
word Sabbath, see Exodus 31.13. Col. 2.16. which word Sabbath signifies a
Rest, now they do oppose the word Sabbath which signifies a Rest, in Exodus
31.13. Col. 2.16. against the same word Sabbath, in the 4th comm. which
signieth a Rest also, proving unto us, that the Sabbath and Rest in the 4th
com. is a sign and a shaddovv, and so abolished, by these Textes, Exodus 31.
Col. 2. which being so, hence it is apparent by their own work and sense,
that not only the Hebrew word Sabbath is an abolished ceremony and shaddovv,
but also that the Rest which it signifies, is also a ceremony and an
abolished shaddovv. And so I come to prove the consequence, namely, that if the
Rest in the 4th com. be abolished, then is the 4th com. utterly and for ever
abolished: this I make good thus; if that Rest from our servile labors, be
abolished, which was once in the 4th com. commanded, then now we may labor,
in our calings, not only on the six days, but also on the 7th day; not only
on the week days but also, on the Sabbath day; and if we may on the Sabbath
day, be occupied a broad the fields after our businesses, this does
necessarily exclud all necessity of assembling in the congregation, to pray
together, and praise God together; for how can a man be both a broad and at
home; in the field and in the Church; plovving there, and praying here, both
together?

Thus I have finished my arguments, raised out of their two Textes, vvherehy I
have proved, that from their objections and expositions, there follovveth not
only an abolition of the Lords Sabbaths, but also a nullification of Gods 4th
com. I must needs confess, I can but wonder that there is any Sabbath day at
all, kept in our Church, when I consider of these common received distinctions,
and objections; for they do directly ouerturne all force and virtue of the 4th
com. for the keeping of any day at all as thence: and to go about to raise a
Sabbath day, out of the New Testament is impossible, as shall be shovvne,
unless some New Scriptures can be found out, that be not now in our Bibles;
wherefore considering these things, it must needs be a singular work, and
providence of God, to incline the hearts of our Church to give God a Sabbath
unto this day: but it lies at the pittes brinke, and at the last gasp, the
least push of a profane mind, who spurneth at piety, would thrust it in, and
bury it for ever.

Thus much be spoken of this use, wherein I have convicted these Ministers, of
the utter overthrow and abolishing of the 4th com. and that partly by this,
that they have abolished that day and time which is prescribed in the 4th com.
so that now we can not have the commanded time, the Divine time, nor that
sanctified time; and as good therefore no time. But suppose we must have a
time, by force of consequence, why then have we for a Divine time, appointed by
God, an humane time, by man: and for a time sanctified by God, we have a
profane time and unsanctified: and yet for all this, this time is not a day,
nor weekly; but an hour in a day, once in a man's life: or at the best, but a
Lecture day for a Saabath day: thus much for the time. Now as for the duties
in the time, either they have utterly abolished them also, as has been shown;
or at the best they have but counterfeit Sabbath duties, for true Sabbath
duties: so much of the duties. Lastly, they have as has been shown, taken
away the very subject matter of the 4th comm. so as now God commands us to
Remember a nothing; and to sanctify a nothing; and so Gods commandment is made
ridiculouse. Lo, this foul error, it is an error, worthy the discovery; and
high time it is that God should raise up some man to discover these things, and
to stand in defense of his 4th com. and for this cause, as I have entitled my
book, a defense of the Lords Sabbaths; so have I entitled it also a defense of
the 4th com. for you see how they have by blotting out the Lords Sabbaths, also
defaced the whole commandment with them.

It is strange to see, what violence this one finale portion of Scripture, to
wit, Gods 4th com. has undergone: and it is the more strange, considering the
learning and knowledge of these times: what vain and friuolouse distinctions,
of a Sabbath and the Sabbath, of one day in 7: of the Sabbath belonging to us,
as it signifies a Rest: and as it belongs unto all Nations: that the time is
a ceremony, and the duties in the time moral: by all which they exclud the
proper time in this 4th com. and yet then again to contradict themselves;
though the time of day be abolished, yet still they will have the day, and a
day out of the 4th com. and a day too of 24 hours long: and though the Sabbath
day, be abolished, as they hold, yet they will have a Sabbath day still, and
out of the 4th com. too: The 10. commandments they call them the Moral Law:
but bring them to this point, of the Sabbath day, and then they are become
partly Moral, partly ceremonial; they might as well say, that that which in
common speech they call white, as the snow, that it is partly white, partly
black. The Papists are blamed for making the 2d com. Jewish and Ceremonial;
and yet say we this 4th Comm. touching the Sabbath day, is Jewish and
Ceremonial: thus having contradicted our selves, then we fall to botching and
cobling of the Commandment; first it is fained that the Lords Sabbath day is
abolished, and worn out of use; and then to repair the loss and breach
again, that there may be a full number of ten Commandments, the 4th comman.
wherein the breach was, must be cobled up again, the new leather where with
all it must be amended, it is the Lords day, and it is put into the room of
the old and over worn Sabbath day: so we have now, a new-old com. or an
old-new com. whither you will; for it is partly old, and partly new. Lastly,
as if all the former were not enough, after sundry contradictions; and after
sundry fine distinctions, whereby they have violently torn a sunder, what the
Almighty has inviolably and inseperablie joined together, at last they cast
them all quite away, abolishing both time, and duties in the time, and
commandment and all: these, with others, which I might reckone up, and with
other violences and abuses, which yet I am to discover, has this one small
portion of Scripture, the 4th com. undergone: I cannot think, any one portion
of Scripture, in controversy betwixt us and Papists, has been more wrested,
and abused by them, then this by us: God amend it. Paul tells Timothy 1. Tim.
1.7. that there were some among them which desiring to be teachers of the law,
understood not what they said, nor whereof they affirmed: This Scripture is
verified of some Teachers in these days, as may appear by the premises; and
as shall yet further appear hereafter.

I come now to the word Remember, and touching this word, a reason may be
demanded, why the Lord should put a Memorandum unto this com. above any others
of the 10? and why the Commandment, should be expressed by this word Remember?
The common reason hereof rendered by diuins is, to prevent carelesnes and
forgetfulness on the six working days, of the Sabbath day, next ensuing;
least men should leave some common works of the six days, to be done on the
7th day Sabbath: this I confess a truth indeed, but this is not all I
suppose: for, if one demands a reason, why God prefixed a Memento to this
Com. more then unto any other of the commandments, this cannot be the reason;
because that by men's not forethinking, of the Sabbath, some works are left
undone on the six days, to be done on the Sabbath day, and so the Sabbath is
profaned, and the 4th com. transgressed: For, seeing that we are in like
danger, of breaking every other of the Commandments, by a carelesnes and a not
forethinking of our duties in them enjoined, it should have been needful
therefore, to have had a Memorandum prefixed, unto every one of the 10. Com. as
well as unto this 4th com. least we break them also, through forgetfulness:
but since a Memorandum is put to this com. and not unto others, such a reason
therefore would be sought, as agrees to this com. and not unto others: Now in
this point, if I may take leave, to deliver mine opinion, I cannot find out a
better reason then this: God foreseeing, that after a long time, that is, about
364 years after Christ (for then was the Sabbath day abolished, by the
Laodicean Counsel, as afterward you shall hear more) this his Sabbath day,
would be not in part violated, and profanely kept; but that it would be
utterly and altogether blotted out of remembrance, in all Christian Churches,
for 1200 years together, as it is to this day; to prevent which forgetfulness
and utter neglect of his Sabbath day, it pleased God, to prefixe a Memento to
this com. that so, if it be forgotten, it might in time, by one means or
other, be brought to remembrance again, which God grant.

If we take a survey of all the 10 Com. we shall find, that nothing commanded
in any of them, is so wholly and utterly buried and forgotten, as is the
Sabbath day, commanded in the 4th com. when they had buried Christ, they laid
a stone upon him, and sealed it, to make all sure, that he might never rise
again; so have they buried the Lords Sabbath day, and least it rise again,
they have cast an heap of stones upon it, calling it Jewish, and Iudaisme, and
a sign and shadow, and a buried abolished ceremony, and what not? and all to
bring it out of remembrance: Now though Papists, have foully forgotten the 2d
com. yet all Protestants remember it well enough, God be thanked: I know not
any one thing in all the 10. Commandments, forgotten by Reformed Churches, but
this one thing only, to wit, the Lords Sabbath day: and as for this; this is
forgotten of all, both Protestants and Papists: it was very needful therefore,
that the Lord should prefixe a Memorandum to this Comman. above and before all
others, that so his Churches might come into a remembrance of his Sabbath day
again.

The Lords Sabbaths are now forgotten, they ley buried in abhorred
forgetfulness, like as a man's body, lies stinking in the grave, God grant
them a speedy and glorious resurrection: they are forgotten, God of his mercy
bring them once again to remembrance. I am but a poor and mean one, every
way low and little, timorouse by nature, stammering in tongue, unfitted for a
business of this nature, so as I durst not adventure upon a business of this
consequence, if by any other means or persons, I could have foreseen any
possibility of a reviving the Lords Sabbaths: but looking about, and seeing
none that would set to his hands, but that still the Lords Sabbaths must
remain in oblivion; I have above and beyond my wonted courage, (as it is
well known) taken unto me a fiery zeal for the Lord of Hoastes; if it be
rashness, I will be rash: if it be folly, I will be a fool, with David; if
I perish, I perish: that small mite, and single Talent, vvherevvith all God
has be trusted me, I will improve it and employ it, to the utmost, for the
reducing Gods Sabbaths, into remembrance again, in his Churches: hitherto, in
comparison of this cause of Gods, I have not counted dear unto me, Wife nor
Children, Friends nor Country, maintenance nor good name; but cheerfully in
regard of the goodness of the cause, have parted with them all more or less;
I have now nothing left, but life and liberty, and these I trust, the same God
that has enabled me, will still; I am in a readincsse, to depart with these
also or either of these, for God, and to seal up his truth with my liefe or
liberty, that so I may once at length attain unto that joyful Crown of
Martyrdom, for bringing Gods Sabbathes, into remembrance again. Remember the
Sabbath day.

A great work requires many hands, and can you, ye Trib of Levy, gaze on,
to se the issue; whilst one, singly and alone, strives beyond his strength;
and labors till out of breath, in Gods quarrel; you neither animating, nor
part taking, nor putting your least finger to the work? I know you can not
plead ignorance, unless it be affected; the point is easy and familiar; were
you but as willing, as able, I could not war alone: said the Angel of the
Lord, curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof: because they
came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, Iud. 5.23. why abidest thou (Levy) among the sheepfoulds, to hear
the bleatings of the flocks, v. 16. come forth, come forth to help the Lord:
the work is mighty, to cause through all Curches, a remembrance of the
Sabbaths of the Lord: it is not a private cause, that a single one only should
combat, the wholl army of Gods host, must take up arms, the cause is public
and universally general: but if nothing will avail; what shall I curse, as
said the Angel of the Lord? no, Christianes must not curse, but bless; I pray
God give them better hearts: it was Paul's case, at my first answer (quoth he)
no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: wherefore with Paul, I pray
God it be not laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4.16. in mean time I faint not, but
fight I do, and fight I will, vhhither with many of with fevv, whilst I have
any breath or being.

And thus far of the Commandment, and of the word Remember.

SECT. VI.
The next words we purpose to speak of shall be these, Six days thou shall
labor, and do all thy work. Touching these words, I purpose to enquire but
after two things; the one is, to know vvhither these words, be a Commandment
or no: the other is, to know which days of our week, these six days here
mentioned are: for the former, some take these words, to be a permission; but
I determine with Perkins, in his Cases of Conscience Page: 106. C. that they be
a Commandment; and his reason shall be my reason, which is this; that they are
a Commandment, because they are propounded in Commanding terms, like as all
Commandments are of the same judgment also is Musculus fol. 62. these words
also, in the days of Christ, were houlden for a commandment; says the Ruler
of the Synagogue, there are six days, in which men ought to work, etc. Luke
13.14. He said men (ought) as of duty, to work in the six days.

If any shall object, that then a man is bound to labor all the 6 days: I
answer it follows not; for, so the Lord said of the Sabbathday, in it thou
shall not do any work, Exodus 20.10. and yet for all that, works of mercy,
and works of necessity may be done: and so here, albeit that God has said,
six days thou shall labor: yet lawful recreationes when necessity is, may
be taken, in the six days.

Yet further, if any shall object, that then we must keep no holy days: if we
must labor the 6 days: I answer it follows not: for, 1. the com. adds
these words, and do all that thou have to do, so that, if a man can so finish
all his works, that he has to do, in less then 6 days, so as no work be
left to do on the Sabbath day, then he may keep that time which he can spare,
for an holy day. 2. it is true that some holy days, may be keept, as Christmas
day, Coronation day, Gunpovvder Treason day, and the like days of public
thanksgiving, and days of public fast, which are one day in a year, not a
day every week; for, we have examples for it in Scripture, Esther. 9.27, Joel.
2.15. now these being extraordinary cases, an exception or dispensation may be
admitted in the com: but what is this to our case? for, the Com. is to be
understood of an ordinary weekly practice, when there is no just and weyghty
cause to the contrary: but the case of holy days, is of a rare and seldom
action, and upon extraordinary occasiones.

The second query shall be to know, which days those are, vvherin God has
commanded us to labor? the answer will be those six days, which were the
first six days of the worlds creation; to wit, those six days whereof we
read, Genes. 1.5.8.13.19.23.31. the which went immediately before the first
Sabbath day, that ever the world saw, the Sabbath day whereon God himself
rested, where of we read, Genes. 2.2.3. these six days, are these: 1.
Sunday. 2. Monday. 3. Tevvsday. 4. Wensday. 5. Thursday. 6. Friday. Now that
these and none other, are the six days, enjoined in the 4th com. is proved.

1. Because else there would be a confusion of Gods 7th day, wherein he rested,
with the other six days; now this must not be, for then God shall be
defeated of his end and purpose, which was to have the 7th day sanctified, as
appears by the 4th com. and that because himself rested on it, Genes. 2.2.3.
but if we keep not the days of the week distinct, it would come to pass,
that we should work sometimes, on that very day, whereon God rested from work,
and which God blessed and Sanctified, for an Holy day. 2. The reason of the
4th com. Exodus 20.11. which God draws from his own example, is by way of
similitude, urging us to tread in Gods steps, to be imitatores, and
followers of him, that is, to labor, when God wrought, and to rest when
God rested: now if we should labor on the 7th day, then slould we not be
like, but unlike to God; for we should work when God did rest, so should we
not imitate God. Wherefore we must choose these six days, which went before
the first 7th day, or Sabbath. 3. It appears by the constant practice of the
Jews until Christ; and by the Jews now living at Amsterdam and elsewhere,
that the 4th com. was to be understood of those very six days, which were
the first in the worlds creation, and which go before our Saturday: for the
Jews ever made, and still do make, these their six vvorking days, Sunday,
Monday, Tewsday, Wednsday, Tursday, and Friday. Yea, since Sabbath day, is a
proper name, and a standing day, by it the other six days may be known. 4.
It appears by the New Testament, for every where, the day of Christ's
resurrection is called the first day, of the week, Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. now
the day of Christ's resurtection is our Sunday, confessed by all sides; so then
our Sunday is the first of those six days, vvherin we ought to labor by the
com. and Friday then will be the last of our six laboring days: having thus
fond out with days of the week, we ought to labor in, we come unto uses
of the point.

Here I might incist, by way of confutation, of that error of Mr. Greenwood;
who stiffly defends it, that these words in this 4th com. Six days thou
shall labor, etc. they are no part of the 4th com. but a part of the 8th
com. as if God had not known how to place his commandementes, but had
mingled some part of the second Table, with the things of the first Table;
and vvrote some part of the 8th Com. in the 4th Com. either God has misplaced
things, or Mr. Greenvvood has mistaken things; but supposing no other divines
will second him, and that the bare mention of this absurdety is enough to
confute it, I pass on.

The first use of this point, is for the discovery of the error of many, who
being urged by the 4th Com. to keep the 7th day for the Sabbath: they answer,
that Sunday, or the Lords day is the 7th day, to them: for they labor the six
days which go before the Sunday. To whom I reply, that albeit Sunday is the
7th day to them, yet is it not the 7th day to God: for that day, which they
count the 7th day, the same day, God ever counted for the first day; our
Sunday, is the first day of the week in a divine account, not the 7 day and
last, as we have proved: wherefore whosoever rekoneth Sunday for the 7th day,
he follovveth an vnvvarrantable and humane account, and forsakes the Scripture
account, which calls Sunday, the first day of the week constantly; now in
divine matters, we must follovv a divine account, and in Gods matters, we
must take Gods account: again, whosoever rekoneth Sunday for the 7th day, and
therefore rests on Sunday, he does not imitate God, in resting when he
rested, and in vvorking when he wrought; according as is prescribed in the 4th
comm. but rather he crosses and thwarteth God, by resting when God wrought;
and vvorking when God rested: for on our Sunday we rest, but on our Sunday
God wrought; in that he began the first days work in the creation upon our
Sunday, making the light on this day, Genes. 1.4.5. again, we cross God on
our Saturday, for in it, we work, but in it God rested; yea, this day, God
blessed it and sanctified it for an holy day, Genes. 2.2.3. and yet this day
we profane it, and make it a working day. Thus it is plain, that it is a
foul error in any to count our Sunday, or Lords day, the 7th day, and so a
Sabbath or resting day, when as it is one of the Six laboring days, and so a
working day.

The second use of this point, is for information: for if by the 4th Com. our
six days, to wit, Sunday, Monday, Tewsday, Wensday, Thursday, and Friday, be
those six days, wherein we are to work, after the example of God; then it
follovveth, that no day of the week can be the Sabbath day, or Resting day,
but Saturday, the 7th day. This is to be noted against all those, who by their
vain glosses, would expound the 4th com. so, as if some other day of the
week, besides Saturday, might be the Sabbath day by the 4th Com. now this
cannot be, seeing God has appointed all the days of the week besides
Saturday, for working days.

The third use of this point, is for confutation: is it so, that our Sunday, or
Lords day, is by Gods com. a working day, it being one of the six days, and
the first of them; how un advised then are those which go about to set up,
and uphold the Sunday or Lords day, for a Sabbath day, and resting day weekly?
when God appointed it for a vvorking day, and also gave it us under his own
example; himself vvorking on it, for our imitation: neither can any answer,
that this law, six days thou shall labor: was a Ceremony and shadow, and
so abolished by Christ: for there is no grownd for that in scripture: the
contrary is rather manifest, for what God did at the creation in vvorking on
our Sunday, Christ our Savior ratefied at the redemption; for being risen from
the dead; upon our Sunday, the day of his resurrection, he travailed, and two
of his disciples also, a matter of 15 miles, Luke 24.13. wherefore Sunday is a
travailing day, a working day, whother you respect Gods example, at the
Creation; or Gods 4th Comm. upon Mount Sinay; or Christ's example and his
Disciples after the Redemption.

But chiefly and principally, I mind to urge this use against some Ministers,
who do again notoriously abuse this 4th com. by proving out of it, an
institution for the Lords day, or Sunday, to be a Sabbath: these men seem for
the time, to have laid aside both wit, and learning: are they not ashamed, to
go about to wrest that Com. to speak for, and command the Sunday, to be kept
for a Sabbath and resting day, the which does expressly command the contrary?
For, this branch of the com. Six days thou shall labor. Does command labor
on the six days; Now the first of these six laboring days, is our Sunday or
Lords day: now was it ever heard before, that one commandment, should
command contrary things? or that one part of a commandment, should command us
to labor, on the first day of the week, and an other part of it, command us,
to rest from labor on the same first day of the week? is this to deal
honestly and faithfully with the word of God in expounding it, to make it
contradict it self; and that not in diverse places, but in one and the same
text? I see it is not without cause, that the Scriptures command people, to
Try all things, 1. Thessal. 5.21. and so they had need do, least they drink
in poison, in stead of an healthful potion.

Thus I have discovered an other shameful abuse of this 4th com. wherefore,
when hereafter you shall hear any of these, preach for the Lords day, and
prove it to be a Sabbath day, out of the 4th com. then think of this use,
collected from these words, Six days shall thou labor. Yea, when you hear
them press men's consciences for the Lords day, to keep it holy, and rest from
work; because the 4th Com. says, Remember the Sabbath day: do you then call
to mind, that this day which they urge so, it is not named Sabbath day, but
Lords day or Sunday; now the 4th com. says not, Remember the Lords day etc.
but Remember the Sabbath day etc. and further call to mind, that the 4th com.
says, Six days shall thou work: one of which six days is the Lords day:
How then can these men urge me to rest upon the Lords day, which is one of the
6 days, and that by the 4th com. when the same com. bids me to labor on
the Lords day, as being one of the six laboring days? Thus if people will be
wise, these Ministers, if they will deceive, they shall but deceive themselves.

SECT. VII.
We have finished the former, and affirmative part of the com. we now come to
the latter, and negative part in these words, But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work etc. See the
same repeated Exodus 31.15. Exodus 35.2. Exodus 16.26.28. Exodus 23.12. Leuit.
23.3. Deuteronomy. 5.14. in which textes, the 7th day is delivered in praeceptiue and
commanding terms, prohibiting straightly, the profanation of it by vvorking,
and that upon pain of death etc. In this negative part of the Com. I will
incist by way of exposition, only upon the word seventh: for the true sense
of this word, we must note that there are two sorts of numbers, a Cardinal,
and an Ordinall: the Cardinal number runeth thus, one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven etc. The Ordinall number runeth thus, the first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh etc. the due understanding whereof,
brings much light to this point; as for the Cardinal number, be it four,
six, or seven, it comprizeth all and every one of the number; as all the four,
all the six, all the seven: but now the ordinall number, it ever notifieth
but one of the number, and that is ever the last of the number also; for
example, The Third, it compriseth not all the Three, but only one of the
Three: again it signifies not the second, nor the first, but the third,
which is the last of that number. 2. The fourth, it compriseth not all the 4,
but only some one of the 4; again it points not to the second, or third of
the number, but to the fourth only, which is the last of the number. Now to
apply this, we must know that this word in the 4th com. (seventh) it is not
a cardinal, but an ordinall number, the property whereof is to notify one
only, and also the last of the number; wherefore, when the Lord said, But
the seventh day is the Sabbath, etc. hereby he gave us to understand, that he
meant it of the last day of the week, and of the last day of that number, not
of the third day, nor of the sixth day, but of that which is last of the
number, to wit, the Seventh day. And if you would know which day of our
week this 7th day is, see all the 4 Evangelists, calling the Lords day of
resurrection, which is our Sunday, the first day of the week; if then our
Sunday be the first day of the week, then reckone onewards, and Saturday
will be this seventh day; and also the last of the number.

Come we now unto the uses of the point, and first, is it so, that this 7th
day, is commanded, and delivered in preceptiue and commanding terms, as has
been proved by sundry textes of Scripture; then this bevvraieth the folly and
madness of some Divines, who seeing that here the Lord God does so directly
point at the Saturday for his Sabbath, as they have no way to avoid it.
Hereupon they fall to a blasphemouse denial, saying, that these words, But
the 7th day, is the Sabbath of the Lord, in it thou shall not do any work,
etc. are no part of the 4th com. and that they are nothing but appurtenances
forsooth; these men will take away no less at once, then the Negative part of
a Com. they would have no more in the 4th com. but these words, Remember the
Sabbath day, to sanctify it. I might easily show them, that these words, Sabbath
day, and seventh day, are used promiscuosly, so as take away the one, and
take away the other, grant the one, and grant both, see Exodus 20.11. Exodus
23.12. Luke 13.14. yea, they be used both, to notify one and the same day; like
as Lords day, and Sunday, be both names for our first day of the week, so are
Sabbath day, and, seventh day, names for Saturday the last day of our week,
if the one then belongs not unto us, no more does the other; and if the one be
a part of the Com. so must be the other also.

But by these and the like euasions, they will by hoocke or by kroocke, as we
say, by one bad means or an other, reject the proper day, and time of the 4th
Comm. and yet their very consciences tell them, that the duties of rest and
holiness, which were commanded together with the time and day, and in the
self same com. do belong unto us: now what an absurd thing it is, for any
to go about to divorce, separate, and disioyne, those things which God has
married as it were and joined together? in the 4th Com. God joins together
the time, and the duties to be performed in the time: now what God has
joined together, let no man put assunder. They think the duties commanded to
the Jews, are descended to us, but not the time, wherein those duties were to
be performed: this conceit of theirs, is much like absurd to these; as if an
house should descend to the heir, but not the grownd whereon it stands: or, as
if a bond of 10l paiable to the father upon the 7th day of May; some Lawyers
should be of opinion that the some of money indeed, to wit, the 10l. is
descended to his son, after his decease but not the time and day of its
payment, mentioned in the bond: or, where as our Savior taught the Jews his
Disciples, in the 4th petition of his prayer, saying, give us this day our
daily bread, to beg for two things, the one is bread, the other is the day, and
time when to have it, to wite, this day: some Ministers should imagine that
indede the petition concerning bread is Moral, and concerns us Christian
Gentiles; but for the day and time, that they would have it this day, that's
Ceremonial, and belonged only unto those Jews the Disciples of Christ, not
unto us: just thus, deal our Ministers now, with Gods 4th Comm. the duties
belong to us, say they, but the time concernd the Jews only, not us: never
were there any Expositions more absurd, then are our Expositions of the 4th
Com. no, for absurdety, popish Jesuits themselves cannot out stripp us: rather
then fail, a part of the Com. shall be denied too.

A second use may be for confutation of such Ministers as will by one means or
other, so falsely expound these words in the Negative part of the Com. which
mention the 7th day, as they will make the people strongly believe, that God
means the 8th day, or the first day: as if God had not known how to
speak, but when he names the 7th day, he means the 8th day; when he
speaks of the 7th and last day of the week, yet he means the 8th or first
day of the week: who would think these to be faithful expounders of Gods
word? there are arguments and lights enough in the Com. as has been shovvn,
whereby one that is but vvilling, may see which day of the week God meant.
Nevertheless, whatsoever can be said to the contrary, these men vvil apply and
urge this 4th com. hardly upon men's consciences for the 8th day, or Lords day;
as if the 7th day, and the 8th day were all one: may it not truly be said of
such Ministers, as once the Lord spoke of those priests, Her priests have
wrested the Law, Zepha. 3.4.

This use may also be pressed against the people, for suffering them selves to
be thus deluded, and blinded: it seems they observe not the rule of the
Apostle to Try al things: nor the practice of the Bereanes, to search the
Scriptures, to see if the things be so, or not: but they handouer head, take
all that is spoken for gospel, if the Minister be an honest man, in their
repute. As S. Paul said, O ye folish Galatians, who has bewiched you, that ye
should not obey the truth? so may I say to many English people; O folish
Auditoures, who has bewitched you, that ye should not understand the truth?
do ye not know the right hand from the left, the 7th day, from the 8th? the
beginnig of the week from the end? vvil you suffer your selves so to be
abused, that a Com. for the 7th day, you should be brought to believe that it
binds your consciences, to the 8th day? finally it seems you choose rather
to believe man then God; for God says in express words, the 7th day is the
Sabbath: but many Ministers say, the 8th day is the Sabbath: now vvhither of
these tvvaine, you give more credit unto, your selves shall be Judges.

I know well they think to salve up the matter with a distinction of a 7th and
the 7th: and so our 8th day, may be a 7th day, though not the 7th day. But we
must know there is a Divine account, and an humane account, now in divine
matters we are to hold us to a divine and scripture account, not to such a
one as we may forge out of our own brains, beginnig at what day of the
week we please for the first of our 7. Now forasmuch as God uses to begine
at our Sunday or Lords day, for the first of the 7; both at the Creation,
Genes. 1.5. and after the Redemption, Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. Luke 24.1. Ioh.
20.1. Act. 20.7. if we will rekone the days of the week, as God rekoneth
them, and begin where he begins, we must count our Sunday or Lords day,
for the first day of the week, or of the Seven; which being so, rekone
forwards, and you cannot possibly make, any day of the week the 7th, besides
Saturday: yea, Saturday is the 7th day, even in Nature, for it is the 7th day
from the Creation: yea, Saturday is also the 7th day, in a Christian account,
if you rekone from the Redemption; for Sunday or our Lords day, being the day
of Christ his Resurrection, vvherin he had finished our Redemption, and this
Lords day, being the first day of the week in a Christian account, for all
Christianes so count it, and so did the 4 Evangelists, Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2.
Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.19. count forwards and Saturday must needs be the 7th
day, to wit, the 7th day from the Redemption: so that Saturday is the 7th day
every way, both from the Creation, and from the Redemption: wherefore, they
who talk so of a 7th day, as if any day of the week might be a 7th day, they
are never able to show us, any day of the week, to be a 7th in Scriptures
account, but Saturday, what a folly is it then for them to talk of a 7th day,
as if Sunday might beit? and yet so they talk, saying we keep a 7th day, on
Sunday, though not the 7th day: it is a 7th day indeed, but a 7th of their
own devise, but never of Gods allowance.

Some expound these words, the seventh day, to be meant thus one of seven: some
one day of the 7. but what is this better, or other, then to say a 7th? for
both ways they make Gods certain time, to be uncertain: for God spoke of the
7th day, which is for certain the last day of the number and week, not of
some one day or other uncertainly.

This one thing is to be noted, as a great folly in the Patrones of the Lords
day, they will have a Sabbath in Remembrance of the Redemption, as the Jews
had in memory of the Creation; and this their new Sabbath also, that it may
stand by the 4th Comm. it must be on a 7th day; and yet they cannot tell where
to find a 7th day, in any divine account for it, unless it be Saturday, which
they abhor; and therefore in room of a 7th day, whereon they tell us, they
have at last lighted on a first day; are they not near the matter think you?
furthermore, they abhor the 7th day from the Creation, for their new Sabbath;
well then, I would gladly know of them, whence they would have a 7th day; it
must be either a 7th day from the Creation, or a 7th day from the Redemption;
there is no third to be imagined: I know they will choose a 7th day from the
Redemption; well then, since Sunday or Lords day, is the day whereon Christ
rose, and so the first day of Redemption, vvherin he brought light and liefe
into the world; let them rekone onwards, and Saturday (though it greeueth
them) will be the 7th day, from the Redemption: wherefore, if they will be like
them selves, Saturday must be their new Sabbath day, if they will keep a 7th
day from the Redemption, in remenbrance of it.

Saturday, is not only the 7th day from the Creation, but also from the
Redemption; wherefore, what day can be more fit for a new Sabbath, then
Saturday? for it answers both to the Creation, and to the Redemption, being
the 7th day from both: how fitly then might the memory of both Creation, and
Redemption, be celebrated both together, upon one day, to wit, Saturday every
way the 7th day?

To conclude, suppose we, that Christ had left a commandment for the Lords
day, in these words, Remember the Lords day to sanctify it, etc. but the
first day is the Lords day, etc. should not they be censured for corrupters and
wresters of the Scriptures, who would attempt so to expound this first day,
which is Sunday or Lords day, as it might be understood of Monday the second
day, which is the day after? why just so do they now deal with Gods 4th
comm. it says, Remember the Sabbathday, etc. but the seaueuth day, is the
Sabbath day etc. And yet they will make the 8th day, which is the day after,
to be the Seventh day: why might not the second day be understood, when
Christ said the first day, as well as the 8th day, when God said the 7th day?

SECT. VIII.
The last thing in this 4th com. to be handled is the reason of it in these
words, for in six days the Lord made the heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, and rested the 7th day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it, Exodus 20.11.

In these words, or in this reason to the com. these things are considerable,
1. That God blessed and hallowed the 7 h day. 2. The reason moving God, to
hallow it. 3. How these words, are a reason to the 4th comm. as for this third
thing, it shall be handled in a Section by it self. For the first, that God
sanctified the 7th day, or Saturday Sabbath: see this plainly in this 4th com.
Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Exodus 20.11. see
it also Genes. 2.3. So God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it. So then,
this Saturday, 7th day, Sabbath, is a blessed and a sanctified day: look what
God has blessed, it shall be blessed: and what God has sanctified, it must be
holy; the Saturday, 7th day, Sabbath therefore, is an holy Time, an holy day.
Thus Musculus fol. 62. God might (says he) have commanded only the acts and
doings of the day, but to set out the matter more pithilie, he said, Remember
that thou sanctify the day of the Sabbath: He charge that the day it self
shall be reputed holy. Where Musculus does not only affirm, that the time and
day was as well commanded, as those duties in the day, of rest and holy
exercises; but also says, that the day it self is an holy day. Neither is
this day holy, by any man's hallovving or sanctifying of it, but by the proper
work of God himself; for, says these textes, the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and sanctified it: and, God blessed the 7th day, and sanctified it. Hereby
we see, how God has chosen out the Saturday for an holy day, above all days
of the week; and God having made it an holy day, he has thereby put as much
difference betwixt it, and other days of the week, as was wont to be
betwixt A Priest, and a common man: the Temple, and their common housen: and as
is now betwixt Sacramental bread, and common bread at our tables. Hence it is,
that Saturday the 7th day, is called, the Sabbath of the Lord Exodus 20.10. and,
the holy of the Lord, Isa. 58.13. and, my holy day, Isa. 58.13. and my Sabbath,
Isa. 56.4. How meanly soever times now count of this day, yet you see by these
names, and Epithites, how God esteemed of it.

I come to the second thing considerable, which is the reason which moved God,
to hallovv this 7th day, Saturday, Sabbath: the reason then why God sanctified
this day, it was, because himself had rested on this day, from his great and
miraculouse work of the Worlds creation; see this most evidently Genes. 2.3.
So God blessed the 7th day, and sanctified it, because that in it, he had
rested from all his work. You see one reason then, of the Sabbaths
institution and consecration: thus A Kingdom, does solemnize the Coronation
day, because on that day the King came to his Crown: men keep their Birth
days, and Marriage days, because on those days they were borne, and married:
Those Jews Ester. 9. kept the days of Purim, because of their deliverance
from Hamans conspiracy.

I come now to the uses of these two points: and first, is it so, that
therefore God sanctified the Saturday, 7th day, Sabbath, because that in it he
had rested from all his work; why then say some men, it matters not which
day, we give God for a Sabbath, so be we give him one etc? Here was a reason
you see, moving God to set apart Saturday, rather then Sunday, or any other
day, to wit, because he had rested on that day: and had God a reason moving him
to make a choice of days then, and is there no reason at all now, but one day
may be as meet as an other? has length of time, worn this reason out of use?
will any say, it matters not which day we keep for Coronation day, birth day,
or Marriage day? for Christ's Passion day, resurrection day, or ascension day?
Is there not some reason even in these, for one day above all others? even so,
is there not a reason, why the 7th day, should be solemnized and rested on
above all others, since that God solemnized it, and rested on it; and did
therefore bless it, and sanctify it, because himself had Rested in it? I
desire this may be observed, by such as expound the com. to be meant of one of
seven: that is, of one day of the 7, or of some one day of the 7 or other? as
if God had made no choice, or difference of days; and as if God had as well
sanctified Sunday, monday, tewsday etc. and made them Holy days, as Saturday
his sacred day.

There are besides others, these reasons why we should celebrate this day,
rather then any other, 1. because on this day God rested, and not on any of the
other 6 days; and we must imitate God. 2. God hallowed and sanctified this
day, and so he did not honor any other of the six days; but appointed them
for work. 3. God had special reason to sanctify this day, because himself
had rested on it; but he had no reason so to sanctify any of the six days,
for he rested not on those, but wrought on them. 4. God commanded this day in
special to be sanctified by his 4th comm. which were reason enough for us to
put a difference of days, if we had none other. We see then, it is a
friuolouse objection, to say the least of it, for men to say, it matters not so
much, which day we give God for his Sabbath, so be he has one. God is in love
with his own choice, no day can so please him, as his own chosen day. The
Jews might as well have said, so be we offer Sacrifice in an house, and by a
man, it matters not which house, nor what man: yet God had chosen his Temple
before all Housen, and his Priests above all men, therefore they durst not
alter Gods choice. Might not we as well say now, it matters not so much what
man ministers the Sacraments, so be a man does it: nor what we drink at the
Lords Supper, so it be liquor? do we not abhor such objections? If we will
keep a Sabbath by the 4th com. we must betake us to such a day only, unto
which this reason of the Sabbaths institution mentioned in the 4th com. does
properly belong: it cannot be said of any of the other 6 days Sunday, Monday,
Tewsday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, that God blessed or sanctified any of
them, because he had Rested on them: if therefore we choose any of these 6
days, 1. we keep a day which God did not bless nor sanctify for that end.
2. We defeat and disapoint God, of his maine reason and end, which moved him
to ordain and command the Sabbath, to bless it and to sanctify it; for,
because God had rested on the 7th day, which is Saturday, Therefore the Lord
blessed the 7th day, and hallowed it, Genes. 2.2.3. I pray let this point be
well observed, for it is of great consequence.

Use 2. is it so, that God has sanctified and hallowed, this 7th day,
Saturday, Sabbath; how is it come about, that this sacred time, is now every
where in all Churches so strangly profaned? for, as those Jews, dealt then
with the Temple, they bought in it, and sold in it, and changed their money in
it, Mat. 21.12. So do we now profane the Saturday Sabbath, by having markets
therein, by buying and selling therein; yea, we refuse not to do the most
base, seruill, drudgery works, that the Kitchine has, on the Lords Sabbath
day: we are far unlike our heavenly Father in the use of this day; he
sanctified it, we profane it; he rested on it, we work on it; he commanded us
to Remember it, we forget it. These things considered, it is high time for
every man, to make a search and inquisition, to know what is become of the Lords
Sabbath? and to be well informed of the reason. why the Lords Sabbaths are now
forgotten, and so strangly profaned: The Priests lips must preserve
knowledge, and people must seek the law, at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. Wherefore
I advise people, to have recourse to their Ministers in this matter, and in
most seriouse manner demand of them what is become of the Lords Sabbaths? and by
what warrant this sacred time, is now so profaned? and if they cannot for the
present give you a sound reason, desire them to take it into consideration, and
to study the point better, that so a full satisfaction may be given to Gods
people in this matter, or else a reformation may be sought: it is no dallying;
the matter is weighty; that a sacred day, so hallowed by God, should be now so
profaned, it stands every man upon, to have sound arguments for it, unless
he will be guilty of the sin of profaning Gods Sabbaths, weekly, and
transgression of the 4th com. and sleiting Gods example and president.

This one thing I dare confidently auovvch, that no Minister is able to show,
any text of holy writ, which does necessarily abolish this 7th day Sabbath: as
for those textes Coloss. 2.16. Exodus 31.13. which are their maine textes,
there is no necessity at all in them, for abolition of the Moral Sabbath; for
there be answers enough to them, and sufficient enough, (as shall be seen
hereafter, when we come to answer to all their objections) if those that
oppose God in his Sabbaths, did but please to retain them, and to sanctify
them: I am confident therefore, that it is nothing but their mere wills, and
pleasures, that makes them inueigh against the Lords Sabbaths: Let people
therefore see to it, what manner of arguments and reasons, they admit of from
their Ministers, for their profaning of the Lords Sabbaths, which he has
hallowed and sanctified; let not every trifling probable argument be auailable,
having but some liklihod to be so; but let them call for such solid and
substantial reasons, as do prove the abolishing of the Sabbath day
necessarily, clearly, and undeniably, to the full satisfying of their
consciences; and let Ministers give them no reasons here, for their justifiable
profaning of the Lords hallowed Sabbath, but such as will hold current, before
God, at the day of judgment, when God shall call for an account of his sacred
time, and holy Sabbaths: neither let the people rest satisfied, till they have
such reasons, for their profanation of the Sanctified 7th day Sabbath, as they
do verily believe are sound and warrantable, and such as God will accept at
their hands, when they shall be questioned therefore, before his Tribunal:
for no probable contingent, and doubtful arguments, will then pass for
current, against an express commandment, and so ancient and sacred an
ordinance, as is Gods Sabbath. I conclud this point, with those words of the
voice from heaven to Peter Act. 10.15. The things that God has purified,
pollute thou not. So say I to Ministers, when your people repair unto you, for
reasons, to justify them in the profanation of the Lords sacred and holy
Sabbaths; have a care, least you dravv all the guilt of Sabbath breaking, and
the sin of transgression of the 4th com. upon your own souls, and that by
your reasons, you do not pollute the things, which God has sanctified and
purified, the Lords Sabbaths I mean: the things that God has sanctified,
pollute thou not.

SECT. IX.
I come now to the 3d thing considerable in the reason to the 4th com.
mentioned in these words, For, in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the 7th day: Therefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. These words six days, you have them
twice mentioned in this 4th com. the first time they are mentioned, is in
Exodus 20.9. and there they are to be considered as a commandment: for they are
delivered in commanding terms. The second time, you have them mentioned, is in
Exodus 20.11. and here they are to be considered as a reason: and so much is
manifest by the rational particle (for) prefixed as you see. Wherefore now
we are to consider of these words, as they are a reason urged by God, to
induce us to the Sanctifying of his Saturday, 7th day, Sabbath, commanded in
this 4th comm. and the reason is to be applied to the com. on this manner. 1.
On the 7th day thou shall rest from thy labors; because I the Lord thy God at
the Creation, rested from my work on the same day, or on the 7th day. 2. On
the six days thou shall labor and finish all thy works, so as nothing be
left to be done on the 7th day: because on the six days, I the Lord thy God
did work, and finish all, leaving nothing to be done on the 7th or Sabbath
day. Thus stands the reason, in relation to the com. as I conceive it: as in
the former part of the 4th comm. God presses us to the observation of the
Saturday Sabbath, by virtue of the 4th com. in commanding terms, saying,
Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it, so in the latter part thereof, God
presses us to the observation of the same day, by his own example: so then,
if either precept, or president will avail with us; if either an imperiouse
commandment, or a sweet and gentle reason will avail any thing with us, then
we must keep Gods Saturday Sabbath: and such with whom neither Gods
commandment, no nor yet his pattern and example proposed for us to follow,
will prevail, they show themselves not children of God, but rebels to God.

God is pleased many times, in Scripture, to propound himself for our
pattern, as 1. Pet. 1.15. As he which has called you, is holy, so be ye holy,
etc. Our Savior Christ exhorts us, to do good to those which harm us, that
so we may be the children of our heavenly father etc. and then he concludes
thus, you shall therefore be perfect, as your father which is in heaven, is
perfect, Matthew. 5.48. and so in this 4th com. God has set forth himself for
our pattern, saying, Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it; for I the Lord
sanctified it: on the 7th day, thou shall rest; for, on the 7th day, I the Lord
rested: if therefore you will be led by reasons, as reasonable men should, then
let Gods reason take place with you; or if you will be led by examples, let
Gods example be of force with you, to keep his Saturday Sabbath: Wherefore
laying aside Gods commandment, I now urge only Gods reason upon you; and Gods
example upon you; exhorting you in the words of the Apostle, Be ye therefore
followers of God, as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. He kept the Sabbath day, do
you so too. But if yet you shall enquire which is the day? I answer, see but
which day of the week it was, on which God rested at the Creation, Genes.
2.2.3. and that is the day which God persvvadeth us to keep: else it were
impertinent, for God to persuade us to keep the 8th or 9th day, because he
kept the 7th day. The premises and the conclusion, must be understood of the
same thing, as Logiceans know well; the 7th day, therefore is the day, to wit,
the 7th day from the creation, which is Saturday; for on this day God rested,
and to this day God persuaded us.

The use of this point is for the just reproof of our times, with whom
neither precept, nor president will prevail; for, neither Gods commandment,
nor Gods example, can do any thing now a days, no nor yet Gods reasons can
move any whit; if any of these 3, or if all of them together, would take place
with us, behold, we have them all in this 4th com. For 1. God commanded the
Sabbath day. 2. God kept it himself. 3. He allureth us by a strong reason,
taken from his ensample, and noted by the particle for. How could a point be
more thoroughly pressed? of all sorts of people, which come under this
reproof, I find none more guilty, then some of the Clergy; for as for the
Laity, though they be guilty hereof, yet a little matter would soon reclaim
them, but as for these of the Clergy, they are intoxicated, and even drunken
with reason and Sophistry; for Gods reason, which he uses here in this com. to
allure men to keep his Sabbaths, it is with them as no reason; for, either
they will make this reason, no part of Gods comman. or but as some needless
appendix unto it; or let it stand still for a cipher, as no reason at all; and
so they make a show to embrace Gods 4th com. but not his reason which he
added to the same commandment; it is the property of an unreasonable man, to
reject Gods reasons. Or else, by their subtle use of reason, they can toss
it, as a man does a Tennis bale, from one day, unto another, as if the reason
must run thus; Therefore God blessed and sanctified the 7th day, because we
should keep the 8th day: therefore God hallowed the Sabbath day, because we
should sanctify the Lords day. As absurd as it is, for the conclusion to be
understood of one day, and the premises of an other, yet can they put some
culler or other on it, whereby the simple, yea and themselves too, are
deceived: and this deceit is the more dangerouse, in that it is cullered over
with a show of learning; common people verily believe, that because they are
so learned and conscionable, therefore they use their learning and conscience
in every matter they meddle withal; I wish it were so; Oh that Lot, David, and
Peter had always used that knowledge and conscience, that was in them?

Were it the common people that violated Gods Sabbathes, we could soon check
them with the 4th com. and with the example, and reason of Almighty God, to
the contrary: but now since it is the syne of Ministers, no bonds, nor reasons
of God, can hold them; for they have fond out so many distinctions, and
answers, and obiectiones, as they can both violate and profane the Sabbath day;
and yet again make God and man believe, that they keep the Sabbath day; as
you see none cale more for it then they, witness their Sermons; so these can
profane Gods Sabbathes, with a grace; they can do it, and defend it when they
have done; they can do it and never blush at it: these therefore are in a most
dangerouse, and well nigh desperate case, small hope of repentance. This one
thing I demand of them, let them put all their lerning, and all their honesty
together, and try, if by them both, they can tell how to apply this example
and reason, which God adds here to this 7th day Sabbath, unto their 8th day,
and Lords day Sabbath.

God has urged his Sabbaths 1. with a Memorandum prefixed to them, more then
to any other thing Commanded. 2. with a Commandment. 3. with his own example.
4. with a strong reason. what may be the reason, why these Clerks professing
to be Masters of reason and Arts, should not see or acknowledge these most
reasonable things? or should so foully misapply them, as formerly we have
shovvne they do? It cannot be the difficulty of the point, for that's easy and
familiar: nor can it be the strength of Scriptures, against the Lords Sabbaths,
for the abolishing them; for they have none necessarily proving that point: nor
can it be the strength of Scriptures for the alteration of the day, for they
have none to that purpose neither: wherefore it must needs follow, that the
eyes of their reason, are blinded with some sinister and by respects or other:
I will propound some, and let their own hearts judge whither I have hit the
mark or not.

Many look upon the antiquity of the point rather then upon Gods
Commandment; verily believing, the abolishing of the 7th day Sabbath, and the
erecting of the Lords day Sabbath, cannot possible be an error, it is so
ancient; as if error could no be ancient.

Many look upon the universality of the point, (an other Popish argument)
verily believing, it cannot possibly be an error, which is so universally
received, espetially many of them being religiouse and Godly men: as if a Godly
man could not err.

Many look upon the learning, of such as have professed it, (an other Popish
argument) as if learned men could not err. Thus, they that look asquint, at
these by respects, when they go to judge of the case in question, rather then
at those 4 maine things even now propounded to be considered in Gods 4th Com.
it is no marvel they cannot see the vvood for Trees.

Many look before they will read my book, or scane the point, at the utter
impossibility of any reformation; (as if our days were worse then ever were
any before) and therefore they have no mind to understand it; thus they look
upon Gods matters with carnal eyes; who, in other cases teach men to do
their duty and leave the success to God: should all men tread their steps,
they would make all sure against any reformation, since they will receive no
information.

Some are of opinion, that God will vvincke at us, as he did at the Patriarks
having many vviues; since it is the practice of all Churches, to do as we do;
and therefore they will go on, regardlesse of any further knowledge of the
point: But such men may live in adultery at this day, upon the same growndlesse
opinion, if but many others would consent and join with them in this wicked
practice, so as they might but have this plea, that all men do so, or that all
Curches do so. (I would not be thought to speak at rouers, and to guess only
in these objections and by respects, at what men may think; for these mine
ears have heard men make the most of these objections which here I propound.)

Many before they will open the door of their understanding, to this point,
first cast in their minds, what a scandale it will be to their Ministry,
what a discredit to their persons, that they have misledd the people so long;
and therefore judge it better to go on still as they have begun, they shall
answer all, a swell as their forefathers who have done the like: and their
people, shall get to heaven in this (wrong) way, as well as the people of
former times did; and therefore they will none of the knowledge of this point:
but I should think, people would more rely upon their Ministers honesty and
fidelity, and credit their Ministry more, if they saw them so far to neglect
themselves and their credit, as for Gods glory, and the good of their people,
to reveal a truth to them, though it cross what they had formely taught them.

Many think, what shall I learn? what I that have thaught others? and now in
mine old age? it is better to hold this for an error, and so to reject all
thoughts of it: but I should esteem that man not worthy to teach others, who
scorneth to learn of others.

Many think, if they should give any way to the knowledge of this point, they
should but disturb the peace of the Church, and we are now at a sweet
concord; it is better therefore to be ignorant of it, etc. But by this reason,
we might have remained all Papists unto this day; for had our forefathers,
upon this grownd rejected Luthers doctrine, had we not all been deeply guilty
still, of the syne and breach of the second Com. and Popish Idolatry? yea, and
what I pray is this better, then gross temporizing, and pleasing of the times?

Many think, possibly it may come to pass, that the profession of this point,
may cost them loss or hazard of their livings, whereby they are now comfortable
maintained; and therefore it is good, not to be first in the knowledge and
profession hereof; they think they may know it soon enough 10 or 20 years
hence to their cost, let others break the ye in the mean time. But these men
set more by a good living, then by a good conscience: they love to serve God,
but it shall be no further, then they may serve their own turns: they will
serve God, if they be suer once, it will cost them nothing.

Many think, it is not safe to be acquainted with this point, least it
entangle their consciences, etc. But these men, whilst they seem to be of
tender consciences, bewray they have no conscience, or very corrupt
consciences: for, if they had any conscience, or any good conscience, would it
suffer them to refuse such a light in to Gods Law, as would cause them to
make a conscience of it? were Gods Laws, and the knowledge of them made (think
you) to entangle men's consciences? do not Ministers and people both, pray and
use means, to increase in knowledge of Gods Laws; and are they now afraid
of the knowledge them, when of tendered unto them least their consciences should
be entangled with them?

Many think, happily it is a truth, and it were not amiss if it were
preformed; for we have little to say for our Lords day; and as little against
the Sabbathday: but that such a mean obscure fallow, as this Brabourne is,
who is such and such; we know him well enough, both what he is, and what
he was, etc. that such a one should attempt this reformation, our Spirits
cannot brook it: But brethren, I have often and still do vvish unfeignedly in
many respects, that God had put it into the heart of some other man, an
eminent person, to have informed in this case, that so my meandness, should
have been no impediment, to the progress of Gods cause, but God is wont to
glorify himself by weak instruments, that so the praise may be to God, and
not to the instrument: that our times are no changlinges; that they differ not
from former times, shall appear by a story I read of in Peter Heylyns
Microcosmos page 291. where it is thus reported; In the time of Luthers
reformation, one Matheo Langie A Cardinal, and A Bishop, of A Bishopric, of
the greatest reuenews, of any in all Germany, ingenuously confessed, that the
Mass was not void of its faults; that the Courts of Rome were corrupted, and
that a general reformation, of the lives of priests and friars, was necessary:
But that a poor, rascal Munke (for so he thought Luther, says the Author)
should begin all; that he deemed intolerable, and not to be endured. Thus
you see, scandal has formerly been taken, at the meandness of the person:
great Clerks, will neither attempt the reformation of abuses them selves, nor
yet can they bear it, that their inferioures should do any thing neither: the
reason I take to be, because in the former, they are in danger to loose their
greatness, in the latter, to loose their goodness: it is lamentable to see,
how now a days, the word and truth of God, is receined with respect of
persons, and that among the best, both Ministers and people: they inquire not
now a days, what he says: and how agreeablie to the rule of Gods word
he speaks: but, what is he? whence comes he? is he a lofte in the
world? benifised with a good living? richly attired? is he a man of note? can
he coutenance us? and the point he speaks for? these, and the like carnal
and childish respects, have Christians, in receiving Gods word; it would
discourage any man almost, that is less then A Doctor of Divinity, and of the
highest rank for honor and vvorldly dignities, to be industriouse in the
study of the Scriptures, so as thereby to ad further light unto profession;
because what he says shall be as meanly accounted of, as his person is: S.
James says. my brethren, have not the says of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons Iam. 2.1.

Who that looks upon these so many stumbling blocks, with many others that
might be shown, can wonder, that men of a sharp sight, yea and holy liefe,
should have their eye sight daz^lled, and not see such a truth, as is
encountered with so many difficulties: were it such a truth, as the knowledge
and public profession thereof, would stand with antiquity, universality,
public applause and approbation, facility of reformation, credit and
reputation, liueings and preferments, then should I wonder and vvonder again,
if Ministers should not find it out presently. and profess it publikly: but
this is such a truth, as is at the first thoughts of it, oppugned by a whole
army of gain saying objections, all which, are preualent with manes natural
corruptiones: let not people therefore, think it a thing altogether impossible,
for many Godly and learned Ministers, to side it together, against such a
truth, and to bewillingly ignorant of it: and let such Ministers themselves,
search out which of these obstacles here mentioned, or the like to them, has so
blinded their minds, and dazelled their reason, as neither Gods Memorandum,
prefixed to the Saturday Sabbath; nor Gods Commandment; nor Gods ensample; no
nor yet Gods reason and persuasion; and all written in the Moral Law, can
prevail with them, to take in to Remembrance again, the Lords Sabbath day:
for doubtless, there must besome beam or other, in the eye of their reason,
which cannot see reason in Gods reason.

Before I conclud this section, one thing more I would commend to your
consideration, and this it is; vvheras this 4th com. generally considered, has
two parts; the one is the Commandment it self; the other is the reason of
the commandment: as formerly I have shown you, that our Ministers have by
their renovvncing of the time in the Com. renownced and abolished, by just
consequence, the whole 4th com. also: so much I am to discover a further error
of theirs, which is, that by their abolishing of the time in 4th com. to wit,
the Saturday, 7th day, Sabbath; hereby also they have nullified, and abolished,
the reason to the com. which is taken from Gods own example, and contained in
these words, For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the 7th day: Therefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it. All these words I say, they have utterly
nullified, so as now they stand but for a cipher, to fill up an empty place.
What I have charged them with, I thus make good: The argutum and thing which
God would persuade his people unto, it is the observation and sanctification
of the 7th day Sabbath, as you may see in the com. foregoeing this reason; to
this end it pleases God, to frame and propound unto us, a most notable, and
lively reason, taken from his own example, to this effect, Remember you to
sanctify the Sabbath day; for because I sanctified the Sabbath day: Do you
rest from work on the 7th day; for because I rested from work on the 7th
day: and therefore I hallowed and sanctified the 7th day Sabbath. Now suppose
we, that the 7th day Sabbath were abolished, as they say it is, which is the
argutum or thing argued, whereunto God did by this reason persuade, then what
use can there be of this reason, which God here propounds? for example, now
that Circumcision, the Passover, and Sacrifices are ceased, what use is there
now of those reasons, whereby Gods people the Jews, were then persuaded to
those duties of Circumcision, the Passover, and Sacrifices? such is the case
here, take away the Sabbath day, and you take away the reasons that belonged to
it, to persuade unto the sanctification thereof: for what need reasons and
motives, to perswad unto that which is not?

But happily they will say (though untruly) that the Sabbath day is not
abolished, it is only but changed unto the Lords day. Well, say we for this
time grant them this for argument sake: then thus I make it good against them;
the reason of the 4th comm. cannot possible be a reason unto the Lords day, for
it is most absurd for any man to think, God should persuade us to keep the
Lords day, because he kept the Sabbath day: or that God should persuade us, to
keep the first day of the week, because kept the 7th and last day of the
week: Thus the conclusion, and the premises should not be of the same, but of
sundry things: For, the day whereof the question is, as now they would have
it, to wit, the Lords day, it differs much from the day mentioned in the
reason to the com. and that thus, 1. The day in the reason, God rested in it,
but the day in the question, God wrought in it. 2. The day in the reason, God
sanctified it, and hallowed it, but the day in their question, to wit, the
Lords day, we no where read that God blessed it, and sanctified it: so the
one differs from the other, as much as an hallowed, or holy day, does from
an vnhallovved, or vvorking day. If it be so then, that this reason proposed by
God, cannot be applied unto the Lords day, then it follovveth, that this
reason, is made by such as oppose the Lords Sabbaths, a very cipher, and of
none use, but to fill up a void place. A very wicked fact it is, whosoever
are guilty of it.

Yet further, that this reason stands now a days (since our Lords day is come
into use, and the Sabbath day abolished) as a mere cipher; it will further
appear, if you do but take a suru^y, of the Sermons of Ministers in the
Pulpit; and of their writings in books; for of all the arguments and reasons,
whereby they urge people to the observation of the Lords day, you shall never
hear them make any use at all, of this reason, the which God himself has
thought most meet to be urged, and has therefore annexed it, to his com. When
did you hear any say, it is your duty, to sanctify the Sabbath day, we now
keep; because on it, God Almighty rested from his work? and, it is your
duty to keep this Sabbath day, because God did at the Creation, bless it,
and sanctify it? No, if they should use these reasons, their davvbing would be
seen into; every man can tell them, this Day that we keep, is not the day
wherein God rested, but the day where, in he wrought; and this day, is not
the d^y which God blessed and sanctified, for this day, is the 8th day, but
God sanctified the 7th day: wherefore they are ashamed to use this reason, and
therefore they let it stand untouched, and thus it has stood for a Cipher, this
many hundredth of years: me thinks the consideration but of this one point,
should be enough to certify them that they are wrong, for as much as they dare
not press this Sabbath we now keep, with Gods reason, annexed to his 4th
Comm. now of all reasons that men can invent, what reason more forcible then
that, which is taken from Gods own example, that he rested on that day, and
sanctified it: but now this argument from the example of God, is stale in the
Churches, is quite out of use; who does excite and stir us up, in these our
days, from the example of God, saying, let us keep the Sabbath day, for God
Almighty kept it? let us rest from our labors on the Lords day, because God
rested from his works on this day? let us sanctify and hallovv the Lords day,
because God Sanctified and hallowed it, at the Creation, Genes. 2.2.3. let us
keep the Sabbath day, an Holly day? for God made it an Holly day, by hallowing
it, Exodus 20.11. Genes. 2.2.3? Let us honor it, as the most ancient holly
day, it being as ancient as the world, Genes. 2.2.3? and as the most
honorable holly day, it being made an holy day, by God himself, and not by
man, Genes. 2.2.3. all men follow the example of the king; and who would not
follow this example of God, the king of kings, if it were urged? if therefore
the Lords Sabbaths, be neglected, for want of forcible and most preualent
arguments and reasons, let such Ministers bear the blame, who deprive the
people of this so effectual and moving an argument: what a maruailouse thing
is it, that God should in his wisdom and goodness to us, besides his Com.
persuade us by such moving and powerful reasons, as he has annexed to his
Com. and yet Ministers are Mute and silent, as if there were no such things in
the Law and word of God: is it not meet, that such af oule error as this is,
should be discovered?

But suppose that some have Sophistically, by playing with the Homonymie of the
word Sabbath, improperly applied to our Lords day, both deceived themselves and
others, and so urged a far off this reason upon our day, surly they have
touched it, but lightly, as glad when they are safely got off it again, least
they should bewray all: for example, suppose a man that knows the difference
betwixt the day called Sabbath day, in scripture; and the day called Lords day:
the one being the 7th and last day of the week, the other, the first day of
the week: the one, being the day before the other; the one being for memory of
the Creation, the other for memory of the Redemption: if now a Minister should
tell him, it is his duty to sanctify the Lords day, because God sanctified the
Sabbath day; would not the man think the Minister iesteth with him? since he
knows God sanctified the 7th day of the week, but our Lords day, is the 8th
day, or first day of the week? and since he knows that the reason which he
uses, speaks of the day named Sabbath day, but the day he applies this
reason unto, it is of another name, to wit, the Lords day? would he not think
the Minister has foully mistaken himself, to misapply so the example of God,
to a wrong day? for, if the Minister would press a man, to sanctify the Lords
day, from the example of God, he must bring an example where God rested on the
Lords day; and where God blessed and sanctified the Lords day. Wherefore, to
conclud this point, either they are a shamed of Gods reason, and dare not use
it at all; or if they do, they must play the egregiouse Sophisters with the
peopse, by playing with the Homonymie of the word Sabbath, vseing it in an
other sense, then it is used by God, thereby to cover their doubling, from the
eyes of the people; but for the most part of them I am suer, they use not this
reason at all, and these do less evil, then those which abuse it.

Thus then you see, they have first abolished the whole 4th Commandment, as
elsvvhere I have proved; and here again you see they have abolished the reason
to the Com. and Gods example: now then let us put them together, and then the
total some will be, that they have by abolishing the Time in the 4th Com.
abolished also the vvholl Commandment: and not only that but also the reason
and example of God, annexed to the Com. and so they have made clear work;
for they have taken away all, even all, root and branch. Thus you see then the
time and 7th day in the Com. is of some consequence, even as the foundation is
to the building, when as it being once removed, all comes tumbling down, let
this time therefore be more regarded, if you will have the 4th com. at all
regarded.

SECT. X.
Having finished the Exposition of the 4th Com. and discovered the manifould
erroures, and shamfull abuses of it; that I might yet further make these
erroures appear; I purpose here to mention two things: The former is, to show
how our Congregations (which is much to be lamented) will for the must part
of them, come short of their hoped for reward, for Sabbath keeping: and that
the residue, do but dally, if not mock with God: this cogitation, does
present it self to me, when I think of the public prayers of the Church: for
there the Mimister in the name of God with loud and audible voice, a among
other of Gods 10 Com. pronounces these words, being the 4th com. Remember the
Sabbathday, to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work. But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it, thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy sone, nor thy daughter nor thy man servant,
nor thy maid servant, nor thy eattell, nor thy stranger, that is with in thy
gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
in them is, and rested the 7th day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day,
and hollowedit. Now presently, these words being uttered by the Minister, the
wholl Congregation confirms them, by this devour and godly prayer, unto
Almighty God saying, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law. The charg of the Minister standing in Gods room, and the Ecchoing
voice of the people, by there prayers, as an answer confirming, puts in my
mind, to think what a lamentable Dialogue would be betwixt Almighty God,
and us, if he should call us to an accounte, for the breach of his 4th Com.
for, albeit we dravv nigh to God, in the Congregation, with our lips, saying
Amen to all Gods precepts; yet in our lives is no such matter: and because we
all, one day, must come to this account; it shall not be amiss, to have the
state of it presented before our eyes here; that so if we cannot acquit our
selves, we may know it in time, whilst there is space for repentance.

Suppose we therefore, Almighty God examining us; and we again answering for
our selves, thus. Question. 1. Have you remembered my Sabbath day as I commanded
you by my Minister in the Congregation, and unto which you did subscrib and
assent by your prayer? Answer, no Lord, we have in deed forgotten that day,
but we have been mindful of the day after it, to wit the Lords day. Question,
2. But have you Sanctified my Sabbath day, as I commanded you? Answer, no Lord,
we have (we must confess it) profaned that very day, but we have sanctified
the Lords day, which is but the day after it. Quest. 3. But as for the 7th day:
where as I certified you, that the 7th day, is the Sabbath day, Exodus 2^.8.
and charged you, that in it thou should est do no manner of work, etc. have
you now refrained your labors, and rested from work, on this 7th day? Answ.
no Lord, we confess indeed, that how ever we have done our works on this
7th day, yet have we rested from our works on the 8th. day Quest. 4. whereas
I sanctified and hallowed the 7th day, and also set you mine own president
for your example, in as much as I Rested on the 7th day, and moved you by a
reason drawn from mine own example, which I annexed to my 4th Com. have you
now imitated mine example; and regarded my reason vvher by I persuaded you?
Ansvv. no Lord, we have neglected thy example, and thy reason: But we have
imitated Christ and his Apostles, in preaching and hearing of sermones and the
like, on a day, whereof we read not that ever thou did Sanctify it,
namely on the first day of the week, which thou did command for labor.
Now think of this matter good brethren in time, least you leese your hoped
for revvard, of keeping the Lords Sabbathes: for will this answer go for
current think you, before God, at that day of Rekoning?

But this answer is too right down for some; for these have ingenuously
confessed the truth: wherefore we must lay down an other answer for them, for
they like Saul, who contrary to Gods Commandment, spared Agag and the best of
the Sheep, etc. yet said, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.20.
so these stand to justify it and defend it, that they do obey the voice of
God, according to his 4th Com. well let these be tried, says the Almighty,
Quest. 1. Have you Remembered my Sabbath day? Answer, yis Lord, for as for that
day, we never thought of it; but we remembered the Lords day, the day after.
Quest. 2. And have you sanctified my Sabbath day, as I commammanded you? Ansvv:
yis Lord, for we profaned it with servile labors, but we have sanctified
the Lords day. Quest. 3. And have your rested on the 7th day; for, the 7th day
is the Sabbath of the Lard, etc. Exodus 20.10. Ansvv. yis Lord, we have labored
on the 7th day, and have rested on the 8th day. Quest. 4. But the 7th day, is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, Exodus 20.10. have you now kept the Sabbath of
the Lord your God? Answer: yis Lord, we have profaned it, but we have kept
the Sabbath of the Lord Christ. Quest. 5. have you kept the 7th day Sabbath, in
imitation of me, the day which I set you for a pattern, the day solemnized in
remembrence of the Creation? Ansvv: yis Lord, for we have kept the 8th day, or
first day of the week, in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, the day
solemnized in remembrance of the Redemption. Judge now good brethren, if these
men may not besaid, to dally and mock with God, in a most seriouse and
weighty matter.

Yet further, there are but two eminent places in the Church, vvherin the
Minister performs his service to God; to wit, the Delike and the Pulpit; and
lo, how these vary and are at jar? In the Deske, the Minister readeing the
10 Commandemets, says, the people must sanctify the Sabbath day: but the same
Minister, in the same Church, and to the same people, being but gotten up in to
the Pulpit, says, they must sanctify the Lords day. In the Deske, he says,
the 7th day, is the Sabbath: but gone, but a far as the pulpit, and there he
says, the 8th day is the Sabbath. Think you, these men are not gone from their
Text, when they read one thing, and preach an other? is it meet, that the
Deske and the Pulpit, should be at such odds?

I confess they have some idle distinctions, and friuolouse answers, whereby
for the present they stop up the month of conscience, and blind the eyes of
the simple, but let them try, if they cane by the same answers and
distinctions, bleare the eyes of Almighty God, at that day: In the days of
blindness and popery before Luther brought light unto the second com. I verily
believe it, that Popish Priests, had not more, nor more gross answers,
distinctions, and objections, to maintain their Idolatry and Image worshipping,
against the second Comm. then now a days our Ministers have, to mainteiue
their syne of Sabbath-breaking, against the 4th Com. but what should I say? I
vvish I knew, how else to inform Gods people of his will; and how they and I
might sanctify Gods Sabbaths, in private, with out the public assemblies of
the Church, and helps of a Minister, and disturbance of the Church; as we may
and cane yield obedience to any and every of the other 9 com. singly and alone
every man by himself, with out the help and company of others; and although
they would not join with us; could I, I say, have devised this, it should well
have been seen, that I would never have blotted paper to inform, or contended
with these cuning Sophisters, who by their wits, such as they are, will make
any thing good they please to undertake; they should for me have goneon, till
they had met with the reward of their dawbing and doubling. For as I suspected
them, so I find them, like Moab, Ierem. 48.11. settled on their lees: and like
the men in Jerusalem, Zephan. 1.12. frozen in their dreges.

The second thing I purpose to mention, for the further appearance of the abuse
of this Comm. here follovveth: whereas words and arguments, will hardly
avail, I purpose in the last place to try, if sense will be informed; for
which purpose, I will give you an occular demonstration, so as the sense of
seeing shall be convinced of the abuse of this Com. That this may be, I will set
here before your eyes, the whole 4th com. intirly, as God wrote it in the
Tables of stone: furthermore, as for these things, which so many Ministers
say, are ceremoniouse and abolished in this Com. those things I will compass
about with a parenthesis, or two half moon circles, that so you may se, which
parts of the Com. they hold for Moral, and which for ceremonial: behold it
thus: Remember (the Sabbath day) to keep (it) Holy. Six days shall then
labor, and do all thy work: But (the Scauenth day, is the Sabbath) of the
Lord thy God (in it) thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy sone, nor they
daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that
is with in thy gates: for in six days, the Lord made heaven and carth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and (rested the 7th day) Therefore, the Lord
blessed (the Sabbath day) and hallowed (it.) Lo, which parts of this 4th Com.
they make Ceremonial and abolished; to wit, all those words, which are
enclosed with in the parenthesis: for the word (day) this they abolish for a
ceremony by these Textes, Romans 14.5. Gal. 4.10. and for the word (Sabbath)
that they hold for an abolished ceremony, by these Textes, Col. 2.16.17. Exodus
31.13. and for these words, (these 7th day, is the Sabbath) this is that which
of all other parts of the commandment: they abhor, as a Jewish ceremony;
so much for the commandment: come we next unto the reason of the com. noted by
the word for; which contains a most effectual persvvasion from Gods own
example: and herin these words (rested the 7th day) do stand for a Cipher; no
Minister at any time in these our days, vseing these words, as a reason to
move and excite us, to rest on the 7th, or 8th day, because God rested at that
time: secondly, these words (the Sabbath day) do stand for a Cipher also; for
no Minister does persuade us in these days, to sanctify the Sabbath day,
because God sanctified the Sabbath day, to wit, the Saturday Sabbath: for it
is the Saturday which God hallowed and sanctified at the Creation.

Now cast thine eye back good Reader, and see the com. behold what they
allow of it to be moral, and how much of it they will needs have to be
ceremonial, and like a cipher; did thine eyes ever before behold, such a
mingle mangle, such a hotch potch: the 4th com. is by these Interpreters
become, half fish, half flesh; A Lynsey wolsey; A morrall Ceremonial
Commandment; partly lasting, partly faded. There be many Statute Laws in
this Kingdom, and it is said, many Lawyers will do much for money; but can
such an instance as this be shown, where the Lawyers, have by their
expositions and pleadings, so mangled any of the Kings Laws, as have our
divine Lawyers, who in this case, have taken away the key of knowledge? Luke
11.52? How can a man's eyes but abhor to look upon, and behold any vvriting,
thus interlaced with parenthessese, many hundredth of years after it was
written? but how should a Christian look upon any of Gods ten commandments,
with any patience, to see them or any of them thus mangled and defaced? was
God so mindful, to place all the morales by themselves, in the Tables of
stone, and to exclud the Ceremonials, and wright them elsewhere, as unfit to
be matched with the lasting Morals, and are there now so many Ceremonial
words crept into this Moral law? We read in 2. S^m. 10.4. how King Hanun
took David's servants, and shaued off the half of their beards, and cut off
their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away; me
think these men, could not look more ill fauouredly and disguisedly, then
does this 4th com. Now it is thus barbared and notched, by our late barbers: If
I would have a thing ugly done indeed, these men shall do it for me.

Furthermore, the indignity offered unto this com. is such, as it is not now
only shameful to look upon; but also it is by their corrupt exposition, made
very nonsense and ridiculouse; to this purpose, let us collect together so
much of this comm. as they allow to be memorall, and omit that which they
make ceremonial, that is, so much as is put within the half moon circles,
and see what a piece of senseless stufe there will be: and this then it is;
Remember to keep holy. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work:
But, of the Lord thy God, thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter etc. see if by their distinctions and subtilties, they have
not picked out the heart, and sense of this com. by picking out the time. Thus
for the comm. but further, for the reason which God has annexed to his com.
taken from his resting on the 7th day; and, from his sanctifying and hallowing
of the 7th day: this reason I say, has not only some words picked out of it,
as had the com. but which is more, the vvholl reason it self, as God laid it
down, and vvrote it in Tables of stone, is utterly by them abolished and
vselesse; no mention of it in these our days, thereby to excite and persvvad
people to the obedience of the 4th com. Wherefore, by your eye sight, you may
behold the abuse of this comm. and by your observation, you may take notice,
how the reason to the com. is nullified; two remarkable things to be observed.

The consideration of these things (me think) should plead strongly against
all the enemies to the Lords Sabbaths, that so all their reasons they bring
against them, should be suspected and rejected; because by their abolishing his
Sabbaths, they must needs make such havoc of Gods 4th com. as you see: Their
textes of Scripture also Col. 2.16.17. and Exodus 31.13. with the rest, are to
be suspected as corrupted and grossly abused by them, seeing that they will so
urge and press them, against the 7th day Sabbath in the 4th com. as that by
one text of Scripture, they will mangle another; and so understand one text of
Scripture, as it shall eat out the very bowels of an other; so setting
Scripture against Scripture; the text Col. 2.16. shall eat out the bowels of
the 4th com. yea this text Col. 2.16. with other the like, and certain reasons
they have, shall pick out the very heart and sense of the 4th com. and make it
senseless, as you see: of like nature are all their distinctions, and
therefore worthily to be abhorred, of all such as love Gods laws: God will
undoubtedly one day, accurse all such distinctions, and expositions of any text
of Scripture, as are made in opposition to his Laws: is there no way to
expound the Gospel, but so as it must needs quite ouerturne the law, or some
part of it? and is it meet to receive such unnecessary distinctions, as shall
rend out, and raze out some portion of Gods law, the Decalogue or 10 Com. I
mean?

But it may be objected, that we do not make such havoc with the 4th com.
nor make it so void and senseless, but that we do still retain it, and do
press it upon men's consciences, well nigh every sermon etc. True indeed, you
urge the 4th com. but how absurdly, let all men judge; like as if a man should
cancel a bond, and pluck off the seals, and yet stiffly plead his bond still;
so these, after by their doctrine they have made the comman. a piece of
senselese and ridiculouse stuff; yet still they call and cry out the 4th com.
the 4th com. ye transgress Gods 4th com. Furthermore, the reason annexed to
it by God, as most effectual to persuade men to obedience of this com. taken
from Gods ensample, this you altogether omit and neglect: For, when are you
heard to persuade the people thus? Let us rest from our works on the Lords
day, because God rested on the 7th day, Genesis 2.2. Exodus 20.11? Let us sanctify
the Lords day, because God sanctified and hallowed the 7th day, Genesis 2.3. Exodus
20.11? Let us be imitators and followers of God, as dear children, and keep
that day weekly for an holy day, which God himself made and kept an holy
day, at the Creation? No, no such matter, for so they should contradict
themselves: If they should persvvad men to follovv Gods example, so the
mystery of their iniquity, would be discovered: for God kept the 7th day,
from the creation; but our Lords day, is the 8th day from the creation: and the
day which God kept, was kept in memory of the Creation; but our Lords day, is
kept in memory of the Redemption: thus as the com. is nullified, so the reason
to the com. is made a mere superfluouse cipher, and altogether vselesse, let
them say what they will to the contrary.

As for the law it self, you urge it indeed upon men's consciences, but with
small conscience you urge it; for you abuse and prefane Gods word (as has been
shown) by applying that to the Lords day, which is a common vvorking day, as
friday is; which should be applied by Gods ordinance, to an holy day, which
himself had hallowed, as to the 7th day; as well might you profanely apply
those Sacramental words of institution, to common bread, and to common water,
as Gods 4th comm. to a common day, not sanctified by God. And thus much for
Exposition of the 4th Commandment.

THus I have endeavored to make it appear, how they have corrupted and
abused the law, and thereby corrupted and abused the people also: What
remains, but that they may be driven to repentance, I mind them of that
fearful denuntiation, uttered by our Savior Christ, after that he had
ratified the law, in the integrity and perfection of parts, even to a jot and
title of it, Mat. 5.18. Whereto he adds these words, Whosoever therefore shall
break one of these least Commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall observe, and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.19. In
which words, our blessed Savior, does persuade, to the keeping of the Moral
Law, in every jot and title of it, unto the worlds end: Further, our Savior
shows wherein, or in what manner, he would have every jot and title of the
Law kept; and this is two ways, the one by doctrine, noted in these words, and
teach men so: The other by practice, noted in these words, Whosoever shall
observe etc. whereby we see, it was the mind of Christ, to have every title
of the law, not only observed and practiced; but also, he would have every
title of it, taught unto the people, and urged and pressed upon them: and on
the other side, because the bare doctrine of the Minister, is forcelesse it.
many men, without his practice; least they should say, he lays heavy
burdens, upon other men, but himself will not touch them, with one of his
fingers, therefore Christ joins practice to doctrine, saying, Whosoever shall
observe and teach etc.

Furthermore, we are in special manner to note, unto what manner of persons
these words are directed, not unto lay men as they call them, but unto the
Clergy, unto Ministers in special; as we may understand by the words teach
men so: so then, this portion of Scripture, it is directed unto the Ministry;
and the will of Christ to them is, that they shall both teach to the people,
and also practice before them, unto the worlds end, every jot and title of the
Law.

Now in the next place, we have Christ his arguments, to move and persuade
Ministers, to these two duties; and because Ministers are of two sorts;
some, though but a small some, will teach and practice, every jot and title of
the Law, to the utmost of their power; but others, will neither teach nor
practice the same; therefore has Christ fitted his Arguments, to both sorts;
and by name, to such Ministers as do both teach and practice; to them our
Savior promises this blessing, that, they shall be called great in the
Kingdom of heaven: oh that there were yet many more, that would covet this
greatenesse in Gods favor, by teaching and revealing the whole counsel of
God, even all his Ten commandments, intirly, in every jot title of them? But
now as for those other Ministers, who refuse either to teach, or to practice,
this Law of God intirly: to these, our Savior threateneth a Curse, to vvite,
that these shall be called least in the Kingdom of heaven: now vvheras our
Savior denounces this curse, unto them, which break one of the least of
these commandments: suppose we the Time commanded in the 4th com. where the
very least of the commandments because they use to cale it, but a
circumstance, and the like; why yet for all that, so long as it is a
commandment, though the least of all the commandments, yet Christ denounces
this Curse unto such Ministers, as refuse to teach the people this least com.
and refuse to practice it before the people: they have pleased to miscale it a
ceremony, and Iudaisme and the like; but let them try if this will free them
before Christ his Judgment seat, from this Curse of Christ, which he
denounced being on earth. I believe all their subtilties and shifts, vvherby
they blind the eyes of men here, will hardly so blind the eyes of Christ then:
he will have an account of his vvholl Law, not of pieces and percels of it,
as we please.

Thus we se what the duty of Ministers is, namely to teach the people, to
observe the Lords seventh day Sabbath, which is one of the commandments,
though you make it the least: and it is their duty also, if they will be
freed of Christ his Curse, to observe and keep the 7th day Sabbath, before
the people; so leading them by liefe and doctrine together: but how sarre off,
is the practice of most Teachers from observing the mind and will of Christ?
in stead of practicing the 7th day Sabbath in their own persons, for
example unto others; they could be content to persecute any, that they se
forward this way; oh fearful! In stead of teaching the people this, which
they count the least of Gods commandments, and urging them to keep, every
jot and title of Gods Law, and so the Lords Sabbath day; they teach openly
and publikly the quite contrary; as namely, that this least of Gods
commandments, it is abolished, and that the Sabbath day, commanded, it is
abolished; thus this least of Gods commandments is trampled down, because it
is a little one, and a ceremonial one, and a circumstantiall one; and not the
Law of Nations, nor found now in the hearts off all men fallen and corrupted,
as a Law of Nature; and because commanded to the Jew, and the like: but what
soever be their shifts, suer Iam the Sabbath day, is not less then one of the
iotes and titles of Gods Law; nor is it less then the least of Gods
commandments; wherefore, who soever teaches in opposition to this Sabbath
day, he bevvraieth himself to be no friend of Christ's, and that he regards
not his mind and will, in teaching and observing all and every of the
Commandemets: nay he proclaims him self in open pulpit, to be a professed
enemy to Christ our Savior and these his words, Mat. 5.18.19. and to the
integrity and vvholnesse as I may call it of Gods Law; he had rather have it
lamed and percelled out, that so he might serve God by halues, and by piece
meal, then to have an indifferent respect with David, unto all Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. and rather then he would have Gods Law entire and
complete, in the perfection of parts, unto a jot and title.

Is not it true of such Ministers werewith the Lord charged those corrupt
Priests, Mal. 2.9. to wit, that they were partial in the Law? and are not
these also in our time partial in Gods Law, when not with standing what
Christ has said, for the integrity of the Law, yet these men will reject a
part of it, and so become like those Priests, partial in Gods Law? for a
part of Gods Law they will have; an other part they will none of: the
duties of rest and holiness in the 4th com. this part of the 4th com. they
will have, but the other duty of the Time, this part of the same 4th com:
they will none of. Were these Ministers of the lovver rank for zeal, and of
the Number of those which are not accounted so zelouse of Gods Laws, it
were the less to be vvondred at; but being puritant Ministers, and such as
would be displeased at him, who should say to them, they had not an
indifferent respect unto all Gods commandments with out exceptions; that
these I say should pick and choose, take and leave; and become like those
profane Priests, partial in Gods Law, it is to be maruailed at; Mistake me not
good Reader, it is not purity that I mislike in puritanes; for of all men I
honor no men more, then such as are, and endeavor to be, of pure heart and
holy liefe: but this I hate in them; to se their practice belie their doctrine
and profession: for they teach daily for universal obedience to all Gods com.
without exceptions and resernations; but Lo they are found here halting: one
of the least (as they say) of Gods Commandments, ratified by our Savior, they
neglect and contemn.

Others there be of the same rank, which be not so impudent as the former,
they preach and teach not against the Lords Sabbaths, and therefore are not
guilty of the Curse of Christ, for breaking this least Com. and teaching men
so: yet are they enemies to this least Comm. for haueing heard of my former
book, which I vvrote in defense of this least Com. and for the Lords Sabbath;
yea, and after they have seen it, and read it over, they spitt fire at it;
and cry out, burn the book; it is a foul error, etc. These men like James and
John, not knovving of what Spirit they are, would have fire come down
presently; and although they know not, either how to prove their Lords day to
be a Sabbath day; nor yet how to disprove the Lords Sabbath day; or to confute
the book, yet they can cry, burn the book, it is a foul error, etc. Thus
these are so far from teaching this least com. to the people; as that they
use all their diligence, to scare and afright simple people, with great
words; that so they might still remain caught in their snares, and in blind
ignorance: if the Laws of this Realm, were fitted to these men's minds, it
should be vvoe to him that touches this Lords day Sabbath, the Diana of our
time; but seeing they do it out of a good affection, I shall with Paul make it
mine hearts desire, and prayer to God for them, that they may repent; for I
bear them witness, that they have the Zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge.

They think it much, that they cannot prevail with the rude multitude, for
the keeping Holy of the Lords day Sabbath, but that, say they what they can,
yet they will revel, riote and profane it: well the case is now become their
own; it shall be seen, whither all that I have said, can prevail with
them, for the sanctifying of the Lords Sabbaths on the 7th day: suer I am I
have said, and shall say much more, and more soundly, for the 7th day Sabbath,
to move them to keep it; then ever they did, or could say, to profane
persons, for the keeping of the 8th day Sabbath: if therefore, synister
affections, prevail so with them, that they will not liften to me, no more
then their profane hearers will to them; let them tell me then, what is the
difference betwixt them selves, and their profane auditors.

An other sort there are, who are disobedient to Christ's will, by denial of
the integrity, wholnesse, and perfection of Gods law; in as much as they do
not only refuse to teach the people, this least of Gods commandments, namely,
which is the proper day and time of Gods worship and service; but if they
find, that by the pains of any others, more faithful in this point then
themselves, any of their flock are taught and instructed in this way of the
Lord more perfectly, that they begin to see a further light into this Law of
God, then they were wont; presently they be labor it, to extinguish this light
in them: to these, I may fitly apply that word of the Lord, Ierem. 23.30.
Therefore behold, I will come against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal
my word, every one from his neighbor. These then, be sacrilegiouse thieves,
who will not sow the seed of Gods word, in the hearts of their people, but
will watch when it is sown, that they may come and steal it away again.

I trust Gods Ministers, will bridle corrupt nature, and give me leave to lay
the plaster, where the sore is; knowing it is their office, to do the like to
others daily; they who teach others to take a reproof, are not to learn in
this point.

Let me speak one word now, to all these 3 sorts of Ministers together:
why are ye, you Tribe of Levy, such enemies to the integrity, wholnesse, and
perfection of the Law of your God? delivered with such majesty and terror,
upon Mount Sinai Exodus 20? Why oppose you your selves also, against those iotes
and titles of this law, ratified by our Lord Christ, unto eternity, in his
sermon on the Mount Mat. 5.1.8? Why do you not according to his will and
mind, teach the people, this least commandment, touching the proper time of
his worship and service? Nay, why are you so unlike your selves? For it is a
rule approved in expounding of the Scriptures, that things are to be taken in
the largest sense, if nothing hinder. Now why then in expounding of this 4th
com. do you abridge it, excluding the proper time thereof, as if nothing but
the duties of rest and holiness, belonged unto us? Whereas you ought to
expound it more largly, as including both the time of the 7th day, and the
duties of rest and holiness also? since there is nothing that you can justly
say against the time. Again, it is another rule in expouding of Scripture, and
in special of the Moral law; that under one thing expressly commanded or
forbidden, are comprehended all of that kind, with the least cause or occasion
thereof: See here how they enlarge the law, to be understood, not only of the
things there by name mentioned, but also, of things not mentioned, as of the
causes and occasions: and yet the same men, being to expound the 4th com. are
so far off, from enlarging it, as they will miserably curtaile it, and
clippe it, and pare it, until they have quite pared away, the 7th day Sabbath:
Why are you so inconstant, and so unlike your selves? is it a rule with you,
that things not mentioned in the Comm. are to be brought in, that so the Com.
may have the largest scope and compass; and will you exclude and thrust out,
things by name, mentioned in the Com. as the 7th day Sabbath?

Again, when we are to deal against Papists, then we are very zealouse for
the integrity and perfection of the law: witness M. Perkins in his first
Volume page 400. where he proves that a Papist cannot go beyond a Reprobate;
because they make the whole law vain: and this he affirms in these words, If
one frustrate but any one point, of any one commandment, the whole law thereby
is made in vain. Cannot a Papist go beyond a Reprobate, if he frustrate any
one point, of any one commandment? and can a Protestant go beyond a
Reprobate, when he does frustrate some one point, in some one commandment? as
we do in the 4th comm.? Must the law stand, in every point, of every
commandment, when we have to do with our Adversaries abroad, and is the
case altered, when we be among our selves at home?

It is made a mark of sincerity, and of the truth of grace, when a man has
respect, unto all Gods commandments, without exception of any: But come upon
the matter with them, and then they that deliver this mark to others, can
scarcely find it in themselves: For, albeit they seem by this mark, to
justify the law, in the integrity and perfection of it; yet ask them what they
think of Gods 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the 4th com. and this they will
baulke and except, under one pretense or other, by miscalling it Jewish,
Ceremonial, and by saying falsely that it is abolished: and is this the
respect they have unto all Gods commandments?

It is a rule also, that the law it is wholly copulative; that is, the things
therein commanded, are firmly combined and knit together, so as not any one
thing can be severed from the law: and thus far they maintain the law, in
its perfection and integrity; but how then comes it about, that now you have
made such a hiatus, such a gape in this law? one of the Linkes of this chain
is broken, the commanded time of 7th day, in the 4th com. is taken out, and
severed from all the rest: so now this copulation is uncoupled, and the law
is not wholly copulative, it is but partially copulative.

Behold how the ene^mies to the Lords Sabbaths, and to the integrity and
perfection of the Law of God say, and unsay it again: abroad with our
adversaries, it is a point of reprobation, to frustrate but any one point, of any
one commandment: at home, it is a point of Iudaisme, to maintain and defend
them all. What should I say more? justly may the Lord lament over England, as
once he did over Jerusalem, saying, O my people, they that lead thee, cause
thee to err, Isa. 3.12.

SECT. XI.
Thus I have defended the Moral law, against both Anabaptists and Libertins:
and also the integrity and perfection of this law, against Protestants and
Papists: to this end I have opened and expounded one branch of this law, to
wit, the 4th com. and discovered many foul and gross errors in the ordinary
received exposition thereof: Now for conclusion, I purpose to add an
Exhortation to the love of this law of God.

It is called a royal Law; But if ye fulfill the royal law, according to
the Scripture etc. Iam. 2.8. It is called a righteouse Law; What nation is so
great that has ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law, which I set
before you this day? Deuteronomy. 4.8. It is as a light, in darkest night; Thy word is
a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path, Psalm. 119.105. Of all men,
the Prophet David, excels in this argument, in his 119 Psalm: Thy
Testimonies are my delight, and my counsailers, v. 24. My delight shall be in
thy commandments, which I have loved, v. 47. Thy statutes have been my Songs,
in the house of my pilgrimage, v. 54. Oh how love I thy Law it is my meditation
continually, v. 97. I hate vain inventions, but thy law do J love, v. 113.
Ye see here how David was in love with Gods law: Now this his love he does
express partly by his desirs and prayers, and partly by comparisons: by
prayers, Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law, v. 18. Hide not
thy commandments from me, v. 19. Mine heart breaks for the desire to thy
judgments, v. 20. Giu^ me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments,
v. 37. J am thy servant, grant me understanding, that I may know thy
Testimonies, v. 125. By comparisons, he sets forth his love unto Gods law: I
have had as great delight in the way of thy Testimonies, as in all riches, v.
14. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and silner,
v. 72. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the
^oy of my heart, v. 111. Therefore love I thy commandments about gold, yea,
above most fine gold, v. 127. In a word, the law of God, it is the Churches
inheritance and possession, Moses commanded us a law, for an inheritance of the
Congregation of Iakob, Deuter. 33.^. and hence it was, that David had taken
unto him, he law as his inheritance for ever, Ps^ 119.111. and hence no doubt
it is, that our Church has taken this law also unto her, as her inhe^itance
for ever, causing it to be read publikly in the Congregation, in most solemn
manner; the Assembly all upon their knees, praying to God, to incline their
hearts to keep this Law.

Here be arguments and reasons enough, without further amplification, to move
every Godly heart, to love the law of God; for, it is a royal law: a
righteouse law: a light for our comfortable direction: a law most lovely, oh
how love I thy law: a law to be desired, Mine heart breaks for desire of thy
judgments. It is better, then thousands of gold and silver: it is an
inheritance; and the inheritance of the Church: What need of more?

As there is no Christian Church in the world, which inioyeth this Law of God
intirly, and in its perfection: So is there no member of our Church, that I
know, who inioyeth this Law, in its integrity, in his judgment, and practice
both; albeit it were much to bewished, it being the Inheritance of the Church,
wherein every member may challeng his share. I divide our Church and
Congregations therefore, in to two sorts, purposing to make application of this
doctrine, unto them both: the one sort, and that the fewest by infinite
numbers, are such as are informed, in their judgments, and enlightened in this
Law of God, in the integrity and perfection of the parts thereof: The other
sort, and those the most, remain yet it darkness, and ignorance of this
their Inheritance, the Law of God in its perfection. Touching the former sort,
is it so, that thou love: his Law of God? then let this thy love to it
appear: and that by hearty and firuent prayers unto Almighty God daily, that
he would be pleased to infuse, the light of this knowledge, in to the minds
and haerts of all men: and that it would please God, to incline the heart of
our sovereign Lord and King, together with all the great gouerners, in Church
and Common weal, to embrace this Law of God, in its integrity and perfection;
that so a reformaiion being made, we may enjoy the Lords Sabbath, in practice,
as well as in judgment.

To this end, two things are required of thee, who art already enlightened,
and do love this Law of God in the perfection thereof: the one is, that
thou further and disperse the knowledge thereof, as far forth as thy place
and calling will peremit, unto thy friends and acquaintance; thus did David,
Teach me thy Statutes, (says he) and then he adds these words, with my lips
have I declared, all the judgments of thy mouth, Ps. 119.12.13. and again, I
will speak of thy Testimones before Kings, and will not be a shamed, Ps.
119.46. Hereto accords S. Paul, wherefore exhort one an other, and edify one
an other, even as you do, 1. These. 5.12. and, Exhort one an other daily,
while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13. he that loves the Law, must not only
love it in the knowledge of it, but also in the practice of it, and how shall
he attain the practice of it, vnlese it be made known unto all, that so a
general reformation may be.

The other thing required of thee, is that in love to Gods Law, thou be ready
in thy place, to defend it, and the integrity and perfection of it, against all
gainsayers: as the Apostle Jude says, contend for the maintenance of the
faith, which was once given unto the Saints, Iud. 3. so should we contend, for
the maintenance of the integrity and perfection of the Law, which was once
given unto the Saints and Church of God. This is that, which God laid to the
charge of his Church long since, that, No man contendeth for the truth, Isai.
59.4. bevvare it be not laid to our charge also. Moses had many brethren, the
Hebrews, yet would he not suffer any one of them, to suffer vvrong of the
Egyptianes, but rose up in their defense, and defended them so, one after an
other, that at last he was forced to fly for his own liefe, Exodus 2.11.15.
so we brethren, if we love this Law of God, it will Kindle in us, an holy
zeal of Gods glory, and indignation against the enemies of Gods truth, so as
we shall rise up to defend and rescve any one, and every one of Gods
commandments, against those that would be shredding and pareing some thing or
other away from the same. David says Gods testimonies they were the joy of
his heart: and again, oh how lou: I thy Law? think we that David, could
with patience have seen this Law, which he so loved, mangled and hacked,
and so defaced, as we now are forced to behold it?

I come now to the other sort of people in our Church, and they are those
who be yet in darkness, and ignorance; who albeit they know much of this
Law of God, yea the most of it, yet are ignerant of it in its integrity and
perfection; for they are ignorant of Gods 7th day Sabbath contained in his 4th
com. and so they know not all the Law, they are not acquainted with the
whole Law, and will of God; for number, these are the most, and therefore the
case is the more lamentable: yea and by so much also the more lamentable yet,
in that they are not fully instructed in a matter, which nearly concerns
them; for this they must take special notice of, to wit, that by this Law
we shall be judged at that dreadful day of judgment, as many as have sinned
in the Law, shall hr judged by Law, Romans 2.12. and again, so speak ye, and
so do ye, as they that shall beiudged by the Law of liberty, Iam. 2.12. Now
it is a fearful thing, for a man to be ignorant of any one part ar percell
of that Law, whereby he shall be adjudged: it concerns every man therefore,
to study this Law, and to take in information of it, and of all the parts of
it, and that with speed.

But you may say, how shall this exhortation, to love the Law of God, in its
perfection, concern such as you say are ignorant of the Law, as touching its
perfection? can a man love the thing unknown? for answer hereunto, we must
know, that how ever a man may he be said to be ignorant of a thing, as by it
self, and in particular: yet may he be said to know it, and so also to love
it, by an other, and in the general: I make it plain thus; he that loves one
or more pieces of gold, as gold, he loves all pieces of gold; and as well
those pieces in general, which he never saw, as those pieces in particular,
which he has seen: and by those particular pieces, which he has seen, and
found good and pleasant unto him, he comes to know that the other pieces
unseen, being of like nature, they are also good and pleasant, and so he grows
in love with them also: The case is a like, in him that has the Inheritance
of A Lord ship or Manner descended unto him, be it that he never saw nor knevv,
some particular Closse, Field, or Tenement of his Inheritance, yet he has a
love unto these unknown parts of his inheritance, in the general: and by
the experimental commodety he finds, by some of the known parts of his
inheritance, he grows in to love of the vnknovve parts also: So it is in
this our case; it is true the most of men, they know not the Law of God, their
inheritance, in all the parts of it, particularly, and by themselves; yet for
all that, they have a knowledge and so a love to Gods Law, and to the
unknown parts of it, in the general, and by the other known parts; in so
much as, many that are ignorant of some one or more points, in the particular,
and by them selves, can yet truly say, that they love the Law of God, and the
Law too, in its integrity and perfection; and out of this love in the general
and by other parts, they unfeignedly desire to be made acquainted with those
unknown parts in the particular, that they might, love them for themselves
also.

To apply this, do thou then love the Law of God, why make it appear then,
both to thine own heart, and unto all men, by thy love unto the unknown
parts of it; for he that loves some pieces of gold in truth, he loves all
pieces of gold also, as well those unseen as those he has seen; so must thou
do, if thy love to Gods Law be sound, thou must be in love with all the parts
of Gods law, in its integrity; as well with those unknown, as with those
already known.

The way vvherby thou must make known thy love, unto the unknown parts of
Gods Law, is in these two things: In an earnest desire to become acquainted in
particular, with those unknown parts of Gods Law; and, in a ready
vvillingnes to embrace the knowledge of them, when occation by Gods mercy is
offered thee.

For the former, as David, desiring to be delivered from his sins, praid not
only against his known sins, but al so against his onknowne sins, saying,
cleanse me from secret faults, Ps. 19.12. so we must desire and that
ernestely, not only the contenuance of the knowledge of the known parts of
Gods Law, but also the knowledge of the unknown and secret parts of Gods
Law: we have the Prophet David a notable pattern in this point, how ernest
a suitor, unto God was he in this case? Open mine eyes (says he) that I may
see the wonders of thy Law: and again Hide not thy commandments from me and
again, give me understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. And then,
his heart bursteth again with eagre desire thereof, mine heart breaks
(says he) for the desire to thy judgments. Thus if there be in us a firuent
love unto Gods Law, as there was in David, we will never be at rest, until
we know Gods Law yet better, and more fully, even unto perfection. The
second thing, to wit, a ready willingness to embrace this knowledge, when
it is tendered thee: this needs no proof, for it follovveth of it own
accord; think you that after the Prophet David, had thus besought God by
prayers, for further knowledge of Gods Law, that then he would not have
with both his arms, embraced him, that would have instructed him? how
beautiful are the feet, of them which bring glad tydiuges! Gods Law he
called it, the joy of his heart: his inheritance; it was better unto him then
thousands of gold and silver. Would not a man be ready to embrace the joy of his
heart? an inheritance? and that which is better then gold and silver, when it is
tendered him? Yis undoubtedly; why such is the law of God, and such also will be
thy readiness to entertain it when tendered, if truly thou love Gods law,
as David did.

I come now to apply the former of the two points: Is it so, that whosoever
loves Gods law in truth, and sincerly, cannot but express his desirs to the
unknown parts of it? Then hereby may men judge of their estate to Godward, to
know whither they do indeed and in truth, sincerly and unfeignedly, love Gods
law, or not: do thou desire the knowledge of all Gods law, as well as of
some of it? Do thou desire the knowledge of the unknown parts, as well
as thou love the knowledge of the known parts? then is thine estate good
to Godvvard, and doubtless, thou love the law of God in truth of heart,
and in sincerity: but if thou contentest thy self, with the knowledge of
that thou do know, not desiring to know more, if more may be known; thy
case is dangerouse; it is to be suspected, that thy love to Gods law, is but a
fained love, and hypocritical, and that thou art rotten at the Core, and not
sound at the heart: For, he that loves one piece of gold, he loves all other
pieces of gold; he that loves one part of his inheritance, he loves every
part and parcel thereof, known and unknown unto him.

Let the most men, both Ministers and people, be examined by this rule, and
their love to Gods laws, will be suspected: it is true indeed, they pray
daily, both in public and in private, that God would increase their
knowledge, and open their blind eyes; as David did, Open mine eyes that J may
see the wonders of thy Law; but do they pray with David's heart, sincerly? Do
they not pray with secret and reserved exceptions, and reseruations? do they
not indent with God secretly in heart, how far they will be enlightened, and
how far not; how far they will know of Gods will, and how far they will
be ignorant still? Let us try both Ministers, and people. For Ministers, have
they not such a distinction as this, nourished in their minds? to wit, that
there be some things unknown of Gods will, the knowledge whereof would make
much to their praise and applause, and would be well approved of by all their
brethren, and would be a meanse to establish them in their livings, if not to
enlarge them; and would not cross, but rather be vpholden by Antiquity, and
universality etc? and there be other things unknown of Gods will, the
knowledge whereof would but tend to their reproach and shame, and would be
generally distasted of all the Ministry, and might be a meanse to deprive them
of their livings, they crossing all Antiquity and universality etc? in so much
as if God should now demand, of these petitioners, what they would have of him,
whither that he should bestow upon them the whole knowledge of his will
intirly, whither it make with them or against them; or only that part thereof,
which might tend to their present commodety, it is to be vehemently suspected,
they would choose this latter only, albeit they would blush to say so: I
appeal to their consciences examined, if I hit not the mark: the reason of my
such suspicion is this, in part, The knowledge of this part of Gods law,
touching his Sabbaths, it is not put upon them to study it out, with great
pains, but it is brought home to their doors, ready studied for them. 2. The
point is most easy and familiar to be understood, no difficulties in it, save
what themselves do voluntarily and unnecessarily put upon it, by their vain
distinctions, and friuolouse objections (as some thing may be objected against
any thing): that it is easy, I know it my self, for I have fathomed it, and
diued good deep into the bottom of it. I know it also by others, both of the
Ministry and private men, who can see it clearly and without difficulty.
Wherefore I can impute their ignorance, to nothing else, but that they are
willing to be ignorant, and have no desires to be acquainted, with that
unprofitable and incommodiouse part of Gods will: for what is there in this
controuercy of the Sabbath, that exceeds the capacety even of the meanest?
but especially if you speak of Ministers, who have a dexterity (when they
will) in understanding questions of Divinity, it is not possible for them to be
ignorant, had they a willing mind. I am very confident, that if they prayed to
God, out of an unfeigned sincere love to Gods Law, that he would inform them,
in the unprofitable part of his will, as well as in the proffitable part,
that God would soon send them a clear light thereof, especially, since the
way is now made so open and easy. I wish they would but make experience of God
in this case, according to my counsel and desire, and if they do not, it
will be bitterness first or last: In a word, Ministers have heard that Gods
Sabbath is now in question: but which of them have gone into their studies, and
deeply minded the point, out of a desire to find it and defend it, if it might
be found and defended? I appeal to their consciences.

Let us now try the people by this rule, and see if there be not, like Priest,
like people: it is true, these pray for an increase of knowledge in Gods laws
also: but do they mean to obtain a knowledge of all the law of God wholly?
or of so much only as may serve the time, and please their Ministers? what
their desire is shall appear by their practice; it is voiced abroad, that the
Lords Sabbaths are profaned, the 4th comman. weekly transgressed; and that
there is a book newly come forth to that effect: well, how do people now
behave themselves upon these tidings? If a man should cry fire, fire, in the
night, so in love men are with their housen, and so desirouse to preserve
them, that instantly they startle, leap out their bedds, make inquiry where?
and search round about their housen, without and with in, and will not be
persuaded to bed again till they be suer all is safe: Did men love Gods
laws, as they do their housen and possessions, they would not be at rest
till they had scanned the point, and examined the book over again and again.

But I shall tell you one of the ordinary questions, they move upon these
tidings, to wit, what think you Sir, may not a man go to heaven in the old
opinion though he be ignorant of this part of Gods word, touching his proper
Sabbath? to pass by what I think of heaven, let me tell you what I know of
hell: I am suer a man may go to hell in the old opinion: these questions way
intimate, that men resolve to give to God, no more service then what neglected,
they plung body and soul in to hell fire; this is no filial but a servile
mind and affection: this is far from David's prayer, open thou mine eyes that
I may see the wonders of thy Law.

Let me tell you also, the success which these tidinges produce with most
others: say they it were much to be wished, this book had never comne forth,
that this point bad never been questioned; I wish the Author had been better
advised; it will cause much stir in the Church, before we were finly quiet,
and this now will cast rubbes in our way, our consciences will be checking
of us, etc. All the answer these shall have from me, is to advise them to see
to it, that by such objections, they be not like to those rebelliouse Jews,
who would not receive instruction, when God would have taught them,
children that would not hear the Law of the Lord: which say unto the Seers,
see not: and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things: but speak
stattering things unto us, etc. Isa. 30.9.10. to conclude, let these their
common objections speak for them, if thereby they do not bewray, that in
their prayers, they intend to obtain no more of God, but a partial knowledge
of his Law; and this their partiality, may breed a shrewd suspicion, their
love to Gods Law, is not sound and sincere: for if it were, they would not
reject the means of knowledge, before they have tasted it. So much be spoken
by way of use, from this, that an unfeigned love of Gods Law, cannot but
desire the knowledge of the unknown parts thereof.

I come now to make some application of that other property: is it so, that
who so loves Gods Law in truth, he will with all readiness,
cherefulnesse, and willingness embrace the knowledge of the vnknovvn parts
thereof, when the same is tendered unto him: if we shall put men upon the
trial for this point also, here we shall in the first place find many in the
Ministry guilty: how unwilling they are, that the knowledge of this part
of Gods Law, touching his Sabbaths, should come abroad into the world, or
into their own heads; both their own consciences are privy to, and the
world takes knowledge of: were the knowledge of a good living tendered them,
I dare say it, fevve or none of them, but would have run and ridd about it,
with all diligence, long before this: could any man inform the^, though but
doubtfully, of some Tyeth unpaid, belonging to their livings; if Lawyers
would not bring them Counsel, they would ride and make out to them for
counsel about the matter: and all their vvites, and friends should be
employed for to find it out, as they would have it, if it were possible: but
now the Tyeth of Gods Law, or a portion of the tieth at least, is detayned
from God, and from themselves, by themselves; and here they will neither
run, nor ride, nor ask for Counsel, in this case; no nor accept and
vvelcome it, when it is brought, and thrust in to their heads: it gives a man
to suspect, that these love more unfeignedly a good living, then Gods law: Nay I
cannot but think, that if I had tendered unto some Ministers a living of 50l.
or 60l. a year, and that upon no better evidence and title, then in my former
book I tendered them the Lords Sabbaths; I cannot think I say, that any man in
the kingdom could wrest it out of their hands: In a word, these that are so
mindelesse of Gods law, when they are so mindful of their own livings, like
as God said, unto his people the Jews, when they neglected the building of the
Temple, and yet were diligent to build themselves houses, Is it time for you
to dwell in your seiled houses, and this house lie waste? Hagg. 1.4. So may I
say unto them, Is it time for you ye Ministers, to enjoy your livings, when
the Lords Sabbaths lie waste? God must have a rekoning of you for these things.

This rule being applied to common people, will detect them also: Is it so,
that whosoever loves Gods law in truth, he will with all readiness and
willingness, embrace the knowledge of the unknown parts thereof? Then, if I
shall make it appear, that most men are unwilling, to embrace the knowledge of
the unknown parts of Gods law, it will follovv very suspiciously, that
most men do not love the law of God in truth, what ever they say, and think
to the contrary: Thus I make it good against them: The doctrine of Gods
Sabbaths, is a part of the law, and it is the unknown part of Gods law:
Now the knowledge of this, being tendered unto men, they bewray their
unwillingness to be taught and instructed in it, and that two ways; the one
is, in that when the matter comes to trial, they admit of insufficient
Artificial arguments; for, they prefer feeble and weak reasons, before
strong and able reasones: the other is, in that they admit of insufficient
Inartificiall arguments; for they admit and allow of dissallowable and
insufficient Testimonies to decide this controuercy by: when these two things
are made plain, the case will go clear against them: for a foundation,
first of all, suppose we, the point in controuercy, to wit, this unknown part
of Gods Law, touching his Sabbathes, is as disputable, contingent,
questionable, and as doubtful as you will; in so much as in your very
consciences you think, it may be, and it may not be a truth; and that it is
as likly not to be true, as to be true; let all this be granted; perhaps there
is some reason it should be granted, seeing that it is a point not heard of
before by common people, neither have they ever spent any time in the study of
the point. Well be it so, I proceed then.

For the first, to wit, that when the point of Gods Sabbaths comes to be
argued, people, yea Ministers also, admit of insufficient arguments, preferring
them before able and strong reasons; and this shall appear, by comparing
together, the reasons brought onboth sides: the reasons brought for the Lords
Sabbaths, among others are these, 1. Gods express Com. Exodus 20.8. Remember
the Sabbath day: and, In it thou shall not do any work: 2. Christ ratified
it, when he with so vehement an Asseueration, auovvched the duration of every
jot and title of the Law, unto the worlds end, saying, Verily, I say unto
you, until heaven and earth perish one jot or one title of the Law shall not
escape, until all things be fulfilled. And again, whosoever therefore, shall
break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.18.19. On the other side, the
reasons brought against Gods Sabbathes, by those which are the enemies thereof
are these, Gal. 4.10. ye observe days, and months, and times, and years,
etc. and Col. 2.16. let no man condemn you in meat, and drink, or in respect
of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days. Now let these
arguments on both sides, be laid into the balances; they, for the Lords
Sabbath, in to the one balla^ce; they, against the Lords Sabbath in to the
other balance, and then judge thou good Reader, vvhither has the greater
weight.

For breuitysake, we will compare only these two textes, Exo. 20.8. and Col.
2.16. The one, thou see is a Commandment, and a Moral Commandment, and it
touches the very point in question, to wit, the 7th day Sabbath: yea that the
4th Com. intends the seventh day Saturday Sabbath is so plain, as was it
never doubted of by any. The other, thou see is a dissvvasion from Sabbath
days, indefinitly, that is, from some Sabbath days, for the Apostle says
not, all Sabbath days in general, but Sabbath days, as of some Sabbath
days, in special: so then this text touches not the point in question, to
wit, the 7th day Sabbath: but other annual ceremonial Sabbaths, if this Text,
did make ought against the Moral 7th day Sabbath, it must speak of all
Sabbathes, generally in the largest sense; that so the Moral Sabbath might be
included and condemned too, but the text does not mention the note of
generallity (all) neither is it necessarily to be collected: for 1. their own
expositers as Perkins, Dod, Greenham, Elton, Ames, with diverse others (as
shall be shovvne) do limite this text, unto some Sabbaths, as unto the
ceremonial yearly Sabbaths; and. 2. The text gives light unto it, for it
condemns only such things as never were vvrote in the Moral Law, as meat,
and drink, and new moons, etc. and therefore we judge the Sabbaths condemned
in this Text, to be only such Sabbaths also, as were never vvrote in the 10
Commandments, as their yearly Sabbaths: so the weekly Sabbaths in the 4th
Com. stand still untouched, by this text. 3, suppose we, that the Apostle had
spoke not only of Sabbaths plurally, but also of Sabbaths generally, and had
used the particle all, saying, all Sabbaths; yet we know, that the particle
all, is often times restrained in Scripture, and is not taken in the largest
sense that may be, witness these Scriptures, 1. Cor. 6.12. 1. Cor. 9.25. 1.
Corint. 10.23.33. 1. Cor. 13.2.7. 1. Cor. 15.22. whereby we see, that this
their text Col. 2.16. may be understood of some Sabbaths only, as namely of
the yearly Sabbaths, and so there is no necessity it should touch the moral
weekly Sabbaths at all.

Judge now good Reader, whither of these two textes are more for the purpose;
for, the 4th com. it is understood directly of the 7th day weekly Sabbaths:
but the text Col. 2.16. is, and may be understood of the yearly Sabbaths: and
forasmuch as none ever doubted, that the 4th com. was for the weekly Sabbaths;
and many have vvrote it, that this text Col. 2.16. speaks not of the weekly
Sabbaths, it is partiality to choose Col. 2.16. before Exodus 20.8. Whither is
the more safe think you, to embrace the Lords Sabbaths, from the 4th Com. or,
to reject them, from this text Col. 2.16? Ponder it well in your minds,
vvhither of these two textes of Scripture, should most prevail with you, to
wit, Exodus 20.8. or Col. 2.16. and this note also, that if this text Col.
2.16. prevail with you, then it must eat out the very heart and bowels of the
4th Com. If you embrace the text in their sense, to be understood of the 7th
day weekly Sabbaths: therefore beware what you do: but if you understand this
text Col. 2.16. only of the yearly Sabbaths, such as you read of Leuit.
23.24.32.39. So you may retain both textes still, and one Scripture shall not
shoulder out an other. I have the rather incisted upon this text of theirs
Col. 2.16. because it is their Master, chief, and choicest text against the
Lords Sabbaths.

2dly that you may the better judge of these two textes Exodus 20.8. and Col.
2.16. note, that not these two textes are compared together, as Scripture,
with Scripture; but the collection and exposition of one of these textes, is
compared with, and set against the other Text it self: for, as for the Text
Exodus 20.8. this commands the 7th day, weekly Sabbath expressly, in so many
words, with out collection, or consequence, of ours: the 4th com. has ever
been understood of the 7th day and weekly Sabbaths, by all the Prophets, and by
Christ him self, witness their practice: but the Text, Col. 2.16. does not
disswad from the 7th day weekly Sabbath, expressly, and in so many words; but
it must be drawn, haled, and wrested to the 7th day, weekly Sabbath, by
feeble blind reason, collectiones, and consequences: so that whosoever does
embrace the Text, Col. 2.16. against Gods Sabbaths, rather then the 4th Com.
Exodus 20.8. for Gods Sabbaths; he chooses consequences before Scripture;
collections before Gods express word; and prefers man's blind reason,
before Gods express will and pleasure: I desire the Christian Reader, to mark
this last passage, with double and treble diligence: for in all my book,
there is hardly any thing of greater consequence: the sum whereof is this,
that menes collections, reasons, and consequences, made out of some text of
scripture, are not of that divine nature and infallibility, that they should
countermand and ouerturne an express Commandment of Almighty God. And this
is the very case, betwixt my adversaries and me: for, I bring an express
Commandment, for the Lords Sabbaths; and against them, they bring nothing
else, but their own reasons, collections, and consequences fetched out of this
text, Col. 2.17. and unnecessarily fetched also.

Thus by the comparing of these two textes of Scripture together, it appears
to every eye, that whosoever refuses the Lords Sabbaths, upon that text Col.
2.16. rather then embraces them, from this text Exodus 20.8. he prefers
weak and insufficient arguments, before able and strong arguments: the which
whosoever does, after fufficient notice given him, he bewraieth that he loves
not Gods law in truth of heart, and for it self, but out of by respects:
for, by his preferring this weak text Col. 2.16. before that strong text Exodus
20.8. he ouerturneth and raseth to the grownd, a part of Gods law: and who can
overthrow a part of Gods law, and yet love Gods law? Suppose we that the Title
of A Ministers Living, or of any man's Inheritance, were to be tried, and he
could show but as good Evidence for it, as the 4th com. is for the Lords
Sabbaths; think you he would fear to leese the day, to one that eould show
no better Evidence, then is the text Colos. 2.16. against the Lords Sabbaths?
no undoubtedly: or, suppose we the Title of A Ministers living, or of any man's
Inheritance, were to be tried, and there were 2. Kinds of Evidence at his
choice to plead, the one as strong as the 4th command. is for the Lords
Sabbaths; the other as weak as the text. Col. 2.16. is against the Lords
Sabbaths; if now this Minister, or other person, would make choice of this
weaker Evidence Col. 2.16. would not every man say, surely this Minister or
this other party, care not for their Living or Inheritance, they do not love
them? just so, it is an argument that men love not Gods Law, nor his Sabbaths
therein commanded, when they will part with them so easily and so
growndlesly: it is a sign they are unwilling to know and acknovvledge the
unknown parts of Gods Law, when they go thus partially to work, in the
trial of the point: did men love Gods law, above Gold and Silver, as did
David, they would not part with his commanded Sabbaths, so lightly: a man
shall find something to do to wring men's gold and silver from them; but for
Gods Sabbaths, you shall have them from them, with out strife; where then is
the love to Gods Sabbaths, where is the love unto Gods laws? Ministers and
people may say and talk much, and make them selves and others believe, that
they stand for Gods laws, and love his commandments; but let them selves and
all men judge, vvhither they speak truly or not, by this mark: is this a love
to Gods Law, to overthrow a part of it, which was ever understood by all
the Prophets and Apostles, of the weekly Sabbaths, by a text Col. 2.16. which
does neither mention the weekly Sabbaths at all, nor yet speak of all
Sabbaths generally, so as the weekly Sabbaths must be included necessarily?
this is to supplant a certainty, by a text which is doubtful and uncertain,
is this love? Thus much of the first way, vvherby men bewray their
regardlesnesse and their vnvvillingnesse, to be taught and instructed in the
perfection of the law, and in the unknown parts, there of; and that by
prefering vveake arguments, before able and strong arguments.

The 2d way vvherby men bewray their vnvvillingnesse, to be instructed in
the perfection of the Law, and in the unknown parts thereof is, in that
they admit of insufficient and disallowable Testimony, for the trial of the
point: that this is so, is plain by this, that all people well nigh put all
their trustand confidence for the trial of this point, in their Ministers,
saying our Ministers say, the 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the 4th com. is a
Ceremony, and abolished; and they are men of lerning, and honest godly men; and
therefore we rest in them; and renonvvce the Sabbath day, though it be
commanded by God in the 4th com: they have studied the point, and they are a
multitude of them, and this contenteth me: I know they durst not speak
otherwise then they think, they be such godly holy men etc.

I must confess, the priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the law at his mouth Mal. 2.7. and therefore I have hitherto advised
people, to repair to their Ministers, for direction and information in this
point; but upon better aduisment I shall recant that, I will do so no more:
for; I find their Testimonies, and affirmations, and protestations, in this
point false: it is true, the Priests lips should of right preserve knovvleg,
but I find they do destroy knowledge; it may be said of them, as the Lord
said of those Priests. But ye are gone out of the way; ye have caused many
to fall by the law: Mal. 2.8. just so, our Ministers now a days, if the
people go to them for instruction in this 4th com. they shall have
destruction; the law shall be so expounded as they will cause men to fall by
the law, saying the law commands the Lords day for Sabbath, and not the 7th
day, which is as false as false can be. 2. I find their Testimony
insufficient, and therefore, I shall no more advise peopleto take their
Ministers counsel in this matter.

I come then to show the insufficiency, of our Ministers Testimony; In an
approved and alovvable testimony, 3. things are required the want of any one
whereof does nullify the testimony, as all Divines will confess: the first
is wisdom, for how can he be thought to give a right and true verdict, that
is ignorant? the 2d is, honesty, for how can we hope he should give a true
verdict, that is dishonest? the 3d is Good will, for how can we expect, that
he should spoke that truth which he knovveth, which is an enemy to it? this
evil will to the cause, will not permit him to utter his, knowledge, to the
furtherance of it: or if he does speak it, he will deliver it in such
equivocal and doubtful words and manner, as a man shall be never the better
for it.

For the 2d of these properties, to wite, honesty (for I will begine with the
second) I grant it to be in our Ministers; be it they be all godly and
religiouse, yet this is but one of the properties of a vvarrantable Testimony.
Nevertheless, because many people plead much the honesty of their Ministers,
saying, they are godly, holy, and very zealouse men etc. for my part, if I
could be moved to question their honesty, here is cause enough: for what
greater cause can there be, to move one to suspect their zeal to be
ignorance, and their holiness to be hollovvnesse and and fained, then to hear
them speak or dispute against Gods word, and ordinance, and against an
express com. in the moral law? a man would think, that man can not be sound
at the core and heart, that dares oppose god, and that unnecessarily: the which
they do, that oppose his commanded Sabbaths.

For the first of these properties, to wit, wisdom: I grant they have
wisdom and learning enough to understand this point; but have they employed
this their wisdom and learning, in the impartial search of this point, for
the finding of it out? for take a wise and learned man's testimony in any Art,
or in any point about Druinity, wherein he is not studied, and he is like an
unlearned man; as Sampson, when his Locks were cut, he was weak like an other
man: Now be it that they have never so much learning, and wisdom, yet since
they have not employed their wisdom and learning for the finding out of this
point what avails it that they are wise and learned? for in this matter, they
are neither wise, nor learned; because they have used neither of the^ in this
study: that this is so, appears from their own confession; for some, and of
the very chief and principal of the^, have confessed unto me, and others
unto my friends who have related it truly to me, that they have said that they
have studied indeed to maintain A Sabbath day, out of the 4th com. but whither
it should be upon the 7 day; or the 8th day, on the Saturday, or on the Sunday,
this point never came into their minds to study it: well then, if it has not
been studied by the chief of them, that have bone the most studious and
serching, it must be yielded, that the residue of them, have much more
ouerskipt it: tell me then, if the sayings of these men, against this point of
the Lords Sabbaths, be to be regarded; when as it is a point, which never so
much as came in to their minds to study it: Let people no more boast of the
vvisdome and lerning of their Ministers then, nor yet of their Multitud etc.
and that they all whith one voice, have cried out and spoke against the Lords
Sabbaths, as ceremonies; can a blind man judge of cullers? or a wise man speak
of what he is ignorant of let people no more therefore rely upon the wisdom and
lerning of their Ministers in this point; but let them imitate those noble
Bereans Act. 17. Let them search the Scriptures daily, to see if these things I
tender unto them, be so or no: and this is one cause, why I reject the verdict
of our Ministers in this point, because it wants one of the properties of a
warrantable testimony, to wit, the use of their wisdom and lerning: and
hereby it appears also, upon what poor grownds, our common people have
hither to gone, in relying their souls in this matter, upon their Ministers
zeal, holiness, and learning; what if they be never so zealous, holy, pure,
and learned, it is but a zeal without knowledge, which speaks of things not
soundly studied.

And so I come to the 3d property, namely good will: this property of a
warrantable testimony our Ministers want; for they have no good will at all to
the cause, but all evil will that may be; witness all their words and deeds
in and about this matter: if a man has a cause to be tried before the Judge,
by 12 Jury men; if he suspecteth some one of the 12, to be his enemy, they say,
it is lawful for him to except against that man, for that cause; and the Judge
will cause that man to be drawn, and an other to be sworn in his room:
which declares, that a man suspected to have no good will, is not esteemed a
sit man to determine of a controuercy: Now that there is cause for us to
suspect most Ministers to have evil will to this cause of Gods Sabbaths,
appears 1. by their words and deeds to the contrary: among others, let those
many slanders, and reproachful speeches, and hard vsages, which they have used
against me, for defending this cause of Gods, let these I say testify whither
they be friends or enemies to the cause. 2. There is great cause to suspect
they will be no friends to the cause; because all their lives long hitherto,
they have taught the people to the contrary, to wit, that the 7th day Sabbath
is abolished: and if now they should be friends to this cause, they must
vnteach what they have taught, and this they cannot bear: for so the people
(as some of them have said) would never believe them again; this is such a
discredit, as they that have ever lived in credit, and never denied themselves,
in such a point as this, cannot tell how to bear it; and therefore can bear no
good will to the cause. 3. That they should receive this point from so vile and
contemptible a person as first brocheth it, this cannot be borne: it cannot be
thought, their high spirits will stoop so low. 4. That the profession of
this truth, may endanger them the loss of their fair livings. 5. It crosses
supposed Antiquity. 6. It crosses universality. 7. It is impossible to be
reformed. These and the like reigning and ruling in their minds, how can it be
but suspicious that they have no good will to the cause? why then should it not
be lavvfull for me, to except against these men's testimony, to have them
drawn, so as they may pass no verdict touching the Lords Sabbaths? For their
testimony is quit disabled, as you see, and therefore to be rejected.

Furthermore, parties we say are no fit Judges: Now Ministers in this case
are parties: for, they are violent against the Lords Sabbaths; wherefore they
are no compitent Judges: if therefore people will have any knowledge of this
part of Gods Law, they must get it themselves, by their own study of the
point: they must search my books for Gods Sabbaths, and their books and
sermons against Gods Sabbaths; and impartially weigh the arguments on both
sids, without any regard had at all to the Authors.

Thus yousee, that if a man has knowledge of this truth, and has Honesty
also, yet if his goodwill be wanting his opinion and judgment is of no worth:
yet fruther I argue, if that a man's testimony be worth less, for want of
goodwill to the cause, when as he once by wisdom knovveth the truth first;
then much more worth less is it, when he was stuffed with a prejudice of the
point before he knew it, that is, when he had evil will to the point before
he knew it: now this is the case of our Ministers, as may be coniectured by
the consideration of those 7. arguments before mentioned: for at their very
firsthearsay of the point, before they had read the book, or studied the
point, these stumbling blocks appeared instantly, to wit, if they embrace it,
there follovveth loss of credit, loss of living, and the rest; so as their
minds are so forestalled with fears of these dangers, as they cannot regard
what they hear, nor what they read; their judgment is quite overthrown
for the most part: and in this case, say that they read the book about the
point, they read rather with a mind desirouse to carpe and cavvill at every
thing, as joyful to make false, what they fear to embrace; rather then to be
further enlightened in the point, as I appeal to their consciences, if I say
not true of them: further, the truth hereof appears, that their minds and
judgments are forestaled, against this point, before they read or study the
point: for, many Ministers, yea the most who never studied the point, no nor
ever savv so much as the out side of my former book, yet at the first hearesay
of it, cry burn the book, and the like: wherefore, if people shall say, I, but
now our Ministers have better studied the point, they have seen and redd his
book, and are yet as violent against it as before etc. why what marvel,
seeing they set upon readinge it, with a forestaled opinion? they resolved by
reading it, to get no good by it, but to see where it was vveake in their
conceit, and so to blaze that a broad: for they want that property of an
allowable witness, to wit, goodwill.

And what though people say, their Ministers are many, who are of the same
mind? for the opinions of 10000. of them, are not worth a rush in this case:
the opinion of some one Minister, who speaks for the Lords Sabbath, with
hazard to loose his living, and credit, with the rest, is more to be esteemed
and prized by the people I auowch it, then is the opinions of 10000. Ministers,
who speak against the Lords Sabbaths, not daring to do otherwise, for fear
of loss of living, credit, and those other discommodities forementioned; the
Testimony of one Martyr, is of more worth, then of all his persecutors: for the
witness of these many, is to be suspected, to speak for their proffit rather
then for a good conscience, but the witness of that one, is to be thought to
speak rather for his conscience, then for his proffit. Wherefore if people
vvil be led by the judgment of others rather then by themselves; or if they
will lean any thing at all to other men's judgments, let them choose to follow
the opinion of him that loses by his judgment, rather then of them who make
again by their opinion

That this point may be yet cleerer, see what a power carnal fear has over a
good conscience: in the days of Christ, it is said Ioh. 12.42. Nevertheless
among the chief Rulers, many believed in him; but because of the pharisees they
did not confess him, lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue: lo here
what a carnal fear will do, it can make men afraid to speak and confess,
what they belecue is a truth! the fear of being excommunicated, made them
that they durst not confess Christ him self: you know also, how some of the
Martyrs through fear, have for a season denied the truth: you know also, how
Peter, through fear denied his Lord and Master, yea and forswore him too:
wherefore, be it that Ministers have wisdom and lerning and do know this
truth; be it also, that they be godly and make conscience; why all this may
be, and yet of fear they may deny Gods truth when they do know it; and also
much sooner, of fear they may refuse to learn to know this truth, when it
is tendered them: for Peter knew Christ, and Peter was a godly Minister also,
and made conscience: and so the Martyrs, and yet you see how far fear to
displease men, and fear of damage may prevail.

The consideration therefore, of these many stumbling blocks in the way of
Ministers, whereof they cannot be ignorant, should me think strike them with
a fear, that they speak partially and corruptly, when they speak against
the Lords Sabbaths; knowing how easy a thing it is, for men's minds to be
forestaled with a prejudice, when a point is tendered unto them, attended with
so many discommodities as this is; I wish they would stay upon the meditation
of this point a while, that it may do them good.

Now as for people, since they have heard at large, how insufficient the
opinion and judgment of their Ministers is, whilst they speak against the
Lords Sabbathes, if hereafter they will still cleave, unto their judgments for
the trial of this truth, they shall bewray their unwillingness to be
instructed in the integrity and perfection of Gods Law, and consequently, that
they love not the Law of God in truth. Yea, a worse matter; they bewray that
they make Idols of their Ministers, equalling them to God, if not advancing
them above God: for many people, yea zealouse professoures, do set more by
what their Ministers say, then by what God himself says: for God says
expressly in that Moral Law, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it. No says
the Minister, you must not Sanctify it: and to culler his speech, he cales and
miscales it a ceremony and Jewish etc. now of these two, that is, of God or the
Minister, who is obeyed? are not the Ministers words regarded, and Gods word
neglected? who cold think, that men professing godliness, should so slight
their God?

Did men love Gods Law, above gold and silver, as David did; and did they
account it as their inheritance, as David did; they would never hazard the
loss of any portion of it, upon such sleity shifts as these, to say our
Ministers speak against it: And our Ministers say it is a ceremony, and the
like: when the Title of A man's Inheritance is in question, be it that one
Lawyer says his title is not good, yet the Heir will not so rest in his
judgment, but he will try an other: and if an hundredth Counsailers should tell
him one after an other, that his Title is naught, yet if among them all, but
some one whom he thinks an honest man, should tell him his Title is sound and
good; would not he retain him for his Counsailer, and cleave unto his
judgment? so, if you were in love with the ways and Laws of God, though an
hundredth Ministers should all speak against them, or against any branch or
portion of them: you would reject them all, suspecting their zeal, holiness,
and judgments, that dare speak against any of Gods Laws, and you would cleave
unto that one, who speaks for God, and for his Laws.

There remains yet two uses more, to be made of this exhortation, to love
Gods Law: the former is this; is it so, that thou do love Gods Law, then
thou vvilt ever more side it, and take part, not only with such parts of
Gods Law, as are already infalliblie known unto thee to be parts thereof; but
also thou will take part with such parts of Gods Law, as are but suspected
by common presumptiones, to be parts of the same: as if there be but
probabilites, coniecturall hopes; and liklihoods of it: thus an Heir will do
with his Inheritance, if any man shall inform him after he is come to his
Lands, that in all likelihood, such an Acre of Land is percell of his
Inheritance, he will redily embrace this nevvse, forthwith he will search his
Evidences, and he will to Counsel upon this intelligence, and if there
remain but a possibility or probale liklihood that it may be his, he will to
Law for it, etc. The case is a like, if a man be but excequtor to his deceased
friend, he will not only use means, for the gathering up of such debtes, as
in his own knowledge, are owing unto his deceased friend, but also, if there
be but a bruit and rumor, that such a one owes his friend a some of money, or
if he can get but any inkling or notice of such a debt, though it be but a bare
liklihood, he will forthwith take part that way, and use all possible
means, to make it appear to be a debt, and to bring it out of doubt, and
question.

Let us apply this then; the Lords Sabbaths on the Saturday, are a part of
Gods law, and plain enough too if men had minds to see; but because of their
vnwillingenesse to side it with god, for his Sabbaths, therefore we must here
suppose the matter doubtful, where no doubt is, and but probable,
coniecturall, and likly: that Gods Sabbaths, are things probable, coniecturall,
and likly to be in force, I thus make it good; 1. because they stand written
and in rouled, among the Moralles, in the Decalogue 2. because all the other 9.
commandments, which were de^uerd at the same time, and in the same manner,
they all belong unto us; and therefore it cannot be less then lykly, that this
for Gods Sabbaths also, should belong unto us: especially since also, they
confess that the other duties, of rest and holiness, commanded at one breath
with the Time of Gods Sabbath, and in the self same commandment, these belong
unto us; it cannot be then, but likly at the least, that the Time of Gods
Sabbaths also should belong unto us: it were very strange that 9. of the 10.
com. should descend unto us, and not the whole 10. nay, more strange it is,
that 9. and an half, or that 9. and the greatest part of the 10th should
descend unto us, and not all the 10. fully and completely; yet such strange
stuff is delivered us now, if we vvil believe it: it is as if the kingdom
of England, should descend to King Charles, with all the Shires, Counties, and
Cities, save London, or Norwich: 3. it is likly and probable that the Lords
Sabbaths are ours, because, they were once in the possession of our
Auncestores, the primitive Churches, who kept the Saturday Sabbath, for 300. or
400. years together after Christ's Ascension. 4. there is some probability in
it, in that some one man (as my self) does stand up to defend the Lords
Sabbaths: let but any one man in a County, rise up, and inform for theking,
and forth with the Judges of Assise will admit his information, and Counsel
shall plead for the cause: albeit the Judges, nor happily, hardly any in the
whole County, do know the matter to be so, besides the Informer and one or two
more with him: so then, the information by one single man, may make the matter
probable and likly to be true. It is a clear case then, that by common
presumptions, it is not less then likly, that the Saturday Sabbath, is a part
of Gods Law belonging unto us.

Is it so, what remains then, but that we exhort and persuade men every
where, to side it, and to take part with this part of Gods Law, touching
Gods Sabbath, whenever it comes unto trial, or into controuercy; but never
to oppose it, or to take up arms against it: to this end, let me propound unto
you sundry reasons and Motives, as 1. the Law of God, with all the parts
thereof, are the Inheritance of the Church Deuteronomy. 33.4. and so David made it his
Inheritance Psalm. 119.111. and our Church vvherof we are members, has also
taken this law, to be our Inheritance, as has been shown: now a man were
unnatural, if he would not side it with him self, and take part in defense
of that which is his own; the law of God, it is our own, in as much as we have
a share in it as in a common Inheritance, being we are members of the Church;
yet behold how unnatural many men are, both Ministers, and people! if Gods
Sabbaths come into question, they all forsake them, like as the Disciples did
Christ, when he was apprehended: nay worse, they turn enemies unto them,
they nickname them reprochfully, and smite them with the tongue, calling them
Iuish, and Iudaisme, and ceremonies, and shadows: why be it that this part
of Gods law, touching his Sabbaths, be not certainly known unto thee, to
belong unto thee, only thou have but some probabilities, conjectures, and
common presumptions that it does belong unto thee; yet, if thou do not
improve all these probable arguments, and manage these common conjectures and
presumptiones, to the utmost for god and for his Sabbaths, it bewraieth, that
thou art not so faith full, in executing the will of thy god, as many
Excecutors are in execution of the will of their deceased friend: for they
vvil omit no debt that they can have any inkling of; but thou bast notice of a
debt of the Sabbath day, owing to god, and yet vvilt not side it with god, nor
improve these tidings to the utmost, in behalf of thy god. It bevvraieth also,
that thou take not Gods law to be thine Inheritance: for if thoudidst, thou
could not sit still in silence, when thou have notice brought thee, that
some moitie and portion thereof is wrongfully detained from thee.

A 2d motive is, because a man's taking in with Gods Sabbaths, will declare
him to be a friend to the law of god: every man would be esteemed a friend unto
Gods law: well then, let it appear thou at so indeed and not in name only,
by taking in with this part of Gods law, which commands the Saturday
Sabbath: use thy wites, employ thy study, thy tongue, thy friends, and what thou
can for the furtherance of this part of Gods law, concerning his Sabbath:
The Lords 7th day Sabbath, it is lost, as was the vvomans Groate luk: 15.8.
she had 10. groates, and having lost but one of the 10. she never leaves
sweeping and seeking till she has found it; so should we for this one
command, lost from the 10. if a man has an 100. sheep, and loses but one of
them (says our Savior) he leaves the nynty and nine in the wilderness, and
goes after that one, until he find it Luk: 25.4. so should we take more
pains and care and study, to regaine this Command, touching the Lords
Sabbaths, then after all the other nine, and an half: but how can they be
esteemed friends to Gods law, who side it, with those, that side it against
Gods Sabbaths?

A 3d motive is from the worth and excellency of Gods Law: the Prophet David
tells us, that it is to be loved above gold, yea above most fine gold, Ps.
119.127. and it was unto him, better then thowsands of gold and silver, Ps.
119.72. if therefore thou know not the price and vvorth of Gods Law, and the
Sabbaths therein commanded, learn it of David who knew the value of it, it is
better then gold and silver; yea, as good, as all riches put together, Ps.
119.14. no man will be an enemy to gold and to silver; be not thou then an
enemy to Gods Sabbaths; for they are better then thowsands of gold and silver,
we may beleene the Prophet David: every man will be a friend unto riches, why
be thou a friend then unto Gods Sabbaths, for they are as good as all riches in
the world.

A 4th motive to stir the up to side it with Gods Sabbaths, is because in so
doing, thou shall side it, and take part with God himself: for the 7th day
Sabbaths, they are Gods; and therefore, he calls them his, saying, mine holy
day, Isa. 58.13. and the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, Exo.
20.10. and, they are Gods because God commanded them, Remember the Sabbath day,
Exodus 20.8. whosoever therefore takes part with the Lords Sabbaths, he takes
part with God also, whose those Sabbaths are: it is usual with God and man,
to take that as done to them selves, which is done to that which by way of
excellency they call theires: every man would be glad to take part with God
(they say) al though it were against all the world; for God is strongest, and
wisest, and able to reward a man well for his pains, and his favor is better
then liefe; well then, stand for Gods Sabbaths, for they are Gods, and so thou
shall take in with God, and fight under his Banner. But woe to that man that
opposes Gods Sabbaths; for as the other bewraieth him self to be a friend of
Gods, so this, bewraieth him self to be an enemy to God, and God will destoy
all his fees. If this argument will not avail with men I know not what will;
if they had rather take part with men, against God and that which is Gods;
then with God and that which is Gods, against men, then let them go on; if it
go well with such, I shall not care how I live here. It is houlden good
policy, to side it with the strongest, for my part I know none stronger then
God, I will therefore side it with him; For that's the safest: wherefore, I have
resolved upon it, to take part with Gods Sabbaths, and with them to live, and
to dye.

The 5th and last motive shall be from the consideration of the Title whose it
is; and this is to be regarded, for if the Title in controuercy, be but a
common man's, then to oppose it, is but common danger; but if it be the Title of
a King, then men had need take heed how they take parts against it: so the
Title of the Sabbaths, now in controuercy, to be tried; if they were called
man's Sabbaths, and of man's institution, then to oppose them the danger were not
so great: But these Sabbaths are called Gods Sabbaths, of his institution;
therefore the Title here is not man's, but Gods, the King of kings: here then
take heed if ever thou tookest heed how thou oppose Gods Title: if a father
has the Title of his land, in trial before the Judge, though the bastard
regards not whither he wine or loose, because he knows that he shall never
inherit; yet the true borne son, wishes in his heart, that his fathers Title
may have the day, so long as he sees there is a probability that it is his
fathers: So doubtless, every true borne son of God, cannot but wish from his
heart, that the Title of God his father, touching his Sabbaths may prevail,
rather then go down: but he that regards not which end goes forward, as we
say, he bewraieth himself to be no son, but a bastard; but he that not only
regards not which end goes forvvard, but which is far worse, turns
himself enemy to his fathers Title, insomuch as he dares with an impudent
face dispute, and openly in Court plead against, and in pulpit preach against
his fathers Title, what a one he bewraieth himself to be, I have no names bad
enough to give him.

If an informer comes into the Court, and informs for the King, albeit the
Court knovveth not how he is able to make good and prove his information, yet
it being a matter probable, seeing it is the Kings cause, both the Judge and
all the Justices, even the whole Court, do countenance the cause: yea and so
far forth take in with it, as that if it be possible, so as no injustice be
done, nor any Law of the Realm thereby violated, he that informs for the
King, shall have the day, rather then a private subject; and good reason for
it: Well, in the case of the Lords Sabbaths, I inform for the King of kings,
the King of heaven and earth; it is now the part of all Gods Ministers, both
superior as Bishops, and inferior as common Preachers, to take in with this
cause of Gods Sabbaths, as Gods cause, their Lord and King; and to countenance
it to their utmost; yea, so far forth to back it, and take part with it, as
Gods Sabbaths may have the day, if no law of God, nor text in Scripture, be
thereby violated, as I dare pawn my life for it, there shall not. If Ministers
in the Church, both superiors and inferiors, do not thus honor God before
the people, by giving his cause the preeminence; the Magistrates of the common
weal, shall rise up in judgment against them, and condemn them.

I come now to the last use of the point; Is it so, that thou love the law
of God; then take up a daily lamentation, for the lamenesse and imperfection of
Gods law; for the weekly violation of Gods 4th com. and for the profanation
of Gods Sabbaths; if we have not Gods Law, in its integrity, and perfection, as
we have not, if we want his Sabbath therein commanded, then have we but a
lame and imperfect law; and if the Saturday be Gods Sabbath, as I have shovvne
it is, and shall further prove hereafter, then is the 4th com. weekly broken,
and Gods Sabbaths weekly profaned.

As David has been our President, shevving us how we should love Gods law;
so let him be our President, to show us how we should mourn for the
violation and transgression of Gods Law: Mine eyes gush out (says he) with
rivers of waters, because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136. And again, I
saw the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word, Psalm.
119.158. It is a property then of a Godly man, to mourn, and to grieve, to see
Gods Laws transgressed; and the reason of that his sorrow and grief, is
because he loves Gods Law, as David did: Oh then that all sorts of people,
would bewray their love to Gods Law, by their sorrow of heart, to see it
transgressed weekly, in the profanation of Gods Sabbaths? Again, and do
thou indeed love the Law of God? how can thou but take it to heart, to see
this holy and Divine Law of thy God so mangled and defaced, so lame and
imperfect, as in these days it is, in all Christian Churches? It is, and ever
has been, a special favor of God, to betrust any Nation or people, with his
word and Oracles; as we may see it in Romans 3.1.2. What is the preferment of the
Jew? etc. much enery way, for chiefly, because unto them were of credit
committed the Oracles of God. Where the Apostle counts it, a preferment of
the Jew; and the chief preferment to have the word of God committed unto their
custody: and it is reported of them, that they have been ever very faithful,
in keeping the letter of the text uncorrupted. Among all Nations and people it
has pleased Almighty God, to prefer this our English Nation with this chief
preferment, and to be trust us with the custody of his word and Oracles, those
10 Commandments, wrote with his own finger: our Church is now become the
receptacle and House of God, wherein he has laid up his word, for its
conservation; it is the grownd and pillar, to supporte and bear up this
truth, as Paul. caleth it, 1. Tim. 3.15. has God, thus in special favor to
our Nation, preferred us above many Nations, and that with his chief
preferment, to betrust us, with the custody of his Law and Oracles; and shall
we prove so unfaithful to him, as to take care but of some pieces of these
Oracles only? What Nation (says Moses) is so great, that has ordinances and
Laws, so righteouse, as all this Law, which I set before you this day? Deuteronomy.
4.8. has God betrusted us with a righteouse Law; and with a Law so righteouse,
as no Nation under heaven but such as know God, and such as have the very same,
has the like to it; Yea, not only are some pieces of this Law, so righteouse;
but all the whole Law, is of the same nature; so says Moses, so righteouse, as
(all this Law) is which I set before you this day: and shall not we preserve
then all this Law? the whole Law, intirly, in its perfection? we should blush
for shame to do otherwise: we should lament and mourn to see it otherwise.

It Is true, we keep these Oracles intirly in the letter, so do Papists; but
what is the letter, when we weaken diminish and abolish the binding force of it?
for we say, this part of Gods Oracles, (But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work) does not bind us Christians:
In it, that is, in it 7th day, thou shall not work, says God: I but this
prohibition binds not now say some Ministers: no? what do we with
Laws, if they bind us not? as good take away the sense of the words of the
Law, and so it shall be senseless; as to take away the binding of the Law,
whereby it is made forcelesse: the binding power of a Law, is the life and
soul of the Law, take away then its binding power, and it is but a
deadlieflesse Law; it is but a Cipher, or a blanke; and so the Church shall be
but like the Lottery pot, which houldeth some blankes among the prises:
suppose we should say of the other 9 Oracles, that we preserve the letter of
them intirly, but hereunto we should add this, that they bind not us
Christians now; what bauocke should we thus make of the Moral Law? it is all
one therefore to reject the Law, as to reject its binding power, vvherby it
binds us.

We have already shovvne, how this Law of God is mangled and defaced; oh that
all people would bewail this! oh that the King would take it to heart! so
did the good King Josiah, when the Law had been lost for a time, he rent his
clothes, 2. King. 22.11. oh that the Bishops of the Land would take it to
heart! so did Elie the Priest, when he heard that the Ark of God was taken
from them, 1. Sam. 4.17.18. he died for grief of heart; why the Lords
Sabbaths, were his hallowed times, as the Arc his holy place. Oh that the
people of the land, would take it to heart! so did the people in Nehemiahs
time; for says the text, all the people wept, when they heard the words of the
Law, Nehe. 8.9. And is there not like cause for our people to weep also, when
in the Congregation they hear these Tenn Oracles read, and yet but nine, or
nine and a piece of them kept? for that which concerns the 7th day Sabbath,
is altogether by every one neglected. Ezra the Priest when he took into
consideration, the unlawful Marriages of the people, it is said, he rent his
clothes, and plucked of the hair of his head, and beard, and sat down
astonished, Ezra. 9.3. because of their strange Marriages: how should we then
be affected to think of the strange Sabbathes, which now are kept? for we
have divorced and put away from us, Gods ancient Sabbaths, and we are married
to a new Lords day Sabbath, a strange Sabbath, never heard of in Scripture,
for a Sabbath.

Great cause we have to lament: for, 1. the Sacred and holy day, which is of
greatest antiquity, is profaned; this Holy day, being as ancient, as the world
it self, Genes. 2.3. secondly, the most honorable Holy day, is vnhallovved;
For God him self made it an holy day, by blessing it, and sanctifying it,
Genes. 2.3. Yea, and God himself rested on it, Genes. 2.2.3. Therefore it is
two ways honorable. 3. That day which God expressly commanded, Exodus 20.8.
is profaned, and by profaning of it, not only Gods 4th Com. is violated; but
also, Gods example is profaned, and set at naught: for we do not now imitate
God, by resting on the 7th day as he did, we have an other day, to wit, the
8th day. And also Gods reason, which he annexed to the 4th Com. to allure and
persvvad men to keep his 7th day Sabbath, this is nullified, and out of all
use in these our days, and so Gods reasons are profaned, as not vvorth the
naming in our Churches: is not this to be lamented, when neither Gods Com. nor
Gods example, nor yet Gods reasons, can avail with us? sometimes things
honorable, sometimes things Ancient are admired and esteemed; but here lo,
neither the Antiquity, nor yet the Honourablenesse of the Lords Sabbaths, can
avail with us, and is not this to be lamented? what an iron age live we in,
that none of all these cane move us?

A 4th cause of lamentation is, because by this neglect of the right day, and
keeping of a vvrong day; by setting a common and unhallowed day, to wit, the
Lords day, in room of a Sanctified and holy day, namly the Sabbath day, all
our Religion in keeping this vnballowed day, (for God never hallowed it) in
Conscience of the 4th com. is mere superstition; and God may say unto our
people an other day, who required this at your hands? thus are people abused;
and is not this a cause of lamentation? some lament for the Ceremonies of the
Church, as the Surplisse and the like: some complain of Arminianisme how it
spreads: some complain of Popery used in corners of the land: every one
complains of his grievance, but I hear none of them all complain of the
profanation of the Lords Sabbaths, of Gods example, of Gods reasons, and of
Gods 4th com. no man takes these to heart, albeit every one of them have their
hands in these profanationes: I wish the current of men's complaints, would
turn unto these things, which more neerley concerns them, then those others.

A 5th cause of lamentation is, because unto the conscionable sanctifying of
the Lords Sabbaths, there are promises annexed, see Isa. 58.13.14. and on the
other side, to such as profane them, there are curses annexed, se Numb.
15.32.35. Nehem. 13.1718. now inasmuch as we profane that very day, to wit,
the Saturday Sabbath, unto which these promises were properly made; it
follovveth, that we are not now capable of any of those promises; because we
keep not the day, unto which the promises were made: I confess that our
Divines have and do apply these promises, unto a Counterfaite day, to wit, the
Lords day, and that they might do it with the less suspicion, and with the
greater applause, they have like counterfaiters and dissemblers, called this
Lords day, Sabbath day: thus by their humane imposition, of new names, upon the
days of the week, the simple well meaning people are beguiled: but the day
unto which these promises properly do belong, it is the day, called in a
Divine account Sabbath day, not unto the day so called in an humane account;
not unto the day called Lords day.

And is not this to be lamented, when people neglect their proffites, and
commodites on the Lords day; some loose their Corn, some their Hay, many poor
men, their labor and work whereby they maintain their families; with many
other losses and damages to their estates, which might be rekoned up; and all
these the well minded people of the land, do willingly neglect and loose,
and all in hope of these promises; trusting to make a better exchang, that for
loss of erthly things in conscience to Gods Command. they shall gain heavenly
things, and interest into Gods promises: but behold, they must fail of the
promises, because they fail God in the Condition: for Gods promises rune thus,
if thou perform the condition, which is to Sanctify the day named Sabbath day,
not the day named Lords day: tell me now, is not this matter of just
lamentation, to see the people of the land, thus beguiled and deceived, and
that both in their temporal estate, and also of the promises of God? if men
have any compassion and brotherly love in them, they cannot but sorrow and
mourn for these things.

On the contrary, as for those forementioned Curses, annexed to the Sabbath
day, and the profaners of it: vvheras our people hope to avoid them, by a
religiouse sanctifying of the Lords day; behold, the people to be pitied! for
all that, they fale into the danger of these Curses; because they profane that
very day, named Sabbath day, unto the profanation of which, these curses were
poperly made: for these curses, were never made unto the profanation of the day
named Lords day, or unto the day nicknamed and counterfeitly called Sabbathday,
as now the Lords day is: for these curses were threatened long before ever the
Lords day, had any being, or could be kept for a Sabbath day, if it had ever so
been kept: as for their religiouse sanctifying of the Lords day in conscience
of this 4th com. God may say unto them, who required it at your hands? and is
not this also matter of just lamentation, to see well minded people, strive and
endeavor with great diligence, to avoid Gods Curses, and yet by reason of
miseinformation, and corrupt teaching, to fale into danger of them? yea, it is
the more pitiful, in that the self same labor and deuotio^s, had they been
performed both on the day before, they had for certain, and out of all doubt,
both been liable to all the promises, made to them that keep Gods Sabbaths;
and also been freed from the least danger of the Curses, threatened to such as
break the Lords Sabbaths.

The 6th and last cause of lamentation, is to see the priests of the Lord, of
all men, Gods Ministers, turn enemies to Gods Law: for they will needs
without any necessity at all, make something in Gods Law ceremonial and so
abolished, Judicial and so to be hated; they cannot abide that Gods 10.
command. should be like a chain of 10. linkes, all of pure gold, one link as
well as an other: but though all the 9. be pure gold, yet some one of the 10.
must be partly gold partly lead; partly moral partly ceremonial, as if snow
could be partly white partly blake; or a shadovv and ceremony placed in the
heart of a moral Law! thus they make Gods Law, like unto Nebukadnezzars
Image, which he savve in his dream, Dan. 2.32. partly gold, and partly clay:
surely this their fiction is but a dream, Gods Law must be moral in every
jot and Title of it, it must be all gold or none gold, all clay or none clay:
but our Ministers will be partial in the Law; they will not endure it to be
moral in all the parts thereof; they are enemies to the integrity and
perfection of it: that servants should not take part with the commandments of
their Masters, but oppose them; that children should not take part with the
command. of their fathers, but turn enemies to them; that subjects should not
take in with their King to defend his Laws, but set them selves against
them; it is undutifulness, disloyalty, and rebellion; but that Ministers,
whom God has taken so near unto him, as to make them of his Counsel; and to
make it their proper office to defend his Laws, and to this end has allowed
them large maintenance as the Tyeth of the Realm etc. that these kind of men,
should refuse to defend his Law, and turn enemies unto it in whole or in
part, what should I say? it is high time the world were at an end: as the
Sabbath is Gods ordinance, so the Decalogue is Gods Law: now were men
professed enemies to God, then if they should do what in them lies, to
abolish his Sabbaths, and to reject as much of his Law as possibly they could
with any color devise, it were but suitable to their profession; but that we,
who are professed friends to God and to his Law, and therefore should embrace
as many of his ordinances, and as much of his Law as possibly we could; that
we I say, should reject, any of Gods ordinances, and desire and endeavor to
reject and abolish as much of Gods Law, as possibly by any wite we can
devise, this is monstrously horrible, and much to be lamented.

This I dare considently auowch, that if our Ministers pleased but to take
part with God, and would but speak for Gods Sabbaths, what with a very
little study, they are enabled to speak, both by parts of nature, and Art,
that all the world could never be able to vvithstand them; they would
victoriously bear down all oppofition: and is it not to be lamented, when
Ministers will not do for God, what they can, or may do? but in stead of
their little study in defense of this cause, all their care and study is how
they may be still ignorant of the point, lest by knowledge of it they should
speak for it, and so endanger their livings and reputations and the like: for
generally they do eschew the reading of my book, whereby they might be
instructed in the point, without their labor, unless it be some few, who
read it only to spy a mote in mine eye, and that they may pick out something
to say against it: yea, they eschew also all arguing conferences, among them
selves in private, whereby the point may be scanned and come to light: they
permit not any of their brethren, to take up a defense of the Lords Sabbaths,
and to argue against the Lords day, albeit he does it but for argument sake,
the better to boult out the truth; if any in the company will be more
ingenuouse and true hearted then the rest, as desirouse by opposeing of our
tenets to find out the truth, the shall be snibed and curbed; some man of
eminency in the place will put all to silence with such words as these, no more
of this point now, no more of this argument in this place; thus they are afraid
least God should by their conferences inlighten them: these things have been
related to me by credible persons: and are not these things to be lamented?
any man shall have free liberty, heart and good will, to speak in their
company, any thing he can invent, against Gods Sabbaths, and for the Lords day,
but not on the contrary, to speak for the Lords Sabbaths, and against the
Lords day: take my word for it, you shall never hear 2. Ministers scann this
point pro and con before any of the people, as you shall hear them in some
other points of doubt: nay it were to be wished, that any 2. Ministers would
by themselves when none hear, them, argue the point seriously pro and con, the
one taking the one part, the other its contrary, that so Gods truth may be
found out; but I fear me, a man shall as soon dravv a Bear to the stake, to
be baited with dogs, as dravv them to any such course as may bring the point
to light; they cannot but foresee, the issue of this course would be, what
they would should not be: and is not this to be lamented, if I should not
prevail with them in so reasonable a request as this is? I desire my brethren
of the Ministri, to take into deepest consideration Gods Sabbaths, to study the
point seriously, to cast a side prejudice; and out of a love to this ordinance
of Gods, study but what may be found in its defense, to study but with a like
good will to defend this point, as they do other points: and is not this to
be lamented if I shall not prevail?

When Paul was to take his last farvvell of the Church of Ephesus, he could say
with a good conscience, that he was pure from the blood af all men, because he
had kept nothing back, but had showed them all the counsel of God, Act.
20.26.27. But how many of our Ministers, when they lie a dying, shall be able
thus comfortablie to plead for themselves I know not: can they say they have
kept nothing back of Gods counsel, what not his Sabbaths? can they say to
their flock, they have showed them, all the Counsel of God; what all the
Law, in its integrity and perfection? what every Jot and Title of the Law?
have they baulked nothing for fear and carnal respects? or for want of that
industry that might and ought to have been in them, in serching out every jot
and title of Gods Law in its perfection? for this let them know, that they
must be countable to God, not only for baulking and concealing what they
know; but also for not declaring unto the people, what by their study, they
might and ought to have known; if therefore they have not been so painful and
studiouse in the serching out of this part of Gods Law, as they might and
ought to have been, they may acquit themselves before men, but before God they
shall never acquit them selves, especially, if they have refused a light into
Gods Law, when it has been tendered unto them: and is not this to be
lamented, when Ministers will dye with festered and guilty consciences?

Many fear that Popery may invade us again, and that were dangerouse; but
sure I am Sabbath breaking does reign amongst us, and that is more dangerouse:
I mean it is more dangerouse to continue among us, then the other to invade
us: for every man is ashamed to say ought in defense of Popery; but on the
other side, every man is imboldened to speak in defense of Sabbath breaking,
and no man is ashamed to speak against the Lords Sabbaths, no not the Lords
Ministers; wherefore this sin, is a dangerouse sin, men may commit it with
authority of their Ministers; men may commit it without blushing, no man may
check and control them by the 4th com. for their Ministers will defend them
in it: and is not this to be lamented, when men shall be boulstered out and
defended in sin, and that by Authority of the Ministry? when I marvel
then, will this sin be reformed? As it was in those unlawful marriages,
the text says, And the hand of the Princes and rulers, has been chief in
this trespass, Ezra. 9.2. So may I truly say, in this Sabbath breaking, the
hand of the Ministers and Teachers, has been chief in this trespass: by so
much the more therefore to be lamented.

But some man may say unto me, what shall it proffit a man to lament these
corruptions of our time? he shall amend nothing thereby; for men are settled in
their courses; and there is no stirring of them etc. Well, be it so, if needs it
must be so; yet this know, that if by thy tears, thou canest not amend
others, yet hereby is not thy labor lost to thy self, unless thou thikest
that the Prophet David's tears were in vanie, when he said, Mine eyes gush out
with rivers of waters, because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136. God has
a bottle for such tears; for here by thou bewraiest thy love to God: and thy
love to Gods Law; and thy love to the welfare of the souls of thy brethren:
and further, as God diliuered just Lot vexed with the sines of those times, 2.
Pet. 2.7. so will God deliver thee, in the day of vengeance and of his hotest
indignation; and to this end, God will give his Angels charge, to mark thee
out for a son of Salvation, as he did those Jews in Jerusalem, who mourned
for the sins of those times; And the Lord said unto him, go through the mids
of the City, through the mids of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads
of them that mourn, and cry for all the abominations that be done in the mids
thereof, Ezekiel. 9.4. our lamentation therefore, for the sins of our times, shall
not be in vain.

For conclusion; let us make our daily prayers, unto Almighty God, that he
would bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived:
and again to confirm this prayer, say, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it etc. But the 7th day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work etc. for, the Lord
rested the 7th day, Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed
it.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

AMEN.
CHAP. III. A discovery of the weakness and insufficiency, of all those
Textes of Scripture, and arguments, which are usually brought, to prove the
Lords day, a Sabbath day, by Divine institution.
I Have finished the two first parts of my book; the former whereof was in
defense of the Moral Law: the latter was an exposition of the 4th com.
together with a discovery of the horrible and abominable corruptions and
abuses thereof. My third task, and third part of my book, shall be to
discover the weakness and insufficiency of those Textes of Scripture, and
arguments, which are usually brought, to prove the Lords day, a Sabbath day, by
Gods ordinance and appointment.

The Lords day, is not Sabbath day, by Divine institution: or, The Lords day,
is not Gods Sabbath day.
SECT. I.
FIrst of all, a word or two touching the name Lords day: It is to be
observed, that this name Lords day, the which we now put upon our Sunday, or
first day of the week; yea upon every S^nday, and upon every first day of the
week, it is not found to be so used in the Scriptures: that is, it is not
found in the Scriptures, that every Sunday in a year was called Lords day: For
all the iiij Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, yea and S. Paul also,
they never called our Sunday, or first day of the week, Lords day; for, they
ever called it, the first day of the week, by it old name, see Mat. 28.1.
Mark. 16.2.9. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.19. Actor. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2. Only once it
is found perhaps, to be called Lords day, but it was long first, as by S. John
Revel. 1.10. so the odds is 8 to one; for our Sunday, is found to be called 8
times, the first day of the week, for once called Lords day.

The knowledge of this point may be useful unto us these vvayes; first, is it
so, that our Sunday had no new name put upon it by none of the Evangelists,
but that it was freque^tly called the first day of the week still, by its
old name, and that after Christ his resurrection; Then is it a matter very
likly and probable, that this day had no new institution or ordination, but
that it remained after Christ his resurrection, as it was before his
resurrection, in its old nature still, that is, to be a vvorking day still, as
it was before: For it is very likely, that if the old nature and use of the day
had been changed, that the old name also would have been changed, and a new
name put upon it. If this name Lords day, had betokened any change of the use
of this day, from common use unto an holy use, in memory of Christ his
resurrection, me think some of the 4 Evangelists would have said some such
like thing; and some of them would in token thereof, have altered the name of
the day, and called it Lords day: but for so much as the Evangelists (who do
largly, and every one of them, set forth the Lords resurrection) have
neuerthemore, either spoke any thing, any of them touching the change of the
day, in memory of the resurrection; no nor so much as given it the new name
Lords day; but constantly all of them agreeing, in retaining its old name
still; it is a thing very likly, that they knew nothing of the alteration or
change of the day at all: It is most probable therefore, that our Sunday or
Lords day, was a working day, in the days of the 4 Evangelists, after Christ
his Resurrection, and at that time, when they wrote their Gospels.

2dly, but suppose we for argument sake, that this name Lords day, had some
secret virtue in it (as the patrones of it would make us believe) to betoken,
that the day so named, must needs be a Sabbath day; yet it follows not, that
every of our Sundays, and every first day of the week, must be kept for a
Sabbath day; for, it is not found in the Apostles times, that they called every
Sunday, Lords day, as we do; for they, the most of them, never named our
Sunday, Lords day, but still called it, by its old name, the first day of the
week; yea, 8 times it was called by its old name, the first day of the week,
to once the Lords day: Wherefore, it is likly, that this Sunday was kept for a
Sabbath, not constantly, but seldom, as namely, upon some one first day of the
week or other, once in a quarter or half a year, or once in a year, or the
like: so often as it can be proved, that our Sunday, was called Lords day; so
often it possibly may be, that our Sunday must be kept for a Sabbath, and not
ofter: now I suppose, it will trouble the patrons of this weekly Lords day
Sabbath, to prove, that ever there was any more Sundays called Lords day, then
one in a year only: so then, the most that can be made of this name Lords
day, is to urge the people to keep it for a Sabbath day, once in a year
only. What injury then is done to the people, to cause them to refrain the
works of their calling, on every Sunday throughout the year; and that under
this pretense that every Sunday in the year is the Lords day, and so a Sabbath
day? let this be thought on.

Secondly as touching the name of the day; It is to be observed, that our
Sunday is no where in all the New Testament named Sabbath day: but it is ever
called, either the first day of the week, or the Lords day: Yea, S. Matthew,
does plainly distinguish betwixt the Sabbath day, and the first day of the
week; as being the one the day before the other; the one upon the Saturday,
the other upon the Sunday. Now in the end of of the Sabbath, when the first day
of the week begane to dawne, etc. Mat. 28.1. the same does S. Mark also; And
when the Sabbath day was past, etc. they bought sweet ointments, etc. and erly
in the morning, the first day of the week, they came to the Sepulcher, etc.
Mark. 16.12. the same is plain also, by S. Luke, Luke 23.56. Luke 24.1. and by
S. John, Ioh. 19.31. Ioh. 20.1. so then the Sabbath day, was the day before our
Sunday, or first day of the week.

The knowledge of this point, bewraieth the error of our Ministers, in calling
our Lords day, and first day of the week; Sabbath day: this their practice is
all together growndlesse: for none of the Apostles ever called the Lord day
Sabbath day: no, they did as you see proved, distinguish between the Lords
day, and the Sabbath day, as being the one, the day after the other.

Nay they are much departed from the practice of the Apostles and Evangelists;
for they called our Saturday, the day before our Lords day, Sabbath day; but
many of our Ministers, who will be thought to follovv the Apostles in keeping
the Lords day for a Sabbath, yet will not follow them in calling our Saturday,
Sabbath day: if they will imitate the Apostles, and Apostallicall times in one
thing, why should they not imitate them in an other? if the practice of the
Apostles does bind us, as they teach; then why do they not cale our
Saturday, Sabbath day, since that was the practice of the Apostles? why is not
Saturday honored with that proper name which does belong unto it? why do
they deceiptfully robb the Saturday, of its honorable name Sabbath day, and
put it upon the Lords day? the very Papists show more fidelity in this point,
then we Protestants; for they imitate the Apostolic times, and to this day,
they call Saturday, dies Sabbathi, and, Sabbathum, that is, Sabbath day, as did
the Apostles: wherefore, if we will do as the Apostles did, we must call
Saturday, Sabbath day, and if we will not be worse then Papists, we must
call our Saturday, Sabbath day still.

Sometimes we will borrow light, from the primitive Churches; why read the
Ecclesiastical Histories, for 300. years and more after Christ; and you shall
find them calling our Saturday, the day before our Lords day, Sabbath day,
constantly: how comes it about then, that our times are so far denegerated
from the primitive churches, that we abhor to call the Saturday, Sabbath
day? and instead thereof, the Lords day must be called Sabbath day: this new
Christening or new naminge of days, is a nouill thing, it is a nouelty of late
invention.

2. The knowledge of this point, may prove proffitable to common people, for
their direction, in reading of the Scriptures, both of the Old and New
Testament; for often times they shall in reading meet with this name Sabbath
day: Now they must be careful which day of the week to apply it unto, else a
foul error is committed, albeit hitherto men have not thought so: by the name
Sabbath day is meant our Saturday, as you see it proved by all the 4
Evangelists above mentioned; and as is plain by the practice of the primitive
Church for 300 years and more after Christ: wherefore when you meet with the
name Sabbath day, as in Isai. 58.13. Nehem. 13.18. Act. 13.14.42.44. Act.
16.13. Act. 17.2. and Act. 18.4. You must understand it of Saturday; and not of
Sunday, or the Lords day, which we now call, and miscall Sabbath day: it is
strange to see how ignorant people are in this point; for they make no
difference betwixt Sabbath day, and Lords day, but take them for the same, when
as Sabbath day, is on the 7th day, and Lords day, is on the 8th day: hence is
their error, that when they read any of those forementioned Scriptures, they
apply them to the Lords day; as if in Esaias, and in Nehemiahs times, the Lords
day, had been then in use for a Sabbath; what a monstrouse error is this?
again, when they read the 4th com. Exodus 20.8. which speaks of the Sabbath
day, they here again ignorantly understand by Sabbath day, the Lords day; and
yet that was on the 7th day of the week, and this is on the 8th day of the
week; as if the Lords day, had been in use for a Sabbath day, in Moses his
time, and at the giving of the law: but let this already said, be enough to
reform this error for time to come; you see all the 4 Evangelists after
Christ's resurrection, calling the day before our Sunday or first day of the
week, which is Saturday, the Sabbath day; wherefore if here after, your
Ministers will misapply the 4th com. to the Lords day, believe them not: for
you see all the 4 Evangelists call Saturday, the Sabbath day; not Lords day,
the Sabbath day; and the 4th com. is for that day only, which is named Sabbath
day, as you may see by reading it. The rather this is to be noted, because such
a mistake of one day for an other, in a bond, may forfeit your bond; as in case
through a mistake, you carry your money in the 8th day of the month, when it
is due on the 7th day of the month: now the 4th com. is a bond, wherein man
stands bound unto God, to pay his divine service, on the 7th day of the week,
but if he delays until the 8th day, I dare assure him that he has forfeited
with God, and broken the bond of the 4th comm: For this bond is not due and
payable on the 8th but on the 7th day. Look to it, as you will. Thus much for
the name, now we come to the thing and question it self.

SECT. II.
For the better scaning of this point, whither the Lords day, be a Sabbath day
or not, by Gods ordinance, I purpose to handle 2 maine questions: the one is
whither every first day of the week, every Sunday, and every Lords day, be a
Sabbath day or not: (and here, and hereafter, I purpose to let it go for
granted them for argument sake, that every Sunday is and may be called Lords
day, which yet can never as you have seen be proved by the Scriptures:) the
other is, whither any one Sunday, first day of the week, or Lords day, be a
Sabbath day or not. Touching which questions, let it be observed, and I dare
say it, that Papists can say as much out of the Scriptures, in defense of that
Fable, of the Fire in Purgatory; as can be said in defense of the Lords day, to
be a Sabbath day.

Touching the former question, that every Lords day must be a Sabbath day
constantly; if they cannot prove this constancy, that every Sunday must be a
Sabbath day; then it will follovv, that we are not now tied to keep a Sabbath
once every week, but only sometimes; as once in a quarter of a year, or
half a year, or once in a year, or the like, and so the life and soul of
this new Sabbath, is extinguished and as good as vanished. That it may
appear, what they can make good this way, I will produce you all their
textes of Scripture, out of which they must prove this point if it can be
proved; and if it shall appear, that none of those Scriptures will afforde
any ground, for a constant weekly Sabbath, then you will say with me, that
they go groundlesly to work, when they urge a constant keeping of the Lords
day.

The first of their Textes is the 4th Com. Exodus, 20.8. But to this Text I
answer, that it is true in deed, that the 4th Comm. does call for a weekly
Sabbath, but this Text has nothing at all to do with the Lords day, as shall
be shown fully in the next question: wherefore this Text is not to the purpose.

A second Text they have and it is, Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spririt on the
Lords day: to this Text I answer, admit for argument sake, that this Lords day,
whereon S. John received his Revelation, were a Sabbath day, and that this
name Lords day, did impley so much; yet can it not be proved from hence that
every Sunday, and every first day of the week, was a Sabbath day: all that can
be gathered out of this Text, is but to prove one day a Sabbath day, and namely
that one day, which was called Lords day, in this Text: (if it could be
certainly found out which day of the week it was.) As has been shown, it
cannot be proved, that every first day of the the week, is in Scripture called
Lords day: wherefore, it cannot be proved, that any more first days of the
week, are Sabbaths, then are called in Scripture, Lords day, and that is but
one day in a year only, or the like. Further, it will not follow neither from
the name or nature of the Sabbath day, that if the Lords day, be a Sabbath day,
then it must be a weekly Sabbath day, as in the 4th Com. for there were
weekly Sabbaths, and yearly Sabbaths also, in the Law; now since they hold
the weekly Sabbaths ceremonies, a swell as the yearly Sabbaths, how kno^ they
vvhither of those two sorts of Sabbaths S. John's was vvherin he received his
Revelation? for it might be a yearly Sabbath.

A third Text they have, and that is, Ps. 118.24. This is the day, which the
Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it: To this Text I answer, as
before, admit for argument sake, that this day must be a Sabbath day; yet as
we say, one swallow makes not a Summer, so one Sabbath day, makes not a
constant practice: this Text can make way for no more Sabbaths, then one in a
year, or one in a man's life time; for David, had but one day in his life time,
in which he was Crowned King; nor had Christ here typed by David, any more
days for his Resurrection, then one: so still here is nothing for the
constancy of a weekly Sabbath day.

A fourth text they have, and that is, Act. 2. where, upon the day of
Pentecost, Peter preached, and converted 3000 souls, etc. To this Text I
answer as before, admite this day must needs be a Sabbath day, because here
was a Sermon in it, yet what is this for a constancy, and for a continued
practise^ it does not follovv, that because Peter preached this one time here
upon pentecost day, that therefore he preached every Lords day, and every
Sunday, or First day of the week after, weekly: can it be shown where
Peter preached the next Lords day, or Sunday, after this day of pentecost? or
can it be shovvne, that ever Peter preached any where, and at any time, twice
together, upon two Lords days immediately succeding one an other? for it is
not enough to show that he preached once only, and upon one Lords day; but he
that will prove a consta^cy, must prove a weekly practice, Sunday after
Sunday, day by day. All that can be gathered from Peter's Example, is but this,
that we preach and hear a Sermon once in a year, at Pentecost day, that is
on Whit Sunday: for on Whit Sunday it is supposed, that Peter preached this
Sermon.

A fifth Text they have, and it is, Act. 20.7. where Paul preached at Troas
until midnight, etc. unto which text I answer as before, be it this day,
were a Sabbath day, because Paul preached a sermon then, which can never be
thereby proved to be a Sabbath day; yet what is this to a constancy? this was
a rare and seldom action, once only done; now Paul's seldom and rare
preaching cannot bind us to an often and frequent preaching, unless you would
have the Scholars out stripp their Master. Can it be shown, that ever Paul
did any where, or at any time, preach twice together, upon two Lords days, one
after an other? If it cannot, as I know it cannot, where then is any grownd for
a continued practice weekly? this Example of Paul's was rare and extraordenary,
like as was Peter's in the forealleaged text; now extraordenary things, do not
bind us to an ordenary practice and frequent: unless you will, that we should
keep the Lords day, more frequently, and more constantly, then did the
Apostles themselves,

A sixth Text they have, and it is, 1 Cor. 16.2. upon the first day of the
week, let every one lay by him, in store, etc. Here it is thought, that there
was a Collection for the poor, and a Sermon, and so it was a Sabbath day.
Unto this Text I answer as before, let it be granted, which never can be
proved, that this was a Sabbath day, because there was a collection for the
poor; yet this Text proves not, any continued constancy, of Sunday after
Sunday, every Sunday, or every first day of the week; for, it speaks but of
one single action, once done only, saying, upon the first day, of the week:
not every first day of the week.

But touching this my answer, Mr. Chapel Minister of S. Andrews in Norwich,
has undertaken to prove the contrary in public, against my former book;
where he affirmed, that the word (Kata) when it is applied to time, or place,
it is taken distributiuly, for every one: and that therefore this Text is to be
read according to the old Translation thus, Every first day of the week, let
every one lay by him in store: And so he would have this collection for the
poor, (if any here were) to be a constant practice. To whom I answer, 1.
if here be enjoined a constant collection for the poor, on the Lords day, as a
proper work for our new Sabbath day, why does he not press his people, the
Overseers of the parish with the rest, to make a collectio^ for the poor,
every Lords day, as a proper Sabbath days work; and as an error for them to
make any collections upon any other day of the week? for that which is
proper to Sunday, is unlawful to be done on any other day.

Secondly I answer, that forasmuch as our New Translatours, have altered and
amended our old Translation, I marvel that Mr. Chapel will oppose them: for
undoubtedly, they did not correct it rashly and unadvisedly; their manner was
to preserve the dignity of the old Translation what they could; and therefore
they would not have altered it, from Every first day, unto, upon the first
day, but that they savv well, that it could not be translated Every first day:
wherefore, I have the new Translation, which is judged by all men the better
translation, on my side, and against Mr. Chapel.

Thirdly I answer, that the grovvnd where upon Mr. Chapel goes, in
contradicting both the New Translatores, and me, is false: for he affirms
that the word (...) when it concerns time or place it signifies Every one:
But I will show him sundry textes of Scripture to the contrary, see Romans 5.6.
For when we were yet of no strength, in due time, Christ died for the ungodly:
(...) is rendered in due time: it being here to be understood of one single
time: but by Mr. Chapels rule, it must be thus rendered, Every time: as if
Christ had died many times for us: see also Romans 9.9. for this is the word of
promise, at this time will I come, and Sara shall have a Son. (...) is
rendered, at this time: as understood of one single time, in which the Angel
would come again: but if Mr. Chapels reason be good, then it ought thus
senselesly to be translated, Every time, will I come, and Sara shall hatte a
son; as if the Angel were to come often times, etc. see a like Text, Ioh.
5.4. for an Angel went down, at a certain season, in to the poole, etc.
According to Mr. Chapel, this Text must be thus translated, for, an Angel
went down, every time, or every season, in to the poole, etc. And see Math.
2.16. Herod slew the children from two years old and under, according to the
time which he had inquired of the wise men. If Mr. Chapels observation upon
the Greek text be good, then it must be thus absurdly translated; Herod slew
the children from two years old and under, every time which he had inquired
of the wise men. (...): now it is plain, that Herod inquired of the wise
men but once, see v. 7. Thus it appears how unsoundly he went to work,
when he vvouldsupporte our New Sabbath.

Fourthly I answer, suppose it could be proved, as he would hane it, that the
word (...) is every where else in Scripture taken for Every one when it
concerns time, yet here in this place, I prove that it must not be taken so,
but as our New Translation has it: for, words must be understood to signify,
according to the Authors mind that uses them, as is well known: now two
reasons there be in this text, which cross Mr. Chapels sense: the one is,
that if this collection be a constant thing, for Every first day of the week,
then were the Churches of Galatia and Corinth bound to make a constant
collection for the poor of the Church of Jerusalem, on every Lords day, or
first day of the week continually: for this collection, was not for their
own poor, but for the poor of remote Churches, for Jerusalem, see 1. Cor.
16.3. like as we, had once in England a collection, for the Church in the
Palatinate: now had this collection been for their own poor, there had been
the more likelihood that it might have been weekly, and continually; but being
it was for the poor of a foreign Church, to wit, for the Church at
Jerusalem, as was ours for the Pallatinate once, what likelihood is there, to
think this collection should be every week, week by week continually? let
the reader judge, The other thing in this text, which crosses Mr. Chapels
translation, is that Paul says, he would have no collection when himself
was present with them, that then there be no gatherings when I come, 1. Cor.
16.2. now who could be so simple to think, that this collection must be
understood to be Every first day of the week, when as Paul himself makes an
exception, and that in the text it self: for he excepteth that time vvherin
himself should be there present with them; that then there should be no
gatherings, thus much for answer to this text also, vvherby you see it cannot
be proved that this collection, and supposed new Sabbath, was a constant
continued thing week by week.

The 7th and last thing they have, that has any likelihood to prove this
constancy, is the frequent Apparitions of Christ evermore upon the first day of
the week, or Lords day: To this I answer as before, suppose we that Christ
his Apparition upon a day, could make that day a Sabbath day; or declare it to
be so, as fondly they imagine; yet it cannot be proved, that Christ appeared
frequently, and every week upon the Lords day: I grant that Christ appeared
to his Disciples, upon one Sunday, or first day of the week, to wit, on that
very day vvhereon he ^ose, Ioh. 20.14.19. But it c^not be proved, that he
appeared any more, upon any Lords day, then this one day: where then is the
constancy and frequency of Christ's appearing, evermore on the Lords day,
whereon Ministers and people boast so much? if there can be found but one Lords
day, wherein he appeared?

I confess there is a text alleged, for a second Lords day, wherein he
appeared, and it is Ioh. 20.26. And eight days after, again his Disciples
were within, and Thomas with them etc. To this text I answer 1. Suppose this
text could prove a second apparition, upon a second Lords day, yet this is not
a constant practice of Christ, every Lords day. 2. But this text is nothing to
their purpose: for they suppose, that this phrase eight days after, compared
with Ioh. 20.19. where is mention of the first day of the week, does note unto
us Christ's second days apparition, to be on the same day sennight, after that
first day of the week, whereon Christ rose, Ioh. 26.1.19. and so consequently
upon the Lords day also: But let the words of the text be better considered of,
and they will afforde no such collection: for the Text says not, upon the same
day sennight wherein Christ rose etc. but it says, eight days after, the day
wherein he rose etc. Now 8 days after Sunday, cannot fall upon the Sunday
again, the same day sennight; but on the Monday sennight after: for the word
after does exclude the first Sunday, vvhereon Christ rose, that it must not be
counted for any one of these 8 days; for then he should have said, upon the
8th day etc. but he says, after 8 days etc. The new Translation reads it
thus and after eight days etc. Now, after 8 days, must be on the 9th day, or
10th day etc. and so not on the same day sennight as they imagine.

It is true, they bring a text, wherein is a like phrase, as Mark. 8.31. And
after 3 days rise again etc. which must be understood, say they, thus, and
upon the third day rise again etc. according to 1. Cor. 15.4. which says, he
rose the third day etc. But I answer, howbeit I could give other answers, yet
this shall suffice for this, that, be it in a case of necessity, to reconcile
two textes of Scripture, we be necessitated to depart from the proper sense of
the one; yet where is no necessity, as here is none, there to depart from the
proper sense of words, is insufferable, by the judgment of all Interpreters:
what other text is there, which says, Upon the eight day, again his Disciples
were within etc? Or what absurdety is in it, to take the words properly, as
that Christ appeared 8 days after the day of his resurrection, upon the
Monday? so then, notwithstanding all their wresting, this text can make nothing
for Christ's apparition, upon a second Lords day: where then are those
apparitions of Christ, so constantly upon every Lords day? there can but one
days apparition be shown; and so consequently, there can be proved but one
Sabbath day, as namely once in a year, upon Easter day; for Christ's apparition
was upon Easter day, being the day he rose on: hitherto then, they cannot prove
a weekly Sabbath, upon every Lords day.

For all this I deny not, but that it may be proved, that Christ appeared upon
every Lords day, after his resurrection; because he appeared on every day, for
40 days together, Act. 1.3. But this text, I know they dare not bring against
me, least whilst they prove the frequent apparitions of Christ upon every Lords
day, they disprove their new Sabbath day, and quite ouerturne it: for, if
Christ made his apparitions, upon every day of the week, for 40 days
together; then is every day of the week as much a Sabbath, as is the Lords
day: because Christ appeared, asvvell upon every day, as upon the Lords day;
yea, he appared the third time, upon a Fishing day, when they went a fishing
Ioh. 21.1.3.6. which they made a vvorking day, for all Christ's apparition to
them on that day. Lo, what poor stuff here is, to prove the constant
practice of the Lords day, and yet I have heard some grave Diuins affirm, that
this one argument, of Christ's constant appearing on the Lords day, does
abundantly satisfy them, for proof of the Lords day Sabbath. Do you not
think therefore, that it is poor stuff, that will satisfy the consciences of
some Ministers? had not people need in these days to try all things, and
keep that which is good? 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Thus I have answered all their textes; and yet no constant continued practice
of the Lords day, appears: But happily they may think, that albeit none of
these textes and examples, will singlie and alone prove the constancy, yet if
all be put together they may prove it: well, we will do them no wrong, let us
join them all together then: we will begin at the day of Christ his
resurrection, for this is the first supposed new Sabbath day, Ioh. 20.1.19. and
upon this day, Christ appeared to his Disciples: but we read not of any other
Lords day, after that, wherein was any Sabbath day duties done, until
Pentecost, Act. 2.1. etc. which was about 50 days, after the resurrection day:
so then here was no continued practice; for we read not of any thing done here
for six weeks, or six Lords days together.

2. The next day supposed for a Sabbath day, is that first day of the week,
wherein Paul preached till midnight at Troas, Act. 20.7. Now we are to search
how long this sermon of Paul at Troas, was preached after the sermon of Peter,
at Jerusalem, on Pentecost day, whither Paul's sermon were the next Lords day,
after Pentecost day, or not: For this end, we must note, that Paul was no
preacher at Christ's death, nor at Pentecost neither, which was 7 weeks after
Christ's death: for Paul made hanocke of the Church, Act. 7.58. Act. 9.1. long
after Pentecost day; and it is holden, that Paul was not converted, till the 3d
year after Christ's ascension: now after his conversion, it was at least 14
years before he went to Jerusalem, Gal. 1.18. Gal. 2.1. now in this his latter
journey to Jerusalem, Gal. 2.1. I suppose it was, when he went up about the
difference of Circumcision, Act. 15.2. which being determined, he returned, and
in his return he delivered the Decrees of the Apostles, to several Churches
where he came, Act. 16.4. and so as he went along he preached, as at Philippi,
Act. 16.12.13. and at Thessalonica, Act. 17.1.2. and at Corinth, Act. 18.1.4.
and at last he came to Troas where he preached this sermon, of which we do
inquire Act. 20.7. So then, count these, and it will be found about a matter of
17. years difference, betwixt the sermon of Peter at Pentecost, and the
sermon of Paul at Troas: where then is the constancy of the Lords day Sabbath,
when we can find none kept for a matter of 17. years together?

The 3d text wherein is mention of our new Sabbath, it is 1. Cor. 16.2. where
Paul ordained a collection, to be made on the first day of the week etc. Now
how many weeks, months, or years, this collection was ordained, after Paul's
sermon at Troas, Act. 20.7. I cannot tell; nor can they prove, that it was the
next Lords day after the sermon Paul preached at Troas: so then, as yet there
can no constant weekly Sabbath be proved. The last text is Reu. 1.10. where S.
John received a revelation on the Lords day; now how many years difference
there was, betwixt the ordination for that Collection for the poor, 1. Cor.
16.2. and S. John's Revelation, I know not; neither can they prove I presume,
that it was on the next Lords day after that Collection. So still there
appears no constant and weekly celebration of the Lords day; let their textes
be considered this way, or that way.

Whereas they talk so much of the constant practice of the Apostles, this I
dare auowch, that it cannot be shown, that ever Peter, or Paul, or any other
of the Apostles of Christ, did ever preach any sermons, upon two Lords days,
immediately following one an other: Nay which is more, it cannot be shovvne,
that any one Apostle, did ever preach twice in all his life time, upon the
Lords day: nay, which is yet more, it can not be shovvne, that all the
Apostles, put them all together, did ever among them all, preach two Lords
days together, one after an other. Who that considers these things, could be
so blinded, as to think this Lords day, can be established and proved to be a
weekly Sabbath from the Apostles practice? surely, he that celebrateth a weekly
Sabbath on the Lords day, as he has no commandment for it from Christ in the
new Testament, so he has not so much as the weekly practice of the Apostles,
for his warrant.

But my Brethren, if you will walk, in a vvarrantable way, wherein you
shall have both an express commandment from God, and also the weekly and
constant practice of the Apostles, then forsake the Lords day, the Sunday
Sabbath: and keep the Sabbath day, the Saturday Sabbath: for, for it, you have
the 4th com. expressly: and then for practice of the Apostles, be pleased but to
pervse these textes of Scripture, and you shall find the Apostles constantly,
keeping the Sabbath day, see Act. 13.14, 42.44. Act. 16.13. Act. 17.2. and Act.
18.4. and this was all after Christ his resurrection: Now judge thou that
read, whither the practice of the Lords day weekly, or the practice of the
Sabbath day weekly, be more soundly proved, and follow the better; Be no more
children, wanering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit
of men, and with craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14.
But, try all things, and keep that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Furthermore, whereas it is supposed, that this Lords day was kept constantly
for A Sabbath; I will give instance to the contrary: of all Lords days that
ever were, that first Lords day, wherein Christ rose from the dead, and then
appeared unto his Disciples, that Lords day was the most eminent and chief;
for from this day, all after Lords days take their name and excellency; this
being the substance as it were, and all others but shadows and ressemblances
of this: for on this first Lords day, was the work of the Resurrection
performed, and not on the others: of all Coronation days in the Kings reign,
none is so properly called Coronation day, nor so excellent and joyful, as is
the first Coronation day, in which the Crown is set upon the Kings head: Many
keep their Marriage days, but of them all, none is so excellent and so
solemnly kept, as is the first Marriage day, wherein the Bride and Bridgrome
were joined together: even so it is between the first Lords day, and other
Lords days following after it: The difference is, as the body from the
shadow; and as the life from the picture; if therefore I shall show that this
first Lords day, was not kept as a Sabbath day, it is more then if I should
show that 20 Lords days together, were omitted in the Apostles days, after
Christ's ascension. Further, if I shall show, that Christ himself, and his
Disciples, whilst he was on earth, and resident with his Church, did not
keep this first and most eminent Lords day; who then will imagine, that these
Disciples of Christ, and this Church, would keep the Lords day a Sabbath,
after Christ's departure from them, and ascension into heaven? for undoubtedly,
the Church would imitate Christ, and follovv his example; look what they saw
him do, whilst he was on earth with them, the same would they do, after he
was departed from them: follow me (says Paul) as I follow Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1.

Now I shevve that this first Lords day, was not kept as a Sabbath and
Resting day: because it was used for a travailing day: for this purpose see,
Luke 24.1.13. where you have mention, of two of Christ's Disciples, who
travailed upon this first Lords day, whereon Christ rose, a matter of 15 miles:
and this I make good thus, they went from Jerusalem, for there the Disciples
were resident, v. 9. and they travailed to Emmaus which Town was threescore
furlongs, from Jerusalem, as the Text says, v. 13. now 8. furlongs make a
mile; so then 60. furlongs, make Seven miles and an half: this done, they
returned the same day, back again to Jerusalem, v. 33. which is seven miles
and an half more; so add these together, and they travailed that day, fiftene
miles: it cannot be thought that these spent less time, then all the whole
after noone of this first Lords day, in travailing: for two miles an hour,
is an ordenary tranailers pase, so that fiftene miles cost them near 8.
hovvres work.

Now can it be thought, that these two of Christ's Disciples, would have made
this day, of all days in the year, a travailing day, if the Church of Christ
had solemnized this day as a Sabbath day, at Jerusalem? these two, were two of
Christ's Disciples and followers, wherefore they would have laid a side all
works, that they might with ioyfulnesse have solemnized this day, in a most
thankful remembrance of Christ's resurrection, if any fame or report they had
heard at Jerusalem, before they came forth, that this day should have been
celebrated for a Sabbath, in memory of the Resurrection of their Lord and
Master: Christ's Disciples were sad, and sorrovvfull men now, for the death
and loss of their Lord and Master, Mark. 16.10. Luke 24.17. how therefore
would they have shevved all tokens of joy and thankfulness, for his restoring
to life again, by celebrating a Sabbath, if they had known of any? Besides,
these two were religiouse and devout men, or else they were hypocrites now
vvhithersoeuer they were, had they but heard any rumor at Jerusalem, that
morning before they came forth, that this day present, should be solemnized by
the Church of Christ, for the first Christian Sabbath of all succeeding
generations; and that they should lead the way, and set a pattern to all
follovving generations, doubtless they would for this day, have laid aside
all iourneys: Further, the Church of Christ's Disciples, were not so many then,
but that two men might be missed, if absent from the Chamber where they met;
now if they were truly religiouse, then would they not have been absent
from the Congregation of the Saints, so in love they were with such
Assemblies, if they had known of any: if they were hypocrites, they would
not have been absent at such a time, for their credit sake, least they should
be pointed at for it: all which, laid together, declare plainly, that they
knevv not of any Sabbath to be kept that day; nor that it was known to the
residue of the Disciples at Jerusalem; for then they should have heard of it
from them, by a common report, like as they heard before they came forth, of
all other things, that had happened on that day, see v. 22.23.24. So much for
the travailing of the two Disciples, on the Lords day.

But happily the Patrones of our new Sabbath, will plead, that this travail
might be some work of necessity and charity, and so a Sabbath days work.
To whom I answer, that sure I am the text gives no such light: a Sabbath
days journey in common estimation is but two miles, Act. 1.12. but this is
much more then a Sabbath days journey, for it was 15 miles: but suppose they
could prove, that this travail, was some work of necessity etc. yet we
know that as they went to Emmaus, so they returned back again that night:
now be it that there was necessity for their goeing forth to Emmaus that day;
yet, what likelihood was there, of any necessity, for them to come back
again seven miles and an half to Jerusalem, on the same day? might they not
have tarried at Emmaus, till the next day?

I come now to show, how Christ himself made this first Lords day, a
travailing day: for first of all after he rose, he appeared unto Mary Magdalene
Mark. 16.9. Secondly, he appeared unto two Disciples as they travailed to
Emmaus Mark. 16.12. and here, he travailed from Jerusalem, unto Emmaus, with
the two Disciples, Luke 24.13.15.28.29.30. and this was seven miles and an
half, as has been counted: Furthermore, that he might show himself, unto
the residue of the Disciples, the same day, he travailed back again to
Jerusalem, Luke 24.33.36. Mark. 16.14. Ioh. 20.19. and this his journey was
seven miles and an half more; so here you see our Savior Christ made this
day a travailing day also, by iournying from place to place, 7 or 8 miles at a
time: Now who could think this Lords day, to be kept by Christ for a Sabbath
day, when he made it his travailing day?

Furthermore, let it be observed that a Sabbath was by the law to be kept in
and with holy Congregations and Assemblies, Leuit. 23.2.3. and accordingly it
was Christ his manner, evermore on the Sabbath days, to be in the Congregation
among the people of God, as we read Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, and,
as his custom was, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to
read etc. So then, it was a customary thing with Christ, on the Sabbath days,
to be teaching in the Assemblies: but lo, on this Lords day, he was in the
fields, travailing too and fro: and sometimes he was in the company of two of
his Disciples, and sometime all alone, Luke 24.31. and he came not into the
assembly of his Disciples, until near night, Ioh. 20.19. Now Christ being
the Shepherd and Minister, where should he have been, but in the assembly of
his Disciples all that day, teaching them, and preaching unto them, if it had
been a Sabbath day? but lo, the flock was scattered, some of the Disciples
were at Jerusalem; other some were travailing to Emmaus; and Christ the Pastor
of the flock, he came not amongst them until the Evening, but was in the
fields travailing hither and thither: was this Lords day, kept like a Sabbath,
by this Christian Church? judge thou that read.

If it be said, that Christ did instruct those two Disciples, in travailing to
Emmaus, and therefore it was a Sabbath duty: I answer, what did Christ do
more here, then Phillip did to the Eunuch in a travailing day? the Eunuch
riding in his charrer, did not Phillip instruct him? see Act. 8.27.28.35. and
must this day be therefore a Sabbath day? yea, what did Christ more here to
these two Disciples, then he did on every day of the week, for 40 days
together, to all the Apostles together, see Act. 1.3. and must all these 40
days therefore be Sabbaths? and these instructions, Sabbath duties? there is
no more likelihood, that these should be Sabbath duties, then there is to
suppose it a Sabbath duty, to see a man sit still, and rest him for an hour
or two on a working day; especiasly if during that time he does but read a
Chapter in the Bible, or the like. Furthermore, can it be thought, that Christ
who was the Pastor of the flock, would spend his Sabbath day, in teaching
two of the sheep of the flock only, neglecting the residue? for, he came
not among the whole flock assembled together, until near night, Ioh. 20.19.
Luke 24.29.33. Wherefore, Christ kept not this Lords day, a Sabbath, with the
assembly, and congregation of his Disciples, and can it then be thought, he
kept it with two men only?

Lo, this is the Lords day, which our new Sabbatharians, would have for a
Sabbath; and you see Christ the Lord of it, travailed too and fro, hither and
thither upon it; you see also how the Disciples of Christ, travailed out and
home 15 miles upon it; yea, and Christ, the Lord of this new Sabbath, looking
on them, without check; nay which is more, countenancing of them therein;
for he justified them, by his own like practice, he travailing along with
them, Luke 24.15.

I would ask a question here, of our new Sabbatharians, which is this; May
not we Christians, safely travail upon the Lords day, fitene, or twenty miles,
more or less, about the ordenary affairs of our callings, without scruple of
conscience? Paul says that we should follow him, as he followed Christ, 1.
Cor. 11.1. Now suer I am, the Disciples of Christ, travailed upon the Lords
day, and if therein they followed not Christ, yet they went together with
him, which is as good; for both Christ, and they, travailed on the Lords day
to Emmaus: why then may not we travail on the Lords day also? may we not
imitate our Savior Christ? and must we make more conscience of the Lords day,
then Christ's own Disciples did, who were taught by Christ himself? what
needless, and nice strictness, is our times fallen into? our Church makes
conscience, where the Church of Christ, who inioyed Christ's corporal presence,
made none.

Furthermore, that we may break the back of this new Sabbaths constancy; I
will prove unto you, that this first, and most famous Lords day, that ever
was, was not kept for a Sabbath, by the Church of Christ then living with
Christ: my first argument is, because the Minister and people, Christ and his
Church, did not assemble on the Lords day, until it was past or nere ended,
Ioh. 20.19. their first meeting was in the evening of the Lords day; since
their second meeting was 8. days after, Ioh. 20.26. and their third, when
they went to fishing, Ioh. 21.1.14. now assemblies and congregations, were
Sabbath duties, Leuit. 23.2.3. wherefore, since the Minister and people,
Christ and his Disciples met not all the day long, to solemnize it as a
Sabbath, until evening and the day was now spent and past, therefore they
kept not this Lords day as a Sabbath. If it be objected, that they could not
assemble sooner in the day, for fear of the Jews, Ioh. 20.19. I answer, it is
more likely, they durst not stir abroad all day long, for fear of the Jews;
and because they feared the Jews, therefore they kept close all the day long
together in the house; and so they were assembled all the day; but like sheep
without their Shepherd. 2. My second argument wherewith I prove it, is because
they knew it not; they had no knowledge of it, that it was a Sabbath: and this
I prove, because they did not then, so much as believe that Christ was risen
from the dead: for this purpose see Mark. 16.11.9. where mention is made that
Christ appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, and the Text says, that she went
and told them that had been with Christ, which mourned and wept; and when they
heard that he was alive, and had appeared to her, they beleened it not: Again,
see Mark. 16.13. where is mention made of the two Disciples that travailed in
to the country, and how Christ appeared unto them also, and the text says of
them; that they went and told it unto the remnant, neither believed they them:
Lastly, see Mar. 16.14. where the Text says, finally, he appeared unto the
eleven, as they sat together, and reproched them for their unbelief and
hardness of heart, because they bleeued not them which had seen him, being
risen up again. S. Luke reports it thus, now it was Mary Magdalene, etc.
which told these things unto the Apostles: But their words (says the Text)
seemed unto them as a fained thing, neither believed they them: Luke 24.10.11.
So by all these Testimonies, you see it plain, that the Church of Christ was
ignorant of his resurrection, through unbelief; not the eleven; not the
Apostles themselves did believe it: Now I pray tell me, how these Apostles with
the residue of the Disciples, could Sanctify this Lords day, for a Sabbath day,
in remembrance of the resurrection of Christ, when as they knew not that
Christ was risen, and when they believed it not? yea, it is yet more plain that
they were ignorant of the resurrection; for the Scripture says that they
mourned and wept, still, Mark. 16.10. And, that the two Disciples that went to
Emmaus, they had communication of Christ, and were sade. Luke 24.17. which
sadness, mourning, and weeping, upon the Lords day, yea when the day was fatr
spent, Luke 24.29. Bevvraieth that they were yet ignorant of the Lords
resurrection: how then, I marvel, could they keep that Lords day, from
morning till night, in a joyful and thankful remembrance of Christ's
resurrection, when they knevv nothing of it? thus you see it apparent, that the
Lords day, was not kept for a Sabbath day, constantly and weekly in the days
of Christ, and of his Apostles: for this first Lords day was neglected.

Nevertheless it is not to be spoken, how confident our Ministers are, that
this Lords day, was constantly kept by Christ and his Apostles; in so much as I
have heard, of some puritan Ministers, that have auowched it, that they will
give their lives, and dye for the defense of this day: whither I may believe
them or no I cannot tell: I should think they would look, before they leap,
as the proverb is: great is the difference betwixt saying, and doing: I
would feign believe them though; but this I resolve, if they prove so good as
their words, and be so vainly prodigal of their lives, they shall never have
my life in keeping. Will our Ministers dye for the defense of the Lords day
sanctification, when the Apostles themselves profaned it? for, the Apostles
did not believe any such matter, as if it were to be sanctified, as you have
seen it proved: I trust the people, will be so wise for themselves in this
point, as to give their Ministers leave to dye first; But it is mine opinion,
that we shall never see many Martyrs for the Lords day.

One thing would be noted more, before we leave this point: It is supposed,
that Christ touching the Redemption, did imitate God at the Creation, for the
setting up of a Sabbath, in memory thereof: well let us see how like or rather
unlike, Christ was unto God, in this matter; at the Creation God chose the
first Sabbath day, or 7th day, to be sanctified: but we have seen it plainly
proved, that Christ chose not the first Lords day, to be sanctified. 2. God
rested himself, on the first 7th day: But Christ travailed up and down the
country, too and fro, on the first Lords day. 3. God gave a special com. the
4th com. for the Church to sanctify the 7th day: But Christ, left no com. in
all the New Testament for the Lords day. 4. God persuaded his Church, by strong
reasons, to the sanctification of the 7th day, taken from his own example,
because he rested on the 7th day; and because he blessed and sanctified the
7th day. But Christ never persuaded his Church, by any reasons, to keep the
Lords day, nor by his example; nay rather, he dissvvaded them from sanctifying
of the Lords day, by his example, and by the example of his Disciples, recorded
in Scripture; for they travailed too and fro upon the Lords day; showing us
thereby, that we may do the like. Forasmuch therefore, as we have no com. in
the New Testament, for the sanctifying of the Lords day, we are left to
follow examples: Now I find the example of Christ, upon the Lords day, far
unlike to the example of God, on the 7th day; and therefore we may follow the
example of Christ, and be as unlike on the Lords day, to the example of God on
the 7th day, as Christ was.

Against this, some Ministers object thus; that happily the new Sabbath was not
yet known; the Church being in her infancy; and Christ being newly risen from
the dead, things were not yet established in the Church etc. Hereunto I answer
1. if this new Sabbath was not known upon this first Lords day; why then they
grant me, what I would have, which is, that the Lords day, was not constantly
and weekly kept in the days of Christ and his Apostles, as now they urge us to
keep it every where; and so they overthrow their own doctrine. 2. This
objection makes the matter worse then it was before; for now they will to
maintain their error, cast blame upon Christ: for if this new Sabbath was
not known to the Church, no not this chief and principal Lords day, whose
fault was it, but Christ's, in that he being their Pastor had not taught it
them yet, no not when it was more then time, that they had known it, that so
they might have kept it.

The Lords day, being instituted by Christ, to be kept for a Sabbath day, in
remembrance of our Redemption (as our new Sabbatharians imagine) it could not
but make as much for the Memory of Christ his death, as the Lords Supper did,
of which Christ said, do this in remembrance of me: now can any man think
that Christ could pass over the doctrine of this, a point of such consequence,
and that in so seasonable a time, vvhithout some neglect, if there had been any
such thing to be taught them? they cannot plead, that Christ could not
conveniently come at his Disciples, erly enough in the morning, to have minded
them of it: for he rose very erly, etc. neither wanted he means to have sent
them word of it: for he sent them word by Mary Magdalene, that they should go
down into Galile, and there they should see him, Mat. 28.1.10. he might as
easily have sent them word also, that it was his will, that they should keep
that present day for a Sabbath, if ever he had intended any such matter. 3. I
answer, that this objection spoils all, for if through infancy of the Church,
and the like, (as some infant-like-men imagine) this first Lords day, was not
instituted for a Sabbath, whither I marvel then, will they rune for an
institution? for there is not any mention in the Scriptures, of any word of
institution; nor of any practice or example, of Christ or of any of the
Apostles, about their sanctifying any Lords day after this first Lords day,
until Pentecost day, Act. 2. which was 6 or 7 weeks after this first Lords
day: so here then, is a greater error; for not only the first Lords day was
omitted for a Sabbath, but also, there is no footing for any Lords day kept
like a Sabbath, for 6 or 7 weeks together, after Christ's resurrection.

Thus the further we search in to this point, the more vain it does appear,
in so much as it irketh me to blot so much paper, as I have done, and must do,
to answer to such an idle argument, as is the Lords day Sabbath: and it vexes
me to see, men of such able parts for lerning and natural endovvments, and so
renoumed for sanctity, thus to befoole themselves, in the defense of such a
friuolouse tenet as is this Lords day Sabbath: But it fares with them as I
think, like men that have had wrong possession a long time; when the true
owner comes to claim his right; yet since they have possessed it so long, they
will invent something to defend it still; they will find tricks, quilites, and
quirkes in the Law, to hold possession still against the true owner: so it
is here, the Lords day, has thrust out the Lords Sabbath day, from possession,
now this many years; and since it is done, and the Lords day has, and has
had the possession long, some culler must be set on the matter, something must
be invented to maintain possession still, though never so vvrongfull, and
though never so to the shame of the defenders of it.

But for all this, they are ready to reply thus, but what is the matter that
this Lords day, is so often repeated in the New Testament, above any other day
of the week? and why were such notable works still done upon that day; as
Christ rose then; and appeared to his Disciples; the Holy Ghost descended Act.
2. Peter preached and converted thovvsands; Paul preached on that day; and here
was a Collection for the poor on that day; and S. John received a Revelation
upon the same day, now all this cannot but point at something, etc. Where unto
I answer, it is true all these do point at some thing; but what is the thing
which they point unto? they should tell us what thing they point unto, and
not say only, they point at something: I doubt not but they point at
something, but vvithall I believe they point at nothing for their purpose, to
help to prove the constant weekly practice of the Lords day for a Sabbath, if
they did, they would not be ashamed to say what they point unto in particular,
turning it off thus in general terms, all these point at something: In the
night time, Joseph had a revelation, concerning Christ, Mat. 1.20. Mat.
2.13.14. In the night, Christ came unto his Disciples, vvalking myraculously on
the Sea, Mat. 14.25. In the night time Christ was betrayed, Mark. 14.27. In
the night time, was brought by the Angel to the Shepherds, those most joyful
tydinges of a Savior borne into the world, Luke 2.8. In the night Paul and
Silas sung Psalms unto God, Act. 16.25. In the night Paul preached at Troas,
and raised up Eutychus fallen down dead, Act. 20.7.8.9. Now all these you may
say, pointed at something indeed, and true it is: But tell us, and prove it
unto us, what is that something? they will not say, we must hence learn to
keep Popish Vigiles, or holy nights, I trust. 2. Whereas they speak of the
often repetition of the Lords day, in the New Testament; the Sabbath day, is
oftener repeated then it: it is true, the 4 Evangelists do every one of them
mention it, but all that, is but as if it were once mentioned only; for the
Evangelists do but mention one and the same thing, albeit it be 4 times
repeated by them all: that there are more Sabbath days spoke of, then Lords
days, see these textes, Act. 13.14.42.44. Act. 16.13. Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4.

Thirdly, whereas they make some great matter of it, because there were so
many notable works done upon this Lords day, and this point is much in their
mouths: J answer, 1. the day whereon notable works were done, is usually
put down in Scripture for the more certainty sake: now to enquire after
other reasons and ends, whereof the Scripture is silent, is prying curiosity,
and to affirm any other ends, is presumption. Ezekiel the Prophet had a
revelation, or a vision, on the fifth day, of the 4th month, Ezekiel. 1.1. Now
who can tell me, why he had his vision, on the fifth day, rather then on the
first: or in the 4th month, rather then in the 5th or 6th month? Eliah had a
revelation in the third year, 1. King. 18.1. Hezekiah, that godly King, began
to reign, on the third year, 2. King. 18.1. who can give a reason why these
notable works fell out still upon the third year? In the 7th month, the
Arcke rested upon the Mount Ararat, Genes. 8.4. on the 7th month; they had a
solemn fast day, Leuit. 16.29. on the 7th month, they had a Sabbath, Leuit.
23.24. in the 7th month, the trumpet for the Iubile was blown, Leuit. 25.9.
now what wise man, can tell why God did these things, still on the 7th month,
rather then on the eight, or nynth month, unless the Scripture had revealed
it? these are idle brains vanities.

2. I answer, if these notable works done in the Lords day, should sanctify
the day and time, for ever after, why should they not have power, to sanctify
the place also, wherein they weredone? for these works should as well sanctify
place, as time, in common reason: and so Jerusalem should be the Holy place
still, for Gods worship; as well as the Lords day, be the Holy time, for Gods
worship: for, were not all these notable works, done in the place of
Jerusalem, as well as in the time of Lords day? did not Christ rise from the
dead there? did he not appear to his Disciples there? did not the Holy Ghost
descend there, in Jerusalem? did not Peter preach, and convert thowsands there?
and did not Christ suffer there?

But happily they may think, that these notable works, had more power over
the circumstance of the time, then of the place; and therefore to satisfy them,
in all their fopperies, we must speak of the time, because the question is
for sooth about time: well then for time; if these notable works, had power to
sanctify, or to declare as sanctified, the Lords day, the First day of the
week; then why should they not sanctify or declare as Sanctified the year,
that is, the first year of every seven, from the first year of our Lord,
hitherto, and so we should keep every first year, of every 7 years, for a
Sabbath year, in memory of the Redemption: like as the Jews kept every 7th
year a Sabbath year, Leuit. 25.4. for the reason is the same, and as good,
that we should keep every first year in 7. as well as every first day, in 7.
for the reason why they would have every first day a Sabbath, is because such
notable works were done in the first day of the week, the Lords day; well
then, and why should we not have the first year of the 7 a Sabbath year also?
for the self same notable works, that were done in the Lords day, or First
day of the week; the self same notable works were done in the first year of
our Lord: for in this year Christ rose from the dead; in this year he
appeared to his Disciples very frequently; in this year the Holy Ghost
descended; in this year Peter preached, and converted thowsands; in this year
Christ ascended up into heaven; why therefore should we not have this first
year a Sabbath, as well as the First day? since the reason is one and the
same in both?

3. I answer, they err, and that by applying these notable works, done on the
Lords day, to uses and ends whereof the Scripture gives them not the least
light: for they apply all these notable works, unto the time and day, wherein
they were done; as if they did show and declare this time and this day to be a
more holy time, and a more holy day, then other days and times; and by name,
that it must be a Sabbath day too: whereas the Spirit of God, intends no such
matter, in recording these works that we can find, but thereby aims at
other ends: as for example, the reason why Christ rose on the Lords day,
rather then on any day after, might be, least that he should see corruption,
Act. 2.27. and a reason why he appeared to his Disciples upon this Lords day,
rather then upon any day after, might be, least his Disciples should despair
in him, saying, he is swallowed up of death: and also Christ appeared to them
on that very day, to put an end to their sorrow and mourning for him, as soon
as might be; for unto that very day, the Disciples were sadd for him, yea they
mourned for him, and wept, Luke 24.17. Mark. 16.10. yea, Christ appeared on the
Lords day, to fulfill and make good his own prophecies, of himself, before his
death, as that Mat. 12.40. as Jonas was 3 days and 3 nights in the whales
belly; so shall the son of man be 3 days and 3 nights in the heart of the
earth. And, Destroy this Temple, and in 3 days I will raise it up again, Ioh.
2.19.21. It was needful therefore, that both Christ should rise on the Lords
day, it being the third day from his Passion; and also that he should show
himself being risen, to his Disciples, upon this third day, to make good his
own words.

And for the holy Ghosts descent upon this day, Act. 2.1. it being Pentecost
day, a great feast day of the Jews, wherein were mert at Jerusalem many
strangers; and on which day, all the people of the City were at home, not
abroad in the fields; and were more apt to assemble and gather together to take
knowledge of this miracle, therefore as it is most likly, did the holy Ghost
choose this day, rather then any other to show this miracle; to grace and
countenance the Gospel, in the sight of all men, and to add authority unto the
Apostles doctrine before all men, that they might be wone to the faith; and
what notable effect it took you see, for thowsands of the people assembling to
see the miracle upon Peter's sermon instantly made unto them, were converted,
Act. 2.14.41. The like may be said of Peter's sermon upon this day, it was
merely occationall, as namely to take off the slander of drunkenness, cast
upon the Apostles, Act. 2.13. and to inform those that doubted of this
miracle, what it should mean, Act. 2.12. but to suppose the holy Ghost
descended, to make this day a Sabbath, is an idle fiction, and fained
invention. Hereby you may see how they wring and wrest the Scriptures, unto
such uses, as the holy Ghost never intended, and whereof the holy Scripture is
altogether silent: who made these men of Gods privy Counsel, that they should
be so well acquainted with such ends of the holy Ghosts actions, as he has
concealed? such interpreters of holy Scripture, if they had their due, would be
sent back to the Uniuersity again, to learn more Logic, or confined to
their studies, for a season, that they might grow better acquainted with the
holy Scriptures, before they be permitted to make public interpretatio^s of
them: they let not to damn men, to the pit of hell, for not keeping this Lords
day constantly for a Sabbath, and that upon these idle grownds; were it fit to
put a sword into a man's hand, that knovves not when or where to use it? should
these men be betrusted with the keys, to shut men out of heaven, and to lock
men into hell, thus causlesly?

By what has been said, it appears 1. that it can no where be proved, that
the Lords day, was in Christ's and the Apostles times, kept constantly and
weekly for a Sabbath day. 2. That the first Lords day, was not kept for a
Sabbath day, by Christ, nor by his Apostles and Disciples: Wherefore it
follows, that if this Lords day, was not kept constantly and weekly in the
days of Christ and his Apostles, then we are not tied in conscience in
imitation of their examples, to keep every Lords day, week by week, as now
we do: it is sufficient if we keep but some Lords day, sometime; as one in a
year, or one in three months, or one in 6 months, or the like; but a weekly
observation is a needless and growndlesse observation, since it cannot be
shown, nor proved in the holy Scriptures. Thus much touching the Scriptures:
Now a word or two out of the Histories of the Church.

We read it mentioned by Mr. Perkins in his first Volume, upon the 4th com.
page 48. that the Lords day (which he there cales Sabbath day) was neglected,
and not observed by those primitive Churches, which lived next after the
Apostles, until it was established by Christian Emperors etc. Thus you see,
the Lords day, was not observed by many of the primitive Churches, for 300
years; for so long it was ere Constantine enacted a law for it, who was a
Christian Emperor: Now who can imagine, that the Lords day, was ever kept in
the Apostles days, weekly and constantly, for a Sabbath day, when as those
Christian Churches, who immediately succeeded the Apostles, kept it not at all
for 300 years together? is it credible that those purest Churches should
neglect such an ordinance of Christ, as the Lords day Sabbath, if any such
ordinance there had ever been in the Church? No, no, the weekly and constant
observation of the Lords day Sabbath, it is but a nouelty, and lately sprung up.

The use I would make of this point is this; is it so, that the Scriptures do
not bind us to a weekly keeping of the Lords day, but that it is enough, if
we keep it at some times only; Why then do Ministers press the people so
hardly to keep every Lords day, and every Sunday, none excepted? may it not in
this respect, be said of these Ministers, as the Lord spoke of those Prophets,
I have not sent these Prophets, says the Lord, ye^ they ran: I have not
spoken to them, and yet they prophesied? Ier. 23.21. Why are these Ministers
more strict then God himself? why do they press to a weekly practice, when
Gods word speaks but of a seldom practice? Why should we be tied to keep
the Lords day oftener, then did the Apostolic Churches? Forasmuch as we are
bound to keep but some Lords days in a year, why are people hindered in the
time of harvest, to gather in their corn on the Lords day, and that upon pain
of damnation if they do; and upon pretense of a breach of the 4th com.? since
they may, both work on every Lords day, all the time of harvest, and yet keep
some Lords days after harvest is done. Also in the time of wheat seile and
barly-seile, why may not the husbandman plow his ground, and some his seed, on
the Lords day? since he may keep some Lords day in a year, after these busy
times be past. In the time of Hay-seile, why should not men make their hay on
the Lords day? seeing they may keep Lords days enough all the year after.
When a Fayer fales upon the Lords day, why may they not keep it upon that day?
or if it fale upon the Monday, why may they not ride to it, and drive carts to
it, on the Lords day, the day before it; as well as Christ's Disciples
travailed 15 miles upon the Lords day, and upon the most eminent Lords day?
since they may keep some Lords days, on the other times of the year, when
there is no fayer.

It is true, I verily believe, that the 7th day, Saturday Sabbath, is still in
force, and that I bear a reverence and a religiouse respect unto that day; and
for the conscience, and duty I owe unto it, I do sanctify the Lords day, not
for it self, but for the Sabbath days sake, which goes before it, giving
God one day for an other, by way of a change, until the time of reformation,
as they did change the Passover day, Numb. 9.1.3.11. It is also true, that
most of our Ministers hold the 7th day, Saturday Sabbath, for a ceremony and
abolished: now could I be persuaded in my conscience, that the 7th day Sabbath
is abolished, as they say they are, I do protest it, that I would not make
any conscience or scruple, of doing the ordenary works of the 6. days, upon
the Lords day; neither would I in any respect of any divine institution, or
conscience of the 4th com: vvithhold any of my family from doing the like:
should I leese my hay in time of Hay-seile; or my corn in time of harvest; or
but hinder my works there abouts; or suffer my conscience to be in thraled,
for such nifling and trifling reasons as these? no I trust not: the like I say
unto men of all trades, and occupationes, in Cities and Towns; if they can be
satisfied in their consciences and before God, that the old Sabbath day, on the
7th day, is abolished; then let them not fear or doubt, to do any ordenary
works of their calings, upon the Lords days, or Sundays, no more then upon
any other days of the week; for there is nothing forbidding them so to do,
in all the scriptures; nay there is warrant for them so to do, by the
Scriptures, if they will harken to them rather then to their Ministers; for,
God says in the 4th com: Six days thou shall work etc: and this Lords day,
is the first day of these Six days: neither was this law ever yet repealed.
2. Christ's Disciples, made this Lords day, a travailing day: and also Christ
him self travailed in it too and fro, as has been proved, wherefore, if we
may receive instruction from Gods 4th com: or if we may follovv the example of
Christ, and of his Disciples, then may we safly do the works of our calings
on the Lords day, as well as upon any other day of the week.

But hereunto some of our Ministers, as those who are so hot for the Lords day
Sabbath, will be ready to reply and say; But Sir, you give too great liberty to
our people; you lay the reins upon their neck; and you speak most profanly
etc. to whom I answer, I know indeed that it is full sore against their wills,
that I have discovered this secret unto their people; for they had rather have
ploded on in their old error deceiving the people still, then this light
should have been seen; but for my part, I had rather please God, then please
men, Knovving, that God cannot away with it, that his Ministers should teach for
his Doctrines, their own inventiones and Traditiones: I Know well, that they
do daily revile me, and reproach me, and say all manner of evil against me
falfly, before their people; that so my person being brought into contempt,
that which I speak against their new Sabbath, may be contemned likewise: but I
desire them to forbear such unchristian and cuning courses; I desire them that
they would no more backbite me, and slander me behind my back, where I
cannot come to answer for my self: but this is a more fair course, which I
will propound unto them: if they think in deed and in truth that I have
given too great liberty unto their people, and have done vvrong unto their
new Sabbath; then let them put pen to paper, and confute this book: so they
shall bewray to the world, that they speak as they think, when they so
bitterly inueigh against me, and against my book: every silly creature can say
it is an error, it is a foul error, it is an abominable error, and it is a wicked
book and an hundredth more; but I would have Ministers that are scholars,
leave words, and fale to blows; let them confute the book: neither do I
exhort them to this, as a matter at their choice, to do it or not to do it;
but I urge it upon them as a duty both to man, and to God: it is their duty
in respect of men, because they have so confidently taught them that this day
is the Sabbath day, and that upon pain of damnation they are bound to sanctify
it, in conscience of the 4th com. wherefore either they must acknowledge that
they have been in an error, and labor so soon as they can to reform it;
which is part of amends, and an argument of an honest mind: or else they must
defend it, that so their people may see, that they play not fast and loose with
them; that they teach them no more in the pulpit, then they will be ready to
defend by their pen, if any oppose it; I cannot see how they can defend
themselves for honest men, unless they do thus: it is not enough for them, to
belch out now and then some reproachful words, and with a kind of scorn and
disdain, to vilify the book and the Author of it; every fool can answer a
book so.

It is also their duty in respect of God; for they say that I am in a foul
error; and that the Lords day, is a constant Sabbath, of Gods institution:
Well then, and will they not defend Gods cause? who should stand up for God, if
Gods Ministers will not? wherefore have they both their livings, and their
office of Ministry, but to manage Gods causes, and defend them against all
oppositions? will they (think you) give their lives in defense of this Lords
day, as they tell their people they will, who will not give their labors to
defend it? when as Peter the Apostle, did but by his example, bring in
Iudaisme, into the Church of Antiochia, Paul the Apostle, withstood him to his
face; and reproved him before all men, Gal. 2.11.14. If therefore I, like
Peter, have offended against the Lords day, then they like Paul, in zeal of
Gods glory, should rise up to confute me, before all men: else they cannot
justify themselves (so far as I can see) to be faithful in their places, and
to be followers of the Apostles. As for the people, me think, they should
never cease pressing of their Ministers, by these and the like arguments, to
the answer of this book, for the quieting of their consciences, and for the
clearing of the truth in this point: they should say unto Archippus, take
heed unto the ministry, that thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it, Col. 4.17. unless they desire to live in ignorance and error, and
in doubt which is the truth. It is true, it has been reported to me, that
some of these 10 Ministers have been thus moved by their people, but they have
returned this answer: We? What we? shall we answer his vain book? let
some Cobbler, Tailor, or Shomaker answer it etc. and are not these lofty
spirits? who could forbear to reprove them openly, that knows them in an
error, in a foul and gross error, and after sufficient means of conviction
tendered unto them, both privately and publicly, and done also in all meekness
and forbearance: and for all this, they still persist, and carry it out in the
height of pride, scorning and disdaining him that shall in love and respect
unto their persons admonish them, as my former book will witnesle for me? So
much be spoken touching the former question, wherein you see that they cannot
prove it, that every Lords day or Sunday, was kept for a Sabbath in the
Apostles days, as now they are.

SECT. III.
I come now unto the second maine question, which is to know, whither it can be
proved that any one Lords day, is a Sabbath day, by Gods ordinance, or not.
For, I deny not only that every Lords day is a Sabbath constantly, and week by
week: but also I deny that there is so much as any one Lords day, a Sabbath
day.

For the better scaning of this point, I will examine all their Scriptures, and
all their reasons, which they produce in this case.

First for their Scriptures; I have read over many the works and writings of
the patrons of this Lords day, to see their grownds for it, but yet among all
the textes of Scripture which they allege, I can no where find a Commandment
for it alleged by them, out of any part of the new Testament: and this
seems to me a straung thing: if you demand of them who is the Author of
this new Sabbath, they will tell you Christ: in the next place, if you demand
of them, where Christ left any commandment for it, by himself, or by his
Apostles; here they are at a non plus, they can find no com. for it in all the
new Testament; no nor any exhortation to keep it; nor promise or threatening
to those who keep, or profane it: now this at the first entrance, does breed
a shrewd suspicion, that this new Sabbath, is but some forgery, when there is
neither commandment, nor exhortation for it in the book of God; neither
promise to them who keep it, nor threatening to them who profane it; when the
old Sabbath was set up, it was done by an express Commandment; and can there
a new Sabbath come into its room, with out a Commandment? was God more
careful to institute a Sabbath in memory of the Creation, then Christ was to
set up a Sabbath in memory of the Redemption?

Furthermore, the new ordinances which Christ set up in the Gospel, as
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Christ was mindful to leave commandments for
them expressly; as for Baptism, Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing
them etc. Mat. 28.19. and for the Lords Supper, Take, eat: this is my body
whith is broken for you etc. 1 Cor. 11.24.26. now this Lords day, is affirmed
by them, to be an ordinance of the Gospel, and a new ordinance of the new
Testament, and instituted in memory of the Redemption; and is it likely that
Christ would leave commandments for some of his new ordinances, and not for
the rest? This Lords day, (if it be, as they make us believe) it may well be
counted by the Church a third Sacrament; for it is to be kept in remembrance of
Christ, like as are the two other Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper:
yea, and this new Sabbath, which is or may well be, a new Sacrament also, is of
as great use, if not of greater, then the two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper: for, Baptism remembers a man of Christ but once in his life
time, in a special sort: and the Lords supper, puts us in mind of Christ's
death but once a quarter; but this new Sabbath, and new Sacrament, should put
us in mind of Christ once a week; so as this would be very useful above the
others; now can we think, that Christ would be so mindful as to leave
Comm. for the ij Sacraments, and be altogether unmindful to leave a
commandment, for the Lords day, to be a Sabbath, if ever he had meant it
should be a Sabbath? and for the Apostles, some fansy that Christ left a
commandment with them, Act. 1.2. but let it then be shovvne; where is it
written I marvel? nay, can we think that if Curist had given the Apostles
a commandment to deliver to the Church, that they durst have concealed it?
could this have stood with their faithfulness? The consideration of this one
point, is enough to make any man to stagger, and the whole building to totter:
their case is above 50 in the 100 the worse for this, that they are enforced
at the first onset, to confess, that they can show no commandment for the
Lords day, from either Christ the founder of it, or his Apostles: The Saturday
Sabbath, has a commandment to authorize it; but the Sunday Sabbath has none;
wherefore I shall make my choice of the Saturday Sabbath, let them that list,
choose the Sunday Sabbath.

Hence this one note would be observed, that since there is no Commandment
for the Lords day, therefore it follows, that the Patrones thereof, must fetch
all their grownds for it, by reason, collections, and consequences out of
Scripture; now how feeble a thing man's blind reasons is, who knows not, that
knows himself? how liable are we to mistake; yea how subject to fallacies
and to be deceived thereby, are the best Logiceans, especially in the Matters
of God: so that if reason may possibly err, and be deceived, the^ may they be
deceived that stand for the Lords day, yea though I in stead of opposition,
should join with them, and all men say Amen to them: for reason and
consequences are their best guide and direction: so then at the best, the
foundation of our Lords day Sabbath, has but the sandy foundation of man's
blind and shallow reason.

But here unto they are ready to reply, that necessary consequence out of
Scripture, is as sound as Scripture it self: where unto I answer, 1. That the
comparison made of man's reason, with Gods word, is unbefitting; for be it that
necessary consequence is sound, and very sound; yet, seeing consequence is by
force of manes reason, it is not fit that it should be compared and equalled
with the never erring word of God. 2. I answer, it is true that necessary
consequence is very sound indeed, but then the difficulty is, to know, when a
consequence is necessarily true, and when not: for many men take their
consequences to be necessarily true, which are but contingent and doubtfully
true: But to pass by this point, let it be noted, that these men who do so
advance men's reason, and consequences, and talk so much for consequences, and
of necessary consequences; there is no men use necessary consequences less then
they do; in so much as I begine to question it, that they talk beyond their
skill, when they talk so before the people, of necessary consequences; for,
if they knew what they said, when they so speak, we should sinde them use
this necessary consequence, in their disputations, and arguments framed by them
for the Lords day Sabbath: for, it is in this argument, and upon this occation,
that they talk so of necessary consequences; thereby insinuating unto common
people, that they have never erring Necessary consequence, for their Lords day
Sahbath: But here I challeng them, any of them all, to show me but one
argument, out of any Text of Scripture for the Lords day Sabbath, which
stands by force of necessary consequence: which if they can not do, as I
know well they cannot do it, then are they but ungodly bragadoceans and proud
boasters, to prattle of necessary consequences, as if forsooth they meant it,
to prove all they say by necessary consequence, but when they come to it, they
flinch, give in, and do nothing less; this is but one of their tricks, to
delude the people withal.

Because we are upon the point, let me show you some of their necessary
consequences; as 1. Christ appeared to his Disciples upon the Lords day;
Therefore the Lords day must of necessity be a Sabbath day. 2. Christ rose upon
the Lords day, ergo, every Lords day after, must necessarily be a Sabbath. 3.
The holy Ghost descended on the Lords day; ergo, it cannot possibly be
otherwise, but it must be a Sabbath. 4. Peter preached once on the Lords day,
and at an other time, I know not how many years after, Paul preached a sermon
too on the Lords day; Therefore of necessity it must be a Sabbath day. 5. There
was a collection for the poor on the Lords day. Therefore it must be a
Sabbath, a poor consequence. 6. It was called the Lords day, therefore it
must be a Sabbath day. As much as if they had argued thus necessarily, it was
called Sunday; therefore it must be Saturday. These and the like are the
necessary consequences, which they use, who talk so much of necessary
consequence; the very mention whereof, is enough to loath a man's stomach, unto
vomiting.

Here comes in an objection; say they, if you must have a command. for the
Lords day, show us you then, where we have a com. for the Baptism of infantes.
1. I answer, you do well to confess that you have no comm. for your Lords
day, for it is so indeed. 2. If you ask me where we have any com. to baptize
infants, my answer is, that I never read of any yet; and therefore I take it
to be an indifferent thing, at the liberty of the Church, to baptize when
infants, or of riper years: if therefore, you can show a Com. for Baptism of
infants which I cannot, then is there reason you should also show a Com. for
your Lords day; but if you can show none, no more then I, then is your Lords
day, but an indifferent thing, and at the liberty of the Church as Baptism of
infants is: this is a rule, that what is not commanded nor forbidden, that is
indifferent: so then, as the Church may baptize one sooner, or later; so the
Church may keep your Lords day, and they may refuse to keep it, if they
please: and this is the highest pitch of honor that you can raise your Lords
day to, that it is an indifferent thing, so as the Church may Rest upon it or
work upon it; keep it, or refuse to keep it, at her pleasure: for, a
commanded thing or day, it is not by your own confession.

SECT. IV.
Thus we have shown, that of all the Scriptures which they bring for the
Lords day, they have never a Commandment for it, from Christ, nor from his
Apostles: Now let us come unto such kind of Scriptures as they have for it;
the first which we will mention shall be the 4th Com. Exodus 20.8. Remember
the Sabbath day, to sanctify it, etc. Hereunto I answer, do not these men
(think you) stand in need of Sampsons strength to drage and hale this 4th
Comm. unto the Lords day? And of more then Achitophels vvite, to make an
argument out of this 4th Com. for the Lords day, which shall stand by force of
necessary consequence, whereof they talk so? had they not need of a long
rope, to tie together this 4th Com. and the Lords day, the one being two
thousand years before the other? the one in Moses his time, the other in
Christ his time. Does our new ordinance of Baptism, stand by force of the old
Law of Circumcision, made thowsands of years, before ever Baptism was heard
of? Does our new ordinance of the Lords Supper, stand by force of the old Law,
of the passover, made thowsands of years before the Lords Supper was ever
heard of? and how then should this new ordinance of the Lords day, be proved,
to stand by force of the old Law, for the 7th day Sabbath, made thowsands of
years before ever this Lords day was heard on? had not these men fore heads
of brass, and cast off shame and wit together, they could not be so impudent,
as to undertake such an absurd task: but this they lean upon, they can but
say the word, and it is done; the simple people believe all for gospel; if
once Mr. Yates, Mr. Gallard, and Mr. Chapel deliver it as their judgment; it
is as if S. Peter, S. John. and S. Paul had said it in express words; thus it
is in our Country, and I believe it is no better in other parts of the
Kingdom.

Who would think that these men, should be so audaciously bold, as to alter
Gods 4th Com. from one day of the week, unto an other? be it, that Christ had
set up the Lords day, for a Sabbath, is not his Authority sufficient for it?
are not all the Textes in the New Testament able enough to justify it, but
they must fly into the Old Testament for a commandment for it? can they show
where Christ or his Apostles, did ever rank this Lords day under the 4th com.
or inioyne it to be kept with reference unto, or conscience of the 4th Com? let
them show their necessary consequence for this.

Furthermore if these men could see, but that they cannot, so long as they
think, wisdom must dye with them, whilst they go about to strengthen
their Lords day Sabbath by the 4th Com. they thereby weaken it, in the sight of
all wise men: For besides what has been said to this purpose, themselves do
bewray it that their cause is feeble, and wants strength and supportation;
for their consciences tell them, that the Lords day, needs a Commandment;
and their eyes tell them, that Christ and his Apostles left none for it in all
the New Testament; wherefore, to make up that which is lacking by Christ,
themselves have supplied it, by running into the Old Testament for a Com. for
it: thus they intimate, that Christ was not a perfect Lavv-giuer, because he
gave none for the Lords day Sabbath: and further they do bewray, that they
cannot find arguments sufficient and enough for the Lords day, neither from
Christ, nor from the Apostles, nor in all the New Testament: for else they
would as well content themselves, with such arguments, as they find in the
New Testament for it, as in other new ordinances they do; they rune not into
the Old Testament, to prove the doctrine of the Resurrection of Christ, of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: Wherefore they bewray that the Lords day is not
grownded in the New Testament, as is the Resurrection, Baptism, and the Lords
supper: this kind of Sophistry is much like unto this; suppose a Lawyer should
affirm it, that it is unlawful for an usurer, to take above 8. in the 100.
and the usurer should demand again of him, when that Law was made, and by
whom, and what King was the Author and founder of it? hereunto the Lawyer
should reply, it was enacted by King Charles, a few years since, etc.
Suppose again, that the usurer doubting of the matter should desire him to
prove it unto him by the Statute book, that there was such a Law enacted by
King Charles, in such a year as he spoke of: if now this Lawyer, could not
show any Statute Law for it, enacted in King Charles his reign, but must bring
forth an old Statute Law, enacted by Queen Elizabeth, many years before King
Charles his birth, where in She forbade to take above 10 in the 100. Would not
any man whose eyes are in his head think the Lawyer does but fumble? And
think here were forgery and deceit in this Lawyer? just so it is with our
divines, they say with one voice, that Christ instituted this Lords day, and
that 1630 years a gone, and yet put them to prove it, and they can show no
Comm. for it, made during the reign of Christ here upon earth, or in the time
of his Successors the Apostles, but they rune out for a Law enacted 2000.
years before Christ or his Apostles were borne: is not this pretty? If I might
advise them, they should hold them closse to such Laws only and Scriptures,
as they can find in the New Testament, enacted by Christ, for the Lords day, if
it were but to save their credites among wise men.

But let us now come unto their arguments, to see how they will prove the
Lords day, a Sabbath day, by the 4th Com. some divines, foreseing the
grossness of others, who hold that the 4th Com. does bind to the Lords day
properly, are ashamed of this, and therefore they have found out a new way of
binding, and that is, not that the 4th Com. should bind to the Lords day
properly, but improperly and Analogically, by way of resemblance and
similitude: but how ever this distinction is some what neat and pretty, and
may serve the turn in schools, yet when it comes a broad into the Country it
is very absurd: for 1. none of our Country divines will use it. 2. This is an
absurd distinction, that one and the same Command. should bind, both properly,
and improperly: properly for two thousand years, and improperly ever after:
Yea, this is contrary to our selves; for we abhor it in Papists, that they
should make 4 senses of Scripture, the Litterall, Allegorical, Tropologicall,
and Anagogicall, as Perkins has them in his Art of Prophesying, page 651.
where he affirms that the sense of Scripture is but one only: now why may
not Papists as well make 4 senses, as any of us make 2 senses, a proper and
litterall sense, and an improper analogicall sense? 3. The 4th Com. inioyneth
us to labor 6 days, and so by consequence upon the Lords day; and therefore it
cannot command rest upon the same day. Neither can the reason of the 4th Com.
be drawn to this 8th day, etc. 4. By this divise, may we revive all the
Ceremonial Laws in the Old Testament, saying they bind us now analogically,
which is flat contrary unto the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.15. Colo. 2.14.5. The fourth
com. cannot bind to the Lords day being a new day, analogically: because the
Sabbath day, which is the old day, is not yet abolished, as shall be shown,
and so it must bind still to the old day properly. Other answers there be also
in my other book of the Sabbath, which here I omit, for I purpose not to
stand upon this point, because I think few or none will urge it.

In the next place, let us come to them that are ashamed of nothing; for they
hold that the 4th com. binds to the Lords day properly: and these have many
devices to deceive themselves and others; as sometimes they have this argument,
that the Hebrew word Sabbath signifies a rest, now on the Lords day, we
Rest; and therefore the 4th Com. belongs unto it. Hereto I answer, 1. that the
word Sabbath used in the 4th Com. was never used for a Rest generally upon any
day, but Synecdochically, for a Rest particularly, upon the 7th day only. 2.
By the like reason, we may hold ffast days, and Christmas day, and
Coronation days, Sabbathes, by the 4th Com. also: for on these days we Rest
also.

Others have this for an argument, they affirm that by Sabbath day, and 7th
day, in the Com. may be meante not the Sabbath, and the 7th day, but a Sabbath,
and a 7th day: and are not these those necessary consequences whereof they
talk so? To wit, because these words Sabbath, and 7th, may be understood of a
Sabbath, and of a 7th day, that Therefore they must so be taken: with them then,
this is a necessary consequence, that, what may be, must of necessity be: it
may be, it shall rain too morrow; does it therefore follow that for certain it
necessarily must rain too morrow? but these friuolouse and childish arguments,
my stomach is so loathed with them, as I will proceed no further, having in
my exposition upon the 4th com. sufficiently discovered these vanities.

The third argument, is. Mr. Chapels which he delivered in public; thus he
argues: If one day in Seven, must be a Sabbath day, and not the Seventh day;
then the Lords day, must be the Sabbath day: But one day in 7, must be a
Sabbath day, and not the 7th day: Therefore the Lords day, must be the Sabbath
day. As for the consequence, this he proved by this argument; because the Lords
day is the fitest of all the six: and that because there was a weekly
collection thereon, 1. Cor. 16.2. with other the like Textes, which are used in
defense of the Lords day ordenarily: but I omit answer to this proof of his
consequence, in this place, because I shall have hereafter a more fit place to
answer this argument, that the Lords day is the fitest, etc. In this place I
will only answer his maine argument, which growndeth upon the 4th Com. for
this is our task in this Section, to deal with the 4th com. only.

I come to his Minor, which consists of two parts; But one day in seven,
must be a Sabbath day; and not the 7th day: for the former part of it, in
these words, But one day in seven; must be a Sabbath day: for proof of this
he alleged my Testimony, and the Testimony of those of the same judgment
with me, saying, as for this part of my Minor, themselves confess it: for
they hold that one day in seven, must be a Sabbath: but hoe there Mr.
Chapel, you must not carry it away so; we must discover your fraudulent
conveiances first; good Sir do not abuse us in our tenets, and thereby abuse
your auditory also; we use not to speak so promiscuously, so generally, and
so indistinctly, as you report us: for, we use not to say, one day in seven,
must be a Sabbath day: but thus, the last day of seven, must be a Sabbath day;
let this be noted: and this we do, to avoid the amphibolie, or double
meaning of the phrase which you charge upon us: for these words, one day in
seven, may have a double meaning; either they may be understood generally, for
any one day in the seven, as well this as that; as well the first of seven,
as the last of seven, or any other of the seaue^: or, they may be understood,
for some one certain particular day, as the 7th day, and last day of the
seven. Now we, to avoid all doubling and equiuocationes, do addict our
selves unto the simplicity of speech, and therefore do choose to say, the last
day of seven: rather then one of seven: but Mr. Chapel quite contrary, he
delights to use in public, and to put upon us, such phrases, as have a double
meaning, that so he may the better double before his people, and delude them;
now of the two senses propounded, (if we shall use his phrase) we do choose
the latter, and do understand, by one day of seven: that one day, which is
the last day of seven: but Mr. Chapel does choose the former sense,
understanding, by one day in seven: any one day of the seven indefinitly;
this or that, or any other: Now in this sense, his Minor is most false; neither
shall he ever be able to prove it out of the 4th Com. that there is commanded,
any one day of the seven: for there is only commanded that one day only,
which is the last of the seven: furthermore, he has abused both us, but that's
not much, but his honest auditory also, and that's worse, in alleging of our
Testimony in public, as if we did vphould and justify his false Minor; which
we do utterly renownce, never vseing his phrase, in his sense: the man is
living of whom I speak, if he think I vvrong him, he can right himself.

And so I come to the other part of his Minor, to wit, And not the 7th day:
where he affirms, that the 7th day, is not the Sabbath day: for proof
hereof, he referred his auditory at that time, to what he had in former sermons
delivered: my self not being present at his former sermons, as I was at this,
and being unsatisfied with this reference, I went unto him after his sermon was
ended, and desired him to give me a coppye or notes, of what he had formerly
preached against the Lords Sabbaths; and he asked me to what end I desired his
notes: my answer to him was thus, I promise you, that I will either confirm
them, or confute them. I gave him also certain reasons, to induce him to give
me his notes, as this, that he was the Lords Champion, and therefore who but
he should defend the Lords cause? I told him further, that he in special
sort, above all Ministers had engaged himself in this quarrel, in as much as
he had openly contested against my book, and the Lords Sabbaths therein
defended: and howbeit I did not rashly, and of mine own head go unto him
with this request (as I told him) but with the advice of some Minister and
near friend of his, who thought he neither would, nor could deny me this
request, yet say what I could, I could get no notes of him: so then for the
latter part of his Minor, and the proof of it, I must take it upon his bare
word, that he had formerly confuted the Lords Sabbaths: but whither he had or
he had not, I can say nothing, because I cannot obtain a sight of his notes;
but I know what I think of it.

This one thing I remember, that M. Chapel was highly magnified and
applauded, not only by his parishoners, but also by all Puritan Divines that
heard him, for his solid and learned overthrowing of the Lords Sabbath: the
which let us take for granted, and so you shall see how the crafty, are caught
in their own craftiness: from this impiouse and ungodly doctrine of M.
Chapel, thus I argue; If that the old Sabbath, mentioned in the moral law,
be abolished by M. Chapel, and then he cannot prove infallibly, that we have
any new Sabbath jure diuino; then must M. Chapel, and his parishoners, and
those Puritan Divines that so applauded his doctrine, all turn Anabaptists
forthwith: and so keep no Sabbath at all. The reason hereof is plain; for if
we have neither the old Sabbath, nor any new Sabbath, then we have no Sabbath
at all; and so must become Anabaptists.

Having answered their arguments, whereby they would prove the Lords day, a
Sabbath by the 4th com. I desire the Reader but to look back upon them, they
are but 3 in number; and to consider how poor and feeble they are, and withal
to think with what face they can so bouldly urge the 4th com. in the pulpit,
upon the Lords day: and so I come to disprove them, and to show, that the 4th
com. cannot be urged upon the Lords day; and let it be considered, whither
their reasons for it, or mine against it, be the more clear, and have better
force of proving.

My first reason to the contrary, is that the Lords day cannot be a Sabbath
day, by the 4th com. because the 4th comman. does command us to work on the
Lords day: for, the 4th com. says, Six days shall thou labor, and do all
thy work, Exodus 20.9. and the first of these 6 days, is the day called the
Lords day, as we have proved, in the exposition of the 4th com. Now this law,
inioyning us to labor six days, and consequently on the Lords day, was never
repealed, for it was noe Type or shadow of Christ etc. Nay Christ ratified
this law, by his own practice; for he labored and travailed up and down, too
and fro, on this Lords day, after his resurrection, Luke 24.15. Now can any
wise man think, that this 4th com. should command us to Rest from work, on
the Lords day, when the same comm. commands us to work on the Lords day?
behold whither these men are not fit expounders of Scripture, when they are so
ignorant therein, as they make not only one Scripture contradict an other
Scripture, but, then the which is nothing more absurd, they make one and the
same Scripture to contradict it self? for they make the 4th com. to say, Thou
shall not work on the Lords day; when it says the quite contrary, Six days
thou shall work, of which 6 the Lords day is one: may not I truly say of
these Ministers, who thus abuse Gods law in expounding it, as Paul said of
some, that they would be Doctors of the law, and yet understand not what they
speak, neither whereof they affirm? 1. Tim. 1.7,

My second argument against them is this; That Sabbath day, which is commanded
in the 4th com. it is a weekly Sabbath, on every 7th day. But it cannot be
proved, that the Lords day, is a weekly Sabbath; for in Christ's time, and in
the Apostles times, it was not kept constantly, and weekly, but once in a
year, or the like as has been shown. Therefore, the Lords day, is not, nor
can be commanded, in the 4th com.

My third argument to the contrary, is because the time, the circumstance of
time, as they cale it, in the 4th Comm. is abolished, as themselves say and
teach: for, they teach that by these Textes of Scripture, Romans 14.5. Gal. 4.10.
and Colos. 2.16.17. the time of the 7th day, commanded in the 4th com. is a
ceremony, and a Ievvsh ceremony, etc. Now from their own doctrine I argue
against them thus; If the commanded time, in the 4th Com. be a circumstance,
and a Jewish ceremony, and abolished; then very foolishly do they that will
rune to the 4th Com. for time, for the new Sabbath, or Lords day: ask them by
what precept this time of the Lords day, is to be sanctified, and they will
tell you by the 4th com. so that they will fetch a time out of the 4th Comm.
and yet they say this time is abolished, what contradicting folly is this?
wherefore unless they can prove, that there was two days, and two times, the
7th day, and the 8th day, commanded in the 4th com. their doeings are like unto
a foolish gardener, who having but one bed of time in his garden, first he
will cut it, or root it all up, and then he will make all men believe, that
yet for all that, he can fetch as much time out of that bed, as he could do
before it was rooted up: of such pulpit gardiners we have too many: they can
take out of the Com. what they please; and they can put into it again, what
they please; But the greatest riddle is behind, how can a man take a thing
away, and yet leave it there still? or, how can a man say a thing is
ceremonial, and yet make it Moral? abolished by Christ, and yet remain after
Christ, many hundredth years? none but these men, can answer this riddle.
Wherefore, since the time in the 4th Com. is abolished as themselves say, there
is no time therefore left in the 4th Commandment for the Lords day.

My 4th argument against them is, because the 4th Com. cannot agree to the
Lords day: for 1. the day commanded in the 4th Com. is a day called properly
the Sabbath day, Remember the Sabbath day, Exodus 20.8. But this day which they
would have is called Lords day, so that they differ palpablie in their names.
2. The day commanded in the 4th Com. it is the 7th day; But the 7th day is the
Sabbath of the Lord, etc. Exodus 20.10. but the day which they talk on, it is
the 8th day, or the first day of the week: now is there not difference
enough to be seen, betwixt the 7th and the 8th? Betwixt the first, and the
last? the one day is at the beginning of the week, the other is at the ending
of the week. 3. The day commanded in the 4th Com. it is that day which God
blessed and sanctified, Genes. 2.3. and it is that day, vvhereon God himself
rested: but the Lords day, which they would have, it is not that day which God
blessed and sanctified, nor that day whereon God rested. 4. The day which is
commanded in the 4th Com. it is that day, unto which the special reason,
annexed by God, to the 4th Com. Exodus 20.11. does properly belong: but the
Lords day, which they would have stand by the 4th Comm. unto it that special
reason neither does belong, nor can possibly be made to belong. 5. The day
enjoined in the 4th Com. was a day known by those Jews, and in use before the
giving of the Law on Mount Sinay, as the word Remember at the beginning of the
4th Com. imports: for we remember things known before, etc. But the Lords
day I trust is not of such antiquity, nor was it known or in use before the
giving of the Law: and therefore the Lords day was not commanded in the 4th Com.

Hereunto I might yet add an other difference, that the day commanded by the
4th Comm. it is a day to be kept in memory of the Creation; But the day which
they would have, the Lords day, it is to be kept, in memory of the Redemption:
and is it not a likly matter, think you, that both these days, differing as
far as the Creation does from the Redemption, should be commanded by one and
the same Com. unless men would studdy how to bewray their folly, I cannot
devise how they should do it more grosely: if this be not botching and
cobling, to thrust this new Sabbath day, into an old Commandment, I know not
what is: to coble, is to put a piece of new leather unto an old shoe; and to
botch, is to put a piece of new cloth, upon an old garment, when that which
was there before, is grown old and worn out; just so they deal in these
Divine things, the 7th day Sabbath being old and worn out (as they say) they
have now with all their skill, wrought into the Com. a new piece, to wit,
the Lords day; such a piece of Taylery was never seen before. Should Popish
Jesuits thus abuse the Scriptures, in point of difference betwixt them and
us, as worse I think they do not, nor cannot, how would even these very
Ministers, make them a scorn and a reproach, and justly, among the people? But
if we do it among our selves, no man must speak of it; but let my tongue
cleave to the root of my mouth, if I be silent, when Gods Laws are thus
mangled; and his holy and sacred word, corrupted and abused; and all to this
end, to maintain superstition, in keeping a new invented Sabbath.

Thus you see we have dispossessed them of their strongest hold for their
Lords day Sabbath, to wit, the 4th Com. let us in the next place make some use
of this point: Is it so, that they cannot prove by their 3 arguments that the
Lords day, is a Sabbath day, by virtue of the 4th Comm. and is it so, that the
contrary is proved, to wit, that the 4th Com. cannot be applied to the Lords
day, as binding men's consciences unto it; then let Ministers take heed how
they abuse the 4th com. in their pulpits, hereafter, by applying it unto the
Lords day falsely; for they must give an account to God one day, for their
dividing and applying Gods word, and if they make the Spirit of God to speak
what he never meant, it will be woe unto them: that's one point.

An other is this, that it behooves Ministers to have a care, so truly and
plainly to interpret the 4th Com. to the people, that when they read the Com.
they may understand which day of the week it is, which God inioyneth for his
Sabbath day: you know, on Sundaies, the 10 Commandments are publikly and
solemnly read unto the people, with great devotion, as it is meet they
should be: and also at the solemn administration of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, then these 10 commandments are read unto the people againr; now it
is the duty of every Minister, when he stands in the room of God, in
pronouncing of the Law unto the people, that he do not dissemble, saying one
thing and meaning an other; wherefore when he says Remember the Sabbath day,
he must not desire in his heart, that the people should understand him of an
other day, that is not the Sabbath day, but of the Lords day; for this is to
say one thing and mean an other; which is a sin in all men, but a double
sin in a Minister; again, when he pronounces these words, with an audible
voice, But the 7th day, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. he must not
desire in his mind, that the people should understand him of a day that is not
the 7th day, but of the 8th day, the day after the 7th day; for this is
dissimulation: now for a man to dissemble at any time is a sin, but when the
Minister is in Gods worship and service, yea at the blessed Sacrament, ready
to eat the body and drink the blood of our blessed Savior, then to
dissemble, is a notoriouse sin. For a Minister to dissemble with one man, is
an evil; but for him to dissemble with an whole Congregation this is a foul
evil: but thus to do, when he represents the person of God unto the
people, and stands in his room who is the God of Truth, now to dissemble,
it is the foulest evil of all.

What a straung thing is it, that Ministers should in Gods room, say unto the
people, Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: and yet will not endure it,
that their people should Sanctify the Sabbath day; but they will call it
Iudaisme, if they sanctify it? or, they will have one trick or other, one
distinction or other, to cast in their way, whereby they will hinder them from
sanctifying it? They call upon the people to keep Gods 4th Com. and pray in
and with the Congregation, to keep this Law, the 4th Com. and yet they will
not abide it, that their people should do the things commanded, in this
commandment? one of the things commanded in this 4th com. is that we should
sanctify the 7th day; but this they will none of: what an horrible kind of
dissembling is this to call much, frequently and zealously, upon the people, to
keep this Law of God; and yet will not abide, that their people should do and
perform, the things commanded, in this Law?

Let me also speak a word or two, unto the people; and first as touching their
devotions in the Congregation; you hear the Minister read thus, Remember the
Sabbath day etc. But the 7th day is the Sabbath etc. unto the which you
devoutly add this prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law; By which prayer, you do yield your assent unto what the
Minister had uttered: it is your duties now also to see to it, that you know
what you pray; else, as the Minister says one thing, and means an other, so
the people say they know not what: you are loath to subscribe your name unto a
writing, or put your seal unto a bond, until you have read it over, and
understand well what it is, that you put your hand or seal unto: Why this
your prayer, after the Minister has recited Gods 4th com. is as your
handwriting, or seal put unto Gods com. you must therefore understand well
what you seal unto: When the Minister says, Remember the Sabbath day: will
you pray God, to have mercy on you, and incline your heart to keep the Lords
day? and when the Minister says, But the 7th day, is the Sabbath: Will you
desire God, to incline your heart, to keep the 8th day for the Sabbath? I pray
judge in your selves, what this is better then babbling before God; we must
pray with the spirit, and we must pray with our understanding also: and that
especially when we are ready to partake of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

2. Let me speak unto the people, as touching their keeping of this Lords day,
in conscience of this 4th com. you see they cannot bring any proueing
arguments, to euince it, that the 4th. com. belongs unto the Lords day:
besides, you see I have proved the contrary, that the 4th com. cannot belong
unto the Lords day; wherefore, people may be as zealouse as they will, in
sanctifying of the Lords day; and hope to please God thereby, as a duty of the
4th com. but let them believe it, all this their zeal, is as the Apostle
speaks, a zeal without knowledge, Romans 10.2. All this their religion, is but
mere superstition; they think to please God hereby, but God may say unto
them, who required this at your hands? may not this truly be counted, as a
limme of that voluntary religion, and, will worship, condemned by S. Paul Col.
2.23? let men try all things therefore; and let them imitate the Bereanes, to
search the Scriptures, and pray to God for illumination, and then for
reformation. They may loose their Hay, and their Corn, on the Lords day if
they will, in conscience of the 4th com. but the 4th com. calls for no such
matters on the Lords day: they may neglect their seed time, on the Lords day,
if they will, in conscience of that comm. Exodus 34.21. In the 7th day thou
shall rest; both in earing time, and in the harvest. But let them know, that
this com. concerns the 7th day, Saturday Sabbath; not the 8th day, Lords day
Sabbath. The like may be said of Brewers, and Mal^sters, they may if they will
neglect to brewe and tunn up their beer, and to steep, and dry their maulte
on the Lords day, in conscience of the 4th com. but it is but their will
worship, and a voluntary religion; it is altogether needless for them, to make
any such scruples. The like I might speak to all other Tradsmen, in Cities
and Towns.

I have often heard many scruples and questions moved, touching the religiouse
keeping of the Sabbath day, meaning it of our Lords day: as whither it be
lawful for Taylers to carry home and fit new garments on the Sabbath day
morning: and whither Shoemakers, may fit shoes in the morning etc. and whither
Watermen, may row on the Sabbath day, after Evening prayer: and whither
Mariners, may set sail, and begine a voyage on the Sabbath day: and whither
any May-games, shooting, and bowleing, or like recreations be lawful on our
Sabbath day: and I have heard it much questioned, when the Sabbath day does
begine and end; at morning, at midnight, or on the Evening; and the like.

To these and the like questiones I answer, 1. if the laws of the Realm will
permit these on the Lords day, I answer the law of Gods 4th com. is not against
them; but rather with them, saying, Six days shall thou labor etc. whereof
the Lords day is one. 2. I answer, it is men's duty, first of all, to be
inquisitive after the day it self, to know which day is the Sabbath day,
before they inquire how the day should be spent, and what may be done on the
day, and what not; there is a greater error amongst us, then they are aware
on; their scruples and questiones, are like unto the minte, and annise, and
cummin; but there is an other thing a weightier matter of the law neglected,
and to be questioned: and that is to know, whither the 7th day, or the 8th day,
be the Sabbath day, or to know whither we keep the Lords Sabbath at all, or
not: for I confidently auowch it, that Gods Sabbaths commanded in his moral
law, are wholly neglected and profaned. I ernestly desire therefore, that men
would now for a season turn the current of their quaeries, from these lesser
matters, unto this weightier matter, until by serching they have found out the
truth; and the blessing of God be upon their labors. Thus much for answer to
the abused text of the 4th commandment for the Lords day.

SECT. V.
A second text produced to prove the Lords day, a Sabbath day, is Psalm. 118.24.
This is the day, which the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it.
Here say some, the word made may be translated Sanctified; and further, this
day here spoken of, was a type of the very day of Christ's resurrection, on the
Lords day, or first day of the week: and therefore God made or Sanctified this
day for a Sabbath. Before I answer this text, least some should object unto me,
that I debase their cause, by bringing in such weak textes, as no man of note
will make use of this way; for to this purpose, one M. Pottes, an ancient
divine, beiond the Seaes, objected this very text unto me, as finding fault
with me, for putting it into my former book, so lightly he esteemd it. now to
wipe away such prejudicial thoughts, let it be known, I could instance
Authoures in printed books, who do urge it; but sparing them, I will nominate
one of my 10 adversaries standing upon this text stiffly, and it is M. Gallard,
Minister of Sprowston in Norff: sometime pupil to the foresaid M. Pottes, and
so I come to the answer.

My 1. answer to this Text is, that whereas M. Gallard says, the word made,
may be translated sanctified. I answer him, that so the word may be translated
made also; and that to translate it made, is the more fitting in this place,
all our Translators both old and new, do bear me witness; for they all
render it made: Now if it may be translated made; how will he prove, that it
must be translated sanctified? for he must remember, that it is his part to
prove, that the word must necessarily be translated Sanctified. Happily he
will say, that the word signifies to sanctifye, when it is referred to
days etc. but, so the word usually signifies also, when it is referred unto
men, and yet in one place it signifies appointed or ordained, thus the Medes
and Persians are said to be sanctified of God, Isa. 13.3.17. That is, appointed
of God to execute his judgments; and why may not the word then be once so
meant also, when it is referred to days?

2. I answer him, suppose it must be translated sanctified, then I distinguish
of Sanctification of days; some days are sanctified for Sabbaths, for the
Church to Rest on; other some days are sanctified for other ends, as for some
particular man's use in the Church, as here in this text Ps. 118.24. This day
which the Lord made or sanctified, he made it or sanctified it, for David's use
properly, for the day wherein he should come to the Crown; and so typically for
Chtist his use, and for the day wherein he should be honorably raised from
the dead, the Lords day; now this Psalm is to be understood in this latter
sense, as he that has but half an eye may see; how then will he prove, that
this Lords day, whereon Christ rose, was sanctified for the Church to
sanctify, when it was sanctified for Christ alone to rise in? for this day,
was not sanctified for the whole Church and people, but for Christ alone: not
for the Church to rest on, but for Christ to rise on.

3. I answer by an other distinction, the word Day is some time taken in
Scripture for a short and ordenary day of 12. hours or the like; and sometime
it is taken for a long space of time, containing many days, weeks, months,
or years, as Ioh. 8.56. Abraham rejoiced to see my day etc. and 2. Cor. 6.2.
behold now the day of salvation. Now the word Day in Psa. 118.24. may be taken
in this latter sense, for all that time wherein David reigned, and so for all
that time of Christ upon the earth after his resurrection; or longer, wherein
he reigns in his Church as King; how then will M. Gallard do to prove, that
by day here, must be meant a short and ordenary day of 12 or more hours, or a
weekly Sabbath day?

4. I answer, say the word day be to be taken for a short day, then let it be
proved, that this is a prophecy of a weekly day, as of every Sunday or Lords
day: for it may be a prophecy of a yearly day only, as of Easter day, since on
that day Christ rose from the dead: and if it be no otherwise, how will they
do for a weekly Sabbath, on every Lords day?

5. I answer, that this Psalm cannot be a prophecy, that the Lords day, or day
wherein Christ was to rise, should be a Sabbath day; and that I prove, because
Christ kept not this Lords day, or day of his resurrection, when it came, as a
Sabbath day, but as a vvorking day; for he travailed up and down, too and
fro, on that day; and so did his Disciples; yea the Apostles themselves were
ignorant, that this first Lords day, should be a Sabbath: for they believed
not, that Christ was risen, but sorrowed and wept, all the day long until it
was nere night; and so could not keep it a Sabbath in memory of the
resurrection: These things have been proved already: Now had this Psalm been a
prophecy that the first Lords day, vvhereon Christ rose, should have been a
Sabbath day, Christ must have kept this day, together with his Disciples, as a
Sabbath day: because Christ must fulfill all things prophesied of him. And thus
much for answer to this abused text of Scripture.

SECT. VI.
Thus we have answered the Scriptures which they abuse, and bring out of the
Old Testament; in the next place we come unto those Scriptures which they
allege out of the New Testament, abuseing them also: the first whereof is
that Text, Act. 2.1.14. etc. Where Peter preached on Pentecost day, and also
converted 3000 souls; and administered the Sacrament of Baptism unto them: and
this Pentecost day, was on the Lords day; and therefore the Lords day must be a
Sabbath day.

Here unto I answer (and in answering, I must be the larger, because in this
Text they put great confidence, saying; here was a Sermon, and here was
thowsands converted, and here was the Sacrament of Baptism administered, and
on this day the Holy Ghost descended; and what would you have more says Mr.
Gallard?) admit, that this Pentecost day, was our Lords day; yet forasmuch as
it was only our Lords day, which we call White-Sunday; if it be a Sabbath,
it does not follow that any more Lords days in a year must be Sabbaths, then
one, and that upon our White-Sunday.

2. I answer, it is not to be supposed, but it must be proved by them; that
this Pentecost day, vvhereon Peter preached, was that year upon the Lords
day, or Sunday: for it is houlden by many, that Pentecost day, does follow
according to the day of the Month variably, and not according to the day of
the week constantly: Waleus upon the 4th Com. Page 161. says it is caled
into question of some whither this Pentecost day, fell then upon the Lords day
or not. Yea, he adds that Pentecost may fale on any day of the week. To this
agrees Aynsworth on Leuit. 23.11.15. alleging it to be the opinion of Sundry
Rabbines; and according to the Hebrew Canones; and translations of the Chaldee,
and Septuagint; that Pentecost follows the day of month, and so is variable,
being one year upon one day of the week, and an other year upon an other day
of the week: and hereunto also do bear witness, the Jews wheresoever now
living; for they keep their Feast of Pentecost by the accounte of the Moon;
and one year upon one day of the week, and the next year upon an other.
Wherefore since it is the most likely that Pentecost day then fell upon some
other day of the week, as Saturday, or the like, how will they prove it fell
now when Peter preached, on the Lords day, or Sunday?

3. I answer, but suppose we that it was the Lords day, wherein all this was
done, it yet does not follow, that this day was therefore a Sabbath day; for
these actions, were no proper actions of a Sabbath day, and done only upon
Sabbath days; for they were common week days actions and such as might be,
may be, and were done upon any day of the week: let us rune thorough the
particulars briefly; and first for the Holy Ghostes descending; how will they
make it appear, that the Holy Ghost in his descent does wait for a Sabbath
day, to come down in? we read of the Holy Ghosts descending, in Act. 10.44.
and in Act. 19.6. But not a word, that these days were Sabbath days. If
notable actions done in a day, must sanctify that day for a Sabbath day, why
are not good Friday, wherein Christ suffered, and Hallow Thursday, vvherin
Christ ascended, made Sabbaths also? for these works, were as behoofefull for
the Church, as was the descent of the Holy Ghost. 2. For the Sacrament of
Baptism, the administration of this, is no proper work for a Sabbath, but may
be done in any common day: Else why do we baptize children, on any day of
the week? and why did Phillip Baptize the Eunuch on a travailing day? Act.
8.38.39. Paul baptized Lydia and her household, upon the Saturday Sabbath Act.
16.15. Sacraments were never appropriated to the Sabbath day, as we may see in
Circumcision, it was on the 8 day, were it Sabbath day or not: the Passover,
it was on the 14th day of the month, were it Sabbath day or not: and Christ
did eat the Lords Supper, on Thursday night, the night before he was
crucified. 3. For Peter's sermon: we know preaching is no work so proper unto
the Sabbath day, as it may not be on any day of the week also: else, why
preach we on Lecture days, on any of the week days? preaching may be on any
day of the week, according to that 2. Tim. 4.2. preach the word, be instant,
in season and out of season. Christ preached on a vvorking day, to the
Samaritan woman; his Disciples being gone into the City to buy meat Ioh.
4.8. the Apostles preached daily in the Temple, and from house to house, Act.
5.42. thus it appears that these are such actions, as may be done on any day
of the week, and how then will it follow, that this day of Pentecost was
Sabbath day, because these actions were done in that day? these are far from
necessary consequences I am suer. No marvel they pretend necessary
consequences for the Lords day; and magnify their reason so highly, in the want
of a Commandment for the day: I see now, there is some cause indeed, that
they should set a good face upon the matter, and having no Com. from Christ for
the day, yet they should make the world believe, that they have good
consequences for the purpose; and do you not see how good they are? had they
neither consequence, nor Com. for the day, they should have just nothing for
it; they had need therefore extol their necessary consequences.

Do not we on a Christmas day, when it falls on a working day, or week
day; both pray, and preach, and use the Sacraments, and rest from labors, and
sing Psalms, in the Congregation; and will any wise man say, there is necessary
consequence in it, that we keep it for a Sabbath day? what vanities are these?

The utmost that can be collected by good consequence, from this Text, Act. 2.
is that the Church kept this day of Pentecost for a Lecture day; like as we
have Lecture days every where on week days, on Tewsdayes, or Thursdayes,
and the like.

Further it is to be noted that Peter's Sermon here, it was merely
occationall, and extraordenary, and therefore can not bind us to ordenary
practice. For upon the extraordenary Miracle of the Holy Ghosts deseent, in
cloven fiery tounges; some people were amazed and astonished, and doubting
said, what may this be? Act. 2.12. Others mocked, and said, the Apostles were
full of new wine, and drunken, Act. 2.13. now here was great occation for
Peter to preach a Sermon unto them; partly to inform and instruct those that
were amazed and doubted; and partly to confute those, who scosted at the
Apostles, as if they had been drunken: so here was matter enough to move Peter
to preach, though he had no respect unto the day, as a Sabbath day.

It is true hence a Minister, by consequence, may gather such a consequent or
doctrine as this, namely, that it is the duty of Ministers, to preach the
word, upon all occations: but for any to collect hence, not only that we
must preach upon all occations, but more then this, as namely, that we must
also ever more preach upon the same day, and in the same time, vvherin the
Apostle Peter preached, that is upon the Lords day, vvhither there be
extraordenaty occation or none, this is idle and absurd; for the Text will not
bear us out in any such collections; nor can it be gathered hence, that we
are bound to preach at all, upon either one day, or upon an other, unless it
be upon extraordenary occationes; such as were Peter's here in this Text.

Further, we may as well coliect hence also concerning the place, as the time;
saying, that we must evermore preach in a populouse and famous City also, as
London, Norwich, and the like; for Peter preached in Jerusalem, a famous
City. And also, when we preach there, we must keep that day for a Sabbath
day too.

4. My 4th and last answer to this text is, by showing their absurd consequence
hence: for, if that the coming down of the holy Ghost, and Peter's sermon, and
the convertion of 3000. and the baptizing of them, etc. did declare the day to
be a Sabbath day, wherein they were done; then is Pentecost, a Jewish
ceremonial feast day, moralized, and made a Christian Sabbath day: and so
Jewish abrogated ceremonies, shall be revived in the Church: the reason thereof
is, because the holy Ghost does not call this day here, Lords day, or first day
of the week; but he calls it Pentecost day; and when the day of Pentecost
was come, Act. 2.1. This day, might be called by 3 several names, as 1. Lords
day. 2. The first day of the week: and 3. Pentecost day. Now in that the holy
Ghost, rejects both those names, of Lords day, and first day of the week,
which should make for their purpose; and chooses this name Pentecost day,
which was a ceremonial day, it follows, that if these actions, had any force
or virtue to declare the day whereon they were done, to be a Sabbath day, they
showed us, that this day considered not as Lords day, but as Pentecost day, is
our new Sabbath day. Suppose we, that upon a Friday, there fall ij holy days,
the one Gowries day, the other King Charles his Coronation day: here this one
day, may have 3 names, as Friday, Gowries day, and the Kings Coronation day: if
now an Act of Parliament be made, having relation to this day, and calls it
Coronation day, rather then by those other ij names: will not every one think
that that Act has rather reference to this day, considered as King Charles
his Coronation day, then to it considered as Friday, or as Gowries day? so it is
here, no man can think, but that the holy Ghost, in relation of these things
done on this day, and naming it Pentecost day and not Lords day, had rather
reference unto it considered as Pentecost day, to make it a Pentecost Sabbath,
then to it as Lords day, to make it a Lords day Sabbath.

Furthermore, I make it appear, that if we imitate Peter here, and the Church
at Jerusalem, we must keep the Lords day, as a ceremonial day, and as
Pentecost day; for they all kept it so, as Jerusalem, Act. 2.1. and this I thus
prove; 1. It is granted by all that the Ceremonies of the law, had 40 or 50
years, until the destruction of the Temple, allowed for their honorable
burial: Whereby is intimated, that until then the Legal Ceremonies were in
use at Jerusalem. 2. It is clear by Scripture, see Act. 21.20.17. where the
Apostles teld Paul, that all the belecuing Jews, were still zealouse of the
Law: Yea further, the Apostles persuaded Paul, that now he being come to
Jerusalem, that he would Iudaize also, by purifying himself, and
contributing etc. v. 24. and all was done to this end, that the believing
jews, might think nothing to the contrary, but that Paul himself also kept
the law; to wit, the Ceremonial Law: by which passages, it is more then
manifest that at Jerusalem, the Apostles, and all the believing Jews, they
still observed the ceremonial law, and that zealously; now this was all
long after Pentecost day; so that, if they kept the ceremonial law, so long
after Christ, much more then at Pentecost, which was within 6 or 7 weeks
after his resurrection: Wherefore, we are to think that these Jews, at
Jerusalem, kept Pentecost, as a Jewish ceremonial Sabbath day; whereof you
may read Leu. 23.15.21. and so by consequence it follovveth, that if these
works of the holy Ghosts descending, and of Peter's preaching, etc. do
declare this Lords day, to be a Sabbath day; that then we must have a
Pentecost Sabbath day, rather then a Lords Sabbath day; a ceremonial Sabbath
day, not a Christian Sabbath day; and the Lords day, is not to be kept as Lords
day, but as Pentecost day. Behold then the absurdety, of these men, who glory
so much in this text, Act. 2.1. as being so strong for their new Sabbath day,
when as they may by the same reason, bring into the Church again, this
ceremonial abrogated day of Pentecost: behold how unconscionably they deal
with the Scriptures, and word of God, making them a nose of wax; turning it
which way they please as may best fit their fancies: if any conscience be
left in them, they had need (I auowch it) ask God mercy upon their knees, for
such abuses offered unto his sacred word.

For conclusion, let the patrones of this Lords day Sabbath remember, that this
is their task, if they will prove the Lords day a Sabbath. 1. They must prove,
that this Congregation Rested from labor all this day; and that in conscience
of it as a Sabbath day; not occationally etc, nor as pentecost day: for, rest
from labor is a part of the Sabbath days duty. 2. they must prove, that
these holy actiones which were performed, of preaching and the like, that they
were done by Peter and the residue, in conscience of the 4th com. for, Peter
might preach in conscience of that com. which Paul gave 2. Tim. 4.2. preach the
word, be instant, inseason and out of season. These are the ij maine things
besides many others, which they should prove; but these they can pass over,
whith out any word tending this way.

SECT. VII.
An other text they allege out of the new Testament, to wit, Ioh. 20.19.
where mention is made, that Christ appeared to his Disciples; and it was upon
the Lords day too; and this reason is current in every man's mouth, Ministers
and people; Why Christ's apparitions (say they) upon the Lords day, prove it to
be a Sabbath day etc. but Ministers begine to be ashamed, to use this over
worn argument any longer; and well they may be ashamed of it: but that it is
so frequent now in peoples mouths, we may thank Ministers for it; for it is
one of their own arguments, which they hau put into peoples heads; and an
erroniouse conceit once fastened in the minds of people, by their Ministers,
will hardly be removed, be it never so idle.

But in one word, to show their absurdety and abuse of this Text of Scripture
also (for they make a practice of abusing the Scripture) if Christ's apparition,
does declare that day to be a Sabbath day, vvherin he appeared to his
Disciples, then was a fishing day, a Sabbath day also; for Christ appeared to
his Disciples on a fishing day, when they were a fishing at the Sea of
Tiberias, see Job. 21.1.2.3.4. Yea, then must Hallow Thursday be a Sabbath day
also, for then Christ appeared again to his Disciples, when he ascended from
them, up into heaven, Act. 1.9.11. Yea we must keep Fowrty Sabbathes
together, once in a year, for Christ appeared to his Disciples, being seen of
them, by the space of 40 days, Act. 1.3. and thus much for this text. whereby
you see, how the Holy Scriptures have been abused, and the Holy Ghost is made
to speak what he never meante: were it not high time therefore, that these
things were reformed?

SECT. VIII.
A 3d text they allege and abuse, in the new Testament, is Act. 20.7. where
they say is an example of the Lords day kept as a Sabbath day, by Paul, and the
Church at Troas: for, Paul abode at Troas 7 days, and on the 7th day, it being
the first day of the week, then the Church assembled, and Paul preached; now
there is no mention of any sermon upon any of the other days, and therefore this
was their Sabbath day. Yea, they had not only a sermon on this day, but also
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for the Disciples came together to break
bread, as the Text says: Wherefore this day must be a Sabbath day: This text
M. Benton Minister, pressed upon me very eagerly.

Hereunto I answer 1. if the Lords day, or first day of the week, were kept
here by Paul for a Sabbath day, why did not Paul do the like upon every Lords
day, in all Churches where he came? and where he might if he would, have done
it? for this purpose see Act. 13.14.42.44. where mention is made, how Paul
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, to wit, the 7th day Sabbath, at
Antiochia, and there preached: Now sermon being ended, the text says, that the
Gentiles besought that they would preach these words to them, the next Sabbath
day, and accordingly it was so done v. 44. Now it is to be noted, that these
Gentiles were converted believers, as the text bewraieth v. 42.43. and it is
to be noted also, that this day being Saturday, on which they thus desired Paul
and Barnabas to preach unto them these words the next Sabbath day, that the
next day after their petition, being Sunday, or Lords day, this was the
Christian Sabbath day, if any such they had; and this was the proper Sabbath
day, for these believing Gentiles, if any such there was: Wherefore 1. it
seems that these believing Gentiles were utterly ignorant of any such new
Sabbath; for else they would have desired Paul and Barnabas to have preached
unto them, the next day, not the next Sabbath day; the next Lords day, not the
next Sabbath day: for they being an hungry, and finding a sharp appetit to
Paul's doctrine; would not have fasted for it 7. or 8. days, until the next
Sabbath day, but would rather have been fed with it, on the next morrow, the
day after, it being the Lords day, and appointed for sermons, and Sabbath day:
but in as much as they desired it not on the Lords day, it argues that these
Christians knew not of any such new Sabbath, as now we know and keep on the
Lords day. 2. Seeing it was the wisdom of the Apostles, to acquaint the
Churches with the new ordinances of Christ, upon the first opportunity; as we
see they baptized those that were but newly converted Act. 2.41. Therefore we
are to think, that if these believing Gentiles, had neglected their duty, or
had not formerly been taught, that the Lords day was their new Sabbath, yet
now Paul and Barnabas, if the one forgot it, the other might mind it, they had
a most fit opportunity to reveal to these believing Gentiles, their new
Sabbath day; they might have taken a fit occation to have answered their suite
thus, what, do you desire to hear the same doctrine again, the next Sabbath
day? Why you need not stay so long, that's 7 or 8 days hence, and that's
Iudaisme, and the Jewish Sabbath day etc. but to morrow, that's the Lords day,
and that is your Sabbath day; seeing you are Christians, assemble your selves
together therefore to morrow, and then you shall hear the same words preached
again: so the Apostles had sit occation to have informed these Disciples at
Antioch, of their new Sabbath, if there had been any; nay I cannot see, how
with discharge of their function they could have omitted such an occation.

Besides, as I said, the Apostles might have kept this Lords day, here, if
they would; for nothing hindered; forasmuch as these Gentiles, were suitors
unto the Apostles, to preach unto them; it was at the Apostles liberty, to
appoint the day and time when; and the sooner the rather: if therefore, here
was fit opportunity; and also, it was at the Apostles liberty, to appoint the
Lords day to preach in, and to assemble the Church on that day, and yet for all
this, did not appoint the Lords day, who can think that the Apostles, Paul
and Barnabas esteemed the Lords day, to be Sabbath day; and hereby it appears
also, that Paul kept not this Lords day constantly, at all times, and in all
places: which is an argument, that when Paul did preach, on the Lords day, as
here he did at Troas, Act. 20.7. that he kept it not for a Sabbath day; for
then he would have kept every Lords day, where ever he came, as well as this
one at Troas. And this is my first answer.

2. I answer, whereas the Patrones of this new Sabbath take it for granted,
that Paul's Sermon, and the Lords Supper, were actions performed on the Lords
day, or first day of the week, this I deny them, and this they must prove: for
it will be found, that both the sermon, and the Lords Supper, were done in the
night time, which is no part of the day; and consequently that these actions
were not done on the Lords day. I confess the Disciples met on the Lords day,
or first day of the week, but it follows not thence, that therefore Paul
preached, and administered the Lords Supper, on this first day, vvherin they
assembled: that this is no paradox, you shall see the Text gives me light unto
this answer; as for Paul's Sermon, that this was performed in the night time,
after the Lords day was past; see the Text, which says, there were many
lights in an upper chamber, where they were assembled, v. 8. Ergo, it was in
the night time that they were assembled; again, the Text says, that Paul
continued his preaching unto midnight, v. 7. Wherefore it is manifest, that
Paul's Sermon was in the night. Further as for the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, it was in those days an evening or night work, see Mark. 14.17.22.
1 Cor. 11.21. and Paul did not celebrate the Lords Supper, in all liklihood
until midnight after his Sermon was finished see Act. 20.11. so both the
Sermon, and the Sacrament were performed in the night.

It is likly also, that the Disciples here at Troas, assembled not in the
morning, but in the latter end of the Lords day, about the shutting in of the
day, for it is said in the Text, that the Disciples came together to break
bread, v. 7. that is, to receive the Lords Supper; now forasmuch as the Lords
Supper, was an Evening or night work, in those days, as has been proved, it
is to be thought, that when the Disciples met to eat the Lords Supper, that
they met not in the morning, or at breakfast time, to eat their Supper, but
at Supper time, and at Evening time, at the end of the day. Again, the text
says, Paul continued his preaching until midnight. Now it is a most
unreasonable thing to imagine, that Paul should begine his sermon, in the
morning, about 8 of the clock, and continue his preaching until midnight: it
was never heard, that there should be a sermon made of sixtene hours long:
wherefore it is the most likely, that Paul might begine his sermon after
Supper, about 9 or 10 a clock at night, and so held on till midnight: There is
no likely hood therefore, that Paul preached in the day time; much less that
he begane in the morning; unless you will absurdly imagine, that the
Disciples met at Breakefast time to go to supper: and also, that Paul
preached a sermon of 16. hours long; which no Auditor could bear with
patience and proffit.

Neither will that hinder this, in that the text says, that the Disciples met
on the first day of the week v. 7. for, as a man may be said to pay a sum
of money on such a day, though he pay it not till a quarter of an hour before
Sune set; so may they be said, to mete on the first day, albeit it was not
till the very last point of the day: Now I hold that the night is no part of
the day, as formerly I have shown in the exposition of the 4th comm. nor is
the night to be counted and rekoned, for any part of the day goeing before it:
so then, this text makes nothing at all for the Lords day; all that they can
hence collect, is no more but this, that we are bound to keep every 8th days
night, or every Lords day night, for a Sabbath night: and that we must preach
as Paul did, till midnight etc. Wherefore, if they will have it that Paul's
sermon, and their assembling begane in the morning, let them prove it; for the
text has no such thing in it.

I know they are ready to say, these were times of persecution, and they could
not meet, till night, for fear etc. but the text has nothing of any
persecution now at Troas; and again, since they met to receive the Lords
Supper, there was no need for them to meet in the day time or morning for
that, the evening was soon enough: let them prove, that the Disciples would
have met sooner, but for fear, if they can: and lastly, had fear of
persecution hindered them, then would they not have met on the first day etc.
in the day time, least they should be seen walking in the streets, and
entering into the common house of assembly; they then would rather have met,
erly before day light, or late after the day was shut in, least they should be
seen etc. but they assembled in the day time, and therefore no fear of
persecutors.

3. I answer, admit that they met in the morning of the Lords day, and that
the sermon, and the Lords Supper, were administered in the day time; yet what
makes this for a Sabbath? for, these are every days work: preaching, is an
every days work, and Lords Supper is so too; for Christ did eat the Lords
Supper on a Thursday night: all that can be hence collected is no more but
this, that the Lords day, is a Lecture day, like as Tewsdayes and Thursdayes be
in many places of the kingdom. Now there is great difference betwixt a Sabbath
day, and a Lecture day.

Besides, whereas they tell us, that this instance in Act. 20.7. is an example
of a Sabbath day, they are much mistaken; for this is but a Sermon example, it
is not a Sabbath example: great difference there is betwixt a Sermon example,
and a Sabbath example: for, to prove a Sabbath example, they must prove that
these Disciples did Rest all day from morning to night; and then secondly, that
they performed those holy actions, in conscience of the day, and of the 4th
com. so then hitherto, they have not proved, so much as any one Lords day, kept
for a Sabbath day, in the Apostles times. Only they have grossly abused this
portion of Scripture also, as they have done the former, to make the holy Ghost
say what he never thought: this abuse of Scripture would be reformed, by such
as make conscience.

4. I answer, whereas they plead that Paul tarried 7 days at Troas, and
preached on the last day, it being the Lords day, and no mention of any sermon
but on the Lords day: if this will prove a Sabbath day, then have I learned a
way how to prove Saturday to be the Sabbath day, and that by the like arguing:
for Paul tarried certain days at Philippie, and preached on the Sabbath day,
to wit, the Saturday Sabbath, and baptized Lydia and her family on the same
day, but no mention there is of any preaching on the Lords day, or an any other
day, Act. 16.12.13.14.15. therefore Saturday must be the Sabbath day. 2. What
though there be no mention that Paul preached in any of the 7 days, till this
Lords day, does it thereof follow, that he did not preach on any of those
days? Were not many things done, that were not mentioned? else the world could
not co^teine the books etc. Yet it may be proved that Paul preached on the day
before this first day, or Lords day, to wit, on the Saturday Sabbath; for S.
Luke testifies of S. Paul, that where Paul came, it was his custom to
preach ever upon the Sabbath day, Paul as his manner was went in unto them, and
iij Sabbath days disputed with them Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4. And Paul who
exhorted Timothy to preach the word in season and out of season; himself I
trust was not idle at Troas, all those 6 days which went before the Lords day.
But then they turn to quaeries, and why preached he on this day? and why is
this day mentioned, and none of the other? Thus when they can go no further,
they fale to beging of questions of us; when it is their part to prove it,
why this day rather then any other is mentioned; if any reason in it they can
find, that will help them, let them produce it.

5. I answer, that this sermon of Paul's, was occationall and extraordenary; and
therefore no likelihood that it was a Sabbath: neither is it likely, that this
assembly at Troas, was a Sabbath assembly: for Sabbath assemblies are works
of the day, not of day and night both. Suppose therefore, that the Church at
Troas, assembled in the morning of the Lords day, and so held on their
assembly whilst midnight; yea, all night also; for so much is plain by the
text Act. 20.7.11. and so they held society a whole day, and a whole night
also, 24. hours: is this to be deemed, an ordenary Sabbath day work? if it
be, then must our Congregations, assemble every week on the Lords day
morning, and so hold on until Moonday morning, or else we are not like our
pattern here, the Church at Troas: see if these men's eyes be in their heads,
who would draw this Lords day, and action of the Church at Troas, unto the
erecting and institution of an ordenary Sabbath: for, if this Text be our
President for our new Sabbath, then it is good reason, we should keep our new
Sabbath, as this text witnesses they kept it. Again, as for Paul's sermon;
Sabbath sermons, are works of the day, not of day and night both: Now if Paul
begane his sermon in the morning, the Text says, that he continued it unto
midnight, v. 7. yea, that he had spoken a long while to the dawning of the day,
v. 11. If this were a Sabbath sermon, what a sack full of troubles were our
new Sabbatharians in; for they must leave their hour and ij hour sermons, and
make sermons many hours long; yea, when they have done preaching in the day
time, they must too it again, and preach in the night also, even to midnight.

As this example at Troas, was extraordenary, so was it occationall; occationed
by Paul's departure from them the next day: for he had tarried with them 7
days, and the next morning he was to take his journey and depart from them,
as the text speaks, v. 7.13. and never to see their faces any more, nor they
ever to see his face any more, as the Text speaks v. 25. Now in all
probability, the Church at Troas knowing this, resolved hereupon to come and
take their last sight and farewell of him, and to receive the Lords Supper at
his hands before his departure; and this was likely to be the occation of their
assembly now on this Lords day; yea, so much may be collected out of the Text
Act. 20.7. Now the Brethren being assembled, Paul could do no less, then give
them a sermon at his departure: and this, he that took all occations to build
up and edify the Church, took this occation to establish these in the faith:
and this, upon this or the like occations, he would have done, upon any day of
the week Sunday, Monday, or any other. Now what is this President unto us, and
to the erecting and instituting of Sermons on the Lords day as a Sabbath day?
All that can be collected hence, is but this, that upon these or the like
occations, people may be assembled together, and the Minister may preach a
sermon to them, and that these things may be done, on that day of the week
wherein the occation falls out, be it Lords day, Monday, Tewsday or any
other; and all this to be done, not in conscience of the time and day wherein
they are done superstitiously, but in regard of the present occation only: but
behold our Ministers have hence collected by their magnified co^sequences, that
we must assemble together, every week for ever, upon the Lords day, be there
occations or no occations to move thereto, I mean extraordenary occations; and
this must be done in conscience of the very time and day, wherein they will
have us assemble: how far off are these departed from their Coppie and
President! Act. 20.7. they met occationally, but we must meet occation or
none; yea with a superstitiouse respect of the time and day we meet in: for
we find not that these at Troas, made any conscience of the day and time
wherein they met: unless you will suppose that all Sunday night, or every
Lords day night, is a sanctified time for Sabbath duties, and to be observed
in conscience. And which is vvorst of all, this time, collected by their vain
consequences out of this Text, wherein they swerue from their Coppie, it must
be pressed upon men's consciences, as a part of Gods worship; and that in
conscience of it, men must neglect their callings, to their great damage, and
that upon peril of sin, and pain of damnation: is it not high time, these
things were reformed?

But happily it will be said by Ministers, that this is an example of the
Apostle Paul, and of the Church of God at Troas, now examples bind conscience,
etc. Whereto I answer 1. this is no Sabbath example, it is but a Sermon
example. 2. If examples bind the Church now, then must rich men sell their
house and land, and lay the money down at the Ministers feet, for so did the
Church, Act. 4.34.35. and if all examples of the Apostles bind conscience, then
are Ministers of all men in an ill case; for they must not only study and
preach painfully, but also must work hard in some honest calling; for so did
Paul, he labored in his Trade of Tent making, Act. 18.3. they must not only
preach on the Lords day, but also, they must preach till midnight, for so did
Paul: they must not only preach in the Church, on the Lords day, but also from
house to house in the week days; for so did the Apostles, Act. 5.42. I but
hereto they will reply, seeing them selves in so ill a case, that these things
were extraordenary, and peculiar to those times, and therefore bind not us now
whereto I answer, and can they see the extraordinarinesse in these examples;
and can they not see also the extraordinarinesse of this example, of Paul's
preaching at Troas? and the extraordenarinesse of Peter's Sermon, on Pentecost
day, Act. 2.1. Where they please, they can see; and where they please, they can
not see at all.

For conclusion, if they will prove their Lords day a Sabbath by this text Act.
20.7. let them remember that besides other things, this is their task 1. to
prove, that the Church assembled in the morning of the Lords day. 2. They must
prove, that the people did refrain all servile labor, at Troas, all the Lords
day long, from break of day in the morning until night: for, they might
assemble together at Church, on the Lords day morning, about nine of the
clock, as we do on Lecture days; and yet come from their labors also, as
we do on a Lecture day: they might meet in the Church by 9 of the clock, and
yet they might have spent 3 or 4 hours, even all the morning before in their
ordenary callings; now forasmuch as they hold that it is unlawful for us to
spend the morning of the Lords day, in servile labor; and because it is a
special part of a Sabbath days duty, to rest from our labors, as it is in
the 4th com. therefore, they must prove unto us, that these Disciples at Troas,
did refrain their works, all the day long, the morning as well as the after
noone. 3. They must remember to prove unto us, that those holy duties, which
the Disciples at Troas performed on the Lords day, they did them in conscience
of the 4th Comm. for, a people may hear a Sermon, in conscience of that Com.
of Paul's, preach the word. etc. in season and out of season, 2. Tim. 4.2. But
this is not the 4th Comm. these are the maine things they should spend their
time in to prove; but of all the rest, these 3 things, are never touched by
them, thus the maine of all which should be labored in, is utterly neglected;
but until they prove these things, believe them that will for me.

SECT. IX.
A 4th Text in the New Testament, which they allege and abuse, is Act. 1.2.
where is mention made, that Christ after his resurrection, whilst he was on
earth, gave Commandments unto the Apostles, whom he had chosen. Now say they,
albeit it be not specified in particular what Commandments, Christ gave them,
yet it is gatherable what they were, by the practice of the Apostles
afterward; now their practice was to keep the Lords day for a Sabbath.

Here unto I answer 1. that whereas they pretend a practice of the Apostles in
keeping the Lords day; they were so far from a practice of it, as it cannot be
shown where any of the Apostles, kept two Lords days, in all their lives: now
a single action, is no practice. 2. I answer, admit that the Apostles kept the
Lords day, yet I deny that it can be proved, that they kept it for a Sabbath
day; for the utmost that can be proved, is but that they kept it for a Lecture
day; if that: that is, that they preached a Sermon sometimes upon the Lords
day: but a lecture day, is no Sabbath day. 3. I answer if the practice of the
Apostles, after Christ his Ascension, be a sure note, that Christ whilst he was
upon the earth, gave the Apostles a Commandment for that practice; then
surely, Christ gave the Apostles a Commandment to keep the Saturday Sabbath:
for, Paul and Barnabas, and the Rest with them, kept the Saturday Sabbath
constantly, after Christ his Ascension; se for this purpose Act. 13.14.42.44.
and Act. 16.13. and Act. 17.2. and Act. 18.4. thus it appears by their own
arguments, that the Saturday Sabbath is still in force, and commanded by Christ
too; and yet they will not acknowledge it, but oppose it. 4. I answer, that it
is absurd for any to imagine once, that Christ gave his Apostles a commandment
for the Lords day: for this were to cast a foul blurr on the Apostles, that
Christ their Master, should give them a Commandment, to deliver unto the
Churches, and they should conceal it: whers then their fidelity? how could they
say with Paul, Act. 20.27. that they had revealed the whole counsel of God,
and kept nothing back? when they had kept back a precept for the Lords day
Sabbath.

SECT. X.
A 5th text out of the New Testament, alleged and abused, for the Lords day,
is 2. Cor. 5.17. and this text as it is used by others, so it is stiffly defended,
by Mr. Greenwood: the words are these, If any man be in Christ he is a new
creature: old things are passed away: behold all things are become new. Whence
he thus argues, what (says he) can be plainer, to prove, that if all things
be new, then a new day of worship also?

Hereunto I answer 1. if all things in Christ's kingdom, be become new; then
show me where Christ has given you a new commandment, for your new Lords
day: I am suer you can find none in all the new Testament, in the stead of
the old 4th com. 2. They say all things in Christ kingdom are become new, and
yet they will needs hau the old 4th com. to strengthen their new Lords day by
it: do they not contradict them selves? if all things be new, then let them no
more urge the 4th and old com. for the Lords day. 3. the Isralites were
commanded to worship the true God, and that by the first and old com. show me
then what other God, or what new God we must vvorshipp, if all things are
become new. 4. S. John says, he wrote no n^w commandment, but an old
commandment unto them, 1. Ioh. 2.7. and Paul tells us, that whatsoever
things are written before time, are written for our lerning To. 15.4. and our
Savior tells us that, until heaven and earth pass, one jot or one title of
the law shall not escape etc. Mat. 5.18. so then, all things in Christ's
kingdom are not become new.

4. This Text is ignorantly wrested, unto a sense the which the holy Ghost
never meant: for the holy Ghost speaks not in this text, of old and of new
laws and ordinances in the Church; as if this text were for the abolishing of
the old Ceremonies, of Circumcision, the Passover, and the like; and for the
establishing of new ordinances, as of Baptism, the Lords Supper, and the like,
as they wrest and abuse it grossly: but it treats of the old corruptions in
men unregenerate, and of new grace in men sanctified: and that a man in Christ,
is not an old man, but a new man in conversation: this is the true sense,
laying open to every eye; and yet for all this, they be not ashamed to wring
and wrest this portion of Scripture to old Sabbaths, and to new Sabbaths: what
a shameful abuse is this of Scripture? me thinks men that make conscience of
other things, should also make conscience of this, to give the word of God,
its due and proper sense: to report a man's words, in an other sense then he
meant them, is in estimation false witness bearing, a finne of the 9th Com.
but to misreport the sacred word of God, and to give such a sense of it, as the
holy Ghost never intended, this is a sin, not against man, but against God;
this is to be a false witness, not against man, but against God: What, have
they no body to father their falshoodes upon, but upon God, the God of truth?
will not the Lords day be vpholden for a Sabbath, without such vile and
ungodly courses as these?

SECT. XI.
A 6th Text out of the New Testament, alleged and abused for the Lords day, is
1. Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week, let every on of you put aside by
himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, that then there be no
gatherings when I come. Lo here say they was a collection for the poor, which
collection, was an ordinance of the Apostle, as I have ordained in the Churches
of Galatia, so do ye. Now when there were collections for the poor, there
must be assemblies; and when there were assemblies, then there were sermons;
and on those days in which were collections for the poor, and assemblies, and
sermons, those were Sabbath days. This text M. Yates has urged upon me.

Hereunto I answer, 1. Here you see the foundation of all this argument, is
from hence, that there was at Corinth a collection for the poor; and that
there was also an Assembly; if therefore I shall make it appear, that there
was neither collection, nor assembly, then you will say this text is grossly
abused, and that herein is no foundation for any new Sabbath. And first
touching the assembly; that here was no assembly or congregation ordained by
Paul, is plain from the words of the Text, (...) apudseipsum reponat, or,
apud se seponat: let every one of you, put aside by himself: the Apostle
speaks not here, of putting up money, in the congregation or assembly, but of
putting it aside by himself: Now it is one thing to lay up money by a man's
self; and an other to lay it up with others in an assembly: for a man may lay
up money by himself, when he is at home, and alone by himself; and this is
that which the text speaks of; and this is not done in an assembly as they
suppose, but out of an assembly: if here were any grownd for them, for any
assembly, the Apostle must have said, Let every one of you, contribute with
others, or in the assembly; or let every one of you, put aside from himself,
as men do to Collectors in the Church; but he says the quite contrary, let
every one, put aside by himself; wherefore this ordinance of Paul's, was a
duty to be done by every man singlie and alone by himself at home; here then
you see is no grownd for any assembly or Congregation.

Now I come to the collection, and I shall make it appear, that Paul made no
ordinance here at Corinth, for a collection: for, his ordinance was only for
a preparation to a collection: Now these ij differ much, to collect money is one
thing, and to prepare or make money ready for a collection is an other thing:
Paul indeed spoke touching a collection, when he said, concerning the gathering
for the Saints, 1. Cor. 16.1. but yet he did not here ordain, that this
collection whereof he spoke, should be then presently made; this he gave order
for afterward concerning the time, when it should be done; only he would have
them in a readiness with their money, that so whenever after, he should give
order for the collectio^ to be made, men's money and what they would bestow,
might not be to seek, but laid up by them, every man's money by himself, in a
readiness: forasmuch as men were to give with respect unto their estats and
abilities, as God had prospered them, it was needful there should be a day
appointed for them, wherein to cast up their accounts and rekonings, to see how
God had prospered them in their estats, and then that done, to lay up by them,
what they could spare, against the day that Paul should send for it.

For the clearing of this text therefore, we may borrow light from 2 Cor. 9.5.
where S. Paul speaking of collections v. 1. he has reference in this his
second Epistle, unto the collection mentioned in his first Epistle 1. Cor.
16.2. as you may perceive by these words, where he speaks of a collection
appointed before, or as our new Translatoures have it where of ye had notice
before, 2 Cor. 9.5. now this collection, where of Paul had given them knowledge
before, it was not made before, but to make still, as appears by these things
1. in that he now tells them of sending the brethren, as collectours, that
they might finish their benevolence, or make up before hand their bounty (...),
whereby you see this collection was yet to be finished and made up. 2. he sseth
an argument to persuade the Corinthians to a liberal contribution 2 Cor. 9.6.
now this perswasiue argument had come too late, if the collection had been past
first: so by this text 2 Cor. 9.5. it appears, that what Paul spoke in the 1
Cor. 16.2. it was not of any collection then to be made, but only it was a
preparatiue, to a future collection; wherefore you see their grownd whereon
they build is false grownd; for they cannot prove by this text, that here was
either any collection upon the Lords day, no nor any assembly: how then will
they gather, that there was a Sermon on this Lords day, and so a Sabbath, if
they cannot prove that there was any assembly or congregation, on this Lords
day? thus you see that hitherto they cannot prove by any one text, that there
was at any time so much as any one Lords day kept for a Sabbath.

Now when they are at their furthest and can go no further, then they fall to
quaeries; but why (say they) was this collection, appointed upon the first day
of the week, rather then on the second day, or some other? surely there was
something in that. Hereto I answer, if surely there was something in it, then
let them show us what it was: for it is their part to find it out if any
thing there was, that might prove it a Sabbath day; doubtless there was some
thing in it, why this collection or preparatiue, was on this day rather then
on any other, but you know there may be many some things and reasons of it,
and yet none of them such as will prove it a Sabbath day; let them refrain
therefore this begging of questiones of us, and fale to proving themselves; let
them prove it, that this collection or preparatiue appointed on the Lords day,
rather then on any other day, must make it a Sabbath day.

2. I answer, if Paul did ordain the Lords day for a Sabbath, to be kept by
the Church of Corinth here; why did Paul him self, voluntarily omit the
keeping of the Lords day, with the Church at Antioch, when he had a most fit
occation (as lately I have shown) and did rather keep the Sabbath day Act.
13.14.42.43.44. When as yet he might have kept the Lords day, if he would? one
word of his mouth would have done it. Surely had the Lords day been a Sabbath
day, Paul would have kept it in all Churches where ever he came, asvvell in
one as in an other.

3. I answer, let all be granted, and yet it will not do; suppose therefore
that here was a collection, and an assembly, and a sermon; yet it cannot by
all these be proved a Sabbath day; all that can be hence collected is no more
but this, that the Lords day was a collection day, and an assembling day, and
a sermon day; that is, a Lecture day; but not a Sabbath day. For, to a Sabbath
day, is more required then to have an assembly, and a collection, and a sermon;
for all these 3. we have on lecture days, in London, and other parts of the
kingdom, on Wednesdayes, Thursdayes and other days of the week, which are
no Sabbath days.

If the patrones of the Lords day, will prove that at Corinth they kept this
day for a Sabbath, they must remember to prove these things; 1. That the
people did refrain all servile labor on the Lords day, from break of day,
till night; for this is a part of the 4th com. In it, thou shall do no manner
of work. 2. They must prove that they spent this Rest, in holy exercises: And
that they did both these in conscience of the 4th com. the which ij things if
they cannot prove out of this text, as it is most certain they cannot, then
have they foully abused this portion of Scripture also; yea, and not only this
part of Gods word have they abused and profaned, but also thereby have they
abused and corrupted, with error, the minds of such their people, as are most
ingenuouse and tractable: a thing much to be lamented of every godly heart:
thus by goeing about, to justify their Counterfaite Sabbath, they add one
sin unto an other.

SECT. XII.
A 7th text out of the new Testament, which they allege and abuse for the
Lords day, is Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day etc. Some from
this text think this Lords day must be a Sabbath day, because S. John received
a Revelation in it: but few do urge it thus; and thus there is not the least
force of proving in it; for how will it appear, that because John had a
Revelation on this day, that therefore it must be a Sabbath day? there is no
likelihood that ever this can be proved: Ezekiel had a vision or Revelation
from God, on the 5th day of the month Ezekiel. 1.1.2. must this 5th. day of the
month be therefore a Sabbath for ever? But I come to the second sort, and
these are the most of those which use this text; they gather all from the name,
that this day is called Lords day: but how they will frame an argument from
this name Lords day, to prove it a Sabbath day, I cannot devise.

Thouching their collections from this name I answer 1. Let them remember, that
since they have no com. from Christ for this day; and therefore are put too it,
to magnify their reason and consequences, provided they be necessary
consequences as they speak, let them not forget I say, when they bring us a
reason hence, that it be not a probable one, but one of their necessary
consequences; if I mistake me nor, they shall find some what to do, to prove
necessarily, from the bare name of a thing.

2. Seeing that Paul did voluntarily omit the keeping of the Lords day, when he
might have kept it, if he would but have spoke the word, as has been shown
out of Act. 13.14.42.44. there is no probability therefore to think, that any thing
should be intimated here in these words Lords day, to declare this day now to
be a Sabbath day. 3. Forasmuch as it shall hereafter be proved out of M.
Perkins, that sundry of the primitive Churches, did not observe the Lords day,
for 300 years after S. John's time, who can think, that in this Text S. John
did ratify the Lords day for a Sabbath, when the Christian Churches, which
immediately succeeded him, were ignorant of it? further, forasmuch as our
Savior Christ, the Lord of this Lords day, did make it a travailing day, when
he was upon the earth; it cannot be thought, that S. John did intimate, by
these words Lords day, that it should be kept as a Resting day, or Sabbath day;
unless you suppose; that John the Servant, put holiness in that day, vvherin
Christ his Lord, put none. 4. You have a Text in Mat. 24.10. besides many others
in Act. 13.42.44. Act. 16.13. Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4. pray that your flight be
not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day. Where our Savior Christ allowed
a conscience to be made of flying and travailing on the Sabbath day, that is,
the 7th day Sabbath, and that 40 years after his death. Were the Patrones of
the Lords day, but as vvilling to embrace the Lords Sabbathes, as they are to
vphould the Lords day, here were a text for them, that has, by far more
probability of truth, then this text has Revel. 1.10. but they bewray their
partiality, when they will refuse that which has better grownds in Gods word,
and embrace that which has worse grownds, yea no grownd at all. 5. It is a
rule in expounding of Scripture, that words that are some what ambiguouse and
doubtful, be so construed and expounded, as that they do not contradict some
other plain and express Text of Scripture: now in the 4th Com. we have a
most express and plain Scripture, never yet repealed, Six days shall thou
labor: now this Lords day, is the first of these six days; wherefore these
words Lords day, must not be so expounded, as if we should Rest from labor on
this day; for so we make a contradiction in Scripture, by setting this text
against the 4th Com.

I come now to answer more directly; and first for this name Lords day: they
take it for granted that S. John meante it of our Sunday, or First day of the
week; but it may bedoubted of: for our Savior Christ was Lord of the old
Sabbath, The Son of man is Lord, even of the Sabbath, Mark. 2.28. Wherefore,
the 7th day Sabbath may truly be called the Lords day: now be it that our
Sunday, or First day of the week may also becalled Lords day, because Christ
our Lord rose on it; So then, if both the 7th day of the week, and also the
8th day of the week, may both be called Lords days, it is your part then to
prove that by Lords day, S. John meant that Lords day, which is our Sunday: it
may be he meant it of the Lords day, which is Saturday.

Suppose we not with standing, that S. John meante it of our Sunday, what
argument can thence be collected? M. Perkins in his Cases of Conscience Chap.
16. Sect. 2. argues thus, that this day is called the Lords day, as the last
Supper of Christ, was called the Lords Supper; and that for this cause, that as
Christ did Substitute the last Supper in room of the passover, so he
substituted the first day of the week in room of the Jews Sabbath, to be a
day set a part for his own worship. Touching this argument, I shall not need
give any other answer, then that reverend divine has put into my mouth: for he
does ingenuously confess it in the same place, that this is but a probable
argument, saying, I suppose, for in these points still we must go by
liklihoods; that this day is called the Lords day, as the last Supper of
Christ, was called the Lords Supper, etc. Well, if then there can be no
arguments drawn from this name Lords day, but suppositions, and likelihoodes,
what have we to do with them? these are no necessary consequence: for how
shall a Minister with a safe conscience, press men peremptorily and
necessarily to a certain keeping of the Lords day, upon probable suppositions,
likelihoods and uncertainties? can an uncertain and doubtful argument, bind
men, unto a certain and undoubted practice? Ministers must have a care, and
make a conscience of it, that they do not bind men's consciences straiter, then
Gods word does: when God speaks probably and doubtfully, they must not speak
peremptorily and certainly, this were to make Gods Laws straiter then they
are: if therefore it be but a likely matter that the Lords day is a Sabbath, let
Ministers leave it and deliver it to people but as a likely thing, so as if
they profane it, it cannot be said for certain, that they sin in profaning
it: but Ministers now a days are gone beyond Perkins, where he saw but
likelihoods, they do see certainties; and dare from such Textes as these
press men's consciences, to the certain and peremptory keeping this Lords day,
upon pain of damnation; how they shall answer this to God I know not: it
behooves them to forethinke of it. In the mean space for the people, if they
be wise, let them not suffer their consciences, to be snared, bound, and
inthralled, touching the Lords day, by such arguments as these.

Yet further, that the vanity of this their collection from the name Lords day,
may appear, see it by the like of the day called the passover day, and of
Pentecost day, and of the action caled the Lords Supper, had not God added his
word and Com. to these days, and to this action, thereby declaring unto us,
what use we should make of these days, and of this action, who could from
these names only, have collected the use of these days, and of the Lords
Supper? even so it is here, S. John has only and barely named this day, Lords
day, and hereunto he has not added any word touching its use, or given us any
reason why he so called it, what man then can hence collect, from its bare
name, what we should do with this Lords day?

Furthermore some argue out of this Text thus; that this Lords day is so called
as Christ's last Supper, is called the Lords Supper; now the Lords Supper is so
called, because it was instituted in remembrance of Christ; and so this day is
called Lords day, because it was instituted for a Sabbath, in remembrance of
Christ. Hereunto I answer, by denial of this proposition that, the First day
of the week is called Lords day, as Christ's last Supper is called the Lords
Supper: in these words they affirm, that there is the like reason, or the same
reason, of the Lords day, and of the Lords Supper: well, now they have
affirmed it, in the next place it is their part to prove it; for bare
affirmations are no arguments; it is not therefore so, because they have said it
is so; for my part I never heard it proved yet, that the Lords day is so
called, for the same causes that Christ's Supper is called the Lords Supper;
neither do I believe that ever I shall hear it proved. In the mean space,
let me show the vanity of this affirmation, and argumentation, by the like,
thus.

This Lords day is so called, as the earth, is called the Lords earth, and all
that is therein: for, the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, 1. Cor.
10.26. Now the earth is called the Lords earth, because the Lord made it, and
all things therein, to serve man in his ordenary and common use Genes. 1.29.
Genes. 9.3. and so this day, is called Lords day, because Christ ordained it,
for man's ordenary and common use; that is, for a working day. If they may take
liberty to give a bare affirmation, and then argue upon it absurdly, then so
may I:2. it is said that we are the Lords, Romans 14.8. Now we Christians, were
redeemed by the Lord Christ, that we should serve him in righteousness and
holiness, all the days of our life, Luke 1.74.75. and if we must serve him
all the days of our life, then must we serve him in the ordenary works of our
calings: thus then I may argue; so is this day called Lords day, that it may be
spent by serving God, in the ordenary works of our calings. 3. James is called
the Lords brother, Gal. 1.19. Now may a man thus say, and argue? this day is
called Lords day, as James is called the Lords brother: now James is called
the Lords brother, because he was allied to him; and so is this day called
Lords day, because it is allied to him? see the absurdety of such collections
as are made from this Text. 4. If this first day of the week, must be a
Sabbath and resting day, because called Lords day; then must the earth rest and
be no more tilled, because it is called the Lords earth: and then must we
Christians hereafter rest from work every day, all our lives long because we
are called the Lords; and the Lords redeemed: thus you see the vanity of their
arguings from this Text: the like may be said out of that Text, Luke 17.22.
where is mention made of the Lords day, or day of the Son of man. But
peradventure, they will object, that these instances are not like their case:
for it is (...) with the article (...) notifying some special thing etc; and it
is to be translated the Lords day, not the day of the Lord: whereto I answer 1.
for the article, look into the Textes alleged by me, and you shall find the
article there also. 2. For the translation, that it neither makes or marreth,
whither of the twain we take is plain, in that Translatores do promiscuously
render it sometimes one way, sometimes an other, see 2 These. 1.8. (...) in the
fire of flame, or in flaming fire, Gal. 1.19. (...) the brother of the Lord, or
the Lords brother: see Iam. 2.1. and what difference is to be made between
these, the mount of holiness, and the holy mount? the Temple of holiness, and
the holy Temple? and so, the day of the Lord, and the Lords day? 3. I will show
you two phrases of nearer affinity then theires, and yet differ as far as
Creation and Redemption: the 7th day Sabbath is called the Feast of the Lord,
and the anniuersary Sabbaths are also called the Feasts of the Lord, Leuit.
24.2.4. and yet the one of these is not every way like the other: for the one
is a Sign of Creation, the other of Christ and redemption: so may it be
between the Lords day, and the Lords Supper etc.

I confess we may be bold to render a reason, why Christ's Supper was called
the Lords Supper; because we have a word of institution added to the name,
declaring its nature use and end, as 1. Cor. 11.20 23.24.25. but it is not so
with the day, called the Lords day, Revel. 1.10. Ye have nothing but its bare
name mentioned, and not a word of the reason of the name, nor of the use and
end of the day, so named; wherefore all consequences from hence, must be as
says M. Perkins before quoted, but suppositions, probabilities, and
likelihoods.

Some argue thus, that which in Scripture, is called the Lords, that is to be
consecrated to the Lord, and to his worship. I answer, as well may they thus
argue and conclud, that because the earth is called the Lords, it must
therefore be co secrated so to God, as it must rest and be tilled no more, and
be employed wholy and only to Gods worship. And so Christianes being called
the Lords must rest from work, and only worship God.

Some Ministers argue thus, that this day is called Lords day, by way of
excellency, as excelling all other days of the week, and therefore it must be
a Sabbath day; for Sabbath days excel all other days. Hereunto I answer,
that every excellency of a day, makes not that day a Sibbath day, unless it
excels as a Sabbath day: for example, good friday, and so every friday
since, do excel all other days of the week, in this regard, that on it
Christ suffered his bitter passion for us; and yet is not every friday since a
Sabbath day. Hallow Thursday, excels all days of the week, in this, that
on it Christ ascended up into heaven; and yet is not Thursday become a Sabbath
day. So the Lords day excels all others in this, that on it Christ rose, and
yet is not the Lords day a Sabbath day, ere the more for this excellency; As
the Minister excels all other men, for a Minister; and yet he is not
therefore a Magistrate, so the Lords day may excel all other days, for a
resurrection day; and yet it is not therefore a Sabbath or Resting day. Lo,
with what idle stuff, they fill peoples heads withal, to boulster out their
fancies.

Others there are, who think their bare naming of the day (Lords day) is
argument sufficient to convince any man, and to prove that the Lords day, must
be a Sabbath day; so strong they are in conceit, and so weak in argument: and
thus they argue; why this day which we keep it is called in the Scriptures, by
S. John, the Lords day, is it not? well and what would you have more then? is
not this enough for any reasonable man? I answer, if it be called the Lords
day, then the Lords day let it be still for me; I go not about to give it any
other name, albeit it may be questioned: but this is that I say, that S. John
did not call this day, Sabbath day, did he? if he had called it Sabbath day,
as he called it Lords day, then would I believe it had been a Sabbath day; but
now I believe that it is but a Lords day, and not a Sabbath day; because S.
John called it but Lords day, not Sabbath day.

Their last vpshot, which is a note that they are at non plus, is to quaeries,
in stead of proofs; as thus; I but why think you, this day was called Lords
day, rather then any other? there was something in it extraordenary doubtless
etc. I answer, it is true, something in it there was, and something
extraordenary too, as namely, it was called Lords day, because on it Christ
rose from the dead, and so he did not upon any other day: But if any thing they
will have more then this, let them show us what it is, and prove it when they
have done, but let them leave this idle begging of questiones of us, the which
is a most frequent thing with them.

Thus you see what poor hold they have for this new Sabbath, from this text,
Revel. 1.10. full little did S. John think when he wrote this Revelation, and
mentioned the Lords day in it, that ever Christians after him, would have so
abused this name, to the seting up of a new Sabbath upon it.

To conclud, since they will be so confident, as to collect a necessary
institution, from a bare nomination, I desire them first to prove it, that this
name Lords day was of divine imposition: there is cause to doubt; there are
many names in scripture, that are not diuinly imposed, as Mars street, Purim,
Matthew, etc. so may this be too: and the rather considering that this name
Lords day, was unknown in the Church for many years after Christ: for, all
the 4 Evangelists named it by the old name, the first day of the week, only:
and so did S. Paul, Act. 20.7. it might therefore be so named first by the
Church, and afterward by S. John in his Revelations: now if this name might be
humane, then may the institution and use of it be humane also.

SECT. XIII.
Thus you have seen their Scriptures, and what pitiful work, they have made
with them; the feebleness and insufficiency whereof, being singly considered
of, and well viewed, they full well seeing, though loath to confess it; now
they have a new devise, and that's this, albeit (say they, or some of them) that
these Scriptures, cannot prove the Lords day a Sabbath, singlie and a lone
considered, yet put them all together and they will prove it. Quae non prosunt
singula multa juvant.

Hereunto I answer, it is well that at last they are forced to confess it,
that none of their Scriptures can prove the point, alone and by themselves
singly; by yielding this, they have fairly yielded their cause: for, I desire
of them, to show me in one argument, framed out of all these textes together,
how they can prove the Lords day a Sabbath; any better then they could out of
them all singlie and alone considered one after an other: the which can not be
done. For, it is with these textes singlie, and together, as it is with a
single cipher, and a multitude of ciphers; if a single cipher stands for
nothing, then add to it an hundredth more ciphers, they increase not the number,
the total sum of them will be nothing still; an 100 ciphers cannot make one
single unity: And so it is with these Textes, if every one of them singlie and
alone, have no force of proving the Lords day a Sabbath, then add them all
together, and if there were an hundredth more of them, and all of them shall
prove nothing: arguments do not chang their nature being a multitude, from
that they were single: we esteem not of arguments by number, but by
weight: many probabilities, cannot make one infallibility.

When a Chapman is to buy of a Merchant, many particular things of one kind,
packed together; the Chapman, least he be deceived, will take them asunder, and
view them singlie one by one: but if the merchant, dares not suffer him, to
look upon them, and try them every one singly, but will enforce him to take
them in the gross and in the lump, whithout a particular sight; the Chapman
needs none other argument then this, to persuade him that there is packing
(as they call it) and that this Merchant, is about to play the crafty merchant
(as they say) with him: and so it is here, if now their textes, must be no
longer viewed and scanned, severally and singlie one by one, but we must have
them thrust upon us, in the lump, all joined to gether, who can but suspect
iugling, and double dealing? was it ever known that such devices were used?
but all this is still to hold, such as they have once taken, in fetters of
blindness and superstition: these cannot say as Paul said, that they have
renounced the hidden things of dishonestie, not walking in craftines, nor
handling the word of God deceitfully, 2. Cor. 4.2. If to refuse a single trial
of every text they bring particularly by it self, be not out of some hidden
dishonestie, craftiness, and handling the word of God deceitfully, I cannot
tell what is.

And thus much be spoken in answer unto all their Scriptures, both out of the
old and new Testaments, in all which you see, they cannot prove unto us, so
much as one Lords day, kept for a Sabbath, no not in all the Scriptures. In the
next place, we are to come unto their reasones; and if their Scriptures cannot
prove the point, I trust their reasones and consequences shall do as little,
unless their reasons be grown more potent then the Scriptures are.

SECT. XIIII.
Amongst all their reasones for the Lords day Sabbath, this is one, that it is
the fitest day for a Sabbath, and therefore it must be a Sabbath: and that it is
of all other days the fitest, this they prove, because Christ rose on it, and
Paul preached on it, and collectiones for the poor were made on it etc.

Hereunto I answer, 1. by demanding of them in whose account this fitness is
to be allowed of? in Gods account, or in man's account: if they say in man's
account, what has man to do in valuing and making choice of days for Gods
worship? God never left it unto man to make choice of his Sabbaths; and for man
to take upon him this office, it is but an usurpation. If they say in Gods
account, then I answer, as for the 6. days, they are unfit for a Sabbath in
Gods account: because God appointed them for laboring days, Six days, shall
thou labor etc. Exodus 20.9. wherefore, if we may take that day for a Sabbath,
which God esteems fitest, then must we have the Saturday Sabbath; for, that
God esteemed this the fitest day of all others, it appears in that he gave a
com. for the sanctifying of this day above all others; God commanded this day,
and he never commanded any day besides this day.

But hereunto they will thus reply, but we mean it of the 6 days only: that
day of the 6 (beginning at Sunday for the first of the 6) which is the fitest,
that day must be Sabbath day: for as for the 7th day, we hold that to be
abolished: I answer, admit for argument sake that the 7th day Sabbath is
abolished, which is more then ever they shall prove; let us take them in their
meaning, of the 6 days: yet it follows not: for, this their arguing, is but
a sley begging of the question, and that by taking that in their argument for
granted, which they should first have proved, to wit, that some one of the 6
days must be a Sabbath: and then this being proved, in the next place they may
consider which of the 6 days is the fitest for the Sabbath, and that in Gods
account: for things may be fit for an use in man's account, which God never
ordained to that use.

This their arguing is like in absurdety unto this, a man has 7 sons,
concerning these, thus one may argue, the eldest son is a Lawyer, because he
is the fitest of all the rest: the eldest son, is a Physician, because he is
the fitest for a Physician: and yet for all this fitness, he is neither
Lawyer, nor Physician: the eldest son is fitest for a gentleman, and yet he
may be a beggar. Saul of all men present, was fitest to offer sacrifice, and
yet God never ordained him to offer sacrifice: so the Lords day, may in a sense
be said to be the fitest for a Sabbath, and yet God never ordained, it for a
Sabbath: but these are idle things; first therefore let them handle their
argument proving that Christ has ordained any one, or some one of the 6 days;
and then let them prove it showing that the Lords day is fitest: when a man
goes into a glouers shopp, he must not use such logic as this, this pair of
glones is sitest for me, therefore they are mine: he must first know if the
glouer will part whith them so or not: for there must be something else
besides fitness, or else you must go whith out them: so first let them show
us that Christ will have one of the 6 days, and then let them show which of
the 6. he will have.

In the mean space I will disprove them, and show that none of the 6 days are
fit for a Sabbath: for 1. God with ut any repeal bath given a com. that these
6 day^s we should labor: Exodus 20.9. and therefore these 6 days are not fit
any of them for a Sabbath. 2dly I will show that of all the 6 days, the Lords
day is not fit for a Sabbath: and that because Christ, and his Disciples, with
his approbation, travailed on this day at least 15 miles, which we know of,
as has been proved out of Luke 24.13.15.33.36. the which he would never
have done, if he had judged it fit for a Sabbath day. 3dly, S. Paul did
voluntarily omit the keeping of the Lords day, when he might have kept it
with those Christians at Antioch, for but a word speaking, as has been
shovvne out of Act. 13.14.42.43.44. which Paul would not have omitted, if he
had judged this Lords day fitest for a Sabbath. Wherefore none of the 6 days
are fit in Gods account for a Sabbath, no not the Lords day it self: they must
therefore bring some other and better argument, then this of fitness, to prove
the Lords day a Sabbath: of all our Lambs, those which are spotless, are
fitest for a sacrifice, and yet no man must now Sacrifice them.

2. I answer to their reason where by this argument is proved: they prove the
Lords day, to be fitest for a Sabbath day, because certain famous works
were done thereon, as 1. Christ rose on it. 2. appeared on it. 3. the holy
Ghost descended on it. 4. Peter preached, converted 3000. and Baptized them on
it; 5. Paul preached on it 6. there was collections on it, and this reason is
very plausible with common people: But I deny that these things do fit a day
for a Sabbath day, in Gods account: (as for man's account, I regard not what he
accountes, or thinks fit in matters necessary to be observed upon pain of
damnation, and in matters of Gods worship) and I desire them to show us, how
they come to know Gods mind in this point; has God at any time revealed it,
that such actiones as are forementioned, should fit the days wherein they were
done, for Sabbathes? or has the Church of God at any time, found out
Sabbathes, or made choice of Sabbathes, by such and the like actiones? or has
God left it to the liberty and wisdom of men, to choose him out his
Sabbathes, by such like actiones? if none of these can be shovvne how dare they
be so presumptuous to affirm, that such actiones do fit the days vvherin
they were done, for Sabbathes? man's reason, is a more blind thing, in the
duties of the first Table, then in the duties of the second Table, now the
point of a Sabbath, is a matter of the first Table; dare men be so audaciously
bold then with their reason and consequences here? yea, and such poor
reasones, and friuolouse consequences? it stands not with the fear of God,
and reverence of Gods Majesty, to be so bold with God. I vvish therefore,
that men, especially Ministers, would make less use of their reason and
consequences, and more use of the Scriptures and conscience.

Further I answer, that if men will be directed by examples in the Scripture,
for the erection and choosing of days for public solemnities, they shall find
that such famous actions, have not caused those very days, wherein they
were done, to be holy days, but God, and the Church, have made choice of the
next days after: Thus, God ended his work of Creation on the 6th day, now he
sanctified the 7th day, which is the day after: and the Church Ester. 9. did
likewise; for those Jews, who had deliverance from Hamans conspiracy, on the
13th day of the month, they kept the 14th day of the month, the day after, a
day of feasting and joy v. 17. and those Jews who had deliverance on the 14th
day of the month, they solemnised the 15th day of the month, the day after v.
18. wherefore if they would follow the Church of the Jews, then must they
think, that these famous actiones, must be remembered, not on the day wherein
they were done, the Lords day, but the day after it, on Moonday, and this day
must be our new Sabbath: or, if they will imitate God, and borrow any light
from him, then must they think that the day after all is done, must be the
Sabbath; and as God set up the 7th day, in remembrance of his work of
Creation on the 6 days, so they are to think that Christ (who in this point
imitated God, as they say) set up the 9th day of the week, in remembrance of
his work of Redemption, done on the 6th, 7th, and 8th days of the week: and
so all those notable actiones, should betoken unto us, that Moonday is our new
Sabbath day, it being the day after. We will be thought to grownd this Lords
day upon Scripture, and yet not follow either the example of God, or of the
Church of God, recorded in Scripture; for we will not keep the day after, but
the very day, upon which those actiones were done.

SECT. XV.
An other of their arguments for the Lords day, to be a Sabbath day, is because
on this day Christ rose from the dead: and this is in every man's mouth, saying,
why should the Lords day be a Sabbath, do you ask? why did not Christ rise on
this day? thus they argue so confidently, as if it could not be doubted of, but
that the Resurrection must needs raise up a new Sabbath.

But hereunto I answer, by the like reasoning, showing that by as good reason
as this is; we may have every friday and every thursday Sabbathes also: for
friday, may not a man say thus, friday must be our Sabbath day; because on this
day, Christ suffered for us on the cross, it is Christ's Passion day: and can
any ask why friday should be Sabbath day, since it was Christ's Passion day?
for thursday, may not a man say as much for it also? Thursday must be our
Sabbath day, because on this day, Christ ascended up into heaven etc. Thus you
see by like reason we may as well have 3 Sabbathes in a week as this one of
Lords day. If any shall object that the Lords day was the greatest, and
therefore most fit, that it before the other ij should be the Sabbath; I answer,
if we may compare them, friday was the greatest; for on it Christ bore the
unsupportable wrath of his father for us, which made him cry out, my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? but on the Lords day, there was only Christ's
soul put into his dead body, and so revived again, now it was agreater matter
(as I think every one will confess) for the Diety, to support the humanity, on
his Passion day, under that unsupportable wrath of God; then to put his soul
into his dead body, in his resurrection day.

2dly I answer, how come they by this knowledge, that they can say, that this
day must be a Sabbath day, because Christ rose on it? is not this one of their
audaciouse and presumptuouse assertiones, who are bold to affirm what they
lift, in the matters of Gods worship? suer I am the Scriptures say no such
thing; nor do they relate any such matter, when they speak of Christ his
Resurrection. I find the Scriptures thus saying, that Christ died for our
sins; and rose again for our justification Romans 4.25. where we hear, what
use we are to make of Christ's resurrection, that is, that it was to justify
us; but we no where read, that Christ rose, to make the Lords day a Sabbath
day.

As for this action of Christ's riseing on this day, can any man think, that
God would raise up new ordinances in his Church as this Lords day Sabbath is,
by a bare action, without a word of institution added to it? suppose we that
Christ at his last Supper, had only brake the Bread; and given a morsel to
this man, and a morsel to that man, without any words of institution added
unto this action, to declare unto them what they should do with the bread,
and what use they should make of it: and suppose be had only given the Cup to
this man to drink, and to that man to drink, and never said any thing unto
them, touching this Cup; tell me now, could the Apostles without a miracle have
known what use they should make of this bread, and of this wine? Why so it is
here, Christ rose upon this Lords day, but never added any word of institution
unto it, to signify unto us, that therefore he rose on this day, because his
Church should keep it for a Sabbath; how then I pray can any the patrones of
our Lords day Sabbath, gather by their consequences, any thing from this bare
action of Christ's rising on this day?

Nay let me come nearer, suppose the Jews, had read it in the Scripture, that
God himself Rested on the 7th day: but had never read it in the 4th com. that
they should imitate God, and Rest on the 7th day also; how could they have
gathered, from that bare action of Gods Rest on the 7th day, that they ought in
conscience to imitate God, and Rest on the 7th day also, when God had added no
com. or word of institution unto his own Rest for their direction? what, can
men know Gods mind, without his word to teach it them? yis doubtless, our
new Sabbathairans can; a bare action, without any word of institution, is
enough for them: had these but seen Christ break the bread only, it had been
enough for them; or heard say, that God Rested on the 7th day, these needed no
more: it is enough they know thus much, that Christ rose upon the Lords day,
they can convert this to their own use well enough, to deceine the simple, and
coosine themselves.

SECT. XVI.
An other argument they have for the Lords day, and that is this; If the Jews
kept a Sabbath in memory of the Creation, then much more ought we Christianes
to keep a Sabbath in memory of the Redemption. The reason hereof they say is
this, because the work of Redemption, is greater then the work of creation.

I answer first to their argument: and herein they have altered the state of
the question, by putting in the word keep into their argument, in stead of
the word institute or ordeine: for our question is not about the keeping of the
Lords day, but about the institution and ordination of the Lords day: let them
therefore first prove that the Lords day was instituted once, and appointed by
God for a Sabbath, and then they may save themselves the labor of proving unto
us, that we must keep it: for we are not unwilling to keep it, if once it
be proved to be a Sabbath: this is but a piece of their Sophistry to prove one
thing, when they should prove an other.

Behold what difference there is betwixt these ij Sabbathes; and the practice
of the Jews, and our practice: for there was an express commandment to the
Jews to keep that Sabbath in memory of the Creation; but there can be no
commandment shown us from Christ or his Apostles, for us to keep the Lords
day in remembrance of the redemption: wherefore we are not bound unto this new
Sabbath, as they were unto the old Sabbath: for there is not the like reason:
this sophistry every man may see.

I come now to their reason, they say the Redemption is greater then the work
of Creation: Hereunto I answer, to know vvhither it be greater or not, would
cost more labor then this their reason is worth, wherefore for argument sake,
I suppose it is greater: but here I demand of them to whom it is greater?
Whither it be greater unto all men, or but unto some men? their answer will
be, that the work of Redemption is greater unto the elect, unto the redeemed,
and to those only which have faith: Well then, the Redemption is neither
greater, nor great, nor any thing at all, to those which are not elected, not
redeemed, and which live and dye without faith; of these ij sorts of people,
the elect are the fewer number; the unbelievers are the greater number: Well
then, see how these things hang together; the thing they must prove, is that
we Christians, that is all we Christians, even every one within the pale of
the Church that is baptized, all these ought to keep the Lords day, for a
Sabbath, in memory of the redemption, when as the one half of these are not
redeemed: and their reason to bind all and every man, thus to keep a
remembrance of this redemption, is because the work of redemption is greater
unto some only of these men: How absurd is this, that every man should be
bound to keep a joyful memory, of that thing, which does belong but unto some
of them only, as not to the one half of them! this is as if they would
undertake to persuade not only English men, but also Dutch men, and French
men, to keep a yearly joyful remembrance with us, for our deliverance from
the Spanyard in 88: Why, what have French and Dutch to do with our
deliverance in 88? this concerned not them, it was not their deliverance: so,
what have such to do, to keep a joyful remembrance every Lords day, for the
redemption, when it belongs not unto them, they being unbelievers, and such
as love not the Lord Jesus? Wherefore, they cannot press this their new
Sabbath of Lords day, by this their reason, upon any but upon such as they see
by their fruits, do already believe: such as do not yet believe, which
commonly are the greater number, these are not tied unto the keeping of this
Lords day: behold what a Sabbath they have then; to wit, such a one, as only
the fewer number of the Church and Parish are tied to keep it, as for the
greater number of our Cities, Towns, and Parishes, these are not bound to
keep it: this their reason therefore does bewray the idleness of the cause;
for we must have such a Sabbath, as the reason of it does belong unto all, and
to every man, none excepted, and such is the Saturday Sabbath, which is to be
kept in memory of the Creation; now all and every man has a benefit by the
Creation, and therefore all are bound to it, none excepted: but it is not so
with the Sunday Sabbath: for a few only have reason to keep it.

Yet further to discover the vanity of this argument, since they will have us
keep a Sabbath in remembrance of the Redemption, I demand of them, how often
they would have us keep a Sabbaah in memory of the Repemption, once every 7th
day, ofter, or seldomer? they will answer once every 7th day: why say I, that
is Jewish, and sauoureth of Iudaisme, to observe a 7th day: this they have
learned from the Jewish Sabbath; wherefore, since they do so abhor Iudaisme
and the 7th day Sabbath, why do they imitate the Jews herein, and the 7th
day Sabbath, by choosing a 7th day? the 7th day, is in imitation of Gods rest
on the 7th day: and in memory of the Worlds creation, finished at the 7th day:
but we are Christians, and as they say, all things are become new, old things
are passed away, well then, we must now imitate Christ the Redeemer, as the
Jews did God the Creator; and we must fetch light from the work of
Redemption, to know how often to keep our new Sabbath, as the Jews did by
Gods direction from the work of Creation.

If then we must imitate Christ the Redeemer, as did the Jews God the
Creator, then must we travail too and fro upon the Lords day, for so did
Christ himself. 2. If we must fetch light, how often to keep our new
Sabbath, from the work of redemption, as the Jews did from the work of
Creation, then must we (since all things are become new) take up a new account
of time also, we must no longer regard a 7th day, but now we must regard the
third day: for, as God was six days in the work of creation and rested the
7th: so Christ was three days in the work of redemption, and rose, and
rested the third day: on good friday; he suffered upon the cross; on Saturday,
and on a part of the Lords day, he lay in the grave; so you see the work of
redemption, cost Christ 3 days work; wherefore, if they will imitate
Christ, they must keep every third day, for a Lords day, and for a new
Sabbath; and so they shall keep two Sabbathes in a week or thereabouts: and
if they do not thus, they may talk what they will, that all things are
become new; and that as the Jews kept a Sabbath in imitation of God at the
Creation, so we in imitation of Christ in the redemption; but where is their
imitation of Christ? do they travail too and fro, and follow their callings
on the Lords day, as Christ did? and do they keep every third day a Lords
day, and Sabbath day, as Christ rose upon the third day? no such matter.

Furthermore, whereas they suppose, that we have as great need of a Sabbath,
to keep a memory of the Redemption, as the Jews had of a Sabbath, to keep in
memory the Creation. I deny it: for God had given the Jews, the Sabbath day
and it alone, to keep in memory his Creation, and therefore it was necessary,
because they had no other helps: but for us, and for the Redemption, we have
two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, to keep in memory the
Redemption, and these are helps enough, so as there is no necessity of a
Sabbath day also, for the same end. Do this in Remembrance of me, so hereby
then the Redemption shall be kept in memory, all though we have no Lords day
Sabbath at all. There is need therefore to have a Sabbath to keep memory of
the Creation, when there is no need to have one to keep memory of the
Redemption.

They have also an other argument, as vain as this past: thus, If God
instituted a Sabbath in memory of the creation, then so did Christ institute a
Sabbath in memory of the redemption. But they cannot prove this consequence, it
is only their naked affirmation; wherefore my bare denial of it, shall be
sufficient, until they prove it: you may see this argument further incisted
upon, in my former book, Page 48. others argue thus: the greater work must
carry the honor of the day, etc. Ans: the greater work may have greater
honor, though not of the same Kind: for the creation, may have the great
honor of the Sabbath day, to remember it: and the Redemption, may have the
greater honor, of not one but two Sacraments, to Remember it.

SECT. XVII.
An other argument for the Lords day they have, and it is this; the Authority
of the Magistrate has Commanded it; and therefore we must keep it, etc. Let
no man think I frame this argument of mine own head; for as I have often
heard common people vseing it, so I have been urged with it my self, by a
divine, and none of the meanest: neither need they be ashamed to hear of this
argument in public, which they do use in private: I assure them, it is the
best argument which they have for the Lords day: none of all these past are
like unto it: for every soul must be subject unto the higher powers, To. 13.1.
if therefore the Magistrate commands us to keep it, we must keep it.

To this argument I answer, 1. that our question is not whither we must keep
the Lords day, or not keep it; but whither Christ has instituted and
appointed it for a Sabbath or not; let this be first proved, and then we will
be ready to keep it, though this argument of Authority be wanting.

2. I answer, if this Lords day has no higher authority then from the
Magistrate, then does it not bind conscience simply and and by it self, but as
all indifferent things do which are commanded by the Magistrate: Yea, the
Lords day it self must be ranked amongst indifferent things, where of the
Magistrate, may properly make Laws: Yea whereas the Magistrate now commands
the Lords day to be kept, if it has no higher Authority then of the
Magistrate, then he may alter the solemnity of the day, from Sunday, to
Moonday, to Tewsday, or to any other day of the week: Yea, and not only alter
it, but also at his pleasure nullifye it, and utterly forbide keepeing of it any
more. And so the Tenor of your new Sabbath will prove but a fickle and
inconstant thing.

3. I answer, if our Lords day stands by virtue of the Magistrate, the^ is it
not kept by virtue of the 4th com. but by virtue of the 5th Com. for it is the
5th Com. that inioyneth obedience to our Superioures: wherefore, then must
Ministers no more press the 4th Com. upon the Lords day, but the 5th Com. they
must no more say, Remember the Sabbath day: But now they must say, Honor thy
Father, and thy Mother: when they would have men sanctify the Lords day. And
people, they must no more say they keep the Lords day in conscience of the 4th
Com. but in conscience of the 5th Com. and thus also, shall the 4th
Commandment be utterly abolished and out of all use in the Church.

This Lords day Sabbath then may be doubly considered of, as it is commanded
by God, or as it is Commanded by the Magistrate; as it is commanded by the
Magistrate, so I do no ways oppose it, let it stand so such as it is in that
respect, so long as the Magistrate pleases, and as little while as he
pleases: but I oppose our Ministers only, who say this Lords day stands by
divine ordination from God, and so entangle the peoples consciences in this
respect, making more Commandments (as we say) then tenn, or making Laws to
bind conscience, where God makes none. For by their collections and
consequences, they make, or say they find that there was a Law of God for the
Lords day, which is most false.

SECT. XVIII.
Thus we have answered to all their Artificial arguments; and now we come
unto their Testimonies: the first whereof is Gods blessing of this day, and
Gods curseing of the profaners of it; and first of the former; say they, Gods
blessing of this day, to the great edification of the Church, is a sign that
God approves of this day.

Hereunto I answer, it is one thing for God to blessed this day and it is an
other for him to bless his ordinance in the day: Gods ordinance in the day, is
preaching and praying, now God in mercy does usually bless these ordinances of
his, being conscionably used, upon any day Sabbath day, or Lecture day: now we
must carefully distinguish betwixt Gods blessing of the day: vvherin these are
performed, and Gods blessing of the ordinances them selves; they therefore
mistake things, that argue thus, that God blesses the day, when they should
say, God blesses his ordinances in the day: for it follows not, that because
God blesses his ordinances done in the day, that he therefore blesses also the
day and time, wherein these ordinances are done; no more then God blesses the
place wherein these ordinances are performed.

Let me show you the vanity of this arguing by the like case; Gods blessing
does usually accompany painful labor; now suppose some profane Tradsman
should work all day long upon the Sabbath day, or Lords day, and finding at
night his work to have increased and thriuen in his hands; might he argue thus,
God has blessed this day unto me for a working day, and therefore here after I
shall use it for a working day; for Gods blessing upon my labors this day, is
a sign that God approves my action, and allows of it for a working day?

The other part of this argument, is that God has cursed the profaners of this
Lords day, and this is a sign that God approves of the day. For we read in
books, set forth by some Diuins, of many remarkable judgments of God, which
have befalne the profaners of the Lords day. Hereunto I answer, 1. that in
controuercies about points of Religion, we must not prove things, by the
arguments of prosperity and adversity: for these are no certain signs of Gods
will and pleasure; no man for certain, knows love or hatred, of all that is
before them, Eccl. 9.1. we must to the Scriptures in this case; for there God
has manifested his will; but you may perceive they be almost out of breath,
in as much as they are enforced to fly the Scriptures, and hale in any thing,
that may help to make a noise, and put some culler upon the matter before the
simple. By this argument we may conclude that the Palatinate his cause was
naught, and the Emperor his cause was good; because God crossed the
Palatinate.

2. We are to distinguish of the day, from the duties in the day: now we may
impute those curses of God, which lighted upon men on the Lords day, unto
their contempt of Gods ordinances of preaching and prayers performed in that
day: it is rather to be thought, that God punishes the contempt of his
ordinances, then the neglect of the day: for such as profane the Lords day and
come not at Church then to serve God, when every body does serve God, it is a
sign that they be ordenary contemners of Gods worship and service; most justly
therefore may God plague them for contempt of his ordinances, when they are
grown to that height of impiety, that they dare ordenarily neglect Gods
worship, yea and upon solemn times also, appointed by the Church, and when
all men meet together to worship God; then to show a contempt, is a greater
sin then otherwise: so it is rather the contempt of Gods ordinances, then the
neglect of the day, that God punishes.

3. Well nigh all men are persuaded in their consciences that the Lords day, is
the Sabbath day enjoined by the 4th Comm. (albeit in truth Saturday is the
Sabbath day, and by the 4th Com.) now if men do neither give God the right
day, through their ignorance, nor yet will give God a wrong day, whereof they
are notvvithstanding well persuaded in their consciences that it is the right
day, then they sin against conscience, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
Romans 14.23. now it is just with God to plague men, if they will neither give
him the 7th day for a Sabbath, nor the 8th day neither; for so they are guilty
of the breach of the 4th Com. in that they give God no day, no Sabbath; no not
that day which their consciences tell them is Sabbath day; and thus God may
punish them for a sin against conscience, though not for the day sake: and
hereby it appears that their arguing is amiss, when they say that God
punishes men for breach of the Lords day; for it is rather to be thought, that
God punishes for other causes.

SECT. XIX.
Their second argument fetched from Testimony, is from the practice of the
primitive Churches, after the Apostles: for, the Histories of the Church (say
they) make mention, that they kept the Lords day constantly.

Hereunto I answer, 1. that it seems this practice, was not universal, and
in all Churches, but only in some places: or not in all times, but at some
time only: for Mr. Perkins upon the 4th Com. affirms out of the Histories of
the Church, that the Sabbath (meaning it of the Lords day Sabbath) was
neglected of those Churches which succeeded the Apostles, but afterward it was
revived and established by Christian Emperors: And for confirmation hereof, he
alleges his Author Leo and Anton. Edict. of Holy days. Whereby it appears,
by the History of the Church and also by confession of M. Perkins, that this
Lords day, was not kept in the primitive Churches constantly, as now we keep
it, in our Churches; for it was not kept until Christian Emperors established
it, now the first Christian Emperor that enacted a Law for the Lords day, as
far as I can find, was Constantine, and this was about 300 years after
Christ; so that this Lords day, was not only not kept by the primitive
Churches, but also it was not kept in all probability, not of 300 years after
Christ: so that they have no great cause to allege the practice of the
primitive Church for their Lords day.

2. I answer, but admit the primitive Churches had kept it consta^tly in all
places, and at all times always; yet there is a tvvofould keeping or
solemnizing of a day; the one is the keeping it a Sabbath day; the other is the
keeping of it for an Holy day: now I deny that they kept it for a Sabbath day;
for, it is most likly that they kept it for an holy day, which is more remise
and slenderly kept then a Sabbath day: and this appears 1. by Ignatius in his
Epistle to the Magnesians where he exhorts both to the keeping of the Sabbath
day, and also to the keeping of the Lords day, and both in one and the same
page: now it is not likely that Ignatius did exhort his people to keep two
Sabbath days in a week, the Saturday and Sunday; and therefore it is likely
that the Lords day they kept it slenderly as an holy day. Again, he cales the
Lords day there, the Queen and Princess of days; where you see he left an
higher room for the Sabbath day, accounting it as the King and prince of
days; and therefore it is likly kept not the Lords day, as they did the Sabbath
day. Yet furher, it is to be noted, that Ignatius exhorting his people, to the
keeping of both the Sabbath day, and the Lords day, he refuses to give that
word unto the Lords day, which he gives to the Sabbath day, and which is
most proper for a Sabbath day: for, in exhorting to the Sabbath day, he uses
this word Sabbatizet, but in exhorting to the Lords day, he changes the word
and uses this word celebret (...) which in liklihood notes a difference in
the use of these two days, the one being kept as a Sabbath, the other as a
Festival day.

2. It appears by a law made by Constantine, as any may read it reported, by
M. Fox in his book of Martyrs, the new Edition page 93. thus; The Sunday he
commanded to be kept holy of all men, and free from all Judiciary causes, from
markets, Martes, fayers, and all other manual labors, only hushandry
excepted. Where you see the works of husbandry, as plowing and the like
excepted, this might be done in those days, and in that Church, on the Lords
day. Now Constantine was the most famous defender of the Lords day, of any
Emperor; and would he think you have given men leave to go to plough and
carte on the Lords day, if he had esteemed it as a Sabbath day? no surely; for
this is plain contrary to the very letter of the 4th com. In it thou shall do
no manner of work: no not in earing time nor in harvest Exodus 34.21. wherefore
since Constantine gave leave to plough and sow, and the like works of
husbandry, on the Lords day; it is a manifest thing, that in his time, the
Lords day was not kept for a Sabbath day, but rather as a light holy day:
hereby it appears, that the patrones of the Lords day, have little cause to
glory so much, in the law that Constantine made for the keeping of the Lords
day holy.

3. It appears by this, that Constantine made a law, for the keeping holy of
Friday, and of Sunday, both: the Friday, because of Christ his passion, and the
Sunday or Lords day, because of Christ's resurrection. For this see Eusebius: de
vita Constant. lib. 4. Cap, 18. and see Sozom. lib. 1. Cap. 8. these ij days
were inacted in one and the same law, and in one and the same manner; whereby
you see, that the Lords day was accounted in the primitive Churches, no more
an holy day, then Friday was an holy day; now I trust no man will think, that
the primitive Churches, kept Friday for a Sabbath day: no nor yet that they
kept both these as Sabbathes, the Friday, and the Lords day; for so they should
have kept ij or iij Sabbathes in a week. Thus you see their argument fetched
from the practice of the primitive Churches for the Lords day, will do them no
good.

SECT. XX.
Their third argument from Testimony, is the constant practice of the Church,
for many hundredth of years together: for (say they) the Church of God, has
kept this Lords day for a Sabbath, now this Sixtene hundredth years, and
upwards; and can it be thought, that Gods Church should lay in an error so
long? what Sixetene hundredth years?

Hereunto I answer, 1. that the Church of God has not ever and in all places
kept the Lords day; for it was neglected of those Churches, which succeeded the
Apostles, until it was established by Christian Emperors, so as in all
porbability, it was not kept for 300 years by some Churches, as you have heard
quoted out of Perkins in the last Section before this.

2. In those Churches where it was kept, it was not kept for a Sabbath, but as
an holy day remisly, and with works of husbandry done in it; and like as they
kept their Friday, as we have shown in the former Section.

3. Since those foremost ages of the Church, it has been kept by all Christian
Churches being Romish, but as an other holy day, until Luther, and many years
since: for until Luther or thereabouts, our Church has lain buried in the
Romish Church, as wheat in the chafe; now it is well known, that the Church
of Rome, do hold and maintain the Lords day, to be but a Tradition of the
Church; and that it is to be kept but like an other holy day; and not by the
4th com. (and herein they are nearer the truth then we are) thus you see how
the Church of Rome does jumpe and agree with the Ancient Church in Constantins
time; and how both in Constantins time, and in the Church of Rome since, until
Luthers time, the Lords day, has been accounted but as an holy day; the
contrary whereto cannot be shown, thus you see what account the Churches have
made of the Lords day, until Luthers time, which is a matter of fiften
hundredth years.

And now let us come unto the times since Luther: If we shall take a survey of
the Reformed Churches in France, and the lovv Countries, it is apparent that
they have kept it remisly, like an holy day, not like a Sabbath day; saving
that, in the Low Countries, at this time, it is more solemnly kept, much what
as solemnly as we in England keep it now; but they have not kept it so
solemnly, until now of late years, as within this 7 or 10 years, or
thereaboutes, as is well known.

Come we then unto our own Church, which is the most famous Church for
keeping of the Lords day of any other: I demand how long our Church of
England, has kept this day, so zealously as now it does? it is well known by
men of years, that can but remember 40 or 50 years agone, that then the Lords
day was not kept, as it is now: I spare to make a Catalogue, of the ordenary
works of men's caleings, then done on the Lords day, publikly, and frequently;
I cannot remember 40 years past, and yet in my time, I can remember such
ordenary works done, generally of all sorts of men, as are no Sabbath day
works I am suer; but for the particulars, I referr you to the memory of men of
greater age and more years.

Thus I have briefly given you a survey, of the times and ages of the Church,
and how the Lords day has been in account and in practice, from the Apostles
times, until now with in these 40 or 50 years, and hitherto it has not been
kept like a Sabbath day; how then can the patrons of the Lords day, boast that
it bath been kept as a Sabbath in the Churches, constantly, for Sixetene
hundredth years? and whereas they ask by way of admiration, is it possible
that the Church of God should lie in an error so long! what 1600 years! they
bewray their own error and ignorance to speak so; for I have shown, that
the Church, never accounted it, or kept it for a Sabbath day but for an holy
day, remisly, for 1500 or 1600 years together.

But admit that our Church, or some in our Church rather, have accounted the
Lords day, for a Sabbath day, by the 4th com. for this 40 years or 50 years,
make they such a wonder, that a Church may lie in such an error, as this is,
as if it were impossible? what will they then say unto the Churches, that
succeeded the Apostles, that neglected the Lords day all together for a matter
of 300 years, until it was revived by Christian Emperors, as we have
formerly proved? why may not our Church, or some in our Church rather, err in
thinking the Lords day, to be a Sabbath, when it is not: as well as those
Churches, which succeeded the Apostles, did err (as these men think that
patronag the Lords day) in thinking the Lords day was not to be kept at all? if
they might err for 300 years together, may it not be thought possible for our
new Sabbatharians to err for 40 or 50 years together? Besides, it is not the
Church of God, that has erred so long; it is the error only of our new
Sabbatharians, who have erred from their cradle, and they think therefore that
the whole Church of God has also ever been in error with them, from the
Apostles days, until now: indeed, they would feign make the world believe,
that all Gods Church, has ever been of their mind for the Lords day, but you
see they are foulely beguiled, there is no such matter, it is but their dream,
when they awake they will see better.

It is to be lamented to see, how by this golding conceit, that the Church of
God has ever constantly kept this Lords day for a Sabbath, since the Apostles,
they have ledd the world after them; and now they have bred such a firuent
zeal of the Lords day, in the hearts of many men, as that they think it no
less then blasphemy, for a man to say any thing against it, as they hold it.

But since they have alleged unto us the practice of the Church; I wish they
would stand to their own argument, and that they would subscribe unto it, that
we are no otherwise bound to the Lords day, then can be proved the primitive
Churches practisedit: for then should not all Churches be bound to keep the
Lords day; but some might keep it, that pleased so to do; and other Churches
might omit the keeping of it, who pleased not to keep it: for so was it in
the primitive Churches; some kept it, but othersome kept it not, no not for 300
years together, as we have proved in the Section before this: Then also,
should not those Churches which do keep it, keep it as a Sabbath, but as an
holy day, remisly, so as they might make hay, in Hay seile; and reap their
corn, in harvest; and plough their Lands, in Wheat seile, upon the Lords day,
for so did the primitive Churches in Constantins time, they did their works
of husbandry on the Lords day. But some in our Church, are grown more strict,
then ever the primitive Churches were, and yet these are holden the purest
Churches, we must do no work in Hay-seile, Barley-seile, Harvest, nor
Wheate-seile, and all in conscience of the 4th com. if we should imitate the
primitive Churches in these days, either by neglecting the Lords day
altogether, as some of them did; or by doing the works of hus bandry on the
Lords day, as othersome of them did, these our Ministers, who use more zeal
then knowledge, would damn us to the pit of hell for it.

To conclud this Section, whereas Ministers have formerly and frequently,
abused the Churches of God deceased, and slaundred them, by fathering this
their error upon them, as if they had been of their minds, keeping the Lords
day for a Sabbath, which is false as you see: hereby they have vvronged the
dead, yea, those pure primitive Churches of God, and made the^ speak what
they never thought, to the boulstering up of a late sprung up error; an error
of 40 or 50 years old, by some in our Church; and of 7 or 10 years old, in
some other Churches: they must consider also how many thousand souls they
have seduced, partly by this golding tale, of the constant practice of all
Churches; and for time to come let these things be reformed, that so those
primitive Churches be no more abused, nor our Christian auditors deluded.

SECT. XXI.
All this while you have heard their Testimonies alleged for the Lords day to
be a Sabbath; now at last, let me have leave to allege some Testimonies,
against the Lords day, for being a Sabbath: and here in, I will not produce you
Divines of the lowest rank, but such only as are of the foremost rank, and of
the chief Divines, that have wrote.

I.
My first Testimony, shall be that recorded by M. Perkines on the 4th com. in
his first volume, in the order of the Causes of Salvation and Damnation page
48. which before I touched upon, where caleing the Lords day by the name of
Sabbath, he thus writes: The observation of the Sabbath, was neglected of
those Churches, which succeeded the Apostles, but after wards was established
by Christian Emperors, as a day most apt to celebrate the memory of the
Redemption. And for this, he quoteth his Author, Leo and Anton. Edict. of holy
days.

Here it is to be noted 1. that this Testimony, is not of what some private
persons did, or thought of the Lords day, but what was done by an wholl
Church; yea by Churches, in the plural number. 2. The thing recorded of these
Churches is, that they neglected the observation and sanctification of the
Lords day Sabbath. 3. The time is to be noted, how long they continued,
without observation of the day; and this is gatherable to be about Three
hundredth years: for it is said, it was neglected until it was established by
Christian Emperors: now it is well known, that the first Christian Emperor,
that made any Decree for the honorable and Religiouse observation of the Lords
day, was Constantine, who lived about 300 years after Christ. 4. The last
thing remarkable, is to consider what Churches these were which so neglected
the Lords day; they were not any of those later Churches, who were corrupted,
with the dregs of popery; but they were the most ancient the primitive
Churches, and so the most pure Churches. Thus far of my first Testimony,
whereby you have seen, what opinion these Ancient Churches, held of our Lords
day Sabbath, for the first 300 years.

II.
My second Testimony shall be to show, what esteem the Church of God had of
our Lords day, in the time of Constantine, at what time it flourished most.
Constantinus Imperator concessit Rusticis, ut diebus Dominicis agrorum
culturae, prout ipsi viderine fore necessarium inservirent. In Cod. tit. 12. de
Feriis. Which Decre M. Fox records, in his book of Martyrs, at the end of
the first book, in the tene first persecutions page 93. in the last Edition:
and page 105. in the old Edition, thus: Constantine commanded the Sunday to be
kept holy of all men, and free from all Judiciary causes, from Markets, Martes,
Fayers, and all other manual labors, only husbandry excepted. The which
Decree M. Brerewood in his Treatise of the Sabbath, against M. Byfield thus
reports, that Constantine the Great licenced the Country people by his
Decree, freely (libere liciteque are the words of the Constitution) to attend
their sowing of grain, setting of Vines, and other husbandry on the Lords day.

Now, would Constantine (think you) assisted with the advice, no doubt, of
his learned Clergy, have given free license and liberty, unto his Subjects, to
have followed their works of husbandry, as ploughing, and the like, on the
Lords day, if those times had judged the Lords day, to be a Sabbath day by
divine institution, and to be sanctified in conscience of the 4th Commandment?
Why, the 4th com. directly forbids all servile labors, such as are
ploughing, carteing, sowing, setting and the like; they could not be so void
of reason therefore, as to give liberty, yea, and that freely, to do servile
works, and laboriouse on the Lords day, if the Lords day had in their
judgment, stood by virtue of the 4th Com. as many now a days feign it.

We hear now a days, much sownd of that famous Decree, of Constantine, made
for the sanctification of the Lords day: but, behold what it was, he required
none other sanctification of it, then we now a days, make of our common Holy
days, S. Matthew, S. John's day, and the rest, if so much: for, then it was not
unlawful, to plough on the Lords day. What therefore if I should say, that the
Lords day is not of Gods ordination; and therefore we may lawfully and safely,
plough, and sow our Lands in Wheate-seile, mow our grass, and make baye in
baye-seile, reap our Corn, and work in harvest, every Lords day? why may I
not be as free from censure, as Constantine, and the Church in his time? what
say I more, then was then decreed, and established by law? yea, and that by
Constantine, who was the most holy Emperor, and best patron of the Lords day,
that ever Prince was.

An other Testimony is a Decree of Constantine recorded by Eusebius de vita
Constant. lib. 4. cap. 18. and also by Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. wherein he
decreed by one and the same law, without any difference making, that all his
Empire, should sanctify both the Friday, and the Sunday; the day before the
Jews Sabbath, and the day after it; The Sunday, because of Christ his
Resurrection; The Friday, because of Christ his Passion. Lo here then were two
days in a week sanctified, the Friday and the Sunday, and that without
difference: Now who that reads this, can think that the Church in
Constantins time, kept the Sunday or Lords day as a Sabbath, unless he should
absurdly think, that they kept two Sabbaths in a week, the Friday and the
Sunday? it is more likely, that they kept them both but as we keep some light
holy days. Nor did the memory of the Resurrection exalte the Lords day any
higher, then did the memory of the Passion exalte the Friday. Thus you see in
what esteem the Church of God had the Lords day, in Constantins time.

III.
My third Testimony, shall be that whereof we read in Socrates his
Ecclesiastical History lib. 5. cap. 21. where he thus writes: The drifte
(says he) of the Apostles, was not to lay down Canons and Decrees, concerning
Feasts, and holy days; but to become paternes unto us of piety, of good life,
and Godly conversation.

Whereas there is great contention at this time, to prove the Lords day to be
a Sabbath day, instituted in the new Testament, by Christ and his Apostles;
this Historian, will determine the controuercy for us, if we will be guided, by
the judgment of those primitive Churches: for he says plainly, that the
Apostles made no Decrees, concerning Holy days; of which number the Lords day
is one; and what he says here of the Apostles, the same also in the same
Chapter, he says of Christ, namely, that he made no law, for the Church to
celebrate the feast of Easter etc. Thus you see, it is the judgment of
antiquity, that neither Christ nor his Apostles, did ever appoint Easter day,
which is the Lords day, nor any other days, to be sanctified for Sabbaths.

I deny not for all this, that those times gave any respect unto the Lords day,
and other Holy days; but this only I deny, that they sanctified this Lords
day, as Divinely instituted, and appointed by Christ or his Apostles; but
rather, as from the same authority, from and by which, they sanctified other
holy days of the Saints, to wit, from and by the Tradition of the Church.

IV.
My fowrth Testimony, shall be the judgment of S. Augustine; who in his 118
Epistle de festis diebus thus writes; But as for those things which we
observe, by Tradition, and not by wrighting, we understand them to be given,
either by the Apostles themselves, or by approved Counsels etc. As the
anniuersary celebration of the Lords Passion, the Resurrection, and the
Ascension etc.

In which passage, we note these particulars. 1. That S. Augustine accounted
the Sanctification of the Lords day, to be a thing received by Tradition. 2.
That its institution, was not to be found in the Scriptures: for he says,
which we observe by Tradition, not by wrighting etc. 3. That S. Augustine was
doubtful and uncertain, vvhither the observation of the Lords day, were a
Tradition received from the Apostles, or from Counsels. 4. That S. Augustine
rekoneth the Lords day, being the Feast of the Resurrection, to be of no
better, nor higher authority, then are Good Friday, and Hallow Thursday, the
Feasts of Christ's Passion and Ascension. We may as well therefore, by S.
Augustins judgment, sanctify every Friday, and every Thursday for Sabbaths
throughout the year, as every Lords day: for they have all three the same
original, and selfsame grownd and Authority: for, they be all Traditions, and
unwritten Traditions, and doubtful, whither from the Apostles or from
Counsels.

By the way, since S. Augustine knew no Scripture; for the sanctification of
the Lords day for the Sabbath, how comes it about, I marvel, that many in
our days, have found out so many Scriptures for it? we have now this text of
Scripture Ioh. 20.19.26. witnessing, that Christ did often appear unto his
Disciples on this day. Another Text we have for it Act. 20.7. where S. Paul
preached a sermon at Troas on this day. An other Text we have found out 1. Cor.
16.2. where there was a collection for the poor on this day. And yet an other
Text we have Revel. 1.10. where this day is called the Lords day. I marvel S.
Augustine, and his times, should be so ignorant, as not to see these textes, as
warrantable institutions for the Lords day, to become a Sabbath, since we see
them, and say they are so clear to prove the point. Shall I tell you mine
opinion? it is this; I suppose, they that first set their wits on work, to
find a Divine institution for this Lords day, they saw nothing but Tradition
of the Church for it, as for the rest of Holy days; but miseliking this, they
judged it better, to have it stand by a Divine ordinance; and therefore, have
used their wits, to wrest these Scriptures thitherwards; so now, they have
fathered the matter all upon God: and made this Lords day a Divine ordinance,
to get the more honor unto it: this durst not S. Augustine do; but he more
ingenuously, plainly confessed it to be, as indeed and in truth it is, A
Tradition of the Church, and of equal authority, for its sanctification, with
Good Friday, Hallow Thursday, and other Holy days.

To conclude, well we may make of the Lords day, what esteem we will; but yet
you see, it is but a Tradition, (a Popish Tradition) and as this was the
Judgment of S. Augustine, so you shall see it confirmed by others also by and
by. Now if it prove but a Tradition them may we conclud, that all Romish
rubish, is not as yet clean swept out of the Reformed Churches.

An other Testimony of S. Augustine, I find in his works contra Adimant:
cap. 16. where he thus vvriteth; For we also do celebrate both the Lords day,
and the Feast of Easter, and certain other festival days: but we observe not
the times, but only the things signified by or in those times etc. Lo here,
S. Augustine says, they kept the Lords day indede in his time, and in that
Church: but how? they kept it much like as they kept other Holy days, and
festiualls: for says he, non tempora observamus, we regard not the times etc.
I, but did the Lords day, stand by the ordinance of Christ, then S. Augustine
would have regarded the time: for he must have regarded that very day, if
Christ had ordained it: and did the Lords day, stand by virtue of the 4th Com.
then S. Augustine must have observed the time: for the day and time, to wit,
the Seventh day, was no less enjoined in the 4th Com. then rest from
labors, and holy excercises: how can men that work on the Lords day Sabbath,
be said to rob God of his time, if the time be not to be regarded? it is more
then manifest therefore, that S. Augustine, and the Church of God in his time
did not believe it, that the Lords day, was instituted by Christ; or that it
was to be sanctified by virtue of the 4th Com. I could allege other.
Testimonies out of S. Augustine, to the same effect, but these are sufficient.

V.
So much for the judgment of the Ancients, and the Primitive Churches, for
the first 400 years and upwards: I come now unto our later times. My 5th
Testimony then, shall be that of Peter Martyr cited by Marlorate in his
Commentaryon, 1 Cor. 16.2. who thus writes, Like as the Sabbath day, was
celebrated by the Law, in memory of the Creation; so is now the Lords day in
use, in memory of the Resurrection: but when this chang and alteration was
made, we have it not expressed in the Scriptures: and then again, a little
beneath says he; Neither are we therefore to be accused as obseruers of days
and times, as if we placed more holiness in one day then in an other: for we
assemble, rather on the Lords day then on any other day, only for civil
respects, and for the order of the Church. It is plain then, that this Holy
man accounted the Lords day, to be an ordinance of the Church only, and a
civil thing, and kept only for order sake: he knew of no Divine institution
for it, nor of any 4th com. belonging unto it; nor thought he that there was
any difference to be made, between the Lords day, and other days of the
week, in any respect unto Christ's institution of it: for he says expressly,
that it is not found in the Scriptures when the Lords day was set up: how
then will men do to prove, the Lords day, to be of Divine institution?

VI.
My 6th Testimony, shall be that of Brentius in Leuit. 23.2. recorded by
Doctor Bownde in his book of the Sabbath Page 109. thus says he; The kepeing
Holy of the Lords day is not commanded by the Authority of the Gospel, but
rather received into use by the public consent of the Church. And a little
after, thus again, The observation of the Lords day is proffitable, and not to
be rejected; but yet it is not to be accounted for a Commandment of the
Gospel, but rather for a Civil ordination. Then this, what can be more
plainly spoken? Brentius says, the Lords day, has no authority for it in the
Gospel, and that it is but a Civil ordinance; but many now a days, would
make us believe (if we were so credulouse) that it has authority from Christ
and his Apostles; and that it is a Divine ordinance. Should I have called it a
Civil ordinance, albeit I know assuredly it is no better, how should I have
been rated for it, and reviled by some Ministers! But I am glad I am not the
first that have so called it, nor am I alone in this opinion.

VII.
My 7th Testimony, shall be that of Calvin on Galat. 4.10. where he thus
writes, When we now a days observe a difference of days, we do not put any
bond or tie, of necessity upon men's consciences; we make no difference of
days, as if one day were more holy then an other, we place no religion in
them; but we only provide for order and concord etc. I but had Calvin held,
the Lords day to have been of Divine institution; he would have placed
religion in its observation: and there had been more in it, then to have kept
it only for order sake, and for peace sake, etc. Yea, had he judged this day,
to stand by virtue of the 4th Com. he would, and must have made a difference of
days, accounting one day, to wit, the 7th, more holy then the rest; yea, he
must have put a bond, and tie of necessity, upon men's consciences: for it is
necessary that the 4th Com. should be obeyed.

Again, see Calvin on Coloss. 2.16. where he thus writes: We observe no
days, as if there were any Religion in holy days, or as if it were unlawful
to work in them, but we have respect unto policy and order, not unto days.
Thus speaks Calvin, of all holy days in general, both the Lords day, and
others, joining them all together. His judgment is direct for our purpose,
that this holy day of the Lords day, together with other holy days, are
sanctified but for order sake, and with respect unto government: and further he
says plainly, that it is no unlawful thing, for a man to do the works of
his calling, on the Lords day: how pregnant is he for our purpose?

VIII.
My 8th Testimony, shall be that of Zanchie on the 4th com. Thesis. 1. who
there does plainly affirm it, that the Apostles left the Lords day, at
liberty to the Church; and that we are not tied to sanctify it, by any tie,
or bond of conscience etc. And for confirmation of this his judgment, in the
same place he gives his reason also: thus Zanchie.

IX.
My 9th Testimony, shall be that of Vrsinus in his Catech. on the 4th Comm.
page 637, where he thus vvriteth; The Sabbath is twofould: one of the old
Testament, which was tied to the 7th day, and its observation was necessary,
and the worship of God. The other of the new Testament, and this depends on
the liberty of the Church, who chose the first day of the week, for certain
causes; and it is to be observed for order sake, but without any opinion of
necessity. Thus you see the judgment of Vrsinus was, that the Lords day, or
first day of the week, is at the pleasure of the Church for its sanctification:
And Moreover, that there is no necessity to sanctify it: surely, Vrsine did
not believe, as many with us do, that Christ and his Apostles, raised up the
Lords day for a Sabbath; nor yet, that the 4th com. had any thing to do with
it. But it matters not what Vrsinus his judgment was, nor Caluines, nor
Zanchies and the rest, we have some Ministers, that have been zealouse
preachers for, and Patrones of the Lords day Sabbath, they have preached for it,
and they will preach for it; they have erred, and they will err; they have
misled the people, and they will do so still; they have resolved, to live and
to dye in it, they will preach for it (they say) as long as they live.

X.
My 10th Testimony, shall be that of Paraeus in his Comment: on the Romans
cap. 14. page 1512. where he makes this his third Hypothesis, saying, The
Holy days of Christianes, remain free and at liberty, so as they may be
altered, and changed from one day unto an other, by the Church etc. And by and
by he adds two reasons amongst others; one is this, because neither Christ
nor his Apostles, did determine any certain holy days to his Church, but left
them at liberty. The other is a Testimony of Augustine in his 118. Epistle,
saying, All these things are at liberty, in their observation. Totum hoc genus
rerum liberas habet obseruationes. Here Paraeus says plainly, that neither our
Savior Christ, no nor his Apostles, did determine of any certain holy days
for his Church, but left it to liberty: so then, they did not set up the Lords
day for a Sabbath, as many hold and believe among us. Yea, he cites S.
Augustine to have been of the same judgment also; saying, that the observation
of these things, are at our liberty.

XI.
My 11th Testimony, shall be that of Chemnitius, in his Examen Cons. Triden: de
diebus festis page 151. who thus writes; The Apostles assembled on the first
day of the week to break bread and to hear the word Act. 20.7. and they
gave Alms 1 Cor. 16.2. because, on the first day of the week, Christ rose
from the dead Mark. 16. because therefore of the resurrection, that day was
judged the more fit, for Church assemblies, in the new Testament: yet for all
that, did not the Apostles ordain, by any law or precept, the observation of
that day, with any opinion of necessity, tying men's consciences, vndor the new
Testament; but the observation thereof was free and at liberty, and for orders
sake. Here you see, Chemnitius cites those very textes, out of which many in
our days, think to prove the Lords day to be a Sabbath, to wit, Act. 20.7. and
1 Cor. 16.2. yea moreover, he names the Resurrection, as the occation of
Church assemblies on that day: and yet for all these, as things of no moment,
to prove the Lords day to be of divine ordination, he concludes, that the
Apostles did never ordain the Lords day to be sanctified, as a thing
necessary, and tyeing men's consciences; but that still, its observation
remained at liberty, as a thing indifferent to be kept or not kept; were it not
for order sake, to avoid confusion, lest men should assemble some on one day,
some upon an other, without regard of the ordinance of the Magistrate etc. You
see then, how this Author estemeth the sanctification of the Lords day, but as
a thing indifferent.

Again, Chemnitius in his Loc. Theolog: de Lege Dei, and quarto praecepto,
page 55. thus writes; The Apostles took the first day of the week, Act.
20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. in which Christ rose, but not with this opinion, that like
as God at the Creation, sanctified the 7th day etc. So Christ by his
resurrection, did sanctify the first day of the week, that it should be
observed upon necessity of Salvation etc. and by and by again he thus says,
that the Apostles might admonish us, that the Lords day in the N. Testament, is
to be kept, not with that necessity as the Sabbath day was in the Law; but at
liberty, only for order and decency sake etc. In which words, besides that he
concludes, that the Lords day is a thing of indifferent nature: he lays
down an other remarkable thing, to wit, that whereas the patrones of this new
Sabbath do affirm, that like as God at the Creation, did sanctify the 7th
day, in memory of the Creation; so Christ, did sanctify the 8th day, or first
day of the week, in memory of the Redemption: the quite contrary does
Chemnitius affirm here, saying, but not like as God at the Creation sanctified
the 7th day; so Christ at his resurrection sanctified the first day of the
week: these two, which they make to agree in similitude, he plainly says,
are a dissimilitude.

XII.
My 12th Testimony, shall be that of M. Perkins, in his Exposition upon Revel.
1.10. his third volume page 239. where he thus writes; It is commonly thought
(says he) that the Jews Sabbath, was changed into the Lords day, by Christian
Emperors, long after the ascension of Christ; but it is more consonant to the
new Testament, to hold, that Christ himself was the Author of this change; and
then he brings his iij textes to prove it. 1. Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Ioh.
20.19.26. In which passage, M. Perkins yields it, to be the common opinion
according to the Histories of the Church, to think, that the Lords day, was
not in use, for a long time after Christ, until Christian Emperors raised it
up, as elsewhere he speaks out of Leo: and Anton. Edict. of holy days: which
was a matter of 300 years; the which bewrayes the nouelty and the weakness
of this new Sabbath: for had it been any of Christ's new ordinances, as were
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, can we think, it would have been forgotten
so soon? what, that the very next Churches unto the Apostles, should so
quickly forget it!

To mende the matter, happily some will say, that howbeit M. Perkins does
grant, it was the common opinion, so to think of the change, yet he adds,
that it is more consonant to the New Testament, to hold, that Christ himself
changed it; and so that Christ was the Author of this Lords day. I grant indeed
he says so, and indeauoreth to prove it to be so, and that by iij Textes of
Scripture; but then the question shall be, whither M. Perkins judged, that it
cold be proved by these Textes, to be a necessary, and undoubted truth, or but
a contingent and probable thing: Now that he held and was of opinion, that it
was but a probable truth, and somewhat likely only, himself else where shall
expound himself: for this purpose, see his Cases of Conscience, and second
Volume page 106. where the holy man, speaking to the conscience, of this new
Sabbath, durst not speak pere^ptorily, as of a thing certainly and infalliblie
true, but tremblingly as it were, repeating over his doubtful speeches, three
or four times, in 6 or 8 lines writing: these are his words; The Sabbath day
in the new Testament (in all likelihood) is tied to that we cale the Lords day;
and that (as I take it) by Christ himself. The reasons thereof are these, 1.
the Sabbath of the new Testament is called the Lords day, Revel. 1.10. now J
suppose (for in these points still we must go by likelihoods) it is called
the Lords day, as Christ's last Supper, is called the Lords Supper etc. And then
his second reason is taken out of 1. Cor. 16.2. and his third out of Ioh.
20.19. Now in proving the Lords day, to be the Sabbath; he utters these
doubtful speeches in these few lines, 1. in all likelihood. 2. As I take it.
3. I suppose. 4. For in these points, we must still go by likelyhoods. Surely,
had there been any sound and proving arguments, to be fetched out of these iij
Textes Revel. 1.10. 1. Cor. 16.2. and Ioh. 20.19.26. M. Perkins would never
have gone so doubtfully to work by suppositions, thoughts, and likelihods, as
here he does: So then it is manifest, that when M. Perkins said, it is more
consonant to the tenor of Scripture, to hold, that Christ altered the Sabbath,
and so instituted the Lords day, that he spoke these words not as of a
certain and infallible truth, but as of a doubtful and disputable point. The
Lords day Sabbath then, by M. Perkins judgment, when he had made the most, and
best of it that he could, is but a probable thing, a mere likelihood,
uncertain whither ever Christ instituted it or not; now tell me is it meet,
that Christian people, should be pressed in sermones, to sanctify this Lords
day, and that upon certain pain of damnation if they fail; when it is
uncertain whither it be of Christ's institution or not? judge of the matter
good reader.

To conclud, how ever, this is plainly yielded by M. Perkines, that if we will
borrow light from the Histories of the Church, it is the common opinion of such
as are acquainted with them, that the old Sabbath was noe thrown down, nor
the Lords day Sabbath set up, until long after Christ's ascension, until a
matter of 300 years after Christ. And so much concerning the testimony of M.
Perkins.

XIII.
My 13th Testimony, shall be that of Doctor Prideaux, in his Treatise of the
Sabbath day, where he thus writes: where is there (says he) any the least
mention, of surrogateing the Lords day, into the room of the Sabbath day? page
140. and again, where (says he) is there among the Evangelists or Apostles,
any distinct institution of the Lords day? yea, where is the text whereby you
can necessarily prove it, if you should deal with an adversary, with whom
you must deal punctuallie, and not by prayer and entreaty? page 143. and
again, as for an institution of the Lords day, whither expressed, or gathered
by consequence, let him show it that can find it. page 144.

In which words, this learned and great Divine, plainly denies the Lords day,
to be of Christ's ordination; and affirms, that it cannot be so much as
collected out of the Scriptares.

XIV.
My 14th and last Testimony, shall be that of M. Brerewod in a learned Treatise
of his lately come forth, against M. Byfield on the Sabbath day, who in page
37. thus writes: You will say (says he) the celebration of the old Sabbath,
was translated to the first day of the week: translated? by whom? by any
commandment of God? where is it? it is certain there is none. And therefore
the solemnity of the Lords day, was not established iure Diuino, by any
commandment of God; and consequently, to work on the Lords day, is for
certain, no breach of any Divine commandment.

Hereby we may see, that a man may work on the Lords day safely, without the
danger of sin: and how ably and sufficiently M. Brerewod has managed this
point against M. Byfield, his work shall speak for it self.

To the like effect, I might here add the Testimony of M. Broad, of Gomarus de
Orig. Sabbat. and of Riuetus in Decal. all late writers, against the Lords day
Sabbath also, as is well known.

XV.
I thought here to have surceased, and wrote no more for matter of Testimony;
but time, and further search, have ministered unto me, yet an other cloud of
witnesses: for I shall yet further set before your eyes, the Testimonies, of
sundry learned Diuins; of two Godly Martyrs; and of the Church and state of
England, assembled in Parliament; all, with one joint consent testifying, that
the Lords-day-Sabbath, is not of Divine institution.

My 15th Testimony then, shall be that of Zwinglius ad Coloss. cap. 2. page
515. who thus writes: The Sabbath, so far forth; as it is Ceremonial, is
abolished; and therefore, now we are not tied or bound, unto any certain
times. Where you see, the judgment of Zwinglius is, that now, we are not tied
unto the sanctification of any days or times; and consequently, that we are
not tied unto the sanctification of the Lords day. And this is that which
elsewhere I have said, admit this error, that the old Sabbath day is a
Ceremony and abolished, and farewell all Sabbaths: for we can find no other
Sabbath then that, neither in the Old, nor yet in the New Testament.

XVI.
My 16th Testimony, shall be that of Melanchthon in his Loc. Commun. De
potestate Ecclesiastica, seu de clavibus: who thus writes; The Church, at the
beginning appointed the Lords day, and certain other Holy days, that there
might be certain times for instruction. But these ordinations, ought not to be
superstitiously understood: For they are no necessary parts of Gods worship;
but they are in very deed (...) things of an indifferent nature, which out of
the case of scandal, may be omitted, without sin. Therefore, unto these
Traditions, we owe obedience in regard of scandal; but out of the case of
scandal, our consciences are free and at liberty. In which Testimony, you
see, Melanchthon affirms these things of our Lords-day-Sabbath. 1. That it is
a Tradition: They therefore who preach so for the Lords day Sabbath, they are
Patrones of old Traditions: they do but defend, vphould, and maintain
Traditions: and why may they not as well preach for other Popish Traditions, as
for this? And further, if the Lords day prove but a Tradition, then it
appears, that all Romish Relics are not as yet abolished out of the
Reformed Churches. 2. That that Church which instituted the other holy days,
the same Church instituted the Lords day Sabbath: and consequently, the Lords
day Sabbath, and other Holy days, are all of equal and like authority. 3.
Whereas he says, that the Church appointed the Lords day, thereby it
appears, that it was not the appointeme^t of Christ and his Apostles, but of
the Church after them. 4. He affirms, that the observation of the Lords day,
is but an indifferent thing, so as (if authority be not offended) our
consciences are free and at liberty, we need not sanctify it. 5. For any man
to esteem better of the Lords day, then as of an indifferent thing, he
affirms it plainly to be Superstition. How many thowsands then of
superstitiouse people and Ministers, have we now in this Kingdom?

XVII.
My 17th Testimony, shall be that of Hemingius in his Enchiridion class. 3 cap.
12. page 366. who thus writes: Traditions, are rites, which are said to be
delivered without Scripture, either of the Apostles, or of the Holy Fathers
after the Apostles: of which kind are the Baptism of infants, and the
observation of the Lord's Day. Here Hemingius affirms, 1. that the Lords day,
is a Tradition of the Church. 2. That there is no Scripture, for the
observation and sanctification thereof. The Lords day then is but an unwritten
tradition, A Popish Tradition: preach for it as long as they list, they do but
preach for Popish Traditions.

XVIII.
My 18th Testimony, shall be that of Bastingius in his Commentary on the
Catechism, and on the 4th Com. page 455. where he thus writes: In that the
Lords day, and certain other days, alloted for the hearing of Sermones, are
still retained and observed, therein we differ far from the Jews; and we do
nothing against the Doctrine of the Apostle, forbidding difference of days.
For, the observation of the Lords day, differs from the Jewish Sabbath; in
that it was not lawful for the Jews, to omit, or to change the Sabbath of the
7th day, by reason of the express Command of God. But the Christian Church,
whither it does allote the first day, or any other day, does it saving their
liberty to do otherwise. In which passage, we may learn these things from
Bastingius. 1. That the Church has alloted the Lords day, or First day. 2.
That the Church may either wholly omit the Sanctification of the Lords day; or
change it unto an other day. And that it is at the liberty of the Church, to
do otherwise in this point, then they now do, if they please.

XIX.
My 19th Testimony shall be that in the Harmony of Confessiones, de feriis etc.
page 168. and, in the Appendix, at the latter end of the book. Where it is
thus recorded: But we teach, that Traditions are not to be condemned, which
command nothing contrary to the Law of God, and have some political end, to
wit, which are made for this purpose, that things may be done in the Church, in
order; of which sort are the Traditions of Holy days, as of the Lords day,
the Nativity, and the rest. These things, we willingly retain in our Churches,
as things indifferent, which out of the case of scandal may be omitted
lawfully. Here we may note these particulars. 1. That the Sanctification of the
Lords day, is no better then a Tradition. 2. That the Lords day, and Christmas
day, are both of like authority. 3. That the Lords day, is a thing indifferent.

XX.
My 20th Testimony, shall be that of the learned Minister, and Godly Martyr of
Christ, M. William Tyndall, who suffered Martyrdom, in the days of King Henry
the VIII. as we find it in his works, bound with the works of M. John Fryth,
and Doctor Barnes, all iij in one Volume: Will. Tyndall, in his Answer to Sir
Thomas Moors Dialogue, page 287. where he thus writes: And as for the
Sabbath, we be Lords over the Sabbath, and may yet change it into the Monday,
or into any other day, as we see need; or may make every Tenth day Holy day,
only, if we see a cause why. Neither was there any cause to chang it from the
Saturday, but to put a difference betwixt us and the Jews: Neither need we any
Holy day at all, if the people might be taught without it. Thus we see M.
Tyndall was of judgment, that the Sabbath or Lords day, is of no higher
nature, then that the Church may freely alter and change it, hither and
thither, at their plesures: And that the Church may as well keep Monday for the
Sabbath day, as Sunday or the Lords day.

XXI.
My 21th Testimony, shall be that of an other learned Minister, and godly Martyr
of Christ, M. John Fryth, who also suffered Martyrdom for the Gospel, in the
days of King Henry the viijth; as we find it in his works, bound together
with the works of M.W. Tyndall, and Doctor Barnes. John Fryth, in his
Declaration of Baptism, page 96. where he thus writes: Our forefathers,
which were in the beginning of the Church, did abrogate the Sabbath; to the
intent, that men might have an ensample of Christian liberty etc. How be it,
because it was necessary, that a day should be reserved in the which the
people might come together, to hear the word of God, they ordained, in stead
of the Sabbath, which was Saturday, the next day following, which is Sunday.
And all though they might have kept the Saturday, with the Jews, as a thing
indifferent, yet did they much better to ouersett the day, to be a perpetual
memory, that we are free, and not bound to any day: we are in a manner as
superstitiouse in the Sunday, as they were in the Saturday: yea, and we are
much more madd: for the Jews have the word of God, for their Saturday, since it
is the 7th day, and they were commanded to keep the 7th day solemn: and we,
have not the word of God, for us; but rather against us: for we keep not the
7th day, as the Jews do, but the first day, which is not commanded by Gods
law. And by and by again he adds. He that thinks that a man sins, which
works on the Holy day, if he be weak or ignorant, he ought better to be
instructed, and so to leave his hold. But if he be obstinate and persevere in
his sentence, he is not of God, but of the Devil: for, he makes sin, in
such things, as God leaves free.

In which passages of Mr. John Fryth we may observe these remarkable things 1.
How the Godly Martyr affirms, that our forefathers, did ordain and appoint
the Sunday, for an holy day: so then, Christ and his Apostles did not ordain
it. 2. He affirms, that now (the Sabbath day, to wit, the old Sabbath day
being abolished) we are free, and not bound to sanctify any day at all: and so
consequently, we are not tied to sanctify the Lords day. 3. He affirms, that
such as so zealously do sanctify the Sunday, or Lords day, they are in so
doing, no better then Supperstitiouse. 4. He affirms, that they who so
zealously sanctify the Lords day, they are besides their right wits, or
become frantic and madd: and his reason thereof is this; because they practice
that, for which they have no scripture, or word of God, but rather the word of
God is against them. We have some Ministers, not ashamed to tell their people,
they will give their lives for the Lords day Sabbath; but here you see, two
worthy, learned, and Godly Ministers, and Martyrs, to wit, Mr. Tyndall, and Mr.
Fryth, who did not say only they would, but did also give their lives for Gods
truth; these men you see, would never have given their lives, for the Sunday
Sabbath: for they would not so much as spend their breathes for it, or speak a
good word of it, but altogether against it. 5. Says Mr. Fryth, he that
thinks, that a man sins, by working on this Holy day, or Lords day, if he
obstinatly perseuereth in the same opinion, he is not of God, but of the
Devil: and that because, he makes a sin, where God makes none.

If this be so, how many in this Land, who profess themselves the Ministers of
God, are notwithstanding of the Devil. For, they make the people believe, that
they sin, fearfully, and damnably, if they do any seruill work on this
holy day, the Lords day: let this speech, of the learned and Godly Minister and
Martyr, be well observed.

XXII.
My 22th Testimony, shall be the judgment, of the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, with the Commons, assembled in Parliament, in the fifth year of
Edward the Sixte; In an Act entitled, An Act for the keeping of holy days
etc. In which Statute, it is thus inacted. It is not to be thought, that there
is any certain time or definite number of days, prescribed in holy Scripture;
but that the apointment, both of the time, and also of the number of days, is
left by the Authority of Gods word, to the liberty of Christ's Church, to be
determined and assigned, orderly in every Country, by the discretion of the
Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most expedient. Be it
therefore enacted, by the King our So^eraigne Lord, with the assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, that all the days hereafter mentioned, shall be kept holy days
etc. That is to say, all Sundaies in the year, etc. S. Matthew, S. Mark, S.
John Baptist, S. Peter, S. James etc. Then a prouiso is added. Provided
always, and it is enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall be
lawful to every Husbandman, labourer, fisher man; and to all and every other
person or persons, upon the holy days aforesaid in Harvest, or at any other
times in the year, when necessity shall require, to labor, ride, fish, or
work any kind of work, at their free wills and plesures; any thing in this Act
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

These things are remarkable in this Statute, 1. That our Sunday or Lords day,
was by these Lawmakers, rekoned to be of no higher, nor other authority, then
are the other holy days of the Apostles, as S. Mathews, S. Marks, S. John's
days, and the rest. 2. That the Sunday or Lords day, is ordained by the Church
and State, for a Sabbath day, or holy day: and that it is at their liberty, to
do in this matter, as they shall judge most convenient. 3. A most remarkable
thing in this Statute for our purpose, is that the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, with the Commons, and so consequently the Church of England, were
clear of judgment, and openly in this Act professed it, that our Sunday, or
Lords-day-Sabbath is not of Divine institution: for they declared it, whilst
they said, it is not to be thought, that there is any certain time, or definit
number of days, prescribed in the holy Scriptures: so then, there is no
Scripture for the Lords day. Again, But that the apointment, both of the time,
and also of the number of days, is left by the Authority of Gods word, to the
liberty of Christ's Church, and to the Rulers thereof to be determined: so
then, there is no Divine institution for the Lords day.

SECT. XXII.
Having finished my answer touching the Lords day Sabbath; for a conclusion of
this Chapter, I purpose to spend a few words in this Section, by way of
Admonition, and dehortation, from Superstition, voluntary religion, and
will worship: the which, as I direct it unto all men, whom it may concern, so
in a special sort, I apply it unto such patrones of the Lords day Sabbath, as
have already made head against my former book, and with great zeal have
scandalized it among the people, and so occationed this book: by name Mr.
Hutchinson, Mr. Benton, Mr. Furnace, Mr. Gallard, Mr. Yates, Mr. Chapel, Mr.
Grenewod, Mr. Stinnet, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Ward. These men obstinatly
persisting in their erroniouse and false doctrine, after sufficient means of
conviction, ought to take these things into consideration.

First touching the Admonition; by the whole discourse touching the Lords day,
already finished, thou may see Christian reader, that there is no footeing
or grownd in the word of God, to make the Lords day a Sabbath: wherefore I do
hereby admonish, both Ministers and people, and desire them to take knowledge
of it henceforth, that this their zealouse sanctifying of the Lords day, in
conscience of the 4th com. and of Christ his institution, it is no better
before God, and with wisemen then Superstition, and needless religion: for
when men will do that in Gods service, and in obedience unto God, the which
he has no where commanded them, what is this but a needless religion and
superstition? when men cannot show Gods will for that they do, then it must
follow that it is of their own wills, and so their religion in that point is
a voluntary-religion, and a will worship. Let me not be mistaken, the Lords day
may be considered as an ordinance of God, or as an ordinance of man: as it is
ignorantly conceived to be an ordinance of God, in this sense only I speak
against it; but as it is an ordinance of man, that is, as it is commanded by
the Magistrate, and so at his will and pleasure, to continue it or discontinue
it, in this regard I have nothing against it: so much for the Admonition.

I come now unto the Debortation: my first reason disswasiue, is because we
hate Superstition and will worship in others: how do we bear against our
adversaries the Papists, because of their superstitiouse Traditiones, and
Religion of will worship! and can we see an error in them, and cannot we see
the same error in our selves! had we been wise for our selves, we might have
seen this error long agone; for they have often admonished us in their
writings against us, telling us, that our Lords day is but a Tradition from the
fathers, and a Tradition of the Church; and herein (give the devil his right,
as they say) they have spoken most truly, albeit we have given deaf care unto
them, and labored to shifte it of: and will we condemn them for will worship,
and superstition, and practice the same our selves? well, hear what S. Paul
says, therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
condemnest: for in that that thou condemnest an other, thou condemnest thy
self: for thou that condemnest, do the same things Romans 2.1. Many
Ministers, think them selves far enough of, from superstition and
will worship, whilst in the pulpit, they can cry out against the superstition
of Papists, when as indeed and in truth, themselves are even then, very
Papists in this point, and great patrones and maintainers of superstition and
will worship: wherefore, let them reform themselves or else let them be silent
touching Papists, you have seen it proved by good Authority, that the Lords
day is but a Tradition of the Church, and shall we retain Popish Traditiones?
will these Ministers be still patrones, and supporters, of unwritten
Traditiones? I would hope better of them.

My second reason disswasiue, is because we shall all leese our labor, in the
Sanctification of the Lords day; we shall labor in vain: For, if we like
servants, will be doing of such works, as our Master never appointed us,
do we think our Master will thank us, yea and reward us for them? you
have heard, that God never commanded us, to sanctify the Lords day, by the 4th
Com. and that Christ never appointed it, in the New Testament, if therefore we
will be hallowing of the Lords day, think you that God will reward you for it,
or that Christ will thank you for it? many men that are honestly disposed,
and of ingenuouse minds, being misled by some Ministers, they leese some years
their Hay in the field; some years their corn in the field, and all of
conscience, thinking it a duty for them so to do, rather then to labor on
the Lords day: and many others, keep the Lords day very strictly, both
privately and publikly, erroniously misperswaded, that that text, Isa. 58.13.
inioyneth the^ so to do: but is not all this Labor in vain? God never
commanded it, Christ never appointed it, neither will God, or Christ ever
reward it: nay, God may answer them thus, who required this at your hands?
Isai. 1.12.

My third reason disswasiue, is because God has manifested his dislike of
superstition, in many passages of his Holy word: see Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I
command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take
ought therefrom. Here you see, that God will have nothing added to his worship
and service: Thou shall put nothing thereto; says the Text: but now the
Patrones of this Lords day, have put some thing thereto: for they have put the
Lords day, unto the 4th Com. of God: a most dangerouse and presumptuouse
attempt, and such as they can never answer before God; nay they cannot justify
it before men, by good argument; how then shall they be able to stand before
God? think they to add an other day, to Gods Com. and justify it before God,
by such their friuolouse consequences, as they vainly pretend to be necessary
consequences? let Ministers think of this and that seriously too, and let the^
do it in time also.

In the New Testament God has reucaled himself this way also, If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book, Revel. 22.18. If Christ was so careful, that nothing
be added to this part of his will wrote by S. John in his Revelation, no doubt
he has the same care, of all parts of his will in the New Testament;
wherefore, let our Ministers that are Patrones of our new Sabbath, think of
this Text also; for when they say and teach the people, that Christ instituted
and appointed the Lords day (which is false; for Christ never instituted it, as
appears by my answer unto all their arguments) in so teaching the people,
they do add unto the New Testament and they add unto Christ his institutiones,
a day which Christ never instituted: thus they have added unto Christ his
ordinances of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, they hau added unto these I say
an other ordinance, that is none of Christ's, which is the Lords day: now let
them hear their doom without repentance; God shall add unto them the plagues
that are written in this book, of the Revelation: and one plague I sinde there
written, which is a plague of plagues, it is hell fire, to have a part in the
lake, that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Revel.
21.8. I know they sleite and contemn me, and think if they can so carry it
with the people, as they may but save their credits with them a while, they
hope to quench me for ever, I being but one, and such a vile one in their
eyes: wherefore I have taken unto me more help, now I have God on my side and
Christ on my side, and they shall defend me against these men; and these men
must know it now, or shall will they nill they hereafter, that they despised
not me, but God and Christ; and that now they have met t with their Master, God
will deal with them, and if they will be adding unto God, God will add unto
them.

You have an other Text also Numb. 15.39. that ye may Remember all the
Commandments of the Lord, and do them: and that ye seek not after your own
heart, nor after your own eyes, after the which ye go a whoring. Where we
see, how God detesteth to have men's devices, brought into his worship; he
calls it a whorish trick: to hold the Lords day, to be commanded by God, or
instituted by Christ, when it cannot be proved, it is to go a whoring after
their own heart, and after their own eyes.

An other Text you have Mark. 7.7.8. But they worship me in vain, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men: for ye lay the commandment of God a part,
and observe the Tradition of men: a like Text you have Isa. 29.13.14.15. where
a woe is denounced upon the people, whose fear toward God, was taught by the
precepts of men. And their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men.
Whereas the former Text says, ye say the commandment of God aparte: how true
this is of these 10 Ministers forenamed, who reject as Jewish and Ceremonial,
the Lords Sabbath, expressly commanded in the Moral Law; let all men judge: for
do they not lay this Commandment of God a part, which inioyneth most
directly the 7th day Sabbath? this by the way; but the words that belong unto
our purpose are these, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. The
Lords day Sabbath, it is a doctrine taught frequently and bouldly; but it is no
commandment of Gods; and therefore it must be only a Commandment of men. The
next words for our present occation, are these; and observe the Tradition of
men. That the Lords day is a Tradition of the Church, not only Papists auowch
it: but also diverse of those Authors which I have cited against the Lords
day, do expressly affirm it, that the Lords day is but a Tradition: and all of
them say, that it is but an ordinance of men, and a Commandment of man, yea so
much the wholl Church confessed in the days of K. Edward. so then in kepeing
it, and in preaching for it, you keep the Tradition of men, and preach for A
Tradition of man: And so also, they that are afraid to transgress the Lords
day, and to work in it, this their fear toward God; it is taught by the
precepts of men; for God has left no precept for the Lords day, the breach
whereof we need be afraid of. Hear then the doom, that belongs unto such
needless religion, all this their worship it is a vain thing, In vain do
they worship me etc. Yea, there belongs a woe unto such worship, and this is
the reward of it, woe unto them etc. Isa. 29.15.

The last Text that I will mention, is Colo. 2.23. which things have indeed a
show of wisdom, in voluntary Religion; or in will worship, Judge now good
reader, if I do them any wrong, to rekone the Lords day, as a limme of this
voluntary Religion, and as a branch of will worship: for if they cannot show us
where God has commanded it, then it is a voluntary thing, and of man's own
will; and therefore may be called a voluntary Religion, and a will worship:
happily there may be, in the eyes of such as have been nusled up from the
cradle, in this superstitiouse practice, a show of wisdom in it, as the Text
speaks: But if S. Paul may be judge, they are things of no value as he
speaks in the same Text. Wherefore since God has in all these Textes of
Scripture, manifested his dislike of Superstition, let this be enough, to
disswad every man from the practice of it: And that so much the rather, because
the vphoulding of this day, is the iusling and shouldering out, of the Lords
Sabbath day, mentioned in the 4th Com. so as the words of our blessed Savior,
are true against them, saying, well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye
may observe your own Tradition, Mark. 7.9. For, they trample down the Lords
Sabbath day, that they may keep their own Lords day.

My 4th reason disswasiue, is because by the vphoulding of this Lords day
Sabbath, the sacred Scriptures, and word of God is profaned: I make that
appear thus; Ministers do daily urge the 4th Com. upon the Lords day; and do
press men's consciences to the Sanctifying of the Lords day, by the 4th Comm.
now the 4th Com. does speak (as he that has but half an eye may see) of the
day called Sabbath day, but this, is a day called Lords day: the 4th Com. was
made for a sanctified and hallowed day: for God himself blessed it, and
sanctified it, Genes. 2.3. but this Lords day, is a profane day, a common day,
never sanctified by God; but on the contrary appointed for labor, it being one
of the six working days, mentioned in the 4th Com. and Christ himself
travailing on it etc. Now for Ministers, to apply this sacred word of Gods 4th
Com. unto a profane, common, and unsanctified day and time; this, or nothing,
is to profane the Sacred word of God. Secondly, many portions of Scripture in
the New Testament; with some also out of the old, are hereby also wrested,
abused, and profaned: the Spirit of God, is made to speak for that, which
never came into his mind to think; a most horrible and insufferable thing in
a Christian Church: as for example these Texts, Psalm. 118.24. Ioh. 20.1.19.26.
Act. 1.2.3. Act. 2.1.14 etc. Act. 20.7.1 Cor. 16.2. 2. Cor. 5.17. and Revel.
1.10. these eight Textes at least, besides the 4th Com. are abused for the
maintenance of a forged, new coined, and counterfeit Sabbath day: who that has
any zeal of Gods glory, or love unto his Holy word, can endure it, that Gods
word and truth should be thus profanly used, profaned, and abused? wherefore,
if you bear any reverence unto the sacred word of God, let a reformation be
made.

Look upon the third Com. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain: now Gods word, is a part of his name, whereby he is known Act. 9.15.
therefore for men to abuse and profane Gods word, it is to abuse and profane
Gods name, and so a sin against the third Com. now the reward of such
profanation, is this, that God will not hold him guiltless, that takes his
name in vain: he shall surely therefore be punished, without repentance and
amendment. But what do I speaking to deaf Adders, men will not be charmed;
what they have holden they will hold; as for me, I am but one and mean, they
are many and mighty: so that I almost despair of remedy: howeuer I have
discovered their sin unto them, at their peril be it, whither they will
amend it or not. I abhor to think of it, yet this I am sure of, that that is
true amongst us, which the Lord once complained of by his Prophet Jeremiah,
that is, that an horrible and filthy thingis committed in the land: the
Prophets prphecy lies; and people delight therein, Ierem. 5.30.31. that the
Prophets prophecy lies, this is apparent as has been shown: and the people
delight therein: this is manifest, in as much as many that are both religiouse
and also counted wise, are not ashamed to speak it, that they wish from their
hearts, that I had never meddled in this point; so we have for the most part,
like Priest, like people, both delighting in this counterfeit Sabbath; and both
like unto Nadab and Abihu, who offered straung fire before the Lord, which he
had not commanded them, Leuit. 10.1.

My 5th and last reason disswasiue is, because it is a sin for Ministers to
preach for the Lords day. This I prove, because they cannot speak for it in
faith: now whatsoever is not of faith is sin, says the Apostle Romans 14.23.
now that they cannot preach for it in faith, is plain by this, that they have
no word of God, for the grownd of their faith: and we have already shown, that
they have no word of God for this Lords day Sabbath: for they can not show us,
where Christ, or any of his Apostles, left any commandment for it: no, nor yet
have they any necessary consequences for it; so often therefore, as A Minister
presses the people to sanctify the Lords day Sabbath, so often he sins. And
so much touching this Lords day Sabbath.

CHAP. IIII. An answer unto all those textes of Scripture, reasones and
arguments, which are usually and profanly, brought against the Sabbath day,
mentioned in the 4th com. to wit, the 7th day Sabbath.
I Have now finished the 3 first parts of my book: the first whereof was in
defense of the moral law: the second was an exposition of the 4th com. with
adiscouery of the corrupt expositiones thereof: the third was an answer to
those Scriptures and reasones, that are brought for the Lords day: and now I am
by order, come unto the fourth part of my book; and herein I am to answer to
the Scriptures, and reasons, whereby the enemies of the Lords Sabbathes, go
about, most wickedly and ungodly, to throw them down: and here my purpose
is, not only to make answer, unto those textes and reasones, which these 10
Ministers, or any of them, in the name and room of the rest, have impiously
objected against the Lords Sabbathes; but also, I purpose to answer, unto all
obiectiones generally, what soever I can hear or read of.

Gods Ancient Sabbaths, are not abolished: or, The Lords ancient 7th day
Saturday Sabbath, is not abolished.
SECT. I.
IN the first place, let me discover an high point of folly in these
Antisabbatharians: for a servant to forsake his old Master, before he knows
where to have a new; or for any man to pull down his old house, before he had
found for certain, that he was able to build up a new house, is a great
folly: into this folly are fallen, not only those other 9 Ministers, by caling
the Lords Sabbaths Ceremonies, Jewish, and Iudaisme, to bring them into
reproach; but especially M. Chapel, by preaching against them openly: now what
an egregiouse folly is this in them, to throw down the old Sabbath, before
they knew where to find a new Sabbath? to abolish the 7th day, before they were
able to raise up the 8th day? me think, a small portion of discretion, should
have taught them, to have made sure work, that they were well able to defend
the Lords day, before they had adventured to debase and abolish the Sabbath
day. I wish all men to learn wisdom by their folly, that is, never to debase
and strive to abolish the old Sabbath, until they know how to prove the Lords
day to be a Sabbath, and so to set up a new Sabbath.

That with the moreculler and show of truth, men might abolish Gods Sabbathes,
besides their loading of them with reproachful terms, of Iudaisme, and
abolished Shadows, and Ceremonies, and the like, they have also taken in hand
to make one of Gods Tenn commandments, namly the 4th com. to be partly Moral
and partly Ceremonial: a thing at the first hearing, very straung, and most
absurd: the absurdnesse whereof, in the first place I will endeavor to set
before your eyes, and then come to show you their reasones, and answer them one
by one.

It is said by Moses that God spoke all these words Exodus 20.1. and this is
equally praefixed to all the 10 commandments: and God wrote them all in Tables
of stone together: now can it be thought, that of all these 10. only one
should so far differ from all its fellows, as when they are intirly Moral,
having no title of Ceremony in them; this one should be half Moral, half
Ceremonial; or partly moral, partly Ceremonial? did not God write as well,
all the whole 4th com. in Tables of stone, as some part of it? and did not God
as well speak all the 4th com. even that part of it which they would have a
ceremony, as all the other commandments? why then should men make a
difference, where God made none?

It can never be shown, that God wrote any shadow, or ceremony in his Tables
of stone: for, no ceremonies ever came with in the compass of that pale or
bedge: nor can it be shown, that God did so far honor any ceremony, as to
deliver it and speak it, from his own mouth: God spoke all these words; that
is, all these 10 Moralles, but God spoke none of the ceremonies; for Moses
spoke these; God appointed Moses to deliver the ceremonial laws; this
difference you may read of, made by God Exodus 20.1.22.24. Exodus 21.1. Deuteronomy.
5.2.4.6.22.31. and is not this absurd, that men should fansy a ceremony to be
in the 4th com. when they cannot show the like, in any of the other nine
commandments? nor that ever God so far honored any ceremony, as to deliver
it by his own voice, and write it with his own finger in Tables of stone?

An other absurdety: who could imagine, that of Tenn commandments, all purly
moral, all to last perpetually to the worlds end, and all appertaining unto
all Nations Jews and Gentiles, save only one of the tenn? and this one
commandment, must needs be of a contrary nature unto all its fellows, the
other 9 commandments; for this must be mixedly moral; a part of it moral,
and an other part of it ceremonial: a part of it to last perpetually to the
worlds end; and a part of it to be faded and vanished away sixtene hundredth
years agone; a part of it to belong unto all nations Jews and Gentiles both,
and an other part of it to belong unto the sole Nation of the Jews only: who
can think that God would yoke and couple such unequal things together? yea,
who could imagine, that there should be a ceremonial ordinance, in the body of
the 4th com.? and in the heart of the Moral law? a man may as well fansy
darkness, to be in the body of the Sun, as a shadow in the heart of the
moral law.

Divines use to resemble these 10 commandments, unto a goolding chain,
consisting of 10 linkes, and of such an unity and combined nature as he that
draws one, draws all, which is a very truth indeed: but these now who set
themselves against the Lords Sabbathes, they feign one of these 10 linkes, to
be made of a metal differing from all the rest; for whereas the chain of 10
linkes is called a goolding chain, they nevertheless will have one of these
10 linkes to be partly gold, and partly lead: so then to speak properly, they
must here after count the 10 com. to be a goolden-leaden chain etc: and
whereas they use to cale these 10 com. the moral law, now to speak properly,
they must cale it the Morall-Ceremoniall law; for they make Ceremony in it;
this is as if the Snow, which hitherto we have caled white snow, we should
hereafter cale it white-blacke snow: thus you see by comparing this 4th com.
with its fellows, how absurd they are, that will attempt to make something in
the 4th com. a Ceremony;

I add hereunto this absurdety also, that these men must deny the integrity and
perfection of the law; and hold a lamed, broken, and imperfect law, and so
serve God by halues and by peecemeale; or else, they cannot dispute against the
7th day Sabbath, contained in the moral law: for take that away, and the law
is not an entire and perfect law, but a maimed and lamed thing.

An other absurdety I charge them with, and that is horrible partiality: for
they can find answers and distinctions, to preserve the Moral Law, from being
abolished by Libertines and Anabaptists, saying, it is abolished for
Justification, but in force still, for observation: and yet will neither find,
and I doubt, nor receive any answer or distinction, that may preserve the
Sabbath day, which is a part of that Law: and is not this partiality, to
defend one part of Gods Law, and not an other? yea, I dare auowch it, that
Anabaptists, Libertins, and Antinomians, do bring every way, as able proving
scriptures against the wholl Law, as Anti Sabbatharians do, against this part
of Gods Law which concerns his 7th day Sabbath: see these against the whole
Law Ephesians. 2.15. Hebr. 7.12. Romans 6.14. 1. Tim. 1.9. 2. Cor. 3.7.11. see these
against this part of the Law, Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. and Col. 2.16.17. now
since these latter textes, have no more nor better force against this part of
the Law, then those former textes have against the whole Law, what abominable
partiality is here used, by admitting these textes against a part of the Law,
when those are refused that be against the whole Law? may these men be said to
love Gods Law, and to love it for it self, and yet to deal thus partially by
it?

Yet further, where as Anabaptists do deny all use of Oaths among
Christians, and that not only in common talk, but also before A Magistrate,
and that from these textes Mat. 5.34. Iam. 5.12. Swear not at all etc.:
Nevertheless, as general as these words of Christ are against swearing, we
do distinguish of oaths, yielding Christ's words to be directed and expounded
against swearing in our common talk vainly, but not against an oath before A
Magistrate: why do not these textes, Mat. 5.34. Iam. 5.12. bear as strongly
against all oaths, and so against an oath before A Magistrate; as do these
their textes Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. Col. 2.16. against all Sabbaths, and so
against the weekly 7th day Sabbath? can you distinguish to preserve an oath
before A Magistrate, and can you not distinguish to preserve Gods Sabbath in
the Church? will you defend an oath before a Magistrate, as enjoined still in
the 3th com. which is therein but by consequence, and will you not defend Gods
ancient Sabbath, as enjoined still in the 4th command. which is therein
expressed? can such your partiality be excused?

Now to consider of the 4th command. by it self: in this they will attempt to
prove the time, to wit, the 7th day, to be a ceremony and abolished; and in the
mean time, they will hold the duties of Rest and holiness, commanded with
the time, to be no ceremony but moral and perpetual: now undoubtedly, they
should hold all the things commanded in the 4th com. to be together moral, or
together ceremonial: either all abolished, or all perpetual: in any wise man's
judgment, such things as God has joined together, no man should put asunder,
retayning something, rejecting other something; but that all must be retained,
or all rejected: either they should embrace the whole 4th commandment, or no
4th commandment: this is in common reason.

The 4th com. is like unto a Bond; in a bond there is two things where unto men
are bound; the one, is the sum of money, the other, is the day and time of
payment; now in common reason, he that stands bound to pay the sum of money,
that same man stands bound to the day and time also, that is, to pay this money
at the time mentioned in the bond: so in the 4th com. men are bound unto 2.
things, the one, is the duties of Rest and holy exercises, the other, is unto
the day and time wherein these duties are to be performed, namly the 7th day.
Now these men, that are undertakers against Gods Sabbaths; and enemies to the
Integrity and perfection of Gods Law; they will not retain both of these, nor
reject both of these; but a division and separation they must have; the duties
of rest and holiness they will have us bound unto, as being moral; but the
day and time wherein they should be performed, to wit, the 7th day, this they
will not have us bound unto, but it must be a ceremony: now was it ever heard
before now, or ever seen in any case but this, that a man should be bound unto
the sum of money, in the bond, but not unto the day of payment? wy these men
will most absurdly suppose, that we are tied unto the duties of rest and
holiness in the com. but not unto the duty of the time and day, mentioned in
the command. in which the duties are to be done: and is not this absurd to
any heareing? and are not those textes, which they use for this absurd
purpose, wrested think you? as these Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. and Col. 2.17. it
were to be wished, that they would not halue it, and piece it, on this
fashion, that is, to serve God by halues in his 4th com. but that they would
observe the whole 4th commandment or no 4th command. all or none.

God has given many several commandments in the old Testament, as concerning
the true God; concerning his worship; concerning his Name; concerning sundry
duties unto our neighbor; concerning the Passover, Pentecost, and sundry
other Festival days; new moons, and Sabbaths; concerning meats and drinks;
concerning Sacrifices, Tithes, Priests, the Temple and place of worship; with
many more; now amongst all these Laws, can they find from the beginning of the
book of Genesis, unto the end of the Prophecy of Malachie, such a mingle
mangled hotch potch as they will make of this 4th comm. that part of those
laws should be moral, and part ceremonial; one part belonging to all
Nations, the other part only unto the Jews? the like was never heard on, I
dare say it, in any laws of God, or Man, Divine or humane: are they not
ashamed, to make such A Monster of the 4th com. as the like has not been seen
in the world? and are not these textes Romans 14.5. Exodus 31.13. and Colos.
2.16.17. monstrousty abused think you, which they use for this monstrouse end?

In the 5th com. we are enjoined ij things, to honor our father; and to honor
our mother: and in the 10th com. we are enjoined many things, as 7 in number:
and in the 4th com. we are enjoined ij things, an holy rest, and the day and
time wherein to keep this holy rest: now they that take one of these ij things
in the 4th com. and reject the other; they are as absurd, as if one should take
one of those ij things enjoined in the 5th com. and reject the other; holding
it moral to honor our fathers, but ceremonial, to honor our mothers: and as
absurd they are, as if they should divide betwixt those 7 things commanded in
the 10th com. holding 4 of them moral, and some such 3 of them as disconceits
them most, for ceremonies: in a word, for any to say the 4th com. is partly
moral, partly ceremonial, it is a position partly religiouse, partly profane.

It is much like that of Papists, touching the 2d. com. about Images, who hold,
that this 2d. com. is ceremonial, and forbids only Jewish Images, not the
Images of Christians; and why may we not admit of Papists absurdetie in the 2d.
com. as well as of Protestants absurdnesse in the 4th com. Oh, how is this
abused Commandment, to be deplored and lamented! and how are the Agents
herein, to be loathed and abhorred? for they attempt with that wicked man,
prophesied on by Daniel, to change times and laws, Dan. 7.25. Gods 7th day,
into the 8th day: and the law of the 4th com. from off the 7th day, unto the
8th day.

An other absurdety is, that by alleging Scriptures out of the new Testament,
as Romans 14.5. Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16. against the Sabbath in the moral law, and
so fathering the abolition of that Sabbath on Christ and on his Paul, hereby we
become a stumbling block, scandale, and occation of offense unto the Jews;
for, when they urge us with the 4th com. for keeping of the old Sabbath day,
and we answer that Christ and Paul abolished it, hereat they are scandalized,
and say, that hereby they know Christ and Paul to be impostors and deceivers:
because they durst abolish one of Gods ordinances in the Decalogue, which all
men count moral: is not the conversion of the Jews daily expected, and prayed
for? and shall we unnecessarily, hinder their coming unto Christ, by fathering
on Christ a thing both false, and most odiouse unto the people of the Jews?
let us beware we be not an occation any longer of the hard-hartednesse of the
Jews.

Furthermore, other absurdeties also these evil Age^tes runinto: he that can
allow of these following arguments, against the 7th day Sabbath, he may with a
safe conscience turn Anabaptist, and keep no Sabbath: for the 7th day
Sabbath, these men will throw down, as they say: And for the 8th day Sabbath,
that's but an idle fiction, as has been shown; so then, throw down the 7th
day Sabbath, and away with all Sabbathes: for my part, I am clearly and fully
resolved in this, that take away the 7th day Sabbath, and then we are not bound
to keep any Sabbath at all, one or other: Thus these enemies to Gods Sabbaths,
they make an high way, and open gappe unto Anabaptistry, that so we should have
no Sabbathes.

An other absurdety is this; The time of the 7th day, it was, and also it may
now again (if men so please) be an help and a furtherance, unto these Moral
duties, of Rest from labors, and the worship of God, commanded in the 4th
Comm. for the 7th day, furthereth these duties, as time and place do further
all duties: and is it not to be wondered at, that men will reject and abolish
such a thing, or things, as be helps and furtherances unto Gods worship, and
unto Moral duties? Divines teach, that not only the duties expressed in the
Decalogue, are to be observed, but also all helps and furtherances unto those
duties; but behold, here they reject as Jewish and Ceremonial the 7th day,
which was in ancient time, and may be again, an help unto Gods worship, and
the other Sabbath duties; Yea such an help, as no other day ca^ be so fit:
for no day but it, is a sanctified day, Genes. 2.3. nor a commanded day, Exodus
20.8.10. nor that has Gods president, Exodus 20.10.11.

I might here allege the Testimony of many, but I will content my self with
iij or iiij, who though no friends to the ancient Sabbath, yet herein justify
me: Doctor Bownde in his book of the Sabbath Page 40. says; That the 4th.
Com. can no more be partly Moral and partly Ceremonial; then the same living
creature; can be partly a man, and partly a beast: Yea, as well may one suppose
the second Com. also, to be partly Moral and partly Ceremonial. To the same
effect, he in page 36. cites Wolph. Chron. lib. 2. ca. 1. saying, but the 7th
day, is not to be rekoned among the figures and ceremonies of the Jews;
because it is commanded in the Decalogue, which contains in it nothing
ceremonial, nothing typical, nothing to be abrogated. M. Richard Byfield, in
his Doctrine of the Sabbath vindicated, against M. Brerewod page 88. says, the
4th com. is part of the law of nature, and so part of the Image of God, and
is no more capable of a ceremony to be in it then God is. For conclusion, you
shall hear doctor Ames speak in the name of all best divines:

In his Theological Thesis page 499. Thus he writes: This is a most certain
rule, and received by all the best Divines, that the moral commandments were
thus differenced in their delivery, from the ceremoniales, that all, and only
the morales, were proclaimed publikly before the people of Israel, from Mount
Sinay, by the voice of God himself, and after also were written, and the
second time written, as it were by the finger of God, and that in Tables of
stone, to declare their perpetual and immutable continuance. Now, do you not
hear how these me^ affirm it, that the 7th day, is not to be rekoned among
the figures and ceremonies of the Jews? and that all best divines hold, that
all and only morales, were wrote in the Tables of stone? and, that the 4th
com. is no more capable of a ceremony in it, then God is? and, that you may as
absurdly say, the same living creature is partly a man, and partly a beast, as
to say the 4th com. is partly moral, partly ceremonial.

Before I produce their arguments, I desire to propound iiij things more, both
unto our opponentes, and also unto my Reader. The for most is this, before they
begine their opposition and wicked work, I desire them to cast their eyes
first upon the ugliness of it, and to view it well; for they fight not for
God blessed for ever; but against God: my warfare is for God, and to defend his
Title touching his Sabbaths, but theirs is altogether to defeat God of his
Title and Sabbaths: my strift is to defend Gods law in the Integrity and
perfection, unto a jot and title of it; but their strife, is with might and
maine, to lame Gods law, and to clype it, as traitoures do the Kings coin;
they will none of the law in its integrity and perfection, that so they may
serve God by halues, and by peece-meale.

An other thing I would propound, is this, I desire to know of these, who are
such implacable enemies to the Lords Sabbaths, if they have any Countermand, or
contrary commandment unto the 4th com. and that in as plain and express
terms as the 4th com: you know, that a law enacted in parliament, cannot be
revoked, but by an other law, enacted for the reuersing of it, in the court of
parliament: so it must be in this case; for the 7th day Sabbath, there was a
law, to wit, the 4th com. enacted from heaven in the old Testament; and they
must therefore show us a law from heaven again countermanding it in the new
Testament, against the 7th day Sabbath: or, if in case they cannot show us A
law, in exprese words against the Sabbath day, the which they cannot do, then,
if they be enforced in stead of a commandment, to fly to reasones and
consequences, made out of textes of Scripture, they must make suer, that their
reasones, collectiones, and consequences, be so clear and apparent, so sound
and so necessarily true, that they may be as undoubtedly true, as a
commandment it self: the reason hereof is, because these consequences, must
stand in the room of a commandment, for the reuoking of that Sabbath day,
which was commanded in the 4th com: every sleity and probable reason therefore
collected out of a text, is not enough to ouerturne an express commandment,
yea a moral commandment: shall a sleity collection or consequence, fetched by
man's feeble and shallow reason, out of these and the like textes Exodus 31.13.
Romans 14.5. and Colos. 2.16.17. ouerturne a sacred time, expressly commanded in
the moral law Exodus 20.8? God forbid. We must show more love and honor, unto
those 10 commandments; which God has honored above all portions of
Scripture, by writing them with his own finger, and delivering them by his
own voice, then to suffer them, or any part of them, to be snached and
wrested out of our hands, by probabilities, likelihoods, and feeble reasones.

A man may well doubt of it, whither any man or Church, may abolish any things
expressly commanded, in the Moral Law, by any collection or consequence of man's
reason whatsoever, yea albeit it be thought of all men, to be a necessary
consequence: for how often do men take that to be sound and of necessary
truth, which once within a few years after, the same men find to be faulty:
let men know therefore, that they who dare attempt so bold an enterprise, as
to diminish any jot or title of the 10. morales by reasones, fetched out of
these and the like textes Exodus 31.13. and Colos. 2.16.17. they must be such
reasons as be as clear as the Sun in its brightness; and so satisfactory,
as every one that hears them, cannot but applaud and embrace them, saying,
God is in these reasones and collectiones: the reason hereof is, because these
reasones and consequences, they must bear down, and confront an express
commandment, written by the finger of God himself, saying, Remember the
Sabbath day, etc. The 7th day is the Sabbath, in it thou shall not work.

The 3d thing which I would propound, shall be an Appeal unto the consciences,
of all such, as dare sharpen their wits, against the Lords Sabbaths, which he
has placed in his Moral Law: my desire unto them is, that they would ransake
and search their hearts, to see if they can find themselves compelled, and
constrained by their consciences, upon the reading and seriouse perpending of
these and the like textes, Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. and Colos. 2.16.17. in the
New Testament, to abolish the 7th day Sabbath or no: let them examine their
consciences, whither all those textes of Scripture, which they bring against
that Sabbath day, placed by God in his Moral Law, be so directly against, and
forciblie opposite unto Gods Sabbath day, as by no honest means of a fit
sense, or a Lawful distinction, it can possibly be preserved from an utter
ruin, and final overthrow, or no: now the reason, why men must go thus
seriously to work, is to free themselves of a fearful censure, that they do
wilfully, maliciously, and unnecessarily impugn an ordinance of Gods: because
we must not lightly and sleitily, make innouationes and alterationes, in Gods
worship and service: Gods ordinances, once established in his Church (as this
Sabbath day was) must not upon every vain conceit and by respect, be removed
out, or holden out of his Church: men must deal with their consciences
therefore in these points, and be suer to go no further against them, then
necessity urges and compels them: if in case an error must be, it is by
far the safer, to err upon the right hand, then upon the left; that is,
rather to give God his Sabbaths still, then to abridge him of them: shall God
fix his 7th day Sabbath, amongst his Morales, and shall we put to our wites,
to root it out thence, and rank it amongst vanished ceremonies? God forbid.

The 4th thing to be propounded: you know it is a Maxim, and a ruled case in
divinity, that one text of Scripture, it must not be so expounded and urged, as
it should overthrow and contradict an other text: now if this rule has place
in any portion of Scripture, it must have place in the 10. commandments, the
Lords prayer, and in the Articles of our faith. for these 3. are esteemed to
contain, the foundation, life and Soul of all religion, and that plainly;
wherefore, no text of Scripture is to be urged or expounded so, as it should
infringe, contradict or ouerturne, any portion of these three principles of
Christian religion: nay, these three are made as a Rule to expound other
Scriptures by, and therefore not to be gainsaied and opposed by other
scriptures: well then, the 7th day Sabbath it is one of those ordinances of
God, established of old in his Church, and placed amongst his Moral Laws, and
in the first Table also, and there expressly commanded by one of the 10.
commandments; wherefore since it is a part of the 10. commandments, neither
these textes, Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. and Col. 2.16.17. nor any other text of
Scripture, must be so urged and expounded, as that this commanded 7th day
Sabbath, be there by abolished, or accounted as a vanished ceremony: this
stands firm, by our own Rule, for the exposition of Scripture: and therefore,
I might well and iustifiablie spare to give them any other answer to their
textes brought against the Lords Sabbath, then this, that they abuse and wrest
the sense of Scripture, making one text to contradict an other, contrary to
this aproued rule; for no text may be admitted against the 4th com.

One absurdety more I would add; whosoever goes about by these and the like
textes, Romans 14.5. Exodus 31.13. and Col. 2.17. to abolish Gods ancient Sabbath,
he makes a godly prayer of our Church frustrate, and mere babbling before God:
for when the 4th com. is rehearsed in the Church, the people answer to it,
saying, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law: now
since the 4th com. cannot be understood of any day, or duties but those done on
the ancient Sabbath day, abolish that day, and the^ our prayer is but babbling.
2. Doctor Prideaux in his book on the Sabbath page 140. affirms, that the
Church following the Apostles, kept the Sabbath, and M. Brerewod in his book of
the Sabbath, page 77. affirms, that the old Sabbath, was religiously observed
300. years after Christ: and this I shall prove toward the latter end of this
book, by sundry other Testimonies: they therefore who by these textes, Exodus
31.13. and Col. 2.16. do attempt to overthrow the ancient 7th day Sabbath,
they do thereby not only make frustrate an holy prayer of our Church, but also
they do condemn the practice, of the most ancient, pure, and primitive
Churches, which lived next unto the Apostles.

Thus you see, how many and foul absurdeties they rune into, who cale the
Saturday or 7th day Sabbath Iudaisme Jewish, and ceremonial, and attempt to
root it out of the Moral Law, by these texts, Exodus 31. Col. 2.17.

SECT. II.
And now we come unto their arguments, and textes of Scripture, out of which
they collect arguments against the Lords Sabbaths: but this note in the first
place, that of them all, they can not show us any express commandment or
prohibition, against the Sabbath day, to countermand it: and therefore it
follows, that what they have against it, the same is but collectiones, and
consequences, framed by man's feeble reason: and this one thing, that they have
no express countermand, against the Sabbath day, does weaken their cause
exceedingly, and it is the worse by above 50. in the 100. for this want; and
so I proceed.

There are two things which they labor to make ceremonial and so abolished,
in the 4th com. the one is the Rest; the other is the time of the 7th day: and
first let us see what they have against the Rest: they do not say the Rest
from labor, is simply abolished, least so they should dashe in pieces the
whole 4th com. by one word; therefore they have refined it, and they desire to
prove the rigorouse strictness of the Rest, only to be a ceremony: and
questionless this conceit of the rigorouse strictness of the Rest, was
therefore invented, least they should seem only to deny the question; namly
the time of the 7th day: for now there is is a little more culler put upon the
matter, when they can deny ij things as ceremonies, in the 10 commandments:
now to this purpose, every text that may seem to savor of any extraordenary
strictness, about the Jewish rest (as they cale it) those textes are not
expounded, (as they say) with a grain of Salt, or any dram of
qualification, but like men that had sworn to it, to forsake the golden mean,
they are carried all wide upon the left hand, and these textes, are stretched
upon the Tainter hoocks, unto the utmost, tending to a rigorousnesse; and he
that can invent how to make this Rest the most rigorouse, he is the best
expositer. And hence comes that vain distinction of the Jewish Rest, as if for
sooth, the 4th com. contained two kinds of Rest in it, A Jewish Rest, and A
Christian Rest; but the vanity hereof will appear by and by, when you shall
have seen the vanity of their arguments, to prove this rigorouse and Jewish
Rest.

Now let me show you their arguments in order; and first I will lay down 3
arguments, used by a worthy Divine and late writer, to prove this rest
rigorouse, whose name I spare for honor sake: the first whereof is this, that
the Jew might not on the Sabbath, go forth, or take a iourny any whither, for
any business of his own Exodus 16.29. this says he, was temporary, and does
not concern these times of the new Testament.

Hereunto I answer, that this text Exodus 16.29. forbad the Jew to travail on
the Sabbath indeed, but by the context it does appear, that here the Lord
forbad travailing friuolouslie when there was no need to travail: for, in as
much as on the 6th day, God gave them Manna enough for ij days, the 6th and
the 7th, and so rained down none on the 7th day; therefore he forbad them, to
go forth on the 7th day or Sabbath day: and this was the journey which God
forbad; namly an unnecessary iourny; for why should they go abroad to seek
Manna, on a day, wherein there was none in the field? and why should they seek
for it on the 7th day, when God gave them enough on the 6th day, both for it,
and for the 7th day also? now I pray show me, where is that rigorouse
strictness of the Jewish rest, for which end this text is brought? is that to
be esteemed a rigorouse rest when men are forbidden to travail on the Sabbath
day, when they have no need at all to travail,? and when their journey is
friuolouse, and to no purpose? if this be a Jewish strictness, we Christians
use it, and urge it at this day: for, we permit not to travail on the Lords
day, upon every sleity occation.

And do they not want matter (think you) against Gods Sabbathes, when they
are forced to rack up such poor stuff as this is against them?

SECT. III.
An other reason he uses, taken out of Exodus 35.3. where the Jew is forbidden
to kindle a fire on the Sabbath day: ye shall kindle no fire throughout your
habitationes on the Sabbath day, and herein (says he) stood the rigorousnesse
of the Jewish rest.

Hereunto I answer, that this text if understood generally, it is set upon the
tainter hoockes, and stretched beyond measure: ye have a text to wit, the 4th
com. saying, in it thou shall not do any work, this text, the same divines
can understand it and expound it, with a due limitation, to wit, of common
ordenary and servile works: why then by like reason, can they not add the same
limitation, in the same case, to this text also, Exodus 35.3? and so understand
it thus, thou shall kindle no fire, that is, to do ordenary, common, and
servile works withal, like as common Bakers, and Brewares do, by making it
part of their trade: thus works of necessity and charity to be done on the
Sabbath, shall be no more forbidden in this text Exodus 35.3. then they are in
the 4th com. Exodus: 20.10. to kindle a fire, as Bakers do, is a servile work;
but otherwise it is a work of mercy, when but to warm one, and the like.

Also it might have a special reference unto the building of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 35.3.4.5. whereof there was no such necessary have, as that they should
kindle fires on the Sabbath, to work about it.

For us to think, that God who allowed a beast to be led to the water on the
Sabbath; and allowed the Jews to lift a beast out of the ditch on the Sabbath;
and to pluck and rubb ears of corn on the Sabbath, would forbid them to
kindle a fire on the Sabbath, to dress a morsel of warm meat, for their
dinner, and to warm them selves in cold winters weather, when they came from
Church, that so they might be the more fresh and lively to serve God again in
the afternone, there is no show of reason in it: would God have mercy showed to a
beast on the Sabbath, and none of a man, that is made after his Image? what
likelihod is there of this?

Further our Savior says the Sabbath was made for man Mar. 2.27. so to
expound this text Exodus 35.3. therefore, as if a man might not, no not in a
case of necessity, kindle a fire, in the time of froft and snow, to warm
himself, and the like, is to make the Sabbath not for man, but against man:
and to make man for the Sabbath, contrary to the words of our Savior.

Again our Savior Christ, was present at a ffeast, on the Sabbath day, Luke
14.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc. now at a feast, there is commonly a fire, to dress
meat for the guestes; and there is attendance to be given by servants, and the
like; now Christ by his presence at this feast, allowed of fire kindling, and
of others as great works, as the kindling of a fire is: whereby it appears,
that this text is wrested, when it is understood so rigorously, as if God had
forbad his people to kindle a fire in any case: thus you see, that it is but a
slander brought up upon the Jewish Rest, to say it was rigorouse; but such
slanders are frequent, to loath men of Gods Sabbath.

SECT. IV.
A third reason he fetches out of Ierem. 17, 21. and Nehem. 13.15. take heed
to your selves, and bear no burden in the Sabbath day, here says he, the
Jews might bear no burdens on the Sabbath.

Hereunto I answer briefly, that these texts, as any man may see by the
context, speak only of burdens bearing, in an ordenary and common case, as a
servile work: but that all bearing of burdens, was forbidden to the Jews is
false; for Christ him self commanded the sick man to carry his bed, on the
Sabbath day, Ioh. 5.8.9.10. seeing therefore, that God did not forbid a man to
carry a burden on the Sabbath day, in his necessity, where is there any grownd
then here, for any man to say, the Ieweish Rest was strict and rigorouse? I
never yet could see, but that God allowed the Jews, as much liberty on the
Sabbath day, as he allows Christianes; and as much liberty, as Ministers
grant unto Christians on the Lords day: and therefore it is but a mere
slander, to say the Jewish Rest, was rigorouse: and the distinction betwixt
the Jewish rest and the Christian Rest is a distinction without a difference:
for all works of mercy, and works of necessity, might be done by the Jews on
the Sabbath day, as well as by us Christianes now. Lo, these devices wise men
have, to defeat God of his Sabbaths.

SECT. V.
A fourth text I will add, which is usually aleaged to the same purpose: bake
that to day which ye will bake, and sees that which ye will sees, and all
that which remains, lay it up till the morning for you etc. Exodus 16.23.
here (say they) the Jews were commanded to dress all their meat on the
ffriday, the day before their Sabbath; and so by consequence they might not
dress any meat on their Sabbath.

Hereunto I answer. 1. for as much as we find, that God has added and expressed
an exception to some Sabbaths, we may therefore think, that the same
exception, is to be understood, in all Sabbaths; see Exodus 12.16. no work shall
be done; save about that which every man must eat: that only may ye do, in
which words you see, that albeit God forbad all manner of work, yet he gave an
exception, allowing men to work so far forth, as may concern their present
necessity, that is, to dress their meat on that day, which they must eat on
that day: I confess this was a ceremonial Sabbath, but for as much as, God put
no difference, betwixt the ceremonial and the Moral Sabbaths, for strictness
of rest (for it was death, to any man, that did any work on either of them
both, as you may see, Leuit. 23.30, and Exodus 31.15.) therefore we may think,
that there is the same reason of both.

2. I answer, that this text is not rightly understood and applied: for they
suppose that Moses bad these Jews bake to day, that was, on friday, all the
Manna which they had gathered that day, to wit, the ij. omers, so as none
should be to bake on the next day being Sabbath day; but it is to be noted,
that Moses left it to their will, how much to bake that day, and how much to
leave vnbaked; for says the text, bake that which ye will bake, and sees
that which ye will sees; he said not, bake all, and sees all; but bake and
sees what ye will: again, where he says that which remanieth, lay it up
until the morning: they understand these words thus, that that which remanieth
baked, should be laid up; but so much cannot be collected out of this text;
but the contrary is rather the truth, namely, that that which remained vnbaked
was laid up vnbaked until the morning: and this the context gives light unto;
for on other days if they reserved any until the morning it stank, v. 20. but
on this day, what they reserved, it stank not, v. 24. now forasmuch as Moses
records it, as a wonderful thing, that it stanke not, nor was full of
worms, by reserving it; it gives us to understand, that it was laid up
vnbaked; for what wonder had it been, that it stanke not, nor had worms in it,
if it had been baked? seeing that baking, does preserve things from stinking,
and worms breeding: it is more likly therefore, that as they baked every other
day, so much as they did eat on that day, so they did on the Sabbath day: So
this text proves not, that the Jews baked and boiled all their food, on
friday.

One answer I here give unto all their 4. texts together; if the Rest
commanded to the Jews in the 4th com. be a rigorouse Rest, and so ceremonial,
then is the whole Sabbath and 4th com. utterly abolished, as rigorouse and
ceremonial also: for there is but one kind of Rest in the 4th com. take away
that, and take away all Rest; and if that be rigorouse and ceremonial, take
away that, and then may men follow their labors, in their several housen,
and in the fields.

An other answer I give unto all their 4. textes, which is this, that if it
could be proved, that the Rest which the Jews kept, was rigorouse, then might
we more safely hold, that the rigorousnesse of their Rest was Jewish and
ceremonial, then that any thing commanded in the Moral Law, is Jewish and
ceremonial: for this Law of kindling a fire on the Sabbath, being not
mentioned in the Moral Law, but written elsewhere, it may be questioned rather
whither it was any branch of the 4th com. or exposition of it; or whither it
was some special Law peculiar unto the Nation of the Jew; because in those
hot countries, they might better want a fire then we in coulder rigiones can,
and better feed on cold meats, dressed the day before, then we in these
colder countries cane: and so the Moral Law should be maintained still in its
Integrity and perfection: and why may not these particular Laws, not being
written in the Moral Law, and Tables of stone, be aduentitiouse, and only
added to the 4th com. as peculiar to the Jews, and those times and Regiones,
as was that Reason prefixed to all the 10. com. that God brought the^ out of
the land of Egypt, which is also added to the 4th com. Deuteronomy. 5.15. and as was
that Law, of offering ij. Lambs, on the Sabbath days Numb. 28.9.10.

Thus then you have seen their textes, for the proving of the Jews Rest, to
be full of intolerable strictness and rigor; but you se how they fail in
the matter; wherefore I may safely conclud, that it is but a slander, raised
upon the Lords Sabbaths, to make men afraid of them, and to loath them: for
God required no more strictness of a Jew; then he does of a Christian; nor any
less of a Christian, then he did of a Jew; the 4th com. it is one and the
same, to Jew and to Gentile, as are all the other 9. commandments.

SECT. V.
Having made answer unto their textes, whereby they would prove the Rest of the
Sabbath, partly ceremonial, because rigorouse: we are now to come unto their
textes, whereby they would prove the time, to wit, the 7th day, in the 4th com.
to be a ceremony, and so abolished: but first this would be noted, that since
they cannot prove the Rest in the Sabbath, rigorouse and ceremonial, now there
is nothing commanded in all the 10 commandments, which they can except
against, but only the question it self betwixt us, to wit, the time, and 7th
day: now how they will disprove this you shall see.

Their first text which I will produce is that Mat. 12.8. for the sone of man
is Lord of the Sabbath: hence some argue thus, that because Christ is called
the Lord of the Sabbath day, therefore he did alter and chang the Sabbath day.

Hereunto I answer, that admit, the Heir of a Manor house, because he is
Lord of that house, he may destroy it, and pull it down; yet it does not
therefore follow, that he will, or has destroyed it, and pulled it down; so,
be it, that Christ's as Lord of the Sabbath might destroy it, yet it follows
not that he did destroy it: no, the contrary rather follows, that because
Christ was Lord of the Sabbath, therefore he did and for ever will, maintain
and uphold the Sabbath; for it is the property of Lords, to uphold their
manor howsen; and to defend those things whereof they are Lords, to the
utmost of their power.

Christ is the Lord, both of the dead and of the quick Romans 14.9. will it
follow, because he is Lord of the quick, that therefore, he will destroy the
quick? no, all that will follow out of this text, is no more but this, that
Christ shows us, how we may in a case of necessity use some labor, to pluck
ears of corn and the like, to satisfy present hunger: thus the Lord of a
corn field, will in a case of necessity, permit his servants, to make a
pathway, thorough the midest of the corn; but yet would be exceedingly wroth
with them, if they should trample all the field over, no necessity compelling
them thereto; and so dealt Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, with his servants,
he gave them leave to make a path thorrow it, as it were.

Lastly it cannot be, that Christ did here at this time destroy the Sabbath
day; for it was not yet time for it; for Christ destroyed and abolished no
ceremonies, until his death upon the Cross Col. 2.14. if therefore the Sabbath
day, had been a ceremony, we cannot think that Christ would abolish it, now
whilst he lived, and so long before his death: and thus much for this text.

SECT. VI.
A second text, is ij Cor. 5.17. old things are passed away, behold all things
are become new.

Hereunto I answer, but briefly, because I have touched this text before:
whereas the text says, old things are passed away, therefore they think the old
Sabbath is passed away too; if this be a good reason, then may we further
reason thus, that because old things are abolished, therefore all the 10
commandments are abolished too, for they are old things: but the Apostles of
Christ have taught us better divinity; for they in the new Testament, do send
us to those old things, in the old Testament, saying, what soever things were
written aforetime, were written for our lerning Romans 15.4. and S. John says, I
write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment etc. 1 Ioh. 2.7.

2. I answer, this text is wrested, because it is not understood; for the
Apostle speaks not here of old ordinances in the Church, as of Sabbaths and
the like, but of old Adam, the old man, and of old ungodly practices; if any
man be in Christ, such old things are passed away from him, and abolished etc.
so here is nothing yet against the 7th day Sabbath,

SECT. VII.
A third text against the time of the 7th day Sabbath, is Josh: 10.13. where it
is said, that the Sune abode in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down
of a whole day: some Ministers make a great deal of title tatleing about this
standing still of the Sune, in Joshua his time; and hereby they think that
time is so confounded, as now no man knows precisely which is the 7th day: and
because the 7th day cannot be known, hence is plea enough for them, to
overthrow the Sabbath day, because it cannot be known: this argument is much
pressed against me by M. Stinnet for one.

Hereunto I answer 1. by this reason then it seems, that neither the
Prophets, nor the Church of God, that lived after the standing still of the
Sun in Joshua his time, until Christ time, did ever keep, or were bound to
keep, the Sabbath day; or to yield any obedience unto the 4th com. and by this
reason the Jews, never after the standing still of the Sun, kept, or were
bound to keep the passover, on the 14th day of the month; nor their other
feast days; and all forsooth because the standing still of the Sun, had made
such an alteration of time, that they knew not Saturday from Sunday any longer,
nor the 14th day of the month from the 13th or 15th days of the month: are
not these men worthily counted enemies to Gods Sabbaths, and are they not very
desirouse to overthrow them, when they study for such simple stuff as this is,
against them? is not this to make a needless, voluntary, and unnecessary
opposition to Gods ordinance? for what necessity is here in this text; to move
a man, to oppose God in his Sabbathes?

2. I prove their grownd false, whereon they build; they suppose the 7th day
cannot be known, because of the standing still of the Sun: but I prove, that
long after the Sunns standing still, the 7th day, was known; for after Christ
his resurrection, all the iiij Evangelists do cale our Sunday, the first day
of the week: if then Sunday be the first day in their account, rekone onwards,
and Saturday after it must be the 7th day; so the^ the standing still of the
Sun hinders not from the knowledge which day is the 7th, and which day is
the first etc. other answers I give also in my former book, but these are
enough, and too many for such idle arguments.

An other argument of like nature they use, and this is a fit place to answer
it, if it deserved answer; it is this, if all nations be bound to keep the 7th
day Sabbath, as well as the Jew, then in some countries, they must keep a
Sabbath day, half a year together: for in some country, there is half a
year light or day together.

Hereunto I answer 1. if this argument be good against the Sabbath day, then is
it good also against the Lords day: for how shall all nationes be bound to
keep the Lords day; seeing that then in some country, they shall be bound to
keep a Lords day, half a year long etc? 2. I answer, by like reason a man may
thus conclud, that the 5th com. belongs not unto all men; because some men
are not bound unto it, as a King, whose father and mother is dead: but what and
if the King who has no superior living, be not bound to the 5th com. shall
none of his subjects therefore, who have parents and superiors living, be
bound unto the 5th com? and so, what if some one country, should not be bound
to the Sabbath day, because of the exceeding length and discommodiousnesse of
their days, shall not we and other nations therefore, be bound to the Sabbath
day, and 4th com. who have days of convenient length, much like as the Jews
had in Canaan, and no such incommodiousenesse? In the 10th com. it is said thou
shall not covet thy neighbors ass: now thowsands in our country have no Asses,
will they therefore conclud, that such men amongst us, whose neighbors have
Asses, are not forbidden, to Covet their neighbors Ass, because this branch of
the 10th com. does not reach unto every man?

Others object, that we cannot keep the Sabbath day, because our Saturday
begineth not just at the some point of time, when the Jews Sabbath day begane
in Canaan; but by the like reason we may now say, that we cannot celebrate the
Lords Supper neither: for, we drink not just the self same kind of wine, which
Christ drank at Jerusalem; nor is it likly that we eat the self same kind of
bread: for we eat whitebread, but in regard of Christ's poverty, it is not
unlikely that he used brown or corse bread. 2. By the like, the Jews might
have thus absurdly reasoned also; whereas the Sabbath day was commanded on
Mount Sinay, Exodus 20. yea, one months journey before they came to Mount
Sinay, in the wilderness of Sin Exodus 16.1.23. yea, and in an other remote
place, as in that part of the world where about Paradise was, since the
Sabbath was from the Creation; hence the Jews might thus peruersly have
argued, saying, we are now in Canaan, or in Captivity in a country that is
far remote from Mount Sinay, where the Sabbath was commanded, or from the
wilderness of Sin, or that part of the world where Paradise was, and where
the Patriarchs kept the Sabbath, and therefore we here cannot keep the Sabbath:
for our Sabbath in this country, begineth not at that point of time, just, when
the Sabbath begineth at Mount Sinay, the wilderness of Sin, or about Paradise:
lo their folly! God requires not a people to begine his 7th day Sabbath, when
other remote Nations begine theirs, but only the^, when by the light of the
Sun, which rules the day, God begineth to that people his Seventh day.

This point is further prosecuted in my former book, but enough and too much
has been here said to this idle argument: men have so little reverence of God,
and of his laws, and of his ancient ordinance the Sabbath, that they think
any thing is good enough, how idle and ridiculouse soever to throw against the
same; every frothie conception of an idle brain, is matter sound enough, to
buze and make a noise in peoples ears, against that sacred time, which God
himself has hallowed and sanctified; and honored amongst his morales.

SECT. VIII.
A 4th text is that Isa. 66.23. From month to month or from new Moon to new
Moon, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
says the Lord. Whence some collect, that the Sabbath here was made a Sign, of
the everlasting Sabbath in heaven: others would have it a Sign of the Church
under the new Testament, and of the Church triumphant in heaven both: and so it
being a sign, it is abolished.

Hereunto I answer 1. it is doubtful what may be the proper sense of this
text, it being a Prophecy, and delivered in Metaphorical and Allegorical
speeches, for instance, what shall be meant by these words, from new Moon to
new Moon? it is doubtful: wherefore this text being difficult, it is not fit
to have a controuercy decided by it; much less to have it used, to the
abolishing of any thing commanded in a moral law: it is not meet that the 4th
com. being uttered in plain and proper speeches, should be contradicted, and
countermanded, by a Prophecy which is uttered in difficult and improper
speeches, what is this but petitio principij?

2. I answer, by the word Sabbath here may be understood, not the weekly 7th day
and moral Sabbath, enjoined in the moral law, but some of the anniuersary
ceremonial Sabbathes, which never came into the moral law; as that Sabbath of
the Seventh year, or of the fiftith year, Leuit. 25.10.4. for since the text
speaks of a continual worshipping of God, under the new Testament, therefore
the Sabbath of a year is more fit to be a type of it, then the Sabbath of a
day, the 7th day.

3. I answer, the Sabbath day here mentioned, is not made a Sign, but rather
the other 6 days which go betwence Sabbath and Sabbath: for so the text
says, from Sabbath to Sabbath, that is, all the days between the Sabbaths,
shall all flesh come to worship etc. so then, it is not the Sabbath day that
was made a Sign, but those Six days which went between the Sabbathes.

SECT. IX.
A 5th text of theirs is Heb. 4.10.11. where there is mention of a Rest; and in
v. 9. there remains therefore a Rest unto the people of God. Here (say they)
the Sabbath or Rest, is made a type of the Rest in the Kingdom of heaven: now
all types are abolished as ceremonies.

Hereunto I answer 1. many think indeed that here is some great matter in
this text for their purpose, but it will prove upon better examination, nothing
so: for, if this Rest here mentioned be a type of heaven, it is so far off
from making any thing against the Sabbath day, as that it rather makes for it:
for, the nature of types is, to last in the Church, until the thing typed out
by them be come; thus all sacrifices lasted until Christ our pascall Lamb was
comne, and sacrificed for us: wherefore by like reason, if this Rest or Sabbath
here, be a type of the kingdom of heavens rest, then may this Rest and
Sabbath last in the Church, until we all come to a rest in the kingdom of
heaven: so then all the time we live on earth this Sabbath may be kept.

2. I answer, if the adversaries to this ordinance of Gods Sabbath, could tell
how to prove the Rest in the 4th com. a ceremony by this text, then hereby they
must wholly overthrow the 4th com: for, take away rest from labors, as an
abolished ceremony, and then may men labor in their caleings, every man in his
several family, and in his several field; and how then can there be any
public assemblies, of the people together in the Church, to keep a Sabbath?

3. I answer, suppose we that there was a type in the word Rest, yet since it
speaks not of a days rest, but of an everlasting rest, therefore may the
year of Iubile the 50th year, be made a type here, rather the^ the 7th day:
for there is greater similitude between the 50th year Leuit. 25.10.11.4.1. and
the everlasting rest, then between the 7th day Exodus: 20.8. and the everlasting
rest.

SECT. X.
A 6th text they use, which is Numb. 28.9.10. where it was commanded unto the
Jews, to offer ij lambs for a Sacrifice on the Sabbath day: whence they would
collect, that if the Sacrifices being a duty of the Sabbath, be abolished,
then is the Sabbath it self aboiished.

Hereunto I answer 1. if the Sabbath day be abolished, together with the
sacrificing of the ij lambs, then must for the same reason also be abolished,
rest from labors, and the moral worship of God, in the Sabbath: for, the
sacrificing of the lambs on the Sabbath day, has as much respect unto rest
from labor, and Gods worship, to declare them also to be ceremonies, as unto
the time, to declare it to be a ceremony and abolished.

2. I answer, that this law of offering ij lambs on the Sabbath day, it was
aduentitiouse, and only added to the 4th com. and to the Sabbath for a time;
and therefore no part of the 4th com. nor essential Sabbath duty: for it was
never wrote by God, in Tables of stone, but wrote by Moses, as were other
ceremonies, and all after the writing of the moral law was finished, and
therefore no part of the moral law, or law of the Sabbath.

3. I answer by denial of the consequence: for since the duties in the
Sabbath day were many, it follows not, that if some one of those duties be
abolished, the day must also be abolished, wherein it was done: for since the
other duties of Rest and Gods worship remain still, the time and day may
remain still for these duties sake.

SECT. XI.
7. They argue out of ij textes together, Ioh. 7.22.23. and Mat. 12.5. in which
textes it is written, that on the Sabbath day, they did circumcise a man^ and
on the Sabbath day, they did (...) the Sacrifices: now these were both
ceremonies, and the Sabbath day gave way unto them, wherefore the Sabbath day,
must be inferior to ceremonies, and so abolished with them.

I answer, by the like absurd reasoning, they may say, the 6th com. thou shall
not kill, is abolished also: for it gave way unto Abraham to slay his son
Isack, the like may be said of the 7th com. which gave way unto polygamie and a
divorce etc. when Christ gave way to be circumcised of a Priest, and to be
baptized of John, does it hence follow, that Christ was inferior to the
priest, or to John? or, that the strong are inferior to the weak; because
they give way unto the weak? Romans 15.1. or, that the Moral Law, is absolutely
abolished, because in some sense, it gave way unto the gospel?

2. I answer, that not only the day and time, to wit, the 7th day, gave way
unto circumcision and unto Sacrifice, but also the Rest and cessation from
labor, and the worship of God in the holy exercises of the Sabbath, both these
gave way as well as the time: wherefore, if this their argument be good for the
proving of the time to be a ceremony and abolished, then must it be as good
also, for the proving those duties of rest and holy exercises, to be ceremonies
and abolished: and then what is become of the 4th com? and where is the
morallity of Rest, and the performance of holy exercises, enjoined in the 4th
com? thus still you see, lik men of a maleuolent spirit, they hunte all the
Scriptures over, to find out something or other against Gods ordinance: and what
will be the issue of all their pains? why, even this; they will at last make
the moral law hereby, to be a morall-ceremoniall law: the 10 goolden linkes of
Gods law, shall have one link become partly goold partly lead: there shall be
now, a shadow and ceremony fansied to be in the heart of a moral law: in a
word, the issue will be, that now they may be partial in Gods Law, and serve
him by halues.

SECT. XII.
8thly, they argue from Ioh. 4.21. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in
this mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the father. In which words, Christ
foreteld of the destruction, and abolishing of the Temple, as the place of Gods
worship: now if the Temple which was the place of Gods worship be abolished, so
is also the Sabbath day, which was the time of Gods worship.

Hereunto I answer, there is not the like reason; for whilst the Curch of God,
was confined to the narrow limits, of the land of Canaan, all people might
possibly go up to Jerusalem, to worship in the Temple there 3 times a year,
Exo. 23.17. but when at Christ his death, the partition wale being broken
down, and the Church enlarged to Jew and Gentile, all the world over; the^ all
people could not possibly come up to the Temple at Jerusalem, to worship, 3.
times a year there; for their dwellings would be too far distant from
Jerusalem; and therefore it was necessary that the Temple should be no longer
the peculiar place, for Gods worship; but that now we might worship God, in
Spirit and truth every where: but there is not the same reason for the Sabbath
day, the time of Gods worship; for the Sabbath day, and 7th day from the
creation, is every where all a like, amongst Jews and Gentiles, all the world
over: the same 7th day any nation had at the creation, the same 7th day it has
still to this day; so as the 7th day, this time of Gods worship, it is not too
narrow for the bounds of the Church, as the Temple was; for it is as large as
the Church of God is or can be; and therefore there is no necessity that it should
be altered.

SECT. XIII.
9thly, they argue from all those textes of Scripture, whereby they use to
prove the Lords day, to be a Sabbath day, instituted by Christ: and thus they
argue thence, that the old Sabbath, is altered and changed, by the coming in of
the new Sabbath: and this is that which is so common in many men's mouths,
saying, why Christ abolished the old Sabbath, the Jewish Sabbath, by bringing
in of the Lords day.

Hereunto I answer, 1. by denial that Christ has set up any new Sabbath, as
has been shown 2 admit that Christ had set up the Lords day on the 8th day
for a new Sabbath; yet this does not hinder, but that the old Sabbath, on the
7th day, may stand still: for example, the Lord set up the moral weekly
Sabbath, on the 7th day, Exodus 20.8.9.10. afterward, he set up other
ceremonial yearly Sabbaths also Leuit. 23.32.38.39. now the coming in of these
other yearly Sabbaths, did not alter change, or abolish the weekly Sabbath, no,
here was an addition of Sabbaths, no alteration of Sabbaths. Just so it may be
here, suppose that Christ had set up a new Sabbath on the Lords day, then have
we ij. Sabbaths to keep weekly, the old Sabbath on the 7th day, and the new
Sabbath on the 8th day; so that the setting up of this Lords day Sabbath, is
but an addition of a new Sabbath unto the old Sabbath; like as when a man
buildes a new house by the side of an old house, this is but an addition of
house, to house; it is no alteration, or change; for the raiseing up of a new
house, by the side of an old house, is not the demolishing and throwing down
of the old house.

SECT. XIV.
10. they argue from all the new Testament, negatiuly; saying, of all the 10.
commandments, the 4th com. is no where mentioned, in all the new Testament;
neither is the keeping of the Sabbath day urged any where; wherefore the
Sabbath day is not of use to us under the gospel.

To this Anabaptisticall objection I answer, first see whither it tends:
namly unto Anabaptistry and prophannesse: for, if the old Sabbath be abolished
we shall have no Sabbath at all; for the Lords day can never be proved a
Sabbath. 2. It tends to the ruin of the Integrity and perfection of Gods
Law, so as we shall have but a lamed and imperfect Law. 3. It tends to make
Gods moral Law, to be a Moral ceremonial Law.

Further I answer, and will you acknowledge no more of the Old Testament, then
what is particularly mentioned, and repeated in the new Testament; then what
do we with the old Testament? it seems then, that not only the old Sabbath
is abolished, but also, the whole old Testament is abolished also, and now it
stands for a cipher, if this arguing be good, why did S. Paul send us to the
old Testament, saying, whatsoever is written a fore time, is written for our
lerning? Romans 15.4.

2. If you will acknowledge no more of the moral Law, then what is
particularly repeated in the new Testament, then what will become of the 10th
com. where is it repeated in every branch thereof particularly, in all the new
Testament? I know, it is found written, Thou shall not lust: but to come to
particulars, where is it written, thou shall not lust after, or covet thy
neighbors house, thy neigbours wife, his man servant, maid ox, ass, or any
thing that is thy neigbours? you may as well therefore conclude against sundry
things commanded in the 10th com. as agaimst the Sabbath commanded in the 4th
com. for neither of them are repeated, in the new Testament particularly in an
express commandment.

3. I will show you how the 4th com. is repeated in the new Testament
generally, and consequently the Sabbath is there urged also, in a general
manner: see Mat. 5.18. where Christ prophecieth of the lasting of the Moral
Law, and of every jot and title of it to the worlds end, now in these words is
the 4th com. and the 10th com. and every commandment, yea every jot and title
of every commandment contained: the like may be proved by Romans 3.31. Iam. 2.10.

It is to be observed, that of all the 10. commandments, there was the least
need, nay there was no need to repeat the 4th co^. nor to urge the
observation of the Sabbath day in particular: for in the days of Christ, and
his Apostles, both Jews and Gentiles were very zealouse for the observation of
the Sabbath day: for the Jews, they were more strict for the keeping of the
Sabbath, if I may so say, then Christ him self was; for Christ would allow the
plucking and rubbing ears of corn on the Sabbath day; and to carry a bed,
and the like; but the Jews could not endure it; what hot contentions did the
Jews move against Christ, and his Disciples, for doing some petty works on
the Sabbath day? yea, upon a time, they would have slain our Savior, for
healing of a sick man, upon the Sabbath day, Ioh. 5.16. what need then was
there, that Christ or his Apostles, should repeat the 4th com. to the Jews?
or urge them to keep the Sabbath day? since they were so hot for it already:
it was enough that the 4th com. and the observation of the Sabbath day should
be spoken of only in some general terms, as you have it, Mat. 5.18. Ia.
2.10. And for the Gentiles, there was no need to press them neither; for, they
coming into the Inheritance of the Jews, and joining in communion with the
believing Jews, did redely embrace the very ceremonies of the Jews, as
circumcision and the like; how much more then did they embrace the Morals with
the Jews, as the Sabbath day? as you may see, Act. 13.42.44. Act. 16.13. look
therefore wherein the Jews were very zealouse, it is to be thought, that the
believing Gentiles were zealouse also, therefore was it needless, that the
Sabbath day, or 4th com. of all the commandments, should be urged, and pressed
in the new Testament.

Nevertheless, something we find touching the Sabbath in particular, in the new
Testament, as Mat. 24.20. Pray (says our Savior) that your flight be not in
the winter, nor on the Sabbath day: In which words, Christ allows a
conscience to be made of the Sabbath day, for above 40. years after his death.
2. we find, that it was the constant practice of the Apostles, after Christ his
ascension, to observe and keep the Sabbath day: see for this purpose, Act.
13.14.42.44. Act. 16.13. Act. 17.2. and Act. 18.4. that the Apostles, did here
keep the Sabbath with the Jews, to bear with their weakness, is a
weakness in any to think so; they ca^ never prove it I am suer: when the
Apostles yielded obbedie^ce unto Magistrates, which was commanded in the 5th
com. and worshipped God, which was comanded in the first Table, may any
absurdly and growndlesly say, they did these things to bear with the weakness
of the Jews? and why then should any say, when the Apostles performed the
things commanded in the 4th com. that they did this for the weakness of the
Jews? and where as some say, the Apostles kept not the Sabbath in conscience
of the 4th com. they having no grownd for what they say, may as well say, when
they worshipped the true God, and obeyed the Magistrate, that they did not these
in conscience of the first, and 5th commandments. 3 In the new Testament, and
after the death of Christ, and abolition of ceremonies, we find the Sabbath day
kept, and in conscience of the 4th com. and the Holy Ghost commending it, by
rekoning it among, and ranking it with other commendable actiones, saying, they
rested the Sabbath day, according to the commandment, Luke 23.56.

SECT. XV.
11. They fetch an argument from Deuteronomy. 5.15. where the 4th com. is repeated,
and at the end of it there is added, as a reason, these words; For, remember
that thou wast a servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God
brought the out thence by a mighty hand: Therefore the Lord thy God commanded
thee to observe the Sabbath day. Hence they argue to this effect, that because
the Sabbath, does depend upon the deliverance out of Egypt; therefore since the
deliverance out of Egypt belongs not unto us, no more does the Sabbath day:
this text M. Chapel urged.

Hereunto I answer, it is true indede, that therefore God commanded the Jews in
this place, to observe the Sabbath day, because he brought them out of the Land
of bondage: but if hence men may gather, that we Christians are not bound unto
the Sabbath day, as M. Chapel did; then 1. it follows, that we now have no
Sabbath day by the 4th com, and so the 4th com. is vselesse as a cipher, or
abolished: for, this reason of Gods deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt, it
is added not to any part of the 4th com. only, but unto all the 4th com.
wholly: now in the 4th com. the adversaries of Gods truth, do distinguish
betwixt the time of the 7th day, and the duties of holiness and Rest: now the
time is that which they would feign trample down, as for the duty of an holy
Rest, this they would have still moral: but if this their argument be good,
then have they hereby at once overthrown, not only the time, but also the
duties of holiness and Rest, in the time; and so quite nullified the 4th com.
the reason hereof is plain: for, that argument of Gods deliverance of Israel
out of Egypt, which they bring to abolish one part of the com. to wit, the
time, it does also abolish the other part of the com. to wit, the holy rest:
for this reason brought by God, does equally appertain to the whole 4th com.
and to all the parts there of, to the time, and to the Rest in the time, as
every eye may see, that but reads the text.

Nay the reason which M. Chapel urges, has special reference unto the duty
of r es^; for the rest is plainly mentioned in these words. That thy man
servant and, thy maid may Rest as well as thou. Deuteronomy. 5.14. what a case is M.
Chapel in now? for in attempting to abolish Gods sacred time, he has also
abolished the duty of Rest in and with the time. He has not only made the
time a ceremony, but also he has made, the duty of Rest a ceremony: what is
become of your Rest M. Chapel, which you vale moral? have not your self made
it a Ceremony?

2. If this their argument be good, then have they not alone rased the time in
the 4th com. and defaced also the 4th com. it self, but also which is more
absurd, they have defaced the whole moral law, even all the 10 com. so then,
now we are not bound by the first com. to have the true God to be our God;
because this com and so all the rest, do depend upon that reason which the 4th
com. depends on, to wit, that God brought the Jews out of Egypt: for this
very reason, is by Moses, prefixed to the first com. and so has influence upon
all the rest; saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Exodus 20.2. wherefore if they abolish
one ^ote or title of the law by this reason, they must abolish the whole law.

3. We must distinguish betwixt the Sabbaths observation, and its institution:
the reasons of the Sabbaths institution are these 1. because God himself
rested on it, at the Creation. Genes. 2.3, Exodus 20.11. 2dly, that it might be
for the benefit and commodety of man, both in body and in soul, Deuteronomy. 5.14.
Mark. 2.27. The Sabbath day was made for man says the text. Now the reasons of
the Sabbaths observation, may be many, even all the mercies of God, these
should move to obedience Deuteronomy. 28.47.48. and so this particular deliverance out
of Egypt, might be a special motive to keep the Sabbath day Deuteronomy. 6.21.24? so
then, albeit the Sabbaths observation, depended in part, upon this mercy of
Gods deliverance of them out of Egypt; yet its institution depended not thereon.

Finally, the passover was instituted, upon occation of Gods spareing the
first borne of the Isralites Exodus 12 now this reason and occation, could not
concern the gentile proselites, and yet were the Proselites obseruers thereof;
Exodus 12.48. and why then may not we observe the Sabbath, allthough this reason
concerns not us?

Behold then by these answers, and the weakness of this, and the foregoing
arguments, if these Patrones of the Lords day, and adversaries to Gods
Sabbathes, do not voluntarily and wilfully set themselves against Gods Sacred,
and Sanctified Sabbaths; it appears manifestly, so as they cannot deny it:
for what force of reason, or consequence, does enforce them to raise an
argument out of this text against the Lords Sabbaths? If no force moves them
hereunto, then it must be merely of their own wills and corrupted minds,
which desire to trample on Gods ordinance.

SECT. XVI.
12. They argue from Mat. 12. where Christ defending his Disciples, for
plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, does rekone up, compare, and
join the Sabbath day, with ceremonies, as with the Showbreade, and Sacrifices,
and the like; which comparisons and arguments (says Walaeus on the 4th com. p.
21.) were of no force, if the Sabbath day, were not to be rekoned of as a
ceremony in some sort.

Hereunto I answer. 1. why should not Christ's argument have force, albeit the
Sabbath day were rekoned of as a moral? for at that time when Christ made that
argument, the ceremonies were all in force, as well as morales; and all bound
men to obedience, as well as morales; and the breach of a ceremonial was a
sin, as well as the breach of a moral: wherefore Christ might very well fetch
an argument from a ceremonial unto a moral; showing that if it were no sin
to violate a ceremonial law, in a cale of necessity, no more was it a sin to
break the moral Sabbath, by rubbing ears of corn on the Sabbath day, in a
case of necessity: the argument could not howsoever but be good unto the Jews,
for they put no difference betwixt morals and ceremoniales, as we do; they
tyethed minte, and annyse, and left the weighty matters of the law: and
therefore Christ his argument might have, and had force enough.

2. I answer, Christ does not only rekone the Sabbath with ceremonies, and
fetch arguments unto it from ceremonies, but also from morales: for example see
Mat. 12.6. I will have mercy and not Sacrifice: where you see our Savior,
fetching an argument to the Sabbath day, from the work of mercy, showing that
some work may be done on the Sabbath day, in case of necessity, because God
will have mercy exercised toward men; now mercy is no ceremony, but a moral:
the like you have Mat. 12.11, 12. where Christ fetches an argument to the
Sabbath, from the helpeing of a beast out of a pit: now to save the life of a
beast is no ceremony, but moral. Thus it appears, that Christ fetched
arguments to the Sabbath, from ceremonials and morals both, making no
difference in this respect; wherefore it cannot be concluded, that the Sabbath
is either moral, or ceremonial from this argument

3. Whereas he says the Sabbath is to be rekoned among the ceremonies (in
some sort) all this may be, and yet the morallity of the Sabbath nothing
infringed: for in this sort it may be like them, that as Sacrifice and
ceremonies were to give place, in a case of necessity, so must the Sabbath day
do: thus then the Sabbath may be like unto ceremonies, and yet far unlike to
them in duration, and ceremonial typicalnesse; see still, how witty and
willing men are, to invent something against Gods ordinances sure I am, men
should employ their Talents, rather to defend Gods Title, then to defeat him of
it.

SECT. XVII.
13. They fetch an argument from Romans 14.5. This man esteems one day above an
other day, and an other man counts every day alike. And from Gal: 4.10. ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years etc. In the former text the
Apostle approves of them that esteem every day alike: and here the 7th day
Sabbath, is abolished: In the latter text, the Apostle sharply reproves the
Galatianes, for observing of days, and times: and here again the 7th day
Sabbath is abolished: and in both textes, all difference of days, appointed in
the law, is taken away.

To these textes I answer, first by showing them whither this objection
tends: namly to Anabaptistry: for they hold from these textes, that there is
no no difference of days a mong Christianes: and take away the old Sabbath
day, and it must be so indeed. 2. Such as manage these textes against Gods
Sabbaths, they are guilty of horrible partiality: for they can find
distinctiones, to save the other 9 commandementes, and half of the 4th com.
from such as would abolish the law, saying, the law is abolished for
justification but not for observation; and yet the same men, will neither
find, nor receive any distinction, that so the other part of the 4th com. may
be also preserved viz: the Sabbath day. These textes, Mat. 5.34. Iam. 5.12.
bear as strongly against an oath before a Magistrate, as does this text Romans
14.5. against the 7th day Sabbath, and yet you can find ways to preserve an
oath still in the Common wealth, and can you not find a way to preserve the
Sabbath day still in the Church? see your partiallity, and be ashamed.

3. A third absurdety they fale into, is this, that they so expound one text of
holy Scripture, as it contradicts an other? yea so as it contradicts a
part of the 10 commandments: now this is against the common received rule:
for no text must be expounded, contrary unto the Analogy of faith, the Lords
prayer, and the 10 commandments: but here they expound these ij textes Romans
14.5. and Gal. 4.10. quite contrary unto one of the tenn commandementes: for
the 4th com. makes the 7th day differ from all others, but they so expound
these textes, as that the 7th day must not differ from the rest of the working
days: wherefore this their exposition, directed against the 7th day Sabbath,
it is erroniouse, and to be rejected: for these absurdeties, with others that
might be added, an other sense of these ij textes, is to be sought.

First therefore (that we may reconcile Scripture with Scripture, that is, the
seeming contradictio^ betwixt these textes in the new Testament Romans 14.5.
Galat. 4.10. and this text in the moral law of the old Testament Exodus
20.8.10.) we may expound these textes, of such days, as were in use among
these Romans, and Galatianes, whilst they were Idolaters, before their
conversion to the faith: for as they had meat sacrificed unto Idols 1 Cor.
8.4. so no doubt had they days dedicated unto Idols: now as some of the
believing Gentiles would eat of those meats sacrificed unto Idols, and
others refused and would not eat; so some might keep those days, thinking it
fit to serve God on those dedicated days, wherein they were wont to serve
their Idols; but others thought it unfit etc: This the context gives some
light unto, see Gal. 4.8.9.10. where the Apostle puts the Galatians in mind
of the time when they knew not God, and did service unto them which are not
Gods, and then he tells them, that now they knew God v. 9. and then he adds
his reproof saying, how turn ye again unto beggarly rudiments etc. ye
observe days etc: by which orderly placing of these things, and by his minding
them of the time wherein they were Idolaters, and hereupon speaks of their
turning again, this gives us to understand, that he speaks of their turning
again unto something they used in the time of their Idolatry, when they knew
not God: and so the days and times which he reproved them for observing, might
be the days dedicated unto Idols: this sense M. Perkines favors, in his
Cases of conscience, Chapt. 16. Sect. 3. page 108. and thus Walaeus on the 4th
com. page 93. answers to these textes, as spoken of the Gentiles white and
black, days clean and unclean meats. The like may be said of the days
spoken of in Romans 14.5. for, it is like that the days here mentioned, were of
the same kind, with the meats, spoken of in the same chapter v. 2.3.14. now it
is like that these meats here spoken of were meats sacrificed unto Idols, as
1. Cor. 10.27. of which, some believers would eat, others being weak would
not eat: and I do the rather think these might be meats sacrificed unto
Idols, then meats unclean by the Leuiticall law, because the Apostle
speaks of eating of herbs Romans 14.2. Now I remember no law, about eating or
not eating of herbs: it is therefore more probable, that this eating of herbs
by the weak, was an heathenish superstition, and of an indifferent nature, as
they used it: and so, as the meats were meats sacrificed to Idols, so these
days were days dedicated to Idols.

Secondly, if this sense pleases not, but it will be rather, judged that these
meats and days, were such as were enjoined by the Law to Gods people the
Jews; why then, I distinguish of days: there were days Moral, and days
ceremonial: or days which God ranked among his Morales, or days that were
excluded the hedge and pale of the Morals, and never came into the Tables of
stone: the Moral days, were the weekly Sabbaths on the 7th day; the
ceremonial days, were the yearly Sabbaths, their new Moons, and other
festival days: now the Apostle in both these textes, may be understood to
speak against these ceremonial yearly Sabbath days, new moons, and
festival days: thus the Apostle may be understood, and yet no wrong or
violence at all offered unto these textes; and by this means these texts are
so expounded, as they do not contradict nor overthrow any other text of
Scripture, or portion of the 10. commandments, nor do we rune into those
absurdeties, which they of the contrary opinion do rush upon.

Behold how easy a matter it is, to reconsile scripture with scripture, the 4th
com. with other textes seeming to contradict it, to such as have eyes in their
heads, and affectiones in their hearts to do it: but when they, these
adversaries to Gods truth, come to touch these and the like textes, with their
polluted hands, and impure minds, by way of exposition and argumentation, they
are so far off from reconciling of the holy scriptures, as they will make no
work of it, but to set Scripture by the ears, as they say; text against text,
making one text as fire, the other as water; the one iusleing and shouldering
out of place the other; the one text commands the 7th day, the other they
make to forbid the 7th day: and yet all this hurly burley, and opposition of
text against text, is made needlessly, and causelessly; no thing moving
thereunto, but the corrupt minds of such as are enemies to this ancient
ordinance of Gods Sabbath: for suer I am, there is nothing in the textes
themselves, to move them and compel them hereunto: it seems therefore, that
these men had rather be against God, then for God; and rather throw down his
ordinance, then uphold and maintain it, thus you see, none of these textes
hitherto alleged, will prove, that the time, and 7th day commanded in the 4th
com. is abolished.

SECT. XVIII.
14. They fetch an argument against the 7th day, out of Ex. 31.13. Keep ye my
Sabbaths; for it is a sign between me and you in your generationes, that ye
may know that I the Lord do sa^ctifie you. This text M. Chapel urges, and
so does every man: now because they put no small confidence in this text, for
the abolishing of the Lords Sabbaths, I must therefore take the more pains in
answering it: for they have no more but this text and an other, and if they
fail in these two textes, as they have done in all the former, then have they
no culler or cloak left them, for maintaining the abolishing of this ancient
ordinance of Gods Sabbaths; and then this fearful sin of a weekly
transgression of the 4th com. and violation of the Lords Sabbaths, will lay
heavy upon the consciences of the patrones of the Lords day: for these are
they, who do teach stiffly that the 7th day Sabbath is abolished, and do
warrant the people, that they may with a safe conscience, violate the Saturday
Sabbath: and behold, these are their grownds for it which we have already
answered, and are in answering: But before I come to lay down their arguments
out of this text, and my answers; I will in the first place show how they are
condemned by their own Authors, who do apply this text, to the Sabbath in
the 4th com. and would make it a sign and so abolished: and then I will show
also, how absurd they are to make attempt, to prove any thing out of this text,
against the Lords Sabbaths.

It is well known, I might here allege the Testimonies of many, both godly
and learned, who writing on the doctrine of the Sabbath day in the 4th com. have
defended it, against this text of Exodus 31.13. showing that it is not so a
sign, as it can be therefore a ceremony, and abolished: of which number is M.
Greenham on the Sabbath, and M. Richard Byfield, page 88.99. of late come
forth: Doctor Bownde, and Doctor Ames, and others cited in the first Section
of this Chapter: with diverse others, whose words and names I spare, as well
known unto such as are seen into this controuercy: for nothing seemed more
absurd unto them, then to think God should put a ceremonial sign and
shadow, into the body of the 4th com, and heart of the Moral Law: all which
writers do condemn those who would make the Sabbath day, a sign, and so
abolished by this text Exodus 31.13.

For matter of absurdety. 1. it appears in this, that by bringing this text
Exodus 31. against the moral and weekly Sabbath, commanded in the moral Law,
hereby they pick quarrels with God, and his ordinances: for, this text does
not say, that because the Sabbath is a sign, thereby you shall know it for
certain, that it shall be abolished: no, but because the Sabbath is here caled
a sign, therefore hence they will needs collect, that it must be abolished:
and for furtherance of this wicked collection, all their wites and invention
are set on work, partly so to expound this text, as it may not be understood of
the yearly Sabbaths by no means, least so the moral and weekly Sabbath should
be preserved from ruin and destruction; and therefore they will expound it of
this moral and weekly Sabbath, that so it may be abolished, and its light
extinguished: partly how to prove all signs to be abolished, and the like: and
this is done to this evil end also, that so they may bring the Sabbath of the
Lord, within the compass of an abolished sign, and so quite raze it out of
the moral Law, and root it out of the Church: thus you see, how they seek
out for, and study to find matter against Gods ordinance; and all this
needlessly and causlesly, save that they bear a grudge against the Lords
Sabbaths, and would have them profaned: for what other reason can they render
of this their fact? suer I am, this text Exodus 31. does not compel them to say
any thing against the 7th day Sabbaths: for they are faint to use their best
wits, to invent something in it, that may make against Gods Sabbath, and is
not this then to pick a quarrel with Gods ordinance?

S. Paul says, Love thinks no evil 1. Cor. 13.5. and suer I am, these men
think no good: for did they love Gods Sabbaths, and Gods commandments for
themselves, unless, some spirit of slumber for the present has possessed
them, they could not but show their love to Gods 4th com. as well as to the
rest of the commandments, and manifest their love also in time of trial, by
thinking good, and that which might make for the preservation of Gods Sabbaths,
and 4th com. intirly, rather then by thinking evil of them, to do some act
against them: how can men think worse of any thing, then to labor its
abolition, ruin, and destruction? yea, and that too, when they need not so
do, having no cause moving them thereunto, save a corrupted mind: this is a
malitiouse and wicked spirit, that will study the overthrow of an ancient
ordinance of God, yea an ordinance as ancient as any in the Church of God what
soever, and labor to undermine it causlesly: I wish M. Chapel, and his other
9. confederate Ministers would think of this point: at the latter end, after I
had handled the 4th com. I gave sundry effectual reasones to move us to the
love of Gods Law; and is this the love that men bear to it, to seek out how
and which way they may overthrow for ever some part of it?

And what will be the issue of all this? why even this: hereby Gods Moral Law,
shall become a morall-ceremoniall Law: Gods Law shall be maimed, and denied its
integrity and perfection: yea a godly prayer of our Church, shall become a
babbling before God: and those most ancient Churches, which lived next the
Apostles, and are therefore accounted the most pure Churches, shall be
condemned, in that they religiously observed this Sabbath day.

A second absurdety, that these men who are partial in Gods Law, do fale
into, by sharpening their wites, to fetch an argument out of this text, Exodus
31.13. against the 7th day Sabbath, is this; that hereby they do contradict
them selves most foulely; for, they teach and maintain, that the Rest in the
4th com. is moral and perpetual: and yet for all that, they will bring an
argument, out of this text, which does plainly ouethrow this Rest, as well as
any thing else: for, the Hebrew word Sabbath, signifies Rest: now then, if the
Sabbath here mentioned, Exodus 31.13. be a sign, and so abolished, so must also
the Rest signified by the word Sabbath, be a sign also, and abolished too: and
yet for all this, will they have this Rest moral and perpetual? will they
have this Sabbath or Rest, both moral and ceremonial? what a gross
contradiction is this?

Yet further, it is to be noted, that whereas the co^trouercy betwixt us, is
about the time and day only; for they would abolish the 7th day, this text
which they bring does not so much as mention the word day in Exodus 31.13.14.
for it mentions only the word Sabbaths: whenc I gather, that though the word
day be implied, yet because it is not mentioned, therefore if any thing be made
a sign of Christ, it is rather the Sabbaths, then the day: wherefore, if the
Sabbaths be a sign of Christ, which signify Restes, then are the Restes,
ceremonies, and abolished signs of Christ: and so the Rest in the 4th com.
which they hold to be moral, by this text they make to be ceremonial: so we
have a moral ceremonial Rest, a contraicted Rest.

A third absurdety that these me^ fale into, who will have God served by halues
and by peecemeale, is this; that whilst they make a gloriouse show to the
people, that they stand for the 4th com. as well as for the rest of the
commandments, they do notwithstanding so gelde it, and pick out the life and
soul of it, as they leave it but like a dead corpse; for, by their
consequences, (such as they are) they would out of this text, Exodus 31.13. make
the Sabbath day, a sign, and so a ceremony, and so then abolished: well then,
be it so; hence then I argue, If that Sabbath day, commanded in the 4th com. be
an abolished sign and ceremony, the^ is the 4th com. nullified, and like a
dead corpse; for, it stands for a cipher, and commands just nothing: for
the clearing of this point, let us see the 4th com. thus it is written,
Remember the (Sabbath day) to sanctifi it, Exodus 20.8. let any man now take out
of these words, in this commandment, these ij. words (Sabbath day) and then
let him tell me, what it is which the 4th com. commands: you may as well take
away these ij. words (Sabbath day) which they say are a sign, and ceremony,
and abolished; and in stead of them, put so many ciphers in the commandment,
as there be letters in these ij. words, that is tenn, and then we may write
this command. thus, Remember the (0000000000) to sanctify it, Exodus 20.8.

I remember our Savior Christ has a similitude, wherein he likeneth such
hearers as hear, but do not, unto a foolish man, who builded his house upon
the sand, Mat. 7.26. but I now tell you of builders, and builders in Gods
house too, who are more foolish then this foolish man, for he built, though not
upon a rock, yet he built upon the Sand, so as his house might stand until
the floodes came and the winds blewe; but these me^, would build Gods 4th com.
upon worse then sand, for they build it upon nothing (0000000000) and make it
to command nothing 0000000000. all this must needs be true against them unless
they can show us, that there were two Sabbath days spoken of in the 4th com.
one upon the 7th day, and an other upon the 8th day; and this they cannot do,
seeing the Lord spoke in the singular number, in his 4th com. saying, Remember
the Sabbath day, and not in the plural number, Remember the Sabbaths, or
Remember the Sabbath days: now forasmuch as they have robbed the 4th com. of
one Sabbath day, there must now be no Sabbath day in the 4th com. unless they
cane by help of their magnified reason and consequences prove unto us, that
God commanded ij: Sabbaths in his 4th com.

A fourth absurdety that these men fale into (who are adversaries to the
Integrity and perfection of Gods Law, by rejecting his Sabbaths) is this; that
they set Scriptures together by the ears, text against text, and God against
himself: for whereas it is a rule, that no exposition, and by like reason, no
consequence or collectio^, is to be given of and from any text, which is
contrary unto other plain texts of Scripture, as for example, the 10.
commandments, and the analogy of faith, etc. yet these adversaries of Gods
truth, have given such expositiones of, and consequences from this one text,
Exodus 31.13. as whereby they do utterly nullify something, plainly and
expressly commanded in the 10 commandments, as for example the 7th day Sabbaths.

First then their absurdety appears, in sweruing from the common received and
approved rule: and secondly in making one portion of holy write, to contradict
an other; yea to contradict an ordinance, commanded in the Moral Law: and,
which is yet worst of all, they make their own idle brained consequences,
fetched out of this text, which never were in it, to contradict an express
commandment of the great Gods: so that now, man's saucy reason, and friuolouse
collections shall confront a plain commandment of his Gods: yea, it shall sit
in equal throne with God: I, and which is worse, it shall take the right hand
of God also: for their consequences do more avail with men, then Gods
express commandment; and their collections, shall be a Counter mand, to Gods
commandment: yea, they shall take the upper hand of it, and shoulder it qui e
out of place, as we see to our hearts astonis^ment it does, when we look upon
the ruined 7th day Sabbath: on times! oh manners! oh wicked manners of these
sinefull times! some men do so pride themselves in their wit, and bear
themselves so strongly upon their lerning, as by these they dare make an
assault upon God, and Syllogistically crush to nothing, what God once
established in his Church, with terrible thunder and lightening: were this done
by some profane person, it were not so much to be thought on; but the Authors
and stife Agents in this most horrible fact, are such as draw nere unto God,
and called puritan Ministers: oh that they showed more purity then this comes
to: it grieueth me, thus to blow up the Skirtes of my bethren, but I have none
other way left unto me now but only this one, to discover them unto the world,
that they may be ashamed of their folly; and to prevent men in following them;
else they will lead the world after them, so mad they are in their dotages,
and so immovable: the Prophet David has a passage which will bear me out in
this, fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, o Lord. Psalm.
83.16.

I might for these reasons and absurdeties of theirs, reject their arguments,
as unworthy any answer at all; for they deserve none: yet as Solomon says,
Least they be wise in their own conceit Pro. 26.5 and think there is worth
and excellency in their arguments, I will misespend some time, and waste some
paper and ink, to show them their vanity: and so I come to their arguments. I
conceive they may argue out of this text Exodus 31.13. these ways; the first
whereof is this, All Signs are abolished: But the 7th day Sabbath, is a Sign,
Exodus 31.13. Therefore the 7th day Sabbath is abolished.

To this argument I answer, as for the minor, it shall be answered, in the
after passages: but as for their Major, I deny it: for, they can not prove it:
and I give instances to the contrary, showing that all Signs are not
abolished: for example, the Rain bow, God made it a Sign that he would never
more destroy the world by a floode of waters Genes. 9.12.13. nevertheless the
Rain bow is not abolished; for we see it still in the clouds, in rainey
weather. For other signs still remaining see the proof of the next Major, and
see these Scriptures To. 3.25. Phil. 1.28. 2. These. 1.5. and thus much for
answer to this argument.

An other way whereby they may argue out of this textis this, All Signs of
Christ are abolished. But the 7th day Sabbath, is a Sign of Christ: Therefore
the 7th day Sabbath is abolished. But I deny this wholl argument, both Major
and Minor.

For the Major, I deny that all signs of Christ are abolished: For, they can
not prove it: and because there are sundry signs of Christ remaining still:
for example, the Bridgroome, was made a type or sign of Christ Ioh. 3.29.
Revel. 29.9. and as we read every where in the book of the Canticles: so the
Shepherd Ioh. 10.11. was made a sign of Christ; and yet these relationes
remain still: we have Bridgroomes still, and Shepherds still. 2. certain
meats legally unclean, as the Hare, the Conie, and the Swine Leuit. 11.5.6.7.
they were made a sign of Christ Act. 10.14.15. Col. 2.16. and, yet for all
that, all Hares, Conies, and Swine, are not abolished, no nor as touching
abstenence from them, as in a fast. 3. The Rock in the wilderness, was made a
sign of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. and yet the Rock is not vanished out of its
place, because it was once a sign of Christ, nor is it become vselesse, but
that men may wash and cattle drink at it to this day. 4. I might add, that
circumcision, being a Sacrament, it was a sign of Christ Romans 4.11. and yet
those infa^ts, circumcised a little before Christ his death, their circumcision
was not gathered as the Apostle speaks, or nullified and abolished,
immediately after Christ's death, nor in all the time of their lives after, see
1. Cor. 7.18. by all which instances, it is manifest that all signs of Christ,
are not abolished.

I come now to the Minor; and here I deny, that the 7th day Sabbath, was at any
time a Sign of Christ considered as incarnate: their text Exodus 31.13. says
indeed; that the Sabbath was a sign; but it does not say, that the Sabbath was
a Sign of Christ: indeed the text speaks of Jehovah, God the father under
this word Lord, but it is altogether silent of God the Son, Christ Jesus,
considered as mediator and incarnate: wherefore this text makes nothing for
their purpose; and thus is this second argument answered.

Nevertheless, some reply and urge this text further for the proving of this
Minor, saying, that God sanctifyeth us, by Christ considered as incarnate, as
is plain Ephesians. 1.3. Hereunto I answer behold! what shufling is here, is this
the way to prove by necessary consequence, when they are forced from one text,
to fly unto an other text? were there that necessary consequence (where of
they talk) in their argument out of this text, they should not need to fly
unto an other; is not this to pick aquarrell against Gods ordinance; and
voluntarily without any necessity, to seek out for matter against God? but all
this will nothing avail them: For, 1. I have some exceptiones against the text
in my former book p. 138. 2dly, admit that God does sanctify by Christ, yet it
follows not; that what souer is made a sign of God the Father, and of God
the Son considered as God, it must also be a sign, of God the Son
considered as redeemer and incarnate: so great is the difference betwixt
Christ considered as God coequall with the father, and considered as Godman
incarnate, as that which being a sign of God the father, though it must also
be a sign of God the Son considered as God coequall to the father, yet it is
not necessary that it should be a sign also of God the Son considered as
God-man and incarnate.

Further more, I will give three answers more unto this argument: the first is
by distinguishing of Signs; if the Sabbath here be a sign of Christ, then
there are some signs of Christ, which are ever present with the thing
signified, as in this text Exodus 31.13. where the text speaks in the present
tense, do, it is a Sign, that I the Lord do sanctify you: where you see,
this is a Sign of something as present: and there be some Signs of Christ,
which are far distant from the thing signified, where the sign was present,
but the thing signified was future; of this kind was circumcision, sacrifices,
meats and drinks, new Moons, and yearly Sabbathes: now the former sense is
it which they must embrace, by this text Exodus 31.13. and in this sense, I
deny, that such signs of Christ are abolished: for albeit it were so, that of
the latter kind of signs, where the sign and the thing signified were far
assunder in time, that at the presence of the thing signified the sign
vanished; yet is there not like reason in the former kind of signs; for then
the Sabbath day, which was made a sign of Christ (as they say) then presently
sanctifying the Isralites, should have vanished and have been abolished, even
in those days wherein Moses wrote this text Exodus 31.13. for then at that
time, was the Sign and the thing Signified present together. It is a sign
that I the Lord do sanctify you, says the text.

My second answer is this, whereas they build so strongly upon it, that the
Sabbath day, was here made a sign of Gods, and so also of Christ's
sanctification, as if sanctification were a maine thing signified, and typed
out, by the Sabbath, this I deny: the Sabbath was not made a sign of
Sanctification: but only a sign of God the Lord. For the word Sanctify in
this text, is used as a description of God, not as the antitype or thing
signified: the antitype or thing signified is only the Lord: as if the text
were thus read, My Sabbath is a sign, that ye may know, that I am the Lord:
or, that I am the Lord, who do sanctify you: For confirmation of this see
Ezekiel. 20.20.12. where the same matter is repeated thus, Sanctify my Sabbathes,
and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the
Lord your God.

Hereby you may see, that the thing signified by the Sabbath, was the Lord our
God; for God would give his people a sign, whereby they might know him, that
sanctifies them, from all false Gods: now if the word sanctify had been the
thing signified and typed, then that word would not have been omitted here, as
being the chief thing intended: Thus you see, the Sabbath was no sign of
Sanctification; and yet upon this supposition, they build all this their
argument.

My third answer, is by distinguishing of the word sanctify: it may be taken 1.
For that inherent grace of holiness which is wrought in the hearts of the
Elect, by the holy Ghost; or 2. For an external privilege, whereby a Nation or
people are severed from other Nations and people, to participate of the outward
ordinances of God, as the word and Sacraments etc. Romans 3.1.2. Romans 9.4. Deuteronomy.
4.8.34. Exodus 19.10. now admit the Sabbath was made a sign of Sanctification,
then may the word Sanctify in the text, be understood of this latter kind of
Sanctification only: now this Sanctification cannot have reference unto
Christ, considered as incarnate; for if it has, then the text must rune thus:
keep ye my Sabbaths; for they are a Sign, that I the Lord (Christ) do
sanctify you: Now the Lord Christ considered as incarnate, could not be said
to sanctify those Isralites in Moses his time: that is, to take the people of
the Jews then from other Nationes, and bestow upon them those holy Privileges
of his Oracles, circumcision, and the rest: for, he was not incarnate of 2000
years after that.

A third way whereby I suppose they may argue out of this text Exodus 31.13. is
this: All signs, whose things signified or antitypes be come wear forthwith
abolished: But the 7th day Sabbath, was a sign, whose antitype is long since
come: Therefore, the 7th day Sabbath, was forthwith (at the death of Christ)
abolished. For the truth of the Major, this they think to prove, partly by
that text Col. 2.16.17. and partly from that common received axiom, that when
the body is come, the shadow or sign vanishes.

Hereunto I answer, 1. for the text Col. 2.16.17. that this text will not help
them; for our question now is about signs: But this text says nothing of
Signs, for it speaks only of Shadows: now there may be great difference
made betwixt a sign and a Shadow; For, every Shadow may be a sign, but
every Sign is not a Shadow: we have the word Shadow used but thrice in the
new Testament, as in Col. 2.17. and in Heb. 8.5. and in Heb. 10.1. and it is
ever used to signify a thing to come futurlie, as the Apostle speaks
plainly, Which are a shadow, of things, to come Col. 2.17. And again, The law
having a shadow of good things to come. Heb. 10.1. But now, Signs are used to
signify things past Exodus 31.17. Romans 4.11. and sometimes things to come, Genes.
17.8.11. and sometime to signify a thing present as Exodus 31.13. wherefore
seeing there is so great a difference, betwixt a sign and a Shadow, we must
not confound them; the Apostle would abolish no more but such signs only, as
did signify things to come: and the Sabbath in Exodus 31.13. is made only a
sign of a thing present.

Have these men an indifferent respect with David unto all Gods commandments
Psalm. 119.6. (think you) when they belabour it so studiously, to overthrow a
part of them? and may not these men be said to love Gods law from the heart,
and to be true friends unto it, when they use all their wit and lerning, to
overthrow an ordinance of Gods, commanded expressly in that law? and what will
be the issue of this their thanklesse work? why this, the bright shining law
of God, which is a light unto our feet Psalm. 119.105. it shall by this their
great study have a dark shadow, or ceremony, placed in the very heart of it:
yea, it shall be made a very monstre among Gods laws: For of all Gods laws
from Genesis to Malachie there is not one like it: such a hotch potch they have
made it: it shall be partly fish parley flesh, partly white partly blake, partly
moral partly ceremonial, partly abolished partly entaining: may they not be
in love with this their work, to behold the ugliness of it?

2. I answer to their axiom, and so also to their Major, by denial that all
signs must forthwith vanish, when the antitype and thing signified is come;
and I give these instances to the contrary. 1. The Passover Lamb, it was a
Sign that God would spare the Israelites at midnight, when he came to destroy
the firstborne of the Egyptians; now this Passover, it was eaten in the
Evening before this midnight, so that it was a sign of a deliverance to come,
as namly in the night after: now midnight being come, and the Angel bauing
Passed-ouer, and spared the firstborne of the Israelites, here then the
antitype or thing signified by the Passover, was come: and yet for all that,
this Sign of the Passover, it was not forthwith abolished; for it lasted many
hundredth of years after, even till the last Supper of Christ: see Exodus
12.6.13.29.25. Luke 22.15. yea, it remained still as a sign of their
deliverance which was past, come and gone long before, as you may see Exodus
12.26.27. lo here, the sign remained, long after the thing signified was come
and gone: for, the fathers were to instruct their Children, when they were in
Canaan, that this Passover was kept in remembrance of Gods deliverance from
the destroying Angel, whilst they were in Egypt, which deliverance was long
before this Passover, and this Passover long after the deliverance signified
by it: And why may not the Sabbath last also in the Church (if it were a
sign) long after Christ's coming in the flesh, even till his last coming unto
judgment? I can see nothing to the contrary, but that it pleases not our
Ministers to have it so: indeed they talk much that the Sabbath it was a
sign, the Sabbath it was a sign, and now the body Christ being come, the
sign must of necessity be gone, but here they see the contrary, the sign of
the Passover it lasted in the Church, many hundredth of years after the thing
signified by it was come.

2. Circumcision, it was a sign, that God would give the Land of Canaan, to
the Israelites Genes. 17.4.8.10. well then, Canaan was the thing signified by
the sign of circumcision: now when the Israelites were come into the Land of
Canaan, then they had received the thing signified; but did not this sign of
circumcision, last in the Church, many hundredth years after that? yis, even to
the coming of Christ; for he was circumcised: and why may, not the Sabbath (if
a sign) remain still in the Church after Christ's death? if they say, that
circumcision was a sign of something else besides the Land of Canaan; so say I
was the Sabbath; for it was a sign also of the creation, or of Gods rest then
Exodus 31.17.

A 3d instance: The Lord gave Moses a sign or token, that he had sent him to
deliver the Isralites; now the sign was this, that after he had brought the
Israelites out of Egypt, both he and they should serve God upon the Mount
Horeb, Exodus 3.1.12. where you see, that the sign, was a good while after that
the thing signified was come: for the thing signified was this, that Moses
should go unto Pharaoh and also bring the children of Israel out of Egypt,
Exodus 3.11. now after he had been with Pharaoh, and after he had carried the
Isralites out of Egypt, then was the sign not abolished, but to be used: An
other instance of like kind, we find in Isa. 7.14. you may see it at your
leisure: by all which instances this one thing appears, that a sign may
remain, long after the thing signified by it be come, and thus is their 3d
argument answered.

Oh, how do these men love the Law of God? who thus dispute against it? and
what would be the issue, if they could obtain their desires? why this, Gods
Law should become A Monstre: and we Protestants should become Anabaptists,
and profane persons, kepeing no Sabbaths at all, for besides this Sabbath,
they shall never be able to show us any other.

Having answered to all that they can say out of this text, and to every
argument severally, now I come to give iij. answers more, which may serve to
every of their 3. arguments: but first I desire my adversaries, either to
embrace these my answers, and distinctiones, whereby I would preserve Gods
Sabbaths, or else to study such others, as may please them better; or else they
bewray abominable partiallity to Gods Law and truth: for they cane preserve
nine commandments, and half of the 4th, and why not the other half, and so
all the tenn entirely?

First, whereas they take it for granted, that the Sabbath here mentioned, Exo.
31.13. which they say is made a sign of sanctification, that it is the 7th day
Sabbath, mentioned in the 4th com. this I deny: there are ii. sorts of
Sabbaths, the weekly 7th day Sabbath; and the yearly Sabbaths: now this their
text, may be understood of the Annual and yearly Sabbaths, which never came
into the Moral Law: if therefore I shall make it appear, that this text of
theirs, may be understood of the Annual and ceremonial Sabbathes, and not of
the moral, weekly Sabbath; then is all their labor lost, and all their 3
arguments friuolouse; for all their arguments have argued only against the
yearly ceremonial Sabbaths, the which no man will defend; for this purpose
therefore, note these things:

1. It is very improbable, that all those verses v. 13.14.15.16.17. which are 5
in number, should treat but of one kind of Sabbath, to wit, the 7th day
Sabbath, as may appear by the very reading of them over, unless you would say
here were a Tautologie, over and over again with the same thing. Wherefore it
is more probable, that in this long and large discourse of Sabbaths, Moses
speaks of ij sorts of Sabbaths, of the yearly Sabbaths in Exodus 31.13.14.
and of the weekly Sabbath in Exodus 31.15.16.17. some light is added hereunto,
if we do but observe Moses; for he uses often in speaking of the Sabbath, to
mention both kinds before he has done, that is, both the anniuersary Sabbaths,
and the weekly Sabbath, as you may see in Exodus 23.12.14.15.16. and in Exodus
34.21.22.23. and in Leuit. 23.3.4.24.32.38.39.

A 2d reason may be this; the Lord had given Moses in charge to build the
Tabernacle, Exodus 25.8.9. the making whereof, would cost great and long
labor; now least the people should think, that because the work about this
Tabernacle, was an holy work, perteyning unto God, for his service and
worship, that therefore they might put no difference of days, whilst they were
in this work, but that they might work upon the Sabbaths also, whither weekly
Sabbaths, or yearly Sabbaths, as well as on the 6 working days; to prevent
this, Notwithstanding (says the Lord) my Sabbaths ye shall keep etc. Exodus
31.13. etc. as if the Lord had said, albeit I will that you make me A
Tabernacle etc. Yet I will not, that you work about it on my Sabbath days;
now because the people, were as prone, upon this occation of building the
Tabernacle, to work upon the yearly Sabbaths when their turn came, as upon
the weekly Sabbath, on the 7th day, therefore it is meet for us to think, that
God would as well make provision here, for his yearly Sabbaths, as for the
weekly Sabbath: and that therefore in this text Exodus 31. Moses spoke of the
yearly Sabbaths, as in v. 13.14. and of the weekly Sabbath, as in v. 15.16.17.
that so the people appointed to work about the Tabcrnacle, as Bezaleel and
Aboliab and the rest, they might not work, either upon the yearly or weekly
Sabbath: but were all these 5 verses spent only about one kind of Sabbath, as
the weekly Sabbath only, then had not God made provision here for his yearly
Sabbaths, which cannot be likly.

A third reason may be this, that in these few verses v. 13.14.15.16.17. there
is threatened the punishment of death, to those that do any work on the
Sabbath, two several times, and in two several verses, as in v. 14. whosoever
works therein, the same person shall be cut of from his people: and in v. 15.
whosoever does any work in the Sabbath day, shall dye the death. Now it is not
likly, that one and the same punishment should be repeated, and twice together
threatened, for the breach of one kind of Sabbath day: and therefore to avoid
a Tautologie and needless repetition, it is most likly that here Moses spoke
of two kinds of Sabbaths, of the yearly Sabbath in v. 13. and so threatened
death to the transgressoures of them in v. 14. and of the weekly Sabbath in v.
15. and so threatened death also to the transgressors of it, in the latter end
of the same v. 15.

A 4th reason may be this, that the Sabbaths in v. 13.14. are made a sign of
Sanctification or Redemption by Christ, as they say; but the Sabbath in v.
15.16.17. is kept in memory of the Creation, and is a sign of Creation, to
remember, that in 6 days the Lord made beauen and earth, and rested on the 7th
day, as you have it in v. 17. now these diverse signs do intimate, that here
may be diverse Sabbaths spoken of in these verses: for, Sanctification and
Redemption may be applied to the one kind, and Creation to the other kind of
Sabbaths: for, it is nothing probable, that Redemption and Creation, should be
both applied unto one kind only.

Thus you see what liklihod there is, that the Sabbaths mentioned in v. 13.
upon which they grownd all their arguments, are not the 7th day Sabbath, which
is our question; but that they are the yearly Sabbaths, which never came into
the moral law, and about which we make no question at all: wherefore, unless
they cane take away these answers, and prove unto v. that by the word Sabbathes
in v. 13. is meante the weekly 7. day Sabbath, they are besides the question;
all their labor has been in vain, and all being granted them which this text
cane afford them, it will make only for the abolishing of the yearly Sabbaths,
but nothing for the abolishing of the 7th day Sabbath: for, suppose it granted,
that the yearly Sabbaths, in v. 13.14. were signs of Sanctification, and
Redemption by Christ, and therefore abolished; yet it will not follow, that the
weekly Sabbath in v. 15.16.17. which was kept in memory of the Creation, and
was a sign, that God created the world v. 17. must also be abolished, and so
much for the foremost of my general answers.

My other general answer to this text, Exodus 31.13 and te all their arguments
hence deduced is this; suppose we that be the word Sabbathes in v. 13. is
meante the 7th day Sabbath, yet it follows not that because it is made a
sign, or a sign of Christ, that therefore the Sabbath day must be abolished:
for, we must know, that the sign of the Sabbath may vanish, and yet the
Sabbath may remain still: for the clearing of this, consider with me, that the
Sabbath may be considered abosolutly or relatiuly: absolutely without any sign,
or relatiuly with its sign: like as an Iuey bush or the like sign hung up at
a Vineteners house; you may consider its absolute nature, as it is no sign,
but as it is an Iuey bush only; and you may consider it relatiuely, as it it
is a sign that wine is to be sold at that house; and these two may be parted;
for take down the Iuey bush, and then it is no longer a sign, it has lost
its relative nature, but yet it is a bush still, so it retains its absolute
nature: and thus the Sabbath, it has an absolute nature, and it has a
relative and signifificatiue nature, now these two may be parted; for it may
leese its relative nature as a sign, and yet retain its absolute nature as a
Sabbath, just as in the similitude of the Iuey bush.

But here happily some may ask of me, what it is which I cale the absolute
nature of the Sabbath, and what the relative nature: To whom I answer, I count
that to be the absolute nature of the Sabbath, which is not considered
typically relatiuly, and significatiuly, even all, that is to be considered in
the Sabbath, over and besides its typical and significatiue nature, that is its
absolute inature: more particularly, the absolute nature of the Sabbath, it is an
holy rest, upon the 7th day, because God rested upon the 7th day, and all this,
as commanded by God: in which absolute nature, are comprised these particulars,
1. a rest from labors, 2. a performance of sacred and holy actiones. 3. that
both these be done on the 7th day: 4. that these three be done in imitation of
God, because God rested on the same day, and blessed it, and sanctified it,
Exodus 20.11. fifthly, that all these be so done, because God commanded them,
Exodus 20.8.10. these 5. things are the absolute nature of the Sabbath: now for
the relative nature of the Sabbath, it is whatsoever is added unto these 5.
things significatiuly, to sign and signify any thing; thus the Sabbath was
made a sign of the Creation and of Gods Rest on the 7th day, at the worlds
creation, Exodus 31.17. and thus was the Sabbath made a sign also of the
Redemption, or of Christ's sanctification of us, as they would have it out, of
Exodus 31.13. which being supposed, the Sabbath had a double relative nature,
the one to signify the Creation as past; the other to signify the
sanctification of Christ as to come: (which double sign being considered, my
insueing instances, might be a little more distinctly carried, but as they are,
it may suffice to give you a taste) and thus you have the absolute nature of
the Sabbath declared, and also its relative or typical nature.

I come now to show, that the Sabbath may leese its typical nature, and yet it
may retain its absolute nature: and first I shall give you instances, where
things had a double type or sign, and the one of them vanisheing,
nevertheless the thing was observed still, with a respect unto the other sign
that remained.

The first instance for this purpose, shall be that Sacrament of Circumcision,
considered as used, after the children of Israel were come into the land of
Canaan: and here we are to note, that circumcision typed out two things; the
one was, that God would give unto the Israelites the land of Canaan, Genes.
17.8. the other was, that God would make Abraham a father of many nationes,
Genesis 17.7.4. and that God would be God unto Abraham and to his seed after him,
Genes. 17.7. now after that the Isralits the posterity of Abraham were come
into the land of Canaan, and did inherit it, then was one of these things typed
out by circumcision fulfilled, and then was circumcision to loose its relative
and significatiue nature, as typing out Canaan to come, for it was come, and
they were in it; and yet this sign of circumcision remained still in the
Church, for many hundredth years, and that as having reference unto the other
thing typed out by it, to wit, that God would be God unto the seed of Abraham,
and that he should be a father of many nationes: thus you see, the action of
circumcision remained in the Church still, when one of the antitypes was come:
and why then may not the duty of the Sabbath day, remain still in the Church,
after one of its antitypes be come; so long as an other of its antitypes is
still in force? admit, the Sabbath was a sign of Christ to come, and so
therefore it be no more kept as a type of Christ to come; yet may it still be
kept in the Church, and so for ever, as a type or sign of the Creation: for
our ages, and so all posterity unto the worlds end, may as well keep the
Sabbath as a sign of the Creation, as the Jews and people of God did at any
time: Why may not the Sabbath be retained, for one of its antitypes sake, as
well as circumcision was retained for one of its antitypes sake?

A second instance for this purpose, shall be that other Sacrament, the
Passover, considered as it was used after the Angel had smitten dead the first
borne of the Egyptians, and passed by the housen of the Isralites: and here we
are to note as before, that the Passover was a type or sign of two things,
the one was, that God would pass over the housen of the children of Isreal's,
and spare them, when at midnight he would destroy others. Exodus, 12.11.12.13.
The other was, that it was a sign of Christ our Passover. 1. Cor. 5.7. Now
after that the Angel had destroyed the first borne of the Egyptians, and
spared the Isralites, then one of the types of the Passover was fulfilled;
nevertheless, the Passover was retained in the Church for many hundredth
years after; and this was because of the other type which was not then
fulfilled:

2 The Passover cold not be a sign, unto those Proselytes who joined to the
Jewish religion, when they were in Canaan, of their deliverance from the
destroying Angel, who smote all the first borne of Egypt; and yet it remained
as a sign to them, of Christ their Passover to come: these Proselite Gentiles
left the Jews, in that which was proper and peculiar unto the Jew, that is, to
use the Passover as it was a sign of deliverance obtained by the Jews only
in Egypt, and joined with them in the use of the Passover as it was a sign of
Christ the common Passover for Jew and Gentile both; see Exodus 12.25.26.27.
Now suppose the Sabbath was a sign of Christ, and therefore abolished in that
respect, when Christ came; yet why may it not remain still, in that other
respect, as it is a sign of the Creation? if it was so with the Passover, it
may be so with the Sabbath day: and, if those Proselites who were Gentiles, did
observe the Passover, neglecting such things therein as were peculiar unto the
Jews, embracing such things only as were common to the Jews and Gentiles
both, why may not we Gentiles, lay aside the typical quality of the Sabbath,
wherein it was peculiar unto the Jews, and embrace the Sabbath in other
respects; and as a sign of the Creation, wherein it was common both to Jew
and to Gentile?

I come now to give you instances of signs, where all the typical and
relative nature is abolished, and the absolute nature remaining still. 1. The
Rock in the wilderness, its absolute nature was to be of a stony substance
etc. And its use, for men to vvash and beasts to drink at: Now this Rock was
made a sign of Christ: For, they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed
them, and the Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.4. so this Rock was a Sacramental
sign: now when Christ was come (if not long before) this Rock ceased to be
a sign of Christ any longer, and so it lost its relative and significatiue
nature; but yet it ceased not to be a Rock still, and of a stony substance
etc. And to be useful for men to vvash and beasts to drink at, it kept its
absolute nature: and so, if the Sabbath be no longer a sign, yet it may be a
Sabbath still, and all those 5 duties which are the absolute nature,
forementioned, they may remain still: suppose therefore that they could prove,
that all signs are abolished, or that all signs of Christ are abolished, yet
it would never follow, that the Sabbath is abolished, any further forth then
as it was a sign; it could leese but its relative and typical quality, like
as the Iuey bush does, when it is pulled down; then it is no longer a sign,
but a bush it is still; and so a Sabbath it is still; for its absolute nature
may remain still, to wit, 1. Its rest 2. its holy performa^ces, 3. On the 7th
day. 4. Because God did these things, on the same day. 5. Because God commanded
them.

A 2d instance may be this, the Bridgroome was made a type of Christ, as we
read every where in the book of the Canticles, and Ioh. 3.29. Revel. 19.7.
so the Shepherd was made a sign of Christ Ioh. 10.11. and yet the death of
Christ, has not abolished these relationes; for we have Bridgroomes and
Shepherds still.

A 3d instance may be that of forbidden meats: we read of certain meats
forbidden to be eaten by the law, as unclean Leuit. 11.5.6.7. as the Cony, the
Hare, and the Swine: now these were made signs and Shadows of Christ, Col.
2.16.17. But Christ being come, these beasts ceased to be unclean, and to be
signs of Christ any longer Act. 10.14.15.12.13. Col. 2.16.17. so, then they
lost their significatiue nature, but yet the same beasts lost not their
absolute nature so soon as Christ was come; for these beasts were the same in
nature and kind the which they were before, the Hare was an Hare still, the
Cony a Cony still etc. And why may it not be so with the Sabbath day also? it
may be a Sabbath, though not a typical Sabbath: or, the flesh of the Hare,
Cony, and Swine, may still be refrained, in a political respect, as in Lent
time; or in a Religiouse respect, as in a fasting day: and why then may not the
Sabbath day be abolished as a sign? and yet remain still, as a sacred time
for Gods worship? for the forbearance of these meats, was as much a type, as
ever was the Sabbath day, and yet we may and do forbear them still: why then
I say may we not still retain the Sabbath, albeit it was a type? may we not
as well observe the Sabbath now, which was a type, as forbear those meats now,
which forbearance was a type?

Here I must crave leave of my reader, to make a short digression, by way of
defense of this last instance; you see I cale the Swine a shadow of Christ:
this phrase is exceedingly distasted of some: by name M. Chapel, undertaking
to confute some things in my former book publikly, took hold of this for one,
and in reproachful manner said, this Author makes the Swine a sign of Christ,
a Swineish argument, quoth he: which check was received by his auditory with
great applause, insomuch as it has been runge in mine ears, and cast in my
teeth sundry times, by diverse men, what a swineish argument, I used: now for
the clearing of my self, see my former book on the Sabbath, at page 146.
where I did affirm the swine to be a Shadow of Christ, and I proved it there
by Leuit. 11.5.6.7. Col. 2.16.17. now that it is so, this text of S. Paul's will
bear me out; for he says that meat was a shadow of things to come, but the
body is of Christ: where S. Paul makes meats to be shadows of Christ, as
well as holy days, new moons, and Sabbaths, as you may see in the text: now
what meats, were shadows, but the prohibited meats, forbidden to be eaten
under the Law? and what meats find you in the Law forbidden to be eaten, but
these the Hare, the Cony, and the Swine, as you may read Leuit. 11.5.6.7. so
then, these forbidden meats, the Hare, the Cony, and the Swine, were these
which Paul counts to be shadows of Christ: why then M. Chapel, may not I
have leave to say, the Swine was a shadow of Christ, as well as S. Paul? and
why should you make me a scorn, and a bye word, unto your auditory, and
disdained in the minds of honest and well minded people? for ought I can see
you might as well have said the same words reprochfully of S. Paul, as of me,
taxing him to have used a Swinish argument: This your error M. Chapel is by
so much the greater, in that when you uttered these words, you preached out of
this very text, the which I used in my book, to prove that the Swine amongst
the rest, was a Shadow of Christ, to wit, Col. 2.16.17. now had you but well
and rightly understood your own text out of which you then preached, you would
never have accused me for vseing of a Swinish argument. for it is your very
text, that bears me out in caling the Hare, Cony, and Swine shadows of
Christ: and so I return whence I came.

A 4th instance shall be that which my adversaries will assent unto: for they
say the Rest in the Sabbath day, is a type of the reft in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Heb. 4. and a sign of Christ, Exodus 31.13. Col. 2.16. and yet they
hold the same Rest to be moral and still in force: and why then may not the
7th day, be abolished as a type, and yet remain as a sacred time for Gods
worship, and as a time to exercise mercy in toward poor servants, by
releasing them from their labors wherein they have been spent the 6. days
before? why I say may not the time remain still, as it is an help and a
furtherance unto those moral duties of rest, and the worship of God? it is to
be wondered at, to see men go about to reject and abolish such things as were,
are in themselves, and may be helps and furtherances of Moral duties.

A 5th instance shall be the feast of Pentecost or Whit-Sunday, which was a
Jewish feast day or Sabbath day, as you may read in Leuit. 23.15.16.21. and it
was also a sign, or Shadow of Christ to come, as you may see, Col. 2.16.17.
and so it was abolished: nevertheless, we Christians do keep this feast day,
and sanctify it as a Sabbath day once every year; for as Peter did preach upon
the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.1.14. so does our Church upon Whit-sunday; only
we have cast of that shaddowish respect which it had amongst the Jews, of
being a sign of Christ to come: wherefore, by the constant practice of our
Church, it appears, that a Jewish ceremonial day, may be retained in our
Church, so be the ceremonies of it be rejected: if then pentecost, a
ceremonial feast or Sabbath day, may be retained in a Christian Church, why
may not the 7th day Sabbath also be retained amongst us? yea if it could be
proved a sign of Christ to come: thus by this instance you see, that a Sabbath
day may remain, after its significatiue nature or quality be vanished.

Thus I have finished my two general answers, the former, showing that the 7th
day Sabbath, is not spoken of in their text, Exodus 31.13. but only the yearly
Sabbaths: the latter, showing that if the 7th day Sabbath were spoken of in
their text, Ex. 31.13 yet no more is abolished of this Sabbath, but its
significatiue and typical quality; but the absolute nature of the Sabbath,
consisting of those 5 things foreme^tioned, may still remain, to wit, 1. rest,
2. holy duties, 3. on the 7th day, 4. because God rested on this 7th day, and
sanctified it. 5. because God commanded these things.

My third general answer (that I may defend the moral Law, with every thing
therein commanded unto a jot and title; and shune those foul and many
absurdeties, which my adversaries rune into) is this: the Sabbath may be
considered naturally and orginally, and so I deny it was any sign: for the
sign was not put into the 4th com. much less to its first institution, Genesis
2.3. or it may be considered accidentally and aduentitiously, and so it became
a sign after its institution, as in Exodus 31.13. so as the sign, was but
accidental and extrinsecall to the Sabbath; it being added to it many hundredth
years after its prime institution; and I know not how long after its
promulgation on Mount Sinay: in this latter sense I yield it abolished, but in
the former, I deny it: for as the Rock after it lost its typicalnesse, it
still remained a Rock; so may the Sabbath; after Christ had abolished its
typicalnesse, which was affixed to it, it may still remain a Sabbath, as it
was originally at its prime institution; it may remain still, as a Sacred time
for Gods worship, and as a fit time to refresh man and beast in, spent with
former 6 days labor.

Thus much for answer unto this their text, Exodus 31.13. wherein we have been
the larger, because they stand so much upon it, as one of their strongest
fortes and suerest houldes, but how weak you see: there remains now but one
text more of theirs to answer, and it is a maine and chief one also, it
follows in this next section.

SECT. XIX.
15thly, they fetch an other and a maine argument against Gods 7th day Sabbath,
out of this text, Col. 2.16.17. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and
drink, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days: which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ. But
before I come to show you their arguments out of this text, against the
Sabbath, let me first show you how absurdly they behave themselves, who would
fetch arguments out of this text, against Gods Sabbath.

The first absurdety is this, that they do voluntarily and wilfully, without
any constraint, set themselves in opposition, to an ancient ordinance of Gods
in his Church: for this purpose, it is to be observed, not only that the
Saturday, or 7th day Sabbath, was an ordinance of Gods, and in high honor in
his Church; but also that it was one of the most ancient ordinances, that ever
God established in his Church: for this Sabbath day, it did not only obtain
like privileges, and honor equally, with the residue of the Morales,
delivered upon Mount Sinay; but also, it pleased God to Sanctify this day at
the very Creation of the world, as we read Genes. 2.3. So God blessed the 7th
day and sanctified it: God did sanctify this day, and rested in it, making him
self our president, beginning this holy Sabbath in his own person: now for any
man to oppose any of Gods ordinances, wilfully and not compelled thereunto is
an evil, but to oppose so ancient an ordinance as is this Sabbath, is a far
greater evil: Baptism, and the Lords supper, are ancient ordinances in the
Church, yet are they nothing so ancient, as be the Lords Sabbaths: whereby you
see, that these patrones of nouelty are enemies to antiquity; I mean, those
who defend the Lords day for a Sabbath, which is a nouill thing, they are
enemies to the Sabbath day, which is a most ancient thing: were it some
nouelty, or new vpstart point in religion, which I speak for, it were
tolerable that they should oppose it; but being so ancient an ordinance in
Gods Church, as that it is backed with the greatest antiquity; here to oppose,
and that causlesly, is most absurd.

Were they compelled hereunto or constrained, by the vrgeing necessity of some
portion of Scripture in the new Testament; or more specially, were they
compelled hereunto by this one text of Scripture Col. 2.16.17. or by any thing
therein contained, they might be excused: but seeing this text, as well as all
others, may be so expounded, as it shall not any whit oppose this ancient
Sabbath and ordinance of God; and seeing there is no collection or consequence,
that is thence deduced against this ordinance of Gods, which necessarily must
follow from this text, therefore they are altogether inexcusable that oppose
it, and make it so odiouse before the people of God.

Wherefore their absurdety appears, partly in this, that they will oppose an
ordinance of Gods; yea one of his most ancient ordinances established in his
Church: and partly in this, that they will set themselves against the same,
voluntarily and wilfully, for no cause at all, but because they will do so.

The 2d absurdety that these do fale into, by forceing this text Col. 2.16.17.
and (so any other text also) against the Sabbath day, commanded in the moral
law, is this, that hereby they are manifest enemies to the Law of God, I say,
to the moral law of God Exodus 20. written by the finger of God Exodus 31.^8.
they bewray their enmity in this, that they are enemies to the Integrity and
perfection thereof: they fear they should rune into Iudaisme if they should
yield obedience to al^ the tenn commandments: for whereas the text says, God
spak all these w^^ds, Exo. 20.1. yet these men will reject some of these words,
namly, all those words which concern the 7th day Sabbath: thus they will not
have as the Prophet David speaks Psalm. 119.6. a respect unto all Gods
commandments. But they will serve God by halues, and by pieces; they will take
and leave where and what they list in Gods law: for they will not embrace and
maintain the whole law of God, as God delivered it; but some pieces of it,
they acknowledge, other pieces they renownce; and thus they deliver to the
people but a part of Gods will, and but a broken, partial, and imperfect law:
if one part of Gods law be good for us Christians, is not an other part of it
good also? if the greatest part of Gods law be good for us, is not the whole
law, and are not all the parts of it good for us also? deprive us not of the
Integrity and perfection of Gods law.

A 3d absurdety, committed by these is this; that they foulely contradict
themselves, by bringing this text Col. 2.16.17. against the Lords Sabbath day:
for, whereas the question betwixt them and me, is solely about the time and
day, to wit, the 7th day, this their text which they bring against this day, it
does not so much as mention they word day at all; for the word days in the
text Col. 2.16.17. it is not in the original, as you may perceive by this,
that our translatoures have written it in smaler letters; the original has
nothing but the word Sabbaths: whereby I gather, that rather the Sabbaths, then
the word day, and the time, are made a shadow of Christ: now the Hebrew word
Sabbath, signifying a Rest from labors, as they will have it: if any thing
therefore be a shadow of Christ, it is this Rest from labors: now they all
teach and maintain, that the Rest in the 4th com. is moral and perpetual,
and yet behold here, by this their text Col. 2.16.17. and by their argument out
of it, they dispute against this Sabbath or Rest; for they make it a shadow of
Christ, and so abolished; and so this Rest, it shall be moral and ceremonial;
perpetual, and yet long since abolished: it shall be moral, by their Doctrine
in the pulpit, and ceremonial by their arguments in Disputation: is not this a
gross contradiction? for this text Col. 2.16. if it makes any thing against
the 7th day Sabbath, it makes as much (if not more) against the word Sabbath
and Rest, as it does against the day and time, which is the thing in question.

And this I make plain by this reason also; they say, that by the word
Sabbaths in Col. 2.16.17. is meant all Sabbaths, both the weekly and the yearly
Sabbaths; which if it be so, then look how largly the word Sabbaths, is
expounded touching the yearly Sabbaths, so largly this word Sabbaths must be
expounded touching the weekly Sabbath. for this one word (Sabbathes) cannot be
taken in ij diverse senses: now this word, in reference unto the yearly
Sabbaths, does includ both the time and day, and also the Rest and duties to
be performed in that time and day, and so all are abolished as Shadows, both
the Rest, and the day: just so it must be touching the weekly Sabbath, if it be
meant in the word Sabbaths, then both the day and the Rest of the day also,
must be included, and so day, and Rest, must be abolished, as shadows both?

A 4th absurdety committed by these enemies to the perfection and integrity of
Gods law, is this, that by bringing this text Col. 2.16.17. (or any other text
or textes) against the Sabbath day, commanded in the 4th com. hereby they do
nullify and utterly bring to naught the 4th com. for, whereas the 4th com.
commands the Sanctification of the Sabbath day; these men will by this text,
prove this Sabbath day, to be a Shadow of Christ, and so therefore to be
abolished: whence it must follow, that by their doeings the Sabbath day,
commanded in the 4th com, is abolished as a shadow, which being abolished the
4th com. is nullified, and made as a cipher, it commanding just nothing at all:
for, if these words (Sabbath day) be a shadow and abolished, then these 10
letters which are in these 2 words, may in sense be put away as abolished, and
in the room of them put 10 ciphers: then whereas the 4th com. runeth thus;
Remember the (Sabbath day) to sanctify it: why now according to these patrones
of the Lords day, it may rune thus, Remember the 0000000000, to sanctify it:
and thus they have nullified this commandment; for you see it now commands
just nothing; unless they can tell how to prove unto us, by the virtue of
their consequences, that God commanded two Sabbath days in his 4th com. the
one upon the 7th day, the other upon the 8th day: suer I am, the Jews never
knew but one, and Christ never kept but one, and God spoke not in his 4th com.
of Sabbaths, in the plural number, but of a Sabbath, or the Sabbath, in the
singular number, as but of one singularly, and this one Sabbath, they have made
a Shadow, and so abolished.

Finally, whereas all Divines affirm, that some time or day in general for
Gods worship, is moral and in force by the 4th com. if this text Col. 2.16. be
urged against the time and day, to wit, the Sabbath day, in the 4th com. then
this absurdety also follows, that there is not some time or day for Gods
worship, moral by the 4th com. the reason is, because look what was commanded
in the 4th com. under these words (Sabbath day) the selfsame is a bolished by
Col. 2.16. under the same words (Sabbath days) if this text be set against
that: for these words must have as large a sense in Col. 2.16. as they have in
Exodus 20.8. and so we shall have no time moral in the 4th com. for Gods
worship, which is contrary to all Divines.

A 5th absurdety, which these enemies of the perfection and integrity of Gods
law, do fale into, by producing this text Col. 2.16.17, (or any other text)
against the 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the moral law, is this, that they
do set Scripture together by the ears, as they say; they make by their
collectiones and by their consequences, one text of Scripture, to be at mortal
wars with an other; and one text quite to overthrow and ouerturne an other;
for example, the 4th com. it commands the Sanctification of the 7th day
Sabbath, in most plain and express words, and yet for all that, they dare
attempt to gather collectiones and consequences, out of an other text of
Scripture, to wit, Col. 2.16.17. whereby they will abolish and nullify utterly
that very thing, which was commanded in the 4th com. in express terms: is not
this, to set Scripture at variance with Scripture, and one text against an
other?

It is the part of all Ministers to love Gods law, and to their best to defend
it, as the Title and Charter of their Sovereign Lord God: and for this end,
they should labor and study, to reconcile such texts in the new Testament, as
seem to oppose any thing commanded in the moral law: but these are far from
reconciling, who study to set the Law and Gospel at odds: I appeal unto
their consciences, if ever they faithful attempted, to reconcile these two
textes Exodus 20.8.10. and Col. 2.16.

Nay which is yet worse, not this Scripture Col. 2.16.17. is set in opposition,
against this Scripture Exodus 20.8. but their collectiones and consequences,
fetched out of this Scripture Col. 2.16.17. by manes shallow reason, is set in
highest opposition against this other Scripture Exodus 20.8. But for a bare
collection and consequence, framed by man's poreblind and feeble reason, that
this should put to perpetual silence, an express commandment, a portion of
Gods written word and will; yea ouerturne an ordinance of Gods, commanded in
his moral law; then this, there can be no greater absurdety, no greater
impiety: for this is to set man's reason, and consequence, in equal Throne with
the most Highest: for man's reason shall be a Countermand, to Gods express
commandment: yea, it shall take the upper hand of God; for it shall be more
forcible, to ouerturne Gods commandment, then is Gods commandment forcible,
to gainesay man's reason and consequence: if this be not blasphemy against the
most Highest, let all men judge: and whither the Pope himself, has more
highly advanced his Authority, above the Scriptures, then do these men their
consequences, let all men judge.

A 6th absurdety is, that these men can find distinctions to preserve the
Moral Law from being abolished, but none to defend Gods Sabbath commanded in
that law. 2. Let Anabaptists bring these textes Exodus 31.13. Romans 14.5. Gal.
4.10. and Col. 2.16. profanly, against Sabbaths in the Moral Law, and these my
adversaries, will find answers and distinctions, to maintain some day in
general, as moral in the 4th com: yea, to preserve the Lords day, in the 4th
com. which God never put there; and yet will find, nor admit of any
distinctions, framed, to preserve the Lords 7th day Sabbath, put there by God
himself: they have an heart to defend their own inventiones, which they have
thrust into the 4th com. but none at all, to defend what they find in the same
com. placed there by God himself: they had rather overthrow it, then defend it.

A 7th absurdety which these do fale into, by bringing this text Col. 2.16.17.
(or any other) is this, that they dispute against Principles and Maxims, now
who so will dispute against Principles, he deserves to be answered with
clubes, rather then with reason: as all Arts have their Principles, so has
Divinity her Principles also; now the 10 commandments, are as 10 foundation
stones, whereupon a great part of the gloriouse building of Christian
Religion does stand; for all Religion stands upon Law and Gospel; faieth and
works; and these 10 commandments, concern that part of Christian Religion,
which stands in works, to wit, in works of Piety and Charity. Now to
dispute against any ordinance commanded in these 10 commandments, is to make a
bold and unchristian attempt, to remove and pull away, one of these
foundation stones; or at least if not a whole stone, yet half, or some piece
and part of a stone: and is it not a rash, bold, and aduenturouse part of
any man, to go about to alter, remove, take away, or diminish a foundation
stone? yea, such a stone as God himselue the master builder has laid, and not
man? will they not endure it in Schools, to hear a man dispute against the
Principles of Art, and shall it be borne, that men shall dispute against the
Principles in Divinity? No man may there, contradict the Axioms of Aristotle,
and shall men here, be suffered to contradict the commandment of God?
Aristotle, and his axioms, are more honored in Schools, then God, and his
Laws, are among Divines: where fore the Schools shall rise up in judgment
and condemn Pulpites: for they honor Aristotle's precepts, more then these
do Gods praeceptes; after I had handled the 4th com. I added sundry effectual
reasones to move us unto the love of Gods law; and is this all the love men
will show to it, to seek out all manner of ways, how and which way they may
for ever overthrow some part of it? where is love to God? where is any love to
his laws for themselves sake?

Furthermore, all other Scriptures, especially if they be such as need
exposition, they are to be brought unto the 10 commandments, as to the common
standard; and Rule of trial, so as no exposition may be admitted of, which any
way crosses the 10 commandments; this is a common received Rule in the
exposition of Scripture: but if these new Sabbatharians may have their will,
the 10 commandments shall be no longer a standing Rule, for the expounding of
other darkesome Scriptures; this star, which guides us in our navigations to
heaven ward, shall be plucked out of the firmament: for the Rule it self shall
be questioned, whither all the parts of it be a Cano^, Rule and touchston of
trial, or not: for they will question the 4th precept in this Rule: and thus
we shall have no certainty, in the Scriptures, no Judge in scriptures
darkesome; we must I think err long, to the Pope again, to be a judge in
Scriptures doubtful: nay these me^ do not only doubt of some part of this
Rule, but they dare dispute against some part of it, in right down terms,
and they will bring Scripture also against it, as Col. 2.16.17. but as the
Devil brought Scripture against Christ, Mat. 4.6.

But since they will question some part of this rule, why may we not by as
good leave, question the whole rule, even all the 10. commandments? I can with
Libertines and Anabaptists, bring Scripture too against all the 10. com. as
well as they can against the 4th com. see Ephesians. 2.15 where it is said, that
Christ has abrogated, the Law of commandments: whence a man might argue, if
he would be so absurd and profane, against not only something in the 10
commandments, but also against every thing in the 10 com. again, Hebr. 7.12.
Jf the priesthod be changed, then of necessity must there be a chang of the
Law: whence a man might also say something against the whole Law, and bring
Scripture to back him too: but forasmuch as the Law, that is, the Law Moral,
is an excellent Rule of our lives, and a notable Rule, for the expounding of
other hard and darksome places of Scripture, therefore we will not be so absurd
as to question it, least so we fale to question every thing, and leave no
certainty in the Scriptures, nor any thing that migt be a Rule and a light unto
other Scriptures, and in conclusion, be driven to the Pope again, to determine
of the sense of Scripture for us. So much for this their absurdety, that they
deny Maxims in Religion, and Principles in Divinity, who deny the 7th day
Sabbath, and dispute against it,

One absurdety more is, that they who allege this text, Col. 2.16. or any
other, against the Sabbath day mentioned in the Moral Law, they herein shake
hands, and join with lawless Libertines and Anabaptists, who do by these
textes, oppose Gods Sabbaths, and so live profanly without any Sabbath, and
conscience of this divine ordinance: and shall we Protestants, shake hands
with Anabaptists, in ouerturning Gods Sabbaths? God forbid.

Thus having shown, the diverse and sundry gross absurdeties, which they rune
into, who bring this text, Col. 2.16.17. (or any other) against the Sabbath day
written in the Moral Law; now in the next place, let us see their arguments
out of this text, that so we may answer them; their arguments are two: the one
of them is this, that by the word Sabbaths, or Sabbath days, in this text,
Col. 2.16. is meant all Sabbath days, universally and generally; and so if all
Sabbath days be abolished, then the 7th day Sabbath also is abolished.

Hereunto I answer, there is a Law Moral, and a Law ceremonial, now when we
read, that Christ has abolished the Law of commandments, Ephe. 2.15. and
again, that Of necessity there must be a chang of the Law, Heb. 7.12. if any
man should press these textes to the abolishing of all laws, we would answer
them by distinguishing of Laws, into Moral and ceremonial; saying, that
these textes do abolish only the Law ceremonial, but not the Law Moral: So
may I answer them, in this point: for the Sabbath day is a branch of the Moral
Law: for it is written in the Moral Law, and commanded in the Moral Law;
wherefore, I answer them by distinguishing thus, there be weekly Sabbath days,
commanded in the Moral Law; and there are yearly Sabbath days, which were
never written in the Moral Law; Leuit. 23.24.39. now this their text may be
understood only of these yearly and ceremonial Sabbaths, and not of the Moral
and weekly Sabbath: and thus are these two scriptures, Exodus 20.8. and Col.
2.16. reconciled.

And whereas they say, that all Sabbaths are meante in this text: I answer,
that this all, may be meant of the ceremonial Sabbaths, that all those
Sabbaths are abolished: for, there is, an all of them for they are many: so
then, we may understand this text, to abolish all Sabbaths generally, that is,
the generality of all yearly Sabbaths; since there is a generallity of them:
or, by all, we may understand all these Sabbaths excluded the Morall-Law, or
Tables of stone, that is, all the Sabbaths written in the ceremonial Laws:
and so the 7th day Sabbath is not touched in this text: thus you see, there is
no necessity at all, why they should hale in the 7th day Sabbath into this
text; for a fit distinction may salve all: wherefore if they will violently
wring the 7th day Sabbath into this text, it is wilfully done of them, to
satisfy some corrupt humor or other: you see this text may safely and soundly
be expounded of the annual Sabbaths only, without any the least violence
offered unto this text.

Furthermore I answer, it is to be observed, that the Apostle speaking here of
Sabbaths which are a Shadow, he does not say all Sabbaths. vseing the general
particle all, but he speaks indefinitly, saying, Sabbaths, or Sabbath days,
without this word all: and therefore may be understood but of some Sabbath days
particularly: It is true indeed, that the Apostle speaks of Sabbath days, in
the plural number, but yet it does not thereof follow, that therefore he spoke
of all Sabbath days generally: there is a difference betwixt a plurality and a
generality; between Sabbahts plurally, and Sabbaths generally: for the Apostle
may make Sabbaths plurally, that is, many Sabbaths, to be Shadows: and yet
not make Sabbaths generally, that is, all Sabbaths, to be Shadows: for
example, a man may say, the Trees do shadow me; and yet all Trees in the
world, do not shadow me. Again Ministers teach that the bread in the
Sacrament is the very body of Christ: and yet it follows not that all
Ministers do teach so; for protestant Divines teach the contrary: so might
Paul say, that Sabbaths were a shadow, and yet neither say, nor think, that
all Sabbaths were a shadow: and thus is their former argument answered.

By the weakness of which argument, we may see the weakness of their love to
God, and his ordinance, and to his Laws: for strong love, would never permit
them to raze down to the grownd, so honorable an ordinance as Gods Sabbath,
and to oppose Gods Law, the 4th com. with so weak an argument: and what would
be the issue, if they might obtain their desires? why this, Gods Law shall be
mangled and defaced: it shall be denied its integrity and perfection: it shall
be made a Monstre, partly moral partly ceremonial: and way made for
Anabaptistry, and the flood of profaneness to flow in upon us, by the want of
Gods Sabbath.

An other argument they draw out of this text, against the Lords 7th day
Sabbath (for they are wonderouse eagre upon it, and desire exceedingly to find,
or make if they cannot find something to defeat God and his Church of the
Sabbath day) and for this purpose, they will feign a necessity upon it, that by
Sabbaths in this text, we must of necessity understand the 7th day Sabbath for
one: because (say they) under the words Holy day, is meant all the ceremonial
yearly Sabbaths, and so then under the words Sabbath days, must be meante the
weekly Sabbaths.

Hereunto I answer, that it cannot be proved, that under these words Holy day,
all yearly Sabbaths are comprised: for it may be that none of the yearly
Sabbaths are therein comprised: to make this appear, let it be observed, that
the word translated Holy day, does signify also a feast, and the words
translated in respect, may be translated in part; and so for these words in
respect of an holy day, you may have in room of them, these words, in part of
a feast (...), and then the text should rune thus; Let no man condemn you in
meat, and drink, or (in part of a feast) or of the new moon, or of the
Sabbath days etc. Now the question is to know, what days are signified by
these words, in part of a feast: and for this purpose, look into Leuit.
23.34.39. where you have two feasts mentioned, and either of them were to last
7 days a piece: now the first day of the 7 should be a Sabbath day, and
likewise the 8th day should be a Sabbath day, as the text speaks, v.
35.36.39. now forasmuch as the first 7 days were the whole feast, when the
first day of those 7 was taken out for a Sabbath day, then the 6 days
remaining, which went between the two Sabbaths, these were the part of a feast:
and these 6 days, being the part of that ceremonial feast, these were those
which S. Paul might say were a Shadow of Christ; and so abolished: so now you
see, what days they were, which S. Paul speaks of, under these words
translated Holy day; and which may be translated, in part of a feast: hereby
is nothing else signified, but those 6 festival days, which went between the
two Sabbaths, and were a part of the whole feast, which lasted by the Law 7
days. so then, whereas they would have all the ceremonial Sabbaths, comprised
under the words Holy day, inconclusion you see, there is none of them at all
comprised in them: for the Apostle may be understood to speak only of those 6
days which went between the 2 Sabbaths, but were no Sabbaths themselves: and so
it will not follow, that by the word Sabbaths, in Colos. 2.16.17. must be
understood the 7th day Sabbath.

In conclusion, let me show you what may be understood by these words holy day,
or, in part of a feast: and these words Sabbath days: by those words holy
day, or, in part of a feast, may be meant those 6 festival days, which went
between the ij Sabbaths, but were no Sabbaths themselves; and then by those
other words in the text Col. 2.6. Sabbath days, may be meant these ij Sabbath
days, which were the bounds of the 6 festival days, to wit, the first day,
and the 8th day v. 35.36.39. together with all other annual Sabbath days.

But if this pleases not, then thus, by the words holy day, or rather feast,
you may understand the Apostle to speak of those ij feasts of 7 days a
piece, in v. 34.39. joining the first day Sabbath, with the following 6 days,
and both these to make up one feast consisting of 7 days: only then these
words (...) must be translated rather in respect, then in part: for the words
may be rendered both ways: now if you put the first day Sabbath, unto the 6
festival days; then by these words Sabbath days in Col. 2.16. may be
understood the 8th day Sabbaths which followed the 7 festival days, and also
all other yearly Sabbaths with it, as those mentioned Leuit. 23.7.8.21.24.27.32.

Or, if this yet pleases not, (for they are hard to please, so eagre they are
against the Lords Sabbaths) then thus, if by holy day, or feast, you will needs
understand all days, both the feasts of 7 days a piece, and all other single
Sabbath days forementioned; then by the word Sabbaths, (...) in Col. 2.16. the
Apostle may be understood to speak not of the Sabbath of days, but of the
Sabbaths of years, of which you may read Leuit. 25.4.8.10.11. where you have
mention of the 7th year, to be kept for a Sabbath, and likewise of the 50th
year, the year of Iubile; so in all these ways, the 7th day Sabbath is not
spoken of.

By all which answers it may appear, that it is no impossible thing to
reconcile these two Scriptures Exodus 20.8.10. and Col. 2.16.17. for, it
appears, how many ways the Apostles words may be taken, and still the
Sabbath day, written in the Moral Law, not touched at all, by this text Col.
2.16. and are they not wilful and malitiouse enemies, to the perfection of
Gods Law, and to his ordinance the Sabbath day, who when the Apostles words may
be taken any of these ways, or some of these at least, so as Gods moral
Sabbath may be preserved, but yet none of them will please them, but some other
unnecessary sense, must needs be violently thrust upon us, and namly such an
one as may perpetually destroy the Lords Sabbath? why, is there no way to
expound one text of Scripture, but so as it must overthrow an other? do men
delight themselves, to make collectiones and gather conclusiones, out of one
portion of Scripture, which shall ouerturne for ever, that expressly commanded
in an other portion of Scripture? where is the fear of God all this while, and
reverence to his word and ordinances? are not these men guilty of the sin of
adding to Gods word? Deuteronomy. 12.32. and of that curse threatened for the same
cause? Revel. 22.18? for like as they have added diverse inventions to that
text. Exodus 31.13. against Gods Sabbaths; so have they added Gods 7th day
Sabbath to this text Col. 2.17. for the ruin of it: and, they have added this
their invention to S. Paul's words, that he spoke universally of all Sabbaths,
when he spoke but indefinitly of some Sabbaths.

Three things more I have to add by way of answer, unto this text Col. 2.16. the
foremost is this, that there are reasones in this text why it cannot be, that
this word Sabbaths, should be understood of the Sabbath written in the moral
law: the former reason is this, that all the other things mentioned in this
text Col. 2.16. are such things, as never came into the Moral Law, as 1. meat
and drink. 2. holy day, or feast, 3. new Moons: wherefore, this gives us an
hint, to conclude, that the other thing mentioned in this text, namly the
Sabbaths, should be of like kind, to wit, such Sabbaths as never came into the
Moral Law neither: for, who could think, that all the other words and things
in this text, should be pure ceremonies, and such as never came into the moral
law; and this one word only, to wit, (Sabbaths) should contain in it a Moral
day, and ceremonial days; or, days some whereof were never wrote by the
finger of God, as the yearly Sabbaths, and some such as God wrote with his own
finger, in the moral law, as the 7th day Sabbath?

An other reason fetched from the text is this, that if in this word Sabbaths
they will includ the 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the Moral Law, then do
they abolish by this text Col. 2.16. Not only the 7th day, and also the Rest,
but also the very commandment it self, the 4th com. and that is abolished
under these words, where it is said, that Christ has Put out the handwriting
of ordinances v. 14. In which words, the written 4th com. is abolished: and
this I make appear thus; the 16th verse of this second Chapter to the
Colossians, is a conclusion, as you may perceive by the note of inference used
in it (Therefore) one of the premises whereof you have in v. 14. Now the
Apostles argument is on this wise; If the handwriting of ordinances (which is
the written Law, which commanded meat and drink, and holy days, new Moons,
and Sabbath days) be put out, and taken away; Then let no man condemn you in
meat and drink, holy days, new Moons, and Sabbath days: But the
handwriting of ordinances, is put out, and taken away: Therefore, let no man
condemn you in meat and drink, holy days, new Moons, and Sabbath days. The
Apostles Minor, you have in v. 14. and his conclusion in v. 16. now forasmuch
as it is a rule with Logiceans, that there must not be more in the conclusion,
then is in the premises; hence it follows, that if by the word Sabbaths in
v. 16. they will understand the 7th day Sabbath, written in the 4th com. then
by these words handwriting in v. 14. they must understand also the handwriting
of the 4th com. or else there is more in the conclusion then in the premises,
for the premisse, v. 14. speaks but of the ha^dwriting of ceremonies written
by Moses only, but in the conclusion v. 16. if they will includ not only the
ceremonial law written by Moses, but also a part of those things written by
God in the Tables of stone, then in the conclusion I say, they have both Moses
his handwriting, and also a part of Gods handwriting, and so there is more in
the conclusion then in the premises: wherefore to avoid this absurdety, they
must understand the word handwriting in v. 14. to include not only the
handwriting of the ceremonies by the hand of Moses, but also they must
understand thereby, that part of Gods handwriting whereby he commanded the 7th
day Sabbath, which is the 4th com. and so you see they abolish the handwriting
of the 4th com. it self, and so we shall have no 4th com. at all: thus you may
see whereunto the opposition of Gods Sabbaths out of this text Col. 2.16.
tends, namely to the subversion of the 4th com. let them talk what they will
of obedience to Gods 4th com. and that they have a respect with David unto all
Gods commandments, yet all is but talk and words; judge the Tree by the
fruits; you see all their endeavors tend unto the subversion of one of Gods
Moral Laws; and this is the first of my 3. Answers, which I told you I had
more to add.

Now I come unto an other of my answers, and it is this, that they that expound
this text Col. 2.16. of the 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the Moral Law, they
do cross and contradict their own Authors; and such writers of their own,
as are of high estimation with them: I will produce a few of them, in stead
of many, that might be alleged: I will begine with M. Perkins who frames an
objection of some adversaries, which they make out of these ij textes Col.
2.16. and Gal. 4.10. saying, that if we observe any difference of days, now in
the new Testament, then we are no better then Jews: unto which textes M.
Perkines thus answers, That both these places speak of the feasts of the
Jews, and of d fference of days, that stands in force by the Jewish
ceremonial Law. Cases of conscience, Chapt. 16. Sect. 3. Page 108. Where you
see M. Perkins, freeth this text Col. 2.16. from having any thing to do
against the Moral Law; or against the difference of days in force by the
Moral Law, by saying, that it speaks of a difference of days, which stood
in force by the Jewish ceremonial Law: now the 7th day Sabbath was never
commanded in the Jewish ceremonial law, but in the moral law.

Let us hear also what M. Dod says in this point; he answers to an
objection framed out of this text Col. 2.16. against the Sabbath day on this
wise: We must know (says he) that here the Apostle speaks of such Sabbaths,
as are in the rank with the meats and drinks, whereof the spoke before, of
which sort were the first day of every month, and the first and last days of
every one of the 3 solemn feasts of the Jews, of these he speaks in the
plural number, and not of the Lords Sabbath day, in the singular number, which
has a singular excellency, and, how ever times change, it never changes: Dod
on the 4th com. Page 132. In which words you see, M. Dod affirms, that this
text Col. 2.16. speaks only of the yearly Sabbaths, which the Jews kept in
their 3 yearly feasts; or 3 solemn feasts; and does plainly deny, that this
text says anything of the Lords 7th day Sabbath, which he caleth the Lords
Sabbath day, in the singular number, by way of excellency.

Of this same judgment, is M. Greeneham in his work upon the Sabbath: of the
same judgment also, is M. Elton upon the Colossians, on this text Col. 2.16. of
the same judgment likewise, is Doctor Ames in his Thesis touching the
Sabbath. To these five, I might add many more, that are of the same judgment,
as themselves cannot but know, seeing they read them dally: one more I will add
who is newly come forth, M. Richard Byfield against M. Brerewood on the
Sabbath, who says in express words, that this text Col 2.16. does not abolish
the Sabbath day in the 4th com. but those other Sabbaths etc. See him Page 130.
Thus you see, that they who would have the Apostle to speak of the moral
Sabbath, mentioned in the moral law, as M. Chapel and his 9 confederates
would, they are contrary unto Divines of great note of their own side.

Objection; say they, why do you allege M. Perkins and M. Dod, and others,
why they do not defend your opinion for the 7th day Sabbath, do they?
Hereunto I answer, it is not my purpose in this place to allege them, as if
they spoke for the 7th day Sabbath: but only for this purpose, to show that
they, even thire own Divines will not endure it, that this text Col. 2.16.
should be pressed any further, then against the Jewish ceremonial law: and
that it concerns not the Lords Sabbath day, spoken of in the 4th com.
singularly, but those yearly Sabbaths, spoken of plurally etc. This is all I
aim at by alleging their Testimony, now the Testimony of a man against
himself, is ever accounted strong and good: and for me to produce one of my
adversaries to justify my cause, it is better and more forcible, then if I
should allege an ^undreth Divines, that are of the same judgment with me:
and so much for this point.

My third answer to this text is this, suppose we that the 7th day Sabbath were
a shadow of Christ by this text Col. 2.17. yet ^ence will nothing follow
necessarily, but that the Sabbath is abolished as touching its typicalnesse and
shaddowish quality, that so it shall be no more used as a type or as a shadow
of Christ to come: but for all this, it may remain still, as a sacred day and
time for Gods worship, as a day to keep memory of the Creation still, as a fit
time to refresh man and beast in, by Rest from the toilsome labors of the
former Six days, and so as an help and furtherance unto these moral duties
of Rest from labor, and performance of Religiouse exercises. For the clereing
of this, I refer you to what has been said in Section the 18. only here let
me give a touch: Circumcision, and the Passover, having either of them a
double type or sign, when the one was fulfilled, yet these Sacraments were
used with respect to the other unfulfilled; and admit the Sabbath should
abolish as a shadow of Christ, why may it not remain as a sign of the
Creation? Exodus 31.17. The difference of meats is abolished as a shadow of
Christ, but remain, as in a fast; and admit the Sabbath be abolished as a
shadow of Christ, why may it not remain, as an help and furtherance unto
moral duties? and if the Proselite Gentiles, observed the Passover with the
Jews, neglecting such things therein, as were peculiar unto the Jews, and
only observed such things therein, as were common to Jew and Gentile both (as
has been shown in Sect. 18) why may not we Gentiles, neglect the Sabbath as a
s^addow of Christ, wherein it was peculiar unto the Jews, and observe it still
in such respects, as it is common to Jew and Gentile both? as it is a sign of
the Creation? and as it is an help and furtherance unto other moral duties?
so much for answer to this text Col. 2.16.17.

And thus like a friend to God, his law, and ordinance therein, I have
reconciled these two textes Exodus 20.8. and Col. 2.16.17. the which other men
do make to fight together, like deadly enemies.

Before I conclude this Section, let me render a reason why I do on all
occationes distinguish, betwixt the 7th day Sabbath and the anniuersary
Sabbathes: my reasones are these 1. because the 7th day Sabbath is more
ancient then the yearly Sabbaths: for these began but after the giving of the
Law; but that begane before the giving of the Law. 2. Because God Sanctified
and hallowed the 7th day Sabbath in a special manner Genes. 2.3. the which
honor he did not to the yearly Sabbaths: these were holy but by precept, but
that also by President: these were holy but by destination only, but that was
holy by consecration also. 3. Because they are distinct in themselves, the one
being once every week, the other once every year. 4. Because God placed the
weekly 7th day Sabbath in his moral Law, and in the heart or first Table
thereof, but the yearly Sabbaths were excluded thence, and never came into the
Tables of stone. 5. Because the 7th day Sabbath was a sign of, and kept in
memory of the Creation, which belongs unto all men alike, but so was it not
with the yearly Sabbaths: there is good reason therefore, why I should
distinguish the weekly Sabbath, from the yearly Sabbathes, according as I have
done in all my answers.

SECT. XX.
Having in the former Sections of this Chapter, answered all their arguments
brought against the Lords Sabbath; so as it manifestly appears, that it
cannot be proved, that it is abolished, but that it is still in force: now in
the last place, I purpose to spend this last section of this Chapter, in a
Disswasory-declaration of the common sin of our time, to wit, the sin of
Sabbath breaking.

And here I would not be mistaken, at the very Threshold and entry of my
discourse: for by the sin of Sabbath-breaking, I do not understand the sin
of profanation of the Lords day, which now a days is called the sin of
Sabbath-breaking, by our Ministers: for they in this point, make more sins,
then ever God made: they deal by the Lords day, as players do with some of
their fellows, whom they make a Counterfeit King, in the sight of the people,
by putting upon him some robes and ornaments, like those of the true King; and
thus do our Ministers; that they might honor this Lords day, in the eyes of
the world, they have made it a counterfeit Sabbath day, and that by miscalling
of it, Sabbath day: like as if a man should cale one man, by an other man's
name: thus they have robbed the 7th day, of its proper and honorable name,
that they might robe and deck with it, the 8th day: but to leave them to their
vanities and counterfaitings; by Sabbath day, I mean the 7th day from the
creation, the Saturday, and day where on God himself Rested, and which is
mentioned in his Moral Law; and by the sin of Sabbath-breaking, I understand
the violation and profanation of this day, contrary to Gods express
commandment.

The persons guilty of this sin, are both Ministers and people: for the
people first; let them know, and take special notice of it, that they lay
under the guilte of the sin of Sabbath-breaking, unto this day: and without
repentance, are liable to those curses, threatened in the book of God, against
transgressoures of the Laws of God: I speak what I think is the truth in my
soul and conscience, and I have good cause thus to think; for, you have seen
that it cannot be certainly and infallibly proved, to the undoubted
satisfaction of any man's conscience, that ever God did abolish this Sabbath
day; now if it cannot be most evidently and apparently proved, that it is
abolished, then though there could nothing be said for it more, yet it is a
sin to profane it: but I have more to say for it, as you shall hear in the
next Chapter, for time to come therefore let men beware, that they do no more
profane the Lords Sabbath day; it will be a dongerouse matter to sin, and go
on in sin, after admonition and information; this let them take notice of, as
being forewarned, that they do live and lie in the weekly breach, of one of
Gods Laws: for every 7th day or Saturday, they do not only neglect the
worship of God, but also notoriously profane the Lords Sabbath day, by buying
and selling, by riding and goeing too market and fro market, by ploughing and
carteing, by working in their Shoppes and howsen, every man in his several
trade and occupation, and by doing the most base drudgery and kitching works,
on this sacred day: when God should be most in our minds, then he is furthest
from our thoughts: let this be thought on, by all such, as make any conscience
of Gods commandments.

But hereunto the people will reply, saying, Alas, what would you have us to
do? we are no scholars, if it be an error, it is in our Ministers and
teachers, and not in us; you should do well to apply this doctrine unto our
Ministers and not unto us; we cannot judge in such matters of difference and
difficulty etc. To whom I answer, Alas, indeed, I pity you from my heart; this
your error is radically indede in your Ministers, for the blind, do lead the
blind; nevertheless you have your share therein: because you justify their
doeings, and approve of their sayings and doctrines in this point: Gods
proceedings are on this wise, that if the Minister does not admonish the
people, of those things which are sins: the Ministers indede shall answer to
God for thy blood, but what will this avail thee? for Thou shall die for thine
iniquity, as you may read, Ezekiel. 33.8. and for this cause, it is fite, I
should give you notice thereof, albeit I mean to lay the chiefeload upon your
Ministers backs. lastly whereas you plead, that you are not able to judge in
such points as these. Hereunto I answer, that men should be ashamed to say they
cannot judge, considering the time, as the Apostle speaks; for men have now
been trained up a long time in the doctrine of Christian religion, and
therefore should be able to judge; the Apostle bids us to Try all things,
and keep that which is good, 1. The 5.21. and again he says, I speak as
unto them which have understanding: judge ye what I say, 1. Cor. 10.15. Here
you see the Apostle would have common people to be judges of that which he
taught; and such were those noble Bereans, Act. 17.11. wherefore you ought to
judge of this point, and to this end to read about it, to confer of it, and
to studdy it: It is true, were it a point to be studdied out, by your own
labor, from the root of it, there were difficulty in it perhapes above your
capacities; but when a point is already studied to your hand, and a path way
beaten out for your foot steps, now there is no invincible difficulty in
the matter: it is true, that common people cannot plead a cause before the
Judge, yet can they judge, having heard both parties plead; people cannot
preach, yet can they judge of a sermon preached; so in this point of the
Sabbath, though people could not first find it out, nor yet dispute it when
found out, yet can they judge of the cause when they see it laid plainly open
before their eyes, if they will open their eyes to see it, and they may judge
of the cause, when they have seen it pleaded on both sides; to this end I have
penned this book, wherein you have the arguments on both sides, plainly laid
down, so as you may easily discern the truth, from error.

Yet further, to take away all excuses; the point in question, touching this
Sabbath day, commanded in the Moral Law, it is A Catechism point: for all the
10. commandments, they are Catechism points, like as are the Creed, and the
Lords prayer: now it has pleased Almighty God, to lay down these Catechism
points, of all other points in religion, most plainly, and most familiarly,
that he that runeth may read them; the 10 commandments are expressed to the
capacety of the meanest in the Congregation, and of all the 10 commandments,
there is not any one laid down in more familiar and easy terms and words to
be understood, then is this 4th com. touching the Sabbath day; for God has most
lively and plainly, painted and pointed it out from all other days of the
week, so that no man can doubt, which day of the week is that which God would
have for his Sabbath day; no nor yet what duties God requires to be done in
that day: it is plain, that that is the day, which is properly called Sabbath
day, in Scripture account; and which is the 7th day in Scriptures account,
namly our Saturday: and the duties are Rest, and Holy actiones performed in
that Rest: these things are so plain in the com. as they need no exposition;
for they are put down in so many words, in the com. now, what need then is
there of such store of lerning, to attain to the knowledge of these things, as
if common people cold not understand them, nor any but Ministers and men of
lerning could judge of them? men may as well say they understand not English,
as to say, they cannot understand and judge which is the 7th day of the week,
and what is meant, by Rest from labor, and performance of Holy actiones: for
which is the 7th day, we cannot but know since the Sunday or Lords day, is the
first day; and what is meant by Holy actiones, or sanctifying of the day, we
know by the like actiones we perform on every Lords day: a small deal of
lerning is enough for a man to judge of these points; wherefore that is but an
excuse, for people to say they are no scholars, and they cannot judge of such
matters; what can you not judge of your Catechism points, which you learned in
your Childhoode?

I confess for all this, there is difficulty about this point, to such as are
not exercised in it (and by the way, it is a shame for any man, not to be so
well exercised in all Gods 10 commandments, as not to be able to defend them,
unto the least jot and title against all opposers) but I desire thee good
Reader, but to observe where the difficulty lies: for the clearing of this,
note with me these ij. things, The 4th com. and, the opposition made against
this 4th com. For the former of these; the 4th com. together with the things
therein commanded, are laid down most familiarly, and plainly, as has been
shown, so as there is no difficulty at all about that, no man but may easily
understand, what it is which God requires therein, and which day of the week
God enjoined for a Sabbath: wherefore the difficulty that is, it is in the
opposition, made by Ministers, against something commanded in the 4th com. now
it is true indeed, that in this opposition, there arises difficulty, because
they trouble the waters of men's understanding, by bringing many and intricate
reasones out of Scriptures, against the Sabbath day written in the 4th com.
which intricate arguments, if these Ministers would forbear, then there were
no difficulty at all, all were as plain as a beaten path way; wherefore, since
you see where the difficulty lies, my counsel to all such people as plead
ignorance, and want of lerning in this controversy, shall be, that they would
therefore rather follow God, then their Ministers: for Gods way is a plain,
smooth, easy, and beaten way, so as every man learned or unlearned, may easily
know, what it is which God requires in this Catechism point of his 4th com.
but their Ministers way, in setting themselves to abandon and root out Gods
Sabbath, it is such a rugged way, and such a difficult way, full of so many
secret and hidden windings and turnings, as people of common capacety cannot
conceive it, nor judge of it, as themselves say: wherefore, my counsel unto
these is this, that they rather take part with God, and with his Sabbath, then
with their Ministers against God and his Sabbath: because Gods way is an easy
and known way, but man's way is an intricate and difficult way.

And further, let them not dare to live in the weekly transgression of the 4th
com. and profanation of Gods Sabbath day, bearing themselves only upon this
poor grownd, that their Ministers say they may so do; and that their
Ministers bring many arguments out of the Scripture, for the abolishing of Gods
Sabbath day, since those arguments (as themselves confess) they understand
not, nor are able to judge of, for want of lerning, when they hear or read
them disputed of: the Apostle says, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans
14.23. If then they cannot comprehend and conceive of the opposite arguments,
brought against the Sabbath, when they are disputed too and fro on boths sids,
how can they work in their calings on this Sabbath day? they cannot do it of
faith, they must do it doubttingly, and so sinfully: wherefore the better and
easier known way, is the surer and safer way, and that is to follow the example
of God, resting upon the 7th day, because God rested on the 7th day; and thus
much for people.

I come now unto Ministers; the first thing I lay to their charge, is the
profanation of the sacred Scriptures, and word of God, by wresting of many and
sundry textes of Scripture, against the 4th com. and the Lords Sabbath day,
therein mentioned: there are many and sundry textes of Scripture, both out of
the old Testament and out of the new Testament, which they abuse against the
Lords Sabbath day, the particulars whereof you have heard in all this Chapter
hitherto, and how vainly, impertinently, and friuolously they have used them,
does evidently appear by my several answers unto them: now do they not know,
that one day they shall give an account to God, for taking Gods Name in vain?
and for vnreuerent tossing of Gods word, hither and thither like a Tennise
bale? yea which is worse, they turn the point of Gods sword (his word I mean)
against himself; setting Scriptures together by the ears: for they set
abundance of Scriptures, both out of the old and new Testaments, against the
Lords Sabbath day, commanded to be kept by the 4th com. like as a man should
set abundance of dogs upon a Bear: for they set all these textes of
Scripture, against this one text of the 4th com: now what may be the grownd of
all this? I cannot devise any besides this, that their minds are forestaled with
a prejudice against Gods Sabbaths, as that they are Jewish and the like, and
therefore down they must: and to this end, the Scripture must be set against
them.

It has ever been the practice of all sober and Godly Divines, to study and
endeavor the reconciliation of Scriptures seemeing to make opposition and
contradiction: but these men are of a contrary Spirit: for having to do with
Gods tenn commandments, and by name the 4th com. they cannot abide to hear me
speak of a reconciliation, and to make a reconcilment betwixt the 4th com.
Exodus 20.8. and this text Colos. 2.16.17. but all their study and invention is,
how they may make these two portiones of holy writ with others, to oppose one
an other in the highest manner, and one to shoulder out an other: my indeauors
are by a reconciliation, to cause an Harmony and sweet accord among the
Scriptures, that so we may still retain a most ancient and proffitable
ordinance of Gods in the Church; but their indeauors are, to reject all
reconciliation, and to cause a jar and discord in the Scriptures, that so
they may deprive the Church of God, of a most ancient and proffitable ordinance
of Gods, commanded in his moral Law. This is a profane use and abuse of
Scripture, to cause it to be at odds and variance with it self, when as by a
reconciliation and fit sense, it may be made to agree and accord in a sweet
Harmoney.

The 2 d thing I lay to the charge of Ministers, is that they have lived a long
time in this sin of Sabbath breaking, and transgression of Gods 4th com. in
their several families; the which without unfeigned Repentance, will make them
liable unto all those Curses temporal and eternal, thereatened in Gods word,
against such as live in the transgression of Gods Laws. And further, if still
they shall in time to come, live in the wilful violation of this ordinance of
God, I give them hereby to know, that they shall be guilty of a weekly sin,
against Gods 4th com. drawing down Gods curses upon themselves and their
families, every Saturday or Sabbath day, week by week, so long as they so
live.

This error touching Gods Sabbath day, is not like unto some other erroures,
which are erroures in judgment only, but like unto those more dangerouse and
perniciouse erroures, which are erroures both in judgment and in practice
also; for you see, that such as are erroniously persuaded, that this sacred and
Sanctified time, the 7th day Sabbath, is abolished; forthwith they fale to an
erroniouse practice also, and to trample upon Gods Sabbaths, by profanation of
them openly; and by calling them Jewish reprochfully.

But happily they will reply, saying, we do not throw down Gods Sabbath, but
God himself does it; for it is God that has abolished the 7th day Sabbath;
and therefore you do ill to tax us for it: whereunto I answer, that it is
false which they say; to father this their own deed upon God, is an heinouse
evil; that God has not done this thing is apparent, in as much as none of all
those Scriptures of Gods, which they have brought against this Sabbath, do
necessarily abolish it, as you have seen by my answers unto them one by one,
so it is not God then but themselves that have done it; and so I tax them
justly.

Yet further, Ministers are guilty, not only and alone of the sin of Sabbath
breaking, in their own families, but also which is more fearful, they are
guilty of the same sin committed by the people weekly: for what is the cause,
why the people do not Sanctify the Sabbath day properly so called, is it not
hence, because Ministers teach people that it is abolished, and Jewish, and
therefore they ought not to keep it holy? the people will lay the load of this
sin, upon their Ministers an other day, when God shall rekone with them for
it, crying out upon their Teachers, who misled them. S. James tells us, if
some man has converted an other from his error, he shall save a soul, and
shall hide a multitude of sins Iam. 5.19.20. If then this be an argument to
persuade all men, to labor to bring their brethren out of errors, because so
they shall hide a multitude of sins: what a terror then should it be unto
all Ministers, to think that they have seduced the people, and led them into
erroures; for thus they have opened a fountain of sins: for every single
person in their congregation, Master and servant, Mistress and maid, Parent and
child, every one of these do hereby fale into the sin of Sabbath breaking
every week, that is 50 times in one year, so as if a man has lived but a
matter of 40 or 50 years, he is guilty of the breach of Gods 4th com. Twenty
hundredth times; what a multitude of sins are here! and all these are the
Minister guilty of; these are the multitude of sins committed by one single
person in his congregation, but if a Minister has 400 or 500 persons, or a
thousand persons under his charge, what an infinite number of sins is he
guilty of! let this be ceriously thought on.

Furthermore, if it does come into the heart of the Magistrate at any time, to
think of a reformation (as God grant it may) what is it that quenches that
motion of Gods Spirit in him? is it not this, that he bethinketh him that his
Minister, and so other Ministers, are of a contrary judgment, affirming with
one consent, that this Sabbath day, is abolished, and ceremonial, and Jewish?
so then, Ministers are not only guilty of the breach of Gods Sabbaths, among
the people for time past, but also they hinder Reformation, in the persons, in
whose power it is to make Reformation: By the mercy of God, we live in a
kingdom, that is governed by Christian Magistrates; and under such gouerners,
as have already made reformationes, in many things, wherein they have been
informed by the Clergy; and I verily believe, they would as willingly take
this point into their considerations, if moved thereunto by the Ministry, as
they have done other things: but behold, they who should inform them, and cale
upon them, are dumb and silent; nay enemies and adversaries to the cause!
wherefore, that this Sabbath breaking is defended by Authority, and not
reformed, but the reformation of it opposed by Authority, this is to be imputed
unto Ministers; let this be ceriously thought on.

Hereunto happily some will reply, but these Ministers who do these things;
are very zealouse and godly men etc. To whom I answer, the more zealouse the
worse, and the more godly the worse: it were enough for the most godless and
profane men, to set themselves against an ordinance of Gods, and to oppose his
Sabbaths; but for men fearing God, and zealouse for God, that these should show
themselves so regardlesse of Gods ordinance, and such enemies to his Sabbaths,
this is in them a double iniquity: for, who but they should stand for God, and
defend his Sabbaths?

In the third place, I lay many things to the charge of such Ministers as do
oppose Gods ancient Sabbath: as 1. that thereby they have defaced Gods
royall-Law, mangled it, and robbed it of its integrity and perfection: they
have diminished the complete number of Tenn Commandments: they have made it a
morall-ceremoniall Law, an hotch potch; a very Monstre. 2. They bewray a great
want of love unto Gods Law, they do not love it for it self: for they
indeauor might and maine, to overthrow a part of it: yea they are horribly
partial, in that they will defend all the other parts of Gods Law, against
Anabaptists; but will not defend this part also against them. 3. They open a
flood gate to impiety and profaneness among people; and draw us to
Anabaptistry, by throwing down Gods Sabbaths. 4. They are guilty of that sin
in Deuteronomy. 12.32. and of that curse in Revel. 22.18.19. threatened to such as do
either add to Gods word, or detract from it: for by that text, Ex. 31.13. they
have unnecessarily detracted from Gods Law, the 7th day Sabbath; and, to that
text, Colos. 2.16.17. they have unnecessarily added, the 7th day Sabbath, for
the ruin of it: now in thus doing, they behave themselves, like men, that are
weary of Gods service, as if it were a burden unto them to sanctify Gods
Sabbaths, and as if it grieved them that Gods Sabbaths should be moral: were
it not thus with them, they would never manage such arguments and Scriptures
against Gods Sabbaths as you see they have done, oh prejudice! oh temporizing!

But admit, that by reason of swaying with the times, a prejudice against the
Sabbath as Jewish, is fastened in their breasts, I see no cause why they should
reject the Matchless example and president of God himself, Exo. 20.10.11. is
this Jewish too? for they cannot abide it, that the Church and people of God,
should be imitators and followers of God like dear Children: that is, that
they should labor on those days wherein God wrought, and rest on that day
wherein God rested, and sanctify that time which God sanctified, yea and also
commanded: but like men, that loved not to be like God, they will have the
people rest when God wrought, and work when God rested, and profane the time
which God Sanctified: they had rather go any way, then tread in Gods steps
and follow him.

The last thing which I lay to the charge of Ministers, is that they have taken
away one whole com. from the 10. commandments: in the former point, I have
taxed them for taking away some part of a com. but here I tax them for
taking away a whole com. by name the 4th com. and this I thus make good against
them; 1. They have taken away the time, to wit, the 7th day, in the com. the
which being gone, there is no day time left in the com. so that an hour upon
any day in the week, spent at a Lecture, in prayer, singing a Psalm, and
hearing Gods word, is as much as the 4th com. can now require, by their
expositiones: now therefore the 4th com. needs no longer go thus, Remember
the Sabbath day: for it may go thus, Remember the Sabbath hour: 2. They have
abolished the duties in the day, to wit, rest, and Holy actiones: for the word
Sabbath signifying rest, this rest they have abolished, by making the word
Sabbath and rest, in the 4th com. a sign, Exodus 31.13. and a Shadow, Colos.
2.17. and so abolished; now if the Sabbath and rest be abolished, then may men
labor in their callings every man in his own house severally; and this takes
away holy Assemblies in the congregation, and all public duties of a Sabbath:
and thus have they abolished by their corrupt glosses and expositions, both the
time, and the duties to be performed in the time, now these being gone, I pray
show me what is left behind in the 4th com. for they have abolished every
thing that was commanded. 3. By making these words Sabbath day a sign, Exo.
31.13. and a Shadow, Col. 2.17. and so abolished, thus they have taken away
the Substance of the 4th com. and left us nothing but a shadow; so as now we
may read the 4th com. thus: Remember the 0000000000, to Sanctify it: and thus
much for the body of the 4th com.

Lastly, they have taken away the Reason and Motive, which God took from his
own example, and added it to his 4th com. Exodus 20, 11. this whole verse, v.
11. containing ij. most lively reasones and effectual, they have robbed Gods
Church of the use of them; for they neither use them themselves, no neither can
man else use them, unto the day we now keep: for God did move unto the
observation of the Saturday and 7th day. 1. Because him self at the Creation
rested on it. 2. Because he had blessed that day, and hallowed it, and so made
it an Holy day. now these two reasones neither are, nor can be applied to our
Lords day: for God at the creation did not rest on our Lords day; no neither
did he then bless and sanctify the Lords day; for the Lords day was not then
known. Thus you see, how they baue made clear work; for they have taken away
both the body of the 4th com. and the reasone annexed to it by God; thus they
have taken away the whole 4th com. head and tail, root and branch: it stands
for us now only to look upon.

Lo, now we may say with the Prophet David, It is time for thee Lord to work,
for they have destroyed thy Law, Psalm. 119.126. Thus since I have faithfully
and plainly discovered this Notoriouse error, I have done what in me lies
toward a reformation; only this remains, that with the residue of the
congregation, I make this prayer unto God, That it may please him to bring into
the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived.

CHAPT. V. This Chapter contains sundry and substanciall arguments out of the
word of God, proueing that the Lords Sabbath day, written in the Moral Law, is
still in force; and so ought to be unto the worlds end; like as are the other
morales.
I Have now finished the four first parts of my book: the first whereof was
in defense of the Moral Law. The second was an exposition of the 4th com. with
a discovery of the corrupt expositiones thereof. The third was an answer unto
those Scriptures and reasones, which are usually brought to prove the Lords day,
the Sabbath day. The fowrth was an answer, unto those abused Scriptures, which
are brought against the Lords Sabbath day. And now by order I am come unto the
fith part of my book, and herein I am to prove unto you, the perpetuity of
the Lords Sabbath, and that it is still in force, and so ought for ever to be.

Touching the Sabbath I note two things. 1. I see many learned and great
Divines of late, prime men, and of the foremost rank in the Universities, both
on this side and beyond the Seas, disclaiming and wrighting against the Lords
day Sabbath; but I see none of them show us where we shall have an other
Sabbath, in the absence of this: as the former bewrayed their learning and
judgment, so this latter bewrayed their forgetfulness: what, shall the Church
of God be left without a Sabbath now? shall we turn from Superstition to
Anabaptistry? I join with them in throwing down the Lords day for a Sabbath,
but I dare not put an end to the work, when it is but half done.

2. As those Jews of old cried, the Temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, so I observe the Patrons of the Lords day, to cry out of the profanation
of the Lords Sabbaths, the prophanatio^ of the Lords Sabbaths, as if they were
the only friends to Gods Sabbaths; whereas in deed and in truth, they are the
chief enemies to them, and are foulely mistaken in their judgment: for they
are the Lords days which they mean, and not the Lords Sabbath days: if
therefore any man may in a right account be said to be a true friend to Gods
Sabbaths, it is not they, it is he that writes for them, and defends them
against the world, and corruptiones of the time: he may indede say with Eliah,
I have been very Jealous for the Lord of hosts: for they have forsaken thy
Covenant, broken down thy Sabbaths, and I only am left.

The Lords Sabbaths, are still in force: or, Gods ancient 7th day Saturday
Sabbath, is still in force.
SECT. I.
IN defending the Lords Sabbath, I purpose to observe this method: first I will
prove the point by arguments less forcible, and then by arguments more
forcible: first by arguments showing that it is a thing meet, convenient, and
very befiting us to keep the Lords Sabbath, and then by arguments showing that
it is a thing very necessary, in regard of Gods appointment and ordination.

By the way, whereas there are many light and triuiall objections, usually
brought against the Lords Sabbath, and some place would be reserved to answer
them, I think it unfit, to place them, after the point is proved by necessary
arguments: for when Gods will is once known, there is no place left for
carnal and triuiall objections against it: and therefore I hold it better to
place these objections, next after the point is proved by probable arguments,
and arguments of convenience: and so these triuiall objections, shall rather
come in by way of opposition unto arguments of convenience, then unto arguments
derived from Gods ordination. Wherefore, I purpose to spend the first Section
about arguments of convenience, and the second Section in answer unto sundry
objections, and then the third Section in arguments proving the point
necessarily from Gods ordination.

To begine with the first of these, namly convenience, and arguments less
forcible; in handling of this point, first I will prove by sundry arguments,
that it is meet we should keep a Sabbath day, one or other indefinitly; and
then I will prove that it is most meet, and fitest, to keep the Saturday or
7th day Sabbath, before any other. (One reason moving me to handle these two
points is, to prevent Profane and carnal men thus to think, why you have
thrown down the Lords day Sabbath, and now therefore, what need we any more
Sabbaths etc? I proceed therefore to give such reasones as may take place in a
carnal mind.) For the former of these, I prove, that it is meet we should
keep a Sabbath day, because it is a work of mercy: that this may the better
appear; we will consider of it in respect of man and beast: touching man, we
will consider of him generally, and then particularly: and first for man in
general; it is a great comfort and work of mercy unto all men to keep a
Sabbath day; for therein their bodies are exceedingly refreshed and comforted:
for look as the Bed at night, is a great refreshment, unto man that has
been occupied all the day before in his painful calling; so is the Sabbath
day, a sweet refreshment unto men, after that they have been exercised Six
days one after an other in continual labors: the truth of this point every
man finds by good experience. We have a proverb, that men must work to day,
as they may work too morrow: that is, that men do not so ouerworke themselves
in one day, as they be unfit for work the next day: this proverb may well be
applied to our present occation, that men must work this week so, as they may
work the next week also: that is, they must not so work and tire out their
bodies, with continual labors in one week, as that they shall be unfit to
labor an other week: now common reason teaches, that man's body cannot endure
continual and perpetual labors, day by day, without ceaseing all his life
long; wherefore of necessity there must be a time for men to Sabbathize, and
rest in from labors; and therefore it is meet that some one day in a week
be set a part for rest, that so a man may so work one week as he may work
an other also; it is a point of wisdom also, for men so to follow their
works, as they may go on, and continue with them; and not like unskillful
Riders, who ride galloping upon the spur in the forenoone, so as their tired
horse cannot go in the after noone; wherefore, if men do but regard their
own bodies, it is meet they should set a part a day to Sabbathize in, and
rest from their labors.

But suppose we, that some man's body, being of any oaky substance, and iron
constitution, could hold out in labors, day by day everlastingly; yet how
unbeseeming a thing is it, for man, whom God has made Lord of all, to become a
slave and a drudge in this world, working and tuging day by day without
ceaseing like horse in a Carte? neither can men plead necessity; for,
experience has taught, that we can compass all our works within the 6 days:
nor yet can the poor plead necessity, because of their poverty; for, as God
gave the Israelites, twice so much Manna on the 6th day, as upon any other day,
that so they might rest upon the Sabbath day; So has God blessed the
established order in our kingdom, of working but 6 days in 7, that the poor
can now earne as much in 6 days, as they should do in 7 days, if it were
customary for us to work every day; for did the poor work 7 days, the rich
would give them the less for every days work, so as they should but barely
get a living then, and so much they get now; for because they work but a few
days, therefore they have the more for every days work, that so they might
live of their work: thus much for men in general.

I come now to men in particular, and by name unto Servants: It is needful
that we keep a Sabbath, because it is a work of mercy unto Servants: now God
was wont to take care for Servants, lest they should be unmercifully oppressed
with labor, and therefore it is added to the 4th com. That thy m^n servant and
thy ma^de may rest as well as thou. Deuteronomy. 5.14. what does this teach us, but
that masters must show mercy unto their Servants, by resting of their bodies,
as well as of their own? for if the one has need of rest, so has the other:
Solomon tells us, that a righteouse man, shows mercy to his beast Pro.
12.10. how much more then unto his man servant, and maid servant? were it not
that we have good Laws in this case, providing for Servants, by forbiding
masters to do their works on the Lords day, some unmerciful, hardharted, and
couetuouse masters, would work their Servants day by day, until they were
weary of their lives: the necessity of a Sabbath in this case, appears by the
Laws now in force, whereby for the benefit ease and refreshment of poor
Servants, it is enacted (no doubt) that many holy days shall be observed
yearly and weekly.

In the 3d place I come to Beasts, it is needful that we keep a Sabbath,
that so we may show mercy unto our beasts: for God was wont to cale for mercy
unto the laboring beast: In the 7th day thou shall rest, that thine ox and
thine Ass may rest. Exodus 23.12. and it is a property (says Solomon) of a
good man, to show mercy to the life of his beast Pro. 12.10. and should a man
labor his beast on every day week by week, he might soon have his skine.
Thus far we have considered of the needfulnesse ca Sabbath day, in civil
respects.

Now I come to show the needfullnesse of a Sabbath in religiouse respects:
that God may be solemnly and publiky worshipped; and that the Church and
people of God, may be further edified in their most holy faith; for these two
causes, it is needful, that there should be a Sabbath day: I shall not need
to spend time to amplify these two things; for they are so requisite and
needful, that all men will grante me, that it is meet to have a day set a
part for the public worship of God, and the edification of the Church of God:
to omit what else might be said, the necessity of a Sabbath day appears in
this, that our Church does now celebrate many Holy days for the same ends, and
not only the Saints days yearly, but also the Lords days weekly.

2. It is meet to have a Sabbath day, because it is a thing of good report,
approved and allowed of by all Christian Churches, now the Apostle calls upon
us to follow those things which are of good report, Phil. 4.8. and those
things therefore which all Christian people approve and allow of, are meet to
be had in use. Papists they allow of resting from labors, and the public
worship of God constantly upon one day of every Seven: Lutherans do the like:
and Anabaptists, how ever they keep no day by Divine Institution, yet they
keep, and hold it fit to keep one day in Seven, wherein they rest from their
labors, and perform public worship unto God. lastly, all Protestants do
allow and approve of one day in Seven, as fit to rest in from labors, and to
worship God publikly: so here is a cloud of witenesses, houlding it meet to
keep a Sabbath day, and a thing of good report. If we should ascend unto the
primitive Churches who lived next after the Apostles, we shall find that they
held it meet to keep one day in 7 and sometimes more, for the Service of God,
and to rest from labors: thus we have a general and joint consent of all
Churches, both now living, and from the Apostles times, that it is a thing
meet to rest, and serve God publikly one day in a week: and so we have proved
this point, namely, that it is meet and convenient to keep a Sabbath day
indefinitly, one in 7 days.

Now I come to prove, that of all the days of the week, the 7th day, or
Saturday is the most fit day: my first reason is, because God Almighty Rested
rather upon the Saturday then upon any other day, Genes, 2.3. and therefore it
is meet we should imitate such a president: were a man to make his choice on
which day of the week to Rest from labors, and to refresh himself, I think
he could not possibly find a more fit day to Rest in, then on that day, wherein
God Almighty Rested.

My second reason is taken from this, that a man may doubt whither the old
Sabbath day be abolished or not, and if it be disputable and doubtful, then
when the matter is in our choice, which day of the week to take, it is the
surest and safest to make choice of that day, whereof there is some doubt
whither it be abolished or not: we have shown, it is certain that the 7th day
is not abolished; but suppose there were some doubt of it, as it cannot be but
doubted of, by the stifiest Anti Sabbatharians: since that some place is lest
for doubting, be it that we doubt never so little of it, yet it is better and
safer to keep it, then to keep any other day of the week: to neglect the 7th
day, being once Commanded of God, and it cannot be clearly proved, that ever
God countermanded it, here upon some scruple at least must remain in men's
consciences touching it; and therefore it is fitest to keep the 7th day; so
shall we make suer work, that God shall have nothing against us out of his 4th
co^. but doing otherwise, we shall lay in perpetual doubts and fears, that
we live in the transgression of the 4th com.

So much be spoken for this point, the which I have insisted upon, not so much
hereby to prove that the 7th day must be the Sabbath, for that I shall do
after the next section, by solid arguments, but chiefly to this end, to stay
and satisfy the minds of carnal men, with carnal reasones, and with
Testemonies, and the like: for some men there are (I fear me) that could wish
in their hearts, that there were no Sabbaths at all; of such an ignoble and
base Spirit they are; all their mind is for work, work, incessantly; it is
meet therefore that it should be declared unto such men, that it is not only
necessary to have a Sabbath in religiouse and divine respects, but also in
carnal respects, as for necessity of nature, and the like: and that otherwise
all Churches would condemn us; for not only the primitive Churches, but also
all Christians every where, and of every Sect, do set a part one day in 7 for
Gods worship: yea our own Church would rise up in judgment and condemn such
conceits by hit contrary and daily practice.

SECT. II.
I come now to give answer unto many friuolouse obiectiones, which are daily
raised against the Lords Sabbath, which being done, I shall have a clear way
opened for me, to prove, that the Lords Sabbath day is still in force, these
rubbes being taken out of the way first.

OBJECT. I.
One objection they have against the Lords Sabbath day, and it is this: what
shall we keep the Sabbath day, the 7th day, the Saturday Sabbath, why that is
the Jews Sabbath day?

Hereunto I answer, my desire it not to strive about names; were the Lords
Sabbath day, called the Jews Sabbath day, in none other, nor worse sense, then
that it might likewise be called the Christians Sabbath day, I should say
nothing to the contrary; but finding it so called reprochfully, I desire to
rescue it from under the feet of contempt.

I desire therefore of such men as so cale it reprochfully, to give me a
reason, why the Sabbath day commanded in the 4th com. should rather be called
the Jews Sabbath day, then the Lord our God, whom we are commanded to Have, in
the first com. should be called, the Jews Lord God: for my part, I can see no
reason, but that the one may be so called reprochfully, as well as the other:
nor any thing can I see to the contrary, but that we may as well cale the
Sabbath day, which the Jews Sanctified, our Sabbath day also; as to cale the
Lord God, whom the Jews worshipped, our Lord God.

But to take of unjust scandal, let not men nickname the Lords Sabbaths, but
rather in an holy reverence of God, let us cale them as God himself calls
them, that is, the Lord Gods Sabbaths: for thus the Lord himself named them in
his 4th com. when he said. The 7th day, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: So
then it is Gods Sabbath, not the Jews Sabbath: it is the Sabbath of the Lord,
and not the Sabbath of the Jews. The Lord tells us by his Prophet Isaiah,
that we should cale the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable.
Isa. 58.13. So then, we should use the name of the Sabbath honorably; but lo
how men will use it reprochfully, caling it Jewish, and the Jews Sabbath, in
scorn and contempt!

Yet further, the Sabbath was ordained from the Creation Genes. 2.3. Now at the
Creation, there was no difference of Jew and Gentile, how then can the Sabbath
be called the Jews Sabbath? it may be therefore the Gentiles Sabbath, as well
as the Jews Sabbath: so much for this name or nickname.

OBJECT. II.
An other objection is this, oh but this were to bring into the Church such
strictness as is intolerable: for if we admit of the Jews Sabbath day, then
must we not so much as kindle a fire on the Sabbath day, nor do any work at
all, how needful soever it be.

Hereunto I answer, that this is but an evil report, and a slander, brought
up against the Lords Sabbaths, by those who are professed enemies unto them,
and delight to bring them into disgrace with the people: for, we have formerly
shown, that the Lord never forbad the Jews to kindle a fire, in a case of
necessity, on the Sabbath: but only for the doing of such works, as might be
done the day before, or tarry until the day after: we have shown how Christ
himself was present at a feast on the Sabbath day, where in all likelihod, was
a fire kindled, to make provision for the guests; or as great works done, in
attendance to the guests by the servants, as is the kindling of a fire, which
may be done in an instant, and without almost any labor: yea our Savior
allowed in his time, of all necessary works, and works of mercy, to be done
upon the Sabbath day, as to pluck and rubb ears of corn, to lift a beast out
of the ditch; or to lead a beast unto the water, and the like: In a word,
there was no more strictness required of the Jews, in keeping of the Sabbath
day, then is at this present, required by Divines, in keeping of our Lords day:
so this objection is but a slander.

OBJECT. III.
An other objection is that it is a thing impossible to be reformed, since the
Sabbath day, has been out of use so many hund^eth years; and since the Lords
day, has been in use so long.

Whereunto J answer, impossible say you? what impossibility is there in it? the
impossibility and all the difficulty is only in the minds of men, in that they
are not willing with it: for, the Commonwealth should not loose every man a
penny by the change of the day; for it is all one to them, whither they keep
Saturday for their Sabbath, or Sunday: all the difficulty in the matter is, as
far as I can see, to possess the minds of our Gouerners with this truth of
Gods, and espetially his Majesty, and if once God shallincline his heart to
the love of this truth, a word from his mouth may reform it, his Decree,
proclamation, or the like, were enough to make this impossible thing possible.

OBJECT. IV.
An other objection is, that Gods Church is now at a sweet peace and concord,
and the bringing of this point to light, will but make a great hurly burly and
disturbance in the Church; wherefore the Author might be better occupied; or
else be silent.

Hereunto I answer, this objection is indeed every where heard of; and indeed
the peace of the Church is to be sought to the utmost; but yet we must not be
so mindful of peace, as to forget holiness; for the Apostle has joined these
ij together, saying, Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the
which no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.14. peace with the Church in keeping
the Lords day, and war with God, in profaning of his Sabbath day, is no
comfortable nor safe peace.

Let me desire such as rest upon these objection, to read and perpend what the
Lord spoke, by his Prophet Isaiah, against the people that would not hear Gods
Law, but rather such things as might please them, and make no disturbance
amongst them, saying, It is a rebelliouse people, children that would not hear
the Law of the Lord; which say unto the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets,
Prophesy not unto us right things: but speak flattering things unto us: Isa.
30.9.10.

The gloriouse Gospel, the Gospel of peace, the word of Truth, did it bring
peace into the world? no; I am come (says our Savior) to put fire on the
earth, Luke 12.49. and again, Think not that I am come to send peace into the
earth, but the sword, and to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, Mat. 10.34. such is the frowardness of man's
nature, as this truth of Gods Sabbath, will never enter neither, with the
peace of men.

OBJECT. V.
An other objection is this; what shall we do, say some; Ministers are at
variance, one says the old Sabbath day is in force still, and others say that
it is abolished long agone, by the coming of Christ; wherefore I shall give no
regard to this new Doctrine, until Ministers can agree among themselves, and
till all men be at one accord in this matter: for they bring reasones on both
sids, so as a man cannot tell which to believe.

Hereunto I answer, if men shall tarry till all men are agreed, so they shall
profess no truth, nor any Religion; for all men are not at accord in any
Religion, nor almost in any point of Religion: wherefore it is a better way,
first to consider of the matter in question, whither it be a difference about
words or about things; and whither about things substantial, or
circumstanciall as ceremonies are: and as the matter is of weight more or
less, so to regard it more or less: for such may the controuercy be, as it
may concern not some men, but all men; and such it may be, as may concern all
men very nearly; now of this kind is this controuercy; for it is not a
difference about words, or unnecessary circumstances, or about that which
concerns but some few men only; but it is about an ordinance of God,
expressly commanded, in his moral Law; and therefore it is a substanciall
matter, and concerns all and every man nearly, like as do all the 10
commandments: and therefore people must not put off the matter until
Ministers be agreed, unless they will be wilfully ignorant in a matter off
great importance, and which so nerely concerns them, as does all the things
commanded in the 10 commandments.

It is a Catechism point, to know Gods Sabbath day; and a point of great
consequence, nearly concerning us all; as appears not only because it is an
ordinance established by the Moral Law; but also in this, that it is put down
in every Catechism, as behofefull for every one to be acquainted with all; now
if such a point come into controuercy, all men should give attendance unto it,
and study it, until the truth be boulted out.

Neither let this be any stumbling block, because this Doctrine is new; for,
albeit it be new unto our times, yet it is as old Doctrine, as is any in the 10
commandments: but what and if it be new to thee? the Doctrine of the Gospel
was as new to the Bereanes, as the Doctrine of the Sabbath can be to thee; and
yet they did not argue thus carelessly as you do, saying, Paul has broched a
new point of one Christ etc. And he is singular and all alone, all our
Doctoures and teachers are contrary to him; wherefore we will not harken to
what he says: but contrariwise, they took the matter presently into
consideration, they fell to search and examine the Scriptures, to see if the
things Paul taught were so or not, and are therefore commended by the holy
Ghost unto all Posterity: oh that men in these times, would turn Bereanes, and
search the Scriptures, to see if I speak according to them or not; if I bring
not an express commandment for that I cale for, let me be rejected: or try,
whither they or I come with Thus says the Lord in our mouths; I bring you the
plain Scripture, to wit, the 4th com. and they bring you nothing but their
reasones and consequences, which they say come out of Scripture, if one may
believe them; but since their reasons and consequences do thwart and cross a
plain commandment of Almighty Gods, therefore their reasons and consequences
against the Sabbath day, are to be rejected; for man's reason must not
contradict Gods express word; unless we will set reason above Scripture:
would people but mark these things, they should not be long in doubt, unless
they will. Neither should they need care, that Ministers are at variance; for
they might easily see which side to take part withal: side it with him which
brings the express word of God; rather then with them which have no word,
but only a few reasones in vented by man's cauilling brain.

OBJECT. VI.
An other objection is this, to say that the old Sabbath day is still in force,
is to say by consequence, that our Church is in an error; now can it be
thought that the Church of God can lay in such an error as this, touching Gods
Sabbath day? it is impossible.

Hereunto I answer, that it is meet we should hold as honorable an opinion of
our Church as may be; and yet for all that we are not bound to believe, that it
is a thing impossible for our Church to be in an error, and in as great an
error too as is this: there are ij. sorts of erroures, there is an error of
maliciousness and wilfulness, against the light of conscience; and there is
an error of frailty and ignorance; this latter kindof error, may and does
befale every godly person, and may befale any Church of God on earth: for it is
a property of the Church Triumphant in heaven, to be freed from all erroures.

Now that A Church of God on earth may fail, I prove by these instances; The
Patriarchs, they lived in polygamie, having many wines, which for any man now
to do, were a sin against the 7th com. Again, the Jews used to put away
their wives, giving them a bill of divorce; now that Church, lived a long time
in this error against the 7th commandment until Christ came, who reformed it
Mat. 19.7.8.9. Again, did not the Church of Galatia fale into a great error,
when the Apostle taxed them, as if they had been removed away unto an other
gospel, Gal. 1.6. Again did not Christ reprove the Churches of Pergamus, and
of Thyatira for corruptiones in them, by suffering them that maintained the
doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicholaitanes, and the woman Iezabell, Revel.
2.12, 13.14.15.18.20. Lastly, and to add no more, how came it about (if a
Church of God cannot err about such a point as the Sabbath day) that those
purest and primitive Churches, which lived immediately after the Apostles, did
neglect to keep this Lords day Sabbath, for diverse hundredth of years; for so
says M. Perkins they did, and cites his author Leo and Anton: Edict: see
Perk: in his first volume upon the 4th com. page 48. surely my adversaries will
judge this a foul error in those Churches: by all which examples, it is too
too apparent, that a Church of God may err, and that too in Moral duties,
commanded in the Moral Law: whence it is plain, that they err who build
their faith upon this fundation, that the Church of God cannot err.

OBJECT. VII.
An other objection against the Lords Sabbath, is this, that if we admit of the
old Sabbath again, the^ we shall bring Iudaisme into the Church; and be guilty
of a kind of Heresy etc.

Whereunto I answer, it follows not: for the Primitive Churches, were of a
contrary judgment, as it appears by Athanasius in his Homily de semente:
we assemble togheter (says Athanasius) in the Sabbath day, not as if we weere
sick of Iudaisme, but therefore we meet on the Sabbath, that we may worship
Jesus, the Lord of the Sabbath, Where you see, that Athanasius in the name of
the Church, testifies, that they were not infected with Iudaisme, because they
kept the Sabbath day: the same may also be true of our Church, we may keep the
Sabbath day, and yet be free from Iudaisme.

It is to be noted, that not every thing which the Jews practiced, was to be
accounted for Iudaisme; for then the whole Moral Law should be Iudaisme:
wherefore those things only are to be accounted for Iudaisme, which never came
into the Moral Law, or 10 com. and which were written by Moses, of which
number were their Sacrifices, Priests, meat, new moons, feasts, and annual
Sabbaths: but as for this old Sabbath wherein God himself rested, this was put
into the Moral Law, and written by the finger of God; and to sanctify this
Sabbath, is no more Iudaisme, then to honor our Superioures, is Iudaisme; for
why should the things commanded in the 4th com. be more Iudaisme, then the
things commanded in the 5th com.?

Since they cannot prove this Sabbath to be a ceremony and abolished, as you
have seen in the 4th part of this book, it is therefore absurd for them to
call the Sanctification of the Sabbath Iudaisme.

Yet further, since they only who keep the Sabbath, do observe and yield
obedience to the Law in the integrity and perfection thereof, and do give God
his wholl worship in all the parts thereof; they may as well say it is Iudaisme
for a man to be entire and pefect in the Law, and to give God his wholl worship
intirly; and brand him with Iudaisme, unless he will mancle Gods Law, and be
partial in the Law, and in Gods worship, serving God by halues.

And further, if it be Jewish and Iudaisme to keep the Sabbath day, to wit,
the old Sabbath day. then 1. the 4th com. is Jewish: for it commands nothing
but Sanctification of the old Sabbath day. 2. If it be Iudaisme to keep the
old Sabbath, then is it Iudaisme for Ministers to call in the Pulpit for the
Sanctification of the Lords Sabbaths, and to use the name Sabbath day: for this
is as well a Jewish name, as the keeping of it is a Jewish practice: and if we
may use the name without tincture of Iudaisme, why not the thing named also? 3.
What is the keeping of the Lords day better then Jewish? for do not we
resemble the Jews, by setting a part on wholl day in every week for Gods
worship, as they did? 4. Since the Sabbath day was commanded to be kept, in
imitation of God, as that we should Rest on the 7th day, because God rested on
the same day, Exodus 20.10.11. men may therefore say it is Jewish, and Iudaisme,
to become followers of God. 5. Since the Sabbath was kept in memory of the
Creation, men may say it is Jewish, to celebrate weekly, a thankful
remembrance of the Creation.

For matter of Haeresy, both Athanasius, Ignatius, and the primitive Churches
observation of the Sabbath day, will clear us of Haeresy: to observe the
Sabbath with its typical and shadowish quality, as a sign and Shadow of
Christ (if ever it were so) this were Haeresy: but renowncing all shadowish
respects, and to keep it only as a sign of the Creation, and remembrance
thereof; as a sacred time for the worship of God; as a fit time to exercise
mercy in to man and beast, by a rest from labors, and so as an help unto
these moral duties of rest, and God worship, this can be no Haeresy: for we
refrain those meats in a fast, which were shadowish; and observe Whie-Sunday
or Pentecost day, which was a shadow of Christ, and yet are far enough from
Haeresy: see Act. 21.20.26. Romans 14.5. hereto I might add the Testimonies of
all those Divines, justifying this point for orthodox, which you shall find
hereafter in my third argument, for the defense of the ancient Sabbath.

I grant, the Laodicean Counsel anathematized it; but the more ancient and
more pure Churches Sanctified it.

If it be Haeresy to keep Gods Sabbaths: then 1. it is Haeresy for Ministers
in Pulpits to use the name Sabbath day. 2. It is Haeresy to celebrate a day
weekly in a thankful remembrance of the Creation. 3. It is heresy for the
Church and people of God, to become followers of God, by working when he
wrought and resting when he rested. 4. It is heresy to walk in obedience to
the 4th co^. 5. It is heresy to be entire and perfect in Gods Law, and to have
an impartial respect unto all Gods commandments: yea it is heresy to give God
his wholl worship intirly. In a word, since the Sanctification of the Sabbath
is a part of Gods worship, if for all that men will call it heresy, I say with
S. Paul Act. 24.14. After the way which they call Haeresy, so worship I the God
of my fathers.

OBJECT. VIII.
An other objection is this, that this point of the Sabbath, it is no
fundamental point, since it is a question but about the day only: and
therefore not much to be regarded.

Hereunto I answer, that these men do say and unsay again, as it may make for
their advantage; for sometimes thus, they argue, the Sabbath day is a matter of
great consequence in the Church; and is it possible that Gods Church, should
have been ignorant in such a fundamental point as is the Sabbath day? thus
sometimes when it may make for their advantage, then the Sabbath day must needs
be a fundamental point, and at an other time, as here you see, then it is no
fundamental point, and therefore not to be regarded.

2. If the Lords day, be in their account a fundamental point; the^ must the
Sabbath day be fundame^tall also; for both are questions about a day: and, the
Lords day, is come into the room of the Sabbath day, as they say; and therefore
the one must needs be as fundamental as the other.

3. Albeit this be but a question about a day, yet is it no less fundame^tall,
then other things commanded in the Moral Law: for this day is as well
commanded there to be Sanctified, as any thing else is there commanded: yea,
and this, it is commanded not in the second Table, but in the first Table, and
that too, with a Memento, above all other things there commanded. and whereas
they say it is a question but about a day only: I answer, thus might a man
extenuate any of the 10 com: whereas in the 10th com. the Lord forbids
coveting a neighbors house, servant, or any thing that is his: against this
one might object saying, this is no fundamental point, since it is a question
but about an house, peradventure some poor cottage: or but about a ma^s
servant, or some small thing, that is my neighbors: and whereas the com. says.
Thou shall not Covet: may one say, coveting, it is but a thought, and thoughts
are free: or it is but a desire, and what is my neighbor the worse, for my
desire of his house, so be I take it not from him? and whereas we are commanded
to love our neighbor as our selves: may we thus extenuate the matter, saying,
my neighbor of whom the question is, he is but a poor fellow, a simple man
etc?

Lastly, that the Sabbath day is a fundamental point, it appears by the
judgment of our Church, who put it into our Catechismes amongst fundamental
points of Religion. 2. as a work of the Law, so it is necessarily required, in
a justified man Iam. 2.10.21.24. and so it is a fundamental.

OBJECT. IX.
An other objection is this, that many thowsands of our forefathers have lived
and died ignorant of this point; and are gone to heaven without the knowledge of
this Sabbath day, so that a man may go to heaven without the knowledge of it:
and further, there is nothing required of us but faith and repentance; and if we
have these all is well.

Hereunto I answer, how can you be said to have repentance, when as yet you
live in the sin of Sabbath breaking, contrary to the 4th com? yea, refuseing
to take knowledge of this your sin, when knowledge is tendered unto you? is
this repentance? I wish men to look better to their Repentance then this comes
too, let them not flatter themselves.

Whereas they plead that thowsands of our forefathers are gone to heaven,
ignorant of this point: I answer, and what is that unto us? their case and ours
differ as much as the day does from the night; their times were times of
ignorance and darkness, for God had not revealed this point unto them; neither
was the knowledge thereof tendered unto them; but in our time, we have the day
light in this point revealed unto us, Gods truth is made manifest and tendered
unto us: now God is pleased to put a great difference betwixt men in these two
estates, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, The time of this ignorance
God regarded not: but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. Act.
17.30. Now be it that God winked at the ignorance of our forefathers, yet now
when means of knowledge is tendered, he will not so wink, but admonishes all
men every where to repent. 2. Thus we may live in the sins of our
forefathers, and plead, that thowsands of them that committed them are gone to
heaven, as Lot, Noah that was drunk, and David that committed adultery: The
Patriarchs are in heaven, and yet lived in Polygamie, the believing Jews are
in heaven, and yet they put away their wives with a bill of diuor cement: may
we think to do the like, and go to heaven, since God has now revealed
himself more fully to the contrary? But suppose we that a man might get to
heaven in the ignorance of this point, is it a property of a child of God, to
go to heaven as blind and ignorant as he can possibly? or rather to grow in
knowledge daily, as the Scripture admonishes us? will thou bequeath unto God a
soul blind of one eye, when thou may give him thy soul with perfect sight
of both eyes?

OBJECT. X.
An other objection is this, and it is in every man's mouth, saying. so be we
give God the duties of the day, it matters not so much for the day it self,
either this day or that day may serve the turn; the duties are, to rest from
our labors, and to worship God publikly and privately, now these are the
things which God does regard; but as for the precise day, that we think should
not be so much regarded.

Hereunto I answer, it is true indeed, that this objection possesses the minds
of many that are very Religiouse and well affected, but herein they bewray
their ignorance, and their halting and haluing with God: the things which God
has joined together let no man put assunder; did not God join the day, and
the duties of the day, both together in one commandment? and has not the day
the same Authority to countenance it, that the duties of the day has? in a
Bond there is ij things enjoined, the day of payment, and thesemme of money;
now is it not a most absurd thing for any man to reason thus; it is the money
that my Creditour chiefly regards, and so be I pay him his money, it matters
not so much for the day; whither I pay it upon the right day specified in the
Bond, or on some other day after it? men dare make more bold with God and bis
Bonds, then with a Creditour; though man will not put it up, yet they make God
to put up any thing; men think it enough to obey half of Gods 4th com. and to
leave the other half undone: but God must have an account given him one day,
for his whole 4th com. as well as for the one half of it: yea why should we
not yield God obedience, to the one half of his 4th com. as well as to the
other half? this is not to have respect unto all Gods commandments with David
Psalm. 119.6. God will have an account as well for the least of his
commandments, as for the greatest, Who soever shall break one of these least
commandments (says our Savior) shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5.19. Now be it that that part of the 4th com. which commands
the day and time be never so little in your account, yet is it not less then
the least of all the things commanded in the Moral Law.

Yet further, full little do men think what a deal of inconvenie^ce does
follow upon this objection, in sleiting of the time and day specified in the
Moral Law: for since this sleiting of the 7th day, has crept into the Church,
what a deal of instability, and profanesse has crept in with it: yea, it is
to be noted, that since this sleiting of the old Sabbath, has been received,
Sabbaths never did thrive in Churches: for the discovery whereof, let us take a
survey of the Christian Churches: look we first into the Church of Rome; how
do they keep the Sabbath in these days? as for the right day, to wit, the
7th day, they hold that abolished, and therefore they keep not that day; well
then come we to the Lords day, and how keep they that? why the Lords day they
keep indeed; but, like a Common Holy day: but as a Tradition of the Church:
now had they retained the ancient purity of the 4th com. holding themselves
closse unto the 7th day, as it is written in the 4th com. durst they have kept
the Sabhath day so profanly, as now they keep the Lords day?

Since we are upon the point, we may by the way discouermore of Romes
abominations; we use to charge her with blotting our and raseing the second
com. so as they have but 9 commandments, but if we look upon the matter a
little better, we shall find that they have blotted out and rased also the 4th
com. and so they have but 8 comma^dements: for they keep no day by virtue of
the 4th com. neither the 7th day, nor the 8 day, so as the 4th com. stands
with them for a Cipher: and whereas there are but 4 commandments in the first
Table, they have rased out two of them, and have lest but ij of them remaining:
so then, the Church of Rome has rejected two of Gods Tenn commandments, and
retains but eight of them: and whereas there be four com. in the first
Table, they have rejected two of those four, and retain but two still.

Again, look we upon the Anabaptists, of whom there be great multitudes in
the Low Countries, and they keep no Sabbath day, in conscience of any
commandment from God, but only for order sake: and this their profanesse, I
must impute unto this sleiting of the day mentioned in the 4th com. as for
their neglect of the Lords day, any man may see they do not that without a
cause; since there is no institution for it left by Christ: and as for their
neglect of the 7th day, this I impute unto the general sleiting of the 7th day,
made by all Churches, the which they being nusled up in, have grown to sleit
it also: nevertheless, this they will confess upon argument, that if any day
ought to be kept for a Sabbath, it must be the 7th day: so thus we see, what
evil effects have followed since the sleiting of the 7th day, has crept into
the Church: for Papists keep no Sabbath according to the 4th com. and
Anabaptists keep no Sabbaths at all, as instituted of God, but count every
day a Sabbath; or all days a like.

Lastly come we unto Protestants, and amongst our selves, we shall find that
much evil has crept into Churches, since the sleit opinion of the 7th day
has invaded the world: for the Church at Geneua, it is in every man's mouth,
how sleitily they have kept all Sabbaths: for the Churches in the Low
Countries, and up into Germany, it is well known how light an esteem they
have had of Sabbaths: and for our own Church of England, it is yet in the
memory of man, how sleit an esteem has been made of Sabbaths, not many years
past: now can we think that these, so famous Churches, would have been so
sleitey in a matter so seriouse, were is not hence, that that special time of
the 7th day, written in the moral Law, is sleited, as deemed a ceremony? which
being taken for granted, they all saw full well, that the 4th com. could not be
pressed upon the Lords day; and hence it, was that they gave liberty, and took
liberty on the Lords day; and thus Gods time being sleited, all Sabbaths were
neglected; and so in conclusion, you see Sabbaths did never thrive and prosper
in the Church, as they would have done, if this time had not been sleited.

Come we unto some particular men; since the day, to wit, the 7th day, has
been sleited, no stability could be found out for any Sabbath day; but even
Divines of the chiefest rank, have staggered and been in a mamering what to
say or think of the point; for example, worthy Perkines, we can speak in
these points (says he) but by likelihoodes: I, but had the 7th day been still
in use, he could have gone beyond likelyhoodes, and have spoken peremptorily
and without doubtings: what should I rekone up Calvin, Zanchie, Vrsinus, with
many others forecited, all which have so sleited all Sabbaths, since this sleit
esteem of the old day, has invaded the Church, as that their judgments are,
that now there is no Sabbath day of higher nature then an indifferent thing,
and that our present Sabbath is to be kept, but for order sake: Lo these are
the fruits that come from this objection, of sleiting the time, as if God
regarded nothing but the duties in the day, but not the day it self: these I
say are the fruits of sleiting the time in the 4th com. to wit, Instability
and doubtfullnesse in Judgment touching the Sabbath: and profanesse in
sanctifying Gods Sabbath: and where these two take place, Sabbaths shall never
thrive nor prosper long: I never look to see, either Divines stable in
judgment, and vnanimouse in consent touching Sabbaths; or Churches zealouse in
Sanctifying them, until first all agree to honor that very day and time
commanded in the 4th com. slight not this time therefore, since the fruits of
such doings, has been and will be of so evil consequence.

OBJECT. XI.
Some object thus, saying, why now all times are alike under the gospel: there
is no time more holy then other; or more fit for the worship of God then other
now.

I answer, 1. Why may there not be some time now under the gospel, more Holy
then other, as well as there are now some persons, more honorable then other?
if by the 5th com. we hold some persons, as our Superioures, more honorable
then other; why then by the 4th com. may we not hold some time, as the 7th day
Sabbath, more holy then other?

2. As touching the fitness of time for Gods worship: I answer 1. that time
which God has commanded for his worship, as the 7th day, Exodus 20.8.10. is a
more fit time for it then such times as God never commanded; of which kind are
all the other 6 days. 2. An holy and hallowed time, such as is the 7th day,
Genes. 2.2.3. is more fit for holy duties, then is a common or vnholly time,
of which kind are all the other 6 daies^ common bread, when it is once
consecrated, is more fit for the Sacrament then other bread; and so the 7th
day, it being once Sanctified Genesis 2.2.3. is more fit for sacred duties, and
Gods worship, then other days,

SECT. III.
Having taken out of the way, their usual obiectiones, which they raise
against the Lords Sabbaths, I come now to prove the point and that by good and
strong evidence out of Scripture: Only one caution I desire first to propound
unto my Reader; which is, to desire him in the fear of God, to empty his mind
of all kind of prejudice, and to lay aside all forestallednesse of opinion,
either of my person, or of the cause in question, that so he may bring a mind
like unto true balances, equally poised.

It is true, that being it is an ordinance of God which I dispute for, it
should incline every godly heart, rather to embrace it then to reject it; and
rather to take part with God, and with his ordinance, then against God and his
ordinance, but if this cannot be obtained, yet let thus much be granted, that
no man read these arguments, as wishing that Gods Sabbaths may rather be
abolished then continued and established: for in vain shall his reading and my
writing prove, if he come with a mind fully bent against the point in question
beforehand, rather wishing that it may prove a falsehood then a truth: for the
better avoiding of this, let it be observed, that it is a property of an
hardened heart, of a benumed conscience, and of a man well nigh forsaken of God
to resist knowledge, and to dislike of the means thereof, when it is tendered
unto him: for this purpose see Act. 28.27. For the heart of this people it
waxed fat, and their ears dull of hearing, and with their eyes they have
winked, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their h^^rtes, and should be converted. These words were
verified upon those stifnecked and hard hearted Jews, who rejected the Gospel
of Christ, and Salvation both at once, because they would not return and be
converted, therefore they winked, least they should see etc. for they had
resolved to go on in their old way, what soever could be said to the contrary:
my earnest request therefore unto my Christian Reader, is that he would not
resolve upon it beforehand, that he will hold on in his old way, and that he
will not suffer his judgment to be converted, what soever he shall find to the
contrary: for it is a sore judgment of God upon any man, to wink with his
eyes, that so he may not see what he is taught: it is the property of an
ingenuouse Spirit rather with Samuel to say, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears: That is, to be prepared to receive and embrace, whatsoever cane
beshowne unto him, to be the mind and will of God, and so I come to my first
argument, where by I shall prove unto you, that the Lords Sabbath of the 7th
day, is now still in force.

ARGVM. I.
My first argument, to prove the 7th day Sabbath, is still in force, is because
the Lords day Sabbath is not in force, and thus it may be framed.

Every man fearing God, must maintain and defend, either the 7th day Sabbath
to be still in force, or the Lords day Sabbath.

But no man that fears God, must maintain and defend the Lords day Sabbath.

Therefore every man fearing God, must maintain and defend the 7th day Sabbath
to be still in force

Here are as you see three propositiones, if the two foremost be proved, the
third and last must be granted, as following necessarily: I am therefore now
to prove the ij. foremost propositions, and first for the first proposition or
Mayor, to wit, That every man fearing God, must defend either the 7th day
Sabbath, or the Lords day Sabbath: and this I prove. 1. Because there is none
other day in question betwixt us, but these two days, to wit, the old Sabbath,
and the new Sabbath, there is no third day, and therefore one of these two
days, must be our Sabbath day of necessity: and one of these two days, every
man must defend and stand for.

2. I prove the first proposition by this, that unless we stand for one of
these two Sabbaths, there shall be no Sabbath day at all in the Church; this
were an heinouse impiety; yea worse then a savage brutishness.

3. I prove this Major by this, that unless we all stand for one of these two
days, we are contrary unto all men; even to the Church wherein we live, for our
Church acknowledges a Sabbath, as due unto God, and she accordingly gives
him one of these two days weekly.

4. I prove this Major by this, that unless we maintain one of these two
days, we profanly and impiously live in the breach of one of Gods tenn
Commandments, by name, the 4th com. for if we deny both these days, then do
we neither keep a Sabbath day, nor the Sabbath day: all divines confess, that
the 4th com. inioyneth a Sabbath day, one or other, though not the Sabbath day,
to wit, the 7th day: so then, every man fearing God, must defend and stand for
a Sabbath day, one or other, the old day, or the new day; or else he lives in
the sinful breach of the 4th com. weekly: And thus much for the proof of the
Major, or first proposition.

I come now to the Minor, or second proposition, to wit, That no man fearing
God, may maintain and defend the Lords day for a Sabbath: and this I prove
thus, 1. Because a man cannot defend this day in faith, and Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin Romans 14.23. now it behooves every man that fears God, to
look to the government of his tongue, that he speaks not in defense of any
thing, unless he can do it in faith: now that a man cannot speak for this
Lords day or new Sabbath in faith, I thus prove it; because he has no word of
God for the grownd of his faith; and that faith which has no word of God for
its fundation, it is not faith but fansy, superstition, and presumption: That a
man can have no word of God, to grownd and found his faith upon, for the Lords
day, I thus prove it, 1. because Christ has left no commandment in the new
Testament, for us to sanctify the Lords day; it is no where said in the new
Testament, Remember the Lords day to sanctify it. 2. As there is no express
commandment for the Lords day, so is there no collection or consequence, that
can be made out of any text of Scripture, whereby it can be necessarily and
infalliblie proved, that ever Christ ordained this day, or left any
commandment touching it, with his Disciples or Apostles: and that this is so,
I prove 1. by the third part of this my book, where by way of answer, I have
shown, that none of all their Scriptures, nor reasons which they do allege
for the Lords day, will or can prove it any more then a Lecture day, at the
most; they cannot prove it a Sabbath day: and this first argument is of great
consequence, and much to be thought on.

I prove it also by the Testimony of Divines of note, and first of M. Perkines,
who thus doubtfully argues for the Lords day, in his second reason for it, in
his Cases of Conscience, Chap. 16. Sect. 2. page 106. The Sabbath day in the
new Testament (says he) in all likelihood is tied to that which we cale the
Lords day, and that as J take it (says he) by Christ himself. And then by and
by he adds these words, for in these points still we must go by likelihoods:
by all which doubting speeches you may see, that M. Perkins was of opinion,
that it could not be proved out of the Scriptures, necessarily and infallibly,
that the Lords day is a Sabbath: as for doubtful probable proofs, and
likelihoods, what have we to do with them in points of this consequence? for
if the matter be doubtful, then it cannot be done in faieth, Romans 14.23. He
that doubts eats not of faith, says Paul. and whatsoever is not of faieth,
is a sin. 2. Doctor Prideaux in his work upon the Sabbath day, thus
writes, where find you (says he) amongst the Evangelists, or Apostles, any
distinct institution of the Lords day, yea, where is the text of Scripture
(says he) whereby you can necessarily prove it? page 143. Hereunto add the
Testimony of Calvin, of Zanchie, of Vrsinus, with many others, who I have
formerly cited, as S. Augustine, Peter Martyr, Paraeus, Chemnitius, Zuinglius,
Melanchton, Hemingius, Bastingius, the two godly Matyrs M. Fryth, and M.
Tindall, with the whole Parliament assembled in the days of Edward the Sixte,
all saying, that the Lords day cannot be found in the Scriptures for a Sabbath.

My second proof of the minor, is from this, that our Savior Christ made the
Lords day a travailing day; for he travailed too and fro, in the Country, from
Jerusalem to Emmaus, a matter of 15 miles, upon the Lords day, as you may read
Luke 24.13.15.29.36. so also, the Disciples of Christ made this day a
travailing day, as you read in the fore alleged text Luke 24.13.15.29.36.
yea, which is more, the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, they were altogether
ignorant that the Lords day was a Sabbath day: and this I thus prove; the Lords
day (as the Patrons thereof hold) is celebrated in memory of the resurrection
of Christ; now the Apostles themselves did not believe that Christ was risen
from the dead, until the day was past, or until night, as you may see Mark.
16.10.11.13.14. Luke 24.36.38.41.45.46. Ioh. 20.19.26.27. Now since Christ his
Apostles, did not know and believe, that Christ was risen from the dead,
until this Lords day was past, how could they keep this Lords day, in memory
of Christ his resurrection? wherefore since Christ, and his Disciples, made
this Lords day, a travailing day; and since the Apostles themselves, did not so
much as know, that this Lords day was a Sabbath day, therefore no man fearing
God, may defend the Lords day to be a Sabbath day, unless he will reprove, not
only Christ, but also his Disciples, for traualing upon it; and unless he
will be thought to be wiser then the Apostles were, that is, by knowing the
Lords day to be a Sabbath day, which they were ignorant of.

My third proof of the Minor, is from the 4th com. for there the Lord
commands us to labor Six days, saying, Six days shall thou labor etc.
Now this commandment was never repealed; and the Lords day, is one of these 6
days, and by name, it is the first of the 6, or the first day of the week;
wherefore by Gods ordinance and commandment, this Lords day is a laboring
day, and a working day: and therefore no man fearing God, may speak to defend
the Lords day, to be a Sabbath day, and a resting day, unless he will
contradict Almighty God.

ARGVM. II.
My 2d argument, to prove the 7th day Sabbath still in force, is because it was
never yet abolished: and thus it may be framed.

Every man fearing God, must maintain and defend, either that the 7th day
Sabbath, is still in force: or else that is was abolished.

But no man fearing God, may maintain and defend, that the 7th day Sabbath was
abolished.

Therefore every man fearing God, must maintain and defend, that the 7th day
Sabbath is still in force.

For the Major, or first of these propositiones, it is of undeniable truth:
for either the 7th day Sabbath must be abolished, or else it must be in force:
one of these two must be a truth; for there is no third way: so then this
first proposition cannot be denied.

I come to prove the minor, or second proposition, to wit, that no man fearing
God, may maintain and defend that the 7th day Sabbath is abolished: and my
reason hereof is, because it cannot be defended in faieth; no man can say in
faieth, that the 7th day Sabbath is abolished: and this I prove, because there
is no word of God for the grownd of their faieth: for, there is not in all the
new Testament, any commandment or Prohibition, as a Countermand to the 4th
com. where it is expressly written, Thou shall not sanctify the 7th day Sabbath:
no, neither is there any text of Scripture, out of which it can be necessarily
proved, that the 7th day Sabbath is abolished; that this is true, it appears
by the 4th part of my book, where by way of answer unto all their abused
textes, which they brought against the 7th day Sabbath, I have shown the
vanity and absurdety of their arguments: wherefore, since they cannot soundly
and infallibly prove, that the 7th day Sabbath is abolished, therefore may not
any man speak against the 7th day Sabbath: for if he does, he speaks against
it, not of faieth, and whatsoever is not of faieth, it is sin Romans 14.23. and
no man fearing God, will wilfully use his tongue or pen sinnefully.

2. I prove the point by many absurdeties, that such do rune into, who defend
the 7th day Sabbath to be abolished: as 1. hereby they deface Gods royal Law,
mancle it, rob it of its Integrity and perfection, diminish the complete
number of Tenn commandementes, make it a moral ceremonial Law, and a very
monstre among Gods laws: this no man fearing God should do. 2. Since the
Lords day is no Sabbath day, they that defend the 7th day Sabbath to be
abolished, they cast down all Sabbaths of Gods, and so draw us to
Anabaptistry, and open a flood gate to all impiety and profaneness among
people: which no man fearing God should do. 3. Since no day can be Sabbath day
by the 4th com. but the old Sabbath day, as has been proved, therefore they
that hold and make it abolished, they make that holy prayer of our Church a
mere babbling with God: for the 4th com. being rehearsed, in vain we say, Lord
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law: now no man
fearing God, should make frustrate such a devout, and ancient prayer of our
Church, by his absurd tenentes. I might mention other absurdeties, but I list
not to repeat them.

ARGVM. III.
My third argument to prove the 7th day Sabbath to be still in force is,
because so much is confessed by Divines, that are no friends but enemies unto
it: and thus it may be framed.

If such as are no friends but enemies unto the 7th day Sabbath, do confess
that it is still in force, then the 7th day Sabbath is still in force.

But such as are no friends but enemies unto the old Sabbath, do confess that
it is still in force.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath is still in force.

As for the consequence it is clear: for albeit the Testimony of a man in his
own case, and for his own advantage be of small esteem, yet a testimony
which a man gives against himself, is ever accounted strong: wherefore if I
shall prove, that such as mislike of the 7th day Sabbath, do for all that
affirm that it is still in force, then the point must needs be yielded to me.

And so I come unto the Minor, and here I shall prove, that such as are no
friends to the 7th day Sabbath, do confess that it is still in force: and
this I shall prove either by their express words, or else by necessary
consequence from their words: for albeit they never intended to speak a word
in defense of Gods Sabbath, yet so clear and apparent has been the truth, as
they could not but speak for it, albeit they favored it not. my first
Testimony shall be that of Doctor Prideaux in his book of the Sabbath Page
140. It is manifest (says he) that our Savior did often contend with the
Pharisees, about the superstitiouse observation of the Sabbath day, but where
is there any thing about the abrogation of it? at vbi de abrogatione ipsius
suspicio? and where is there any mention of setting the Lords day in the room
of it? did not the Apostles keep the Sabbath of the Jews, with the Jews,
without any scruple, after the ascension of Christ? and did not the followinge
Churches do the like for many years? If then, there be no suspicion of the
abrogation of the Sabbath day, in the new Testament, as Doctor Prideaux says,
then it necessarily follows, that the Sabbath day is still in force.

My second Testimony shall be that of M. Perkines on the Creed, speaking of
the Creation, Page 152. where he speaks of the place of Gods worship then, to
wit, the garden of Eden, and also of the time of Gods worship, to wit, the
Sabbath day: Touching the time of Gods worship it was the 7th day from the
beginning of the Creation, the Sabbath day; And here we must note (says he)
that the keeping of the Sabbath is moral: some indeed (says he) do plead,
that it is but a ceremony; yet falsely: for it was ordained before the fale of
man, at which time, ceremonies signifying sanctification, had no place. Here is
no speech of the Lords day the 8th day, it was not known at the Creation, but
all this is spoken of the Sabbath day the 7th day: and M. Perkins does plainly
affirm, that this 7th day Sabbath is moral: and contesteth against those who
hold it to be a ceremony, saying, they speak falsely etc. Now if it be moral
and no ceremony, then it must needs be still in force.

My third Testimony shall be that of M. Dod, on the commandments, who in his
exposition of the 4th com. page 122. says, that the Sabbath is moral and
perpetual: and again, Arguments to prove the Sabbath day to be perpetual,
Now that all this must be true of the old Sabbath day, and not of the Lords
day, is plain, 1. Because he names the Sabbath day, and the Seaue^th day. 2.
Because he fetches reasons to prove the morality, from Gods rest at the
creation, and because it was a day blessed: now these things cannot agree to our
Lords day. 3. In page 129. he thus concludes: So that these reasones do most
evidently confirm, to the arts of all Gods childere^, that the keeping of the
Sabbath day is a moral Law, and binds us, and all men to the end of the
world, as much as it did the Jews before Christ. 4. In page 124. he brings an
other reason for the morality of the Sabbath, from the time of its first
institution, in Adams innocence, saying, Now then since it was instituted in
Paradise, etc. it may not be reputed among ceremonies. Now this cannot be
understood of the Lords day, other reasons of his I spare: well, if the old
Sabbath day be moral, as it must be by these his words and reasones, then it
is still in force.

My 4th Testimony shall be that of Doctor Bownd in his book of the Sabbath,
page 40. The 4th com. (says he) ca^ no more be partly moral and partly
ceremonial; then the same living creature, can be partly a man, and partly a
beast: yea, as well may one suppose (says he) the second Commandment to be
partly moral and partly ceremonial also. If then, the 4th com. be not partly
ceremonial, as touching the 7th day, then is the 7th day still in force.

My 5th Testimony shall be that which I find quoted by Doctor Bownd, in his
book of the Sabbath, page 46. out of Wolph: Chron. lib. 2. cap. 1. saying, But
the 7th day, is not to be rekoned among the figures and ceremonies of the
Jews; because it is commanded in the Decalogue, which contains in it nothing
ceremonial, nothing Typical, nothing to be abrogated. If the Decalogue
contains nothing ceremonial, or to be abrogated, then is not the 7th day
ceremonial, but still enforce.

My 6th Testimony shall be that of M. Richard Byfield, on the Sabbath against
M. Brerewod page 88. where he thus writes. The 4th com. is part of the Law of
nature, and so a part of the Image of God; and (...) capable of a ceremony to
be in it then God is. If ^^n there can be no ceremony; in the 4th com. then is
not the 7th day therein a ceremony; and therefore it must be still in force. so
absurd (it seems to me) it seemed unto these Divines, to suppose a ceremony to
be in the Moral Law or Decalogue, that had they seen it, the Lords day cold
not be proved to be a Sabbath day, nor the old Sabbath to be abolished, but by
making it a ceremony, and so defacing of the Integrity and perfection of the
moral Law, they would rather have yielded the old Sabbath to be still in force.

My 7th testimony shall be the judgment of the best Divines, witness Doctor
Ames in his Theological T^esis Page 499. saying, This is a most certain Rule,
and received by all the best Divines, that the moral commandments were thus
differenced in their delivery, from the ceremoniales; that all, and only the
morales, were proclaimed publikly before the people of Israel, from Mount
Sinay, by the voice of God himself, and after also were written, and the
second time written, as it were by the singer of God, and that in Tables of
stone, to declare their perpetual and immutable continuance. If then this was
a true mark of difference betwixt morals and ceremoniales (as it was) that God
wrote no ceremonies in the Tables of stone, but only norales then is the 7th
day Sabbath a moral, and still in force: for God proclaimed the 7th day
Sabbath before all Israel, and wrote it in Tables of stone, to d^clare its
immutability and vnchangablnesse.

My 8th and last Testimony shall be the Judgment of all Divines: w^o though ^o
friends to the old Sabbath, yet confess this with one voice, that one day in
Seven is of Divine institution from the 4th com. now hence it follows, that
as we have formerly proved it, since of all the seven days in the week, none
of them can agree to the 4th com. but Saturday the 7th day, therefore of
necessity, their voice must be understood, as given for this one day of the
seven, to wit, Saturday the 7th day; and so it must be moral.

ARGVM. IV.
My 4th Argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force is,
because none other day of the week can be the Sabbath day but it only: and
thus it may be framed.

Jf no day of the week can be a Sabbath day by the 4th com. but the 7th day
only; Then must the 7th day be our Sabbath day.

But no day of the week can be a Sabbath day by the 4th com. but the 7th day
only.

Therefore must the 7th day be our Sabbath day.

As for the Major or first Proposition, no man will deny it: for every man
stands to maintain a Sabbath; and also, a Sabbath from the 4th com.
wherefore, if no day of the 7 can be Sabbath by the 4. com. b^t the 7th day,
then of necessity they must hold the 7th day to be our Sabbath day.

And so I come to the Minor, or second proposition, to wit, that No day of the
week, can be a Sabbath day by the 4th com. but the 7th day only. And this I
prove from the 4th com. it self, where the Lord has commanded us to work all
the days of the week, save the 7th day: for there the Lord has expressly
commanded us, to work and labor upon the Six days, saying, Six days shall
thou labor, and do all thy work. Exodus 20.9. wherefore, we cannot both work
upon these Six days, and also keep one of them weekly, for a Sabbath day,
therein resting from work: this were impossible, to work upon every one of the
6 days, and yet to rest from work upon some one of them: Nay further, this
were to make God to contradict himself, and that in one and the same
commandment; if he should by this 4th com. inioyne men to work upon the 6
days, and yet for all that, should inioyne men in the same commandment, to
rest from work in one of those 6 days: wherefore no day of these 6 days, can
be a Sabbath day by Gods 4th com. this is most plain, unless you would
suppose foolishly, that God should say, and unsay it again, with the same
breath: wherefore, since none of the 6 days of the week can be Sabbath day,
therefore the 7th day only must be the Sabbath day.

I cannot devise what euasiones, they should find against this truth, unless
these two; the one is this, it is true (may they say) Six days we must labor;
by the 4th com. and do we not labor Six days, and the^ rest the 7th day,
constantly every week? Mo^day, Tewsday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday, in these 6 days we labor, and on Sunday, the 7th day, we rest from
labor; new the 4th com. does not tell us which 6 days we are to labor in.
Hereunto I reply, that this kind of answer is common indeed, but it is idle
and foolish; for this were to count the days of the week in a most absurd
fashion, differing both from the computation of our own Church; and also of
the Scriptures: as for our Church wherein we live, do they not all account
Sunday or Lords day, the first day of the 7, or of the week? how then comes
it about, that these men will begine at Monday, for the first day of the week?
as if Monday were the first day of the week, or of the 7 days. 2. This
account is differing from the Scripture account: for the Scriptures have ever
rekoned our Sunday or Lords day, for the first day of the week, as we read
Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.1.2. Luke 24.1. Io. 20.1. The day after the Jews Sabbath,
was called the first day of the week, Luke 23.56. Ioh. 19.31. Mark. 16.1. Mat.
28.1. compared with Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1. Mark. 16.2. and Mat. 28.1. Now it is
known to all the world, that Saturday is the Jews Sabbath day; so then Sunday
must be the first day of the week; because Saturday the Jews Sabbath day, is
the 7th day, and the last day of the week. It is also plain by this, that we
all hold, that Christ rose upon our Sunday, or Lords day, now the Scripture
calls that day whereon Christ rose, the first day of the week; wherefore if
these men will begine at Monday for the first day, they have rejected Gods
account, and therefore we may reject this their account: forasmuch as we are
about Gods matters, we must follow Gods account: wherefore, since this account
to begine the week at Monday is a nouelty, and of man's devise, it is to be
rejected as unwarrantable; there is none accounte warrantable, but a Divine
account, and that account is to rekone Sunday for the first day: neither is
there any account warrantable in the Church, but the Churches account, and the
Church wherein we live, accounts the Lords day, or Sunday, for the first day
of the week, and not Monday.

Furthermore, if the Jews might have taken this liberty, to begine the week
where and at what day they would, as these men do, then might they have
disappointed God of his 7th day Saturday Sabbath, before Christ's coming in the
flesh; and if they would have begune at Monday for the first day, as these do,
they might have labored upon that day, whereon God rested; and profaned the
Saturday Sabbath, and given God the Sunday Sabbath as we do now; for if they
had rekoned Monday for the first day, then Sunday after would have been the 7th
day.

Finally, whereas they say that the 4th com. has not declared unto us which 6
days we should labor in, this is false: for God has plainly discovered it in
his 4th com. which are the 6 days; and that these ways, 1. they are those 6
days we should labor in, which God himself labored or wrought in, to wit,
the first 6 days from the Creation; as you may see by the reason added to the
com. for in 6 days the Lord made the heaven and the earth etc. Exodus 20.11. so
God setting himself as a pattern unto us, we are to follow his ensample,
which is, to work on those 6 days, wherein God himself wrought: which point,
we have further proved in the exposition of this part of the 4th com,
formerly. 2. God has revealed it, in his 4th com. by commanding us to sanctify
the Sabbath day; now the Sabbath day, was on the 7th day, on our Saturday;
wherefore seeing we know which day is the resting day, thereby we know which are
the laboring days; for all the 6 days which go before the Sabbath day,
resting day, or Saturday, those are the 6 working days. So you see, it is but
an idle cavil, to raise doubts about the 6 days which God appointed out for
labor. 3. If we will not imitate God, laboring those very 6 days wherein God
wrought, then we fale into these absurdeties. 1. that as they begine and make
Monday the first, so may I begine at Tewsday for the first, or Thursday, or
Friday, or skip over 100 or 10^0 days before I set a first day, and so God
shall have a Sabbath but once in an 100 or 1000 days. 2. To say the 4th com.
has not declared unto us which 6 days we should labor in, since it is
manifest by the constant practice of the Church of the Jews, one may as well
say, that the 4th com. has not declared by the word (day) whither we must
keep a natural day, or an artificial day, or the day of grace, which is a
day concisting of many years: as we must have recourse to the practice of the
Jews for the one, so for the other. And thus much for their first evasion.

An other evasion they have, and it is this, that these words in the 4th com.
Six days thou shall labor, They are not a commandment, but a permission: as
if the Lord had said, Six days may thou labor, if thou will: Hereunto I
reply 1. that these words are an express commandment, as well as any other:
for they are delivered in commanding terms, as well as any other, this point I
have formerly proved, in the exposition of these words in the 4th com.
therefore here I omit to repeat it. 2. Admit that these words be but a
permission, yet so they will make enough for my purpose, and that thus; for if
God did in his 4th com. permit us, and give us leave to work, in those 6 days
wherein himself wrought at the Creation; then cannot any wise man think, that
God would in the very same commandment, forbid us to labor in some one of
those 6 days: vnlese you will think, that God permitted us to work upon a
day, and revoked his permission again, and all under one breath. Wherefore,
seeing that God gave us leave, to work by his 4th com. upon all those 6 days,
which go before the Jews Sabbath day, and our Saturday, the 7th day;
therefore if we will have any Sabbath day, from the 4th com. we must betake us
to the 7th day, our Saturday, the Jews Sabbath day: and that because God has
permitted us to work upon any day, save the Saturday. Thus much for my 4th
argument.

ARGVM. V.
My 5th argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, is
because to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, is a part of the 4th com. or a part
of the Decalogue and 10 Commandments, and thus it may be framed.

Every part of the Law is still in force.

But to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, is a part of the Law.

Therefore to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, is still enforce.

I have purposly framed this argument, for the sake of those who do so dote
upon this fiction, that the Time in the 4th com. it is but a circumstance, and
an accident, and I cannot tell what other triuall thing they make of it; but
(say they) if it could be once proved unto us, that this Time of the 7th day,
were a part of the Law, or of the 4th com. then would we soon embrace it:
well, they shall see it therefore proved to be a part of the Law of God.

For the Major, or first proposition, I thus prove it, Every part of the Law
is still in force, because the Law is still in force, for if the Law be in
force, then of necessity the parts of the Law must be in force this follows
necessarily, by the rule of Logicianes, Posito aut remoto toto, necesse est
poni, vel remoueri parts. But the Law is in force, as you may read, Romans
3.31. Rom, 13.8.9.10. yea the whole Law is in force, as you may see Mat. 5.18.
Iam. 2.10. for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one
point, he is guilty of all. Therefore all the parts, or every part and
persell of the Law is in force.

In a word, whosoever denies this Mayor, he is an enemy to the Integrity and
perfection of Gods Law, he must be partial in the Law: yea, he must hold it
Jewish and Iudaisme for any to be entire and perfect in the Law, that is, to
have an indifferent and impartial respect unto all the parts of Gods Law: for
whosoever is entire and perfect in his obedience to Gods Law, he will sanctify
his Sabbaths as one part of his Law, which these men must account for Iudaisme:
and so much for proof of the Mayor.

I come now unto th proof of the Minor, or second proposition: and here I
prove, that to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, is a part of the Law: my first
reason is, because the Sanctification of the 7th day Sabbath, is as well and as
much commanded in the Law, as any other duty therein mentioned is: for other
duties, are delivered but in commanding terms, and so is this: for the Lord
says, But the 7th day is the Sabbath etc. in it thou shall not do any work.
Where you see, that God expressly mentions the Time and day, to wit, the 7th
day: and of this Time and day, he says, In it, thou shall not do any work:
so that God has as well forbidden men, to labor and work upon the 7th day;
as he has forbidden men, to kill, to Commit adultery, or to steal: and
therefore the 7th day, and the sanctification of it, is no less a part of the
Law, and may challeng it of right, then are the commandments of murder,
adultery, and stealing.

2. In a bond, there the debtor is bound unto ij. things, the one is the sum
of money, the other is the Time and day when it must be paid; now will any man
say, that the Time and day mentioned in the bond, is no part of the bond?
there is the same reason of the things in a bond, and of the things in the
bond of the 4th com.

3. The Jews were commanded to circumcise upon the 8th day; and to eat the
passover on the 14th day; now will any man think, that these days commanded,
were no parts of those Commandments?

4. An other reason to prove the time and day to be a part of the Law, is
because if it be taken away, then the Law is imperfect and lame: for, take away
these words, But the Seventh day, from the 4th com. and then you leave the 4th
com. imperfect and lame for it wants those words which the Almighty wrote in
it, to wit, these words, But the Seventh day. 2. As hereby the Law is lamed in
its words, so also is it in things; for, our new Sabbatharians, when they have
abolished the old Sabbath, the 7th day Sabbath, then they think the Law is
imperfect, for it wants a day: and therefore they have patched it up again
with a new day, to wit, the Lords day; saying, the 4th com. commands now the
Lords day: wherefore, themselves are my witnesses, that the Time and day, is a
part of the Law, and also a part so necessary, as they hold the Law
imperfect, until they have put in a new piece to make up the breach: when a
stud or pillar of an house is taken away, so as they must set in a new stud or
pillar into its room, then that old stud surely was in right account, a part
of the house; so is it here, since a new day must be put into the 4th com. in
the room of the old day, surely the old day was a part of the 4th com. a man
may therefore as well take away the studes or pillars of an house, as abolish
the 7th day Sabbath; and as the one tends to the ruin of the house, so the
other tends to the ruin of the whole Law of God, but specially of the 4th
com.

5. If these words, But the 7th day is the Sabbath, be no part of the Law, or
4th com. then are we not now bound to give God one day in 7 for a Sabbath: for
one day in 700 may suffice; and more we are not commanded, if so much.

6. Those words which expressly forbid servile labor, are a part of the Law or
4th com. But these words, The 7th day is the Sabbath, in it, thou shall do no
manner of work, do expressly forbid servile labor: Therefore these words, The
7th day is the Sabbath etc. are a part of the Law and 4th com.

7. Those words, the breach whereof are punishable with death, are a part of
the Law or 4th com. for punishment implies sin, and sin presupposes a
law: But these words, The 7th day is the Sabbath, in it, thou shall do no
work, are punishable by death: see Exodus 31.15. Exodus 35.2. Therefore are
these words, The 7th day is the Sabbath etc. a part of the Law or 4th com.

8. If these words, The 7th day is the Sabbath etc. be no part of the Law or
4th com, then by so saying, you condemn all Expositors: for they affirm that
in these words, one day in 7 is commanded etc. which could not be, if these
words were no part of the Law or 4th com. and thus much for my 5th argument.

ARGVM. VI.
My 6th argument to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force is,
because it is the 7th day, besides which there is no 7th day; and thus I frame
it.

That day which is a 7th day, besides the which there is no 7th day; that day
must be our Sabbath day:

But Saturday the 7th day, is a 7th day besides which there is no 7th day:

Therefore Saturday the 7th day, must be our Sabbath day.

For proof of the Mayor or first proposition: many Divines are of judgment,
that the 7th part of time is Gods, and to be consecrated to his worship and
service as moral: wherefore all such Divines must approve of this Major, to
wit, that that day which is a 7th day, besides which there is none other 7th
day, that day must be our Sabbath day, consecrated to Gods worship and service:
my reason hereof is, because that day which is the 7th day, besides which there
is no 7th day, it is the 7th part of time, in the strictest and best accounte.

2. All Divines in expounding of the 4th com. do expound these words, The 7th
day is the Sabbath, Exodus 20.10. to be understood of a 7th day: and so they
would have a 7th day to be in force, though not the 7th day: wherefore, since
they hold a 7th day to be in force; they must needs grant, that that day which
is a 7th day, besides which there is none other 7th day, it must be our Sabbath
day: and thus all Divines do justify my Major, w^ither hey hold a 7th part of
time, to be Moral: or that a 7th day, is Moral; and so much for proof of the
Major.

I come now unto the proof of the Minor, or second proposition, to wit, that
Saturday the 7th day, is a 7th day, besides which thereis no 7th day. For this
purpose note, that a 7th day must be so accounted, either Naturally or Diuinly;
first for the account Natural, Saturday must needs be a 7th day naturally,
besides which there is none other 7th day: for Saturday is the 7th day from the
Creation; and there is no 7th day besides it from the Creation: now the account,
which fet cheth its beginning, from the Creation, that is the natural account;
because time and days, begane at the beginning of the Creation; and he that
counts days in number as they were in being, he follows the Natural
computation. Further, as Saturday is naturally the 7th day, besides which there
is none other: so Saturday is the 7th part of time, in a natural accounte,
besides which there is no 7th part of time, this is very apparent at the first
view.

2. For the account Divine; Saturday must needs be a 7th day in Divine account,
besides which there is none other 7th day: for the Scriptures (whose computation
is Divine) do inform us that Saturday is a 7th day; inasmuch as they cale the
day whereon Christ rose, the first day of the week, Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. and
that is our Sunday; now if Sunday be the first day of the week, in a Divine
account, then Saturday which went before it, or the Saturday which comes after
it, must be the last, and a 7th day of the week, in a Divine account: and
forasmuch as the Scripture, accounts no day, the first day of the week, but
one, to wit, our Sunday; therefore besides Saturday, there can be none other 7th
day, in a Divine account. Further, as Saturday is a 7th day, besides which there
is no 7th day, in a Divine account; so is Saturday, the 7th part of time, in a
Divine account, besides which there is no 7th part of time.

Thus you have seen the Minor proved, to wit, that Saturday the 7th day, is a
7th day, besides which there is no 7th day: and it is proved to be a 7th day,
both in the account Natural, and Divine.

Further if we shall come to the computation of all Christian Churches, whither
Protestants or Papists, still Saturday will be both the 7th day, beside which
there is no 7th day; and also the 7th part of time: for do not all Churches,
account our Lords day, or Sunday, for the first day of the week? if then
Sunday be the first day, Saturday must be the 7th day: and also, if there be no
first day of the week but one, to wit; Sunday; then can there be no 7th day of
the week but one, to wit, Saturday.

One thing be pleased to note, that since Saturday, is as well the only 7th
part of time, as the only 7th day, as appears formerly; therefore I might
frame an other argument, concluding Saturday to be the Sabbath day: because it
is the only 7th part of time, as well as because it is the only 7th day, as
thus, That day which is the 7th part of time, besides which there is no 7th
part of time; that day must be Sabbath day. But Saturday, is the 7th part of
time, besides which there is no 7th part of time. Therefore Saturday, must be
our Sabbath day. Let me here demand of those Divines, who hold that a 7th
part of time, is to be consecrated to Gods worship, as Moral; which time they
would make to be the 7th part of time, besides our Saturday, which is the 7th
day from the Creation? I desire to know where they would begine, or which day,
shall be their first part of time, besides our Sunday, which is the first day
of the worlds Creation? it cannot enter into my head as yet, where they should
begine their account of time, unless it be from the Creation or from the
Redemption; there is none other famous action in the world, that I can
conceive of, the which Christians should make their computation of time by,
then these two, the Creation and the Redemption: Now if they will account from
the Creation, which is the Natural account, yea or by the Divine account, then
Sunday must be the first part of time, and Saturday must be the 7th part of
time: but if they will account from the Redemption; then suer I am in the first
place, that they cannot make our Sunday or Lords day, which now we consecrate
to Gods worship, to be a 7th part of time: and secondly, if they will rekone
our Lords day, to be the first day of the week and so the first day and first
part of time, it being the first day of the Redemption, Then they must hold
our Saturday to be the 7th part of time, and so to be consecrated to Gods
worship.

Thus let them rekone either from the Creation, or from the Redemption, and
they must acknowledge Saturday to be the day, to be consecrated to God.

It is meet, that all Divines, who acknowledge a 7th part of time, to be
Gods, and for his worship, (as I think the most Divines do) should tell us
also, which is that day, and which is that 7th part of time, in particular,
that so we may know it, and keep it: and it is meet also, that they tell us,
from whence they begine their account, whither from the Creation, or
Redemption, or whence else; and so show us which day is the first part of time
in their account.

Let me also demand, of all Divines, who expound the 4th com. of a 7th day,
which day of the week that a 7th day is whereof they speak? I desire of them,
that they show us, which day of the week, they will count for their first day
of the 7, so shall we see where they will begine their account, whither from
the Creation, or from the Redemption, or rather from neither of of them, but
from some new devise of their own brain: suer I am, if they will follow that
account which is natural, or that which is Divine, they must rekone our Sunday
for their first day; and then they must fale upon Saturday for their 7th.

To conclude this argument, whereas all Protestant Divines, that I either know,
or hear of, do maintain these ij Positiones; the one; that a 7th part of
time is Gods, to be consecrated to his worship and service: the other, that a
7th day is to be sanctified for a Sabbath day: whereas it is now discovered
unto them, that there is none other 7th part of time, or 7th day, in any
approved Authentical account, besides our Saturday the 7th day; my petition
here unto them all is, that henceforth, they would embrace, that ancient
ordinance of God, the Saturday Sabbath; or else, their own Doctrine and
positiones, shall rise up in judgment, against them. And so much for my 6th
argument.

ARGVM. VII.
My 7th argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, is
because it is a singular help and means to keep in the Courch of God, the
memory of that wonderful and miraculouse work, the Creation of the world by
Almighty God. and thus it may beframed.

That thing which was ordained of God, to be a special means, and a singular
help, to keep in his Church, the memory of that most wonderful and
miraculouse work, to wit, the Creation of the world by Almighty God; That
means and help, ought still to be in use in the Church of God.

But the 7th day Sabbath, was ordained of God, to be a special means, and a
singular help, to keep in his Church, the memory of that most wonderful and
miraculouse work, to wit, the Creation of the world by Almighty God.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath, ought still to be in use, in the Church of God.

For proof of the Major, or first proposition: The Almighty has done many and
maruailouse works in the world; he has done many Miracles; he caused the
Sea to diuid, and stand upon heaps, and to be a wale on either hand, until
his people went through on dry land: he caused the Sun to stand still, in the
midest of the heavens, for an whole day: he caused the Earth to tremble and
quake, the Sun to loose her light; and many dead bodies of the Saints to
awake, at the passion of our Lord Christ, with many other wonderful miracles
recorded in the Scriptures; but amongst them all, there is none that does
excel this Miracle of Miracles, the Creation of the world, how well then does
it beseem us, to keep a memory of such a miracle! for this purpose, ij.
things are to be considered, the one is, that it is a duty which God requires
of us, to magnify and praise the name of God: and how shall we perform this
better, then by keeping of a thankful remembrance of Gods works of wonder?
The other is, that this miracle of the Creation, it is not like unto many other
miracles; for that of the dividing of the Sea, it concerned the Isralites only
and that of the Sun its standing still, it concerned these times only; but
as for this of the Creation, it concerns us, and our times, every way as much
as it did the Isralites; for there is not a man, woman, or child amongst us, but
has its share and benefit from the Creation, as well as those Jews had, and
therefore we in these days, and all people to this worlds end, have and shall
have, as good cause, to keep a thankful remembrance of the Creation, as ever
any nation or people had.

But if we join both these together, as first, that it is a duty lying upon
us, to magnify the name of God, in this his so great a work of wonder; and
secondly, that this so great a work, it does redownd to the proffit and good
of every one amongst us; then what great cause, and what just cause is there,
that every one of us, should at this day, celebrate a thank full remembrance of
the work of Creation? Neither can I think, there is any man so ungrateful, as
to deny unto God a thankful remembrance of this so great work, by means
whereof we live, and have a being and all the creatures seruicable unto us,
even the Sun it self to serve us with her light and heat: whence I thus
argue.

If it be our duty, and also such duty, as we freely do acknowledge unto God
to keep a thankful remembrance of his Myraculouse work of Creation; why then
should any man deny us the special helps, and needful means, appointed of
God, to keep the memory of the Creation in his Church? there is nothing more
absurd, then to grant the performance of an holy action, to be due unto God,
and yet to deny such needful and proffitable means, as God has ordained to
that end: this were all one, as if we should grante indede, that it is a duty,
to keep an holy remembrance of the death of our Lord Jesus, and yet to deny
the use of the Sacraments in the Church, which serve to put us in mind
thereof: in a word, it were to eparate the means from the end, then the which
nothing is more absurd: wherefore, as we will approve and testify our
thankfulness to God, for so great a blessing, as the Creation is unto us; and
as we desire to give God the glory of his maruailouse works; so let us be
zealouse to maintain in the Church, all the means and needful helps thereof.

Furthermore, it will appear, that we in our times, have as great use and
need, of means and helps, to keep in memory, this great work of Gods
Creation, as ever had the Jews and people of God, if not greater need: for by
nature, we are as ungrateful, unthankful, and unmindful of Gods blessings
and mercies received, as ever they were; and we stand in as much need as ever
they did, to be stirred up by all helps and means, to give unto God, the
glory due unto his name, for his works of wonder which he has wrought: nay
we stand in more need now then they did then, by how much we live in times
longer and further off from the Creation then they did; for we are in more
danger of sleiting and forgetting this great benefit of the Creation, then
were the Israel of God, because they lived nere unto it, and hard by it as it
were, in comparison of us, who live thowsands of years after them: and who
knovveth not, how soon things done long agone, slip out of memory? or if they
slipp not quite out of memory, yet they lay there like the ingrauings written
upon grave stons, which by continual trampling upon, are well nigh worn
out: it is needful therefore that we should have all means and helps, that
may as it were daily new write, and ingraue upon out memories, the honorable
memory, of the Miracle of Creation.

It may be some will answer thus, that the means once ordained of God, ought
still to be in use, if none other as fit may be found out: but other as fit for
that use may be found out, as the Lords day: for herein we may keep a memory
of the Creation: Against this I have these reasones 1. the Lords day, or Sunday
is as unfit to keep memory of the Creation, as the Sabbath day, or Saturday is
in their account, unfit to keep memory of the Redemption. 2. the day which is
set a part to celebrate the memory of the Creation, it must have an aptenesse
in it by way of similitude, to represent it unto us; like as the Sacraments,
have aptenesse in them, to represent unto us the Redemtion: now God finished
his work of Creation, and rested on the 7th day or Saturday, and of all days
in the week, we have none that has such similitude and liknesse to Gods 7th
day, as is our Saturday, which is the same 7th day in order with Gods; and
therefore it is the only fit day for this purpose: now the Lords day, is so
far from any similitude with Gods resting day which was on the 7th and last
day of the week Genes. 2, 3. as it is the first day, and beginning of the
week. 3. suppose that me^ could invent some other day as fit as the 7th day
appointed by God, will they reject Gods choice for one of their own? could they
show us some other day, as fit in Gods account, they should speak to some
purpose, but to reject that means appointed of God, because they can find an
other which pleases them as well, is audaciouse presumption: why by like
reason, may they not as well chang the Elements in the Sacraments for others?
as well may they reject Christ's choice, as Gods choice.

But happily some may object, that some helps for the keeping in memory of the
Creation, are abolished, as for example the Sabbath day: for all Sabbaths are
abolished in Col. 2.16.17. Hereunto I answer, that the folly of this objection
has formerly been answered; here therefore a word or two shall be fufficient.
1. it is to be noted that the text Col. 2.16.17. speaks not of Signs, but of
Shadows; and as formerly it has been shown, there is a difference betwixt
Signs and shadows; wherefore this text is impertinently alleged; for we
have here to do with Signs, and not with Shadows. 2. suppose we this text
spoke of Signs, yet it spoke of such Signs as had respect unto Christ, which
are a Shadow of things to come, the body whereof was Christ, as the text
speaks: so that these Sabbaths here abolished, were only such Sabbaths as
had respect unto Christ, and to the Redemption; but we speak of a Sabbath that
was a sign of the Creation: therefore the Sabbath we here speak for, it
differs from those Sabbaths, which the Apostle abolished, as far as the
Creation differs from the Redemption: and this yet further appears in their
text; for it speaks of a Shadow of things to come, so that those abolished
Sabbaths, had respect unto things to come afterward, as unto Christ; but this
Sabbath for which we plead, it was a sign of things past, and done before, as
of the Creation: so that this Sabbath, differs from those abolished Sabbaths,
as far as things past, do differ from things to come: so then, it does not
appear, that any thing once made an help, to keep in memory the Creation,
was ever abolis^ed: and indeed it were contrary, unto all reason that it
should: for albeit that such signs should vanish, as had respect unto things
future, when once the substance was come and in presence; yet is it far
otherwise, with such signs as had respect unto things past; for here the
substance or thing signified, should never be come any nearer then at first it
was unto the sign, but rather farther off still, so as the longer the sign
lasted, the more use and need there would be of it: and so much for answer to
this fond objection.

I come now unto the proof of the minor, or second proposition, to wit, that
the 7th day Sabbath, was a special help and means, to preserve the memory of
the Creation, in the Church of God, and this I prove, because the Sabbath day,
was made a sign of the Creation; and signs are helps and means, to keep
memory of those things whereof they are signs: here then my task is to prove
unto you, for the confirmation of my Minor, these two propositiones; the one,
that the Sabbath day was once a sign of the Creation, the other, that signs
are helps and means to keep memory of the things they signify. For the
former of these, to wit, that the Sabbath day was once a sign of the Creation.
This I prove first by the Testimony of all men; and secondly by the Testimony
of the Sriptures.

For the Testimony of men; that the 7th day Sabbath is a sign, this all of
them grant, when they allege that text Exodus 31.13. against the Sabbath, as an
abolished sign: further, that this sign respected the Creation, as the thing
signified by it, is found to be the judgment of Divines, every wherein their
writings, as might be shown, if it were needful: yea, this is plain by the
common arguments in every man's mouth; for when they would prove, that the Lords
day must be a Sabbath, they thus argue, if the Jews kept a Sabbath in memory
of the Creation, then so ought we Christians, to keep a Sabbath in memory of
the Redemption: and again, the Lords day was instituted (say they) in memory
of the resurrection, like as the Sabbath day, was instituted, for me mory of
the Creation: by which kind of reasoning they do confess it, that the Sabbath
day was instituted, for the memory of the Creation.

So much for the Testimony of men: next I come to prove it by divine Testimony
from the Scripture: for this purpose see, Ex. 31.17. where the Lord speakeing
of our 6 days labor, and of our 7th day Sabbath, says thus, It is a sign
between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord
made the heaven and the earth, and in the 7th day he ceased and rested, as if
the Lord had thus said, because I labored in the 6 days at the Creation and
rested on the 7th day, therefore your 6 days labor, and 7th days rest, is a
sign between me and you, of my 6 days labor and 7th days rest, thus the
sense must be rendered, if we take the words as they are translated: but
because this kind of sense making is difficult, and not so familiar unto our
understandings, by reason the thing signified by the sign, is not expressed
but collected; therefore to make the sense of the text appear more clearly, it
is better to put the word (that) in the room of the rational partice (for)
and then the sense will be very familiar and easy: for so the thing signified
by the sign, shall be expressed in the text; and then the text should be read
thus, It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever (that) in
six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and in the 7th day he ceased and
rested. Thus you see it plain, that as all men hold, the 7th day Sabbath, was
kept in remembrance of the Creation, so this text confirms it, saying, that
it is a sign (that) God labored 6 days and rested on the 7th day.

Now that this particle translated (for) may be translated (that) it appears.
1. By the Septuagint which rendereth it (...) which may be indifferently
translated (for) or (that) according as may best fit the text. 2. In sundry
other textes our Translatores have translated the same Hebrew word (that)
rather then (for) as you may see Deuteronomy. 29.6. That ye may know (that) I am the
Lord your God: Thus I have proved the one of the propositiones, to wit, that
the 7th day Sabbath was a sign of the Creation.

The other proposition which I am to prove is, that Signs are helps and
means, to keep in memory the things they signify: and this is so plain, as I
might spare the labor toproue it: for it is the very nature and property of a
sign, to be a means to bring to mind the thing fignified by it, wherefore
serves the picture of a man's absent friend, but to help to bring him to mind?
The rain bow in the clouds, it is called a sign or a token, Genes. 4.13. and
the Lord said, he would look upon the bow, that he might remember the
Couea^t, which was the thing signified by the bow, v. 16. The passover was a
sign or toke^, which when the Angel saw, he remembered the Covenant, and
spared the Isralites, Exodus 12.13. The Lords Supper it is a Sacramental sign,
and it is of this use, to be an help and means, to remember us of the death
of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.24. you may read the like also in Genesis 17.11. and Exo.
31.13. by all which instances it is plain, that signs are helps and means,
to bring to mind, and preserve in memory, the thing absent and signified by
those signs.

Thus much for the Minor or second proposition; and also for my 7th argument,
whereby you have seen it proved, that the 7th day Sabbath must still be in
force; because it is a singular means to preserve in memory the myraculouse
work of Gods Creation.

ARGVM. VIII.
My 8th argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, is
because God has expressly commanded it, in his moral Law: and thus it may be
framed.

Whatsoever God has expressly commanded to be done, in his Moral Law, or 10
commandments, that is still in force.

But to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, God has expressly commanded it to be
done, in his Moral Law, or 10 commandments.

Therefore to sanctify the 7th day Sabbath, is still in force.

Here I will begine with the minor or second proposition, proving that first,
because it will be soonest done: the point then I am to prove is, that God has
commanded the sanctification of the 7th day Sabbath, in his moral Law, or 10
com. and here first I will prove, that the Lord has commanded the
sanctification of the Sabbath day: and 2dly, that this Sabbath day is the 7th
day: for the former, see Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy; or to sanctify it: where you see an express commandment given, to
Remember the Sabbath day; and to sanctify it, or keep it holy: and so the
former point is proved.

The next point to be proved, is that this Sabbath day, it was the 7th and last
day of the week, which is our Saturday: and this I shall prove, first by
humane Testimony; 2dly by Divine Testimony: for humane Testimony, 1. the Jews
wheresoever they live, they keep the 7th and last day of the week, our
Saturday, for this Sabbath day, here commanded, as it is well known. 2. All
Christians, both Protestants and Papists confess, that the 7th and last day of
the week, our Saturday, was the Sabbath day, commanded in the 4th com. which
point, I have incisted more largly upon, in the Exposition of the 4th com.

I shall prove the same also, by Divine Testimony, and that before the Law; at
the giving of the Law; and after the giving of the Law. 1. Before the giving of
the Law, see Exodus, 16.26. Six days shall ye gather it, but in the 7th day is
the Sabbath: in it there shall be none: So here you see, before the Law was
given, by Sabbath day, was understood the 7th day. 2. At the giving of the Law,
see Exodus 20, 10. But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord. So here at the
giving of the Law, was understood by Sabbath day, the 7th and last day of the
week. 3. After the giving of the Law, see Exodus 23.12. Six days thou shall
do thy work, and in the 7th day, thou shall Rest. And see Exodus 31.15. Six
days shall men work, but in the 7th day is the Sabbath of the holy Rest. See
also Exodus 34.2. Six days thou shall work, and in the 7th day thou shall
Rest: both in earing time, and in harvest. see also Leuit. 23.3. Six days
shall work be done, but in the 7th day shall be the Sabbath of Rest. And so it
continued in the Church until Christ's time, as you may see Luke 13.14. yea,
and after Christ's death, as you may see Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.1.2. thus you have
seen it proved, that by the word (Sabbath) in the 4th com. God, and the Church
of God, understood the 7th and last day of the week: and so you have seen it
proved, that God commanded the sanctification, of the 7th day Sabbath, in his
moral Law.

Now I come to the Major or first proposition: the proof of this will cost me
longer time then the former, not but that it is as clear as the former, but
that men of perverse minds, have wilfully bent their wites and lerning against
it, as they have done against the former, but it is no matter, truth shall
prevail, God assisting it: the point then that I am to prove is this, that
whatsoever God has commanded in the Moral Law, or 10 commandments, it is
still in force, or now to be observed and obeyed: if they deny this Major, then
I require them to give me an instance to the contrary; let them show me, where
God has commanded any thing to be done in the 10 commandments, which is
abolished and not in force now, remembering that they bring not the thing in
question for their instance.

2. Happily they will answer by lymitation, and distinguishing and so deny some
part of this Major, for example, sometime they distinguish of the substance of
the commandments and of the Accidents: granting those, denying these: by
substance, they understand that which they please to make moral in the
Decalogue, as the Rest in the 4th com. and the holy actiones of prayer,
reading, and preaching Gods word: by Accident, they understand that which they
please to make ceremonial in the Decalogue, as the time of Gods worship, to
wit, the 7th day: but this is a foolish distinction, and so much the more vile,
in that it is made against God; for has not God as well commanded the
Accident, and time, as the substance, and Rest? and is it not necessary to obey
God, in one commandment as well as in an other? for, the one is as well
commanded as the other: did they distinguish between things commanded, and
things not commanded, it were tolerable, but they distinguish of things all of
them commanded; as between great commandments, and little commandments; the
one they cale substances, the other Accidents; now the greater commandementes
which they cale substances, these they will embrace; but as for the lesser
commandments, which they please to cale Accidents, these they will reject and
deny; so then, Gods greater commandementes, they will obey; but as for his
lesser commandments, these they will not obey: and that because they are
little, and light in their esteem; but our Savior Christ has taught them an
other lesson, saying, whosoever shall break one of these least commandments,
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5.19. Let them cale
them Accidents if they will, yet since they are commandments, they are not
less then the least commandments, of which our Savior speaks.

That no distinction is to be received, whereby any thing enjoined in the 10
commandments is denied, I thus further prove it. 1. this is a position so
clear, as the Sun, that All Gods 10 commandments do bind us, to obedience
of them, and are still in force: now if it be lawful for any man, barely to
deny this truth, saying by way of answer, that some of his commandments do
not bind us to obedience; then every private man's bare denial, shall be as
authentical as this clear truth and orthodox position; which is most absurd:
for thus a froward adversary may put a man to bring a light cleerer then the
Sun, that is, he may put him to prove whither any of Gods commandementes do
bind us now or not: for example, a Minister reproves an adulterer, from the
7th commandment; and thus he frames his argument against him.

All the 10 commandments do bind us etc. But the 7th com. is one of the 10
commandments etc. Shall it be lawful for this unclean person, to deny the
Major in some part of it, by a distinction, and put the Minister to prove,
that All the 10 commandments do bind us? what an impiouse and ungodly answer
were this? why this is our case; for in my Major I affirm, that all the 10
commandments do bind us to obedience; and they make this ungodly answer, by a
distinction, that all of them do not bind us; and will put me to prove, that
they do bind us.

If this answer be lawful, why may not Papists deny that the 2d com. binds
us, or that it is still in force, saying, the 2d com. touching Images, it is
Jewish, and concerned the Jews only, and that it forbad only Jewish Images;
and that it concerns not Christians, and Christian Images? and why may not
Anabaptists, and Libertines, and our new sprung up Eatonistes, deny the whole
Law, even all the 10 commandementes, and that upon plausible pretenses also?

Furthermore, such distinctiones are Blasphemouse; and therefore to be
rejected: for, to deny that any thing commanded by God, in his 10 com. both
bind us to obedience; is to deny, that Gods will should be obeyed by us; to
reject his Sovereignty and governance; and as much as if we should say, we will
not, that God shall Reign over us. is it not Blasphemy, when the Creator
shall say, do this, and the creature shall answer, He will not? thus do they,
who by distinctions, will reject any one thing, commanded in the 10
commandments.

Further such answers as by distinctions, deny any one thing, commanded in the
10. commandments, do plainly bewray the Authoures thereof, to be professed
enemies, to the Integrity and perfection of God Law; and would that God should
be served but by halues and by peecemeale; and therefore, their such
distinctiones are unsound, and to be rejected by all men fearing God, and
loving the Laws of God.

Such answers are to be rejected, and men are solely to rest contented with
this, that it is commanded in the Moral Law, without demanding any other
proofs my reason hereof is, because neither better proofs, nor of higher
authority, can be possibly produced for the proof of any doctrine in Divinity:
for what better proof, can any man bring, or any Christian man expect, then
Gods commandments? and amongst all Gods commandments, then his 10 Moral
commandments? there is no Scripture of higher Authority, then the Moral Law.

The 10 Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords prayer, these of all other
Scriptures, are holden as principles of our Christian Religion: now how absurd
a thing it is, for any to deny principles in any Art, let all men judge that
have any skill in Arts: A man may as well be permitted by a distinction to
deny that every one of the 6 petitiones of the Lords prayer, do belong unto
us; or that some of the Articles of our faith, do belong unto us upon some
plausible reasones forged, as by a distinction to deny that whatsoever is
commanded in the 10 commandments does belong unto us.

Thus I have proved, that it is insufferable in A Christian Church, that any
man should use a distinction or denial, against this Orthodox and most clear
truth, that all things commanded in Gods 10 commandments are in force, and
do bind us to obedience. for this cause, I need not proceed any further, for
the proof of this Major and orthodox truth: for, if it be so clear and
undeniable a truth, as no man may deny it, then I may very well spare the
proof of it: Nevertheless, for the truethes sake, and for its further
confirmation, I will prove it unto you, by many and sundry arguments: but by
the way, one thing first, I would should be taken into consideration, which is
this, that Divines and all others, who are enemies unto this most ancient
ordinance, of Gods Sabbath, they are driven to shroud themselves, from the
force of this my 8th Argument, by this abominable and ungodly answer, saying,
that all Gods commandments do not bind us to obedience; or, that some of the
10 commandments, do not bind us to the obedience of them: nay, they must
hold, if they abolish the 7th day Sabbath, that it is a sin for us to yield
obedience unto all the 10. commandments, and that it is Iudaisme: I desire
that all men would take special notice of this absurdety that so they may see
what rocks, these are forced to rune upon, who deny the Lords Sabbaths.

Should common people make such answers, they deserved but a common censure,
but if Ministers; yea Puritan Ministers shall make such ungodly answers, what
censure are they worthy of? I have great reason to urge this point; because if
they grant me this truth, to wit, that all Gods commandementes do bind us to
obedience, the which no man fearing God can deny, then of necessity they must
grant me, that the old Sabbath is still in force, because it is one of Gods
commandments.

An other thing I desire should be taken into consideration, is that such as
deny any thing in my Major by any distinction, that so they may deny Gods 7th
day Sabbath, they rune into these other absurdeties, 1. they hereby do deface
Gods royal Law, making it a Morall-ceremoniall Law, an euerlasting-temporary
Law, and a very Monstre. 2. They draw us to Anabaptistry, and profaneness, that
so we should have none of Gods. Sabbaths. 3. They make an ancient and holy
prayer of our Church, a mere babbling with God: to wit, that prayer added to the
4th com. in the Congregation. 4. As the Sabbath is Gods ordinance, so the
Decalogue is Gods Law: now were men professed enemies to God, then if they
should do what in them is, to abolish his Sabbaths, and to reject as much of
his Law as possibly they could denise, it were, but suitable to their
profession: but that we, who are professed friends to God and to his Law, that
we (I say) should reject, and desire to reject as much of Gods Law, as
possibly by any wite we can devise, this is abominable: and so I come to make
proof of the point.

That all Gods commandments are now to be observed and obeyed: I prove it by
Testimony humane, and Divine: for humane Testimony, the first shall be that of
Reverent Perkines, who writing against our common adversary the Papist, he
undertakes to prove, that the religion of the Church of Rome agrees to the
corruption of man's nature: amongst many other arguments, he shows how that
Papists do repeal and make of none effect, all the 10 commandments of the
Morall-Law: and to this purpose he begineth on this wise, The moral Law
containing perfect righteousness, is flat opposite to man's corrupt nature:
therefore whatsoever religion shall repeal and make of none effect the
commandments of the Moral Law; the same religion must needs join hands with
the corruption of ma^s nature, and stand for themaintenance of it. This does
the Religion of the Church of Rome: it may beit does not plainly repeal them,
yet in effect it does, and if it shall frustrate but any one point, of any one
commandment, yea, the whole Law thereby is made vain. Perkines, in his first
volume, page 400. under the title, A papist cannot go beyond a reprobate. I
desire that these his words may be weighed; where he says, thar if the
religion of the Church of Rome, shall frustrate but any one point, of any one
comman. It does thereby make frustrate the whole Law.

Now a double use I may make of these words, the one is, that all Gods
commandments are now to be observed and obeyed: because he says, that not so
much as any one point, of any one commandment is to be frustrated; and further
he adds for confirmation thereof, that the abolishing of any one point, in
the 10 commandments, it is the abolishing of the whole Law also; and so he
has confirmed my Major. The other use I make of these his words is, by his
Testimony, to confute the madness of such Divines, as deny the Integrity and
perfection of Gods Law, and therefore invent distinctiones, whereby they may
curtaile the law, denying that whatsoever is commanded in the 10 com, does
belong unto our practice; which is the absurdety confuted in the last point
handled before this; for the further confirmation whereof, let it be observed,
that Learned Perkines says that, that religion, which frustrateth but any one
point, of any one cemmandeme^t, it does thereby frustrate the whole law; let
these Divines then see into what a snare they are fallen, by denying some on
point, in some one comman. to wit, the Lords 7th day, Saturday Sabbath, for
hereby they pull upon, not themselves alone, but upon our Christian religion
also, this guilt, to wit, that by so doing, it does abolish the whole Law, and
join hands with corrupt nature.

And further, hence it is, that he has put upon the tope of those leaves in
his book, this title, A Papist cannot go beyond a reprobate. If then a Papist
cannot go beyond a reprobate, if he frustrateth but one point, of any one
commandment; then tell me, how far some Protestant Divines, can go beyond
reprobates, who do frustrat this ancient ordinance of Gods Sabbath, expressly
commanded in the 10 commandments, and that after sufficient means of light
afforded them, by my former book? I wish those tenn Ministers, against whom
especially I write, to note this point: happily they will sleite my judgment,
but M. Perkins judgment, I know they reverence: and further, if this be good
Divinity against Papists, I trust it cannot be bade, when applied to
Protestants: these are not my collectiones, you see they are made by a man of
their own side.

Unto the Testimony of M. Perkines, let me add the Testimony of Vrsinus who
shows sundry differences, betwixt the Doctrine of the true Church, and the
Doctrine of other Sects and Religiones; one of the differences is this, In
Ecclesia lex Dei integra and incorrupta retinetur: aliae Religiones and sectae
legem Dei mutilant vel corrumpunt. Vrsi. Catechis. Page 4. Jn the Church (says
he) the Law of God is preserved intirly and uncorrupted, but other Sects and
Religiones do lame or corrupt the Law of God. In which words as you see,
Vrsinus does lay it down as a property of the true Church, to preserve Gods
Law in its integrity and perfection; and as a mark of a false Church to lame
and detracte from Gods Law: By which words, he plainly ratifieth all the 10
commandments, with whatsoever is therein commanded: Further, if it be a mark
of a false Church, and of Sectaries, to lame Gods Law, what reproach and danger,
do such Ministers bring our Church, and specially themselves into, by denying,
that all the things commanded in the 10 commandments are in force, binding us
to obedience? do they not what lies in them, labor to make our Church noe
true Church? and themselves Sectaries?

Take also the Testimony of Polanus, in his Syntag. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 10,
de lege Dei. Page 353. who having to do against Papists, that say, the 2d com.
against Images, belonged only unto Jews, not unto Christians (as many
Protestants, say of the 4th com. touching the old Sabbath) he proves the
contrary, by this argument: quia ad Christianos totus Decalogus pertinet,
because the whole Decalogue appertains unto Christianes. If this reason be
good against Papists, it cannot be bad with Protestants.

In the 4th place, I will prove it from their own mouths: for these which are
such notoriouse enemies, to the Lords Sabbaths, they do frequently in their
pulpites, reprove the Adulterer, the thief, the falswitnesse bearer, the
Blashemer of Gods name, and the rest, by the Lawof the 10 commandments,
saying, these deeds, are sins, and liable to condemnation, and must be
refrained etc. Because they are forbidden in the Law of God: which kind of
arguing, does recessarily imply thus much, that whatsoever thing is commanded
or forbidden in the Law, is in force still, and does bind us now to obedience:
the reason of this consequence is, because there is one and the same reason for
all and for every thing, which there is for any one thing; for if Gods writeing
and commanding any one thing in his Law, be a sufficient reason to incline our
hearts, unto the obedience thereof, then the same reason will move us to the
obedience of every thing, which is therein written; because God has as well
written and commanded every thing therein, as any thing: and thus you see, how
it necessarily follows from their own mouths, that because they cale for
obedience now, unto some things which God has commanded in his Law, because
he has commanded them; that therefore they must yield, that all things in
Gods Law, must now be obeyed; because he has commanded them all: wherefore,
since they teach this unto the people, they must grant it me here. Thus you
have heard this truth confirmed, both by some particular persons of note, and
also by the mouths of all my adversaries.

5. I will prove it unto you by the Testimony of our Church: In the order for
the Administration of the Lords Supper, or holy communion, set down in the
book of Common prayer, it is thus ordered by our Church, Then shall the
Minister rehearse distinctly all the tenn commandments, and the people
kneeling shall after every commandment, ask God mercy, for their
transgression of the same: and again, after that all the 10 commandments be
rehearsed by the Minister, it is ordered, that the people shall all conclude,
with this holy prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these, thy laws
in our hearts, we beseech thee. In which holy ordinance of our Church, we may
observe these things; 1. that our Church maintains the Law of Gods 10
commandments, as now in force; because we are to ask God mercy for the
transgression of them; and because we desire God to write them in our hearts.
2 observe, that our Church ratifieth, not some only of the 10 com. but all of
them, even every commandment which was written in Tables of stone: for the
Minister must rehearse distinctly, all the tenn commandment; and the people
are taught to pray to God, to write all these laws in their hearts. Thus you
see, our Church does ratify and confirm, all the laws of God, written in the
Tables of stone, as they are rehearsed by the Minister, without mutilating or
curtailing of any of them: they are no children of the Church therefore, who
deny my Major, and thus I have abundantly proved the point, by humane
Testimony, and so I come to prove it also by Divine Testimony.

But me think, ever and anon as I am writing, that some body should wonder at
me, that I should spend so many words, to prove a point so plain as this, that
all Gods commandments are now to be obeyed: why may they say, it is a point we
never till now heard doubted of, we ever took it as an Article of our faith,
that all things commanded in the Moral Law, did bind us to the obedience
thereof; and is it now become a question amongst Divines? if this principle be
doubted of now, we shall scarce know what to do in Religion, and what not to
do, what to believe, and what not to believe; but surely Sir you are mistaken,
there is no Minister that has any fear of God before his eyes, that will doubt
of this point; and for common people, they are as far from doubting of it, as
the heavens are from the earth. Whereunto I answer, that when I seriously enter
into the consideration of it, it makes my very heart to tremble within me, to
think that any man that professes godliness, should be so far in love with
old error, as to deny so clear a truth as this; nevertheless, not only
Ministers, but puritan Ministers go about to doubt of and deny this truth;
for by their distinctiones, they will deny, that all the commandments written
in the Decalogue, do bind us to obedience: which if they did not deny, I
should save this labor; and, they must embrace that most ancient ordinance of
Gods Sabbath day; wherefore good Reader wonder not at me, but rather wonder at
such your Ministers, who are become so unfaithful to God, as that rather then
they will confess an old error, they will stiffly deny a manifest truth.

My first argument then, of Divine authority is this, that every thingonce
commanded in the Moral Law, stands still unrepealed, and is therefore still
in force. For these enemies to Gods Sabbaths, they cannot prove, that any one
thing, once commanded in the Decalogue, was ever since revoked and abolished:
now whatsoever thing, God has once commanded, in his 10 comman, that thing is
to stand everlastingly, unless it can be shown, that God has revoked and
reuersed it: like as Statute Laws in our Realm, though made long since, are
nevertheless in force still, unless it can be shown, that they have been
repealed since, by the same Authority that first inacted them.

For the further strengthening of which argument, let these Scriptures be
perpended, What soever things are written aforetime are written for our
lerning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15.4. and again, For the whole Scripture is given by inspiratio^ of
God, and is proffitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness etc. 2. Tym. 3.16. In which two portiones of Scripture, you see,
the Apostle does ratify, an vninersallity of things written in the old
Testament, and an Integrity and wholenesse of the Scriptures of the old
Testament; now if we shall not apply these ij. textes to the maintenance of the
Moral Law, or 10 commandments, to maintain the vniuersallity of all things
written in the 10 commandments, and to maintain the Integrity perfection and
wolenesse of the 10 commandments, then whereunto shall we apply them? for what
portion of Scripture is there, besides this Law, in all the old Testament,
whereof it cane besaid, that all things therein written, concern our practice?
and that, that whole Scripture is proffitable to teach us, to convince us, to
correct us, and to instruct us? What scriptures of the old Testament (I say)
can be the adaequate Subject or Object, of these ij. Scriptures, but the moral
Law?

My 2d argument, to prove that all the 10 commandments, and every commandment
therein, do bind us still to the obedience of them, is this: that the Apostle
S. Paul does ratify this Law, in the new Testament; saying, Do we then make
the Law, of none effect through faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the Law,
Romans 3.31. Where you see the Apostle affirms, that he did establish the Law:
now the word Law in this text, is not to be restrained to some parts of it
only, but to be taken in the largest sense, seeing there is nothing in the
context to hinder it, now this Law is known to contain 10 commandments, Then
he wrote upon the Tables, according to the first writing, the ten
commandments Deuteronomy. 10.4. the which were numbered by God, least the number
thereof should be diminished by me^: and again, Cursed is every man, that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do
them Gal. 3.10. Here again, all things written in the Law, are ratified.

Furthermore, S. James thus writes, whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. Iam. 2.10. In which words, S.
James ratifieth all the Law, or the whole Law. so then S. Paul has ratified
the Law in its generality; and S. James in its Integrity, yea, S. James goes
further, and ratifieth all and every part and point of the Law, in as much
as, he would not have us fail, in any one point of it, as the text speaks:
yet further, see what our Savior Christ says touching this matter, whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be caled the least in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.19. Here then our
Savior ratifieth, and that to the worlds end, as you may see in the verse
before, v. 18. the very least thing commanded in the 10 commandments.

In all which Scriptures you have seen. 1. That the Law is still enforce, 2.
That all things written in this Law, are still in force. 3. That the wholl Law
is still in force 4. That the very least thing commanded in the law is still in
force; what can be desired more?

My 3d argument, to prove that every commandment in the Decalogue, does bind
us to obedience is because God has joined the commandments together: now
that which our Savior says in an other case, is true in this also, Let no man
put a sunder that, which God has coupled together, Mat. 19.6. Now behold, how
God has coupled all these 10 commandments together. 1. They were c^upled
together when God spoke them all together; Then God spoke all these words,
saying. Exodus 20.1. 2dly they were coup^ed together when God wrote them
together, in the Tables of stone Deuteronomy. 10.4. 3dly they were coupled together by
number, Thus God Almighty coupled them, when he teld us, that wrote Tenn
commandments Deuteronomy. 10.4. 4thly Our Savior Christ coupled them together, when
he rekoned the commandementes to be two in number, as love to God, and love to
our neighbor, on these two commandments (says he) hangs the Law and the
Prophets Mat. 22.40. 5thly The Scripture, every where coupleth all these
commandments together, and that by binding them up all together, in this one
word Love. wherefore since God has coupled all the 10 commandments thus
together, with every commandment therein contained, it follows, that all and
every of these commandments, must go together; take one, and take all,
abolish one and abolish all: and further it follows, that since God has
joined every one of them together, that therefore it is insufferable, that any
man should by any distinctiones separate them, and make any division amongst
them, to embrace some and to reject other some of them: vnlese you will hold,
that man may put a sunder what God has joined together.

For the further strengthening of this my 3d argument, let me relate unto you,
a notable observation of learned Iunius, which I find recorded by D. W^llet on
Exodus 20. page 317. touching the special manner of accenting and writing,
which God observed in writing of the Decalogue, more then in any part of the
Scriptures besides. Ordinarily (says he) every word in the Originallhath but
one accent: But every word in the Decalogue excepting the 7. ^^. and 17. verses
have a double accent: one serving for the accenting and prolation of the word:
The other showing the conjunction and coherence of the matter. The thing of
note to be observed, in this observation of learned Iunius is this, that God
has added one accent, to the writing of every word, in the 10 commandments
extraordinarily, so as the like is not found in the Scriptures besides, which
is a most remarkable thing: now the use of this rare and extraordinary accent
is, as says the same Iunius, to show unto us, that the matters and things
contained in those several words, are conjoined and coupled together by God,
as well as the words.

Now howeuer there is an exception, in three verses, as in v. 7.12.17. that is,
in the third, fifth, and tenth commandments, yet in the 4th com. there is no
exception; for he gives instances in the 4th com. for one of those, which have
this double accent: the consideration whereof, is of notable use for our
purpose: for, whereas the adversaries to Gods Sabbaths, could be content to
allow, all things in the 10 commandments, to be ever lastingly coupled
together, so they might cast away that sacred time, sanctified by God, the 7th
day, here therefore it has pleased God, to be mindful of his 4th com: and of
his sacred time, above the 3d, 5th, and 10th commandments: for this 4th com.
has its double accent, as well as any other: wherefore, such Ministers as
would divide betwixt the time, in the 4th com. and the duties in the time;
embracing the one, rejecting the other, they are hereby corrected by God: for
the Almighty has shown unto us, by this rare and extraordenary accent, that
the things specified in his 4th com. should go hand in hand everlastingly
together; so as he that imbraceth the duties in the time, he must embrace also
the time with the duties.

My 4th and last argument, to prove that every commandment in the Law does
bind us now to the obedience thereof is, because God spoke every commandment
in the Law, as well as any one therein: see Exodus 20.1. God spoke all these
words etc. Now wherefore is this praeface set before all the commandments, but
to give aequall authority unto them all? and to this end, that whosoever,
whersoeuer, or whensoever any of these commandments are received, then, and
there, and by the same persons, all of them must be embraced? because God
spoke them all; and gave alike authority, universality, perpetuity, and
morality, unto all: to this purpose, M. Dod speaks excellently, in his work
upon the commandments, in his exposition of these words of the preface (all
these words) page 9, God (says he) spoke not the first commandment only,
nor the second, or third, and left there: But he spoke them all; and gave as
strict a charg to keep every one, as any one; and no one was uttered by Gods
voice, or writ with his own finger, more then the other: whence is to be
learned, that whosoever will have any true comfort by his obedience unto Gods
Law, he must not content himself to look to one, or to two; but must make
conscience, and have a care to keep the^ all and every one: because he that is
the Author of one, he is the Author also of all the rest etc. Where you see,
M. Dod collecteth this, that obedience must be given to every thing commanded,
because they all had one and the same Author: God spoke them all.

Furthermore, that this kind of arguing is sound, I prove it by S. James, who
uses the same kind of arguing: for he, in convincing men of the sin of
respect of persons, and endeavoring to prove, that he that fails in one
point of the Law, he is guilty of all the points in the law, fetches his
argument (as I conceive of it) from the preface to the commandments, God spoke
all these words Exodus 20.1. and thus he argues, for he that said, thou shall
not commit adultery, said also; thou shall not kill: now though thou do none
adultery yet if thou killest, thou art a transgressour of the Law. Iam. 2.11.
In which words you see, S. James argues thus, that he that fails in one
precept of the tenn, he is guilty of all the rest; and his reason is, because
God spoke them all; or, because he that said the one precept, he it was that
said the others also: now if this his reason, had not been generally true of
all the things commanded in the Decalogue, it had been insufficient to prove
what he would: for an instance to the contrary might have been brought thus: it
follows not James, that if one offend in one point, he is guilty of all;
because God spoke all: for example, God spoke that part of the 4th com. but
the 7th day is the Sabbath, and yet he that offends in some other point is not
guilty of this: because this is abrogated. Wherefore, either we must grant S.
James to be of judgment, that every thing enjoined in the Decalogue is still
in force; or else his argument is vain.

For conclusion of this argument, I make mine Appeal, unto the conscience of
my Reader, and unto the conscience also of the adversaries of Gods Sabbath, if
they do not find the Spirit of God, secretly moving them to think, that all
things commanded among the Morales, should be moral; and that all precepts
which God spoke, and wrote, should be more lasting and durable in the Church,
then those precepts which Moses spoke, and wrote: and if they find it thus, as
I verily believe they cannot but find it thus, then let them beware of
quenching the Spirit, and to say or do ought against the light of conscience:
for, at the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, their consciences
will bear witness, and their thoughts accuse or excuse them Romans 2.15.

ARGVM. IX.
My 9th argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, is
because unless it be in force, the whole 4th com. with every part and percell
of it is abolished, nullified, and altogether vselesse. And thus it may be
framed.

If the 7th day Sabbath be not now in force; Then is the whole 4th com.
nullified and altogether vselesse.

But the 4th com. is not nullified, and become vselesse. Therefore is the 7th
day Sabbath now in force.

First a word or two of the minor or second proposition; for the truth of it,
namely that the 4th com. is now in force, this is plain, first by the
Testimony of our Savior, who ratifieth the very least of the commandments, as
you may see Math. 5.19. secondly, it is ratified by our Church, which has
ordered, that the 4th com. be read in our Churches, and also, that the people
shall use this prayer, at the rehearsal of it by the Minister, Lord have mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Thirdly I know no Divine,
one or other that denies it, or doubts of it; and it were heinouse impiety,
for any to deny it; for it were to deny one of the tenn Moral Laws, of
Almighty God. So much therefore for proof of the Minor.

I come then unto the Major or first proposition; wherein I affirmed that the
abolishing of the 7th day Sabbath, does draw after it, the nullifying of the
whole 4th com. and now I prove it. In the 4th com. are ij things to be
considered, the one is the commandment it self; the other is the reason of
the com. and I shall prove, that both these are nullified by abolishing of the
7th day Sabbath, or by denying that the 7th day Sabbath is still in force.

To begine with the commandment it self: that I may shewhow this is
nullified, first we must see what it is which they deny; namely the 7th day
Sabbath; in which words we will consider, that they deny the Sabbath day, that
is, the old Sabbath day, to be in force now: and then we will consider how they
deny the 7th day, that is, the 7th day from the Creation, to be in force now:
for both these they do deny, in denying that the 7th day Sabbath is now in
force: of these two I will begine with the Sabbath day, that is, the old
Sabbath day; which they do deny by these textes Exodus 31.13. and Col. 2.16.17.
now I prove, that if the old Sabbath day specified in the 4th com. be
abolished, and not in force now, then is the 4th com. made nonsense, and to
stand for a Cipher: and that this may appear, you shall see it made plain to
your very eyesight.

The Lord God said, Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it Exodus 20.8. Now
the Sabbath day here mentioned, it was the old Sabbath day; but this old
Sabbath day (say these new Sabbatharians) is abolished, and not in force now;
which if it be so, then in this commandment Exodus 20.8. the Lord God
commands now at this time, just nothing at all; for, take away these ij words
Sabbath day from out the commandment, and in stead thereof, put so many
Ciphers, as you have letters in the two words, as you may do, if those words,
or the thing meante by those words, be abolished, and then the commandment is
no more but thus much, Remember the 0000000000, to sanctify it: Thus you see by
denial of the old Sabbath day, they have made the word of God of none effect,
and Gods commandment to become nonsense, and a bundle of Ciphers: and this
must be so, unless they can show us, that God commanded us, two Sabbath days,
in his 4th com. the one, caled Sabbath day, the other, caled Lords day: which
all the Logic in their heads can never do. And so much for their denial of
the Sabbath day.

I come now unto the other thing that they deny, to wit, the 7th day, from the
creation: and in this I will consider aparte these ij. things; first the word
day, and then the word Seventh: first for the word day: they say that the day,
to wit, the old day is abolished, and as by other textes, so also by these
textes, Romans 14.5, and Gal. 4.10. secondly for the word Seventh, they say that
the 7th day in order of time is abolished, to wit, the 7th day from the
Creation, whence it follows. 1. That if the day be abolished, then is there
no day now enjoined in the 4th com. for, take away that day which was
commanded, to wit, the old day, and then is there now no day required for a
Sabbath in the 4th com. so then, now an hour in a day may be sufficient, for a
Sabhath; and so a Sabbath day may be turned into a Sabbath hour: Lo then, if
by denial of the 7th day, they have not nullified the 4th co^. or as good as
nullified it: for, the Lord was wont to have an whole day, celebrated for his
worship by the 4th com. but now, we need give him but an hour in a day for his
worship, by the 4th com. thus Sabbath days, may be turned into Lecture days;
and is not this a manifest violence done unto Gods Law? and thus it must be by
their denial, unless they can show us, that God commanded ij. days in his 4th
com. an old day, and a new day; the 7th day, and the 8th day.

2dly, it follows, that if the 7th day from the Creation be abolished, as
they say it is, then now a days, we are not bound by the 4th com. to give God
one day in every 7 days for a Sabbath; but we may give God one day in 7, or
one day in 14, or one day in a month, or one day in a year, or one in 7
years, or one in a man's life time: for being that the 7th day in the co^. is
abolished, and none other day there is specified, or put into its room, we are
now left at random, to take a day when we please; for the 4th com. does not
tell us how often we should keep a Sabbath, since those words (the 7th day)
are abolished, which teld us how often we should give God a Sabbath; now judge
thou good Reader, if they have not as good as nullified Gods 4th com. by
abolishing the 7th day, since God was wont to have a 7th day once a week by
his 4th com. but now we need not by that com. give him a Sabbath above once in
a year, or once in 7 years, or once in a man's life: for the time how often,
being abolished, there remains in the 4th com. no more but the duty, to keep
a Sabbath day; and that we may perform, if we keep but one in our whole life.

But we have not yet done: In the 4th co^. there is ij. things to be observed,
the one is the duty of an Holy Rest, the other is the duty of an Holy time,
to wit, the 7th day: now of these two things, they hold the time a ceremony and
abolished; but the duty of an Holy Rest, this they hold moral, and this they
carefully perform on the Lords day as they persuade the^ selves, well but if
now I shall prove unto you, that their performance of this Holy Rest upon a
wrong day, is not the Sabbaths duty, nor the duty required by God in his 4th
com. then you will say with me, that their abolishing of the time the 7th day,
is the abolishing of the 4th com. also: for there are but ij. things inyoned in
the Com. and they deny the one expressly, and the other by just consequence.

For this purpose note, that the like is not the same: for example, A
counterfaite, is like a current shilling, yet it is not a current shilling:
Saul's Sacrificing was like to Samuels sacrificing, but not the same: and so,
the Lords day, Holy Rest, may be like the Sabbath days, Holy Rest, but yet for
all that, it is not the Sabbath days Holy Rest.

It is to be observed, that the Lords day Rest, differs from the Sabbath
days Rest three ways; the first is in the name; for the name Rest, receineth
its denomination most properly, from the day wherein it is done; thus the Rest
performed on a Fast day, is called a Fast days rest; and the Rest on a common
Holy day, is to be called an Holy day rest, not Sabbath day rest; the work
done on a Saturday is called Saturdaies work; and the work done on a friday,
it is called Fridaies work; and so the Rest performed on the Lords day, it is
the Lords day rest, not the Sabbath day rest; it is absurd to misename things;
for if you may call the Rest, performed on the Lords day, the Sabbath days
rest; why may you not by the like reason, call the Fridaies work, Saturdaies
work? and the rest on a common holy day, the Sabbath day rest? and a Fastdaies
rest; or any day of public thanksgiuings rest, the Sabbath days rest? and why
may we not call Saul's sacrificing, Samuels sacrificing? the Lords days Rest
therefore, is not the Sabbath days Rest.

The other way whereby the Lords day rest, differs from the Sabbath days
Rest, is in respect of the 4th Comm. for the rest performed on the Sabbath day,
is properly the rest of the 4th Com. because the 4th Com. inioyneth its rest,
to be upon the Sabbath day; but the rest performed on the Lords day, cannot be
a rest belonging to the 4th Comm. because the 4th Comm. does not command any
rest upon that day which is named Lords day: it commands only such a rest
as is on the day named Sabbath day, and it commands labor and work on the
day called Lords day, it being one of the six working days.

Happily they will say, that they perform this rest on the Lords day, in
conscience to the 4th Com. But I answer, that it cannot belong therefore unto
the 4th Com. for it is not men's conscience, but Gods ordinance that makes a
rest to be the rest of the 4th Com. which I thus declare, if men's keeping a
rest with a respect unto the 4th Com. would therefore make it a rest commanded
in the 4th Com. then it shall follow, that if any man in his ignorance, will
observe the rest on a fast day, and on a Coronation day, in a conscience of the
4th Com. faineing to himself that it is commanded in the 4th Com. then it
shall come to pass, that Fast days, and Coronation days, shall stand by
virtue of the 4th Com. and be Sabbathes too: further, by this devise, whereas
the Jews had many Sabbaths, some weekly, others yearly; they might have
observed their yearly Sabbaths in conscience of the 4th Com.

The third way whereby the rest of the Lords day, differs from the Rest of
the Sabbath day, is in regard of the ends wherefore they are observed: for the
Holy rest of the Sabbath day, is kept to preserve in Gods Church the memory of
the Creation; but the Holy rest of the Lords day, is to preserve the memory of
the Redemption: the Sabbath days rest, minds us of Gods rest upon the
Sabbath day; but the Lords days rest, minds us of Christ's Resurrection upon
the Lords day.

Thus you have seen it manifested, that the Holy rest which we now perform on
the Lords day, it is not that Holy rest required in the 4th Comm. it is only
like unto it, but it is not the same; for it differs, 1. in the name, the one
being properly called the Sabbath days Rest; the other, the Lords days Rest,
2. It differs in respect of the 4th Com. for the Rest proper to the 4th Com.
is a rest upon the 7th day, and upon a day whose name is properly Sabbath day;
but our rest, is upon the 8th day, and upon a day whose proper name is Lords
day. 3. It differs in the use and end; for the Rest on the Sabbath day, is to
preserve a memory of the Creation; but the rest on the Lords day, is to
preserve a memory of the Resurrection or Redemption. 4. I will add a 4th
difference which is this, the rest upon the Sabbath day, which is commanded in
the 4th com. is a rest, to be observed in imitation of Gods Rest, on the 7th
day, at the Creation Genes. 2.3. Exodus 20.11. but the Rest on the Lords day, is
not done in imitation of Gods rest at the Creation; nor can be: for God rested
on the 7th day, and our Lords days rest is on the 8th day: now this is far
from imitating of God, when he rested upon one day, and we will Rest upon an
other. And thus in these four respects it is evident, that the Rest which now
we keep, it is none of Gods Rest, ordained in his 4th Comm. it is but like it,
as a counterfaite shilling, is like a current shilling; let no man therefore any
longer deceive himself, by thinking he keeps Gods rest, when he rests on
the Lords day.

To conclude, forasmuch as the Holy rest we now keep on the Lords day, it is
not that Holy rest required in the 4th com. hereby you see plainly, that now we
neither give God the time, no nor the duties of the time; and that by
abolishing of the sacred and sanctified time of the 7th day, they have also
abolished the Holy rest, required of God in this 4th Com. and thus there being
but two things enjoined us in the 4th Comm. they have rejected them both; judge
then good Reader, if they have not by abolishing of the 7th day Sabbath, made
void and nullified also the 4th Commandment: for they observe just nothing of
all that God commands, but have rejected both the time, and the duties in
the time. And thus much for proof, that by abolishing the 7th day Sabbath,
they have made void and nullified the 4th Com. it self.

I come now unto the reason of the 4th Com. to show you how they have nullified
and made void that also; for they have made most horrible havoc with Gods
Commandment, by rejecting the Saturday Sabbath: The body of the 4th Com. is
contained in iij. verses, Exodus 20.8.9.10. and I have shown how these iij.
verses, of the xx Chapter of Exodus, are made void and nullified; and now I
come to show how they have made frustrate also an other whole verse, to wit,
verse the 11th, and so they shall have filled up the mesure of their iniquity
ful^, by a sacrilegiouse robbing God, of iiij. whole verses out of his Moral
Law, by taking away the key of knowledge from them: for I account it all as
one, to rend iiij. verses of sacred Scripture out of the Bible, and to pervert
the sense of them; or to turn the sense and use of them, into Ciphers.

That I may show you, how by denying and abolishing the 7th day Sabbath, they
have nullified and made void the reason of the 4th Com. also, first I will
recite the reason, for in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth,
the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the 7th day: Therefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it Exodus 20.11. This 11th verse, is a
reason given by Almighty God, thereby to persuade unto the obedience of the
4th Com. The Commandment was this, that we should work upon those six days,
which were the first six days from the beginning of the Creation; and that we
should rest from labor on the 7th day from the Creation: now the reason
whereby God would persuade us hereunto, is a reason drawn from his own
example; because that in those six days, God himself labored, and in the
same 7th day, God himself rested; yea, and therefore hallowed and sanctified
this 7th day.

Now what reason can be more liuly, then a reason drawn from Gods example? and
what argument can be more moueing, with the sons and daughters of God, then
an argument fetched from the example of their heavenly fathers? but let the
oldest man living tell me, if ever he heard any Minister in the pulpit, press
the keeping of the 4th com. by this reason, which God has here added unto his
4th com, or let any man tell me, if ever he heard the sanctification of the
Lords day, which is the first day of the week, pressed by this reason here
added by God unto his 4th com. Nay, what Minister will not be ashamed, to
persuade men, either to the keeping of the 4th com. or to keeping of the Lords
day, by this reason, which here God has propounded? for, we neither work on
those 6 days wherein God wrought, neither do we rest on that 7th day wherein
God rested: for we rest on the 8th day, or first day, not as God did, on the
7th day; and our Lords day, God did not rest on it, for our imitation, but he
labored on it for our imitation; so as there is no correspondency betwixt our
Lords day Sabbath, and our now keeping of the 4th com. and Gods example and
reason propounded unto us.

When did you ever hear any Minister say thus, Let us rest from our labors
on the Lords day; because God himself, as our Pattern, rested on the Lords
day? and let us sanctify and hallow the first day; because God blessed and
sanctified the first day? you see how God has added a most lively and
effectual reason, to his 4th com. drawn from his own example, to move us to
rest on the Lords day, and to sanctify the first day? tell me, if ever you
heard any Minister thus press this reason, and Gods example: or, if ye have
heard any houer about it, as loath to touch it, he has nicknamed days,
caling the Lords day, Sabbath day; and the 8th or first day, the 7th day:
wherefore, because Ministers cannot devise, how to make Gods example, and
exemplary reason, to fit and square to our new Sabbath, therefore they are mute
and sile^t touching it; and thus you see the reason of the 4th com. stands in
our Bibles but for a Cipher; and men are a shamed to use it, least they should
shame themselves: is it not a lamentable thing, that Ministers are ashamed to
deliver the whole will and counsel of God, least thereby they should both
shame themselves, and bewray unto the people their foul error in abolishing
of Gods Sabbaths? for if this reason were used, men would easily see, how wide
we are from the mark, in keeping the Lords day, in conscience of the 4th com.
when as the very reason of the 4th com. would plainly ^each us that it is the
7th day Sabbath, wherein God himself rested, that we should rest, and not on
the 8th day Sabbath.

To sum up all, you have seen how they that abolish the 7th day Sabbath,
they have turned the body of the 4th com. into a company of Ciphers; and this
has been declared and proved many ways: yea they have also turned the reason
to the 4th com. into so many words, so many Ciphers; for it stands in the
book of God for a mute, and is like a blanke in a Lottery; no Minister vseing
this reason of God before his people, to persuade them to the keeping of the
Lords day, or of the Sabbath day, by it: So then since they have not only
nullified the commandment, but also made void and vselesse, the reason
annexed to the commandment; hereby you see, they have by rejecting Gods
hallowed and sanctified time, the Saturday Sabbath, rejected also the whole 4th
com. with every part and persell of it, root and branch.

There are not many verses in the Moral Law, and behold how of those few
verses, they have turned into Ciphers, and made void and vselesse, no less
then iiij whole verses. v. 8.9.10.11. there are not above 15 or 16 verses, in
all the Moral law; now whosoever rejects the Saturday or 7th day Sabbath,
you see he makes void and frustrate, no less then 4 of those verses: it is
an error, caling for deepest consideration, and a speedy reformation. Thus
much for my 9th argument.

ARGVM. X.
My 10th Argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath mentioned in the law, is
still in force: is because our Savior Christ ratified the very least thing
commanded in the Law to endure for ever, Mat. 5.18. and thus it may be framed.

He that ratified the very least thing commanded in the Law, unto the least
letter, to last for ever; he ratified the 7th day Sabbath to be still in force.

But Christ ratified the very least thing commanded in the Law, unto the least
letter, to last for ever.

Therefore Christ ratified the 7th day Sabbath to be still in force.

As for the Major or first proposition, it is clear of it self; for nothing
therein can be doubted of: for admit that the 7th day Sabbath, be the least
thing commanded in the Moral Law; why then he that ratified every thing
commanded in the Law, unto the very least thing therein (call it an accident,
or a circumstance of time, or what else diminutily you will) he did ratify
this little thing also, the 7th day Sabbath: the argument is good a minori; for,
if Christ would not have a title of a letter in the Law altered, much less an
ordinance commanded in the Law, as is the 7th day Sabbath.

I come next unto the Minor or second proposition, and this is most clearly
proved by the words of our Savior Christ, For truly I say unto you until
heaven and earth perish, one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the
Law, until all things be fulfilled Mat. 5.18. In which words, our Savior
Christ plainly ratified, the very least things commanded in the Law, to last
for ever: for as Chemnitius says upon this text, jot, is a letter of the
Hebrew Alphabet of the least value of all other letters in the Alphabet: and
title, says he) is as a prick to a letter, or as a comma to a sentence:
whereby we see, that inasmuch as Christ, would not have one of the least
letters of the Law, no nor so much a title of a letter, as a prick is upon the
letter (i) in no wise to depart from the Law, hereby he ratified the very
least thing commanded in the Law: that Christ ratified the Law, unto a jot and
title, extends to the very least things in the Law, more emphatically, and
more void of exception, then if he had said, nothing shall pass from the Law.

(Had the 7th day Sabbath been to be abolished a while after, Christ should
have forknowne it well enough; and then remembering that, he would never have
here ratified the Law so universally unto a very jot and title of it)

This is plain, if we look but upon the very next verse verse. 19. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be caled the least in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.19. So here then in
plain words you see our Savior ratifieth the very least commandment: yet
further, Christ intended to ratify not only the least comman. but also the
least branch of every commandment: for he ratified not only the 6th com.
touching murder but also the least thing therein contained, as rash anger, and
caling an other fool v. 22. and the 7th com. he ratified it to the least jot
and title of it, even to the adultery of the heart, and to a lustful look v.
28. and the seconp Table, of love, Christ ratified it to the utmost, extending
it, even to the love of our enemies v. 44. by all which it is most apparent,
that our blessed Savior, intended, to ratify this Divine Law of his heavenly
father, to the very utmost, and unto the very least thing therein commanded,
neither can any man (I think) invent, should he study 7 years for it, how to
express himself in words more universally and emphatically, to comprize every
thing, unto the very least of all, so as his words should be liable to no
exceptions, then our Savior Christ has expressed himself here: so
emphatically, so universally, and so full are his words here spoken to that
end.

Thus you have seen this argument firmly proved, neither can I devise, what
should be more plain and pregnant, for the maintenance of this ordinance of
Gods moral Sabbath, then this text uttered by our Savior Christ: but by how
much it is the cleerer, by so much the more, Satan stirs up opposition
againstit; let us therefore see what tricks and quillets the wit of man can
devise against it; that so all rubbs being removed, our faith may rest upon
this rock of Christ's word, the more firmly and securly.

1. One answer brought against this argument is this, that by the word Law may
be understood, both the moral and Ceremonial Laws. But this is an
unwarrantable enlargment of the word law: for it is a rule, that general
words, must be restrained unto the Subject matter in hand; as in Heb. 7.12. if
by the word Law there, we should understand both moral and ceremonial Laws,
we should make foul work; wherefore as the word Law in Heb. 7.12. is to be
rastained unto the Leuiticall ceremonial Law, according to the matter there
spoken of; so must we by the word Law in Mat. 5.18. understand only the moral
Law, according to the matter here spoken of: for as you may se plainly by the
context, our Savior speaks of the moral Law, for our Savior having ratified
the Law in general in v. 18.19. then he descends unto particulars, giuinge
examples in the 6th com. touching murder, as in v. 21. and in the 7th com.
touching adultery, as in v. 27. and in the third com. touching swearing, as in
v. 3. and the latter part of the Chapter, is spent in duties of love toward
our neighbor, contained in the second Table, whereby we see our Savior spoke
only of the moral Law.

2. I prove that the ceremonial Law cannot be here meante; for, Christ said
but in the verse a forgoing, that he came not to destroy the ( Law or the
Pr^phets) which phrase, our Saniour uses in this Sermon, for the Moral Law
only Mat. 7.12. and never otherwise, Mat. 22.40. secondly, then should Christ
have ratified the ceremonial Law, unto the worlds end, in Mat. 5.18. which is
contrary unto all Scriptures: and therefore Christ spoke nothing of the
ceremonial Law in this place. 3. Since Christ spoke here, of the duration and
continuance of the Law, for ever; it is absurd to think, that in this case, he
would join the Moral and the Ceremonial Laws together, as if they were both
of a like perpetuity and lasting nature: and therefore only the Moral Law was
here meante. 4. Can it be thought that Christ should make here in v. 17. an
Apology for the Ceremonial Law, when elsewhere he preached against it? Ioh.
4.21. Besides since Christ intended a little after, to abolish the Ceremonial
Law, he would rather have been silent now, then to say ought that might ratifye
it.

2. An other answer made against this argument is, that the duration of the Law
here spoken of by Christ, is but until Christ his passion; noted in those
words, until all things be fulfilled v. 18. for at Christ his passion all
things were fulfilled. But this answer is very absurd; for these words of
Christ, are a prophecy of the continuance of the Law; which prophecy was
ratified by a great Asseueration, saying, verily, or truly I say unto you etc.
Now the time when Christ made this prophecy, it was not above a matter of two
years before his passion or there about; now who could think, that Christ
should make a prophecy, and that in such solemn a manner, with such an
Asseueration, that the Law should last, and continue yet, two years longer?
Further, if this answer and exposition be justifiable, then by the same answer
may we now reject, a great part of Christ's sermon in the mount, and
especially his exposition upon the Moral Law; for whereas, our Savior
ratifieth the very least of the commandments in v. 19. and expounds the 6th
Com. to forbid rash anger, and calleing a man's brother fool, v. 22. and
expounds the 7th Com. to forbid a lustful look, ver. 28. and the 3d Com. to
forbid swearing by the creature, v. 34.36. and the 2d table, to command love to
our enemies v. 44. a man may at once cut off all these, from binding us; if he
will but suppose, that these enlargments of the Law. being so strict and
rigorouse were Jewish, and pertain not unto Christians; and for the better
avoiding of them, he may answer, that Christ ratified the Law, thus expounded,
but until his death and passion, were not this a goodly answer?

2. It is false which they say, that all things were fulfilled at Christ his
passion: It is true indeed, that Christ upon the Cross, said, it is finished,
Ioh. 19.30. that is, his death and passion was finished, but yet all things
were not finished; for the Resurrection was behind. Wherefore the truer sense,
is by these words (till all things be fulfilled) to understand, even all
things, whatsoever Christ was to do for his Church; and all things, which were
any way prophesied of him, or of his Church militant: as this for one, Christ
tarrieth now at the right hand of God, until his enemies be made his
footestoole, Hebr. 10.12.13. This one thing, is not yet fulfilled: see 1 Cor.
15.25. an other thing is, that the heavens must contain Christ, until the
time that all things be restored, Act. 3.21. this other thing is not yet
fulfilled, to wit, Christ his second comeing, and the restoration of all
things. A third thing is, that the Church shall sing A triumphant song, over
death, the grave, and sin, 1 Cor. 15.55.56. and this thing is not yet
fulfilled neither: now since all these things, shall not be fulfilled, until
the worlds end, therefore the Law is to last unto the worlds end; for it must
last, until all things be fulfilled.

Yet further, the same is evident and apparent in the Text it self; for our
Savior says, that the Law shall last until heaven and earth perish, or pass
away: that is, until the end of the world: for then shall the heavens, and the
earth pass away, and be dissolved, as says S. Peter, the heavens shall pass
away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with
the works that are therein, shall be burnt up etc. 2. Pet. 3.10. so long
therefore as the heavens and the earth last, so long shall the Law, and every
jot, and title of it last: the same is ratifyed by S. Luk, saying, It is more
easy that heaven and earth should pass away, then that one title of the Law
should fall, Luke 16.17.

Lastly, suppose we that in this text, there were no Prophecy at all, touching
the duration and continuance of the Law, yet forasmuch as we embrace this
Sermon, which Christ preached upon the Mount, as concerning us and our times;
we must therefore embrace this part of his Sermon, wherein he preached and
taught, that the Law, with the least commandment thereof, yea and every branch
of this Law, unto a jot and title, must go together; for, Christ did not only
press the Law upon his Disciples, but also every title of it: wherefore by the
same right that we embrace the other parts and passages of Christ's Sermon, by
the same right we must embrace also the Law, and every jot and title of the
Law: this Divine Sermon of Christ, it is iij Chapters long, it begane Mat.
5.1.4. It lasted unto Mat. 8.1. If you may reject some parts of this Sermon,
as not belonging unto us, then may you reject all the Sermon; and if you
embrace some parts, then must you embrace all: and thus you see, their answer
is vain, in goeing about to confine the duration of the Law, unto the time of
Christ's living upon the earth, or unto his death and Passion only.

3. A third answer is, that not every jot and title of the Law is now in force;
for there be some things in the Law, that be not in force, as in the preface to
the commandments; I am the Lord thy God, that brought the out of the Land of
Egypt: this deliverance out of Egypt, belongs not unto us Christians; for we
never were in bondagein Egypt: and also the reason annexed unto the 5th com.
that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee:
this Land was Canaan, and therefore the promise of this Land, cannot belong
unto us Christians. Hereunto I answer, that the Apostle does apply this promise
unto Christianes, that lived not in Canaan, as you may read Ephesians. 6.1.2.3.
neither does the Lord say, that thy days may be long in the Land of Canaan:
but generally thus, that thy days may be long in the Land, which God shall
give thee, that is, any Land, into which God should bring them: wherefore the
promise to the 5th com. is not to be restrained unto Canaan only, but may
belong unto any Land. And as for the preface touching the deliverance out of
Egypt, this belongs to this day, unto those people unto whom it did at any
time belong, that is unto the Israelites

Furthermore, I give one answer serving unto both these, which is this, admit
that there be some titles of the Law, that do not belong unto us, as these two
reasones annexed to the Law, yet they cannot show any titles of the Law, that
do not belong unto us, which are parts of the Law: for we must distinguish
betwixt the law, and the appurtena^ces belonging to the law: the law, is that
part of the Decalogue, which command. or forbids something; the
appurtenances of this Law, are the preface to the Law; and the motives or
reasones to persuade to the obedience of this Law; and these are not delivered
in commanding or forbiddeing terms: now I stand to defend by my argument,
nothing more in the Law, then what is Law, and expressly commanded or forbidden:
neither do I expound Christ's words Mat. 5.18. Any larger then so; howbeit
Iiudge, that Christ his words ought to be extended, not only unto the Law, but
also to the appurtenances of the Law, if possibly they may, and where
necessity and absurdety do not hinder. To conclud, since my argument speaks
only of such iotes in the Law, as are Law, and delivered in commanding or
forbidding terms, their objection is impertinent and besides the matter in
question, to bring exceptiones of such iotes as are no law, nor part of Law,
bur only appendixes to the Law: for all the appurtenances belonging to the
Law, might possibly be of no force, and yet the law it self may stand safely
still; like as a man's apparel may be worn out, or burned, and yet his body
may be safe still.

For a conclusion, let me add one thing in general, which makes against all
their 3 answers, which is this, All Orthodox and sound Divines, when they have
to deal against the enemies, of Gods law, who would abolish the whole law, as
Libertines, Anabaptists, and our new vpstart Eatonists, they do defend Gods
law to be Moral and perpetual by this text for one Math. 5.18. Nay I know not
any text we have in all the new Testament, that is more auailable for this
purpose, the^ is this one text: but if now our divines, will stand to defend
these 4 answers, which I have confuted, then why may not any of these
Libertines or the rest, make the same answers to them, when they produce this
Text, Mat. 5.18. to defend the perpetuity of Gods Law? as first, why may not
these Libertines answer, saying, by the word Law, in Mat. 5.18. may be meant
both the Moral and the Ceremonial Laws; and so Christ should ratify the
Moral Law no more then he did the Ceremonial Law? 2. And why may they not
answer also, that the duration of the Law here spoken of by Christ, is but
until Christ's passion? 3. And why may they not answer you also, that there are
some iotes and things in the Law, that belong not unto us Christianes? as in
the preface to the Commandments, Gods deliverance of the Israelites out of
Egypt: And the reason to the 5th com. that thy days may be long in the Land
that the Lord thy God gives thee, that is, in the Land of Canaan? that so you
shall not from this text, defend all and every of the tenn commandments.
Wherefore, either they must withdraw and renounce these 3 answers made to me,
or else they must receive them at the hands of Libertines, Anabaptists, and
Antinomians.

Thus much for my 10th Argument, whereby I have proved, that our Savior Christ
ratified the 7th day Sabbath, commanded in the Moral Law: because he ratified
the very least things commanded in the Moral Law.

ARGUM. XI.
My eleauenth argument to prove the 7th day Sabbath still in force is, because
our Savior Christ would have it observed, for about ^0. years after the death
of all Ceremonies, saying, Pray that your flight be not in the winter, nor on
the Sabbath day, Mat. 24, 20. and it may be thus framed.

He that commanded his Disciples, to use all means possible, that they might
not profane the Sabbath day, by working, travailing, moileing and toileing on
it, for about 50 years after the death and end of all Ceremonies, he would
have the Sabbath day sanctified, and still in force.

But Christ, commanded his Disciples, to use all possible means, that they
might not profane the Sabbath day, by working, crauailing, moiling and toiling
on it, for about 50 years after the death and end of all Coremonies.

Therefore Christ would have the Sabbath day sanctified, and still in force.

For the Major or first proposition, two things are there in considerable, as
for the former, it is a most clear case: for he that would not have the
Sabbath day profaned, he would have it sanctified and observed: like as in the
7th com. in that God would not have a man commit adultery, it follows that
God would have him live chastely: the removing of one contrary is the bringing
in of the other: the forbidding of a sin, is the commanding of its contrary
virtue.

And further, he that wills all possible means to be used, for the avoiding
of any evil, he would that that evil should be avoided, and the contrary good
brought in: and so, he that commanded all possible means to be used, that the
Sabbath day might not be profaned, he would not have the Sabbath day profaned;
but that the contrary good should be brought in, which is, that the Sabbath day
should be sanctified: for to that very end, that it might not be profaned but
sanctified, he appointed the means to be used; now no man commands means to
be used, for the obtaining of that thing, which he would not obtain.

The other thing considerable is, that he that willed the Sabbath day should be
sanctified and kept from profanation, 50 years after the death of all
Ceremonies, he willed that the Sabbath day should be still in force unto this
day: the reason hereof is, because there was but one proper time, for the
abolishing of all ceremonies; and all ceremonies they were abolished together
at once; and therefore whatsoever was ratified and to be observed 40 or 50
years, after the proper time for the death and end of all ceremonies, that
thing was no ceremony; for if it were, it should not have suruiued all
ceremonies: neither was it abolished with ceremonies as a ceremony; for then no
care shoul have been used so long after, for its observation: now if it was not
a bolished with ceremonies, at the proper time when all ceremonies were
abolished, then was it no ceremony but a Moral, and consequently to last
perpetually.

I grant that many ceremonies were in use in the Church, long after they were
abolished, but it was by connivency and by sufferance only, and for the
weakness of those times, but never by the authority of the Lord of them, as
this is: for, the Sabbath day, it was not by conniuency, for Christ commanding
his Disciples, to pray against the profanation of the Sabbath day; does thereby
warrant the sanctification of it.

Furthermore, whatsoever was authorized to be used in the Church, 40 or 50
years after Christ his death, that is still to be retained and used in the
Church; for all things which the Apostles did either erect or continue in the
Church for 10.20.30. or 40 years after Christ his Passion, not as conniued at,
but as authorized and as a duty, those things are still in force in the
Church; no instance can be shown to the contrary. And so much for proof of
the Major.

I come now unto the Minor or second proposition, and this I prove out of Mat.
24.20. But pray that your flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath
day. Which words of our Savior do fully prove my Minor: for 1. these words
are a commandment of Christ's, in that he bids them pray; But pray etc. 2.
This commandment it was directed unto his Disciples, as you may see Mat.
24.1.2. 3dly This commandment was, that they should use all possible means,
to avoid their flight upon the Sabbath day: for there was none other means to
be used for the avoiding of this flight, but only prayers to God; for their
study and care, and other humane and natural means, could do nothing in this
matter, for the Prevention of this flight, so then prayer being all the means
that possibly could be used, Christ commanded his Disciples to use all means
that was possible to be used: yea, since prayer must be accompanied with all
means and indeauores of man, if more means could have been used, Christ would
have had more used. 4. This means of prayer to God, which Christ commanded
them to use, was to this end, that they might not profane the Sabbath day: for
so says the text, pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day: Whereby you
see, that our Savior would not have them profane the Sabbath day, by their
flight upon it: for the further clearing of this point, because it is of the
greatest consequence; I will prove unto you, that when our Savior bad them
pray against flying on the Sabbath day, he spoke it because he would not have
them profane the Sabbath day by that their flight.

For this purpose note, that it is the common opinion of expositers upon this
text, that when Christ spoke of flight upon the Sabbath day, he spoke of it in
a religiouse respect: and this may be yet further confirmed unto us, if we
consider the Author of these words, who was Christ; who was a Physician for the
soul, and all his Doctrine tended to the furtherance of the kingdom of God;
wherefore all his speeches are if possible, to be understood as concerning the
soul, and the kingdom of God; but especially when he mentions matters of
Religion, as is the Sabbath day, then we cannot but think he spoke of it in
relation to the soul, and to the 4th commandment for the furtherance of the
kingdom of God, and the observation of the will of his heavenly father,
showing what conscience men ought to make of doing Gods will, and keeping of
his Sabbaths: yea, the text gives light herein: for why should they pray not
to fly in the Winter, but because of discomodety of flight then, by foulness
and couldnesse of weather etc? So, why not on the Sabbath day; but because of
incommodiouse travailing then, by reason of the 4th com. and men's consciences,
which is a religiouse respect? Nay how can it enter into any man's head to
think, that Christ should command them to pray, that they might not fly on
the Sabbath day, in any other sense then this, because he would not have them
profane it, and because he would have the will of his heavenly father revealed
in the 4th com. carefully observed and obeyed; and because he would not have
those, his Disciples, pollute their consciences, with profanation of Gods
Sabbath?

For the yet further clearing of this point, let it be noted 1. what is
comprised in this word flight: suppose Christ had foreteld them, that over a
few years, such an house should be on fire, in one of the seven days; and
had also bidden them pray, that they might not be put to quench the fire on the
Sabbath day; what could this imply, but that Christ would not have them work,
labor, moyle and toil so on the Sabbath day ^eue^ so it is here, for this end
consider, that this is such a flight, as is made out of a city by the
inhabitants, when the enemies have beseiged it with soldiers, as you may see
Luke 21.20.21. Now when the beseiged and distressed Citizens, fly out from
the violence of their enemies, they usually carry out with them whatsoever
things of worth they have in the city, even as much as possible they can, as
their young infantes and children, their best apparel, and other things of
price; every man carries forth, even as much as his back can bear with his
safety, so that they go laden out: besides, they do not walk at ease, as men
do on the Sabbath day for recreation, but they fly and travail with all
possible labor and speed; so as the day of their flight, it was a day of
moyleing and exceeding toyleinge: I need not mention the disquiet and
distraction of the mind, their careing how to save their own lives, and the
lives of their wives and children, and how to save their goods; all which
disinabled them for, and were enemies to the sacred duties of the Sabbath and
the worship of God therein: all this neglect and putting by of the sacred
duties of prayer, reading, heareing, conference etc. does necessarily follow
the labor of the body by flying on the Sabbath day: Thus much is comprised in
the word flight; so that, when our Savior bid them pray against flight on the
Sabbath day, it is all one, as if he had bidden them pray, that they might not
be driven to carry burdens on the Sabbath day; and that they might not be put
to laboriouse and painful travails on the Sabbath day. 2. Let it be noted,
that to bear burdens, and to travail on the Sabbath day, were ever accounted
for breaches of the 4th com. and for profanation of the Sabbath day, as you may
read plainly in Nehem. 13.15.17. For Nehemiah reproved the Rulers for bearing
of burdens on the Sabbath day, saying, what evil is this that ye do, and
profane, the Sabbath day? see also Ioh. 5.10. Exodus 16.29. Whereby you see it
most apparent, that when Christ bad them pray against flight on the Sabbath
day, he meante it, that they should pray against profanation of the Sabbath
day: for these ij are both one, to fly, carry-burdens on the Sabbath day; and
to profane the Sabbath, as you see by Nehemiahs words: and what does the word
Profane signify, but to make a thing common? and what do they else by flight
on the Sabbath, but make it a common day, to wit, a travailing and a laboring
day? The will of Christ doubtless was none other, then the will of God in the
4th com. that is, that his Disciples should be careful, to keep an holy Rest
on the Sabbath day, and to refrain all servile labors, according as it is in
the 4th com. In it thou shall not do any work etc.

But here I must take away a maine objection; they will be ready to say, that
it is no profanation of the Sabbath day, to travail on it in a case of
necessity, and to fly to save a man's life, as they do who are beseiged etc.
Hereunto I answer, yis, it is a profanation of the Sabbath: for what is it to
profane an Holy thing, but to convert it unto common use? and be it men
travail to save their lives, yet since travailing and laboring are common
works; by travailing and laboring on the Sabbath day, as they do on common
days, they make the Sabbath day a common day, and so profane it: neither will
it follow, that because it is no sin to travail on the Sabbath in a case of
necessity, therefore it is no profanation of the Sabbath: for God has
permitted us to profane and make common the Sabbath in a case of necessity,
and so profanation of it is no sin as otherwise it would have been; the
profanation remains still, but it is no sinful profanation. 2. The
consideration of this objection does strengthen my argument: for, if our
Savior would not have men to fly and travail and work on the Sabbath day,
no not to save their lives, if possibly by means of prayer they might avoid it,
much less would he have men do any work on the Sabbath, when there is no
necessity, and in a common case: it is a sign, that Christ was maruailously
zealouse of his fathers Sabbaths, to have them religiously and carefully
sanctified after his death, when he would not have his Disciples to do, no not
such necessary works as might save their lives, on the Sabbath, if they might
be prevented: and thus I have sufficiently proved the 4th thing in my Minor.

The 5th and last thing, to be proved in my Minor is, that this flight on the
Sabbath day, was spoken of to be, about 50, years after the death and end of
all Ceremonies: that the destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian was a matter of
40, or 46. years after Christ his passion it is confessed by all: and that
this observation of the Sabbath, was to be 40, 46, or near 50 years after the
death of all ceremonies, is proved by this, that all ceremonies ended with
Christ, upon the Chrosse, as you may read, Ephesians. 2.15. Colos. 2.14. Now the
Sabbath day, being to be observed by an holy Rest, at the destruction of
Jerusalem by Vespasian which was near 50 years after Christ's passion, at
which time all Ceremonies ended, it follows that the Sabbath was to be
observed near 50 years after the end of all Ceremonies, and thus I have
proved and confirmed, both propositiones in my argument.

Yet I cale to mind iij objections more that may be made against this argument;
the one is, that Christ had not respect so much unto the Religion and
conscience of the Sabbath, as rather to this, that he had a care to the
safeguard of the lives of those beseiged: for if they should fly in the
winter, they should be hindered by the foulness of the ways; and if on the
Sabbath day, they should be hindered by their superstitiouse and needless
conscience, which they would make of the Sabbath, and so it might come to
pass, that their enemies should surprise them because they could not make that
speed that was fiting in such a time of danger. Hereunto Ia^swer, 1. It is
agrosse co^ceipt of any, to account that obedience superstitiouse and
needless, which was done according to the prescript of a Moral Commandment,
to wit, the 4th com. seeing they cannot prove the old Sabbath mentioned in the
4th com. to be abolished. 2. I have before shown, that Christ when he spak of
slight on the Sabbath, he spoke it in a religiouse respect: but admit that
Christ spoke these words for the safeguard of their lives, yet so it will come
to the same still, that Christ ratified the Sabbath day: for, as in the winter,
the deepenesse of the ways, the shortness of the days, and tediousness of
the weather, would aggrauate their cross, and hinder their speedy flight; so
on the Sabbath day, the great sorrow of heart that would seize upon them, for
that they were urged to moile and toil and work so hard upon that day,
wherein they were wont sweetly to Rest with the people of God, and to praise
God in the assembly of the Saints, and for that they were enforced to profane
the Sabbath, which they would gladly have sanctified in obedience to Gods 4th
com. these things would aggrauate the cross, and stick so in their minds as
it would make their hearts to fail them, and so hinder their speedy flight:
thus the winter would be an impediment to their bodies, and the Sabbath would
be an impediment to their souls, and so the whole man, would be disabled for a
speedy flight, and for the safeguard of their lives.

Further more as touching their superstitiouse conscience: what reason can be
imagined, that it should be more unfit to fly on the Sabbath day, then on a
week day, or why should their speedy flight be more hindered on the Sabbath
day, then on an other day, if not for this cause, that they made a conscience
of flying and travailing on the Sabbath day, more then on any other day? now
forasmuch as our Savior commanded them, to pray to God, that they might not
fly on that day, for the offense of their consciences, thereby he allowed of,
and approved of their making conscience of the Sabbath day: suppose our Savior
Christ had commanded Agur, Prove. 30.8.9. to pray that he might not have too
much, least he should grow proud and hauty, nor too little, least he should
steal: he should thereby approve of Agurs fears of growing proud, and of
stealing: and so it is in our case, for in that Christ bad them pray, that they
might not fly on the Sabbath day, least thereby their consciences should be
offended and their hearts filled with sorrow for profaning Gods Sabbath;
thereby Christ allowed of their conscience of the Sabbath day, and of their
sorrow for profaning it: and so it was no superstitiouse conscience: had the
Sabbath day been abolished long before this seige, as this objection supposes,
and so the conscience of Christ's Disciples been but superstitiouse, then would
Christ never have commanded them to pray to God in this case? for this were to
give gold for dross, and to spend Substance for shadows; would Christ think
you have bidden them spend Divine prayers, for the satisfying the desires of a
superstitiouse and needless conscience? and had not this been an abuse of holy
prayer, and of the Majesty of God, to beg of him things for their lust and
vain desires? If their conscience were a vain and needless conscience, then
they should pray to God to fulfill the desires of a vain and needless
conscience, and Christ should instruct them so to do too, which is most absurd.

Had the conscience of Christ's Disciples, been superstitiouse touching the
Sabbath day, then would Christ have reproved them for it, and rather have
rectified their judgments; and taught them now before hand, that as touching
the Sabbath, if it fell out that they must fly on the Sabbath day, they should
then take no care for that, for he came to abolish that amongst other things,
and it should be nullified long before their flight, so as that should be no
let unto their flight; thus would Christ have prepared them beforehand, and
streng thened them against this superstition, if it had been superstition: nay
had it been superstition, Christ had nusled them up, and flattered them in it,
when he bad them pray to God, that their superstitiouse consciences might not
be crossed or disquieted; therefore it was no superstitiouse but a justifiable
and religiouse conscience which they made of the Sabbath day: and this is yet
the more strengthened, by consideration of the persons that should make this
conscience of the Sabbath, they were Christ's own Disciples, of his own
teaching; and can we think, he would leave them in superstition, at this time,
and in this case, when it was so needful that they should be instructed
therein?

Happily it will be said, they were not fit to hear now of the abolishing of
the Sabbath, it being a thing so highly honored amongst them etc. but why I
pray, were they not as able to hear of the abolishing of the Sabbath, as to
bear of the destruction of the Temple? for they had the Temple in honor, no
less then the Sabbath.

Yet further, it appears by the context, that their conscience was not a
fained and superstitiouse conscience, but a true and religiouse conscience: for
the other things whereof Christ admonishes them, are not fained things, but
true and real things; as when he said, woe shall be to them which are with
child, and which give suck v. 19. This was no fained thing, for it was a true
evil, for women to be put to fly when great with child, or with children
sucking on them: again, to fly in the winter, v. 20. it was no superstitiouse
conceit in Christ's Disciples, to think the winter a very unseasonable time to
fly in, but it was so indeed, and so we are to think semblably, of their
conscience of the Sabbath day, that it was no needless and superstitiouse
conceit in them to think it an offense unto God, a breach of the 4th com. and
a grieuouse matter to travail on the Sabbath day, at what time they should be
serving and worshipping of God: and thus much for this objection.

The 2d objection is this, that by the word Sabbath mentioned in the text, may
be meant not the 7th day and weekly Sabbath, but some one of their yearly
Sabbaths: and so then if Christ had ratified any thing in this text, it had not
been the 7th day Sabbath, but a ceremonial Sabbath etc. and the rather they
think thus, because it is thought that when the Jews fled out of Jerusalem,
it was not upon the 7th day Sabbath, but upon a Festival Sabbath. But hereunto
I reply, 1. That it was no yearly Sabbath whereof Christ spoke: for, the yearly
Sabbaths being all Ceremonies, and to be abolished long before that seige of
Jerusalem, if Christ's Disciples had made conscience of those, then their
consciences had been superstitiouse, But their conscience was not
superstitiouse, as has been shown; and therefore the Sabbath whereof Christ
spoke and they made conscience, it was no yearly and ceremonial Sabbath, but
the 7th day and weekly Sabbath. 2. The word Sabbath, when in Scripture it is
put absolutely, without any addition, and when the context gives no light to
the contrary, it is to be understood of the 7th day and weekly Sabbath: for this
was the most frequent and ordenary Sabbath, and Christ's his speeches are to be
understood in an ordenary and not in an extraordinary sense, and of those things
which were usual, rather then of those which were rare and seldom.

As for their reason, that it is thought they fled upon a yearly Sabbath day,
and not upon the weekly Sabbath day, this proves not, that therefore their
conscience was not of the weekly Sabbath day; but rather, that their conscience
was of the weekly Sabbath day: for, inasmuch as Christ commanded his Disciples,
to pray that they might not fly upon a Sabbath day, it is to be believed, that
they did pray accordingly; and further it is to be believed, that since they
prayed at Christ's commandment, and being Christ's Disciples, that they prayed
in faith: and that therefore they obtained their prayer: whence it may be
collected, that they prayed against flight on the weekly 7th day Sabbath;
because they did not fly on the weekly 7th day Sabbath; for God heard their
prayer. But to think they made conscience of a yearly ceremonial Sabbath, and
prayed against it, and yet were driven to fly on it, is absurdly to suppose,
that God crosed their prayers, and denied their petition. And thus much for the
2d objection.

The last objection or rather answer is, that by the name Sabbath day Christ
might understand the Lords day. But why may they not as well say, when Christ
spoke of Winter, he meant the Summer? and when in the new Testament there is
mention of Circumcision, thereby may Baptism be meant? where did they ever read
the Lords day named Sabbath day in Scripture? suer I am, the holy Ghost puts
a plain difference betwixt the Sabbath day, and the Lords day, or first day of
the week, see Mark. 16.1.2. Finally, who that considers how Christ and his
Disciples, made the Lords day a travailing day Luke 24.13. Could think, that
Christ would not permit his Disciples 50 years after, to travail on the Lords
day, to save their lives, if by this Sabbath day, he meant the Lords day? and
thus much for my eleauenth argument, which stands good against all their
obiectiones and gainesayings.

ARGVM. XII.
My Twelueth and last argument, to prove that the 7th day Sabbath is still in
force, is because 1. The Apostles, did constantly observe and keep it, after
Christ's resurrection. 2. The primitive Churches, did observe and keep it,
after the days of the Apostles, for 300 or 400 years after Christ time. 3.
Our own Church, does daily pray to God, to incline our hearts to keep it,
and it may be thus framed.

That day which the Apostles of Christ, did constantly observe and keep after
Christ's death; and which the primitive Churches did observe and keep after the
days of the Apostles, for 300 or 400 years; and which our own Church, does
daily pray to God, to incline our hearts to keep; That day is still in force.

But the 7th day Sabbath, the Apostles of Christ, did constantly observe and
keep after Christ's death; and the primitive Churches, did observe and keep it
after the days of the Apostles for 300 or 400 years; and our Church does
daily pray to God, to incline our hearts to keep it.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath, is still in force.

As for the Major or first proposition, it needs no proof, so clear it is:
it consists of 3 branches as you see; as for the first of them, which is
that, that day which the Apostles did constantly observe, is still in force, or
must be our Sabbath day, this point must needs be granted me; because it is the
very position of my adversaries: for they thus argue for their Lords day
Sabbath; that, That day which the Apostles did consta^tly observe, must be our
Sabbath day: Wherefore they cannot doubt of my Major.

Furthermore it may be confirmed by this, that we are bound to imitate and
follow the practice of the Apostles: Be ye followers of me, even as I am of
Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1. Therefore that day which the Apostles did constantly
keep, that day must be still in force, and we must keep it.

It is true indeed, if that the Apostles had kept a day, but now and then, as
once in a month, or once in a year, or once in many years, (as they kept the
Lords day) then it had not followed: But that day which they kept constantly,
usually, and every week, week by week, there can be no reason imagined, why
that day, should not be still in use, in the Church. No, nor can we, with a
good and quiet conscience, reject the constant practice of the Apostles: If the
example, yea the frequent and customary example, of the Apostles, shall not be
available with us, what then will avail with us? In other cases, the very
mention of it, that S. Paul did so, or that some other of the Apostles did so,
it is sufficient to bind us, to do the like; and why then should we not be
followers of them, in this case also, keeping that day for our Sabbath which
they kept, and constantly kept also?

As for the other 2 branches of my Major, they cannot be denied; unless men
dare censure those purest and primitive Churches, which lived next after the
Apostles, as if they should live in an error of practice 300 or 400 years
together; I should rather suspect our own times then their times: Nor, unless
men would make frustrate an holy prayer of our Church. And so much for the
Major.

I come now to the proof of the Minor, or second proposition: this consists
of 3 branches, which I will prove in order one after an other, the first branch
is this, that the Apostles did constantly keep the Sabbath day after Christ's
death; for this purpose see Act. 13.14. But when they were departed from Perga,
they came to Antioch of Pisidia, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day
etc. Here you see the Sabbath day in use; and on this day, Paul preached a
Sermon to the congregation assembled, as you may read in the following parts
of the Chapter. Again, see Act. 13.42.44. And when they were come out of the
Synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles besought, that they would preach those
words to them the next Sabbath day: and the next Sabbath day, came almost the
whole City together, to hear the word of God. Lo, here again was an other
sermon preached upon the Sabbath day: and further, note the constancy of
keeping the Sabbath day; for here were two Sabbath days together kept, the one
immediately following after the other, and this is signifind by those words, the
next Sabbath day. Again, see Act. 16.13. And on the Sabbath day, we went out
of the City, besides a river, where they were wont to pray: and we sat down,
and spoke unto the women, which were come together. Lo here, at an other time,
and in an other place or City, the Sabbath day was kept also: and further it
is to be noted, that on this Sabbath day, was Lydia converted; and she, and
her household Baptized. Again, see Act. 17.2. And Paul, as his manner was, went
in unto them, and three Sabbath days, Disputed with them by the Scriptures
etc. Lo here, at an other time, and in an other place or City, the Sabbath
day was kept: note also, the constancy of their keeping the Sabbath, that three
Sabbath days together were here kept, as the text speaks: note also, that i^
was no rare and seldom thing, for the Sabbath to be thus kept, but that it was
in the Apostles times, a most ordenary and constant thing so to do; and this
is signified unto us, by those words, And Paul, as his manner was: So it was a
custom with S. Paul, to keep the Sabbath day, evermore wheresoever he came.
Again, see Act. 18.4. And he Disputed in the Synagogue, every Sabbath day, and
exhorted the Jews and the Grecians. Lo, here again, at an other time and in
an other place or City, the Sabbath day was kept: and note the consta^cy of
the keeping the Sabbath day; for in this city Paul kept every Sabbath day, so
says the text, every Sabbath day, not a Sabbath day once in a quarter of a
year, but every Sabbath in a year. What can be more plainly proved, then this
point is, that the Sabbath day was kept, yea and constantly kept in the days
of the Apostles?

Furthermore it shall not be amiss to show also, by whom the Sabbath was kept;
and here I shall prove unto you, that this observation of the Sabbath day, it
was an Apostolical practice; and therefore the more to be regarded: for this
purpose let us look back unto the texts fore alleged, see Act. 13.13.14. Now
when Paul, and they that were with him etc. Where you see, that the Apostle
Paul kept the Sabbath day; and also other Christianes, that accompanied him in
his voyage, namly those who were with Paul, as the text speaks. Again, see
Act. 13.43.44.46. Where mention is made of Barnabas the Apostle, who joined
himself with Paul, and those other Christianes, in the observation of the
Sabbath day. Again, see Act. 16.1.3.13.19.20. Where is mention made of
Timotheus, and of Silas, both which, joined with Paul in the sanctification of
the Sabbath day. Thus you have seen, that the Sabbath day, was observed after
Christ's resurrection, by the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, and by Timotheus and
Silas, and by other Christians that accompanied Paul in his voyage: wherefore,
we may safely cale, the observation of the old Sabbath day, an Apostolical and
Christian practice: for it was observed by the Apostles of Christ, and by such
as were Preachers of the Gospel of Christ: and therefore the observation of
the old Sabbath, has Authority sufficient to back it, by those that published
and preached the Gospel of Christ, under the new Testament.

Thus you have seen it proved, that the Sabbath day was kept, and constantly
kept, after Christ's death and resurrection. 2. That it was kept by the Apostles
themselves, and by such as published, and preached the Gospel. 3 It shall not
be amiss to show you, how universally the Sabbath was kept: for it was kept
in diverse and sundry places, as at Antiochia Act. 13.14.42. And at Philippi
Act. 16, 12.13. and at Thessalonica Act. 17.1.2. And at Corinth Act. 18.1.4. So
you see, the Sabbath day was kept in these 4 Christian Churches, to wit, in the
Church at Antioch, at Philippi, at Thessalonica, and at Corinth: all these we
know of.

Albeit we have sufficiently proved; both the Major, and also the first branch
of the Minor; yet all is not done in this argument which some that are very
scrupulouse require: for say some, it is true indeed; that the Apostles kept
the Sabbath after Christ's resurrection; but it was amongst the Jews, and in
the Jewish Synagogues, but prove unto us, that ever the Apostles kept the
Sabbath, among the Gentiles. But hereunto I reply.

This distinction of keeping the Sabbath among Jews, but not among Gentiles is
fond and vain; for these men make doubts and differences, where the Apostles
made none, as I shall prove unto you: for, the Apostles kept the Sabbath day,
among both Jews and Gentiles, joined in one congregation together: see Act.
18.4. And he disputed in the Synagogue, every Sabbath day, and exhorted the
Jews and the Grecianes: Here you see the Sabbath was kept, both with Jews and
Gentiles; for the Grecianes, were no Jews but Gentiles, see also Act. 17.2.4.
And some of them believed, and joined in company with Paul and Silas: also of
the Grecianes that feared God a great multitude: Here you see a multitude of
Grecianes or Gentiles, were present with the Jews, in the same congregation,
when Paul and Silas kept the Sabbath day, as in v. 2. so then, the Apostles
made no difference, in keeping the Sabbath day, betwixt Jews and Gentiles.

Nevertheless I will prove unto you, that the Apostles kept the Sabbath with
the Gentiles, see Act. 13.42.44. And when they were come out of the Synagogue
of the Jews, the (Gentiles) besought, that they would preach these words to
them, the next Sabbath day, and the next Sabbath came almost the whole city
together, to hear the word of God. Lo, here is a most pregnant text for the
purpose: for here the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, kept the Sabbath with
Gentiles; yea with the whole city almost of the Antiochian Gentiles;
wherefore, the Apostles made no difference of keeping the Sabbath between Jews
and Gentiles: for they kept it indifferently, as well amongst Gentiles as
amongst Jews.

An other text whereby I shall prove unto you, that the Apostles kept the
Sabbath among the Gentiles, is Act. 16.12.13. And from thence to Philippi,
which is the chief City in the parts of Macedonia, and whose inhabitants
came from Rome to dwell there: and we weere in that City abiding certain
days, and on the Sabbath day we went out of the City, besides a river, where
they were wont to pray: and we sat down, and spoke unto the women, which
were come together etc. In this text, it is to be observed, that these at
Philippi with whom Paul, Timothy, and Silas kept the Sabbath day, v. 3.19.
they were Gentiles: for, 1. Lidia, who was then converted, and she and her
household baptized, she was a Gentile, for she was of the City of Thyatira, as
the text speaks. v. 14. It does not follow, that she was a Iewesse, because
the text says, she was a worshiper of God, as some think: for so was
Cornelius also a worshiper of God Act. 10.2. But yet he was no Jew, no nor so
much as a proselite, for he then was uncircumcised, Act. 11.3. secondly, it is
plain in the text; because the text says that these Philippians were Romans:
Whose inhabitants came from Rome to dwell there, v. 12. now the Romans were
not Jews, but Gentiles: which appears further in v. 20.21. by the
opposition, betwixt Jews and Romans, These men who are Jews, trouble our
City, and preach ordinances which are not lawful for us to receive, seeing we
are Romans. These philippians therefore were Romans, and so Gentiles: and so
it is evident by this text also, that the Sabbath day was kept among Gentiles,
and that the Apostles were as ready to keep the Sabbath when they came among
the Gentiles with the Gentiles, as they weere to keep it when they came among
the Jews with the Jews: they made no difference betwixt Jew and Gentile for
this point.

Finally, suppose it could not be proved, that the Apostles kept the Sabbath
with the Gentiles at all, but only with the Jews; is it lawful therefore to
reject the examples and practice of the Apostles? if it be, then these
absurdeties follow, 1. That when the Apostles exhort us, to become imitatores
and followers of them, as in 1. Cor. 11.1. and 1. Cor. 4-16. and Phil. 3.17.
then these textes must be understood, with this vain limitation, that we must
imitate the Apostles, only in such actiones, as they did do among the
Gentiles, but not in those they did among the Jews. 2. If we must imitate the
Apostles, only in such things, as they did do among the Gentiles; then is the
example of the Apostles, of little or no use for our direction: for all their
actiones well nigh, were done, among the Jews only, or else among Jews and
Gentiles mixed together, as you may read every where, see Act. 2.14. Act.
13.14.42. Act. 14.5. Act. 17.4.5. Act. 18.4. So much for their first answer.

An other answer they usually bring, against the Apostles keeping the Sabbath
day, after Christ's resurrection is, that it was so done for a time only, to
bear with the weakness of the Jews, who would not be suddenly weaned from
the Sabbath day, no more then they would from Circumcision. Hereunto I reply.
1. That it was no weakness in the Jews (I trust) nor so to be esteemed of
us, for the^ to yield obedience unto a moral precept, which inioyneth the
Sabbath day: neither are they to rank the Sabbath day with circumcision,
supposing the Jews to be as superstitiouse in the one as in the other, until
they know how as well, to prove the Sabbath day to be abolished, as it is easy
to prove Circumcision to be abolished.

If the Apostles keeping Sabbath, was to bear with the weakness of the Jews,
then I would gladly know, why they kept Sabbath with the Gentiles; this was not
I trust to bear with the Jews weakness, see Act. 13.42.44. this repetition
sermon or sermon preached again at request of the Gentiles, it was not made
for the Jews sake, but for the Gentiles sake, who requested it: now what cause
was there then, that Paul and Barnabas should preach this sermon unto the
Gentiles, upon the Sabbath day, to bear with the weakness of the Jews, for
whose sake it was not preached? had this sermon been preached at the request of
the Jews, and so for their sakes, happily this might have had some better
culler; but it being prached for the Gentiles sakes, and at their request, it
is absurd therefore to think, that the Apostles should have regard to the
Jews in this case: and so much for the Sabbath day kept among the Gentiles at
Antioch Act. 13.14.42.44.

The vanity of their answer, will further appear if we look into that other
Church where Paul, Timothy and Silas kept the Sabbath day also, to wit, at
Philippi, and that too among the Roman Gentiles Act. 16.12.13. now for so much
as we read not of any Jews dwelling at Philippi, but have proved the
contrary, nor can they prove that any dwelt there, who could think, that S.
Paul and the rest, should keep the Sabbath there, infauor of the Jews? or for
the weakness of the Jews? since there were no Jews either in that City, or
in their Assemblies, of whom the Apostles should be afraied, or for whose sakes
they should do it.

But here it is answered, that albeit there were no Jews in this City or
Assembly, yet if Paul had not kept the Sabbath here, it would have been by one
means or other carried to the Jews where they dwelt, whereat they would have
been offended, and therefore Paul kept the Sabbath here at Philip. But how
vain this conceit is appears. 1. Because this supposes, that the Apostle
durst not free the Gentiles, from the observation of needless ceremonies in
their own Church, for fear he should offend the superstitiouse Jews in some
other remote Church. 2. By the like reason, Paul should not have reproved Peter
for Iudaizing in the Church of Galatia, Gal. 2.14. nor have durst to speak
against Circumcision; nor to have wrote to the Colossians against Meats and
drinks, new Mones, and yearly Sabbaths, Colos. 2.16. for by one means or
other, this would have come to the hearing of the Jews, and offended them. 3.
By this it should have come to pass, that there should have been no place left
in the world for the Apostles to have begune a reformation of Jewish
ceremonies, if they durst not refaine them for fear it should come to the
hearing of the Jews: wherefore the Apostles kept not the Sabbath at Philippi
for to please the Jews only, nor only for fear of offending them.

Yet further, there is not want of good reason, to show that the Apostles kept
not the Sabbath for the weakness of the Jews only: this being laid for a
grownd, that if they be supposed to keep it for the weakness of the Jews
only, that then it was a ceremony and so abolished, my reasons are these.

1. Because the Apostles kept it voluntarily, and when they might have avoided
it, as appears. 1. Because the Apostles remained certain days with the
Church at Antioch Act. 13.42, 44. and with the Church at Philippi Act. 16.12.
Now any day of the Six had been as fit for the Gentiles, as the Sabbath, if
the Sabbath was a ceremony. 2. Because the Gentiles besought the Apostles to
preach to them the next Sabbath day Act. 13 42. Now what is obtained by request
of Superiors, is at their liberty to grant: now can any think the Apostles
would use an abolished ceremony, when it was at their choice and liberty to
use it or not? forasmuch as the strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, it was a burden for an Apostle to use a Jewish Ceremony: and would the
Apostles then take an unprofitable burden on their backs, when they might
avoid it?

2. If the Sabbath was kept for the weakness of the Jews, and so appeared to
be but a Ceremony, then had the Apostles rune upon ij dangerouse rocks. 1. As
touching the Jews, how could this but harden the heart of the Jews in their
Iudaisme, and retaining still of Ceremonies, when they saw S. Paul, the
greatest enemy to Ceremonies of all the Apostles, to observe the Sabbath day
still, not only when he was among them, but whersoeuer be came, yea among the
Gentiles also; 2 As touching the Gentiles, if the Sabbath had been kept for the
weakness of the Jews only, as a ceremony, then had S. Paul by keeping the
Sabbath among the Gentiles, infected them with Judaisme by his practice: yea,
and so taught them that now in practice, which he must afterward beat down
and vnteach again by Doctrine; Thus the Apostles should be supposed to make
themselves work: first to infect, and then to heal and cure: further, if
their answer be good, then was Paul bound, to permit and suffer the Christian
Churches in Iudaisme; for the strong ought to bear the ^^firmities of the
weak. Romans 15.1. Now Paul was strong, and those Jews were weak.

3. To suppose the Apostles to keep the Sabbath among the Gentiles, for the
weakness of the Jews, is absurd: for by so doing the Gospel should receive no
advantage: for look what a superstitiouse Jew was eased thereby, by so much a
believing Gentile was burdened and combered; he being entangled with a Jewish
Ceremony: now what were this better then if the Apostles should pull a thorn
out of the foot of a Jew, and thrust it into the foot of a Gentile?

4. Observe, that S. Paul was the Doctor of the Gentiles Gal. 2.7. Now by
Gentiles here, we must not understand such congregations as consisted only of
Gentiles: for of all the Churches which Paul planted there were few such, but
for the most part they were all a mixed people, of Jews and Gentiles both, as
you may see Act. 17.2.4. Act. 18.4. Act. 19.10. Act. 13.14.42. Act. 14.5.
wherefore, suppose ye that the Sabbath had no where been kept among the
Gentiles, that is, in such a congregation wherein there were none but Gentiles;
yet is the cause the same still: for first, it is plain that Paul kept the
Sabbath frequently in these Churches, which were mixed of Jews and Gentiles,
see Act. 17.2.3. Act. 18.4. And secondly, it is plain, that these were the
Churches which Paul planted, and over whom he was set: now if the keeping of the
Sabbath had been a ceremony, as meats and drinks were, then had Paul committed
a foul error by using of this Ceremony in his Churches, the Churches of the
Gentiles: for he had constrained thereby the Gentiles unto Iudaisme; the which
fault, he sorely reproved Peter for Gal. 2.14.12. For, Paul's keeping the
Sabbath must as well constrain the Gentiles to Sabbathizing, as Peter's
refraining of Meats, did constrain these Gentiles to do the like.

5. If Paul did Sabbathize among the Gentiles, for the weakness of the Jews
only, and that ordenarily and customarily, for so he did Act. 13.14.42.44.
Act. 17.1.2. Act. 18.4. Then this absurdety follows, that Paul did also
circumcise the Gentiles, for the weakness of the Jews, and that ordenarily
and customarily: for there is as great reason, that Paul should have used
circumcision among the Gentiles, in favor of the Jews, as to have used the
Sabbath day among the Gentiles, in favor of the Jews: for the Jews were as
zealouse for circumcision as they were for the Sabbath. Hereunto I might also
add, that Paul must as well have used their new moons, and abstinance from
prohibited meats, among the Gentiles, for the sake of the Jews, as the
Sabbath day, if these were all alike Ceremonies, and if there were no more
morallity in the Sabbath, then in the new moons and prohibited meats.

6. As touching things indifferent, and the Ceremonial Law, Paul became all
things unto all men etc. Unto the Jew who had the Ceremonial Law, he became a
Jew; and unto the Ge^tile, who were without this Law, he became a Gentile;
that is, when he was among the Jews, then he used the ceremonial Law, but
when he was among the Gentiles, then he behaved himse^fe without Law, he used
no Ceremonies: from this text then thus expounded, it is plain, that Paul's
Sabbathizing among the Gentiles, it was no Ceremony, nor done for the weakness
of the Jews: for among the Gentiles he was without law, that is, he used no
Ceremonies: To think otherwise, were to think that Paul did not only unto
the Jew become a Jew, but absurdly that unto the Gentile also he became a
Jew.

7. If the Sabbath was a Ceremony, and observed, by the Apostle, in those
Churches where he kept it, for the weakness of the Jews, then this absurdety
follows; that he did not root out Ceremonies, or refrain Iudaisme in those
Churches; and consequently that he left behind him, many famous Christian
Churches, pestered with Ceremonies, and infected with Iudaisme: for he kept the
Sabbath day in many famous Churches, see Act. 13.14.42.44. Act. 16.12. Act.
17.2. Act. 18.4. Now if Paul was forced to observe Ceremonies, for the
weakness of the Jews at that time, then so must he for the same cause, have
done ever after during his life: for the Jews remained weak in this matter of
Ceremonies, to Paul's dying day: since that all confess it, that Ceremonies had
for their honorable burial among the Jews, until the destruction of the
Temple, which was about 50 years after Christ.

8. It cannot be that the observation of the Sabbath was a Ceremony, and kept
for the weakness of the Jews only, among the Gentiles: for, if any Jews
could be offended at the neglect of Ceremonies, they were those at Jerusalem as
much as any: for they were all still zealouse of the law, that is, the law
Ceremonial. Act. 21.20. Now these Jews, the very chief of them, as the
Apostles and Elders, they had determined it, and written unto the Gentiles,
that they should observe no such things, that is, that they should observe no
Ceremonies Act. 21.18.25. How then can we think, that S. Paul, who was ever an
enemy unto Ceremonies. Act. 21.21. should be so forward, as to observe the
Sabbath day, if it were a Ceremony? yea, and that too in the Churches of the
Gentiles, contrary unto the decrees and determinations of the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem, made against the use of Ceremonies among the Gentiles? and
so much for confutation of this their second answer, whereupon I have dwelt the
longer, because it is their chief answer, wherein they put greatest considence.

A third answer they make to my argument, against the Apostles keeping of the
Sabbath day is this, that the Apostles must take such days as they found in
use in the Church then, or else they could not preach and divulge the Gospel:
and the Jews would assemble then on no days but on the Sabbath days,
according to their ancient custom.

Hereunto I reply saying, that whereas the enemies to this most ancient
ordinance of Gods Sabbath, do feign a necessity upon the matter, as if the
Apostles were compelled to keep the Sabbath day; this is but a forged fiction
of their own brains: for the Apostles knew how to divulge and make known the
Gospel, albeit they had never preached on the Sabbath day, nor taken the
opportunity of the Jews assemblies, and Synagogues: for they could preach it,
from house to house, in private howsen; as we read they did sometimes, and
daily in the Temple, and in enery house, they ceased not to teach, and to
preach Jesus Christ. Act. 5.42. And when Paul forsook preaching in the Jews
Synagogues and assemblies, he could find other places to teach and to preach
in; and therefore we read, that he taught a longtime, in the Schole of one
Tyrannus, and there assembled unto him both Jews and Gentiles, for the space
of two years. Act. 19.8.9.10. and this place he found out to teach in, after
he left the assemblies and Synagogue of the Jews, as you may see in the text:
and therefore it is but a forged invention, to say, that the Apostles, must
take the opportunity of the Jews assemblies, to preach unto them when they
were assembled; there was no necessity of it, as you see. And it is but a
forgery of them to say, that the Jews would not assemble on any days but on
their Sabbath days: as if they would not hear Gods word, out of the Sab. bath
day, as well as out of the Synagogue: and as if the Apostles should preach
daily, but the people did not hear daily Act. 5.42. and see Mat. 5.1. with
Mat. 4. last. Yet further, Paul could assemble and gather together the Jews,
at his pleasure, as you may read he did Act. 28.17. And the third day after,
Paul called the chief of the Jews together, and when they were come, he said
unto them etc. Now he did not cale them together into the Synagogue, but into a
private house, as you may see v. 16. And further, not only the Jews, but the
very chief of the Jews (as the text speaks) refused not to come at his
cale: And therefore, Paul was not compelled to seek out them, and to go into
their assemblies, and Synagogues; for he could cale for them to come unto him,
and that unto his Chamber or lodging. Yet further, Paul being a prisoner,
remained two years in an house hired for himself, and thither the people came
unto him, to be taught and instructed in the kingdom of God, and those things
which concern the Lord Jesus, as you may read Act. 28.30.31. It is therefore
an idle plea, to say, that the Apostles must take the opportunity of the
Assemblies of the Jews, then to preach unto them; as if there could be no
other time for the Apostles, but only that time wherein they were met in
their Synagogues, to preach Christ in.

But happily it will be said, that though this time, wherein the Jews were
assembled in their Synagogues, on the Sabbath day, was not necessary, yet it
was the most opportune and fit time for the Apostles to preach in. Hereunto I
answer, when an opportunity and an inconvenience meet, the greater of the two
is to be regarded: Paul's care was so to instruct the Jews touching Christ
already come, as he might therewithal, beat down all Ceremonies and shadows
of Christ to come: for, He taught the Jews among the Gentiles, to for sake
Moses, and circumcision, and the Jewish customs. Act. 21.21. Now if the
Sabbath day, was a Ceremony and a shadow of Christ to come (as these men
imagine) and then Paul should frequent the Jews assemblies ordenarily and
usually, week by week upon the Sabbath day, himself keeping the Sabbath with
them; this were of dangerouse consequence, least it should flesh and hearten
the Jews in their hard heartedness, to think that Christ was not yet come,
since that the Sabbath was a sign (as is holden) of Christ to come: and
further, it was of dangerouse consequence, least it should ouerturne all Paul's
doctrine, when they heard him preach that the Messiah was come, and yet they
saw him keep the Sabbath with them, which signified that Christ was still to
come: Yea, it was perillouse unto the Jews that were believing Jews, that by
this means, they might be still retained, in a superstitiouse opinion of
Ceremonies, when they saw Paul keep them with them so generally, and so
constantly: Now let all these inconveniences, or but any one of them, be put
into the balance, with that oppertunity of preaching to the Jews, whilst they
were assembled after their wonted manner; and then tell me whither of the
twain is the greater, and whither must give place unto the other: doubtless,
Paul would not hazard the least of these inconveniences, for to gain that
opportunity of the Jews assembly; he would rather have made a new assembly of
them, upon some other day, and in some other place, then to have put them into
such peril of danger: for Paul was most careful to weane them from
Ceremonies; and so much for their third and last answer.

Thus you see, we have proved the keeping of the Sabbath day was an
Apostolical practice, and to be imitated and followed of us: and have
alsotake^ away whatsoever they can object to the contrary: but suppose we could
only have proved, that the Apostles did constantly observe the Sabbath day,
yet in this have we done and said much more in defense of the Lords Sabbaths,
the^ they have said, or can say, in defense of the Lords day, who are patrones
of it: this Lords day Sabbath, were it not the Diana and darling of our time,
and supported by men of learning, holiness, and zeal, I would say of it, that
it is the most idle and friuolouse thing, that cane be invented; for besides
other defects in it, they cannot prove a constant practice of it, no nor that
it was ever kept week by week, two Lords days together, one after an other,
in any place, nor at any time: I can but wonder therefore, that any man, that
has but either learning or honesty, should after the consideration of these
things, prefer the Lords day above the Sabbath day, or neglect the ancient
ordinance of Gods Sabbath day, to embrace this nouill Sabbath of the the Lords
day.

I have now finished my 12th and last argument, as touching the first branch of
it, wherein I have proved, that the Apostles of Christ, did constantly keep the
Sabbath day, after Christ's resurrection: and now I am to proceed, and to prove
unto you, the second branch of my Minor or second proposition, which is, That
the primitive Churches, which lived after the days of the Apostles, kept the
Sabbath day, for 300 or 400 years after Christ. And this truth I shall
confirm unto you by sundry Testimonies.

1.
I will begine with that which M. Perkins reports, saying, The observation of
the Sabbath, was neglected of those Churches which succeeded the Apostles, but
afterward, it was established by Christian Emperors: his Author for it is Leo
and Anton Edict, of Holy days: Perk. in his first volume, upon the 4th com.
page 48. by the word Sabbath M. Perkins understands the Lords day Sabbath:
Now of this Lords day, he says according to his author, that the Churches
which succeeded the Apostles, they neglected it until it was established by
Christian Emperors; now these Churches, were the primitive Churches, for they
lived immediately after the Apostles: and they lived in the neglect of the Lords
day Sabbath, for about 300 years after the days of the Apostles; as is
gatherable by this, that he says, it was established by Christian Emperoures:
now the first Emperor that established the Lords day, was Constantine the
great, as says Hosp. Cap. 9. page 27. and this Constantine, lived about 300
years, after the Apostles: now for as much as these Churches, lived about 300
years without the Lords day Sabbath it follows, that they all that time kept
the 7th day Sabbath; unless we shall uncharitably censure them, to have lived
profanly without any Sabbath day all that while, which were absurd to think:
many Churches kept both Sabbaths together, to wit, the Sabbath day, and the
Lords day, as you shall see by and by; now can it be thought, that some of the
Primitive Churches, should be so zealouse, as to keep two days, and other
some so key could, as to keep none at at all? wherefore, since these Churches
kept not the Lords day, therefore it must follow, that they kept the Sabbath
day: thus you see it follows, that the Sabbath day was in use in the
primitive times, for about 300 years after the Apostles: so then as the
Apostles kept the Sabbath day, constantly, after Christ's resurrection; so the
primitive Churches that succeeded next after the Apostles, they kept it for a
matter of 300 years longer.

2.
My next Testimony shall be out of the Centuries: where it is thus recorded,
Romae conventus ecclesiasticos non fuisse in Sabbato, quemadmodum in aliarum
terrarum ecclesiis: Centur iiij. Cap. vj. page 477. de ritibus ecclesiae
Romanae. The sum whereof is this, that There was no Ecclesiastical or Church
assemblies, upon the Sabbath day at Rome, as there was in other Churches. In
which words, there is an opposition made, betwixt the Church of Rome, an other
Churches (to wit, Christian Churches) about keeping of the Sabbath day, now it
is recorded, that there was no Church meetings, upon the Sabbathday, at Rome;
but yet, there was Church assemblies, upon the Sabbath day in other Churches
abroad in the world: so then by this Record, it is plain, that the most
Churches kept the Sabbath day, albeit Rome did not: and it is no marvel, that
Rome had learned of the Laodicean Counsel, to reject the yoke of Gods 4th
com. with the first; and further', this Testimony was of what was done in these
Churches, for 300 or 400 years after Christ: so then you see that the Sabbath
day, was observed in the most Churches 300 or 400 years after Christ: and so
much for this second Testimony.

3.
My third Testimony shall be from an act made by the Laodicean Counsel in
the year of Christ 364. Laodicenum Concilium celebratum circa annum 364
sanxit: Non oportere Iudaizare Christianos, and in Sabbatho vacare, sed potius
operari in eadem die, Dominicam praeponendo Sabbatho: quod si inventi fuerint
Sabbathum Judaeorum observantes, anahemate ibidem feriuntur. Hospin: de origin.
Fest. Chap. 9. page 27. The sum whereof is this; The Laodicean Counsel held
about the year 364 made a Law, that Christianes should not Judaize, and rest
upon the Sabbath day, but rather work upon it; and that they should praeferre
the Lords day above the Sabbath day. And if so be any were found observing the
Jews Sabbath, they should be excommanciated or accursed. By this Law then it
appears, that the Sabbath day, was in use in those times, for else this Law
had been made in vain, which forbad Christians to keep the Sabbath day any
more, upon pain of excommunication; for gouernes do not enact Laws against
nothing. 2. Note, that as the Sabbath day was in use in those times, so also it
was in use amo^gft Christianes: for this law as you see, was bent against the
practice of Christianes, forbidding Christianes to keep the Sabbath day;
whereby we see, that in these times, the Sabbath day was honored among
Christianes. 3. Note, that unto this time Christianes did honor the Sabbath
day with or above the Lords day: and this I gather from hence, because this
Counsel ordained, that for time to come, Christianes should prefer the
Lords day before the Sabbath: now they neded not to have made a law, to bind
Christians, to prefer the Lords day before the Sabbath day, if they had done
so before the making of this law; and this is a remarkabl thing, that in these
times the Sabbath day was had in such honor with Christians, as it was as
highly, or rather more highly set by then the Lords day was. 4. Note the time;
this Law was made 364. years or there about after Christ: whereby we see, that
the Sabbath day, was in use amongst Christianes, for nere 400 years after
Christ.

A digression, by the way showing 1. the Invalidity of this Laodicean Counsel
and Decree, made against the Lords Sabbaths. 2. The Original of the Lords day
Sabbath. 3. The time when, and the persons by whom, the ancient Sabbath was
first thrown down.

First of the first, that this Decree made against Gods Sabbaths, is not to be
regarded or esteemed, shall thus appear, because it was an ungodly act and
decree: for they made a Law directly against Gods Law: for God said, Remember
the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: but they decreed, that no Christianes should
observe the Sabbath^ day, to sanctify it: and therefore this Counsel, was
guilty of that brand of that wicked one, Prophesied of by Daniel, Who should
speak words against the most high, and think that he may change times and
Laws. Dan. 7.25. Now this Counsel, did here change times, to wit, sacred
times, sanctified of God, the Sabbath day; and decreed, that this time should
now be profaned, and men, yea Christians should profane it by working on it:
and further, they changed this day for an other day, to wit, the Lords day,
casting down sinfully the Sabbath day, and setting up in its room, and
preferring above it superstitiously the Lords day.

And as this decree against the Lords Sabbaths, was ungodly in them, so was it
Schismatic also: for they now begane not only to decline from ancient
purity, but also to rend Chureches, and to divide betwixt Church and Church,
Christianes and Christianes: for other Churches which lived about their time,
and together with them, kept that ancient ordinance of Gods Sabbath, as we have
proved already out of Perkines, and out of the Centuries, and as you may
perceive by those Testimonies which you shall see by and by; and other
Christanes, kept the Sabbath also, even among themselves; as appears by their
law inacted against Christians, for keeping the Sabbath day; thus it appears,
they rent themselves, both from those other Churches living then with them, and
from Christianes then in their own Church also: You shall see by and by also,
how this Counsel, has made a rent from the Churches, whereof those famous
lights Athanasiius and Ignatius were Bishopes, and which lived before this
Counsel, and thereby you shall perceive, how they have made a Schism and rent
also, from the most ancient and purest Churches, that lived before them.

Neither is any man to wonder at this, for if we consider what was Prophesied
of this Church of Laodicea, whereof this Counsel has its name, we can expect
no better from it: for of all the 7 Churches, which John wrote unto in his
Revelation, this of Laodicea, it was the worst: and therefore says Christ,
because thou art luke warm, and neither could nor hot, it shall come to
pass, that I will spue thee out of my mouth Revel. 3.16. Christ here forteld
them, that it should come to pass, that he would spue them out of his mouth,
as most loathsome unto him; and think you that they did not well deserve it at
this time; when they begane to make a Schism and rent from other the Churches
of Christ, and to change Gods time: and to enact laws against Gods Law?
considering therefore, what an vnzealouse Church, Christ foretold this
Laodicean Church should be, it therefore is not to be regarded, what they
decreed against Gods Sabbaths.

Yet further, if we shall note the time wherein this Counsel lived, and made
this decree, their decree will grow more suspitiouse, and less to be regarded:
for it was 364 years after Christ; about which time, begane the Mystery of
iniquity to work: for the purity of the primitive Churches, begane to decline
and be Ecclipsed then, and superstition and popery, begane to insinuate it
self, and creep into the Churches: for those pure Churches of the primitive
times, are compared to a river, the which the further off it runs from the
spring head, the more filth it gathers, and so it was with these Churches:
for, as you may read in Perkins his Demonstration of the problem, about the
300 and 400 years after Christ, then begane Images to creep into Churches,
The Cross to be adored, Invocation of Saints, prayers for the dead,
Pilgrimage, Purgatory, Single life of Ministers, Monkery, and Monastical
profession etc. Till at last they had corrupted the second commandment by
Images, Crucisixes, and the breaden god: now what marvel, that they had also
corrupted the 4th com. and abolished the Lords Sabbaths, when those times had
corrupted the second commandment? wherefore their decree made near 400 years
after Christ, is to be suspected, because then was the time of the Churches
declining and faleing away, from their former purity.

A second thing to be observed by the way, from the decree of this Counsel,
is to note the Original and first vpspringing, of our new Sabbath, caled the
Lords day, as a sole Sabbath, and generally received; The pite out of which it
was dug, is the Laodicean Counsel; the Antiquity that can be alleged for
it, it is no higher the 364 years after Christ; for, 1. until about the time
of this counsel, and since hitherto, this Lords day was never generally
received in the Christian Churches, for the Churches whereof Perkins speaks,
which lived immediately after the apostles, they neglected the Lords day, for a
matter of 300 years, until Christian Emperors established it; it is true,
that Constantine enacted a Law for the generallobseruatio^ of the Lords day,
which was 300 years after Christ, and so a matter of 64 years before this
Counsel; but in Constantines time, the Lords day was not kept as a sole
Sabbath; for the Sabbath day was then kept also, as by and by we shall prove by
Athanasius who lived in Constantines time. 2. Until the time of this
Counsel, and since, the Lords day was never received and kept for a sole
Sabbath, as now it is: for before the time of this Counsel, the Sabbath day,
and the Lords day, were both kept together, in many Chuches, as you shall see
by those Testimonies which by and by I shall produce, out of Socrates, and from
Jgnatius, but now, at the time of this Counsel, begane the Sabbath day to be
rejected, and also the Lords day, to be set up as the sole Sabbath without any
other: and now the Lords day must forsooth be preferred before the Sabbath day:
and so you see the first Original of our Lords day Sabbath, to be a sole
Sabbath, was this Counsel of Laodicea.

The third and last thing to be observed is, that here we take knowledge, of
the persons by whom, the Lords Sabbaths were first thrown down, and of the
time when they were first thrown down. The perso^es that did commit this
horriblefact they were that lukewarm people of the Church of, Laodicea: none
others durst attempt to change Gods times, and to make a sacred time become a
profane time but these: the time when, it was in that declined time, to wit,
364 years after Christ: the former times, which were the more pure times, they
durst not lay violent hands of Gods ordinance: thus we see when, and by whom
Gods Sacred Sabbaths were rooted out of the Church. Thus my digression
finished, I return whence I came.

4.
My fourth Testimony shall be the words of M. Perkins, and Doctor Prideanx,
and M. Brerewood; For M. Perkins, he moves a question, to know who changed the
Jews Sabbath? And then his answer is this, It is commonly thought (says he)
that the Jews Sabbath, was changed into this Lords day, by Christian Emperors,
long after the Ascension of Christ. Perk. in his Exposition upon the first
Chapter of the Revelation; and verse the 10th. In which words M. Perkins does
deliver, though not his own, yet the common opinion and judgment of others:
now the common opinion is (says he) that the Jews Sabbath was changed, long
after Christ his Ascension; and that by Christian Emperors: so then, it is the
common opinion, that the Sabbath day lasted in the Churches, a long time after
Christ his Ascension; even 300. years.

For Doctor Prideaux, says he in his work upon the Sabbath page: 140, Annon
Sabbathum Iudaeorum oum Iudaeis, sine scrupulo and murmr obseruarunt
Apostoli? caetus in Sabbatho coactos libentissime instituerunt? Annon insequens
Ecclesia, tam Sabbathum hoc, quam diem Dominicum per aliquot annorum decursum
sacris conventibus distinauit? Notiora sunt ista quam vt probatione indigeant.
The sum whereof is this, did not the Apostles (says he) observe the Jews
Sabbath, with the Jews, without the least scruple making? and did they not
most willingly appoint assemblies on the Sabbath day? and did not the Church
which followed them, appoint both the Sabbath day and the Lords day, for holy
assemblies, for diverse years? these things are so well known that they need
not to be proved. By whose Testimony, you see, that the Churches which followed
the Apostles, they observed and kept the Sabbath day, for diverse years: and
this is so plain by History, that it needs not any quotations or proof.

For M. Brerewood, Professor in Gresham College in London, in his Treatise of
the Sabbath day, against M, Bysield page 77. thus writes: And little do you
know (says he) of the ancient condition of the Church if you know it not,
that the ancient Sabbath, did remain and was obserned, together with the Lords
day, by the Christians of the Eastern Church, above 300 years after Christ's
death etc. And again, The Sabbath of the 7th day, was religiously observed in
the East Church, 300 years and more, after our Saviors passion. That Church
being a great part of Christendom. Thus by the judgment of those who are
well seen into the Histories of the Church, it is a plain case, that the
Sabbath day, was religiously observed, and that by Christians, for more then
300 years after Christ.

5.
My fifth Testimony shall be that recorded by Zanchie out of Sozomen, the sum
whereof is this, That those of Constantinople, and almost all others have
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, to hear Gods word, on the Sabbath day, and on the
Lords day. Zanchie upon the 4th com. These. 1. Here you see, that not only at
Constantinople they kept the Sabbath day, but also, almost in all other
Churches, the Sabbath was kept.

6.
My sixth Testimony shall be out of Socrates, the sum whereof is this.
Assemblies were wont to be in the Churches, every week, upon the Sabbath day,
and upon the Lords day. Socrat. Chap. 8. lib. 6. and again, At Cesarea,
Cappadocia, and in Ciprio, upon the Sabbath day, and upon the Lords day, the
Presbiters and Bishopes did evermore interpret and expound the Sciptures.
Socrat. Cap. 21. lib. 6. here you see, a weekly observation of the Sabbath day;
and a constant practice of Presbiters and Bishopes, to expound the holy
Scriptures upon the Sabbath day.

But before I proceed any further, it shall not be amiss, to answer a doubt,
that may rise in the minds of some that read these Antiquities: may they say,
what did the primitive Churches keep two Sabbath days every week? for it
seems so; because they kept both the Sabbath day, and the Lords day. For
answer hereto, we must know, that howbeit they kept two days, yet it is not to
be thought, that they kept them both for Sabbath days, resting from labor all
day long, according to the 4th com. for, 1. This were more then ever God
required in his moral Law, to rest two days in Seven. 2. Jgnatius put a
difference betwixt the Sabbath day, and the Lords day, as between the King and
the Queen: for he caled (as you shall see by and by) the Lords day, the queen
of days, hereby intimating, that the Sabbath day whereof he spoke also in that
place, was the King of days. 3. The Christianes, against whom the Laodicean
Counsel, enacted that law forespoken of, they honored the Sabbath day above
the Lords day, as there we showed. 4. Many Churches of Christianes, they kept
not the Lords day at all for 300 years together, as we have shown out of
Perkines. 5. In Co^stantines time he gave leave for men to go to plough, and
other works of husbandry on the Lords day, as else where we have shown: by
all which it is more then manifest, that the primitive Curches, though they
kept the Lords day, yet they kept it not for a Sabbath day, or like the Sabbath
day, but rather much like as we now keep a common Holy day, or a lecture day,
wherein we come to Church and hear the word of God, but we keep not the whole
day, in a rest from labors and in conscience of the 4th com. thus you see,
albeit they kept two days in a week, yet but one only was kept for their
Sabbath, the other was kept lightly and partially: they kept these two days in
a week then, much like as we now keep the Lords day, and some light Holy day;
or the Lords day and a Eecture day, when they fall both in one week.

7.
My seaue^th Testimony shall be that of Athanasius, who lived about the time of
Constantine, 300. years after Christ: who in his Homily de Semente says
thus; We assemble together in the Sabbath day, not as if we were infected with
Iudaisme, but therefore we meet together in the Sabbath day, that we may
worship Jesus the Lord of the Sabbath. Centur. iiij. Cap. vj. page 410. In which
words, we see what was the practice of the Christian Curches, in the days of
Athanasius; for then they kept the Sabbath day, as we see here.

Furthermore, it is worth our observation to consider, that Athanasius does not
only and barely auowch it, that they then kept the Sabbath day; but moreover,
he does Justify and defend their keeping of it: for whereas some might object
unto him saying, but do your Churches keep the Sabbath day still? why that is
Iudaisme etc. of this mind was the Laodicean counsel, that lived not long
after Athanasius: and it seems that this slaunderouse opinion of the Sabbath,
was creeping into the Church in the days of Athanasius, and grown to
ripeness within a matter of 60. years after him: for now the Laodicean
counsel durst cale it Iudaisme in plain terms, for Christianes to keep the
Sabbath day; but see how this famous Athanasius, and godly Bishop, foreseeing
this mischeife, meets with the privy obiectiones of some in his time, who
were already infected with this leaven, saying, not as if we were infected with
Iudaisme: The judgment therefore of this Godly Bishop was, that a Christian
Church, might sanctify the Sabbath day, without any tainte or tincture of
Iudaisme. I wish all Ministers now, would learn to know of Athanasius, that to
keep Gods Sabbath, it is no Iudaisme. but how is it to be lamented to see the
most divines, rather to follow that Schismatic decree, of the counsel of
Laodicea, caling the keeping of Gods Sabbath Judaisme then to follow that
famous Athanasius, who defends it, that the keeping of the Sabbath day, is
no Iudaisme.

Further, it is to be noted, that the Christian Churches, in the time of
Athanasius, kept the Sabbath day, and that this was about 300 years after
Christ; so that the Sabbath day was in use with Christianes, for 300 years
after Christ. Now the first 300 years after Christ, are accounted for the most
pure times, and the freest from corruptiones: and the after times were less
puer, abateing of their purity daily, as the Church grew elder; now forasmuch
as the Sabbath day, was honorable amongst Christianes, and religiously
observed in the most puer times, this is much to be regarded; for what if the
Sabbath day begane to be trampled upon, and counted for Iudaisme, 60 or 100
years after these puer times? what is that to us? for if we follow any, we will
choose rather to imitate the more puer Churches (I trust so) then those that
were less puer; now the more puer Churches (as you have seen it abundantly
proved) they kept the Sabbath day: To conclude, so long as the Churches
retained their best purity, so long the Lords Sabbaths were in use and honor;
but when the Churches begane to decline and fale away, as to set up Images; to
adore the Cross; to pray to Saints; to pray for the dead; to believe a
purgatory; and the like, then they begane to esteem the Lords Sabbath
Iudaisme, that so they might forsake them, and set up days of their own
invention: but my trust in God is, that as he has caused a reformation, of the
abuses of the second commandment, which crept into the Church in those times;
so the same God will find a time, to reform the abuses of the 4th com. also,
which crept in then too, but remain to this day unreformed.

8.
My eight and last Testimony, shall be that of Ignatius, who lived about an 100
years after Christ: Let not us (says he) keep the Sabbath day, in a Jewish
manner, pleasing our selves with a rest or idleness: for he that will not
labor let him not eat etc: But let every one of us, keep the Sabbath day
Spiritually, reioyceing in the meditation of the law: not in a remissness or
idleness of the body; but in an admiration of the workmanship of God; not
reioyceing in daunceings, and uncivil Showtinges etc. And after the Sabbath
day, let every one that loves Christ celebrate the Lords day, being the queen
of days etc. Ignat. in his Epistle to the Magnesianes. In this exhortation of
Ignatius, we may note. 1. That he speaking both of the Sabbath day, and also
of the Lords day, does insinuate a plain difference betwixt them, as touching
their estimation: for the Lords day he counts as the queen of days, and so
leaves a place for the Sabbath day, to be in account as the King of days: yea
speaking of the Sabbath day, he uses the word Sabbathizare, but speaking of
the Lords day, he uses the word celebrare.

2. We may note, that he speaking of the Sabbath day, does consider it
doubly; first, as the Jews in those days did use it, or abouse it rather,
(...) reioyceing in idleness or slothfulness, as he speaks, And secondly,
as Christianes ought to use it: for the former, we may note by Ignatius his
words, that the Jews in his days, did keep the Sabbath day indeed, but yet
they kept it profanly, as a feast of Bacchus, with idleness, with daunceings,
with showteing, and the like: now this kind of Sabbath keeping, Ignatius did
abhor, saying it is better for the Jews to labor on the Sabbath day, then
thus to keep it: for he that will not work (says he) let him not eat;
which words are to be referred unto the Jews, not unto the Christianes to whom
he wrote, unless they would join with these profane Jews in reuelling and
roioting on the Sabbath day: by which manner of speaking, Ignatius alludeth
unto a like form of speech used by God himself, in a like case, saying, I
cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabbaths etc. My soul hates them etc. Isa.
1.3. Now God did not simply hate their Sabbaths, since he had commanded them;
but he hated their irreligiouse and hypocriticale observation of the Sabbaths;
and so Ignatius did not mean simply, that the Jews should work upon the
Sabbath day, or else they should not eat; but comparatiuly, and respectiuly,
as if he had thus said, rather then men should keep the Sabbath, as do the
Jews, in reuelling, and sporting, and idleness, let them be forced to labor
and work in it, by denying them food: for it is better to work on the
Sabbath day according to that commandment which inioyneth labor. 2. These.
3.10. then to rest according to that commandment. Exodus 20.10. when a man
dothit only to please the flesh, and not to further him in the worship of God:
it is better to keep no Sabbath, then to keep it only in a carnal manner:
honest labor is better on the Sabbath then carnal slothful and reuelling
rest: Now this kind of profane and carnal keeping of Gods Sabbath, is that
which Ignatius does admonish Christians of, and does dehorte them from, saying,
Let not us keep the Sabbath as do the Jews, or in a Jewish manner etc.

In the next place Ignatius speaks of the Sabbath, as Christianes ought to
keep it: and that is, not profanly and carnally, but religiously and
Spiritually; But let every one of us (says he) keep the Sabbath Spiritually:
and then he proceeds to mention the duties of the Sabbath particularly, the
one whereof is, to rejoice in the meditation and Divine contemplation of the
Law of God: reioyceing in the meditation of the Law: the other is, to make an
holy admiration, of the Creation of the world, and of the providence of God in
the governance of the same etc. In an admiration of the workmanship of God: Now
unto this Holy, Spiritual, and religiouse observation of the Sabbath day, did
Ignatius exhort those Christians unto whom he wrote, saying, But let every one
of us, keep the Sabbath day etc. In which exhortation, you see that Ignatius
did not only permit: the keeping of the Sabbath day, among Christianes; but he
goes further then so; for he falls to a plain and right down exhortation
and persuasion of Christians to keep the Sabbath day, Let every one of us
(says he) keep the Sabbath day. What ca^ bemore plain? had Ignatius
esteemed the observation of the Sabbath day, an abolished ceremony, as many
think now a days; or Iudaisme, as those of the Laodicean Counsel thought
it, who lived 200 years after Ignatius; and as many of us now a days judge it
to be; he would never have exhorted and persuaded Christianes to the
observation of it.

Thus you see, that so long as the Church was in its greatest purity and
perfection, so long it retained in honor the Lords Sabbaths: for Ignatius
living so near unto the time of the Apostles, he lived in the most flourishing
estate of the Church for purity: and even in these so pure times, was the
Sabbath day in honor and use; and so continued, until the Church begane to
decline, which was 200 years after this time, about which time they begane to
corrupt the second Command. and what marvel if they then also made havoc of
the 4th commandment too? but this I say, so long as the primitive Churches,
remained in their greatest purity, so long Christians retained the Lords
Sabbaths in honor and use, and thus much for the second branch of my Minor, so
hitherto we have proved these two things, the former, that the Apostles of
Christ, did constantly observe the Sabbath day, in their time: the other, that
the most pure and primitive Churches which followed the Apostles, kept the
Sabbath, so long as they kept their purity, which was 300 or 400 years after
Christ: and now I am come to the third and last branch of my Minor.

The 3d branch of my Minor or second proposition, which I am to prove is, That
our Church does daily pray to God, to incline our hearts to keep this Sabbath
day. I shall not need to go far for the proof of this point: for our daily
prayers to God, every Sunday or Lords day, in the Congregation, will confirm
it: for the Minister, as it is ordered by our Church, in the book of Common
prayer, rehearses to the whole Assembly, the 10. Commandments of Almighty
God, and among the rest he repeateth the 4th Com. saying, Remember the Sahbath
day, to keep it holy etc. But the 7th day, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shall not do any work etc. for the Lord rested the 7th day, and
therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Now as soon as
this Commandment, touching the 7th day Sabbath, is rehearsed in the audience
of the people; It is by our Church ordered, that the whole Congregation shall
hereunto subioyne this devout prayer, Lord have mercy on us, and incline our
hearts to keep this law. And thus you see, that our Church does ratify the
Sabbath day, by praying daily to God, to incline our hearts to keep it.

But happily some may say, our Church does not intend by this her prayer, to
ratify the 7th day Sabbath, which is the Jews Sabbath. Hereunto I reply, that
by this her prayer, she must be understood to pray to God to incline our hearts,
either to the keeping of the 7th day Sabbath, or to the keeping of the Lords
day Sabbath: now strongly I am persuaded, that the Reverend Bishopes of our
Church will not say, that the 4th com. does command us to keep the Lords day;
and therefore when we pray to God, to incline our hearts to the keeping of the
4th com. we cannot understand our prayer, to be meant of the Lords day: for it
is not the day caled Lords day, which the 4th Com. inioyneth; but it is the day
called Sabbath day, as you see in the Commandment: and it is not the Lords
day, which the Minister pronounces in reading the 4th com. but it is the
Sabbath day, which he speaks of: neither is it the 8th day, or first day of
the week which the 4th com. speaks of; but it is the 7th day, and last day
of the week which the commandment mentions: neither is it the 8th day, or
first day of the week, or Lords day, where in God rested at the Creation, but
it is the 7th day wherein God rested, as the Commandment says: neither is it
the Lords day, which the commandment says God blessed and hallowed; but it is
the day caled Sabbath day, which God blessed and hallowed, as the 4th
commandment speaks: wherefore, when the Minister says Remember to Sanctify
the Sabbath day: if then we shall pray thus, Lord incline our hearts to keep
the Lords day; do we not so make answer, as sometimes deaf men do, who when
a man caleth for a knife, they bring him the sheath? and when the Minister
tells the people which day is the Sabbath day, saying, But the 7th day is the
Sabbath of the Lord; if then we shall pray thus, Lord incline our hearts to
keep the 8th day; are we not then like those that come to Church when the
Sermon is done? and that go to sell commodities, the day after the fayer? yea
were not this to babble with God, and to profane this Holy ordinance of prayer?
when the prayers of the Church cane be taken but ij. ways, it is a very absurd
thing, and uncharitable, for any man to expound them in the worser sense, which
is a false and absurd sense: wherefore since the Lords day cannot be mea^t in
our public prayer, therefore the Sabbath day must be meante: for there is none
other but one of these two that can be imagined, and thus I have proved, the 3d
branch of my Minor, to wit, that our Church does pray to God daily, to incline
our hearts to keep the Sabbath day, and so these 3 points are proved. 1. That
the Apostles kept the Sabbath day. 2. That the primitive Churches after them
kept it. 3. That our Church daily prays to God to keep it: wherefore, if the
constant practice of the Apostles and the religiouse practice of the most
ancient and primi tiue Churches after the Apostles; and the daily prayers of
our Church will any thing avail with us; then must we sanctify the 7th day
Saturday Sabbath.

ARGUM. XIII.
I had thought to have added no more by way of proof, for confirmation of the
Sabbath day, but further search has ministered unto me more arguments: and these
they are which follow. My 13th Argument for confirmation of the 7th Sabbath is,
because we must imitate God, who kept the 7th day Sabbath: and thus I frame it.

Whosoever must imitate God in his keeping of the 7th day Sabbath, they must
keep the Saturday 7th day Sabbath.

But we must imitate God, in his keeping of tho 7th day Sabbath.

Therefore we must keep the Saturday 7th day Sabbath.

For the Mayor it is clear: for since God kept the Saturday 7th day Sabbath,
if we must imitate him, then must we keep the same day in order when i^ comes;
and so doing we shall tread in his footestepes. But this is no imitation of
God, to consider how he rested on the 7th day, and for us to rest on the 8th
day: or, when he rested on the 7th and last day of the week, for us to rest
on the first day of the week; this is rather to thwarte and cross God, then
to imitate and follow God. To imitate God, is to do as like him, and to come
as near him as possible we can: now no day of the week, is so like the day
wherein God rested, as our Saturday the 7th day; because God rested on the
Saturday 7th day: nor can we come so nere God, in practice on any day of the
week, as we may on our Saturday which is the 7th day. So much for the Mayor.

I come to the Minor, to wit, that we must imitate God, in his keeping of the
7th day Sabbath: and this I prove, 1. in general: for the Scriptures do
frequently set God before us for our pattorne, and exhort us, to be imitators
and followers of him, as Ephesians. 5.1 Be ye followers of God as dear children
etc. Math. 5.48. Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father which is
perfect. 1. Pet. 1.15.16. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye
holy, in all manner of connersation. Because it is written, be ye holy, for I
am Holy. Luk 6.36. be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is
merciful. Thus we see how frequent the Sacred Scriptures are, in exhorting us
to be followers and imitators of God: and doubtless God does delight to be
imitated by menn, and to see them follow his ensamples, in such things as he
has set him se^fe forth, unto us to be imitated in: if then we must imitate
God in one thing, then why not in an other? Yea, if we must imitate God in
things more difficult, as in his Holiness, Mercifulness, and in his
perfection, much rather should we imitate him, in things most facile and easy
to be done: now what is more easy for us to do; then to change the Sunday
Sabbath, into the Saturday Sabbath; so should we imitate God indede, and keep
the 7th day, as he did, at the Creation.

2. I prove the Minor in particular, from the 4th Com. where God Almighty
commands us, to rest upon the 7th day, Exodus 20.10. and then he fetches a
reason to move us to do so, from his own example; because himself rested on
the 7th day, Exodus 20.11. as if he had thus said, Rest you on the 7th day, as I
did: for I at the Creation rested on the 7th day.

I shall further prove the same, by the Testimony of Divines of note. Musculus
in his Exposition upon the 4th Com. fol. 66. The imitation of the example of
God (says he) stands in this, that in the same Six days, in which God
wrought all his works, we work ours; and in the seventh day, when he
rested, from his, we do rest also from our works, according to his example.
Thus you see Musculus expounding the 4th Com. so, as he says, we must imitate
the example of God, and rest upon the same 7th day, in which God himself
rested.

M. Perkins on the 4th Com. in his first volume page 47. upon these words of
the Com. for in six days etc. says thus. This is the third reason of this
Com. taken from the like example. That which I did, thou also must do: but I
rested the 7th day: Therefore thou must do the like. Again Perkins in his
Cases of conscience page 106. D. says thus, The second reason is taken from
Gods Example; That which the Lord himself has done in person, the same must
man do by his Commandment: But the Lord himself rested the 7th day; Therefore
man must do the same. This reason made by God to the creature, must stand in
force, till he reuerse it, which yet he has not done nor does. Thus M.
Perkins affirms the truth of my Minor, most fully.

M. Dod on the Commandments, upon these words of the 4th Com. for in six
days, etc. page 121. says thus, The third reason is taken from Gods example
etc. as if he should say, if thou will follow examples, then follow the example
of the best: now, what better example can there be, then of God himself? who
when he made the world rested on the 7th day: Therefore from his example,
learn thou that on the 7th day, thou give thy self wholly to the duties of
sanctification. To the same essect he speaks again in page 167. where he
says, that God proposed himself for a President, to be imitated of us: God
ceased from creating on the 7th day therefore he would have us cease from our
works also on the 7th day. In which words M. Dod affirms, that we must
imitate God, in his keeping of the 7th day Sabbath, so much for proof of the
Minor.

Hereunto some may say, the example of God, was for the old day, for the 7th
day etc. To them I say, they say the truth: what other day is commanded in the
4th com- then the old day? the 7th day? can they think the 4th and old com.
should command any new day? as the 8th day? or can Gods example agree to any
new day? surely this old 4th com. is for none other then for an old day, and so
is Gods old example.

Happily some will answer, that reason annexed to the 4th com. where upon this
argument leans, is no part of the 4th com. it is only an appurtinance unto
it etc. I reply, and will you therefore reject this reason annexed by God? then
fall you into these absurdeties. 1. That you will retain the Sabbath day
mentioned at the beginning of the com. Exodus 20.8. and yet reject Gods reason
annexed thereto, to stir up to the observation thereof; as if Gods reason were
forcelesse, and vselesse: these think they have no need of Gods exsamples to
lead and move them to obedience. 2. They absurdly feign, that this reason
taken from Gods Rest on the 7th day at the Creation is Jewish, and Gods
ensample, belonging unto the people of the Jews only, or else why will they
reject Gods example? love they not to be followers of God? or shall the Jews
only be the followers of God, but not Christianes? 3. If you say this reason
belongs not unto us Christianes, then do you cast a foul blurre upon our
Divines Musculus, Perkines, and Dod with many others, who have expounded, and
applied this reason from Gods example, unto us Christianes: yea M. Perkins
says expressly that, This reason made by God unto the Creature, it must stand
in force, until he reuerse it which yet he has not done nor does. So much
for this answer.

I conclude, if we will become followers of God, and imitate him, as he has
prescribed in his 4th com. then must we sanctifye the Saturday 7th day Sabbath.

ARGVM. XIV.
My 14th argument, for maintenance of the Saturday Sabbath is, because we may,
together with Antinomia^s, Libertines, and Anabaptists, as well abolish all the
Moral Law by the Scriptures, as with them abolish the Saturday Sabbath, and
thus I argue.

If we may, together with Libertines, Antinomians, and Anabaptists, abolish by
the Scriptures, the Saturday Sabbath as a Jewish Ceremony; Then may we with
them also, abolish by the Scriptures, the wholl Law of God, even all the tenn
commandments, as Jewish Ceremonies.

But neither we may, nor yet may those lawless Christians; of Libertines,
Antinomians, and Anabaptists abolish by the Scriptures, the wholl Law of Gods
tenn commandments, as Jewish ceremonies.

Therefore we may not, together with Libertines, Antinomians, and Anabaptists,
those lawless Christians, abolish by the Scriptures, the Saturday Sabbath, as
a Jewish Ceremony.

For proof of the consequence; it is well known, that those Lawless
Christians of Libertines, Antinomians, and Anabaptists, do reject the
Santification of all Sabbaths: not but that they keep the Lords day as a
Sabbath, together with those Protestant Churches among whom they live; but
they keep it only as an ordinance of the Magistrate, and as in obedience to
their gouerners; yet so too, as in case they could do any common servile work
on the Lords day, without offense to any, they would, and do profess it that
they would: but to keep any Sabbath, as a Divine institution, and as an
ordinance of Gods, and by virtue of the 4th commandment, this they do reject
as Jewish, and Ceremonial: and for their warrant, among other textes of
Scripture, as we do, so do they allege Exodus 31.13. and Colos. 2.16.17.
against the Saturday Sabbath, showing that it is abolished, as a sign and
shadow etc. Thus they bring Scripture against the old Sabbath, as well as we,
and the same Scriptures that we bring: so then, we are justly ranked with
Libertines, Antinomians, and Anabaptists, for abolishing by the Scriptures, the
ancient Sabbath day.

Now J proceed to prove the Major (for as for the Minor, it needs no proof)
if we may by these Scriptures Exodus 31.13. and Colos. 2.16.17. Together with
these Sectaries, abolish the Saturday Sabbath, which is one thing commanded in
the moral Law; then may we together with them also, by these Scriptures Ephesians.
2.15. Heb. 7.12. Heb. 10.1. Col. 2.14. Abolish the wholl Moral Law, and all
things commanded therein: the reason hereof is plain and manifest: for these
Sectaries do bring Scripture against the wholl Law of God, as well as against
that one part thereof, which commands the Saturday Sabbath: now if we will
shake hands with them in the one, why not in the other also? if we will join
with them, in urging and pressing these textes Exodus 31.13. Colos. 2.16.17.
Against the 7th day Sabbath, which is one branch of the Law; why then should we
not by the same reason, join with them also, in urging and pressing these
other textes Ephesians. 2.15.7.12. Heb. 10.1. and Col. 2.14. Against the wholl Law
and every branch thereof, and so abolish it too? there is the same equity for
both, let us not therefore abolish Gods Sabbath day, unless we mind to turn
Anabaptists and Antinomians, and abolish the wholl Law also.

Happily it will be thought, there is not so good reason, to abolish the wholl
Law, by these Scriptures which these Sectaries do allege against it, as there
is in those other Scriptures, which they allege against the Saturday Sabbath:
But for this matter, I shall make it appear, that (as these Sectaries, have as
little cause to urge these textes, against the wholl Moral Law, as they or
we, have to allege those textes against the old Sabbath day, so) they have as
good cause and as strong reasons, to allege these textes against the wholl
Law, as they and we have to allege those textes against the old Sabbath day:
for this purpose, let us compare the textes on either parts.

First, for the textes brought against the Sabbath day, Exodus 31.13. and Colos.
2.16.17. Here say they and we, the Sabbath in the Moral Law is made a sign,
and a shadow: now all signs and Shadows, are abolished at Christ's coming,
he being the substance of those shadows. 2. In the text Col. 2.16.17. Say
they and we, here we have the very thing in question, expressy mentioned,
namly Sabbaths, and Sabbaths too in the plural number, and so all Sabbaths
both weekly and annual, in the Moral Law and in the Ceremonial Law, are
abolished: Now on the other part, for the textes brought against the wholl
lawsee Heb. 10, 1. for the Law having a shadow of good things to come etc.
Where the things commanded by the Law, are called a shadow: hence I thus
reason, if the Sabbath commanded in the Moral Law be abolished, because
Sabbaths commanded in a Law are a shadow; Col. 2.16.17. Then are all things
commanded in the Moral Law abolished (and consequently the Law also) because
things commanded in a Law are a shadow. Heb. 10.1. Is not there as good reason
for the one, as for the other? come we to the other textes also, see Ephesians. 2.15.
Col. 2.14. Heb. 7.12. Where it is said, there is a chang of the Law: and that
the handwriting of ordinances is put out: and that the Law of commandments is
abrograted, In which texts it is affirmed, that the law is abolished: here then
may they say in like manner, in these textes we have the thing in question
expressly mentioned, namly the Law: and by Law in Scripture is sometimes meant,
both the Moral and Ceremonial Law Mal. 2.7. And so the wholl Law is
abolished, both Moral and Ceremonial: well then, hence I thus reason, if the
Sabbath in the Moral Law be abolished by Col. 2.17. Because there is mention
of Sabbaths abolished; then must not the Moral Law, be abolished also by Ephesians.
2.15. Col. 2.14. and Heb. 7.12. Because here is mention made of the law
abolished? is there not the same reason in both? for if you will extend the
word Sabbaths, which is only understood of the Sabbaths in the Ceremonial Law,
unto the Sabbath enjoined in the Moral Law; why may not they extend the word
Law, which is only understood of the Ceremonial Law, unto the Moral Law? and
whereas you allege, that in Col. 2.16.17. There is mention of Sabbaths in the
plural number, and therefore all kinds of Sabbaths weekly and anniuersary must
be abolished; why may not they, and you with them, argue also and say, that in
Ephesians. 2.15. and in Col. 2.14. There is mention of ordinances and commandments,
in the plural number, and therefore are all Gods ordinances, and all Gods
commandments, whither in the Moral Law or in the Ceremonial abolished?

Thus you see then, there is as good reason for us, to join with Antinomians
and Anabaptists in casting away the Moral Law, as to join with them in
casting away the Sabbath day, commanded in the Moral Law: we may as well cast
away by the Scriptures misapplied, even all Gods commandments, and all Gods
ordinances, as Gods Sabbath day: we may as well turn Anabaptists in wholl as
in part, and reject all things commanded in the Decalogue with them, as any
one thing therein commanded. To conclude, unless we will justify those
Sectaries in destroying the whole Law of Gods 10 commandments, let us as we
ought, raise up Gods Sabbath again.

ARGUM. XV.
My 15th. argument in defense of the Saturday Sabbath is, that it must be
moral: because if you abolish the Sabbath day by the Scriptures, you must also
by the Scriptures abolish the law of the Sabbath day, which is the 4th
commandment, and thus I argue.

Jf by the interpretation of the Scriptures, you abolish the Saturday or 7th
day Sabbath; then by the interpretacion of the Scriptures, must you also
abolish the Law of the Saturday or 7th day Sabbath, which is the 4th com,

But no man may by the interpretation of the Scriptures, abolish the law of the
Saturday or 7th day Sabbath, which is the 4th commandment.

Therefore no man may by the interpretation of the Scriptures, abolish the
Saturday or 7th day Sabbath.

For the Minor, it is out of question: for every man grants, that the law of
the Sabbath, the 4th com. is moral; and that it were horrible impiety to
abolished it, any more then to abolish any of the rest of the Decalogue: and
how be it they say, that something in this Law is abolished, as the time of the
7th day, yet as for the Law, it retains its commanding and binding force
still as they do confess: I come therefore unto the Major, to prove the
consequence thereof.

How beit the point is clear enough of it self, yet such is the enmity of men
to Gods Sabbaths, as rather then they will embrace them, they will question any
clear truth: for what is more clear then this, take away the thing (yea any
thing) commanded in a Law, and take away the Law thereof? take away the Sabbath
day, commanded in the 4th com. and you take away the 4th com. also? there are
many laws in the old Testament, which are now abolished; let my adversaries
show me any one of them, wherein any thing once commanded, was abolished, but
that that Law it self also was abolished: if then it be the constant
interpretation of Scriptures, to judge when a thing commanded in a Law is
abolished, that then that Law is abolished, then so it must be in this case
also: take away the Sabbath day, and take away the Law of the Sabbath day, for
example.

There was a Law made touching the difference of Meats, Leuit. 11. Now the
Apostle showing us, that the difference of meats is taken away, Colos. 2.16.
hence we conclud, that not only that difference of meats is taken away but
also that law, which commanded that difference of meats is taken away: Again,
there was a Law for the observation of New-Moones Numb. 28.11. which was to
sanctify the first day of every month: Now the Apostle showing us, that those
New-Moones are abolished, Colos. 2.16. hence we conclud, that that Law of the
New-Moones is abolished also. Again, there were diverse Laws made, for the
keeping holy of diverse anniuersary Sabbaths, Leuit. 23.7.21.24.32.35.39. now
the Apostle showing us, that those yearly Sabbaths, are all abolished, Colos.
2.16. hence we gather, that together with the abolition of those Sabbaths, all
those laws made for those Sabbaths, are abolished also, it is clear
therefore, that if you abolish the weekly Sabbath, which is Saturday the 7th
day, you must also from those Scriptures by which you abolish it, abolish also
the Law of it, which is the 4th com.

A second reason J take from Colos. 2.14.16. where the Apostle abolishing those
yearly Sabbaths in v. 16. does also abolish the Laws of those yearly Sabbaths
in v. 14. and that under the name of hand-writting of ordinances, showing how
Christ upon the cross did put out, and abolished this hand writting of
ordinances, that is those Laws and ordinances, of those many yearly Sabbaths;
whence I thus argue, if by this 16th verse of Colos. 2. you will abolish the
weekly Saturday 7th day Sabbath, then must you by the 14th verse of Colos. 2.
abolish also that Law, handwriting, and ordinance of the 4th com. which
belonged to, and was made for the weekly Sabbath day: for, look what Sabbath
days you include in v. 16. The Laws of those Sabbath days, you must include
in v. 14. and so abolish them: for it is plai^e that the Apostle speaks no
larger in v. 16. then in verse. 14. he condemns no Sabbaths in v. 16. but such
whose Laws be abolished in v. 14. and thus you see it clearly proved, that
take away Gods Sabbath, and ye take away the Law of Gods Sabbath, which is the
4th com.

Here by the way note, that since Anti-Sabbatharians will have nothing in the
4th com. moral but the duties of Rest and Holy exercises, therefore let them
know, they shall have no Law for these duties; they shall not press to the
practice of these duties by any Law: for in that they will have the 7th day
Sabbath a ceremony, and included in the text, Col. 2.16. thereby they have
abolished the Law of the duties of Rest and holy exercises, by Colos. 2 14.
and then their Lords day Sabbath shall be a lawless Sabbath; and the duties
of the time and Rest, and holy exercises shall be lawless duties.

But hereto it will be a^swered, in the 4th co^. is two things inyoined, the
du^^ies of rest and holy exercises, and the time; now though the time be
abolished, as a ceremony, yet so long as the duties of rest, and holy
exercises, which are moral, remain, the 4th com. may be abolished as touching
the time, but not as touching the other duties of Rest and holy exercises. But
how absurd this answer is, appears. 1. In that it cannon be shown (as has
been said) that ever any thing commanded in any of God laws, has been
abolished, but the Law it self also has been abolished: it is therefore a
growndlesse fiction, to imagine any of Gods laws to be abolished in part, and
yet to remain in part. 2. The absurdety of this answer appears in this,
that by the same answer, they may retain in the Church still, all these
abolished Laws of the New-Moones and of these yearly Sabbaths before spoken
of, saying, that in these new-Moones, and yearly Sabbaths there were two things
inyoined, the duties of rest, and holy exercises, and the times; now though
these times be abolished, and so those commandments as touching these times;
yet those commandments may all remain still, as touching the duties of rest,
and holy exercises: by this kind of absurd answer therefore you see, we may
still hold all those abolished ceremonial Laws, to be of use in the Church
still and moral. I conclude therefore take away the time and 7th day, and take
away also the Law of the time and 7th day, which is the Law of the 4th
commandment.

ARGVM. XVI.
My 16th argument in defense of Gods Sabbaths is, that the time, to wit, the
7th day, must be moral and perpetual; or else those duties performed in that
time by the 4th com. to wit, rest from labor, and holy exercises, these must
be ceremonial and abolished: as in the former argument we have proved, that if
they abolish the 7th day, they abolish also the Law of the 4th com. so in this
we shall prove, that if they a bolish the 7th day, they do also abolish the
duties enjoined in the Law of the 4th co^. and so farrewell Law and duties
both: Thus I argue.

If by direction from the Scriptures, you make the time, to wit, that 7th day
in the 4th com. ceremonial and abolished; then must you by the same direction,
make those duties performed in that time, to wit, rest from labors, and
religiouse exercises, ceremonial and abolished also.

But noe man will make those duties of rest, and religiouse exercises,
ceremonial and abolished.

Therefore may no man make that time of the 7th day in the 4th com. ceremonial
and abolished.

As for the Minor it is gain said by none. J come therefore to the Mayor, the
consequence whereof J prove to be sound, from the practice of the Holy Ghost in
Scripture, who, when he abolisheth the day and time once commanded, he thereby
infers, the abolition also, of those duties to be done in that day and time.

For example, on the first day of every month, which was their New moon, the
Isralites were bound to rest from labors Amos 8.5. and to be conversant about
religiouse exercises ij. king. 4.23. now when the Holy Ghost did put an end to
these duties, he did only mention the time and day, as, Let no man condemn
you in respect of the New moan, Colos. 2.16. Gal. 4.10. and by abolition of the
time, he inferred the abolition of those duties also performed in that time.
Again, the Isralites had many yearly Sabbaths, wherein they were to rest from
labor, and to be conversant in holy duties, as you may read at large, Leuit.
23. now when the Holy Ghost would put an end to these duties he did only
mention the time and day as, ye observe times, and days, and years etc. Gal.
4.10. Romans 14.5. Colos. 2.16. and by his abolition of the times and days, he
inferred the abolition also, of those duties of rest, and holy exercises
performed in those times, now this practice of the holy Ghost, gives us to
understand, that where the time is abolished, there those duties usually
performed in that time, are abolisned also: wherefore, if you will abolish the
time and day, to wit, the Jewish Sabbath day (as some call it) then if you will
fetch light from the Scriptures, you must learn of the Holy Ghost, to abolish
also those Jewish duties, of rest, and religiouse exercises, performed in that
day and Jewish time.

Thus you see, unless you hold the old Sabbath day moral, you cannot hold the
duties of a Sabbath moral: and if you condemn the time and day for a
ceremony, you must also relinguish those duties which you would feign have be
moral.

ARGVM. XVII.
My 17th argument for defense of the Saturday Sabbath, proving that it must be
moral and still in use is, because it is a part of Gods worship: and thus I
argue.

All the parts of Gods worship, comprised in the first Table of the moral
Law, which were written by the finger of God in Tables of stone, are moral and
now in force.

But the sanstification of the Saturday or 7th day Sabbath, is a part of Gods
worship, comprised in the first Table of the moral Law, and was written by the
finger of God in Tables of stone.

Therefore the Sanctification of the Saturday or 7th day Sabbath, is moral and
now in force.

For the Major, it is not only a truth, but also a truth of that importance
and consequence, that there should be no Christian found (me think) dareing to
deny it: for he that denies it, does deny God some part of his worship; he
denies that God should have his wholl worship; and will give God but some
pieces thereof only: now what God has joined together, how dare any man to
put them assunder? the Almighty, in setting man a platform of his worship,
divided it into four parts, and commanded it by four several commandments,
which make up together the first Table of the Decalogue or Moral Law, and so
the wholl worship of God, complete in all the parts thereof; now how shall
any man dare by his denial of this truth, to put these asunder, and to pluck
any one of these parts from its fellows, but that he must be guilty of
heinouse impiety, and horrible Sacrilege? if it was so heinouse, to rob God of
his Tithes and Offerings Mal. 3.8. what is it, to rob him of his worship and
service! if not one jot or title of the Law shall fail, so long as heaven and
earth endure Mat. 5.18. with what warrant may any man say, that a part of Gods
worship, prescribed in that Law is abolished? as safely may a man clipe the
Kings coin, as clipe, pare off, or diminish any part of Gods worship: the
highest and worst degree of impiety and ungodliness in a Christian, is to
turn Athiest and to deny God; and the next unto it, is to deny God his worship
and service, in wholl or in part: now this they must do who deny my Major.
Nay which is worse, they do not only deny God a part of his worship, but also
they must account it Iew^sh, and Iudaisme in any that are entire and perfect in
Gods worship, that is, in such as give God, all the parts of his worship: for
such as perform unto God all his worship, intirly and perfectly, they will
sanctify his Sabbaths as one part thereof, which these men must account
Iudaisme.

I confess indeed, some textes are brought to prove the abolition of one part
of Gods worship, to wit, the old Sabbath day, as Exodus 31.13. Colos. 2.16.17.
But these are but clokes, to cover their evil dealing with God, under a
pretense of Scripture: because this part of Gods worship, has been out of use
in the Church now a long time, and because it is now grown through neglect of
it into reproach, as to be called Jewish, Ceremonial, and a circumstance with
the like, therefore to color the matter over, men have abused these textes of
Scripture; but suer I am, it is more out of a desire and will men have to
reject this part of Gods worship, then any thing else, that these Scriptures
are alleged: for there is nothing in these textes for that purpose,
necessarily proving so much, but only that they who allege them are wilful,
and will make them of larger extent then they need to do. I desire these
words (necessarily proving) may be well observed, since I place great Emphasis
in them: for an ancient ordinance of Gods, is not to be unnecessarily and
voluntarily abolished, as if men were weary of Gods worship, and did study how
to abolish and reject his ordinances, and lay wast Religion. Now whither it
will stand with a good conscience, for any man to abolish any part of Gods
worship when he needs not, and when there is no necessity by any thing in
those textes to do it, I leave it to all men to judge of.

I come to the Minor, and here I am to prove, that to sanctify the Saturday or
7th day Sabbath, is a part of the worship of God; and this I prove first in
general; for it is a general received truth, that all the things command in
the first Table of the Decalogue, are the parts of Gods worship; yea, and
they are Gods immdiate worship, as Polanus in his Syntag. page 558. says; if
then the first Table of the Decalogue commands the worship of God, the
sanctification of the Saturday and 7th day Sabbath must needs be a part of
the worship of God; because it is commanded with the other parts of Gods
worship, in the first Table of the Decalogue. 2. I prove it particularly, and
that by the Testimony of two worthy Divines; the one is Vrsinus in his Catech.
on the 4th command. page 637. where speaking of the old Sabbath day, he
expressly says of it, that it was tied to the 7th day, and that the observation
thereof was necessary, and it was the worship of God: thus he. The other is M.
Perkines in his cases of conscience page 108. where he expressly affirms, that
the Jews Sabbath, was both the time of Gods worship, and also a part of Gods
worship. Thus I have made good the Minor, to wit, that the Saturday 7th day
Sabbath, was commanded of God, as a part of his worship.

By the way, it is to be noted, that albeit men sleit this ordinance of Gods
ancient Sabbath, caling it, but a circumstance of time, and the like, yet you
see it clearly proved, that it is such a circumstance as is not to be sleited;
for it is a part of Gods worship. I conclude, the Saturday Sabbath must be
moral and still in use; because it is a part of Gods worship: and because if
any deny it, they are enemies to Gods entire and wholl worship and service; for
they do diminish it, and detracte from it, they pare of from it and clype it,
as Traitoures do the Kings Coin, making it lighter and lesser then his
Majesty coined it for.

ARGVM. XVIII.
My 18th argument, for the maintenance of the ancient Sabbath day is, that it
must be Moral and still in use: because it was observed by Christians, with
the approbation of the holy Ghost, after the death of Christ, and abolition of
all Ceremonies. And thus I argue.

The observation of that thing by Christianes, after the death of Christ, and
abolition of all Ceremonies, which the Holy Ghost records to posterity, by
way of approbation and commendation, that is no ceremony, but moral and still
in force.

But the observation of the old Sabbath day, was celebrated by Christians,
after the death of Christ, and abolition of all Ceremonies, and was recorded by
the holy Ghost to all posterity, by way of approbation and commendation.

Therefore the observation of the old Sabbath day, is no ceremony but a moral
and still in force.

For the Major, there can be no doubt of it: for since that all Ceremonies had
their period and last date, at Christ's death upon the Cross, it cannot be
thought, that the holy Ghost would give the least commendation or approbation,
of any Ceremony practiced after the death of Christ, at which time all
Ceremonies had their end; unless we should think the holy Ghost would build
up again, what Christ had thrown down: it cannot be thought, the Holy Ghost
would give any approbation of a Ceremony, unto posterity and the Christian
Churches succeding: wherefore the observation of Chistians, commended by the
holy Ghost, after the death of Christ and all Ceremonies, must be judged a
Moral.

I come to the Minor, the truth of which I prove out of Luke 23.56. And they
returned and prepared odoures, and ointments, and rested the Sabbath day,
according to the commandment. Jn which text, we may note these particulers for
the proof of our point. 1. that the parties who rested this Sabbath day, they
were Christians, namely, Christian women, as Mary Magdalen, and Ioanna, and
Mary the mother of James, and other women with them, as the text speaks Luke
24.10. 2dly, we may note, that this Sabbath day, was sanctified after the death
of Christ: for Christ suffered the day before it. 3dly, it was sanctified after
the abolition of all Ceremonies: for all Ceremonies ended upon Christ's Cross,
as we read in Colos. 2.14. So that an end was put unto all Ceremonies, on the
day before this Sabbath was sanctified. 4thly, the sanctification of this
Sabbath day, was recorded by the Holy Ghost, unto all succeding Churches, as we
find it and read it in this text at this day. Yea, which is remarkable, these
women preferred the Sabbath day, before the embalming of the sacred body of our
Lord Jesus: for considering those hot countries, it had been very needful to
have embalmed the dead body before it had been 3 days dead; and yet as
needful as it was, they neglected it, preferring the sanctification of the
Sabbath before it; and this zeal of these holy women, has the holy Ghost
recorded unto posterity.

5thly, that the holy Ghost recorded this, by way of approbation and
commendation of their fact; appears hereby, 1. because he does rank it
together with other remarkable and commendable facts: for he records it with
that commendable fact of Joseph of Arimathea, who begged the body of Jesus of
Pilate, took it down from the Cross, wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid
it in a new Tomb Luke 23.50. etc. And with that laudable fact of those women,
who observed the place where they laid the body of Christ, prepared odoures and
ointments, and on the first day of the week erly in the morning, they went
unto the Sepulcher to embalme the body of Christ Luke 23.55.56. Luke 24.1. now
together with these laudable actiones, is rekoned up also the religiouse
sanctification of the Sabbath day, by those religiouse women.

2. Had their observation of this Sabbath day, been any thing but moral; or
any thing less then laudable, doubtless the holy Ghost would have passed by
this point, and huried it in silence, as God did the body of Moses Deuteronomy. 34.6.
In a place unknown lest succeding Churches should hence take occation to
honor and sanctify it.

3. The Holy Ghost commends in these women, their observation of the Sabbath
day, most remarkablie in this, that he does not relate it barely thus, they
rested the Sabbath day, but he further added the rule they did it by, and that
which warranted their action, which was that they did it according to the
commandment, that is, the 4th commandment; And rested the Sabbath day,
according to the commandment: Had this their fact been the observation of a
ceremony and a matter indifferent at that time, and so not deserving special
notice and commendation, in all liklihode, it had been most fit to have been
passed over in silence, or at the most to have made a bare and sparing relation
of it, as to have said, they rested the Sabbath day, and added no more; but
surely the addition of these words, according to the commandment (...) have an
emphasis in them: for as in divinity, these words, to do a thing against or
contrary to a Commandment, do carry with them a dispraise, and are a note of
a discommendable action, so on the contrary, to do a thing according to a
commandment, does carry with it a praise, and are a note of an action laudable
and commendable: where did we ever read, that either Prophets or Apostles did
make report of any man's action, and added this thereunto, that it was done
according to a commandment, or according to Gods will and mind, but that this
was added by way of praise and commendation? for this end look the use of this
addition, in these scriptures, Luke 2.22.23.24.39. ij. Ioh. 4. Gal, 1, 4. Luke
1.6. Dan. 9.5. Ezra. 3.4. Ezra. 10.3.5. So much for proof of the Minor.

Happily some may say, that it mattereth not so much what these women did at
that time, considering that they then knew not of the abolition of any
ceremonies etc. But for the avoiding of this, I do build the weight of my
argument (as you may see) not upon the action of those women, but upon the
allowance and approbation of the same, by the Holy Ghost; now the Holy Ghost
knew well enough, that all ceremonies were abolished the day before this
Sabbath was kept, Col. 2.14.

ARGVM. XIX.
My 19th argument in defense of the Sabbath of the Lord, proves that it must
be moral; because if you make it a ceremony and abolished, then you raze out
one of Gods Tenn commandments, by making it but a tautologie and needless
repetition, of what was commanded in other of the commandments: and thus I
argue.

That doctrine which teaches and affirms such things, as make one of Gods
Tenn commandments, a tautologie and needless repetition, of what is commanded
in other of the same 10 commandments, that doctrine is false and erroniouse.

But the doctrine which teaches, that that ancient ordinance of Gods the old
Sabbath day, is a ceremony and abolished, is that doctrine which makes one of
Gods 10 commandments and by name the 4th com. a tautologie and needless
repetition, of what is elsewhere commanded in other of the 10 commandments.

Therefore the Doctrine which teaches and affirms, that that ancient
ordinance of Gods the old Sabbath day, is a ceremony and abolished, is
erroniouse and false.

For the Major, none will deny it, since it were to ouerturne the number of
Gods commandments which are Tenn, Deuteronomy. 10.4. and to make things differing in
number, one and the same in nature; and so make an horrible confusion: yea, no
man can endure to hear on it, that there should be a tautologie in the Moral
Law: I come therefore unto the Minor, to show, that they which hold the old
Sabbath day to be a ceremony, they make one of Gods tenn command. and by name
the fourth, to be a tautologie, and needless repetition, of that which is
commanded in other of the command: for this purpose we will consider all the
things commanded in the 4th com. and then show you, that if that time of the
7th day be a ceremony and abolished, then there is nothing left in the 4th com.
but what is commanded in the other of the 10 commandments.

All the things then commanded in the 4th com. are three: the one is holy and
religiouse exercises; the other is a rest from labor; the third is the time
wherein these are to be performed: as for the first of these, to wit, holy and
religiouse exercises, as prayer, preaching, singing of Psalms, with the like,
these being parts of Gods worship and furtherances thereof, are commanded in
the second Commandment: for the second commandment forbids all false
worship, and commands the true worship of God, as prayer, preaching, Psalms,
and Sacraments; as Divines acknowledge: so then, we need not rune to the 4th
com. for these duties of the Sabbath, to wit, holy exercises of prayer,
singing of Psalms, preaching and reading of Gods word: for we have them
enjoined in the affirmative part of the second commandment: thus for the
first point you see, that as touching the duty of holy exercises, the 4th
com. inioyneth nothing, but what was before enjoined in the 2th com. and so the
4th command. in these respect is but a tautologie and needless repetition of
what is else where commanded in other of the to commandments.

As for the second thing enjoined in the 4th com. it is Rest from labors: now
this duty, if you consider it as a natural Rest, for the refreshing of the
body being toiled and spent with labors, then so it is enjoined in the sixte
commandment, in the affirmative part thereof: but if you consider it as a
spiritual rest, it being a vacancy from corporal labors, that so way may be
made for holy exercises; then so it is enjoined in the second commandment
also: for when the second commandment inioyneth Gods worship, it necessarily
infers a rest and cessation from how should and field works; from
merchandising, buying and selling, that so men may be at liberty and fredome to
worship God: thus for the second thing to wit, Rest, you see the 4th co^.
inioyneth nothing but what was before commanded in the 2th com. and therefore
the 4th co^. in this point is but a tautologie and needless repetition, of
what is else where enjoined in other of the 10 commandments.

The third and last thing is the time enjoined in the 4th com, which since they
say it is abolished, it follows, that there is no time or day now in the 4th
com. enjoined: touching which I thus argue, if the time to wit, that 7th day
from the Creation, or the last day of the week, enjoined in the 4th com. be a
Jewish Ceremony and abolished, then is there no day enjoined now by the 4th
commandment, for take from a Law the thing it inioyneth, and then that Law
inioyneth nothing: for example, those anniuersary and Ceremonial Sabbaths
mentioned in Leuit. 23. and abolished by Colos. 2.17.18. when God abolished
those very days commanded in those Laws, he utterly abolished all days, that
were enjoined in those commandments: those days being Ceremonies, when they
were abolished, not other days came in the room of them, by those
commandments. There Is the same reason for the day and time in the 4th com. if it
be supposed a Ceremony and abolished: wherefore the old day being abolished,
and no new day enjoined by the 4th com. there is now nothing left in the 4th
com. peculiar unto it; nor can they show us any thing in it as now, which is
not else where commanded in the Decalogue: thus you see, if you hold the old
Sabbath day to be abolished, then is this 4th commandment a tautologie, and
needless repetition of things before commanded.

Or, if you would suppose, that that particular time in the 4th com. is
abolished, but yet that a time or some time still remains in the 4th com. why
still it will come to the same: for a time, or some time; is enjoined in the
2th com. for where God requires his worship, there it is necessarily inferred,
that he there requires a time or some time for his worship, without which it
cannot be. Thus I have proved it, that if you hold the old Sabbath day for an
abolished ceremony, then you raze and deface the 4th com. by making it but a
tautologie, and a needless repetition of such things, as are commanded before
in the 2th com. it remains therefore, that that doctrine which affirms the
old Sabbath day, to be a Jewish Ceremony, is false and erroniouse; the contrary
whereto is the very truth.

ARGVM. XX.
My 20th argument for defense of the Lords Sabbath proves, that it must be
moral; or else there is no day at all commanded now by the 4th com. and thus I
argue.

If we abolish Saturday the old Sabbath day, which was commanded in the 4th
com. then we leave no day as commanded now by the 4th com.

But we must leave a day, as commanded now by the 4th commandment.

Therefore we must not abolish Saturday the old Sabbath day.

For the Minor, it is confessed by all, that there is a day commanded now by
the 4th com. and therefore I pass that point as granted; and so come unto the
Major, the consequence whereof I prove to be sound, by an Induction of
particulares, of which ^here is one and the same reason.

First for their new-moones, which God commanded the Israelites Numb. 28.11.
wherein they were on every first day of the month, to rest from labors Amos.
8.5. And to repair unto the Minister for instruction ij King. 4.23. Now when
God abolished by the text Col. 2.16.17. that very day commanded in that Law
Numb. 28.11. then he left no day as commanded still by that law Numb. 28.11.
In the next place, come we unto all those anniuersary Sabbaths commanded in the
Ceremonial Law: the Israelites had one Sabbath, on the first day of the 7th
month Leuit. 23.24. again, the Israelites had two other Sabbaths in the 7th
month, as we read Leuit. 23.39. besides diverse other Sabbaths there mentioned
in Leuit. 23. Now when by this text Col. 2.16.17. every of those days,
commanded in those laws, were abolished, there were no days left as commanded
still by those commandments in Leuit. 23. Now there is the same reason of the
day commanded in the 4th com. if you hold it a Ceremony, as there was of those
other days which were Ceremonies Leuit. 23. for as the time in these
anniuersary laws, was a Ceremony, so my adversaries hold the time in this 4th
com. is a Ceremony; wherefore there is the same reason in all; that is, abolish
that special time specified in any of these commandments, and you leave no
day as commanded in these laws and commandments.

2. I prove it from all those textes which are usually brought against the
Lords Sabbaths, as Exodus 31.13. Col. 2.16.17. Romans 14.5. and Gal. 4.10. In
which texts, our Anti-Sabbatharians or enemies to Gods Sabbaths, say, that the
Sabbath day of the Jews, commanded in the 4th com. is abolished as a sign and
shadow etc. And that text of esteeming one day above an other Romans 14.5. And
that text also reproving the Galatianes so observing of days Gal. 4.10. are
spoken against that day mentioned in the 4th com. wherefore since the word
(day) is of as larg an extent in these texts, as the same word (day) is of in
the 4th commandment it is as clear as the sun at noone day, that if that
day, commanded in the 4th com. be an abolished Ceremony, then is there now no
day commanded by the 4th com. and if the observation of those days, commanded
in the 4th com. be reprouable, and abolished by Gal. 4.10. etc. Then are there
no days now in use by virtue of the 4th com. the reason is, because those
days which were commanded are abolished, as they say.

It is more then manifest then, that if we abolish Saturday the old Sabbath
day, once commanded in the 4th com. then we leave no day as commanded now by
the 4th com. we must therefore cleave unto Saturday which God has sanctified
and hallowed Genes. 2.2.3. or else bid farewell unto all days, and Sabbaths,
as diuinly instituted.

ARGVM. XXI.
My 21th argument for the defense of Gods Sabbath proves, that it must be
moral and still in force, or else we mancle and lame the royal Law of Gods
commandments, receiving and acknowledging but but some parceles and pieces
thereof only: and do deny that entire and whole Law of God, to be whole and
entire to us, or to belong unto us in the Jntegrity and perfection thereof. And
thus I argue.

If any man abolish the 7th day Saturday Sabbath, commanded in the Law of Gods
10 commandments, he must also mancle and lame that royal Law of God,
receiving and acknowledging but some parceles and pieces thereof only, and he
must deny that entire and whole Law of God, which was uttered by the voice of
God, and wrote in Tables of stone by the finger of God, to be whole and entire
to us, or to belong to us in the Jntegritie and perfection thereof.

But no man may mancle and lame that royal Law of Gods 10 commandments,
receiving but some parceles and pieces thereof only; nor deny that entire and
whole Law of God, to be whole and entire to us, or to belong to us in the
integrity and perfection thereof.

Therefore no man may abolish the 7th day Saturday Sabbath, commanded in the
Law of Gods 10 commandments.

For the consequence of the Major: because this argument fetches all its
force, from the wholnesse and Integrity of the law, it is needful therefore
that I show, what the wholnesse and perfection of the Law is: note therefore,
that the Law is then said to be whole, entire, and perfect, when it has all
the parts and percelles added to it, which God at the making of it, put and
joined together, lacking none of them: like us we cale him an whole an perfect
man, who has all his joints and parts which God gave him when he made him:
and as we cale that an whole and perfect Bible, which has in it, both the old
and New Testaments, together with all and every of the several books and
Chapters bound together, which at the first God joined together; and as that
man is said to be an whole and perfect man, who lacks no limme or joint, of
those which God joined together when he made him: and as that is said to be an
whole and perfect Bible, which lacks neither Chapter nor verse of all those
Chapters and verses, which God delivered in writing, from the Prophets and
Apostles; so that is said to be the whole entire, and perfect Law of God which
has all the parts and things commanded, which at first belonged to it, and
which lacks none of all those precepts, which at the making and diuulging of
that Law, God joined together. If then we would know, whither we have the whole
law of God intirly now or not we must have recourse unto the making and first
diuulging of this Law: look therefore into the twentyth Chapter of Exodus, and
there you shall see this whole and entire Law of God, with all and every the
members thereof, as God made it when he first proclaimed it unto his Church:
thus you see both what the wolnesse and integrity of Gods Law is, and where to
find it whole and entire as God made it; and if any man shall diminish or deny,
any one particle commanded in this Law, he must be said to mancle and lame this
Law: and the Law must be accounted but a lame, mancled and imperfect Law, like
as if a man lacks but a ioynte of his hand or a finger, he is said to be a
lame man; and if a Bible wants but a leaf or a verse, it is an imperfect
Bible.

Now to apply this; Jn the Decalogue, God charge his people, to Remember the
Sabbath day, and to sanctify the Sabbath day, and to Rest on the 7th day; now
this day caled Sabbath day, and 7th day, was our Saturday, as all men know:
wherefore if any man will abolish this Saturday 7th day Sabbath, as not
commanded now to be remembered, now to be sanctified, and now to be rested on,
that man, does mancle and lame the royal law of God: for he withholdeth one
branch of Gods Law, which inioyneth the remembrance and sanctification of the
Saturday 7th day Sabbath, that man, receives and obeys but some parceles and
pieces of Gods Law only: for he yields obedience but only unto some nine,
or nine and an half of Gods tenn commandments; for he leaves out that piece
and part which concerns the Saturday Sabbath: and that man, must deny Gods
entire and whole law, to be entire and whole unto us; or, to belong unto us, in
the integrity and perfection thereof: for if the Law belonged unto us, in its
integrity and perfection, then the Saturday Sabbath, which was once commanded
in that Law, and so was a part and a piece of the Law, it must now also be
commanded in the Law, and so belong unto us now. Thus the consequence is proved
good, that whosoever abolisheth the old Sabbath day, he mancleth Gods Law, he
yields obedience but unto percels and pieces of it, and he denies that Gods
Law belongs unto us, in its intigrity and perfection. For the Saturday
Sabbath, serves to make up Gods Law, an entire, an whole, and a perfect Law;
and without it, it is but a lame, imperfect, maimed, defective Law; like a lame
man wanting an hand, or a finger of his hand; and like an imperfect and
defective Bible, lacking a Chapter, or a verse of some Chapter.

I confess that those tene Ministers, Gods adversaries and mine in this point,
go about like botching Taylers, or sowterly Cobblers (for I cannot more aptly
and fitly resemble their action) to make up this breach again, by adding a
piece of new cloth to fill up the rent, and so they suppose to avoid this
blow, and to make up the Law again an entire and perfect law: now howeuer it
is commendable to piece and mend old garments, yet it is altogether
insufferable, for any to play the botch er and cobbler with Gods laws: the new
piece wherewithal they would fill up this rent, and make up this breach, it is
the Lords day or first day of the week, and this day must now be thought and
firmly believed, to be put into the old Law of the Decalogue, and then we
shall have 10 commandments again wholly and completely: but as once it was
unlawful to wear a garment of Linsey wolsey, and to bring profane and common
persons into the Temple, so is it now, to mingle humane institutiones with
Divine ordinances, and to bring a day appointed by man, into the Moral,
eternal, and sacred Law of God: for the Lords day has no higher institution
then the ordinance of the Church; and will they piece and mend up the Divine
Law of God, with the piece of an humane ordinance? but admit that the Lords day
were of Divine ordination, yet is this piece too bigg or too little, to stand
in the breach of the 4th commandment, as formerly I have shown, because it
cannot agree to the 4th com. besides, to see the unskillfulness of these
peecers; they confess that this Lords day Sabbath is a new ordinance,
pertaining to the new Testament, as are Baptism and the Lords Supper, and yet
they will attempt to mende up the breach of the old Law, with a piece taken out
of the new Testament: thus the old law, shall be partly old, partly new; partly
Law, and partly Gospel; a new kind of botching. They said indeed a Cobbler
should answer my book, and see now if they be not as good as their word; is
not this work of theirs Cobblers work?

Having proved the Major, I come unto the Minor, and here I am to prove, that
no man may so wrest the Scriptures, as thereby to mancle and lame the Royal
Law of God, no man may receive and obey but some percels and pieces of it
only; and that no man may deny the whole and entire Law of God, to belong to
us wholly, fully, and in the integrity and perfection thereof: me think none
should deny this Minor; if any will. 1. He is guilty of doing violence, to the
Law, and of being partial in Gods Laws, this was the sin of those Priests
laid to their charge by God, who had polluted the Sanctuary, and done violence
to the Law, Zeph. 3.4. and again, ye have not kept my ways, but have been
partial in the Law: Malach. 2.9. yea, he must hold it Jewish and Iudaisme in
any that will be entire and perfect in Gods Law, that is, that will have an
indifferent and impartial respect unto all the parts thereof: for he that is
entire and perfect in the Law, will have respect unto Gods Sabbaths, which they
must count Iudaisme.

2. I find it in Polanus Syntag: page 353. that Papists do deny the second
Commandment against worshipping of Jmages, to be Moral and appertain unto
Christianes: to the like purpose I find in Willet on Exodus 20. page 342. 343.
these passages. The commandment (say Papists) of abolishing and destroying
Images, was ceremonial, and therefore it concerns not Christians now. And
again, The second praecept against the making of Images was only temporal,
and concerned the Jews. Thus Papists are partial in the Law, and deny its
integrity: now if we may deny the Integrity of the Law, tell me why Papists may
not do so too?

3. If any will deny this Minor by the judgment of M. Perkins he denies
himself to be regenerated: see M. Perkins in his Commentary on the Galatians,
Chap. 5. v. 4. page 311. where treateing of the Law, thus he writes, The Law
it is wholly copulative: all the parts of it are linked one to an other: he
that is bound to one Commandment, is bound to all: he that keeps one indeed,
keeps all: he that breaks one, in respect of the disposition of his heart, is
a breaker of all, Iam. 2.10. he that makes no conscience to keep some one
commandment, if occasion be offered, will break any: Hence it follows, that
true regeneration is that which is a reformation and chang, according to the
whole Law of God: Josias turned to God according to the whole Law. Zachary and
Elisabeth, walked in all the Commandments of God. David says, he shall not be
confounded, when he has respect unto all the Commandments of God. Here you
see M. Perkins urges it, as a note of true regeneration, that men be reformed
according to the whole Law; and exemplifies it by that of Josias, Zachary and
Elizabeth, and the prophet David: if that regeneration then be a reformation,
according to the whole Law, then is the whole Law still in force, and so men
may not deny its Integrity and wholnesse, men may not mancle and lame it;
unless it grieueth them that the 10 Commandments should be all Moral.

To conclud, we must either reassume and reedify Gods ancient Sabbaths, or else
we must reject and demolish the integrity and perfection of Gods royal Law.

ARGVM. XXII.
My 22th Argument, in defense of the Sanctified and hallowed Saturday Sabbath
Genes. 2.3. is, that it must be Moral and still in force; partly because all
Divines with one accord do hold and maintain, that one day in a week is
Moral and still in force by the 4th Com. and partly because there can be no
day sanctified by the 4th Com. of all the 7 days, but Saturday only. And thus
I argue.

If one day in a week must be sanctified for a Sabbath by virtue of the 4th
Commandment, then Saturday Gods ancient sanctified and ha^lowed 7th day
Sabbath, must be our weekly Sabbath day.

But one day in a week, must be sanctified for a Sabbath day, by virtue of the
4th Com.

Therefore Saturday Gods ancient sanctified and hallowed 7th day Sabbath, must
be our weekly Sabbath day.

First I will pro^e the Minor, namely, that some one day in a week, must now
be kept for a Sabbath day by the 4th Com. and then in the second place, I will
prove the Major, namely, that that one day, must be our Saturday. For the
former, I will prove it first by the Testimony of our Church in general, and
then by the Testimony of many particular Divines of n^te. First then for our
Church: see the book of Homilies, Homily the 8th, of the place and time of
prayer page 138. where it is thus written, As concerning the time which
Almighty God has appointed his people to assemble in together solemnly, it
does appear by the 4th Com. And t en a little beneath, And therefore by this
commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in a week, wherein we ought
to rest, and give our selves wholly to heavenly exercises. And by and by
again, Thus it may plainly appear, that Gods will and Command^ was, to have a
solemn time, and a standing day in the week, wherein the people should come
together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him
thanks for them. Here our Church acknowledges and teaches, that by the 4th
Com. we ought to set a part a time, as one day in a week, and to have a
standing day, in the week for the worship of God.

Bishop Babington, in his exposition of the Commandments, and on the 4th Com.
P^g. 168. thus wri^eth: To have one day in the seven, to serve the Lord in,
that was Moral., and remains still, binding us unto it. Doctor Willet in
his Hexapla on Exodus, and upon the 4th Com. page 356. thus writes; This then
may safely be affirmed, that to keep one day of seven holy to the Lord, is
Moral and not ceremonial. And aga^ne page 363. This Commandment as it is
Moral continues still; namely, that a certain day should be set a part for
the public service of God; and that as Chrysostom says, in circulo
hebdomadis etc in the compase of a week, one whole day should be set a part
etc. Hom. 10. in Genes-Musculus in his Common places, on the 4th Comm. at the
latter end, says thus, Touching the Sabbath, it stands with the Law of nature,
that we should some day give our selves unto holy exercises: in this respect we
must not shake off the sanctification of the Sabbath, which is so far
delivered unto us by the Law of nature, that all people universally, have their
standing Holy days, consecrated for the doing of holy things. Peter Martyr,
in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, Chapt. 14. v. 5. page 436.
says thus, It pertains to the 10 Commandments, that out of the whole week,
should one day be consecrated to the worship of God. Purchase, in his pilgrimage,
page 21. Some (says he) make question of the Sabbath: Howbeit I must confess,
that I see nothing in that Commandment of the Decalogue, praescribed, but is
natural and moral: and that the observing of one day of seven in every week
appears both by the first order estabilished in nature, when God blessed and
Sanctified the 7th day, and by necessity of a Sabbath, as well before the Law,
in the days of the Patriarchs, as in the times of David, or Solomon: and by
the general consent of all, that it is Moral to set a part some time to the
Lord etc. Thus we see it abundantly proved, that one day in a week is still in
force by the 4th Com. I might be infinite well nigh, in the proof of this
point, out of M. Perkins, M. Dod and many others; yea what pulpit is there in
the Kingdom of England, which does not on all occationes seal unto this
truth, by proclayming and publishing it unto the people?

Having proved the Minor that one day of the week must be a Sabbath hy the 4th
co^. now J come unto the Major, to prove that this one day must be our
Saturday: or to is, that if one day in a week must be a Sabbath day by the 4th
com. then Saturday must be our weekly Sabbath day: my reason of this point is,
because none other day of the week can be a Sabbath day, by the 4th com.
besides our Saturday: this I shall prove, by sundry arguments taken from the 4th
com. we will fetch our first argument, from the first word of the ^th com.
Remember.

That day, and that day of the week only must be Sabbath day by the 4th com.
the which this word Remember does send us unto: now this word has reference
unto Saturday the old Sabbath day only: for the word Remember, implies a thing
foreknowne; thus Peter is said to remember the words of Jesus which he had said
unto him. Mat. 26.75. and so it is here, whereas God said remember the Sabbath
day, he speaks to his people the Jews, of a day which they knew beforehand:
for it was consecrated, not first at the giving of the Law, but long before,
even at the Creation, Genes. 2.3. now the Jews, they knew no day for a Sabbath
day, and so could remember no day, but Saturday the 7th day, they knew not of
the Lords day, nor of any other; and therefore this 4th com. and the word
Remember in it, belongs properly unto no day of the week but Saturday, 2.
That day of the week, and that only is the Sabbath by the 4th com. whose
proper name is Sabbath day Remember the Sabbath day Exodus 20.8, now no day of
the week was ever called Sabbath day by the Scriptures, or ancient fathers,
but Saturday: and therefore no day but Saturday can stand by the 4th com. I am
not ignorant that we cale Sunday, Sabbath day, but this is but a miscalling and
nicknaming of days, as elsewhere is showed, see Mark. 16.1.2. where Saturday
was caled Sabbath day, and sunday was caled the first day of the week. 3.
Only that day is Sabbath day by the 4th com. which is the 7th day of the
week. But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, Exodus 20.10. now no
day of the week is by any approved computation called and accounted the 7th
day but Saturday, as elsewhere has been shown: therefore Saturday is the
Sabbath day by the 4th com. see Mark. 16.1.2. where Sunday is caled the first
day of week: and if Sunday be the first day, then Saturday which comes after
it, must be the 7th day. Thus you see, none other day of the week can be
Sabbath by the 4th com. because none other day was ever caled Sabbath day, nor
counted the 7th day. 4. No day of the week ca^ be Sabbath day by the 4th com.
but Saturday the 7th day, because the reason of the 4th com. and Gods ensample
of his rest on the 7th day therein contained Exodus 20.11. cannot belong unto
any day of the week besides Saturday, this point is elsewhere cleared also.

Thus you see it vndeniablie proved, that if one day in a week must be a
Sabbath day by the 4th com. it must of necessity be Saturday: because the 4th
com. in all the parts thereof, point us out unto Saturday, and unto no day of
the week besides it.

ARGVM. XXIII.
My 23th argument in defense of the Lords Sabbath proves, that it must be
moral and perpetual, because it is such an ordinance of Gods, as does greatly
further the public and solemn worship of God, tend unto piety and furtherance
of the duties of the first Table, nourish Christian Religion; and generally
helps all sorts of people, to the attainment of grace, and grows in all
the duties of piety toward God, and Charity toward man: yea, because it is
such an ordinance of Gods, as tends unto mercy, and that not only toward
mankind in general, but also unto mercy both unto man and beast. And thus I
argue.

That which is expressly commanded in the moral Law, which by experience we
find, tending unto, and a notable furtherance of Gods public and private
worship and service; and of all sorts of people, for their attainment and
increase of grace and godliness, and growing up in our Christian Religion: yea
and further, which is commanded as a work of mercy unto mankind; yea both to
man and beast; that thing is moral and perpetual, and still in force.

But to rest from work on Saturday the 7th day, is expressly commanded in the
Moral Law, and we find it by experience tending unto, and a notable
furtherance of Gods public and private worship and service; and of all sorts
of people, for their attainment and increase of grace and godliness, and
growing up in our Christian Religion: yea and further, which is commanded as a
work of mercy unto mankind; yea both to man and beast.

Therefore to rest from work, on Saturday the 7th day, is moral perpetual
and still in force.

As for the truth of the Major, I suppose none will deny it: for it is a Rule
in expounding the commandments, that not only the things expressed in the
Decalogue are commanded as duties binding us, but also all causes, helps, and
furtherances unto those duties: whence I reason thus, if the helps and
furtherances of moral duties belong unto us, though not expressed in the Law,
then by like if not by stronger reason, such helps and furtherances as serve
unto moral duties, being expressly commanded in the Law, do belong unto us
and bind us as moral: yea further, that duty which is commanded in the law,
as a work of mercy, that must needs be moral without all controversy.

And as for the Minor, I suppose it is as clear as the Major: for, 1. it is
expressly commanded in the Moral Law, that we should rest from work on the 7th
day, which is Saturday. But the 7th day is the Sabbath etc. in it thou shall
not do any work etc. Exodus 20.10. And 2. we find it by all experience, that
if we rested from our labors on Saturday the 7th day, it would greatly tend
unto the furtherance of Gods public worship on that day, and unto the
begetting grows and increase of grace in all men: for when men do ^et a
part all worldly employments, to attend on the service of God, then are they
free from many distractiones and incumberances, which would hinder them in Gods
service, and then are they fiter for all Religiouse exercises etc. The truth
hereof we see by our now keeping of the Lords day; for our resting from worldly
employments on this day, does greatly further the worship of God, and all holy
exercises; just so it would be with the 7th day if we had it in use.

3. That a rest from work on the 7th day, is commanded as a work of mercy, is
plain Exodus 23.12. In the 7th day, thou shall rest, that thine ox and thine
Ass may rest, and the son of thy maid, and the stranger may be refreshed.
See to this effect also Deuteronomy. 5.14. So then God would that men should rest on
the 7th day, for the relief ease and refreshment, both of man and beast: God
would that Masters should exercise pity and mercy to their wearied and tired
servants, by resting them on the 7th day. Now in this respect, I may cale the
Saturday or Sabbath day, the Servants Iubile; for on this day every week, they
should have release from their painful and servile labors, to refresh
themselves therein: on this day all Masters should exercise mercy to their
wearied servants: how ever other times and holy days for servants refreshment,
are at the liberty and pleasure of gouerners, yet this time and day, is not so:
for of duty God in the behalf of Servants requires it of Masters, and so it
is the Servants by right from God. Thus you see it clear, that to rest on the
7th day, is a work of mercy unto man and beas^, and a work greatly tending to
the furtherance of all the duties of piety and charity.

In a word, the observation of the Sabbath day, must needs be a thing greatly
tending to the good of mankind: because it was made for them: The Sabbath was
made for man. Mark. 2.27. unless therefore we will accuse God of
unskillfulness, in making things for men, which are not good and proffitable
for them, we must needs yield, that the observation of the Sabbath, is a thing
tending unto, and a furtherance of man's good in general,

What answer may be framed to this argument I cannot foresee, unless it be
some such as this, that the rest from labor is it only which tends unto
piety, and is a work of mercy, but not the day, to wit, the 7th day, this
helps not etc. But contrariwise.

1. The day helps unto a religiouse sanctification of the rest; because it is
a sacred day above all others in the week, for God hallowed it at the
creation, and it only, Genes. 2.3. and therefore it does best besuite sacred
actions, and adds a kind of a more reverent respect unto them: thus a man is
touched with a more sublime and honorable regard of the duty of prayer, in
the Church (as of ancient in the Temple) then in a common house: see Genes.
28.16.17. Eccles. 4.17. Leuit, 19.30. ij. Chron. 8.11. Mark. 11.15.16.17. And
Moses must put off his shoes, because the place was Holy grownd, Exodus 3.5.
Thus Nehemiah required of the people, behavior suitable unto the day; the
people must not weep, because the day was Holy, Nehem. 8.9.10. and This is the
day which the Lord had made, let us rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118.24.
Here the day minded them of the duties in and of the day, to wite, joy and
gladness, like as the Coronation day when it comes, it minds us of the
duties of the day, and that in a more lively manner then any other day: if
therefore sacred places, did further men in sacred duties, by touching their
hearts, with a more then ordenary reverence and religion, and channge of
behavior; and if days do mind us of the duties of the days: then why
should not also, the sacred day of the Sabbath when it comes, be of like use?
it being of like kind? why should not the presence of this sacred day, the
more move us to be holy, because the day is holy? if Moses must put off his
shoes, because the grownd where on he stood was holy grownd, why should not we
be the more moved, to put off all carnal and sinful affectiones, because
the day wherein we are is an holy day? and if the people in Nehemiahs time,
must not weep, because the day was holy, must not we learn to abstain from
work the rather; because the day is holy? So thus we see, sacred places, and
sanctified days, have added somewhat unto the increase of holy affectiones;
and reasones have been fetched, from the holiness of the places, and days, to
m^ue unto more reverence in gesture outwardly in body, and inwardly in heart,
and to decline such things as do not bes^te these places or times: this may
yet further appear in the Lords day: for it being supposed a sacred day, and
of Divine institution, the day thus considered, does not a little further our
rest from labors, and so help us to a more proffitable use of all holy
exercises in the day, which would not be so, if the day were in esteem but a
common day.

2. One duty of the Sabbath, is to sing Psalms, unto the praise of God, as we
may see by the title of the 92 Psalm: and among other things the Church does
praise God, for that his marvailouse and miraculouse work of the Creation of
the world, whereof the Sabbath day or 7th day is a sign, Exodus 31.17.15. Now
this very day, does not a little further this sacred duty, of praising God for
the Creation of the world; and that. 1. Because this day, being the same day in
the weke for order whereon God rested at the Creation, it does more lively
represent unto us Gods rest, then can any other day of the week. 2. Because
God made this day to be a sign of the Creation, Exodus 31.17.15. as the
Elements of bread wine and water in the Sacraments, be signs of the
redemption; now signs do further the remembrance of the things signified by
them; and therefore the Sabbath day being a sign of the Creation, it does
further the thankful remembrance thereof, and our cheerful praises of God
for it, since by it we have life being and well being, without which should
have had no being at all.

3. The 7th day being that day whereon God himself rested at the Creation
Genes. 2.2, this day has a force in it above all days in the week, to
perswad men to rest themselves, and give rest unto their servants on that day,
in an imitation of God, because God rested on it: and thus it furthereth. 1.
The work of mercy, in afording rest unto poor servants: and 2. It furthereth
the works of piety and religion: for the more freely that men rest, the more
cheerfully they worship God: this efficacy no other day has.

4. As a place, so the time of the 7th day, is a furtherance to Gods worship;
for thereby we have time to serve God in, without which God cannot be served;
yea further, this time and day does further the continuance and frequency of
Gods worship: for were it not for this, some men would think it enough to give
God but one hour or two in a day, and one day in a month or quarter of a
year.

5. The time and day, was commanded at once together with the duty of rest,
both in one commandment, both in one sentence in that commandment, both with
one breath, Exodus 20.10. The one as a duty, the other as the proper time for
the performance thereof: now it is consentaneus and agreeable to all reason to
think, that these two things being thus enjoined immediately together, should
both tend together unto one and the same end, each after its manner and kind,
so as if the one tends unto the worship of God, so should the other also: and
it is absurd to think, that the one should tend unto oen end, and the other
unto another and diverse end: A decre is made, that one the 5th of November,
the day should be kept in a thankful remembrance for that deliverance etc. and
that people shall refrain their labors, and resort to their parish
Churches; where the Ministers shall publikly praise God etc. now who cold
imagine, but that as the duty of resting from work tends unto the public
praise of God, so does the place appointed thereto, to wit, the Church, and so
do the persons, to wit, the Ministers, and so does the time and day also, to
wit, the 5th November? and it were absurd to think, that the rest from work
should te^d to the publik praise of God, but the day should te^d to some other
end: it follows therefore, that as the rest enjoined in the 4th co^. tends
unto the furtherance of Gods worship, so does the time, to wit, the 7th day
there also enjoined; and as the rest from labors te^deth unto mercy toward
man and beast, so the day, to wit, the 7th day, tends unto mercy also.

Thus I have proved it, that the observation of Saturday the 7th day, is moral
and perpetual: because it tends unto the furtherance of Gods public (as
well as private) worcester hip and service; and because it is a work of mercy, both
to man and beast: now all works in the Decalogue, tending to promote Gods
service, are Moral; and all works therein commanded, which are works of
Mercy, are Moral also, by the judgment of all Divines: and so much for this
answer.

An other answer some may frame, saying the day, to wit, the 7th day is not
necessarily tending unto the worship of God, and a work of mercy etc, since
these may be furthered also by an other day. But contrariwise, 1. This answer
is absurd, and thus I make it appear, there is a twofould necessity, there is
a necessity which is absolute, as when the worship of God cannot stand,
unless it has such a day etc. And there is a necessity in some respect, as
when Gods worship cannot so well and fitly stand, unless it has such a day
etc. Now, if they will admit of no more of the Moral Law, then is necessary
in the first respect, then these absurdeties they fale into, 1. that they may
reject the 8th Com. Thou shall not steal: for it is not absolutely necessary
that this 8th com. should be retained among us, since Coveting an other man's
goods in heart, is forbidden in the 10th Com. now he that keeps the 10th Com.
stands not in any absolute need of the 8th Comm. yea, they may as well
reject as not Moral, the 6th, the 7th, and 8th Commandments, as not absolutely
necessary: because the Magistrate may make Laws against murder, adultery, and
stealth: if men will reject Gods 7th day which he has sanctified and
commanded, because men may find and set up an other day, then may they reject
for the same reason the 6th, the 7th, and the 8th Commandments also.

2. An other absurdety they fale into, which is this, that thus they may
reject the setting a part of an whole day, for rest from labors, and for
Gods worship: for both these may be done in half a day, or in some fevve
hovvres of a day: yea, they may reject the weekly sanctification of a day unto
God, and keep but one day in a month or in a year: for it is not absolutely
necessary to Gods worship, and as a work of mercy either to keep an whole
day, or one in every week.

3. An other absurdety they fale into which is this, they may as well reject the
Element of Wine the Sacrament, saying, wine is not necessary to the Lords
Supper, as to say the 7th day is not necessary unto Gods worship: for common
beer may be drunk in stead of wine, as well as a common day be used in stead
of an hallowed day. Yea, as well may we change bread in the Lords Supper for
flesh, and eat flesh in remembrance of Christ's body, as change that sanctified
day, which God commanded.

2. I prove it that the very precise time of the 7th day, is necessary unto
Gods worship, if not absolutely, yet secundum quid, if not for the being of it,
yet for the right, fitest, and well being of it: my reasones are these 1. if
the 7th day, was not in some respect necessary unto Gods worship, and a work
of mercy, then might the Jews have changed the day and set out an other day
for the same duties: But it was not Lawful for the Jews to change their
Sabbath day, as all confess: Therefore was the 7th day necessary in some sort.

2. If the 7th day, were not necessary in some sort unto the service of God,
and work of mercy in refreshing man and beast after they were spent in labor,
then would not God have expressly commanded it for those ends: But God did
expressly command the 7th day to those ends, as we read in the fourth Com.
Deuteronomy. 5.14. Exodus 23.12. Mark. 2.27. Therefore is the 7th day necessary in some
sort etc: why should we think, that God should expressly command the 7th day
by name for his Sabbath, the 8th day for Circumcision, and the 14th day for the
passover, when he mentioned not the day for baptizing of Infantes? nor the
day for administration of the Lords Supper? but that the days expressly
commanded, were necessary, and the days not commanded were indifferent? had
not the 7th day been necessary, God would have left it uncommanded, as he has
done many indifferent things.

3. Our Savior says, the Sabbath was made for man Mark. 2.27. Now if made for
man, then it was necessary for man's good, either for his being absolutely, or
for his well being respectiuly; or else it was needless and superfluouse: But
it was not made needlessly etc. Therefore it was necessary.

4. If no day of the week, can be so fit a day for Gods worship, as the 7th
day, then is the 7th day necessary in some sort: But no day of the week can
be so fit a day as is the 7th; because all the other 6 days are common and
unhallowed days, and only the 7th day, is a sanctified and holy day Genes.
2.3. and so fi^est for holy duties. Ergo etc.

5. If all the other 6 days in the week, be ordained for labor and work,
then of necessity the 7th day must be kept for Gods worship, and for a work of
mercy to man and beast: But all the other 6 days are ordained for work, Six
days shall thou labor etc. And ordinarily and weekly to alter the institution
of any of those Six days, is to violate Gods ancient ordinance: Therefore is
the precise time of the 7th day necessary.

6. On the Sabbath day, men are not only to afford rest unto their wearied
servants, but also to make holy assemblies Leuit. 23.2.3. to worship God Ezekiel.
46.3. and to do the exercises of Religion: now forasmuch as no day is
commanded by God, for these duties, but only the Saturday or 7th day,
therefore if you take any other day, it must be a day of man's appointment: now
let all men judge, if men will not be more careful to yield their servants
rest, to meet together, in the public assemblies, and to perform the parts
of Gods worship and exercises of Religion, on that day which God has
commanded, then on that day which is but of man's commandment: this may appear
by our common holy days, what thin assemblies? what cold devotion then? in
comparison of the Lords day, which is supposed of divine institution: so
necessary then is a day of Divine institution as without it, Religion and Gods
worship will languish of a continual consumption: now since there is no day of
divine institution but the Saturday or 7th day, it is of necessity that we
keep the Saturday or 7th day, to prevent the decay of Religion, and to support
and further Gods worship and Service

Thus I have proved it, that to rest from our labors on Saturday the 7th day,
is moral and perpetual: because we find it tends unto the furtherance of
Gods worship; and because it is a work of mercy, to man and beast; yea, in a
sort necessary also: and thus much of this argument.

ARGVM. XXIIII.
Because many stand so much upon the law and light of nature, holding that
only to be moral in the Decalogue, which is ratified by the light of nature:
and, that they would embrace the Sabbath, if it could be proved to be a Law of
nature: for the benefit of such therefore J frame this argument; and thus I
argue.

That duty which is expressly commanded in the Decalogue, which being made
known to a mere natural man, he cannot by his light of nature and reason
oppose, but must allow of and subscrib unto as good for him; that duty is
moral, concerns our practice, and is perpetually to be kept.

But the observation of Saturday the 7th day Sabbath, is expressly commanded in
the Decalogue, and is a duty which being made known to a mere natural man,
he cannot by the light of nature and reason oppose it, but must allow it, and
subscrib unto it as good for him.

Therefore the observation of Saturday the 7th day Sabbath, is moral,
concerns our practice, and is perpetually to be kept.

As touching the proof of the major, if any shall except against it, saying,
they could like of it, if it spoke of such a duty in the Decalogue, as were
first found out by the light of nature; but mislike of it, because it speaks
of such a duty as is first found out by a supernatural light, and then made
known unto a natural man. Hereto I reply, that it is not matteriall whither
the duty be first found out by the light of nature, and after allowed of by
the same light, or first found out by the supernatural light of Gods word in
his 4th com. and then subscribed unto by the light of nature: it mattereth not
I say which way and by whom the duty was found out first, so long as nature
and the light of reason does allow of it, justify it, and subscrib unto it,
after it is found out: for, men are as well bound by the Law and light of
nature, to observe those duties which the light of nature allows and
approves, being taught unto them, as to observe those which were never taught
them: for it is not the finding of them, nor the manner of getting the knowledge
of them that binds, but it is the approbation, and allowance of them, that
binds to the observation of them, and which has the force of a Law in a man:
wherefore, what duty soever is prescribed us in the Decalogue, if the light of
nature cannot oppose it as harmfull and incommodiouse, but does rather allow of
it, justify it, and approve of it as good, that duty must needs be moral and
practiced by us; or else we bewray our selves to be unnatural, and to put out
the light of nature in us, and to go against conscience: for we will refuse to
do that, which the very light of nature in us, allows of, and subscribeth
unto as good to be done, and so I come to the Minor.

Jn the minor I shall not need to prove any thing but this to wit, that a mere
natural man, cannot oppose Gods 7th day Sabbath, but must allow of it as good
to be observed, so soon as the Author, use, and end of it be discovered unto
him: first the^ for the Author of the Sabbath, a mere natural man cannot by
the light of reason, but allow of all laws and ordinances made by a Deity. 2.
for the use, and end of the 7th day Sabbath, 1. as it is kept in memorial of
the Creation, so a natural man cannot but allow of it; since by the Creation
he received his being, and all comforts of this life. 2. It crosses not the
good of particular persons, societies, or common weal^s; but on the contrary,
it serves to refresh both man and beast, being ouertoiled and spent in the 6
days before by labors; it helps the exercise of Religion; and it is a
duty, which societies and commonweals cannot well subsist without: for we
see, besides weekly Sabbaths, that commonweals do maintain sundry anniuersary
holy days, and therefore at the least one day in 7 is counted needful for
Rest: wherefore, suppose we that the Lords day, or the Sunday Sabbath were
changed into the 7th day or Saturday Sabbath, since the common weal stands
in need of one day in 7 at least for rest and refreshment and the exercise of
religion, therefore it follows, that if we had the Saturday Sabbath in use,
the common weal could have nothing against it to oppose it, but must allow of
it, approve it, and subscrib unto it as good to be observed: because in it and
by it, a good and benefit comes unto the common weal, both for their bodies
and souls.

In a word, does not nature teach us, that it is meet to show mercy unto
Servants, and allow them one day in 7 to rest in from their painful labors,
and to refresh themselves? and so to fit them for labor again on the next
Six days? and does not nature teach, that it is fitter that this day should
be of Gods choice, which is Saturday the 7th day, then of man's choice? and
also, that the time should not be indifferent, at man's pleasure, least some
cruel Masters should deny their Servants this necessary refreshment, but
necessary, as enjoined by God and as a duty from all Masters?

How then should this Sabbath be but moral, when the light of nature cannot
except against it? and how should it not but be observed of us to this day,
when that natural light of reason that is in us, does consent unto it, and
allow and approve of it as good for us? as the Apostle said, Does not nature
teach you, that if a man has long hair, it is a shame unto him? 1. Cor.
11.14. So may I say, does not nature teach us, that if we had Gods ancient
Sabbaths, the observation of them would prove both piouse and commodiouse? our
Savior says, The Sabbath was made for man. Mark. 2.27. Now what an unnatural
man is that, who will reject that thing which was made for him? will any man
refuse an house, or a garment that was made for him? or any of Gods Creatures
which were made for him? and shall not such incurr an heavy censure, who will
reject a duty commanded in the Decalogue, the which the light of nature still
remaining in us, does allow of and approve of?

This is one thing I desire may be in special manner observed, that such as
reject Gods Sabbath, they reject a most ancient ordinance of Gods expressly
commanded in the Moral Law, saying, that very day and time is not moral nor
concerns our practice, as do the rest of the 10 commandments, when as not
withstanding our consciences, and that light of natural reason which is in us,
do consent unto it, approve it, and allow of it, as a thing very good and
commodiouse for us, if we had it in use among us: shall not such opposites be
condemned, by their guilty consciences for opposing of that ordinance of Gods,
which is no way against them, but every way good for them, their consciences
being witnesses thereof? should we urge the practice of any thing impossible to
be kept or unnatural to be done, the which nature rises against and
abhors, the^ if it were opposed it were the less maruailouse, but when we
urge and stand to defend, nothing but a bra^ch of the moral law, nothing that
nature dissalloweth of, but rather cheerfully imbraceth, that such a thing
should be opposed as no moral, nor appertayning unto us, but as Jewish and I
cannot tell what, this is the matter of wonder, and so much for this argument.

For conclusion, let me go a little further then my argument draws me, I see
not but it might be proved, that the 7th day Sabbath is a Law of nature, even
in their own sense, who say they would embrace it if it were a Law of nature:
for as the Gentiles some of them found out the true God, so some of them found
out the true and 7th day Sabbath: for the proof hereof I refer you to Walaeus
de Sabbatho, page 46. 47. who affirms the point himself; and also proves
it; for he cites diverse ancient Authors, as 1. Philo the Jew lib. 2. de vita
Mosis, Our custom (says Philo) does adominish all Barbarianes, Graecianes,
Europianes, and Asianes of duty: for who does not honor that sacred day, which
returns every week? ij. he cites Josephus lib. 2. aduersus Appionem circa
fine^ libri, saying, There is not any City, Graecianes or Barbarianes, nor any
Nation, unto whom the observation of the 7th day, in which the Jews rested, is
not come. Thus Josephus. iij He cites a most ancient author Theophilus
Antiochenus Patriarcha lib. 2. ad Autolicum, As touching the 7th day (says
he) which among all mortal men is greatly famous, it is caled the Sabbath
etc. iiij. He cites Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 5. stromatum: Not only the
Jews (says he) but also the Gentiles knew that sacred 7th day etc. 5. He
cites Eusebius, praeparat. Euangel. lib. 13. who proves the same out of
Plato, Hesiod, Homer, Callimachus and others, for further proof hereof, I
refer you to M. Richard Byfield on the Sabbath, page 81. who there alleges
sundry Testimonies, showing that the Gentiles kept the 7th day or Saturday
Sabbath; among the rest these Seneca in his 95 Epist. and Macrobius, Saturn.
lib. 1. Cap. 7. And Aretius, problem de Sabbathi obseru. thus you see that the
Saturday or 7th day Sabbath was found out by, and in use among the Gentiles,
wherefore the 7th day Sabbath stands firm, by the Law and light of nature.

Thus much for my arguments, whereby I have proved the morallity and perpetuity
of the Lords Sabbaths: wherein (as I trust) I have given satisfaction
abundantly, to the conscience of any man that is not vn-willing to see a
truth: but as for such as read with preiudicate opiniones, resolving before
hand, to stop their ears least they should hear, and shut their eyes least
they should see, which is a brand of an heart hardened by the just Judgment
of God, I leave them to him that shall judge them an other day.

Consider what J have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.
SECT. IV.
WHereas we have made proof of the morallity and perpetuity of the Lords
Sabbath, and finding that men have sundry distinctiones, and euasiones, whereby
they would shune the force of our arguments, I have therefore reserved this
Section, purposly to confute those distinctiones; and to show the vanity and
absurdetie, of such their euasiones; that so all rubes and scruples being
removed, our arguments may have free passage, and be received without all
doubtinges: it is true, I shall handle many of those distinctiones and
euasiones here, which I have touched before, by way of use, in my Exposition of
the 4th commandment, but those things which there I did but touch cursorily
here I shall handle more largly, as the more proper place for them: but say I
should but repeat them, it were not labor lost; for being they are the common
answers, and often beaten into the minds of people, there is need of an often
confutation of them, that so what is said, it may stick the faster, and
remain the longer in men's minds.

I.
The first evasion which I will deal withal, shall be their distinction of a
Sabbath, and the Sabbath: for an argument being brought, for the morallity of
the Sabbath day, out of the 4th com. they are ready to blunt the force of it,
by this answer for one, to wit, that the word Sabbath may as well be translated
a Sabbath, as the Sabbath.

To discover the vanity of this idle distinction, (for many care not how idly
and absurdly they answer, so be they may say something against this sacred
ordinance of Gods) first, we must know what is the difference betwixt a
Sabbath, and the Sabbath: by the Sabbath, is meant that common and well known
Sabbath day, to wit, Saturday the 7th and last day of the week, the which the
Jews kept for thowsands of years, this I cale the Sabbath emphatically and by
way of excellency, and as a certain well known day. Now on the contrary, by a
Sabbath, they would understand some one day of the 7, but uncertainly which:
not any one rather then an other, not any certain standing known day of the
week; but so as the 4th commandment may indifferently be applied unto any
day, as unto Sunday, or Monday, or Tewsday etc.

The sense of this distinction being given, the absurdety of it will appear by
the like cases; the Lord said, let the earth bud forth the bud ^f the herb etc.
Genes. 1.11. were it not a senseless translation to render it thus, Let a earth
bud forth etc? again, then the man said, the woman which thou gave me, she
gave me of the tree etc. Genes. 3.12. were it not an absurd translation to
render it thus, then a man said, a woman which thou gave me etc? as well may
they translate it a earth for the earth, a man and a woman for the man and the
woman, as a Sabbath for the Sabbath: for as there was but one earth, and but
one man, and one woman, so was there but one Sabbath day. Again, suppose a
commandment had been given in the new Testament, for the Lords day, in the
same form of words with the 4th com. for the Sabbath day, saying, Remember the
Lords day, to sanctify it etc. But the first day of the week, is the Lords
day, in it thou shall do no work etc. for on the first day, the Lord rose
from the dead, and therefore the Lord blessed the Lords day and hallowed it:
If any now should frame such a distinction against our Lords day Sabbath,
saying, this name Lords day, may be translated a Lords day, that so he might
turn the sense of the commandment, from that day which has so many
hundrethes of years been known, and called by the name Lords day, unto any
day of the week, would not the Patrones of the Lords day, cry fie on such a
man? it is pity he lives, that will so corrupt the Scriptures? the case is
their own; I appeal unto their consciences, if by these answers, they have
not as shamefully corrupted and abused this portion of Gods Law the 4th com.

2. Whereas they say, the name Sabbath may be translated a Sabbath, that this
translation is unfit, and disagreing to the Scriptures and contextes, I
allege, against them, all the learned translatoures both new and old, that ever
translated the Bible, for they all constantly, do render it the Sabbath not a
Sabbath.

3. If by the name Sabbath in the 4th com. was meant a Sabbath, uncertainly
what day of the week, then this absurdety follows, that the Jews were not
bound distinctly unto the Saturday Sabbath which they always kept, and held,
themselves bound to keep, but that they might have kept Sunday, Monday, or
some other day, in imitation of God, and in memory of the Creation. Yea
further, since all men confess, that the Jews by Sabbath day understood the
Saturday, if now it be otherwise understood, then one and the same word shall
have one sense for 2000 years and more, and afterward, the same word shall
have an other sense: and so the words in Scripture shall change their sense, as
the times change; what is more absurd?

4. The absurdety of this distinction yet appears in this also; for since
there was never any day of the week, weekly caled Sabbath day, in all the
Scriptures, but the Saturday only, how can any man in his right wits, apply
the 4th com. to any day but Saturday? it is as absurd, as if one should suppose
two Saturdayes in a week, a Saturday and the Saturday: or two Christmas days
in one year, a Christmas day, and the Christmas day. I confess we cale now a
days Sunday, Sabbath day, but what matters it what we cale, who take liberty
to cale, and to miscale days at our pleasure? but I speak of a Divine
nomination of days, used in the Scriptures; for neither Prophets nor Apostles
did ever cale the Sunday, or Lords day, Sabbath day, nor any other day of the
week save Saturday. Since therefore there is but one day in a week named
Sabbath day, by Divine computation, how can there be a Sabbath day, and the
Sabbath day?

5. In my exp^sition of the 4th commandment I have at large proved it, that by
Sabbath day, in the 4th com. we must understand the Sabbath day emphatically,
that is, Saturday, and not a Sabbath day, at rouers and at random; unto which
profes forepast I referr my Reader, see my Exposition, upon these words Sabbath
day.

6. The absurdety of this distinction appears in this; if this word Sabbath,
should be translated a Sabbath, then one and the same word, should have diverse
senses in one and the same commandment: for the name Sabbath, at the latter
end of the commandment Exodus 20.11. must be translated the Sabbath; for it was
not any day of the week which God blessed at the Creation, but it was Saturday
the 7th day only and certainly: it is absurd therefore, to translate the same
name Sabbath, at the beginning of the commandment Exodus 20.8. otherwise, as a
Sabbath, as of a day at random and uncertain. And so much for this
distinction.

II.
A second evasion I will touch, and it is there distinction of a 7th day, and
the 7th day: let a man urge those words of the 4th com. But the 7th day is the
Sabbath of the Lord etc. to prove that we must sanctify the old Sabbath day
which is the 7th day, and they will make this for one of their answers, that
the commandment speaks of a 7th day not of the 7th day: by a 7th day, they
understand some day or other of the week, at rouers and at random, but not
any one certain day of the week. Were there nothing else against this
distinction, this one were enough, that by refusing the 7th day which implies
a settled, well known, and certain day of the week, to embrace a 7th day, at
rouers, as an uncertain time, hereby they labor to make things known when,
unknown when, things certain to be uncertain: as if they delighted in
uncertainties; and as if God should require a time for his worship, but no man
knew when.

2. Were this answer tolerable, what should stand firm in the Scriptures? God
commanded circumcision on the 8th day, had some of our times lived in those
times, they could by this Law, have circumcised a child on the 9th or 10th day,
and made it in their account a 8th day, though not the 8th day: for if they
would but skip over the first or second day of the child's birth, not rekoning
them, then the 9th day or 10th day, would be a 8th day. The Lord commanded the
Passover to be eaten on the 14th day of the month: lo we have some, by a new
devised computation, could have justified it, that by the same Law, they might
have eaten the Passover on the 15th or 16th day of the month, and all well
enough: for they could make the 15th or 16th day of the month an 14th day
though not the 14th day: for having said, that the commandment may be
understood of a 14th day, they can thus make it good; they will not rekone the
first day of the month for any of the number, but begine their account at the
second day, and so the 15th day will become a 14th day, is not this pretty
iugling? think you that these men think they have to do with a God, when they
thus expound his commandments? or with some babe or child that cannot tell to
7 or to 14? but they will say perhapes, they do not so rekone nor skip over
days etc. But that this is false, I thus prove it: our Sunday, or Lords day is
not only the first day of the week, in our common account; and in the
computation of all Chruches Jews and Christianes, Protestants and Papists;
but also it is caled the first day of the week, constantly in the Scriptures,
see Mat. 28.1. Mark. 16.2. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.19. Act. 20.7. ij. Cor. 16.2.
Now that our new Sabbatharia^s, might make their Lords day Sabbath, to become a
7th day, and so accord to the 4th com. they must skip over Sunday in their
account, not rekoning it for the first day of the number, and so begine their
rekoning at Monday, counting Monday for the first day of the week, and then
the Sunday or Lords day following will be a 7th day: thus by their distinction
and cuning iugling together, that day which our Church and all Churches cales
dies octavus the 8th day, these have made it a 7th day: and that day which the
Scriptures cale, the first day, the same they have made a 7th day.

I abhor with my heart and soul, to see Gods people thus deluded, and his
sacred Scripture, I mean his 4th com. thus abused, and made a nose of wax to
be turned hither and thither as the times please. I know some are ready to wish
I had spent my time better, then to have meddled in this point of the Sabbath,
so in love they are with their wonted erroures: and others, have wished me and
my book hanged up together, with the like, so rash is their furiouse zeal for
their new Sabbath, and so madd they are and enraged against me for discovering
this their abominable abuse, both of Gods people and the sacred Scriptures:
but whither I have done well or evil in this point, and whither they or I do
rather deserve this censure, I leave to the indifferent and impartial reader.

3. An other absurdety against this distinction is, that if a 7th day may be
understood in the 4th commandment indefinitly and uncertainly, then were not
the Jews tied to sanctify the Saturday Sabbath, no more then any other day in
the week.

4. All Translatores both new and old, are against them: for they constantly
translate it the 7th day, as the most fit, not a 7th day.

5. Since there is no more 7th days, then there is Saturdaies in a week, it
is a foolish distinction to talk of a 7th day, as if there were or could be
more 7th days in a week then one: for since our Sunday or Lords day, is the
first day, in a Divine account, as has been proved, and also in all other
approved computationes, therefore Saturday following, and only Saturday must
be both the 7th day, and a 7th day without difference.

6. That it must be translated, and also expounded of the 7th day, to wit,
Saturday, and not of a 7th day uncertainly which day, I have proved it in my
Exposition of these words of the 4th com. But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the
Lord etc. Unto which place I refer my reader.

7. The absurdety of this distinction appears thus: if the word seventh, may
be translated a 7th, as of a day uncertain, then one and the same word, in one
and the same commandment, should have diverse senses: for the word seventh,
at the latter end of the commandment Exodus 20.11. must be translated the 7th,
as of a day certain: for God rested the 7th day, to wit, on Saturday Genes.
2.3. it is absurd therefore to translate the word seventh, in the former part
of the commandment Exodus 20.10. a 7th, as a day uncertain. And so much for
this distinction.

III.
A third evasion they have, and this is very frequent in all men's mouths, let
a man urge the 4th com. for the Saturday Sabbath, and your answer shall be
this, One of Seven, the 4th com. it inioyneth one day of 7, so they reject the
7th day, and will have one of 7. Thus they lean upon this false exposition of
the com. that by the 7th day, is to be vnsterstod one day of the 7: by one of 7
they mean any one of the 7, or some one day of the 7 or other with out
difference. Thus these enemies to Gods Sabbath, do corrupt the proper sense of
the scriptures, rather then they will see their old erroures, and be take them
to a reformation; glad they are if they can invent any thing, for the
subversion of this sacred ordinance Gods Sabbath day.

My first argument against this evasion shall be this, that the word Seventh
used in the 4th com. it is not a Cardinal as they cale it, but an Ordinall
word of number; it notes but one of that number, and its order also, as that
it is the last for order of that number named; thus the Tenth, is not any one
of the 10, but the last for order of the 10. The fowrth month of the year, it
is not any one month of the 4, but the last month of the 4, so the Seventh
day of the week, it is not any day of the 7, but the last for order of all the
7. they do therefore most shamefully corrupt the word of God, who when they
hear God say, But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord, which 7th is the
last day of the number or week, then they will come in with their devices to
defeat God of his day and time, saying, by the 7th, may be meante one of 7,
or, some one day of the 7, that is, as well the first day of the week, or any
other, as the last day.

2. The absurdety of this answer and exposition, may appear by the like cases:
The passover was by the Law to be eaten upon the 14th day of the month; now
according to these Expositers of Gods Law, a man might have eaten the passover
upon one of the 14 days, as on the 5th or 8th or 12th day, and iustifiably
too; for their Exposition of Gods law is, by 14th to understand one of 14, or,
some one day of the 14, that is, any one day of the 14. Again, they were to
circumcise a child on the 8th day, I, say these men, that is, upon one or upon
some one of the 8 days: so they might at their choice, circumcise a child on
the 4th or 6th day of its age: thus by their exposititiones they make Gods
Laws of none effect: for God made choice of one certain day above all others,
and these have made all days common; God would have the 7th day which is the
last of the 7 for his Sabbath, but these tell us, one of 7, some one of 7, or
any one of the 7 may suffice; as if God had not made his choice of the day, but
left us the prerogative, to make the choice: good Lord deliver us from such
Expositers, and such Expositiones. I could have borne this grief with silence,
as a long time I did if these Antisabbatharians, or enemies to Gods Sabbaths,
would have taken knowledge of these their erroures, in love and the spirit of
meekness, either in private before I printed my former book, or in public by
my former book; but now they maintain the^ with an high hand, utterly
co^de^ning me, and protesting against me both in public and in private,
wherefore I do the world to know, how I abhor these their ungodly
proceedings in abusing Gods people, and in corruption the sacred Scriptures.

3. If by the 7th day, may be understood, one of 7 indifferently, the^ might the
Jews have kept any one day in the week without difference for their Sabbath,
as Sunday, Monday, or some other, but this is absurd to imagine: yea a greater
absurdety; for since all me^ confess, that the Jews, with their Prophets and
Christ himself, understood by the words Sabbath day, one certain day of the
week, as Saturday, if now we will expound the same words in the 4th com. of a
day uncertain, then shall the words of scripture chang their sense as the
times cha^g: the same words for 2000. years shall signify one thing, and ever
after that, an other thing: oh manstrouse absurdety!

4. If by the 7th day, may be understood some one day of the 7 without
difference, then may we Christianes, keep the Saturday Sabbath again with the
Jews: for this is one day of the 7: but this they hold a foul error, to
keep the Jews Sabbath; and therefore by the 7th day, we must not understand
one day of the 7 indifferently.

5. If by the 7th day in the 4th com. be understood, one day of 7, then is there
no ceremony in the 4th com. for, if one of 7 be the true exposition of the 4th
com. it was ever the true sense of it; and if one of 7 indifferently, both was
and now is, the true exposition of the Com. where I pray is the ceremony? where
is the time which we say was abolished by Christ? since the sense of the com.
is every way the same now which it was: But our new Sabbatharians all say,
there is a ceremony in the time: Therefore is not one of 7, the true sense and
exposition of the 7th day, in the 4th com.

6. The 4th com. it inioyneth one day of 7, and but one one day of 7, to wit,
the last of the 7: now since they oppose this text Colos. 2.16. which
abolisheth Sabbaths, to the 4th com. against that Sabbath there; hereby they
abolish that one day of 7 in the 4th com. how absurd then is it, for them to
talk of one day of 7, as if still one day of 7 were moral by the 4th com.
when themselves have abolished that one day of 7 there commanded, by Colos.
2.16. they will abolish a thing, and yet maintain it still?

7. That by these words in the com. the 7th day, must be understood the 7th day,
as of a known certain day, and not one of 7, indifferently and indefinitly, I
have proved it in my Exposition of the 4th co^. upon these words But the 7th
day is the Sabbath etc. whither I refer my Reader: and thus much for this
evasion, that by the 7th day, they say may be understood, one of seven, or some
one day of the 7.

IIII.
Some seeing how hardly they are beset in the former distinctiones, have found
out an other and new evasion, and they seeing that these words of the co^. bear
so strongly against them, to wit, But the 7th day is the Sabbath, they therefore
have thought it fit, to reject these words altogether, and so all the after
parts of 4th com. also; and therefore they answer thus, that there is no more of
the 4th com. moral, but these words at the beginning of it, Remember the
Sabbath day, to sanctify it: and as for all the residue of the com. that they
reject altogether, as appurtenances to the com. and as application.

I must confess., I never heard any man so impudent, save one M. Greenwood a
silenced Minister, one of my 10 professed adversaries, and one man more whose
name I spare; neither would I have judged it worth the confutation, but that I
fear the rest of my adversaries may be take them to this refuge, when they be
hardly put too it. When I look upon this man's answer, together with those
forementioned, me thinks they have dealt very honorably, with Gods Law: for
they have not dared to deny any part of it in right down terms, but this
man, (as they say) without fear or wit, lays violent hands on Gods Law, and
rendeth or teareth away, the greater part thereof at once: me think he that
makes conscience of a Surplisse^, should make some conscience, of doing
violence to a Moral Law, and of denying such a portion of Sacred Scripture: I
hear indeed of much conscience used in other matters, I see too little used in
disputation, woe is me that it is so: any thing shall be said, or done, yea
Gods Laws shall be mancled and quartered, rather then God shall have his
Sabbathes again. But first, it is absurd for any man to put asunder what God
has joined together: could any thing be more nearly joined to other, then the
latter part of the 4th Com. is to the former? and yet this man dares sunder
them. Our Savior said, that the Law, in every iot^ and tittle of it, should
last for ever Mat. 5.18. But M. Greenwood says, not only that some jot or
title of it is abolished, but also that many letters, yea words of it are
abolished: the Law of the 4th Comm. had not one hundredth words in it, and be
has here rejected above Four score of them: is that a contrite spirit, that
trembles at Gods word Isai. 66.2. which rejects his word?

2. The latter part of the Comm. naming the Seventh day, has as good right
to be Moral as the former part naming the Sabbath day; for, like as the Lords
day, and Sunday, be two names, both notifying one and the same day, to wit,
our present Sabbath day; so are Sabbath day, and Seventh day, two other
names, both not^fying the Saturday; and therefore the Holy Ghost uses them
promiscuously, the one for the other: for that which in one place is named the
Sabbath day, as in Exodus 20.11. in an other is named the Seventh day, as in
Genes. 2.3, Exodus 23.12. Exodus 34.21. yea it is so in one and the same verse,
Exo, 20.11. if therefore the Sabbath day, be moral, then must the 7th day be
moral too.

3. As the other commandments, have two parts, an affirmative and a negative,
so has this 4th com. the affirmative, you have in these words, Remember the
Sabbath day, to sanctify it. The Negative, you have expressed also in these
words, The 7th day is the Sabbath etc. in it thou shall not do any work etc.
Now this man by denying these words, he denies a part, yea the Negative part
of the 4th co^. and is it not absurd to embrace the affirmative part of a
commandment, and to reject the negative part thereof? yet nothing is so
foul, but it may be said, to abolish Gods Sabbaths. Where is rest commanded
and servile labor forbidden, if not in this latter part of the com. take away
then this latter part of the Com. and you take away Gods commandment, which
forbids all servile labors on the Sabbath day: now shall the duty of rest
from labor be moral, and not that part of the Com. which expressly inioyneth
it? shall we have no Law now against working on the Sabbath day?

4. If these words, But the 7th day is the Sabbath, be not moral, but
abolished, then this absurdety follows, that we are not tied by the 4th com.
to give God a Sabbath once a week, or one in 7 days, but it is enough if God
has a Sabbath once a month, once a year, one in 7 days, or one in 700
days: for in what part of the commandment, will you find on what day in 700,
you shall keep your first Sabbath, if you abolish those words, But the 7th day
is the Sabbath etc. were it not for these words, might you not begine your
first Sabbath, at the 700th day, as well as at the 7th day?

5. If no more of the 4th com. be moral, but these words, Remember the Sabbath
day, to sanctify it; then is the commandment. Six days thou shall labor,
and do all that thou have to do, Exodus 20.9. a bolished also: now, I marvel
what offense these words are unto any, that this command. must be rased out
too? were these words typical or ceremonial at any time, that they must be
also abolished? is it Judaisme too to observe this commandment? yet further,
take away the latter part and words of the 4th com. and then 1. you abolish
the cause and grownd of the Sabbath institution, noted in these words, And
rested the 7th day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.
Exo, 20.11. Genes. 2.2.3. now it is very absurd to retain the Sabbath, and to
reject the grownd and cause of its Institution. 2. You abolish also that
Matchless example, and perswasiue president and reason, which God gave us,
taken from his own example, to move us to keep the Sabbath, Exodus 20.11.
what, is Gods example now become Jewish, and to tread in his steps Iudaifme?
may not Christians be followers of God as dear children, as well as Jews? 3.
You blot out the memory of the Creation, in remembrance of which Miracle, the
7th day Sabbath was solemnized. Exodus 31.17.

6. I allege the Testimony of M. Perkins against him: for of all the other
words in the co^. M. Perkins did judge these words to be moral, see his
Comentary on the Galatians, Chap. 4. v. 9. page 286. It may be (says he) the
first words, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it; and these words, In it
thou shall do no manner of work, are spoken of the Jews Sabbath: But the
words, six days thou shall labor etc. And, the 7th day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God, are moral, and contain a perpetual truth. And again, see M.
Perkins in his Cases of Conscience, page 106. D. upon these words for in six
days etc. where he thus writes, The second reason is taken from Gods example:
That which the Lord himself has done in person, the same must man do: But
the Lord himself rested the 7th day: Therefore man must do the same. This
reason made by God to the creature, must stand in force, till he reuerse it,
which yet he has not done. Thus M. Perkins does expressly affirm it, that this
reason annexed to the 4th commandment is still in force.

In a word, I might be infinite in alleging Authors this way: for what writer
but holds these latter words of the Com. to be still in force? as appears
in that in their Expositions on the 4th com. they understand by these words,
the 7th day is the Sabbath, one day of 7 to be meant and to be moral: but M.
Greenwod will be contrary to all Authors, rather then God shall have his
Sabbaths again.

7. If only those first words of the commandment, Remember the Sabbath day,
be moral; then is the 4th com. utterly abolished: for they allege these texts
Exodus 31.15.16. and Col. 2.16. where is mention made expressly of the Sabbath
day, for the abolishing of the Sabbath day in the 4th com. as a sign and
shadow: wherefore, since by these textes, they abolish the Remembrance of the
Sabbath day, mentioned in the beginning of the 4th commandment it must needs
follow, that those words in the begininge of the com. Remember the Sabbath day,
are abolished: and so, if no other words be moral in the 4th com. but those,
then are none at all moral, but all abolished.

Now whereas some say, all but the first words of the com. are Application: it
is more likely, that they are Explication: now they will not reject (J trust)
the Explication of the commandment. 2. to say they are application, it does
imply, that the words Sabbath day in the beginning of the commandment are
certain general words, which may be applied unto any day, and so the latter
part of the commandment should apply them to the 7th day: but their
foundation is sandy, for they cannot show where at any time, these words in the
4th commandment Sabbath day, were taken generally, or for any other day then
Saturday the 7th day. 3. Since that these words (Sabbath day) at the beginning
of the commandment, and these (the 7th day is the Sabbath) toward the end of
the commandment, are promiscuously used in Scripture, the one for the other,
as has been proved, it is absurd to suppose the one of these to be the
Application of the other 4. Since that we are commanded to sanctify the
Sabbath day Exodus 20.8. and, probibited to work on the 7th day Exodus 20.10. It
is absurd to say, that this latter is an Application of the former: is it not
rather an Addition, and that of one part of the commandment to an other? 5.
If the after parts of the commandment be but Application and belong not to
us; why then do all Divines out of these after parts of the commandment
determine, that one day in 7 is moral?

And whereas some say that all the latter words of the com. are appurtena^ces
to the com. I reply, if they be but such appurrena^ces as may safely be severed
from the com. then 1. we have no need now as those Jews had, of Gods insample
and reason mentioned in the 4th commandment Exodus 20.11. to move us to
sanctify the Sabbath day. 2. Then need we not give God a Sabbath once in 7
days, or once in 700 days etc. 3. Then do we abolish Gods express
prohibition, of doing servile works on the Sabbuth day Exodus 20.10. fourthly
then why have Divines and Expositers, affirmed that, one day of 7 is moral,
out of these words, the 7th day is the Sabbath? 5. that these words, (the 7th
day is the Sabbath) are no appurtenances, but of higher nature, I have proved
in my 5th argument in defense of the Lords Sabbaths, where I proved, that these
words are a part of the 4th com. and so cannot be severed from the
commandment as appurtenances may be.

To conclude, there is a Tradition among us, that these words (the 7th day is
the Sabbath etc. in it, thou shall do no work) is but Application, and
Appurtenances. Of this I may say, as Christ said, ye have made the
commandment of none effect by your tradition. God said, (in it, thou shall
not work) I say they, this is not to be regarded by Christianes; for it is but
Application and Appurrenance yet further whither rend all these distinctions
and euasiones whereby men would deny Gods 7th day Sabbath? and what is the reason,
that to this end, Gods Law must be thus rent and torn assunder? do not the
Authors of these things behave themselves, like men weary of Gods service, and
as if it were a burden unto them, to have so many of Gods ordinances in his
Church? and therefore they diminish the number, as if the fewer of them the
rather: it grieueth them that Gods sacred Sabbath should be moral, lest they
should be bound to sanctify it: were it not thus with them, they would not
invent such euasiones against this ordinance as they do. But they have
conceived a prejudice against it, and therefore down it must.

V.
An other evasion I meet withal, and it is this; let a man allege the 4th
commandment for the sanctification of the Sabbath day; properly so caled; and
our answer shall be this; the Sabbath day, why do we not keep the Sabbath
day? the word Sabbath, it signifies a Rest, and do we not rest on the Lords
day? why? we have the Sabbath day already, we keep it every week; so long as
we rest from our works every Lords day.

Let me show you the absurdety of this slye evasion by the like: suppose we a
commandment given for the sanctification of the Lords day, in the new
Testament, thus Remember the Lords day, to sanctify it: but the first day of
the week, is the Lords day; in it thou shall do no work etc. for on the
Lords day Christ rose from the dead, and therefore he blessed and sanctified
the Lords day. Suppose we also, one of our new Sabbatharians should allege
unto me this commandment for the observation of the Lords day, if I should
answer him thus, the Lords day, why do I not keep the Lords day? the old
Sabbath day on Saturday, it is the Lords day: for the 4th commandment says,
the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord etc. And do I not then sanctify the
Lords day when I keep the old Sabbath day on Saturday? were not this a slye
eusiaon? and yet such slye euasiones they use, as if because they can deceive
themselves, and blind the poor people, by such sleites, they could deceive God
himself too thereby: but, as in the supposed commandment for the Lords day,
it is manifest enough which day is the Lords day, as namely not Saturday, but
Sunday: for it is caled the first day of the week, which is true of Sunday
only; and it is caled the day wherein Christ rose, which is true of Sunday
only: so in the true commandment for the old Sabbath, it is plain enough to
any, but deceivers, which day the Lord meant for his Sabbath, that is, not the
Sunday or Lords day, but the Saturday: for it is caled in the commandment the
7th day, which agrees to Saturday only; and it is said in the commandment to
be the day wherein God rested at the Creation, which agrees to Saturday only.

2. May they not by the like sophistry keep the Coronation day, a fast day, or
Christmas day, when it faleth on a working day, and all by the 4th com. and in
stead of Gods Sabbath? for the word Sabbath signifies a Rest, now on eue^y of
these days, we rest from work, and do we not then keep the Lords Sabbath
think you; when we keep the Coronation day? a fast day? or Christmas day?
thus wise me^, yea and Religiouse me^ play with Gods com. as a fool would play
with an other man's nose, and yet let a man in love of Gods truth, with all
meekness and submission to them (for time was I so carried it toward them)
tell them in most friendly manner, of these erroures, and they are ready to fly
in a man's face, and to fill the world with clamoures against him, as one not
worthy to live any longer, as one morefit for the iayle then to enjoy common
liberty. These are good encouragements, are they not, to provoke one to study,
and to discover erroures, and to set men in the right way? these and worse have
been my reward hitherto.

I might be larger in confutation of this sleite, as by showing that these
words (Sabbath day) are a proper name of a day, to wit, of Saturday, and
therefore we must not rest in the bare signification of the word Sabbath, but
look how the Spirit of God uses it, and to what day he does apply it, namely
unto Saturday: for as Lords day, is a proper name for Sunday, so is Sabbath
day, a proper name for Saturday; whence it plainly appears, that they dally
and play with the word Sabbath, when they fly to its signification, neglecting
its application, and the Holy Ghostes use of the word these with other things
we might add, but enough has been said for him that will understand: if
further you desire to see of this point, I refer you to my Exposition of
these words in the 4th commandment Sabbath day: and so much for this evasion.

VI.
An other evasion is this: let a man allege Gods Com. for the 7th day Sabbath,
and one answer shall be this; The Sabbath day, or the Lords day, all is one;
for it is bur time you stand on, and time is but a circumstance, and why should
you be so strict for a circumstance? as if God regarded a time so much etc.

Because you say but a time, and but a circumstance, by way of sleiting, you
must know that this time, this circumstance, it is an ordinance of Gods, yea
one of the most ancient ordinances of God in the Church; it is a time indeed,
but it is a Sacred and Holy time: for God himself pleased to Hallow it, and
make it an Holy day, at the Creation So God blessed the 7 day, and sanstified
it, Genesis 2.3. Were it not blasphemy to but at Gods ordinances, why might not
some thus but at our Sacraments, as well as these do at Gods Sabbathes? why
may they not as well say the Sacraments, what need you be so strict for them,
they are but Signs of things etc? the water, it is but well water; the bread,
it is but Bakers bread etc? as you say, the Sabbath, why it is but a time, and
but a circumstance?

2. We must know that some circumstances be but indifferent, and others be
necessary: for example, the circumstance of time, when it is not commanded and
limited, then it is an indifferent circumstance, and then a man may but at it
by way of diminution, thus the Sacraments are to be used, but whither in the
fore noone or in the after noone, whither on the Lords day, or on an other day,
is a thing indifferent, because not Commanded. On the other side, the passover
was not only commanded to be e^ten, but also the time when, namely on the 14th
day often he month, now here this time, to do it on the 14th day, was a
necessary circumstance, not to be butted at and sleited, but to be stood for,
as for an ordinance of Gods, the omission whereof had been a sin: so it is in
this question of the Sabbath, not only these duties of rest, and religiouse
exercises, are commanded, but also the time and day is as well commanded,
Rememember the Sabbath day etc: But the 7th day is the Sabbath, in it thou
shall not work etc: here the circumstance of time is not left to man's liberty
as an indifferent thing, but is commanded; and so is a necessary thing, because
commanded, therefore we must stand for it, and be strict about it: The time and
day commanded in the 4th Comm. is like the time and day of payment specified in
a Bond; now every man accounts the day in a Bond or Bill a necessary
circumstance, and not to be sleited.

I might add hereunto an other evasion of like moment, why; say some, the time
it is but an accident etc. Well this time was a part of Gods worship, as
Divines confess, saying, the old Sabbath day, it was whilst it stood, not
only the time of Gods worship, but also a part of Gods worship: I; it is a
circumstance of like dignity with that circumstance of place, to wit, the
Temple vvhiles it stood: and therefore no more to be sleited then may a part of
Gods worship; or then might the Temple whilst it stood. Yea, it is no
accident; for it is a part, and a part of the 4th Com. for the time is as
well c^mmanded, as those other duties of rest, and Holy exercises: But
suppose it were an accident, and let it be a circumstance, and what else you
will, vvhither I pray tend all these extenuations, and diminutiones? since the
time and day, is no less commanded; then those other duties of rest, and Holy
exercises, what mean they, but this? namely that because it is a thing of the
lest moment, therefore they care not for it, therefore they sleit it and neglect
it? as if they would yield obedience to Gods greater Commandments, but none
to his lesser; to the more weighty matters, but none to the less weighty
matters: is not this to be partial in Gods Law? is this to have respect unto
all Gods Commandments? me think, a matter of the least moment that can be
d^u^sed, such as was the eating of an apple at the Creation, when it comes
attended with the broad Seal of Gods Command. annexed to it, it should be
honorably, and reverently entertained; how much more, this most ancient and
Sacred ordinance of Gods Sabbath, which is an instrument of so great good and
proffit to the Church of God, which is a part of Gods worship, and which
bringech so much glory to God: bevvare of sleiting this Sacred time; for it is
an ordinance, and a most ancient ordinance of Gods, yea and it is a part of
Gods worship.

To conclude, forasmuch as God did ever put as much difference, betwixt his
Sabbath day, and all other days in the week; as between her that is a man's
wife, and all other women: a man therefore under colorable pretenses, may as
well leave his wife, and take some other woman, as leave Gods 7th day
Sabbath, and take an other day: as well may a man dally with the 7th com. and
live in adultery, as with the 4th com. and live in Sabbath-breaking: he that
lies with an other man's wife, may as well say he keeps the law of wedloke, as
he that keeps the Lords day, say he keeps the 4th com. and so much for this
evasion.

VII.
An other evasion: let a man allege the 4th com. for the sanctification of the
Sabbath day, and this shall be one of your answers; we, are we Christians
bound to the Jews Sabbath day? no, no, the commandment for the Sabbath day
was delivered to the Jews; But the 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
in it (thou) shall do no manner of work: by (thou) here is meant the Jew,
thou Jew shall do no work in it etc.

If this be a good answer to me against Gods Sabbath, then can it not be bad,
If I pay them in their own coin. when these men press the sanctification of
the Lords day, and that from the 4th com. I answer them as they me; we, what
are we Christians bound by the 4th com, to the keeping of the Lords day? no,
no, the 4th commandment was given to the Jew: (thou) that is thou Jew etc.

2. It is true indeed, the Sabbath day was commanded to the Jew, upon Mount
Sinay, neither were any English men there that J read of; but if therefore we
English men may reject Gods Sabbath, because the Sabbath was not commanded unto
English men, but unto Jews, then by the same right may we reject not only the
Sabbath of the Jews, but also all the 10 commandments of the Jews, even the
whole moral Law; for it was all the Jews in this sense, all of it being
commanded unto the Jews. Yea we may go further, for upon the same reason, we
may reject that divine Sermon of our Savior Christ, which he preached on the
Mount Mat. 5.1. etc. and also we may reject the whole Epistle to the Hebrews,
and the Epistle of S. James; for to whom was Christ's Sermon preached, but unto
Jews? and unto whom were these two Epistles wrote, but unto Jews? there were
no English men in those quarters that ever I read on.

3. The Passover, it was first commanded unto the Jew, thou Jew etc. Exodus 12.
but for all that, the Gentiles (such of them as turned unto God) observed it
also, see Exodus 12.48. Yea albeit there was something in the Passover, which
was peculiar unto the Jew, and belonged not unto the Gentile at all, as, the
celebration of it as a token that God spared the first borne of the Isralites;
nevertheless they observed it; there can be therefore no absurdety in it, for
us to keep the Sabbath, though it had been given to the Jew only. 2. admit
the Sabbath as delivered on Mount Sinay, had been given to the Jew only, yet
forasmuch as the Sabbath is a branch of the moral Law, hence it follows,
that it was from the Creation, and so unto all people, Jew and Gentile; for
there was then no difference of Jew and Gentile. And so much for this evasion.

VIII.
An other evasion I meet with which is this, that the time indeed commanded
in the 4th com, quod ad genus attinet, is moral and perpetual: that is, that
some time or day in general, be allotted for Gods worship, is by the 4th com.
moral; but not that special day which the Jews kept: thus Chemnitius in his
Loc. Theolog. de quarto praecepto: page 56. with whom accords others of
greatest note also.

Against this distinction J conceive these things. 1. that by the same
distinction, we may still retain all those Ceremonial and anniuersary
Sabbaths in Leuit. 23. holding them all moral and in force still quoad genus,
as touching some time to be annually allotted for Gods worship, but abolished
as touching those special days: quod ad Speciem attinet: and so there shall
be no more morallity in the 4th com. then there is in those Ceremonial
commandments, which is just none at all: or else the 4th com. shall be every
white as much a Ceremonial commandment, as any of those commandments for
those yearly Sabbaths in Leuit. 23. Yea, what morallity shall there be in Gods
Sabbath, more then is still in the Tabernacle or Temple? for hence Divines
collect that some place must be assigned now, for Church assemblies, and
public worship; and they collect no more from Gods Sabbath in the 4th com. as
namely, that some time be allotted now, for Gods worship.

2. Since that the authors of this distinction, do grant, that some day in
general is by the 4th com. moral and perpetual, I will prove, that that day
must be Saturday the 7th day: my reason is, because the other Six days are
commanded in the 4th com. for the days of work and labor: Six days thou
shall labor and do all thou have to do Exodus 20. now this commandment of
Six days labor, is moral and perpetual, never yet altered: and so says M.
Perkins in his commentary on the 4th Chap. to the Galatianes v. 9, page 286.
But the words (says he) Six days thou shall labor etc: and, the 7th day is
the Sabbath of the Lord etc, are moral, and contain a perpetual truth. and
in his Cases of conscience page 106. D. thus; This reason made by God to the
creature, must stand in force till he reuerse it, which yet he has not. And
further, the Six days mentioned in the 4th com. are Sunday, Monday, Tewsday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, namely, those Six days wherein God himself
wrought at the Creation Genes. 1.5.8.13. etc. Exodus 20.11. For Saturday never
came into the number of the Six days; neither by the commandment did the
Jews observe, or rekone any other days for those Six, but these I have
mentioned, as I have proved in my exposition on these words of the 4th com.
wherefore, if one day of the 7 be moral by the 4th com. and then the former 6
of those 7 days, be ordained for work by the 4th com. then it must follow,
that that one day which is moral by the 4th com. is Saturday, the 7th day, and
the last of the number: because of all the 7 days, none is left vacant for a
Sabbath, but Saturday the 7th day; all the other days being appointed by the
4th com. for work. Hereby it appears, that this distinction is friuolouse,
saying, that some one day is moral by the 4th com. in general, but not that
particular day which God commanded, and the Jews constantly kept,

3. That this distinction is absurd, I prove it, because it ouerturneth, one of
Gods tenn moralls, to wit, the 4th com. for as for a time or day in general,
this is commanded in the 2th com. where Gods worship is enjoined: for if God
must be worshipped, then of necessity a time or a day in general one or other,
must be allotted therefore: so then, deny that special time to wit, Saturday
the 7th day, and you abolish the 4th com. utterly; and grant no more moral in
the 4th com. but a time in general, and you confound the 2th com. with the 4th
com. and make the 4th com. a needless repetition.

4. If some one day in general, be moral by the 4th com. and not determined
which day, then the Church may choose Saturday the Jewish Sabbath day again:
But they hold it Iudaisme, to keep Saturday the Jews Sabbath day; Therefore
is not some one day in general vndeterminedly, moral and enjoined by the 4th
com. or, the Church may appoint the day of Christ's Nativity Christmas day, or
the days of Christ's passion, our Fridayes, for Sabbath days by the 4th com.
since the 4th com. is holden not to determine the special day and time.

5. If some one day, or some time in general, be all that is moral in the 4th
com. then are we not tied to give God a Sabbath weekly; it may suffice if we
give God a day once a month, one in a year, or one in 7000 days: for thus
there shall be a day, and some time in general, allotted for Gods worship; and
this is an other absurdety, whereof this distinction is guilty.

6. If one day or some time in geneaall, be all that is moral in the 4th
commandment, so as the special day and time must be allotted and appointed by
the Authority of the Church; then this absurdety follows, that this sacred
ordinance of Gods sabbath, shall be partly Divine and partly humane, a mingle
mangle: for God commands (a) time and man commands (the) time. Yea, so one
ordinance of God, to wit, his Sabbath, it shall stand by virtue of two several
commandments, as if one were not enough: for it shall stand by the 4th com. as
it is (a) time, and so commanded of God; and by the 5th com. as it is (the)
time, and so commanded by the Magistrate.

7. That the absurdety of this distinct on may yet further appear, let it be
obser^ed, the old Sabbath day, which was expressly commanded in the 4th com. and
which the Jews kept, to wit, Saturday, they say that this special time and
day was abrogated as appears by Exodus 31.13. and by Colos. 2.16. and other
like textes; now they oppose these textes which speak of Sabbath days not
only unto those anniuersary Sabbath days in Leuit. 23. but also to that
weekly Sabbath day in the 4th com. Exo. 20. and hereby they hold the 7th day
Sabbath abolished: now I would feign know of them, if the word Sabbath in
Colos. 2.16, be not of as large a sense, as the word Sabbath in the 4th com. if
there be no difference, as none they can show, then if follows, that if the
Sabbath day in the 4th com. be abolished by this text Colos. 2.16. which
speaks of Sabbath days, then are all Sabbath days, and times in the 4th
commandment abolished, and that both specially and generally: for every
aniuersary Sabbath abolished by this text, is abolished both generally and
specially: so then, since they apply this text, Colos. 2.16. against the
Sabbath mentioned in the 4th com. it is a friuolouse tenet, to say the time in
the 4th com. is moral quod ad genus attinet, and to say that by the 4th co^.
some day or time in general only is moral: this cannot be, unless it be
vainly supposed, that the name Sabbath day in the 4th com. has a genus, but
the same name in Colos. 2.16. has none.

8. If only the time commanded in the 4th com. quod ad genus attinet, be
moral and perpetual, but not quod ad Speciem attinet, then this absurdety
follows, that we shall have a genus without a Species.

9. If the time in the 4th com. be moral quod ad genus attinet, then must also
the Special Sabbaths, contained in the genus, be also moral: for the genus
cannot be without its Species; and the proper Species to the genus of the 4th
com. are the weekly 7th day or Saturday Sabbaths: and thus, this distinction
will prove a good argument, for the morallity of the old Sabbath day, and so
much for this distinction.

IX.
An other evasion we meet withal, and it is this, let a man allege the 4th
com. for the Lords Sabbath, and one answer shall be to this effect, That the
Law belongs unto us Christians, but as it is the law of nature; or so far
forth as it agrees with the Law of Nationes, and light of Nature etc. now this
is an answer of great esteem; for they foresee it, that the Gentiles have not
by the light of nature, found out and observed the Saturday Sabbath, of all
other things in the moral Law.

For confutation of this, if no more could be said against it, but that the
authors thereof are partial in Gods Law. Mal. 2.9. and have not an
indifferent respect unto all Gods commandments, Psa. 119.6. this were enough:
for since we embrace Gods Law, it is shameful to profess it by haules and
pieces: and thus these do, who embracing all other things commanded in the
moral Law, do nevertheless by this distinction, reject that part thereof,
which commands Gods Sabbath.

2. If they will receive no more of the Decalogue, then agrees to the Law of
nature, then these absurdeties will follow. 1. That they must reject the
doctrine of the Trinity in unity: for this is not found in the Law of nature or
Nationes. 2. They must reject the 10th com. for S. Paul could not find lust to
be a sin, by the Laws and light of nature, but by the Law of God, I had not
(says he) known lust, except the Law had said thou shall not lust, Romans 7.7,
and they must renownce the doctrine of original sin: for the Gentiles could
not find it out by their light: so then. they may as well reject the first and
the 10th commandments as reject the Sabbath of the Lord.

3. This distinction is blaphemouse: for it quite raseth out one of the 10
moral Laws, to wit, the 4th com. for the Law of nature teaches no more, but
that some time be allotted for Gods service, not respecting that 7th day which
God hallowed at the Creation, Genes. 2.3. and expressly commanded, Exodus 20.8.
now sometime is alloted for Gods worship, on fridaies, and wednesdaies, and on
Lecture days; and all this may be, and is, without the 4th com. and thus the
4th commandment is rased out.

Yea further, some time or other for Gods worship, is necessarily implied in
the second Com. where Gods worship is enjoined: for if God must have a worship,
of necessity he must have some time alloted for it: if therefore, they will
have no more of the moral Law, then agrees to the Law of nature, they must
most wickedly, blott out Gods 4th com. as a superfluouse and needless Law: for
all that the Law of nature caleth for, it is found in the 2th com. and that
which is in the 4th com, it is besides, or more then the Law of nature
requires: thus by flying to the Law of nature, they have rejected the Law of
God.

4. If the Law of God must be ruled by the Law of nature, so as rather the Law
of nature must teach us, what is moral, and appertains to our obedience,
then the Law of God; then this blasphemy follows, that the Law of nature is a
more perfect rule for Christians to walk by, then the Law of God: and then
also these absurdeties follow. 1. That it was needless for God at the first to
commit his Law unto writing, Exodus 20.1. for the Jews had the light of nature
to direct them; and why would God give them an imperfect rule, when they had
already that which was more perfect? 2. If the Law of nature can direct us
Christians, and better too then the Law of God, then what need have we now of
the Law at all? 3. If the Law of God be not sufficient for our direction,
without the Law of nature to correct it, why are we sent by all Divines, unto
the Law of God for direction of our lives? they should add this limitation, so
says the Lord, Ex. 20.^. etc. according to the Law of nature. 4. If the Law of
nature be the supreme for direct on, let us no longer study divinity out of
the Law of God, but rather out of the writings of the Heathen.

Whither it be fiter for us to subject Gods Law, unto the Law of nature for
trial, or bring the Law of nature to be tried by the law of God, I leave it to
the consideration of all me^: to co^oclud whither the Law of God, given to his
people the Jews, is to be preferred above the Laws of nationes, let Moses
determine it, What nation (says he) is so great that has ordinances and Laws
so righteousse, as all this law, which I set before you this day, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
Did not Moses here prefer the law of God, above the laws and light of
nature? Again, He shows his word unto Iakob, his Statutes and his Judgments
unto Israel: he has not dealt sowith every Nation, neighther have they known
his Judgments, Psalm. 147.19.20. And shall this law then given to Israel, be
snibbed, pared, and cheked, by the Laws of Nationes, and light of nature? the
Prophet says, the Nations have not known Gods Judgments, that is, his Laws:
and shall they be our guides and instructers to teach us what is moral? shall
blind men judge of cullers for us? shall we to the ignorant to get knowledge?
why may we not fly to the Pope, to determine for us whither the 2d com. be
moral or not, since he is a Christian, as well as fly to the Nationes; to
tell us whither the 4th commandment be moral or not, since they be heathen,

5. It is the judgment of Divines, that the reason of the writing of the law
on Mount Sinay, was because this Law being a Law from the Creation, and the law
of nature, begane then to be obliterated and blotted out of men's minds, and
therefore God wrote it now in Tables of stone, which before was written in the
Table of men's hearts: well, and is it so that the light of nature waxed dime,
as the world waxed old, to amend which God it mercy wrote his law in the Tables
of stone, for a perpetual help of memory, and preservation from corruption,
and will we now forsake this law, and betake us to the dime light of nature
for direction? were the people of God before the giving of the Law, in danger
to forget it and corrupt it, and shall we think the Gentiles and Heathen that
know not God, have retained all the Moral Law perfectly, without forgetting
any thing therein? do we think better of the Heathen Gentiles, who have lived
since the giving of the Law, then of the people of God, who lived before the
Law? if the light of nature in the people of God, before the Law, needed a
better light, to wit, the Law of God, to direct their Law and light of nature;
can the blind light in Heathen people since the Law, give a light unto the Law?
if it cannot, why then will we rather learn what is moral by the light of
nature and laws of nationes, then by the light of lights, the Law of God?

Should we urge the practice of any thing that is vn-naturall, or which nature
abhors, then there might be some more ^uller for this distinction, but since
we urge nothing vn-naturall, nor any thing impossible, nor any thing harmefull
to a Church or State and common wealth, in this case what grownd should there
be to draw us to the Laws and light of nature? suer I am, though nature be
ignorant of the Lords Sabbath, yet enemy unto it, it cannot be: for let nature
be informed what manner a thing Gods Sabbath is, and it will embrace it: for
nature abhors to profane sacred things, of which kind the Sabbath is: and
nature approves of a day, and this day as well as any other day, for Gods
worship, and for man's refreshment in a rest from labors: why then should we
reject Gods Sabbath, because blind nature is ignorant of it? and not rather
embrace, it because if nature be but taught it, it cannot oppose it, it will
embrace it?

I find it, that this distinction is merely invented for the very nonce to
thwarte, raze down, and root out Gods ancient Sabbaths: for I find nothing
else prescribed in the moral Law, which they do reject by this dinstinction,
but only Gods Sabbaths: now as well might they reject the drinking of wine in
Lords Supper, as the Sabbath day in the 4th com. for there is the same reason;
seeing that the drinking of wine, is not natural to English men, no more then
the Sabbath is to Heathen people: for wine is not the natural fruit and
liquor of our Country, but Beer: like as they say, the 4th com. belongs unto
us but as it is the Law of nature, but not as it was given to the Jews; for so
it was Jewish; so might they say, the institution of the Lords Supper belongs
unto us English men, but as it is a law in our nature, and not as it was given
to the Jews Christ's Disciples; to drink Beer is natural to us, but to
drink wine is Jewish; for the Jews used wine at their meals, as we use Beer.

6. The Apostle Paul tells us of a Law written, and of a Law of nature; the
one written in Tables of stone, the other in the Tables of the heart; the one
given the Jews, the other to the Gentiles: As many as have sinned without the
Law, shall perish with out the Law; and as many as have sinned in the Law,
shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2.12.14. I would feign know, where the
difference lies between these two Laws, the Law of nature, and the written Law
of God, if we will embrace no more of Gods written Law, then the Gentiles
find written in their hearts: yea, and what then are we the better, for having
Gods written Law among us? 2. Inasmuch as the Apostle says, that as many
as have sinned in the Law, they must be judged by the Law, hence it follovveth,
that all we Christians who embrace the written Law, we must stand or fall to
this written Law, and must be judged by it an other day: and can we then with
safety reject this written Law, and take the unwritten Law for the rule of
our Lives? no surely, unless we could think we should live by one Law, and
be judged by an other.

7. If so much of the Law of God be Moral, as is found among the Gentiles,
then is the Ceremonial Law of Sacrifices, a Moral Law: for the Gentiles
have had their Sacrifices: thus we read, that Jupiters Priests, brought Bules
with garlands unto the gates, and would have Sacrificed unto Paul and
Barnabas Act. 14.13. Wherefore the light of nature in the Gentiles, is no
sufficient rule to distinguish Morales from Ceremoniales.

8. This distinction is Antichristian: for it is against Christ, and his Apost
es: for they ever sent the Churches unto the vvritt^n Law, never to the
unwritten Law: Mat. 1.18.19. Romans 3.31. Iam. 2.8.10, Paul says, he believed
all things which were written in the Law etc Act. 24.14: And, whatsoever
things are written a fore time, are written for our lerning Romans 15.4. and,
cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law, to do them Gal. 3.10: and, the whole Scripture is by
inspiration, to teach etc. 2. Tim. 3.26. in all which scriptures, we are sent
unto the written Laws, the Laws given to the Jews, and not unto the
unwritten Laws that were given to the Gentiles: the Holy Ghost would that
we should borrow light from the written Laws given to the people of God,
but the Authors of this distinction, will send us to the unwritten Laws,
which are found among Heathen people, and Infideles, to borrow lig^t from
them: It seems then, that we shall borrow light from darkness: Ye were once
darkness, but are now light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8.

9. If no more of the Law shall bind us, then so much as is found out by the
light of nature, then Gods word shall not bind properli^, by and of it self;
but that it must borrow strength elsewhere, as from the Law and light of nature,
or else it shall not bind, nor be a Law: this is to detract from the Dignity
and Authority of Gods word: for a Minister must not now come with Thus says
the Lord, but he must strengthen it with this, and so says the Law of nature:
he must not say only, Thou shall not steal, not commit adultery: for thus no
man is bound, until he add this, And this the Law of nature.

10. If so many of the precepts of the Law only shall be in force with us, as
are allowed of by the Law of nature, then it shall follow, that so many and
such qualified men among us, shall stand bound to the first Commandment only,
as by the Law and light of nature, did acknowledge the true God: and they are
for number a few, 3 or 4 in a Country, City, or Kingdom: and for quality
only the most learned and deepest scholars: for such only did acknowledge the
true God, among the Heathen. The reason hereof is, that if we must fetch
direction from the Heathen to know which precepts we are bound unto, then by
like reason must we fetch light from them also, to know how many persons, and
what qualified men, are bound to those precepts.

11. Whereas they say, that the 4th Com. belongs unto us no othervvi^e then
as it is the Law of nature, hereby they grant, that some time in general is
prescribed as Moral in the 4th Com. for, they all say, the Law and light of
nature, teaches, that some time in the general is to be allotted for the
worship of God: And hereby they deny, that there is any thing else commanded
in the 4th Com. as Moral, save only some time in general: now the absurdety
of this opinion, that only some time in general, is all which is Moral in
the 4th Comm. I have by sundry other arguments, confuted, in their 8th evasion,
the Section last before this, vvhither I referr my reader, for a further
confutation of this distinction, if further he desires to see it confuted. And
so much of this Atheistical, Antichristian, blasphemouse, and most absurd
distinction, wherein I have taken the more pains, because I find it stood
upon even by all, as a common and sound answer.

X.
The 10th evasion (not vvorth the naming, but that the Patrones of it put
confidence in it) is that the Sunday or Lords day may be the 7th day, as well
as the Saturday: for if you begin at Sunday for the First day of our number
then Saturday follovving will be the 7th day; but contrariwise, if you
begin at Saturday for the First day, then Sunday before it will be the 7th
day: like as if you lay down 7 counters in order, one after an other in a
right line, begin at the first counter to wards the left hand, and then the
last counter next the right hand will be the 7th; but begin at the first
counter toward the right hand, and the last counter next the left hand will
be the 7th.

I may well call this account a counter-play, or a counterfaite play: they see
the 4th Comm. so express for the 7th day, as they wring their wits hither
and thither, to make the Lords day the 7th day, but all in vain: for Saturday
only is the 7th day. The very mention of this evasion is enough to confute it:
for who ever rekoned backwards before? to rekone thus, Sunday the first, Monday
the second, Tewsday the third etc, is allowable, and all men so rekone; but to
begin at the last day, saying Saturday the first, Friday the second, Thursday
the third etc, this foppish device was never heard on before: this is worse
then Carter like, to set the Carte before the horse, to account a day for the
first, before it is or has a being: why may we not read words in the
Scripture backward, as well as re^one backwards? I dare say it, such men would
chide their children, if they should bear them rekone the days of the week
thus backvvards, but any childish toye, is answer good enough to defeat God of
his Sabbathes.

The Law was, that the passover should be eaten on the 14th day of the month,
but by this new account, they might (counting the 14th day, to be first day)
have eaten it one the first day of the month. To conclude, not only our
Church, but also the four Evangelists, call the Lords day the first day of the
week, and consequently Saturday after the 7th day: But these counterplayers,
think they may deal with the days of the week, as they do with their
counters, begin where they list: and so what God and our Church accounts for
the 7th, that these men count the first; and again, what they count the first,
these count the 7th: enough of this device, M. Yates.

XI.
to conclude, whereas they distinguish in the 4th com. between the duties of
rest and holy exercises, and the time wherein they were to be done, saying, the
duties are Moral, but the time is a ceremony and abolished: these absurdeties
this distinction is guilty of 1. that if the time, to wit, that of the 7th day
be abolished, then whenever we perform the duty of rest and holy
exercises, we may be said to keep the Sabbath day, and yield obedience to the
4th Com. as on Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and Lecture days, and common Holy
days: for on these days we rest, and do religiouse actions.

2. Not only this, but all the forementioned distinctions are guilty of these
absurdeties, 1. that they are horrible partial, in that they can find
distinctions to preserve the Moral Law against Libertines, and here will
invent distinctiones to ouerturne Gods Sabbath, which is a part of that Law.
Yea, they can defend the common Holy days of the Saints, used in our Church,
from being Popish, as some would have them, and yet will not defend that Holy
day of the Holy one of Israel, from being a ceremony and Jewish, but rather
undermine it by distinctions. 2. They are partial in Gods Law, laming and
maiming it of its Integrity and perfection. 3. They make Gods 4th Comm. a
monstre, half Moral, half Ceremonial. 4. They set open a gate to
Anabaptistry, that so Gods Church should have no Sabbathes. 5. They reject that
which was, and again may be, an help to the worship of God. 6. They make an
Holy prayer of our Church, to be a babbling with God. 7. They condemn those
most ancient the Primitive Churches, who lived next the Apostles, of erroniouse
practice. 8. They show no love to Gods Law for it self, and to his ordinances:
for if they did they would embrace as much of it, and as many of them, as
possible they could; but this they do not: for they reject what they are not
compelled to reject: God send his Laws and ordinances better friends I pray
God. These with other absurdeties formely mentioned, are these distinctions
guilty of: Thus much for confutation of their vain distinctions. And here ends
the defense of the Lords Sabbath.

SECT. V. Of the Antiquity of the Sabbath day.
TOuching the antiquity of the Sabbath, I find two opiniones; the one holding
that it was from the Creation; the other, that it was first instituted in the
wilderness, after the people of Israel came out of Egypt: how be it much I
suppose cannot be said on either sides, yet of the two, I hold the former to be
the more orthodox, and to carry the greater probability with it: you shall see
the reasones on either parts, and first for those on the contrary part.

I.
On the contrary part, they reason against the Antiquity of the Sabbath, out
of Exodus 16.23. where it is thus written. To morrow is the rest of the Holy
Sabbath unto the Lord. Hence they gather, that the Israelites were ignorant of
the Sabbath until this time, and consequently that the Sabbath was not from
the Creation: for if it had, Moses should not have needed to tell them, that it
was to morrow etc.

Hereunto I answer: the Lord teld his people from Mount Sinay, that the 7th day
was the Sabbath Exodus 20.10. Again after that, he teld them in Leuit. 23.3.
that the 7th day was the Sabbath: now will it hence follow, that because God
teld the Israelites in Leuit. 23.3. that the 7th day was the Sabbath; therefore
the Israelites were ignorant of the Sabbath before? Again, in their own text
Exodus 16.25. Moses said, eat that to day, for to day is a Sabbath unto the
Lord etc. will it hence follow, that because Moses teld the Jsraelites, that
that day present was the Lords Sabbath, therefore they knew not so much before?
the contrary is plain but two verses before: For in Exodus 16.23. Moses had
teld them over night, or the day before, that on the morrow should be the
Sabbath day.

The text therefore is not to be understood, as if Moses had informed them of the
Sabbath day, whereof they were before ignora^nt; but that he informed the^ what
they should do with their Manna on the Sabbath day, whereof they were ignorant
before: for this see the context, in v. 19. Moses had said, that no man should
leave of their Manna till the morning: now since on the 6th day, they had
gathered enough for that day and for the next day v. 22. the Rulers could not
tell what to do with this overplus: for Moses had said, they should keep none
until the next day therefore the rulers came unto Moses for counsel in this
matter v. 22 hereupon Moses informs the^ what they should do with their
overplus of Ma^n^ on the Sabbath day v. 23. saying, to morrow it being the
Sabbath day, let the overplus be laid up until then, or until the morning v.
23. so whereas in v. 19. Moses had said, they should not lay up any Manna till
the morning, he does here expound himself in v. 23. as if he had said, that
precept was but for the 6 days only, not for the Sabbath day: for this is
excepted, they might lay up Manna until the Sabbath day morning, though not
unto other mornings. Thus you see this text clered, and nothing for their
purpose.

II.
Again they reason against the Antiquity of the Sabbath from Exodus 31.13.
where the Sabbath was made a sign betwixt God and the Israelites: whence they
thus reason, that if the Sabbath had been from the Creation, it had been no
more a sign unto the Israelits then unto the Gentiles etc.

I answer, if the Sabbath had been a sign from the Creation, as it was a
Sabbath from the Creation, as this argument falsely supposes, the argument had
had more culler: it cannot be proved, that the Sabbath was made a sign from
its first institution, no more then the Rock was a sign from its first
Creation, 1. Cor. 10.4. The Sabbath became a sign but after the giving of the
Law, as we see Exodus 31.13. The sign was but aduentitiouse, and added to the
Sabbath after its institution: wherefore, the Sabbath if it had been a sign
from the Creation, then it should have been a sign as well unto Gentiles as
unto Jews: but it being made a sign among the Jews only, it might be a
sign unto Jews and none unto Gentiles: since therefore the Sabbath was not a
sign originally, as it was when it made a difference betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, this argument is of no force.

III.
Again they reason thus: If the Sabbath had been from the Creation, and so
unto all people, the Lord would have reproved the Gentiles, for profaning of
his Sabbaths, as well as the Jews: But God no where reproved the Gentiles, but
only the Jews etc.

I answer, forasmuch as the Law written in the heart begane to be obliterated
before the giving of the Law, therefore the Gentiles might be ignorant of Gods
Sabbaths, and so God in mercy might spare them, The time of this ignorance God
regarded not, says Paul Act. 17.30. The Jews having a cleerer light then the
Gentiles, they were the more obnoxious, and these the less. 2. whereas they
say, that God no where reproved the Gentiles for Sabbath breaking: how know
they this? since all things done among the Jews, were not written, much less
the things done among the Gentiles. 3. by the like absurd reaso^ing, we may
prove, that other of the moralls were not from the Creation: because God never
reproved the Gentiles, for the breach of them neither. So much for this
argument.

IIII.
Lastly they argue from Deuteronomy. 5.2.3. where Moses says, The Lord made not this
Covenant with our fathers, but with us, who are alive this day etc. Here Moses
speaking of the Covenant of the Moral Law, says, it was not made with their
forefathers, and so the Sabbath which was a part of this covenant, was not from
the Creation.

I answer 1. if these words be taken properly, then they will make as much
against the antiquity of the wholl Moral Law, as against Gods Holy Sabbath:
now it is manifest, that the Moral Law was more ancient, then the giving of
the Law on Mount Sinay: for we read of diverse parts thereof, in the book of
Genesis. 2. whereas Moses said, the Lord made this Covenant with them alive
only in Horeb v. 2. it is manifest, that it was not only made in Horeb, but
before: for we read of one branch of this covenant made at least a month
before, in the wilderness of Sin, and that was for the keeping of Gods holy,
Sabbath, as it is there caled Exodus 16.23.28. for these causes, an other sense
of the text must be given: thus therefore it may be understood, that the Lord
made not that covenant with their fathers, that is, not with them so expressly
and apparently, with such terror and such majesty, as with those alive at the
giving of the Law: like textes, requiring like expositions, see Ephesians. 6.7. Psalm.
51.16. Ierem. 31.34. Thus we see, this text makes nothing against the Sabbaths
antiquity, and these are the chief reasones, alleged by Gomarus against the
antiquity of the Sabbath, in his book de origin Sabbathi, and how weakly you
have seen.

Thus you have heard of the reasones against the Antiquity of the Sabbath, and
now we come unto the reasons for the Antiquity thereof: touching which let this
be noted, that I do not determine whither the Sabbath was instituted in
Paradise before man's fall, or instantly and immediately after man's fall: and so
I proceed.

I.
My first reason is drawn out of these words: So God blessed the 7th day, and
sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all his work, which God
created and made Genes. 2.3. after that God had created the world in 6 days,
on the 7th day, and so ever after he rested from that work: in memory whereof
God blessed the 7th day and sanctified it, that is, God consecrated the 7th
day; and by consecrating it, he instituted the 7th day above all the days in
the week for an holy day: for to sanctify and consecrate a day, to hallow a
day, and to make a day to be an Holy day, I take to be all one: Now the
question may be, whither God did sanctify this day for himself to rest in, or
for man (if not for both) I rather think for man: for, as for God, he rested
no more on the 7th day, then on the 8th, 9th, and 10th days, and so every day
after; but to man it might be otherwise, he might rest on the 7th day, and
work on the 8th, 9th and 10th days etc. yea: many holy days God has made
since the Creation, Leuit. 23. but it can no where be shown, that he made any
for himself, but always for man: yet more plainly, that God sanctified the
7th day for man's use, it shall appear by the 4th com. Exodus 20.11. where the
Lord uses a reason, to persuade us to rest on the 7th day, and it is this,
because God himself rested on the 7th day, blessed it and hallowed it: which
reason is drawn from the Sanctification of the 7th day at the Creation Genes.
2.3. as if the Lord had said, you shall rest on the 7th day: because, I blessed
it and sanctified it at the Creation, for the self same end: hereby then it
appears, that the 7th day at the Creation was sanctified with reference unto
man: yet further, it shall appear by the words of our Savior, Mark. 2.27.
saying, The Sabbath was made for man etc. it is plain then, that when God made
the Sabbath at the Creation, he made it for man: thus it appears, that the
Sabbath was from the Creation.

Hereunto some answer, that the Sabbath at the Creation, was exemplary indeed,
but not obligatory, until the 4th com. was delivered in the wilderness. But
the vanity of this distinction. shall thus appear. 1. If the law of the
Sabbath, the 4th com. did not bind until it was delivered on Mount Sinay, then
did none of the other Nine com. bind neither, until they were delivered on
Mount Sinay: unless you will say that the Law had not ever tenn commandments
in it, and that the law is not of a Copulative nature. 2. It were most strange
to suppose, that God should give an example, more then 2000 years before any
should follow it: for wherefore are examples, but for to be imitated? 3. When
our Savior said, The Sabbath was made for man, Mark. 2.27. he means not,
that it was made at the Creation for an example vselesse, but for man's use, as
to rest in it etc. 4. Can any man think it, that God should sanctify the 7th
day, and so make it an holy day, at the Creation, and then suffer it to be
profaned and polluted, for 2000 years after, until the Isralites came into
the wilderness? or, can any man think, that God should make a Sabbath day at
the Creation, for the people of the Jews only? who were not a people distinct
of nere 2000 years after, and not for the Patriarchs also, who lived before
the flood? or, can we think that the Fathers before the flood, had Sacrifices,
and no Sabbaths? that they had the worship of God, and no time allotted for it?
or can we think, that the Church of God from the Creation, had no day set
aparte, for a thankful and holy remembrance of the Creation of the world,
until they were come into the wilderness?

II.
My second reason to prove that the Sabbath was from the Creation is, because
the 4th com. must be supposed, to be as ancient, as are the other nine
commandments of the Decalogue (for the Decalogue is holden of all, to be as
ancient as the world) and so it must be, for else the Law were not of a
copulative nature; the 10 commandments were not linked together, as a chain
of many linkes: for one link, to wit, the 4th in midest of the chain should
be wanting, contrary unto Iam. 2.10. and contrary to the doctrine of all
Divines. 2. If the 4th co^. were not as ancient as the other 9 commandments,
then it must be absurdly supposed, that the Decalogue had not always 10
commandments in it, as it had Deuteronomy. 10.4. If then the 4th com. be as ancient
as are the other 9 commandments, then the Sabbath therein commanded, must be
as ancient, as is the Moral Law, which is for antiquity from the Creation.

It may be objected, that there is no mention of the Sabbath day, until the
Law was given upon Mount Sinay, Exodus 20. or at soonest in the wilderness of
Sin, Exo, 16.1.23. well, be it so, but does it follow, that because it was not
sooner mentioned, it was not therefore sooner in use? the Law against murder,
it is not mentioned at the soonest, until after the murder of Abell Genes.
4.15. but will it thereof follow, that there was no Law against murder, before
Kaine killed Habel? we know, many things there were, which were not recorded;
for else the world could not contain the books Ioh. 21.25. on the contrary,
for so much as we find, that the Sabbath was in use Exo. 16.23. before the 4th
com. was given on mount Sinay, Ex. 20.1.8. it is therefore the most likly, that
it was from the Creation: for if it had not its first original at Mount Sinay,
when can it be thought to have its beginning, but at the Creation, together with
the other commandments of the Decalogue?

III.
My third reason, that the Sabbath was from the Creation is, because we find
not the Spiritual works of the Sabbath day particularly expressed in the 4th
com. given upon Mount Sinay Exodus 20. nor yet in the mention of the same Law
before, in the wilderness of Sin, Exo. 16. which is an argument, that the
Sabbath day was in use, and the manner how to sanctify it, was well known unto
the Jews, before either of these Laws were written Exodus 20. or Exodus
16.5.23.28. otherwise, God himself would in some of these textes, have
expressed particularly unto them, after what manner, and where withal they
should sanctify this day: The same is also confirmed, by the first word of the
4th com. Remember: Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: signifying that
they knew before, and could cale it to mind again, how to Sanctify the
Sabbath day; and therefore touching this point, the Lord needed not say any
more unto them, but Remember it etc. I have often maruailed in my self, why it
should please God, so punctually and expressly to mention, the corporal
observation of the Sabbath, in resting from bodily labors, and be so silent
as it were, in the Spiritual duties of the Sabbath, which are the more
excellent: doubtless, the reason is because the Sanctification of the Sabbath
did not then begine, when the Law was given Exodus 20. or Exo. 16. but that it
was an ancient ordinance of Gods, long before in the Church, and in the memory
of all men before the giving of the Law, as were the other Morales in the
Decalogue; so as they knew how to sanctify the day, and with what duties.

I confess it, that the Lord uses the word Sanctify in the 4th com. which
does in general imply the particular means and ways of sanctifying the day,
but it does not show us how or whereby in particular, the day should be
sanctified: how know we at this day, where withal to sanctify the Sabbath day?
we rather find is by observation, how the Church of God ever did sanctify it,
then by the 4th com. as far as ever I could understand; we find the people
and Church of God, constantly sanctifying it with sacred actiones: for they had
on that day, holy conuocationes and assemblies, Leuit. 23.3. then the people
resorted unto the Prophets for instruction ij. King. 4, 23. then the Sacred
Scriptures were publiquly red, Act. 15.21. then they sung Psalms, Psalm. 92.
then the people did worship before the Lord at the gate of the Temple, Ezekiel.
46.1.3. on this day our Savior Christ, and his Apostles after him, did
constantly preach unto the people, Luke 4.16. etc. Act. 13.44. Act. 16.13. Act.
17.2. Act. 18.4. Now as we learn, what God meant by the word Sanctify in the
4th com. by the observation how Gods Church did sanctify the Sabbath day in
their practice, so no doubt, those Isralites in the wilderness, knew what God
meant by the word sanctify, by the constant practice of their ancestores before
them.

IV.
My 4th reason is drawn from the first word of the 4th com. Remember: Remember
the Sabbath day, to sanctify it etc. now in as much as God commanded those Jews
at Mount Sinay, to remember the Sabbath day, it implies that the Sabbath day
was in use before then, and that they knew it, and could cale it to mind
again: for remembrance implies the caling to mind of a thing forepast and
foreknowne.

Hereto some may thus answer, admit this word remember has relation to the
Sabbath as foreknowne, yet there may be a double relation, the one to the
Sabbath as instituted from the Creation, the other to it as commanded in the
wilderness of Sin Exodus 16. But that this word remember, has relation to a
knowledge beyond that in the wilderness of Sin, and consequently unto the
Creation, it will appear 1. By this, that God bad them remember to Sanctify
the Sabbath day, now how to sanctify the Sabbath day in a special manner, as
has been shown, they learned not by the 4th commandment Exodus 20. Nor in the
wilderness of Sin Exodus 16. and therefore this word remember had reference to
times before their being in the wilderness of Sin. 2. It is nothing probable,
that this word should have reference but unto the Israelites being in the
wilderness of Sin: for, the mention of the Sabbath in the wilderness of Sin,
was but one month before the giving of the Law, on Mount Sinay, as you may see
Exodus 16.1. Exodus 19.1. Now can it be thought, the Jsraelites were of so
brittle memories, to forget a law given them but one month before, as they
should stand in need to have the word Remember added so shortly after? is it
not by far the more likly, that this word had reference unto some long time
before, as unto the Creation, the memory whereof stod in need of a special
Memorandum, least they should forget it? yea, does not the reason annexed to
the commandment Exodus 20.11. drawn from Gods hallowing of the 7th day at the
Creation, to move the Jews to sanctify the 7th day, imply so much? as if the
Lord said, because I rested on the 7th day at the Creation, and therefore
blessed it, and sanctified it for your holy use, therefore forget it not,
though it was done long since, but Remember it, to sanctify it etc.

V.
My 5th reason: we do not only learn it from our Savior, that the Sabbath
was made for man Mark. 2.27. But also more particularly, we find that it was
made for the exercising mercy unto man, yea both to man and beast, as we read
Exodus 23.12. Deuteronomy. 5, 14. that so poor tiered servants, might by a rest then
be refreshed: hence I thus argue, if that the Sabbath was not from the
Creation, and so before the Israelits came into the wilderness, then this
absurdety shall follow; that God was not so mindful, to show mercy unto the
poor tired servants of the Patriarchs; as he was unto the servants of the
Jews in the wilderness: nor so merciful before the giving of the Law, as
after.

6.
My 6th reason for the Antiquity of the Sabbath, shall be the vnanimouse
consent of well nigh all Divines: for this purpose Doctor Bownd in his book
on the Sabbath, page 6. says, The Sabbath was from the beginning, from the
Creation: it came in with the first man, and must go out with the last man:
for confirmation hereof, he alleges sundry Authors, as Vatabl. Iunius, Peter
Martyr, Bullinger, Hospinian, Danaeus, Zanchie, and page 12. Chrysostom, Beza,
Bertram, Athanasius.

To the same effect Walaeus de S^bbatho cites sundry Authors of best note,
page 43. as Philo Judaeus lib. 3. be vita Mosis: and among Christianes
Chrysostom Hom. 10. in cap. 2. Genesis Theodoret: quaest. in Genes. Augustine ad
Casul. Epist. 86. Luther in 2. Cap. Genes. Zuinglius comment. in 20. Cap. Exodus
Calvin in 20 Cap. Exodus and in 5. Cap. Deuteronomy. Beza in 1. Cap. Apocalyp. Martyr
in 2. Cap. Genes. and in 4. praecept. Bullinger in Cap. 12. Mat. Zanchie de
operibus creationis Cap. 1. Vrsinus Catech: in 4. praecept. Gualtherus in Math.
12. Homil. 162. The institution of the Sabbath (says he) is most ancient,
neither is there any thing in all the worship of God more ancient etc. Aretius
tom. 1. loc. com. loco 30. Bertrame in libello de Politia Iudaicea cap. 2.
Mercerus in Cap. 2. Genes. Anton. Faius. Junius in 2. Genes. Pareus in 2.
Genes. Zepperus lib. 4.24. de legib. forens. Iudaeorum. Alstedius Theol.
Catecheti. Sect. 3. Cap. 6. Having quoted all these Authors, with others more,
to prove the Sabbath was from the Creation, then Walaeus concludes thus, The
same also is affirmed, almost of all other interpreters, of the Reformed
Church: neither (says he) have I ever yet seen any that has directly denied
it, vnlese some one or two of our late writers, who have been bold to question
it.

Here let me add what I find recorded by M. Aynsworth in his Annotationes on
the 92. Psalm, upon the Title of it: where he says the Chaldee paraphraseth
upon it thus, An hymn, a song which the first man Adam, said for the Sabbath
day, It seems therefore, by the judgment of Antiquity, that the Sabbath was
from the Creation, and that Adam himself sanctified it. Let these reasones and
Testimonies be put into the Scale, together with those on the contrary part,
and I believe those will not hold weight with these: and so much for the
antiquity of this sacred ordinance, the 7th day Sabbath. Now shall we suffer so
ancient an ordinance, to be causelessly and needlessly trampled under foot? who
that loves Antiquity, but should be in love with this so ancient an ordinance?
then the which, is not a more ancient ordinance now in the Church of God; or if
there be, it is not above one day older: this ordinance it is well nigh as
ancient as the world it self. So much for the Antiquity of the 7th day or
Saturday Sabbath.

CHAPT. VI.
THis Chapter contains a Dispensation, touching the present practice;
showing, that a Christian is not necessarily bound in conscience, to make a
rent from our Church in his present practice; but that he may wait, for the
fitness of season and opportunity; and the public reformation of the
Magistrate. And then it concludes, with an Exhortation, to use all possible
and lawful means, for a public and general Reformation.

A Dispensation touching the present practice.
SECT. I.
WHen I had found out by diligent study (Christian Reader) that this most
ancient ordinance of Gods Sabbath, is still in force; in the next place I gave
my self seriously to think of the practice of it; whither to fale to present
practice, or to wait some more fit season.

When I thought of a present practice, then these inconveniences presented
themselves. 1. If we fale upon the present practice, then the Magistrate will
be offended; because we make a schism and rent in the Church. 2. Our
Christian brethren will be offended; because we diuid and separate from their
fellowship: and both of these will take it the worse, when they think of our
rashness and inconsideracy, that we will forsake the practice and fellowship
of the Church, before we have given them time sufficient to consider of the
matter, as we our selves have had, whereby we should have waited for their
approbation in judgment, and reformation together with us in practice: and
hereupon may arise great diuisiones of heart, and much hartburning betwixt
brethren, who should live in amity and godly love. 3. As in the two former, we
should do that which would be evil to our brethren; so also should we do
that which would prove evil unto our selves; and that in a double respect. 1.
in regard of our bodies. 2. in respect of our souls: for the former, we live
not, as they do in some part of the world, who are at liberty to practice
what they will in matter of conscience, but we live under an established
government, where we cannot transgress the laws thereof, without peril to
our persons and goods. For the latter, if we enter upon a present practice of
the Sabbath, then we rune into this spiritual inconvenience, that we shall
pine our souls, for want of that spiritual food, which we were wont to enjoy
upon the Lords day, and which is needful upon the Sabbath day: for the laws
of our kingdom, will not permit private conue^ticles, or that a minister should
preach in private: and therefore we cannot have the benefit of an able
Ministry, to help us in the sinctification of the Sabbath, and to feed our
souls with the bread of life: these are the inconveniences which attend upon
the present practice.

But when I thought of a delay, and to wait some more fit season for the
practice, then this evil presented it self, that, by the neglect of a present
practice, we fale into sin, and transgression of the 4th commandment by
profanation of the Sabbath day; and we should be guilty thereof, until that
sit season of reformation comes: so whither soever I turned me, I saw my self
in a strait: for, the former inconveniences, would be avoided; but this
latter, of necessity must be shuned.

Whilst I was at a stand, it pleased God to cause me think of a dispensation;
the which after J had seriously considered of, I resolved, that the word of God
would bear a dispensation in this case; and so it should come to pass, that
we should shune the inconveniences on the one side, and the sin on the
other; and so we might walk on comfortablie, without offense either to God, or
to man, or injury to our selves.

Let us now therefore address our selves unto this Dispensation: touching
which, first we will handle this question in general; whither a man is bound
in conscience, to conform his practice, at all times without dispensation or
exception, to the doing of that which the word of God says must be done, and
he knows must be done, or not? 2. we will handle this question in
particular; whither the Sabbath day, may not be neglected, in a case of
necessity, for a season, until the time of reformation; by those who are
verily persuaded that it is still in force; if in case they give God for it, an
other day in the mean space, as the Lords day, by way of change. And first of
the former of these two questiones.

SECT. II.
In this section I shall prove unto you, and that by sundry justifiable
examples, that a man is not bound at all times without dispensation and
exception, to the doing of that thing, which the word of God says must be
done, and he knows must be done.

For this purpose note, that God has given us a moral Law touching wedlock,
to wit, the 7th commandment: Thou shall not commit adultery: now our Savior
says, that whosoever marries a divorced woman, commits adultery; and the
woman commits adultery also, in case she was divorced for any thing besides
her adultery Mat. 5.32. Nevertheless, for the hardness of the Jews hearts,
in a case of necessity, to avoid cruelty toward their wives, or the like Mat.
19.8. a marriage was permitted, to and with the divorced woman; as you may
read Deuteronomy. 24.2.3.4. Where the Lord by Moses, speaking of the divorced woman's
second marriage, speaks not of it by way of prohibition, but by way of a
permission: and it were strange, if the woman being an innocent party, should be
denied that remedy of marriage, for the hardness of her husbands heart, and
for his default only. Here then we see is a dispensation, in a case of
necessity.

The consideration of this, may be of use, to stopp the mouths of such as cry
out, saying, what, a dispensation from a Moral Law? if the Sabbath be a
moral, then there can be no dispensation: but lo, here they see the contrary;
the 7th commandment is a Moral, and yet there was a dispensation touching it:
for Moses permitted that for the hardness of the jews hearts, which from the
beginning was not so, and which our Savior accounted to be adultery, and so
against the 7th commandment: but we shall touch this point further by and by,
in answering to an objection.

A second instance shall be that of David: it was a law of God, that whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed Genes. 9, 6. Now David
being king, Ioab murdered two Captains 1 King. 2.5. here it was the duty of
David to have executed vengeance: for he was Gods minister to take vengeance R.
13.14. Nevertheless, David finding Ioab too strong for him, ij Sam. 3.27.39.
Omitted the execution of Ioab, and gave it in charg to his son Solomon, to
do it after his death 1 King. 2.6. Here David knew well, that it was his
office, to have put Ioab to death, and he was willing so to have done,
nevertheless, because he was but weak in his kingdom, and Ioab strong, it
might have made a commotion in his kingdom, and much hurly burly, and blood
shed, and hazard of his Crown: now in this exegency and extremity, David did
neglect to do for a season, what he knew he should have done, and would have
done most gladly, but that the times would not bear it. Thus you have seen a
dispensation in two examples.

A third instance shall be that of the omission of circumcision: you know it
was a Law, that every man child of 8 days old, should be circumcised Genes.
17.12. Now though the Israelites knew this, yet they circumcised not their
children, for 40. years together, even all the time they were in the
wilderness, as you may read Josh. 5.5. So here again was a dispensation for
a season, in a case of necessity.

A fourth instance shall be that of David's eating the Shewbread: David knew
that the Shewbread was to be eaten by the priest only; nevertheless, David in
a case of present hunger, did eat the Shewbread, contrary to the Law, and
Christ does justify him in it Mat. 12.3.4. so here again is a dispensation in
a case of necessity.

A fifth example, shall be that of the Disciples plucking and rubbing ears of
corn, on the Sabbath day, which was not lawful to be done on the Sabbath day;
Nevertheless, in a case of present necessity, they did pluck and also rubb
the ears of corn, which was else unlawful to be done, and Christ iustisied
it: so here again, you see a dispensation in some case. By all which instances
it is more then manifest, that exceptiones and dispensationes from something
commanded, may be, in some cases.

These instances do put an answer into our mouths, against them who cry out
saying, since you know it, and are persuaded, that Saturday is the Sabbath, why
keep you it not etc? I answer, David knew it to be his office, to slay the
murderer: and David knew, that he should not eat Shewbread: now tell me why
David, and the rest, did not do what they knew. And so much for the former
question, and now I come unto the latter.

SECT. III.
In this Section I shall come more particularly to the point in hand: and here
I shall show you, that in a case of necessity, such as know that the Sabbath
day is still in force, may neglect it for a season, until the time of
reformation, so be they give God for it, an other day in the mean while, by
way of a change. And this J shall prove unto you by two arguments. The former
is this, that the Sabbath day may be changed in a case of necessity: because it
may be neglected or profaned in a case of necessity. And thus I frame it.

ARGVM. J.
That which may be neglected in a case of necessity, that may be changed in a
case of necessity:

But the Sabbath day, may be neglected in a case of necessity.

Therefore the Sabbath day may be changed, in a case of necessity.

By changing the Sabbath; day; I mean nothing else but this, that we give God
the Sunday in stead of the Saturday for a season; the 8 day for the 7th; or to
keep the Lords day with our Church for a season, in the room of the Sabbath
day: like as if a King should prorogue his Coronation day, and by reason of the
plague or other necessity, should keep its solemnity, on an other day then the
accustomed day.

So I come to the proof of the Major or first proposition; but I may spare
labor, it is clear enough of it self, none I think will deny it: for it is
a less evil, or loss to God (if I may so speak) to chang a day with him,
then to take a day from him; or neglect a day; like as it is a less loss to a
man, to chang a shilling with him, in a case of necessity, though it be a light
and clypt shilling, for an heavy and waity one, then it is to take a shilling
from him, or then it is to neglect to pay him a shilling, which I owe him. But
happily some may object, that there may be no changings in Gods ordinances.
Whereunto I answer, that the contrary is true; for whereas the Passover was to
be in the first month of the year, Leuir. 23.5. The godly king Hezekiah
changed the day of the Passover, from the first month of the year, unto the
second month of the year, in a case of necessity, as you may read ij Chron.
30.2.3. Wherefore, there may be some changes in Gods worship in some case, as
in a case of necessity. And so much for the Major.

I come next to the proof of the Minor, or second proposition; and here I am to
prove, that the Sabbath day, may be neglected or profaned, in a case of
necessity: and this I prove. 1. Because other duties may be neglected and
omitted in a case of necessity the neglect whereof were sins, as well as the
neglect of he Sabbath day, if omitted out of the case of necessity: for
example, Moses might neglect to punish some kind of adultery: Diuid might omit
to execute Ioab for his murder: The Israelites might neglect circumcision for
a season: David might eat the shewbread in a time of hunger: all which we have
enlarged in the Section before this. Now the omission or neglect of all these
were sins, out of the case of necessity, as well as the neglect of the
Sabbath day; and therefore there is the like reason of all.

2. I prove it by this, that our Savior Christ, did allow his Disciples and
others, to neglect and profare the Sabbath day in his time, in a case of
necessity: As for his Disciples, when they profaned the Sabbath day, by
plucking ears of corn, and by rubbing of them, it being done in a case of
present hunger, our Savior iustisied them in it Mat. 12.1.2.3. etc. As for
others, our Savior justified them, when they profaned the Sabbath day, by
moyling and toyling, to lift a beast out of a pit, on the Sabbath day, it being
a case of necessity Mat. 12.11.

3dly I prove it by the Testimony of all Divines, who are of judgment, that a
man may profane the whole Sabbath day, by hard and painful labors, if it be
in a case of necessity, as to quench an house on fire, on the Sabbath day: or
to fly before the enemy, he pursuing us, to save our life: or to resist the
invasion of a foreign enemy on the Sabbath day.

4thly I prove it by this, that The Sabbath was made fur man, and not man for
the Sabbath, as our Savior says Mark. 2.27. Now if that when man is in an
exegency and extremity, he must rather observe the Sabbath, then provide for
his own safety, then the Sabbath should not be made for man; but contrarily,
man should be made for the Sabbath: and this Christ does expressly deny, saying,
that man was not made for the Sabbath: wherefore, of the two, if the case be at
such an hard point, that the one must be neglected, and cannot be avoided, then
such is the mercy of God to man, as his ordinance of the Sabbath shall give way
(I trust none will beso profane, and vngratiously ungrateful, as to abuse this
mercy of God, making necessity, when he needs not) Now that I do not abuse
these words of our blessed Savior, shall appear, if you look but into the
context Mark. 2.23.27. Where our Savior, defends his Disciples, plucking and
rubing the ears of corn on the Sabbath, to satisfy their hunger, by showing
one use and end of the Sabbath day, namely, that it was made for man's benefi^;
and as forth good of his soul, so also even for the good of his body, in so
much as, if in case he were pinched with present hunger, and destitute of other
helps, then he might work on the Sabbath day, to relieve his pr^sent
necessity; for so did the Disciples here, by plucking and by rubing ears of
corn.

5thly, I prove that the Sabbath may be neglected and profaned in a case of
necessity, and that by all men who are subjects, and under the jurisdiction of
Magistrates: now my reason is, because servants may profane the Sabbath in a
case of necessity: Thus I argue, If servants may profane the Sabbath, then
subjects may do so too: For there is one and the same reason, between the
subject and the Magistrate, that there is between the subject and the
Magistrate, that there is between the servant and master. But servants in a
case of necessity, may profane the Sabbath. As namely in this case of
necessity, when their masters command them to work on the Sabbath; then there
is a necessity upon them: for God commands servants to obey their Masters
Col. 3.22. Therefore subjects may in a case of necessity profane the Sabbath
also.

If any shall ask if there be like necessity for subjects to profane the
Sabbath, as there is for servants, when commanded by their Masters, I answer
there is, for. 1. our Magistrates command us to follow the works of our
calings on Saturday, which is the Sabbath day. And 2. Gods word commands
subjects to yield obedience to Magistrates Romans 13.1.

But against the Minor, the 4th commandment will be objected, which forbids
servants to work on the Sabbath day, and we must obey God rather then man. I
answer by a denial; the 4th commandment does no where forbid a servant to
work on the Sabbath, when he is commanded by his Master to work, but only
when he may forbear work by his Masters allowance. For the clearing of this,
note, that as the 5th com. is directed unto inferioures, so the 4th
commandment is directed unto Superioures; the commandment says not, Thou
servant shall do no work; as spoken to the servant: but, Thy servant shall
do no work, as spoken of the servant, but to the Master; binding the Master
absolutely and expressly, and the servant consequently and in this respect, if he
may have his Masters allowance: the 5th commandment speaks of Superioures,
but lays the charge expressly on Inferioures; so the 4th commandment speaks
of Servants, but lays the charge on Masters expressly: Honor thy father, this
is spoken to the Son; so, Thy servant shall do no work, in propriety of
speech, is spoken to the Master: it is the Servant that is spoken of, it is the
Master that is spoken to. Further I answer, that as no clause in the
commandment, so no conuincing argument can be fetched out of the commandment,
to prove that a servant is absolutely bound to rest on the Sabbath, his Master
commanding him the contrary.

2. I answer, in Deuteronomy. 5.14.5. There is a reason added to the 4th commandment,
persuading to the observation of it: and it perswads Masters to give rest unto
their servants on the Sabbath day. That thy man servant, and thy maid may rest
as well as thou etc. Which shows, that the 4th commandment foregoing was
directed unto Masters not unto servants; and there fore bound the Masters
absolutely and expressly, but not the servants: for this reason cannot be
applied unto servants. 3. considering that the servant is not at liberty, nor
has the power of himself, but is at his masters command, common reason
inclines us to expound the commandment rather as given to, and binding the
Master, then the Servant: this point you may see learnedly observed and
handled, by M. Brerewood on the Sabbath, against M. Bysield.

And so you see, that the Sabbath day may be profaned, in a case of true
necessity. And so much for my former argument, whereby it appears, that in
case of necessity, the Sabbath day may be changed, and so the Lords day keptin
room of the Sabbath day, till the time of reformation.

My second argument to prove that the Sabbath day may be changed for a season
is; because the Passover day might be changed for a season; and thus I frame
it.

ARGVM. II.
Jf the Passover day might be neglected, and an other day kept in its room
for a season, in a case of necessity; Then the Sabbath day also may be
neglected, and an other day kept in its room for a season, in a case of
necessity.

But the Passcouer day might be neglected, and an other day kept in its room
for a season, in a case of necessity.

Therefore the Sabbath day also may be neglected, and an other day kept in its
room for a season, in a case of necessity.

I prove the first proposition, or the consequence to be good, because there is
like reason of both, that is, of the Passover day and of the Sabbath day: and
this I make appear in these particulars. 1. As the Sabbath day was commanded
by God Exodus 20.8. So also, the Passover day was commanded by God Exodus
12.2.6. 2dly, As on the Sabbath day, there must be holy Assemblies; and no
servile work door, Leuit. 23.3. So also, on the Passover day or Passover
Sabbath day, there was to be holy Assemblies; and no servile work done Leuit.
23.8. 3dly, as the breach of the Sabbath day, was to be punished with death
Exodus 31.15. So also, the breach of the Passover day, was to be Punished with
death Numb. 9.13. Thus you see how like the Passover day, was to the Sabbath
day: for 1. they have both the same Author, God. 2. They were to be sanctified
with holy assemblies, and rest from labors both alike. 3. They were to be
strictly kept, the one as well as the other; for there was one and the same
punishment, to be inflicted upon the transgressoures of both, alike. Now they
being thus alike both, what hinders, that there should not be like reason of
them both? it was a sin to trangresse the one, and it was a sin to
transgress the other also: now if it were no sin then, to neglect the one,
and make a chang in a case of necessity; why should it be a sin, to neglect
the other, and make a chang in a case of necessity? why should there not be
like reason, of things that were so like?

But hereunto happly some will object, that the Passover day was a Ceremony,
but the Sabbath day you hold to be a Moral; and therefore there is not like
reason. Whereunto I answer, that this is a friuolouse objection, for 1. God
has as well permitted a dispensation in morales, as in ceremoniales: for God by
Moses permitted a dispensation against the 7th commandment, in some kind, and
that too upon worse conditiones then is our present case of necessity, as shall
appear: for Divorce was permitted for the hardness of the Jews hearts: but
our dispensation shall appear to be a better case and condition then that, to
be a more warrantable necessity, as you shall see when we come to it by and by.
2. I answer, be it that because the one was a Ceremony, and the other a Moral,
that therefore God had less regard unto the Ceremony, then he has unto the
Moral; yet this makes but a difference betwixt them of less and more; the
one being less regarded, the other more regarded: Now this difference hinders
not the argument, Magis and minus non variat speciem, as Logiceans speak, a
piece of silver of nine pence, is like a piece of silver of twelve pence, they
being both silver, though the one be a lesser piece, and the other a greater
piece: now if it be permitted unto A Debtor, to exchang with his Creditour,
and give him six pence in stead of his nine pence, in a case of necessity;
then by like reason and proportion, every man will judge, that it is permitted
unto him, in like case, to give him a nine penny piece, for a piece of twelve
pence: but especially, if the necessity for the greater chang, does exceed the
necessity for the lesser chang, and this is our case: for the chang of the
Ceremonial Passover day which is the lesser, might be upon this one
necessity, if a man were in a far journey: but our chang of the Sabbath day
which is the greater, is upon a necessity consisting of 4 branches, as you
shall see by and by, which as they exceed the other in number, so also in
weight, if they be compared together. By which demonstration, you see this
objection though common, yet friuolouse. And thus much for proof of the
consequence or first proposition.

I come now to prove the Minor or second proposition: to wit, That the
passover day might be neglected, and an other day kept in its room for a
season, in a case of necessity: for proof of this see Numb. 9.5. where the
Isralites kept the passover in the 14th day of the first month; according to
the time appointed of God, at its first institution, as you may see v. 1,2. and
Leuit. 23.5. and Exodus 12.2.6. now it so fell out, that some men in the
Congregation, were defiled by touching of a dead corpse; and so they were
debarred from keeping the passover at that time with the Congregation.
Hereupon they came before Moses and Aaron for counsel; and Moses not knowing
what to do in this case, he repaireth to God for direction; whereupon the Lord
makes him this answer, If any among you shall be unclean by reason of a dead
body, or be in a long journey, he shall keep the passover in the 14th day of
second month etc. Numb.9.6.7.8.9.10.11. So hereby you see, that howbeit the
passover was by its prime institution, to be kept in the 14th day of the first
month; yet in a case of necessity, the time was changed, from the first
month, unto the second month; and so the days and times commanded in the
Law, at the prime institution, were neglected and profaned by those which had
this necessity upon them: the cases in which the passover time was changed,
were. 1. If a man had touched a dead corpse. 2. If a man were from home, in a
far journey, and thus much for proof of the Minor.

Nevertheless to this argument, some do answer thus, that it is true indeed,
that there was a dispensation for the passover day, but it was given by God
himself, but so is not your dispensation for the Sabbath day; for there is no
exception that can be shown for the chang of the Sabbath day in the
Scriptures, as their is for the passover day. Hereunto I reply, that this
answer is very absurd, for it denies all argumentation, and collectiones from
the Scriptures, for they will not grant the question, unless it be proved by
an express text of Scripture, in so many words; for they will have an express
dispensation in so many words, shown for a chang of the Sabbath day in the
Scriptures, as well as there is a dispensation to be shown for the passeouers
chang in the Scriptures. Furthermore, if they will not gra^ that the Sabbath
day may be changed now, because the passover day might be changed in old time,
how will they do to prove, that we may baptize infants now, because they did
circumcise infints in old time? for there is no express word of God for either;
they must both be inferred by collection from other Scriptures, yet further,
wherefore is it, that S. Paul sends us to the things written in the old
Testament, if we may not collect and learn from them, to do the like in like
cases? Whatsoever things are written a fore time are written for our learning.
Romans 15.4. After the Law for the passover was given, there fell out
extraordinary occurrences, in which Moses could not tell what to do, wherefore
he had recourse unto God for direction, Numb. 9.10.11. So, after the Law for
the Sabbath was given, there is fallen out an extraordenary occurrence, the
Sabbath has been profaned now for 1000 or 1200 years, now how to work a
reformation hereof we are at our wites ends, and we cannot now a days have
such recourse unto God, as Moses had for direction; wherefore now we must to
the Law and to the Testimonies, and borrow light from former presidents.

Finally, I shall prove it unto you, that we may extend this dispensation of
the passover day, further then it is expressed by Gods dispensation in Numb.
9.10.11. so be we do it by like reason: for this end note, that the Lord gave
leave to chang the the passover in these two cases, 1. If a man had touched a
dead corpse. 2. If a man were in a far journey: but the good King Hezekiah
keeping the passover long after, he fell into other extremities and straites;
and he could not keep the passover on the 14th day of the first month, but
profaned it, and made a chang, unto the 14 day of the second month, and that
upon these two occations. 1. Because he had not Priests enough sanctified, or
because the Priests were not sufficiently sanctified. 2. Because the people
were not come up together to Jerusalem, or had not assembled themselves at
Jerusalem, as you may read ij. Chron. 30.2.3. Now these two extremities, and
reasons of Hezekiah his chang, were not the very same, which God specified in
Numb. 9.10.11. but yet they were such as might be collected by like reason:
whereby it appears, that we may go beyond the letter of the text, so be we
hold closse to the like reason: and this I have done, in fetching my argument
from the passover day to the Sabbath day; for I have held me to like reason of
them both, as you have seen.

And so much for proof, that the Lords day may be kept for the Sabbath day by
way of A change, for a season, in a case of necessity. But yet it remains,
that I prove now, that our case in changing the Sabbath day for the Lords day,
is a case of necessity; and this being done, all is firm; for this therefore,
see the next section.

SECT. IV.
In this section I shall prove unto you, that there is a true necessity upon
us, to neglect the Sabbath day for a season, and to keep the Lords day with
our Church for it, and in room of it.

This necessity I shall declare unto you. 1. In respect of our bodies. 2. In
respect of our souls. 3. In respect of our brethren. and first of the first of
these touching our bodies: and in this respect, I shall make necessity appear
two ways; the former is this; that if we keep the 7th day or Saturday
Sabbath, then we shall have but 5 days in a week to provide for our bodies,
and to compass the works of our caleings in: for, when we have kept the
Saturday Sabbath, the Magistrate will compel us, by the laws of the Realm,
to keep the Sunday also: and so we shall have but 5 days in every week, or
in every 7 days, to perform the works of our caleings in: now it is of
necessity, that we should have 6 days in every week ordenarily, or in every 7
days, to do the works of our caleings in: because, else God would not have
allowed man 6 days to work in for himself, and have taken but one for his
worship, as he did in the 4th com. Exodus 20.8. now since there is a necessity,
that we have 6 days ordinarily in every week, to follow our caleings in, it
is of necessity, that we neglect the Sabbath day, and work in it, for a
season; unless the Magistrate will dispense with his Law, touching the Lords
day; or until it shall please God, to incline the heart of the Magistrate, to
proclaim a reformation, that so the Sabbath day may be kept: for unless the
Magistrate does one of these two, we can have but 5 days in every week for
our caleings, and so much for the former necessity in regard of our bodies.

I come now unto the other necessity, in respect of our bodies, which is this,
if we keep the 7th day Sabbath, then we offend the Magistrate, and transgress
the Laws of the Realm; and hereupon will follow imprisonment of body, and
consequently poverty: for when a man is imprisoned, he must neglect his
caleing, and means of maintenance; and so he shall be brought to a morsel of
bread, and he, his wife, and children which depend upon him, shall come to
want of things necessary: now who so shall incur these evils, by keeping of
the Sabbath day, to him there is a necessity to neglect the Sabbath day, namely
the necessity of want, poverty, and hunger.

Now least any man should marvel, that I will plead this kind of necessity of
all others, therefore I will strengthen it, and that by the allowance of our
Savior Christ, and practice of his Disciples: for you read, Mat. 12.1.2. How
Christ's Disciples did neglect the Sabbath day, and fell to plucking ears of
corn, and to rubbing them in their hands, Luke 6.1. which works they did on
the Sabbath day, to prevent a little hunger; and Christ justified this action.
Now if hunger, was a case of necessity in Christ's Disciples, why should not
hunger be a case of necessity in us also? and if they might work on the
Sabbath day, to prevent hunger; why may not we do so too, to prevent hunger,
and imprisonment also? yea to prevent penury, not in himself alone, but in his
whole family, wife and children? so our necessity is greater then was that of
Christ's Disciples.

The consideration of this may be useful, to satisfy the obiectiones that rise
in the minds of some, saying, it seems then you have more mind of your belly
then of God; of your safety then of Gods Sabbaths: but the vanity of this
objection shall appear by this, that the very same objection bears as
strongly, against Christ's Disciples, as against us: for may not such objections
rise in your minds also, against Christ's Disciples? saying, it seems you
mind your bellies more then your God, and you fear a little hunger more then
the breach of Gods Sabbaths. thus you see the weakness of this objection, and
so much for the necessity in regard of our bodies.

I come now unto the necessity in regard of our souls; and here I shall make
it appear, that to keep the Sabbath day, as things stand yet, it will pine
our souls. And this I shall show in two respects; the former is this; you
know the Sabbath day, ought to be solemnised with Assemblies Leuit. 23.3. Now
the benefit of company and fellowship, in sanctification of Gods Sabbaths, is
of great use, to kindle zeal and forwardness in our fr^zen hearts, like as
coals laid together burn more firuently, I rejoiced (says the Prophet David)
when they said to me, we will go into the house of the Lord Ps. 122.1. Now
such as are convinced of this truth, to believe that the lords Sabbaths are
still in force, are few in number, as one in an house, two in a Town, 3 or 4
in a City, like the clusters that grow nearest the sun, here one and there
one ripe before the rest; now if these thus dispersed should keep the Lords
Sabbath continually, solitarily and alone, it is much to be feared, that their
zeal would wax could, like burning coals, when scattered upon the hearth, and
put asunder; and so their souls should languish and pine away as it were.

The other respect, whereby it will appear, that there is necessity to chang
the Sabbath day, lest the soul pine, is this; you know that to the
sanctification of the Sabbath day, is required the help of the Minister Luke
4.16. Act. 15.21. To go before the people in the duty of prayer to God; and
to open the Scriptures, feeding them with the bread of life, dividing the word
of God a right: now because the laws of our kingdom, will not permit private
Conuenticles; and because there cannot be a Minister in every family; therefore
if we keep the Lords Sabbaths as things stand now, then we must keep them
without that ordinance of Gods Ministry; and so our souls should languish and
pine away, for lack of the daily bread, the heavenly food of our souls; for
we should be deprived of our Sabbath days bread, and want the Sabbath days
meals: and this is an other case of necessity, whereinto we fale if we keep
the Sabbath day; and for the avoiding whereof, we may make a chang of the
Sabbath day, into the Lords day for a season.

Hence it is, that obedience to the 4th commandment requires an assent and
fellowship of others, which is not required in the other commandments: for a
man may yield obedience to every other commandment singlie and alone by
himself, though no man else will join with him; but for this 4th commandment
it cannot be observed, as it should be without the fellowship and society of
others joining with him.

Now a word or two, for the justifying of these two necessities touching the
soul, to be true necessities, and such as may warrant a chang of a day
appointed by God: for the former, namely Assemblies: the want of assemblies,
was one cause of the change of the Passover day, by Hezekiah, as you may read
ij Chro. 30.3. For the latter, namely, Ministers: the want of Ministers or
Priests, was an other cause of the passover dais chang, by Hezekiah, as you
may read in the forealleaged place, And the King and his Princes, And all the
congregation had taken counsel in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in the
second month: for they could not keep it at this time, because there were not
Priests enough sanctified, neither was the people gathered to Jerusalem. 2
Chro. 30.2.3. Where you see, the want of the peoples assembly; and the want of
Priests; were the ij causes, of the chang of this day from the first month, to
the second month.

I confess our new Translatores read it thus, because the Prists had not
sanctified themselves sufficiently: But this comes still to the same: for our
Ministers have not yet sanctified their understandings, from a profane opinion
of the Lords Sabbaths; and therefore we cannot have their help, to the
sanctification of the Sabbath day: so it is all one, whither there be not
Ministers enough; or whither those that be, are not willing to yield us their
help; for both ways we shall want the help of the Ministry, if we keep the
Sabbath day: and, if the Priests insufficiency, were cause enough to chang the
day; much more then, when Priests and Ministers are both insufficient, and also
unwilling, so as they cannot be persuaded to lend us their help: and thus you
see, that the want of people, and the want of Ministers, are a sufficient cause
to make a chang of a day, and that the old day should be profaned, whilst an
other is kept in its room and stead.

If any shall ask me now, why I keep not the Sabbath day, since it is my
judgment that it ought to be kept: my answer shall be. 1. That a man is not
bound in all cases, and at all times, to put in practice what he knows should
be done; as I have shown by the examples of Moses, touching diuorcement: of
Israelites omitting Circumcision: of David's spareing Ioab: and eating
Shewbread: and the rest. And further, and more particularly, I keep it not;
because as I have proved, by two good arguments, that an other day may be kept
for it, for a season. 2. My answer shall be, that I keep not the Sabbath day,
because I cannot keep it, necessity lying upon me. Now I cannot keep it. 1.
Because so I should have but 5 days in a week, to follow my caleing. 2.
Because so I should impouerish my self and my family, which is a justifiable
plea, in this case of the Sabbath. 3. Because I cannot have assemblies on the
Sabbath, to join with in holy Sabbath exercises; and specially because,
Ministers will not preach to us upon the Saturday or Sabbath: for how should we
keep the Saturday Sabbath, when Ministers will not come to Church, and preach
unto us on the Saturday? and my 4th reason and necessity is, that as I am a
Subject, so J stand bound to obey my gouerners, so long as they command me
nothing, which Gods word has forbidden me: now they command me, to follow my
caling, on the Saturday Sabbath; and the 4th com. does not forbid me the same,
I being considered as a Subject and servant unto my superioures.

But hereunto some will be ready to say, why if you can not keep the Sabbath
day as you would, why keep it then as you may, without assemblies, and without
a Minister, for God requires no more of a man then he can do etc. Hereunto I
shall give none other answer, then this, that the same objection, lays as
well against the practice of the godly King Hezekiah, as against me, and
hereby the absurdety thereof shall appear; why might not you as well object to
Hezekiah when he put off the passover day, from the 14th day of the first
month, to the 14th day of the second month, upon my reasons, saying, why did
not Hezekiah, keepethe passover, upon the 14th day of the first month, which
is the right day, and the day established at the institution of the passover,
since it was his judgment that it ought to be then kept? what and if he could
no have the assemblies of the people, as he would; why yet he might have kept
the passover with that company he had in Jerusalem, as himself, and his
Princes, and Courtieres, and Citizens of Jerusalem; what needed he to profane
the first passover day, and to chang it unto an other day, for want of the
residue of the people? and what and if he had not priests enough already
sanctified? or not sufficiently sanctified, why yet he might have kept the
passover as he could with those priests he had; or with the priests such as
they were whither sufficienly or insufficiently sanctified? for when Hezekiah
had tarried till the second day, yet the^ many in the Congregation were not
sanctified as they should be, and therefore he prayed saying, The good Lord be
merciful toward him that prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God,
though he be not cleansed, according to the purification of the Sanctuary, ij
Chro. 30.18.19. And why could not Hezekiah have kept the passover on the first
day, with people, and Priests, insufficiently sanctified, as well as on the
second day? yet for all these obiectiones you see Hezekiah, in hope to have
things in better order, and in hope of a reformation, against the second day,
therefore he neglected and profaned the first day, and made a chang of the day.

Others will be ready to object thus, why your souls need not pine; for you
may have supply the next day, by keeping Sunday or Lords day also, and herein
you shall have assemblies, and Ministers both. Hereunto I answer. 1. That is
more then ever God required, that we should keep two Sabbaths in one week:
and also it is more then the necessity of our caleings will permit. 2. Suppose
we should keep the Lords day also, yet so doing we should want our daily
bread, that is, that spiritual food which is appointed of God for that day;
we should want our Sabbath days meals, and so all that day long, our souls
should lack its refreshments, and all the Sabbath day long our souls should
be pineing and languishing: wherefore, the supplies made upon the Lords day,
will no more help for the Sabbath day when it is past, then a meals meat on
Sunday will comfort a man on Saturday, and so much for this objection; there
are other objections also, but I will handle them together in the next Section:
and thus much shall suffice for the proof of this Dispensation.

Having proved the Dispensation, here let me add a reason or two, showing why
we should the more willingly embrace it: my first reason is because it tends
much unto peace and concord, and to contain the members of our Church in
unity: I shall not need to show, what discord might arise, if a rent in
practice, should be made from our Church: neither shall I need to show, what a
benefit peace in the Church is; every man knows it, every man cales for it:
well then, if it be so good to preserve peace in the Church, let all that are
lovers of this peace, embrace all conditiones and helps which tend unto peace,
if in case they be such as may possibly be admitted of: I grante it, that for
the present, we are few in number who are of this contrary judgment; but
seeing the case is so plain, I verily believe it, that in Gods good time
multituds will be of the same judgment also, and then the rent would be
grieuouse to be borne: now it is fit, a wise man should have his eyes in his
head, and foresee, and prevent an evil: let all that love therefore the peace
of the Church, receive and embrace this Dispensation, which tends to the
peace thereof, if possibly it may be received and embraced; let it have the
most charitable and favorable constructiones that may be, that so it may
stand, and so the peace of the Church be maintained and preserved; where things
may be taken in a better sense, and in a worser sense, therelet the better be
chosen. But, woe is me, (as the Prophet David speaks) my soul has too long
dwelt with them which hate peace, I seek peace, and when I speak thereof,
they are bent to war. Ps. 120.5.6.7. Never did I suffer and undergo such
reproaches, and such tauntes, as since I have delivered this Dispensation: my
good name has been torn into a thousand pieces; not only in the Churches and
public places, by M. Yates, and M. Chapel, charging me with Hypocrisy and
likening me unto the false Apostles, and the like: But also, what Table, or
private meeting is there almost, wherein my good name has not been made
odiouse? thus whilst I have sought peace, with the Church, and with them, they
have raised up civil wars against me: now that they might the better make
way for my downefale, they have been so far from taking things in the better
part, as he is accounted for the most excellent, that can use the least
charity; and he is most applauded, that can wrest my Dispensation to the worst.
And so much for my first reason.

An other reason let me give you, whereby you may be induced, to construe my
dispe^satio^ in the better sense and not in the worse; and to embrace it, if
possible it may be; and it is this; that by this Dispensation, I do tread in
the footestepes of the Apostles themselves: for so we ought: Be ye followers
of me, says S. Paul 1 Cor. 11.1. For this purpose, note how the Apostles, had
a great reformation to work, to wit, the abrogation of the Ceremonies and the
Ceremonial Law, from among the Jews: Now how behaved they themselves, in this
matter? did they gallop forth post-hast unto a reformation? did they instantly
ruinate and abolish the use of Ceremonies, among believing Jews? no such
matter; but contrariwise, they went thereunto in a soft walk, according as
the times, and conditiones of their people would bear it: and for the present,
they retained all the Ceremonies still in the Church; yea, and they the
Apostles, used these ceremonies, together with the people, as you may read
Act. 21.20.21.22.23.24. And they waited for season and opportunity to throw
down Ceremonies afterward; and thus by their wisdom they wone many of the
Jews to the faith, which otherwise by a rash and violent course they might
have lost. Just so (if this Dispensation be embraced) shall we imitate the
Apostles, in this reformation touching the Sabbath: The Lords day has been in
use a long time, and now in these days it is in great honor: so also, the
Lords Sabbath, has been a long time out of use, and at this time in dishonor:
and so great is the love of most men unto the one, and hatred of the other, as
cannot easily be expressed: now can it be thought, that the current and stream
of the times can be turned in an instant? what, before they have heard on it?
for many have not so much as heard of this question: and many that have heard
on it, have not read it; and such as have read it, it is fit they should take
a time to deliberate, and to advise about it: now what shall we do the mean
while? shall we fale to a present practice, and so rend our selves from our
brethren? is this the way to wine them, or to exasperate them rather? did the
Apostles rend themselves, from the believing Jews in practice? no such matter:
All things are lawful for m^ (says Paul) but all things are not expedient:
and all things edifye not: let no man seek his own, but every man an others
wealth. 1. Cor. 10.23.24. And again, Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain the Jews. 1 Cor. 9.20. It is expedient therefore that every man
seek an others wealth and edification, so as if possibly he may, he divide not
from his brethren in practice; but rather to seek their wealth, by holding
conformety with them: it is enough that the Doctrine and truth of the Lords
Sabbath is published, give it time to root and to ripen; this foundation being
laid, are formation (by God blessing) will come off in time the more kindly:
and thus with the Apostles we shall wait season and opportunity, for a happy
reformation.

There are I confess (but they are such as be our adversaries in this case)
who would have us in their rash and inconsiderate zeal, to rush violently and
instantly upon the practice; without all respect had first unto our brethren,
or to the Church wherein we line, or to expediency, season, or opportunity, or
Presidents of former times; and these men press us thereto with this, that it
is the Law of God, and a Moral Law, and it is your judgment, and the like;
these men would have the harvest and the seed time both go together; so hot
they are: but leaving these in their indiscretion and intemperancy, it is safer
to imitate the Apostles, and to take time and leisure. To conclude, since this
Dispensation, tends to the peace of the Church: and also imitateth the
Apostles, let it obtain the most favorable construction that may be, at least
let it not be racked and wrested uncharitably.

SECT. V.
I have reserved this Section, to make answer unto fondry objections, which are
framed upon occation of this Dispensation; and these they are which follow.

OBJECT. I.
Some object thus; forasmuch as I am persuaded, that the Lords Sabbath is still
in force, howbeit I am also well persuaded of the truth of your dispensation,
yet can I not pass over the Sabbath when it comes, profaneing it, and working
upon it, without many and great checkes of conscience; and much sorrow of
heart, that I should profane the Lords Sabbath; and that too after I know it to
be the Lords Sabbath, and still in force by the 4th commandment, thus I am
afflicted and pricked in conscience every week: now I pray what say you to
this? is it not a sin for me, to go against the checkes of my conscience?
what may I do in this case?

For answer hereunto, we must know, that some checkes of conscience do arise
from the doing of something, which we should not do: and for a man to go
against these, it is dangerouse and sinful, and a note of an hard heart.
Again, there are some checkes of conscience, which arise from the doing of
something which we would not do: and these are not always sinful, but are
notes of a soft heart, and tender conscience; for they would not do the
things they do, if it were in their power to amend them. I will clear this
case by some examples: it is lawful for a man to fly for his life, his enemy
pursuing him, upon the Sabbath day: and it is lawful for a man to work, in
quenching of a fire on the Sabbath day: nevertheless a soft heart, and tender
conscience, will be full of prickings in the time of his flight, and whilst he
is at work: Now the reason hereof is, not because these his actions are
sinefull, but because he does what he would not do upon this day, if it could
be avoided; and because he neglects the special service of God all that
time, which he would much rather have been employed about. Furthermore, David,
when he eat the Sewbread, it could not but grieve him, that he was cast upon
such necessity, as that he must eat that, which was not lawful for him to
eat. And David, when he spared the life of Ioab, which he should have taken
away, it could not but be a corziue to his conscience, so often as he saw that
murderer live. And the Apostles, when they observed those things commanded in
the Ceremonial Law, in circumcising, and shauing the head, and the like, they
knowing that these things were abolished, they could not but do it with
checking and unquiet consciences in some respect: and yet these were not evil
consciences, nor these actiones sins, but they were marks of softened
hearts and tender consciences: and so is it with the checkes in conscience,
which we cannot but have, in some respects, so often as we neglect the Lords
Sabbath: they are notes of soft hearts and tender consciences, plainly
bewraying, that we would much rather Sanctify the Lords Sabbath, if it were in
our power.

Furthermore, whereas you asked me, what you should do in this case: I answer,
even all you can do, to the utmost of your power, to get out of this
necessity, that so you may have your hearts desire in sanctification of the
Lords Sabbaths: for no man will lay still under a necessity, any longer then he
needs must: a poor man will get out of his poverty; a sick man out of his
sickness; a prisoner out of prison, with all the speed they may. Now the way
to get out of our necessity is this, to labor a general reformation; and
that, first by instant and constant prayer to God: and next, by divulging this
truth of God, as far as thin occationes and caleing will permit; that so it
may rune from man to man, till at length it may come unto the Magistrate, whose
office it is to make reformation, and so to loosen thee from thy necessity of
profaning the Lords Sabbaths any longer.

Indeed it is fit we should have pricks, and checkes in conscience, all the
time we lay in the neglect of the Lords Sabbaths, that so we may be thereby
often rowsed up, to use all good means possible and speedily for a
reformation: If God should let us bequiet in mind, we would grow secure with
this Dispensation, sit down, and take our ease, never careing what becomes of
Gods sacred Sabbaths, nor when a reformation were made.

OBJECT. II.
Some who are enemies to Gods Sabbaths, and friends to the Lords day, argue
thus; forasmuch as the Lords day, may be kept for a Sabbath still, by virtue of
this Dispensation, why should we trouble our selves? for we have that already:
let us keep us where we are still, for we are well enough.

But hereunto I answer, that you are not well enough: and for the discovery of
this, you must note, for whom this Dispensation is made, and unto whom it does
properly belong: for it belongs not unto all men: this Dispensation
therefore is made, for such as are persuaded, that the Sabbath day is still in
force, and therefore do make a conscience of it; who in a case of necessity,
may keep the Lords day for it, for a season, until a time of reformation: But
this Dispensation, is not made at all, for our new Sabbatharians, who make no
conscience of the old Sabbath: for to what end should they have a Dispensation
from the old Sabbath, who make no conscience at all of it?

In the Dispensation, it is allowed for men to keep the new Sabbath, or Lords
day, for the old Sabbath, and in stead of it for a season; which does imply,
that they had rather keep the old Sabbath then the new; and that they have a
conscience of the old Sabbath still; and that the Lords day is not kept for it
self sake, but for the Sabbaths sake; so that it is the Sabbath, that has all
the respect and honor; and the Lords day has none as for it self: Now our
new Sabbatharians, will not keep the Lords day still, in this sense: but if
they will take any advantage from our Dispensation, and from our keeping the
Lords day with them, they must keep it in this sense, for in this sense the
old Sabbathatians do keep the Lords day: we honor the Sabbath day, as our
King; and we esteem the Lords day in its room, but as a deputy, that for the
time occupies the place of the King, and whom we honor not for his own sake,
but for the Kings whose place he possesses: so we honor the Lords day for the
Sabbath days sake which went last before the Lords day; and in room whereof
the Lords day stands as a deputy for the present necessity. 2. We can by
virtue of this Dispensation, keep the Lords day, in conscience of, and
obedience unto the 4th commandment; but you cannot keep the Lords day in
obedience unto the 4th commandment: holding still your own grownds, and
rejecting the Sabbath day. 3. Whereas you say you are well enough, and will
keep you where you are still: then know, that your good and contentfull
condition wherein you rest, it is no better then Popish superstition; if you
think hereby to please God, in obedience unto his 4th commandment.

To conclud, let no man flatter himself, in his keeping the Lords day, or new
Sabbath, because we old Sabbatharians do keep it with them: for we keep it
in one sense, and they in an other; we justify our keeping of it, but they can
never justify their own keeping of it, holding still their old grownds and
opiniones of it: we so keep the Lords day with them, as for all that, we
renownce it for Gods Sabbath, and to have any Divine institution; if any
therefore will take advantage from this Dispensation, or incouragment from our
keeping the Lords day, they must keep it in our sense, as we keep it and
esteem of it.

OBJECT. III.
Yet further, our new Sabbatharians object thus unto us, saying, you say you
keep the Lords day, in place or room of the Sabbath day: well, and so do we
too: like as we keep the Lords Supper in room of the Passover, so do we the
Lords day, in room of the Sabbath day.

I answer, we say not only that we keep the Lords day in room of the
Sabbath, but this we add, that we keep it in room of the Sabbath, by way of a
change, for the Sabbath: now here they leave us, they will not say they keep
the Lords day for the Sabbath day sake, for so they should renownce the Lords
day, and not keep it for it self sake: Albeit we keep the Lords Supper in
room of the Passover yet we keep it not for the Passover sake, but for its
on own sake: or else we should advance the Passover above the Lords Supper,
and so it should not be regarded for it self sake. For example, when the old
King is dead, then the new King his heier, rules in his room and place; and we
obey the new King in stead of the old, but for his own sake not for the old
Kings sake; and in this sense they keep the new Sabbath in room of the old
Sabbath, supposing the old Sabbath to be dead, and therefore they keep the
Lords day for it self sake not for the Sabbaths sake: But it is otherwise with
us; for when the King goes to the wars into some foreign Land, and leaves
a deputy or viceroy to govern in his room, we obey this deputy in the room
indeed of the King, but not for his own sake, but for the Kings sake; and so
we keep the Lords day for a time, in room of the Sabbath, but for the
Sabbaths sake, not for its own sake.

OBJECT. IIII.
Some argue thus, forasmuch as those which stand so strongly for the old
Sabbath, do profane and neglect it themselves, and do by this Dispensation
justify it as warrantable; therefore what need we to take any care at all of
it? why should we make any scruples of conscience about it? why should we fear
to profane it, and to work on it? and why should we be in doubt of
transgression of the 4th commandment by neglecting it?

Hereunto I answer, great is the difference, betwixt our profanation and
neglect of the Sabbath day, and the profanation and neglect of it by our new
Sabbatharians; and therefore it follows not that they may profane it, as
well as we, and as safely; for we do profane it in grief of heart, like as
David did break the Law of the Shewbread; and, did suffer Ioab to live; and,
as the Apostles did use and retain Ceremonies among believers, after they were
abolished; and, as a man labors to quench an house on fire, on the Sabbath
day; so as we heartily and v^f^i^edly wish it could be otherwise. 2. Whilst we
profane this day, we freely give God an other day for it, by way of exchange,
as Hezekiah did: and hereby it appears, that whilst we profane it by bodily
labor in a case of necessity, we do reverence it, and honor it highly in our
hearts. But on the contrary, these new Sabbatharians, they do profane the
Sabbath without any respect had unto necessity; they profane it voluntarily:
for they take no grief of heart, at their working on the Sabbath day; neither
do they wish it were otherwise, and that there were a reformation; neither do
they give God an other day for the Sabbath day, but they keep the Lords day
for it self only, hateing Gods Sabbath: and therefore vain is their arguing,
to say, they may as well neglect the Sabbath day as we do. Let them know, that
if our neglect were a sin, it were but a sin of frailty, but their neglect
of it, is a sin with an high hand; our were but a sin against our wiles,
but theirs is a sin with full consent of will, nay ours is no sin; for 1.
we give God an other day for it. 2. we profane it but in a case of necessity
only, as David did eat the Shewbread, and as men quench an house on sier on
the Sabbath: But on the contrary theires is a sin: for they profane Gods
Sabbaths willingly, never respecting any necessity at all. Wherefore, let not
them bear themselves upon us, nor think to work upon the Sabbath day, as
well as we do, unless they did it with the same mind that we do it with.

You know the Israelites went thorough the Red Sea safely; for they had a
warrant from God so to do; but the Egyptians following them, thinking they
might as well go thorough as they, were drowned. Let no man sooth up and
flatter himself therefore, thinking he may work on the Sabbath, because we
do work on it; for it may cost him dear to follow us, unless he be of the
same judgment with us. I verily persuade my self, that many a man cozeneth
himself, taking heart and courage, to live still in the want of reformation,
either of his judgment or practice in this point, because he sees us to
neglect the keeping of the Sabbath day; but let him be admonished in time; I
dare assure him, that he shall be accounted of God, for a Sabbath breaker, when
we shall be justified; and he shall be arraigned before Gods Tribunal, for a
weekly transgressour of his 4th commandment, when it shall be said unto us,
Well done thou good and faithful servant.

OBJECT. V.
Some happily may object thus; it seems to us, that Sabbath breaking is a
fearful sin, whilst we read your exposition upon the 4th commandment: But
now since we have read your Dispensation, it seems but a light matter;
because a man may live in the weekly breach thereof, and yet justify it too.

Hereunto I answer, I account the sin of Sabbath breaking here, no less
heinouse and fearful, then I accounted it there: for it does not follow, that
because there is a Dispensation from a commandment, in a case of necessity,
that therefore the transgression of that commandment, when there is no
necessity, is a light matter: A Dispensation indeed, makes the breach of that
commandment light, for that time, and to those persons unto whom the
Dispensation does properly belong; as the eating of the Sewbread in a case of
necessity, it was for that time light, and unto David in hunger, it was light;
but yet at other times, and to such persons as were not in David's case at that
time, it had been an heinouse and a fearful sin, to have eaten of that
bread: and thus it is with the Sabbath, whilst there is a Dispensation in a
case of necessity, and to those persons unto whom it does belong, it is light:
nevertheless, out of this case of necessity, and Dispensation, to break the
Sabbath it is an heinouse and a fearful sin: now in the exposition of the
4th commandment, there we considered of the Sabbath day, out of the case of
necessity, and so it is to be considered, unto all such as are enemies unto it:
and to them it is an heinouse and fearful sin, to profane it by working on
it, like as it had been a great sin, for David himself, to have eaten the
Shewbread, out of the case of hunger: but in the Dispensation, there we
consider of the Sabbath; as in a case of necessity, and so it is to be
considered only unto such as make a conscience of it, and are true friends
unto it; and to these it is light for they may work on the Sabbath, as David
might eat the Shewbread in the case of hunger. Wherefore to conclude, when the
breach of the Sabbath, is to be esteemed light, then it is to be considered as
light, only unto the true friends thereof, but not unto the enemies thereof;
let not them therefore take heart hereat, as if God meant to favor them: for
their Sabbath breaking, is never a whit lessened or lightened from being unto
them, an heinouse and a fearful sin, by the Dispensation granted unto
others.

OBJECT. VI.
Some object thus, by this Dispensation, you have answered and confuted your
self etc: others say, you have contradicted your self etc.

Hereunto I answer, that these men speak, as if they neither knew what a
confutation or a contradiction meante: for in the former part of my book,
where I disputed for the observation of the Sabbath, there I considered the
Sabbath absolutely, and out of the case of necessity; but in my Dispensation,
where I give leave to break the Sabbath, it is considered, in the case of
necessity: like as if a man, should first dispute in defense of the Shewbread,
that it ought not to be eaten by common persons, that is, out of the case of
necessity: and then he should again dispute touching the Shewbread, showing
that it may be eaten, to wit, in a case of necessity and hunger: does this man
think you, confute or confound himself? or does he contradict himself trow
ye? or rather, do not such as idly so charg him, bewray their weakness, and
ignorance, that they know not what or where a contradiction is?

OBJECT. VII.
Some object against us, and lay sorely to our charg Hypocrisy; because our
judgment and our practice go not together; for we hold the 7th day to be the
Sabbath day, and yet keep it not; which must needs be no better the^
Hypocrisy: yea, and these men being informed, upon what grownds we go, when
and why we refrain the practice of the Sabbath, yet so great is their
charity, that nothing can please them, but still it must needs be Hypocrisy.
And for the proof hereof the Hypocrisy of Peter is alleged, Gal. 2.12.13. And
so we are condemned for Hypocrisy as Peter was.

For answer hereto, first we must know what Hypocrisy is: Hypocrisy therefore
in the common sense of the word, is when a man does make semblance and show, to
be that which in deed and in truth he is not; his outward appearance being
one thing, but his home and inward practice being an other. In this sense our
Savior denounces a woe unto the Scribes and Pharisees, caling them Hypocrites,
because they made clean the outer side of the Cupp and Platter, but within
they were full of bribery and excess: and because they were like to whited
Tombs, which appear beautiful outwardly, but within they were full of dead
men's bones, and filthiness: and because outwardly they appeared righteouse to
men, but within were full of iniquity Mat. 23.25. etc. Now this description of
Hypocrisy, we are as free from it in this our practice, as they are that tax
us with it: for where can they show that we use any of this Hypocritical guile
and dissimulation, making a fair show outwardly, of that which we practice not
indeed and in truth? if indeed we did outwardly profess, that we kept the
Sabbath day in our families, but when these men that so tax us, come amongst
us, they see no such matter; then they might tax us for Hypocrisy: but behold
the quite contrary; for we openly, fairly, and honestly profess it, that in
our judgments we hold, we are not bound unto the present practice, as the case
stands: now according to this our open show, appearance, and profession, just
so is our practice at home; for we keep not the Sabbath day, but the Lords day,
let them tax us if they can: where then is this Hypocritical dissembling?
where is this guilfull dealing, wherewithal they tax us so sorely before the
people in their Pulpits? can any men deal more fairly then we do? for our
words and our deeds go together. It is a rule in Divinity, that if a brothers
actiones may admit of a double sense, the better sense is to be given; but suer
I am, these men were far from the practice of this rule of charity, whilst so
uncharitably they have given the worser sense, yea a false sense: so far off
they are from charritable constructiones, as they have stretched their wites
upon the Tainters, to find out as bade a censure as possibly could be made,
to make us to stink before the people, and odiouse to all that know us. But
they shall give accomptes to God, for such slanders one day; when we shall be
blessed that have been so reviled Mat. 5.11.

Furthermore, we cannot be censured with Hypocrisy, if they look but upon our
judgments, which we have formerly revealed to them: for we openly profess it
and so ever have done, that we think in our consciences, that a Dispensation
is good in our case; and that we are not bound unto the present practice,
dureing this case of necessity: now suppose, that this our judgment were
erroniouse, and that there ought to be no Dispensation; yet, so long as we do
indeed, think and believe, that we may refrain the practice; so long (at the
worst) we can be censured but for an error of frailty, and for a^ error of
ignorance; because we practice according to our judgment: but to brand us with
Hypocrisy, is very uncharitably done; for Hypocrites are commonly understood, to
practice cuningly and guilfully, wittingly and wilfully, contrary unto their
judgments; the which we do not.

Further, whereas they say, it is Hypocrisy in us, to hold one thing and
practice an other; Herein they misevnderstand us grosely, and propound our case
most falsely: for our judgment, and our practice do most truly accord and go
together: for howeuer we hold in judgment, that out of a case of necessity,
the Sabbath day must be presently practiced; yet, in a case of necessity, we
hold that we are not bound to the present practice; and this is our case; so
that our practice, is all one with our judgment; saving that malitiouse men,
who seek occation against us, had rather misevnderstand us, then understand
us: these men if they should take in against the Apostles, as they have done
against us, they could soon tax them also with Hyprocrisy; for they used
Ceremonies in the Church as touching practice, when in a sense, their judgment
was contrary; for they knew that Ceremonies were abolished. And they might as
well tax David for Hypocrisy, who in practice did eat the Sewbread, yet in
judgment, he knew it was for the Priests only.

Lastly, let us see how fitly they have alleged the example, of Peter's
Hypocrisy against us Gal. 2.12.13. For this purpose note, that Peter did eat
of prohibited meats, with the Gentiles; and so for a time, lived as the
Gentiles, as the text speaks: But after a time, upon the coming of some Jews
into their assembly, Peter for fear of them, refrained, and would no longer
eat of those unclean meats: now for that Peter did thus through fear,
withdraw himself, from his former practice with the Gentiles, and so drew
other of the assemby after him to Iudaisme, from the practice of Christianisme;
therefore Paul taxed him with Hypocrisy, as you may see Gal. 2.11. etc. Now
herein lay his Hypocrisy, that unto the Jews, who were newly come into the
Christian Assembly, Peter made show in outward apperance, as if he had retained
Iudaisme still: for he refused to eat with the Gentiles; howbeit indeed and in
truth he had forsaken Iudaisme; for he had eaten with the Gentiles until
their coming, and had so done still, had it not been for fear of them. Again,
he bewrayed Hypocrisy toward the Gentiles; for until these Jews came into the
Assembly, Peter made show, as if he had renownced Jewish ceremonies; for he did
eat unclean meats with the Gentiles; but no sooner were a few Jews come in
amongst them, but instantly for fear of them, Peter withdrawes himself, and
will no longer eat with the Gentiles, whereby he bewraies that he had not
renownced Jewish ceremonies: so that Peter used Hypocrisy both with Jews, and
with Gentiles: now can M. Yates or M. Chapel parallel our practice with this
of Peter's? do we in some company, keep the Sabbath day, and in other company,
neglect the keeping of it? we are always the same in all companies: or do we
make a show unto any of keeping the Sabbath day, when it may be proved against
us, that we in some places have neglected it! has fear to displease men,
caused us at any time to use such dissimulation as Peter used? these were the
things whereof Peter was accused, but they cannot accuse us of these; wherefore
they have done us great wrong, to accuse us in public place, of this Hypocrisy
in Peter, when our case and his, is nothing like.

Let any indifferent man, lay our practice and judgment, first unto this of
Peter's; and then let him lay them again, unto the practice of the Apostles,
who in judgment misliked of ceremonies, and yet in practice used the^, Act.
21, 20.21.22.23.24. and the^ let him tell me, whither of the twain, we are to
be paralleled with; whither our case be more like unto Peter's dissimulation; or
rather unto the Apostles cinserity: for if our practice, be more like unto the
honest conversation of the Apostles (as it is) then unto Peter's dissimulation,
the^haue they been iniuriouse to our good names, to compare us to Peter, when
they should have compared us unto those other Apostles.

OBJECT. VIII.
Some object saying, that forasmuch as the Sabbath day is a Moral, there can
be no dispensation for it etc.

Hereunto I answer, that we find dispensationes in the Scripture touching
Moralles: for example. 1. The Patriarchs had a dispensation from the 7th com.
when they took them many wives: and so had the divorced woman, as has been
shown, Deuteronomy. 24.1. etc. 2. There is a dispensation from the 5th com. in case
the Magistrate commands things contrary unto God, Act. 4.19. 3. To take usury
of a poor man is a moral, and against the Law of mercy, and yet there was a
dispensa^ion granted unto the Israelites in some case, as that they might take
usury of a poor stranger, that is, of a poor Gentile, Deuteronomy. 23.20. 4. It is
generally holden, that to sanctify one day of seven for Gods worship is
moral, as the Lords day every week, and yet they will not deny a dispensation
from this in some case, as in case of necessity, when an house is on fire, and
when an enemy makes an assault upon one of our Cities etc. The duties of rest,
and performance of holy exercises prescribed in the 4th com. are holden Moral
by all, and yet in cases of necessity there lays a dispensatio^, they may be
wholly omitted for one or two weeks together. 5. Abraham had a dispensation
from the sixte Com. to kill his son, Genes. 22, 2. Neither did David take
vengeance for God, in punishing Ioab the murderer 1 King. 2.5. which he ought
to have done, and which law is in force at this day, Genes. 9.6. Romans 13.4.
Finally, why a dispensation should not be in a moral as well as in a
ceremonial, they have yielded no reason, nor do I think they can.

An Exhortation to a speedy Reformation.
WE have now done with the Dispensation; and according to promise, we are to
end with an Exhortation: now it is very requisite, that an exhortation unto
reformation, should be added to the Dispensation, least that peradventure,
lazy security, and spiritual slothfulness, should possess the souls of
some men, thinking all is well enough; since we have a Dispensation touching
the practice, we need not put forwards unto a reformation: for the prevention
whereof, and also for the encouragment of all men feareing God, to put forwards
unto a desired Reformation, I have added a few reasones and Motives.

But happily some may ask of me, what it is I would that they should do in
this case; for may they say, we are private persons etc. and I am but one etc.
and what can we do? Whereunto I answer, it is true indeed, that Reformation
must begine at the head His Majesty, the Reverend Bishopes, and Parliament,
are they that cane do this great work; Nevertheless private persons, and
single persons may be helpers: The Master builder lays the stone, but
inferior persons hew the stone, and single persons carry stone to the
building. His Majesty and Parliament enacteth Laws, yet often and again,
those Laws take their original in the Country, from private persons, and
single persons, who foreseeing the necessity of such Laws, acquainting their
brethren therewith, they rune from man to man, till at length they come to the
King himself. All therefore I desire thee, as a private person to do is but
this; first, pray to God instantly and constantly, to make known this doctrine
of his Sabbath, to all persons, and so in time unto his Majesty, and other
Reformers under him: and that God would incline both His and all men's hearts,
unto a public and general Reformation; Secondly, use all means possible
within the compass of thy caleing, that may any ways tend unto a reformation;
to this end, after thou have well studied the point, then speak of it freely,
as occation serves, unto all whom it does concern: let the Lords Sabbaths
have thy good word, let them have thy countenance, and all possible
furtherance, that so the light of this truth, may be conveyed from man to
man until it be spread all over the Kingdom, and until it has reached unto
the Palace of the King, and Parliament house.

When the Lords Tabernacle was to be made, every one of a wiling heart, brought
something thereunto; some brought gold and silver; some blew silk and skarlet;
some oil for the light; some rams skines; and badgers skins; so every one
would have an hand in that gloriouse and sacred work. Now the Lords Sabbaths
are to be reedified, let every one bring something thereunto; and if they
cannot afford gold and silver, yet let them bring something, a skine or two, or
a little oil for the light: a man cannot afford God, and his cause, less then
his good word, and countenance; and his good word, may prove as oil for the
light; for it may procure much light: this is all which I desire of private
persons; and thus they may serve very usefully for the Lords building, as
hewers of stone for the building; or as bearers of stone to the Master
builders; or as oil for the light: and this is all I desire of single
persons, who say I am but one etc. why one may light a Candle, which may give
light unto twenty; and one may kindle a fire, that may warm a great many, and
so much for common persons.

Further, we must know this Exhortation concerns not only common persons,
but it reaches unto the very chief: it belongs unto Laiety and Clergy both:
it concerns common Ministers nearly, but it concerns the Byshopes and
Fathers of the Church more nearly, it concerns the Commons of the land
nearly, but it concerns the Gentry and Nobility more nearly; and his
Majesty most nearly: for by how much God has advanced any in Authority above
others, by so much this Reformation more nearly concerns them or him: and in
case they neglect it, the greater account they shall have to render unto God at
that day. The 4th com, it was (as has been shown) most principally given unto
Superiors etc. And Nehemiah reproved the Nobles and Rulers of the land, for
the peoples profanation of the Lords Sabbaths, Nehem. 13.17. Let the Commons
speak for a reformation, let the Magistrates make reformation, and so I come
unto the Motives.

I.
In the first place, we will consider of the greatness, and so of the
difficulty, of this reformation, that so many men may be moved to put too their
help. Since the days of the Apostles, I cannot call to mind, that ever the
Church of God, made any reformation, comparable to this of the Lords Sabbaths;
unless it were that one remarkable reformation; touching the second
commandment, begune by that worthy instrument of Gods glory, Martine Luther,
if the evil eye of the inviouse man, will give me leave to say so.

The greatness whereof may appear. 1. Because it concerns all men without
exception: for there is no man living in the Church, but the observation of the
Sabbath concerns him, and that in a special sort.

2. It will be the greater, because it has layne buried now, about twelve
hundredth years; even since that wicked and Schismatic decree, of the
Counsel of Laodicea, Anno 364, which rent the Churches a sunder one from an
other, the younger, from the more ancient and pure Churches, as touching the
observation of the Lords Sabbaths. Now an old sore is not easily cured: the
miracle of Christ, was the greater upon Lazarus, because he raised him from the
dead, when he had been so long buried, that he stank again: the Lords Sabbaths
have been now so long dead and buried, that they stink again in men's
nostriles, through their want of a true Sent, the reviving and raising of them
up again therefore, will be a work of great difficulty.

3. It will be the greater, because it is like to meet with mighty and great
oppositiones: for what great work was ever attempted, that had not as great
oppositiones? when the Wales of Jerusalem were builded, what oppositiones? and
when the Temple was reedified, what opp^sitions? and no doubt, but at the
reedifying and raising up again of the Lords Sabbaths, there will be no small
oppositiones: Now great works, and difficult works, as they stand in need
of the help of great men; so they need the help of many men; to one
Captain or General, there are hundreths and thowsands of common soldiers: it
is needful therefore, that every private man, should put to his hand, and his
voice, for the reedifying of the Lords Sabbaths; and by how much the more
difficult, by so much the more need there is, of a general assistance, and
the aid of all men.

II.
In the second place, we will consider of the Honourablenesse of this
reformation: and this will appear, by the Honourablenesse of the thing to be
reformed, to wit, the Lords Sabbath: touching which, first we will consider of
its antiquity: this ordinance of Gods Sabbath, of all others, it is one of the
most ancient; for it is of the age of the world; it being instituted at the
Creation Genes. 2.3. If therefore the honourablenesse, may be valued by the
antiquity, what can be more honorable? for nothing is more ancient: who would
not have an hand and a voice, in the raising up again, of so ancient and
honorable an ordinance of Gods, as is his sacred Sabbath?

Secondly, we will consider of its constant observation, a long all times and
ages, from before the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinay, until 300 or 400
years after Christ's ascension: for as we have formerly proved: the Sabbath day
was in use in the Church, before the giving of the Law; and so also it was in
use, after the giving of the Law, until Christ: yea, and it was in use in the
days of the Apostles, by the Apostles themselves after Christ^: and also it
was in use in the primitive Churches after Christ, for 300 or 400 years, even
so long as the Church retained its best purity; and until corruptiones and
popery begane to creep in: now if we shall value the honor of the Sabbath
day, by the honorable estimation, that the Church of God had constantly for
thowsands of years of it before Christ; and if we shall esteem of its honor,
by the honorable estimation, which the Christian Churches had of it, for near
400 years after Christ, then doubtless the Sabbath is an honorable thing:
and the reformation of it will be no less honorable: and who would not put
hand and voice, to such an honorable reformation?

Thirdly, we will consider how Almighty God has honored it: this will
appear in these particulares 1. God honored it by, his own observation of
it, at the Creation: for God himself rested upon the Sabbath day Genes. 2.3.
2dly, God honored this day and time above all days and times, in that he
blessed, hallowed, and sanctified this day, as we read Genes. 2.3. Exodus
20.11. and so made it an Holy day. 3dly, God honored this day, by commanding
it by his own immediate voice, upon Mount Sinay; and by placeing it amongst
the other Morales; and giving it there also an eminent and chief place; for
he put it into the first Table of the Decalogue; and after that, caused it
carefully to be laid up and preserved in the Arc, with the other Morales.
4thly God honored this day, by taking it unto himself in a special sort,
caling it his day, as mine holy day, Isa. 58.13. And, the Sabbath of the Lord
Exodus 20.10. whence it is caled the Lords Sabbath, Emphatically.

Wherefore, since God rested on this day, let us endeavor a reformation, that
we his children also may rest on this day: and since God hallowed and
sanctified this day, let us use all good means, that we may hallow and
sanctify this day also: and since God delivered this day by lively voice; let
us use our toungs and voices for it: and since God placed it amongst the other
Morales, and set it eminently in the first Table; let not us suffer it to be
thrust out amongst the Ceremonies; and seeing God gave it an high place in the
Moral Law; let not us suffer it to be thrust quite out of place, so as now it
should have no place at all in the Moral Law: whers your courage? whers your
zeal for God, if you can endure these things? If Christian men, love to have
their hands in an honorable work, then let them cast aside shame, and fear,
and such like carnal affectiones; and let them armed with courage and zeal,
speak for God, and defend his Sabbaths, and cale for a reformation: the work
is honorable; for it is honored with Antiquity; and with the constant
practice of Gods Church, and that also of the purest and primitive Church; and
with special honor done unto it, by Almighty God himself.

Yet further, this Sabbath is in Scripture expressly called an Holy day: To
morrow is the Rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the Lord Exodus 16.23. Isa. 58.13.
and one reason thereof may be, because at the Creation, God blessed it and
sanctified it, Genes. 2.2.3. And so made it an Holy day. Now no day of all the
7, no not the Lords day, was ever sanctified by God, or caled an Holy day. Yea,
God had many anniuersary Sabbaths, as we read in Leuit. 23. Yet do we not
read, that ever God blessed and sanctified any of them, as he did this Sabbath
of the 7th day, So highly God honored it. This difference therefore of this
day from others, is as the difference of Sacramental bread from common bread
and as was the sacred Temple from common howsen, and who would not labor the
reedifying, of such an holy and honorable thing?

III.
In the third place, we will consider of the necessity of this Reformation: and
here, If until a reformation be made, diverse and sundry verses of the holy
Scripture, yea in the 10 commandments, be as so many verses rent out of the
Scripture, or quite blotted out of the book of God, or stand but as so many
Ciphers: And also, the Decalogue or Moral law, is not taught, and maintained
in our Church, nor in any Christian Church besides, in its integrity and
perfection, but only lamely and maimedly. If until a reformation, the whole
4th commandment, is utterly and wholly abolished, both root and branch. If
until a reformation be made, the Land and Kingdom wherein we live, with all
other Christian Churches, do live in the weekly profanation of the Lords
Sabbaths, and transgression of the 4th commandment. If I shall show unto you,
that until a reformation be made, we sanctify a common and profane day, and
profane a sanctified and holy day: And Gods worship will languish and
profanesse invade us: And that a Romish Relic is honored in stead of an
ordinance of Gods: And that Gods worship is daily neglected: yea and corrupted:
with many other euiles. If I shall prove unto you, that until a reformation,
the sin of Idolatry is committed by many in the Land: if (I say) I shall make
these things plainly appear unto you, then I trust you will say with me, that
it is high time, that every man lay too his helping hand for a reformation, and
that speedily.

I.
For the first of these, there are not many verses in the Decalogue or 10
commandments, and yet there are no less then four whole verses in the 10
commandments, which be as so many verses, rent out of the Scripture, or
blotted out of the book of God, or stand but for so many Ciphers: and they are
these, verse the 8th, and verse the 9th, and verse the 10th, and verse the 11th
of the xx Chapter of Exodus: for, the Sabbath day, there specified, we have
not: and the 7th day, there specified, we have not: and the Six days for
working days, there specified, we have not: and the 7th day, wherein God
rested, and the which God blessed and sanctified, we have not. These things we
have more largly proved in the former parts of this book, and therefore a
touch of them here is enough. Wherefore seeing we have not in use, the things
specified and commanded, in those iiij verses, therefore those iiij verses, be
as if they were rent out of the sacred Bible, or blotted out of the book of
God, or stand but for Ciphers. Now is it not high time to stir, when the
Scriptures of God are thus abused? for we have but the brann or husk, that is,
the bare words of the 4 verses, as for the flower and kernel, which is the
sense and the things meant by those words in these verses, this we have not.

II.
Furthermore, that the Decalogue or Moral law, is not taught or maintained in
its integrity, wholenesse, and perfection, in our Church; this I have made
plain also, in the former part of this book: for unless we hold and teach
(which we do not) that the Decalogue is wholly Moral, without any Ceremony
commanded in it, and so maintain the Lords Sabbaths for moral; we do not
teach and maintain Gods Laws in their integrity and perfection; but we teach
the laws of God by halues and by pieces, in a lamed manner, taking and
leaving, picking and choosing: now is it not high time for every man to
bestirre him, when the Priests are become partial in the Law? and when they
reveal not unto the people, the whole counsel of God?

III.
Yet further, that the whole 4th commandment, is utterly overthrown, and
altogether abolished, both root and branch; this I have also formerly proved,
here therefore the mentioning of it is enough: not only the root and body of
the commandment is nullified, but also, that most preualent and lively reason,
which Almighty God in his wisdom, thought good to annex unto his 4th
commandment, Exodus 20.11. And the which was drawn from his own example; and
also from his blessing it, As you may see Exodus 20.11. This is also become as a
Cipher in our Churches: and so the whole commandment is abolished, both in the
duty prescribed, and in the reason also, to move unto that duty; and so root
and branch is quite gone: and is not a reformation necessary (think you) when
a whole law of God, and a Moral Law too, is abolished? is it not high time
now for every man to stir? what, will you see the laws of God, trampled
under foot, and still be silent?

IIII.
Furthermore, that every man lies in the weekly profanation of the Lords
Sabbaths, and transgression of the 4th commandment, this is most plainly
proved also, in the former part of this book; for we have alredly firmly
proved, that the Sabbath day, mentioned in the 4th commandment, it is no day
of the week but Saturday: now since we profane the Saturday, it follows
undeniably, that we profane the Lords Sabbaths, and that weekly and are guilty
of the breach of the 4th commandment, and so may as well live in the sin of
Adultery weekly against the 7th commandment, as in Sabbath breaking against
the 4th commandment, and is it not necessary that there be a reformation, when
until then, every man is a Sabbath breaker, and every week guilty of a sin
against the 4th commandment? is it not high time, that men cast aside shame,
and fear of men, and such carnal affectiones, and show forth their shame and
fear toward God, and be no longer silent?

V.
Until a time of Reformation, a profane and common day, is given unto God, in
stead of a sanctified and holy day: for the clearing of this, we must remember,
that the Saturday or 7th day Sabbath it was consecrated and sanctified, and so
made an holy day, by God at the Creation, Genes. 2.2.3. yea, it is expressly so
called Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath etc. The like we
read of in Isa. 58.13. but we no where read that the Lords day, or first day
of the week, was ever so called: nay it is by Gods ordinance in the 4th com.
one of the 6 working days, and so a profane and common day, as Thursday or
Friday is: wherefore such as give God the Lords day, they give him a profane
and common day, for a Sanctified and Holy day: now as well may we use common
bread in the Sacrament, for Consecrated Bread, as a common day for a
Consecrated day: and as well might the Jews, have performed Gods worship in a
common house in stead of the Temple, as we to give God a common day, for an
Holy day: and is it not time then, that a reformation were made, that so the
Holy God, might be served with an Holy Sabbath? and his Holy Church have an
Holy day, wherein to perform her Divine service?

Furthermore which is worse, we not only sanctify a profane day, but we also
profane a Sanctified day: and who can but take it to heart, to see sacred
things profaned? now were it not meet this should be reformed?

VI.
Until a time of a Reformation, Gods worship will languish of a declining
consumption, and profannesse will invade us, for the clearing of this, note,
that Masters will not permit their servants, one wholl day in every week, to
be vacant from their service, and to go to Church, and spend the time in holy
exercises; nor will they set apart one day in a week for themselves, for holy
exercises, so freely, when that day is but of man's institution, as when the day
is of Gods institution: this we may see clearly, in the difference betwixt the
Lords day now, which is supposed of Divine institution, and our other Holy
days, which are of humane institution; how devoutly is God served on the Lords
day, what great Assemblies then in comparison of other Holy days? But now,
since the Lords day is found faulty, and destitute of a Divine institution,
what difference (think you) will err long, be made betwixt the Lords day, and
other holy days? and thus the heat of Religion will abate, and prophannesse
creep in: now is not a speedy Reformation needful, to prevent this?

VII.
Until a time of Reformation, a Romish Relic, and Popish Tradition is
honored, in stead of an ordinance of Gods, his Holy Sabbath: for the clearing
of this, I shall prove unto you, first that the Lords day is a Tradition, and
secondly that it is a Popish Tradition, or worse. 1. That the Lords day is a
Tradition of the Church, you may remember I have formerly proved it, and that
by the Testimonies of S. Augustine, of Melanchthon, of Hemingius, and out of
the Harmony of Confessions. 2. It must needs be a tradition and no better: for
the institution of it, is no where found in the Holy Scriptures, as has been
shown, and therefore it must be supposed, to be ordained by the Fathers, or to
come unto us, from the Apostles, by some unwritten Tradition of the Church; or
else it must have a worse original: Thus you see the Lords day is a Tradition,
or worse: give it its due, and it is an old Tradition, newly furbushed and
trimmed up: or an old Tradition, cullered and painted over with Scripture.

Now that it is a Popish Tradition, and Romish Relic, I thus prove it;
because there being no grownd for it in Scripture, yet for all that the
patrones of it, do urge and press the observation of it, as a necessary
thing, as tying men's consciences, and upon pain of damnation: now for any to
urge indifferent things, not found in the Scriptures, upon pain of damnation,
is Romish and Popish: Neither let this seem strange unto any, that I call it a
Romish and popish Tradition: for the Papists thems^lues do willingly own it,
and father it, and stifely defend it for one of their unwritten Traditiones.

It may be it will be said, that Popish Traditiones come unto us, as is holden,
from the Apostles, by the practice and allowance of the Fathers: but we hold
the Lords day, to come from the the Apostles, by the Scriptures, by force of
necessary and sound consequence etc. Hereunto I answer, for my part I can see
no difference between these two, unless it be that our case is the worser, and
the Tradition the better: for what wise man, would not as much reley upon the
Fathers, as upon their vain consequences? or more honor the Authority of the
Fathers, then these men's friuolouse consequences? To conclud, seeing all Romish
rubbish is not yet swept out of our Church, is it not necessary there should be
a speedy Reformation?

This is that point, for the discovery whereof I have suffered so much: they say
indeed I will suffer nothing, and therefore have made a Dispensation, but they
say amiss: At my first discovery of it, I said no worse of it then thus, that
there is no warrant for the Lords day Sabbath in the Scriptures, and therefore
I durst not preach for it, if I might gain 500 l. I did not deliver this my
judgment in Pulpit, but only in private to 3 or 4 of my inward friends: Now
for this, I was censured by some godly and religiouse Ministers, to be
unworthy of the place, I then inioyed, and hereupon the Gentleman of whom I
did depend, dismissed me of my place: it is now more then four years since,
all this time I have suffered with my family great want, for the want of that
my maintenance, and for ought I can foresee, so am like to live and so to dye:
But if now, it be found that I was in the truth, and those godly and
religiouse Ministers in the error, will not all men say, they are bound in
conscience to make me amends, by a restitution of my loss? I demand it of them
by these presents: without restitution repentance is unsound: the cries of the
oppressed are entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.

VIII.
Until a reformation be made, 1, There is a gate set upon unto Anabaptistry,
that so Gods Church should have no Sabbaths. 2. The religiouse observation of
the Sabbath, by the primitive and most pure Churches, is not imitated, as if it
were erroniouse. 3. A godly prayer of our Church, is but a mere babbling before
God. 4. The religion used in observation of the Lords day, is but Superstition
and will worship: the Corn and Hay men loose in the fields, the neglect of
their callings, with all their deuotiones done on this day, in conscience of
the day, shall never be rewarded: these particulars I have handled formerly
more largly, and therefore a touch of them here is enough: And do not all
these things plead for a speedy reformation? Arminianisme is a great mote in
many men's eyes, and great is their desires it were reformed; but lo, here is
a Beam in most men's eyes, and should we not first labor to pluck out this
beam out of our own eyes? so should we see better to pluck out the mote that
is in other men's eyes.

IX
Furthermore, I shall show unto you, that until a reformation comes; Gods
worship is daily neglected amongst us. By a daily neglct, I mean an every 7th
days neglect; or a neglect every day when the Sabbath comes. By the worship
of God, I understand service and obedience to be performed unto God, according
to the first Table of the Decalogue: for Divines account the duties of the
first Table, to be the parts of Gods worship and service; yea and of his
immediate worship.

Now that Gods worship is neglected among us; this will easily appear; for the
sanctification and hallowing of Gods Sabbath, it is one of the duties,
specially commanded in the first Table; and therefore it is a part of Gods
worship: yea Divines accord in this, that the old Sabbath, it was not only the
time of Gods worship, but also a part of Gods worship: wherefore, we standing
for the old Sabbath, and speaking of it, it is a part of Gods worship, by the
judgment of our own Divines: to proceed then, if the old Sabbath be a part
of Gods worship, and then this old Sabbath be neglected among us, as it is,
then is Gods worship, or a part of his worship neglected among us: Nay further
which is worser, in as much as the Saturday Sabbath is exceedingly contemned
and depised, by contemning it, men contemn and despise the worship of God; a
most fearful thing.

Now tell me, if it be not time to seek a reformation, when God is denied his
worship, due unto his Honor yea, and denied it weekly too: yea, and a
principal part of his worship: for it is his immediate worship, and the
worship of the first Table: for you see, that God has not his weekly worship,
prescribed in the 4th commandment: furthermore, is it not time to seek a
reformation, when Gods worship is lamed, and parselled out unto him? for God is
denied his whole worship, he has it not in all the parts thereof, in its
integrity and perfection: for of iiij parts of his worship, prescribed in the
first Table of the Decalogue, God has but iij. And as for the 4th part,
concerning his most holy Sabbaths, this he is utterly denied: and is it not
time that all good people, should wish for a reformation, that so God may have
his entire worship and service among us? that he may be entirely worshipped,
and not by halues?

Furthermore, whereas at this day, the Lords sacred and hallowed Sabbaths, are
trampled upon, and contemned, and despised, as Jewish, and as Iudaisme, and as
vain Shadows and abolished Ceremonies; and so a part of Gods sacred worship,
is trampled upon, and a principal part of his worship, to wit, his immediate
worship, is contemned and despised; is it not time, and more then time, that
these things should be amended?

When we consider of the time, how long time God has been denied his entire
worship, in all Churches both of Protestants and Papists, to wit, for a
thousand years and upwards, is it not now high time then, that a reformation
should be sought for, and that this spreding evil should go no further? oh,
let us no longer provoke God, with our sins of ignorance: The fogges and
mistes, and black darkness of Popish ignorance, are not yet all dispelled; a
great light I confess came in by Luther, by means whereof, the corruptiones
of the second commandment were happily reformed; but yet all that Romish
rubbish was not then removed; the sanctuary of the Lord, was not then clean
purged; for albeit the worship of God, as touching the second commandment, was
then restored; yet Gods worship, as touching the 4th commandment, was left
untouched; and no doubt, God that appointed that part of his worship, to be
restored by those times, has reserved this part of his worship, to be
restored by our times; if we will be so happy, as to take the hint: our
Protestant Churches, have obtained that honorable Title, to be caled the
Reformed Churches; and this we obtained, by a reformation of the worship of
God, touching the second commandment: but if unto that reformation, we shall
add now an other, and reform the worship of God touching the 4th commandment,
and so purg the Lords Sanctuary and make it clean, that so God may have his
entire worship, in all the duties of the first Table; then shall we doubly
deserve that honorable Title, of Reformed Churches.

We have a notable exhortation recorded for this purpose, Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty. 2. Cor. 6.17.18.
This exhortation, we may fitly apply unto this purpose: the Church of Rome,
she lives still in the neglect and corruption of Gods worship, both in the
duties of the second commandment, and also in the duties of the fowrth
commandment, for she neglects and denies God also, the worship of his
Sabbaths to this day: now as says the Apostle, what communion has light with
darkness? 1 Cor. 6.14. This Romish Church, she lies still in ignorance,
blindness, and darkness touching this part of Gods worship, prescribed in
the 4th commandment, as well as in that other part of his worship, prescribed
in the 2th commandment, now since we will have no fellowship with her, in her
darkness, blindness, and ignorance touching the 2th com. why should we have
any communion with her, in her darkness, blindness, and ignorance touching
the 4th commandment? The principal and immediate worship of God, is contained
in iiij commandments of the first Table: now the Church of Rome, has divided
with God, and ij of them, she yields God, and the other ij she robs him
of most sacrilegiously: she gives God those parts of his worship, contained
in the first, and third commandments, but she denies God those other parts
of his worship, contained in the second, and fowrth commandments; well, we
have happily forsaken her, in her corruptiones of the 2d commandment, let us
also forsake and depart from her, in the corruption of the 4th commandment:
let us come out from her; let us be separate from her; and let us touch none of
her uncleanness. And thus much for this, namely, that Gods worship is weekly
neglected.

X.
I come now unto that other thing forementioned; to wit, that until a time of
reformation, God is not purely worshipped, for his worship is corrupted amongst
us: And this shall appear by this, that the Lords day, which by Gods ordinance
in his 4th commandment, is appointed for a working day, it is by many brought
into the worship of God, and sanctified by virtue of the 4th commandment.

It is a poor shifte that some make; saying, we keep not the Lords day now,
as a part of the worship of God, as the Jews did the Sabbath day: For, 1
since we hold that the Lords day, is kept in room of the Sabbath day, as the
Lords Supper is kept in the room of the Passover; it must needs follow, that
forasmuch as the Sabbath day whilst it stood, was a part of Gods worship, that
so in like manner, the Lords day, must be a part of Gods worship also: for it
stands in the place of that which was a part of Gods worship. 2. If we will
keep the Lords day, by virtue of the 4th commandment, then it must of
necessity be kept as a part of Gods worship: for, what is performed in
obedience to any of the 4 precepts of the first Table, that must needs be the
worship of God: because the duties therein contained, are the worship of God.

It is to be noted, that the Lords day, it is by Gods ordinance in his 4th
commandment a working day; for God himself wrought on it, at the Creation, it
being the first day of the world; and by his exemplary working on it, he set
us a pattorne that we should do the like. Yea to his example, he gave us his
precept for it, saying, Six days shall thou labor etc. Now the Lords day, is
the first day of those Six, and therefore also a working day. Yea further, God
did not hallow, bless, and sanctify the Lords day, as he did the Sabbath day
Genes. 2.3. So that this Lords day, it is a profane, unhallowed, and
unsanctified day; like unto the other 5 working days of the week. Yet
further, Christ himself, and his Disciples, made it a travailing day; and
never made it a Sabbath day, wherefore it is but a common day: now for any man,
to advance this common and unhallowed day, and place it in the first Table of
the Decalogue, amidst and amongst the parts of Gods worship; and then to
sanctify it and consecrate it unto God, by virtue of his 4th commandment, it
is to pollute the holy worship of God, with profane things: and they that so
use it, do worship God impurly and corruptly: as well might those profane
persons, whom our Savior whipped out of the Temple, for buying and selling
there, bring their doves, and wares into the Temple to sell there, as in a
common market, Mark. 11.15. As these may bring the Lords day, into the first
Table, and worship of God. And as well might Nadab and Abihu, put strange fire,
which the Lord had not commanded, into their Holy Censers, to offer unto God
Leuit. 10.1.2. As these may put the Lords day, into the first Table, to be
consecrated to God: as well may they put the name of some King or gentleman
into the third commandment, or of S. Paul or S. John: and then sanctify these
by virtue of the third commandment, with like divine adoration, as the name of
God is to be sanctified, by virtue of the third commandment, as to put the
Lords day, into the 4th commandment, and sanctify it by the 4th commandment,
as the Sabbath day was sanctified.

M. Dod on the second Commandment, says, that Papists sin against the
second Com. by defiling of Gods worship: his words are these, Papists are to be
condemned, because they do defile the worship of God, with their own
inventions; as by praying for the dead, by putting holiness in meats and
days etc. Now do not these patrones of the Lords day, put holiness in days,
to wit, in the Lords days? for God never put holiness in this day, it is
themselves therefore that have set it aparte from all other days in the week
for an Holy day, and to be consecrated by the 4th Com. and Christ's institution:
thus doing, by M. Dods judgment, they have together with Papists, defiled
Gods worship, and live in the weekly transgression of the second Com.

Now is it not high time, that a general reformation be sought after, when
Gods worship is impure and imbased? and when the Doctrines and Traditiones of
men, are crept into the worship of God? and when common and unhallowed days,
are offered and consecrated unto God, in stead of pure and sanctified days? Lo
how Gods worship is polluted.

XI.
Yet further, if I shall make it appear, that multitudes (I do not say all)
are guilty of Idolatry, until a Reformation comes; then you will say with me
it is high time indeed, to seek for a reformation. For this purpose, you must
know, that there is as well a puritan Idolatry, as a Popish Idolatry: for, as
when A Crucifix, the Breaden God, the Images of Christ, the virgin Mary, and
the rest, come in presence, instantly Papists uncover the head, and perform
much honor in respect of them: So, no sooner does the Lords day Sabbath come,
but forthwith Puritanes, unclothe themselves of their base array, and attire
themselves in their best apparel; and they lay aside all servile labors for
that time, as a profanation of that sacred time; and much religiouse honor and
devotion, is performed in respect of this days presence: yea great conscience
is made of it. (Pardon me beloved, the sins of Gods children must not be
clocked; neither must I be partial, no neither must I deal ouerly, but tell
every man, or rank of men of their sin, without baulking) I cale it Puritan
Idolatry, because these are the great Patrones thereof.

That I may discover it unto you, first we will begine with the word Idolatry;
this word is a greek word (...) and it is compounded of two words: the one
whereof signifies, an image and likeness of a thing; or, an imagination and
fiction of the brain: the other signifies, honor and reverence; now put both
these together, and they signify, an honor and reverence, of an image and
liknesse of a thing; or of an imagination and fiction of the brain: thus you
have the signification of the word Idolatry. Now when divine and religiouse
honor is given to a similitude or fiction of the mind, then it is a dangerouse
matter: and when the conscience stands in awe, of a similitude or fiction of
the brain, reuerencing it for a divine ordinance, then it is Idolary. Now to
apply this.

The Lords day is this Idol; and they that preach for it, and practice it, are
the Idolaters: to make this good, you shall see how fitly these may be caled
Idolaters, and their practice Idolatry: first touching that part of Idolatry
which consists in imagery and liknesse, you shall see how like they have
framed the Lords day, to the Sabbath day, and made it a very image, similitude,
and liknesse of the Sabbath day, and consequently an Idol, for, 1. They have
given the very name, the proper name of the Lords Sabbath unto it, for do they
not usually cale the Sunday or Lords day, the Sabbath day? 2. They sanctify and
keep the Lords day, like unto the Sabbath day, with a resting from all servile
labors, and with preaching, and prayers, and the like. 3. they keep it in
conscience of the 4th com. like as the Sabbath day was. 4. They apply all those
textes of Scripture unto the Lords day, which were wont to be applied to the
Sabbath day, and which indeed are proper to the Sabbath day, as Neh. 13.15.
Isa. 58.13. Math. 12.1.2.3, etc. with others, behold then, if they have not
made the Lords day, as like, as like may be, to the Sabbath day; an image or
picture, cannot be more like a man, then they have framed this Lords day, unto
the Sabbath day; nay the images and similitudes, which Papists make of God, of
Christ, or of Saints, are not so like unto God, and Christ, and Saints, as
this Lords day, is made and fashoned, like the Lords Sabbath day: like as
idolatrouse Jeroboam made a feast unto his calves, like unto the feast that was
in Judah, 1. King 12.32. so have these made a new Sabbath, like unto the Lords
Sabbath in the Moral Law.

2. Touching that other acception of the word, where it is taken for an
imagination, or fiction of the mind or brain: And in this sense an Idol is
Nothing as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 8.4. An Jdoll is nothing in the world:
that is, it is no such thing, as it is imagined, and fansied to be, and in this
sense also the Lords day is an Idol, and the obseruers of it are Idolaters,
and their sanctification of it Idolatry: for 1. whereas they cale the Lords
day, Sabbath day, it is a mere fiction; for they never found it so named, in
the Holy Scriptures, 2. That the Lords day, should be kept like the Sabbath
day, with a rest from labors all day long, is an imaginary conceit; for they
find no such observation of it by Christ, nor by his Apostles. 3. That the
Lords day should be observed by virtue of the 4th com. is not only a fiction,
but an absurd foolery. 4. That Christ instituted the Lords day, is a mere
forgery and fansy of men's brain, as has been formerly shown: and thus you
see, that the Lords day; is a mere Idol, or a very Nothing, that is, nothing
but a fancy and fiction of men's brain: of this day therefore, we may say, as
the Lord said of Ieroboames (Month) which he had consecrated unto his Idols,
that it was the month which he had forged of his own heart, 1 King. 12, 33.
so this Lords day, is the Sabbath day, which men have forged of their own
hearts. And thus we have cleared and made apparent, the two first things in
this Idolatry, to wit, that the Lords day, is an Image and liknesse: and that
the Lords day, is an imagination and fiction; or an Idol and Nothing.

I come now to the third thing, which makes complete Idolatry; and that is,
Honor and Reverence: for that is properly Idolatry, when religiouse honor and
reverence, is attributed unto Images and similitudes; or unto Imaginations and
fictions of the brain; or unto Idols and Nothing as when men reverence these
as Divine things, and as ordinances of God. Now I shall easily demonstrate unto
you, that men give Honor and Reverence unto this Lords day, yea no civil
honor, but divine and religiouse Honor.

For, 1. The patrones of the Lords day, they do esteem one day above an
other, the Lords day above and before any other day in the week, and that in a
religiouse manner; and thus they honor it, by advancing it above all other
days: yea by holding the cause of the institution of the Lords day, to be
greater, then the cause of the institution of the Sabbath day, they must hold,
that the Lords day is an higher and more honorable day, then was the Sabbath
day: for they say, that the work of the Redemption, was the cause of the
institution of the Lords day; now the work of Redemption they hold to be a
greater work then was the work of the Creation, which was the cause of the
institution of the Sabbath day; and thus you see they must have the Lords day
in more honor, then the Sabbath day was in.

2. They make a conscience of observing and of sanctifying the Lords day; and
do reprove such as profane it, and make a common day of it by working; and
hereby they do Reverence it.

3. They observe the Lords day, as instituted by Christ, and as commanded by
God, in his 4th com. and in so doing, they do Honor it and Reverence it; for
they honor it as a commanded day, and as a day set aparte by Christ to be Holy.

4. Many Divines do in their public prayers, and sermones, bless God for
vowchsafing us his holy ordinances, as his Sabbaths and Sacraments etc. by
Sabbath, they mean our Lords days; whereby you see, they honor the Lords
day, together with the Sacraments; and so they must do: for the Sacraments and
the Lords day, have both one use in the Church: for as the Sacraments do mind
us of Christ's death and resurrection; so the Lords day is sanctified in memory
of Christ's death and resurrection: thus the Lords day is honored as the
Sacraments are: now all men confess that the Sacraments are honored with
divine and religiouse honor, and so then is the Lords day also: yea, who
fears not to profane the Lords day, as he fears to eat the Lords Supper
unworthily?

5. They honor the Lords day with that kind of honor wherewith they honor
the sacred Name of God, enjoined in the third com. for they are careful to
sanctify the Lords day, as they are careful to sanctify the Name of God: and
their consciences are in awe of the Lords day, as well as of the Name of God;
for they fear to profane the Lords day, as well as they fear to blaspheme and
abuse the Holy Name of God: they respect this day as an Holy day, like as Gods
Name is an Holy Name.

6. By setting the Lords day into the place and room of the Sabbath day, they
must and do give unto it the like religiouse honor which was due unto the
Sabbath day, and that was a religiouse honor: Call the Sabbath a delight, the
Holy of the Lord, honorable, Isai. 58.13. Now this very text is applied to our
Lords day; wherefore it is honored with divine and religiouse honor: and thus
is their Idolatry complete.

Note, that if this Honor and religiouse reverence and respect, be given but
unto any one of the two former senses, it makes Idolatry: for example, if the
Lords day be considered of as an Image or liknesse, to the Sabbath day; and
thereunto men add honor, this is Idolatry: or, if the Lords day, be but
considered of, as an imagination, a fiction, or a devise of man's brain, which
indeed is an Idol and Nothing, and then hereunto me^ add a religiouse and
co^scionable honor, reverence, and respect, be it (...) or (...) forthwith the
Lords day becomes an Idol, they Idolaters; and their devotion honor and
conscience of it, Idolatry: for it is to set up an Idol in Gods worship, when
men set up their fictions, conceits, and devises, to be reverenced and
religiously honored; when they place their own devices, and set them in the
first Table of the Decalogue; as now a days men do this Lords day.

In a word, it is the common and received opinion, that all Humane inventions,
thrust into divine Service, or worship of God, are plain Idolatry: now the
Lords day, is an Humane Invention, as has been shown; and it is thrust into
Divine Service, and worship of God: for it is believed and taught to be an
ordinance of Gods, commanded in the first Table, among the parts of Gods
worship; and it is honored, with that religiouse reverence, which is proper
unto God and the parts of his worship: and therefore the Lords day, is an
Idol, and the religiouse sanctification of it Idolatry.

The Lord would not endure it, that his meat etc. should be given unto, and
bestowed upon Idols, My meat which I gave thee, as fine flower, oil, and
honey, wherewith J fedd thee, thou have even set it before them for a sweet
savor etc. Ezekiel. 16.19. And can we think, that that God, who would not have
his meat, oil, and honey, bestowed upon Idols; will endure it, that we shall
bestow his glory, honor, love, conscience, and religiouse reverence, upon this
Idol of the Lords day Sabbath? for all those Holy and religiouse affectiones,
which we bestow upon the Lords day Sabbath, they are Gods affectiones, and
proper unto his Majesty: Now my glory says God, I will not give to an other,
Isa. 42.8. and God is a Jealous God, as we read in the second co^. Ex. 20.5.
and therefore, he will never endure it, that this his glory and service, shall
be bestowed upon an Idol of man's making and devising: the Lord vpbraided the
Jews, because they did Idolatrously worship the work of their own hands,
which their own fingers had made, Isa. 2.8. so ridiculouse they were: for who
would worship a thing, which himself has made with his own hands? but with
us, the conscience is made to stand in awc of the work of men's brains; and
religiouse honor and Holy affectiones, and worship, are bestowed upon that
which we have made our selves, if not by our own fingers, yet by our own
wits: Now who would be so ridiculouse, as to fear the pollution, of what
himself has made Holy? or religiously to honor a mere nothing, a very fansy?

For men to give unto the Lords day divine honor, that is, to reverence it as
an ordinance of Gods, upon pain of damnation, this is to advance a fiction of
man's brain, and place it in equal Throne with Gods ordinances, and to exact
of men's consciences, like religiouse reverence, as is due unto Gods ordinances:
for this fiction shall have power to command and constreine the Conscience,
like as Gods ordinances have, and that upon pain of damnation too; what an
heinouse thing is this? Is it not as great a sin, to give Divine worship,
unto men's fantasies, as unto Images! to the devices of protestants, as to the
Trinkets of Papists? My glory (says God) I will not give to an other, Isa.
42.8. What an heinouse and horrible sin then is it, for any to give
religiouse worship, which is proper unto God and to his ordinances, to a mere
device of man's making! God is a Jealous God, and most zealouse of his glory,
woe therefore unto him that robs God of his glory, to give it unto men's
devices.

Three euiles there are combined in this one, which make it a Capital evil.
1. That the people of the Land who are most tractable unto goodness, have
their consciences brought into slavery, bondage, and thraldom, for they are
made afraid of the shadow of a man, of the shaking of the leaves of the trees,
that is, that upon pain of damnation, they work not on the Lords day. 2. By
the supposed necessary consequences, men have advanced this Idol of the Lords
day, and ranked it among the Stars of the Heaven, that is, they have placed
it among the Ordinances of God, and given it like power over the conscience
which they have; now how God will take this at their hands, it behooves the
Authors hereof to be think themselves. 3. The Authors hereof do bewray most
audaciouse presumption, in that they dare approach so near the Majesty of God,
that Jealous God, with their own inventions; that they dare rank them with
the Ordinances of God: now what would they more, unless they take the Crown?
that is, to Deify themselves? for who but A God, can exercise power over the
conscience, and make ordinances tying conscience? and of equal authority, and
power with Divine ordinances? Since this deformity is in the visage of a
Protestant, happilly it will be winked at, or ouerly looked upon, or minced and
extenuated, if not defended, but were it, in the face of a Papist, suer I am it
should find no mercy, but according to the just desert thereof, it should be
aggrauated to the full: but what should I say? love is blind, I mean self
love: we can spy a blemish in an other, but cannot or will not see it in our
selves.

I cannot see but that these men may as well set up a new Sacrament of
Baptism, in stead of the old one, as to set up a new Sabbath in room of the
old one: or an other Lords Supper in stead of that instituted by Christ, as an
other Sabbath in room of that instituted by God: and since none but a God can
set up Sacraments and Sabbaths in the Church, what else do they but usurp the
room and Authority of God, who set up new Sabbaths in the Church? By the way,
as touching Gods ancient Sabbaths; have not Papists by their reasons and
consequences out of Scripture (which these men call their neceessary
consequences; but how unnecessary you have seen) abolished Gods Sabbaths,
expressly commanded in the Moral Law? and have they not hereby advanced their
Syllogisticall reason, to be of equal authority with never erring Scriptures?
and their consequences to be of equal authority with Gods 4th commandment?
nay to take the upper hand, and to showlder out of place Gods commandment? Now
since a law inacted in Parliament, cannot be revoked but by the same authority
that first inacted it, does it not follow that Papists make Idols of
themselves, when their reason shall be a Countermand to Gods commandment? were
Papists only guilty of this sin, a man might with applause manage this
argument against them: but since Protestants also have a hand therein, I dare
not pass my censure.

Thus you see, the Lords day is an Idol, the preachers for it Idolaters, and
their observation of it Idolatry, (let none envy and malice me, for
discovering unto them this their sin; but rather, let them turn their envy
against themselves, for being such sinners, and their malice against their
sin; nor let any study to wrest my words; but let their study be how to work
a reformation). To conclude this point, seeing that as the case stands, there
is Idolatry committed by many thowsands in the Land, and that by most
puritanes, is it not high time to seek out for a reformation?

Now lay all these forementioned things together, and be stirred up to
endeavor for a reformation: for so, as S. James speaks, Thou shall hide a
multitude of sins Iam. 5.20. And endeavor for a speedy reformation: for
reformation is Repenance; and Repentance is by no means, to be delayed and
procrastinated, as we are daily taught.

I read in the prophecy of the Prophet Haggay, an excellent exhortation, to
incourag all sorts of people, to the reedifying of the Temple; it is this, Yet
now be strong, o Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong, o Ioshuah, sone of
Jehozadak the High Priest: and be strong all ye people of the Land, says the
Lord, and work: for J am with you, says the Lord of Hoastes. Hagg. 2.4. I
verily think that I may apply this Exhortation, unto all sorts of people now;
to incourag them to the reedifying of the Lords Sabbaths, saying, be strong, o
Prince, be strong, o Priest, and be strong, all ye people of the Land, and
work; for the Lord of Hoastes is with you: God was with his Church in the
days of Luther, he prospered the^, so as gloriously they reformed the
corruptions in his worship, and the Idolatry daily committed against the second
commandment; why should we doubt but that the same God favorably allows
this our work? or fear to expect a like blessing, when the Cases are so like?

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy: That 7th day, is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work: For the Lord rested on
the 7th day, and therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and Hallowed it,
Exodus 20.8.10.11. Lord have mercy upon thy universal Church, and incline their
hearts, to keep this law: and speedily, to reform the weekly transgressions
of it. Amen, Amen.

My reward with men for times past, has been evil; my expectations for time
to come, are worse; but Lord, wipe not thou out the kindness that J have
showed to thy Law, and to thy Holy Sabbaths: Remember me, o my God, concerning
this; and pardon me, according to thy great mercy. Nehem. 13.14.22. 1. Cor.
4.4.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In page 51. lin. 9. for reverence, read reference. page 103. lin. 2. for
preformed, read reformed. page 165. lin. 5. for denegerated, read degenerated.
page 331. lin. 6. for contraicted, read contradicted. page 421. lin. 22. for
eparate, read separate. page 475. lin. 2. the text Romans 15.1. there cited, with
ij lines before it, I judge unsoundly applied. page 582. lin. 36. for subject
and Magistrate, read servant and Master. As for other faults, as mise-pointing
of sentences, and mis-placing, lack or superfluity of a letter here and there,
the intelligent Reader may easily correct them.


