All the examinacions of the Constante Martyr of GOD M. John Bradforde, before
the Lord Chancellor. B. of Winchester the B. of London, and other
commisioners: Whereunto ar annexed his private talk and conflictes in prison
after his condemnacion, with the Archbishop of york, the B. of Chichester,
Alfonsus, and King Philips confessor, two Spanishe freers, and sundry others.
With his modest learned and godly answers.

Anno. Domini 1561

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Original of his Life.
John Bradford borne in Lancastershire, in Manchester, a notable town of that
country, was of his gentle parents brought up in virtue and good learning
even from his very childhode, and among other praises of his good educacion, he
obtained as a chief gift, the co^nynge and redines of writing, which knowledge
was not only an orname^te unto him, but also an help to the necessary
suste^tacio^ of his living. About ye time, was one sir Iho^ Haringto^ paymaster
to king Henry the.8. which at Boloign by order of knighthode being much
renomed, but yet by his own virtue a great deal more noble, was there suruier
and paymaister of ye soldiers. Who then had the service of master Bradford,
and so kept him both in his family and in his favor: that it can scarce be told
whether lived to other, either more beloved or more profitable. For Bradford
both learned many things of him, and also experience and practice of things
more increased and abounded. On the otherside, he which tried his service so
faithful, esteemed him as a great treasure and so loved him: that in all his
affairs he would always be coupled with him. In which trade of life when
Bradford long time had been co^uersa^t, ye way to riches seemed not so far of
unto him, if he would have set his mind to gathering of worldly riches, but
the immutable providence of god drew him another way. For after he was weary of
this kind of life, and had made a dilligent and true account of his masters
affairs: he desired license to depart, and so went from him to the intent that
he being rid of all other troubles, he might serve Jesus Christ, the secret
working of gods calling so mouinge him, which never suffered his mind to be
at rest: until it had fully and wholly possessed him: In so much that after he
had forsaken his master, and gotten him to the study of the law, his mind
could not long abide in that trade of lawyers, but that forsaking also that
kind of study, in which he was not altogether ignorant: he departed from the
temple where he studied ye common and temporal laws, to Ca^bridge the temple
of gods laws to apply those studies, which pertained more to the ministerye of
gods church. In the which, with what vehemens and force he labored, it is
evident by this: yt the first year of his comimng thither, he obtained degree
of schole, and was made master of art, and gatte the favor and admiration of
all men, that by and by he was chose^ fellow of Penbrooke hall, where he so
daily profited, by a certain heavenly dexterite of his wit, that as he was had
in estimacio^ of all good men: so also he began to be well-beloved of Martin
Bucer, which hoped of no small fruit to proceed, from that his so godly
disposicion. wherefore he counseled him, to bestow his gifts and talent, to
the common profit of instructynge Christ's flock. To whom when he had alleged
his weakness and lack of learning: Bucer answered, that though he could not
feed the^ with fine cakes and white bread, yet he should satisfye them with
barley bread, were it never so course. By whose often exhortacions Bradforde
being boldened, although of his own accord he was ready enough while he was
altogether i^ this thought it came happelye to pass, that by D. Ridly bishop
of London, he was sent for from Cambridge, to take upon him ecclesiastical
orders and functio^s. Of whom being first made deacon and afterward licensed to
preach having a good stipe^d out of the Cathedral church of Poules: he
diligently labored in the ministry of public teching in ye church of god, so
long as king Edward living there could be any place for godly teachers. But
when at lenght ye religion changed by death of ye prince, and he nevertheless
exercised his office of preching: an occaso^ was found and yet most unjust
(because that by the laws it was not yet concluded) that his mouth being
stopped he was thruste into prison: the occasion was this. The xiii. day of
August, one of the Popish sect called Bourn afterward bishop of Bathe, railed
with many words most shamefully upon king Edward, and the pure doctrine of the
gospel in his time preched, whosoever behaved himself, yt he had much a do to
escape, but yt the multitude of hearers would have laid hand upon him, and
pulled him out of ye pulpit, which thing they declared by manifest tokens. For
so great was the indignacion of al men kindled against him, that neither with
ye reverence of the place, nor by the authority of the bishop of London then
present, nor at the lawful commandment of the Maire: this commocion of the
people could be pacyfied. But as for Bourn, he was so stricken with fear both
by the greatness of the tumulte, and chieflye for a dagger which was thrown
from the mids of the company against the pulpit: that he durst not make an
end of his sedicious sermond (much like the Oracions that the Tribunes in Rome
were wont to make) nether would ye people suffer him: he humbly desired
Bradford which stood behind his back in the pulpit, yt he would take his place
and speak to the people remembringe perchance, and not vnwiselye vyrgils
counsel. That when among a people stout
It chances to betide
The multitude to make a fraye
Of wit full often wide,
That stones and wepons flies a broad
and what come first to hand
Some sadman comes that for his right
Is loned of all the land:
Anon they ceaste and silence make,
And down they lay there rage
To hark at him, and he with speech
their wood minds does aswage.
Neither was his purpose disappointed, for as soon as Bradford stood forth in
ye midst: all the tumulte was easilye appeased, and the people at the first
sight of him, wished him long health, crying Bradforde Bradforde god preserve
thy life Bradford. After yt with much attencio^ they heard him entreat of quiet
and christian obedience. Finally after his sermond ended: the most part of the^
went quietlye and peasably home to their houses. In the mean time among the
residew which resisted (for it could not be that in so great offense of ye
multitude, al things could so quickly be quieted) there was a certain
ge^tleman with his two servants, which coming up the pulpytte stairs rushed
against the door, desyring to enter upon Bourn, I know not what he minded.
Than Bradforde which seemed to know him, and perceyuyng his entente: resysted
as much as he could, in the mean time, priuelye geuynge Bourne warning by
his Servant, that he should avoid the present danger as soon as he
could. Bourne straight way flying unto the Mayor once again, escaped death,
and yet not thinking himself safe enough, he desired Bradford that he would
vouchsafe to be present and help him, til he might hide himself in some
house, that he might be safe from all fear and danger, which ge^tlenes he
willingly performed, that is to say he covered him behind with his gown,
till by the Mayor and the Sherifes, he was safely brought into Poules scole. On
this wise the railing preacher against king Edward, by Bradfordes help escaped
death, which for his raylinge he had deserved, which thing they which would
have been revenged of him, did not dissemble, for one of them openly testifying
to Bradford. said: Ah Bradforde Bradforde dooest thou save his life which will
not spare thine? go too I give thee his life, but if it were not for thy sake,
I would thrust this beast through with my sword. Master Bradforde the same
day after dinner preaching to the Londoners in the chief streate of the
city, did sharply rebuke them for this sedicious and tumultuouse behavior,
waytinge afterward at London what should be thend of this business. Thou have
now reader ye whole discourse of Bradfordes fact, whereby thou dooest
understand what reward he deserved of equal Judges, for so godly service.
Now hear what reward he received.

Three days after this was done he was sent for by the counsel, and
bishops, to the tower where the Queen than lay, and was compelled before
them to purge himself of sedicion and heresy, surely by the same reason, that
ye lamb sometime was accused by ye wolf for troubling the water, in which he
drunk a great deal lower than the woolfe, not that he had offended, but that
the woolfe was an hungered, not that he had troubled the water, but that he
was not hable to resyste the other, which troubled it in deed. After the same
sort was Bradforde set a fire with the flame of that Sedicion, which he
alone did quench, and so commanded to prysone, where abiding almost two
years together he sustained many conflictes with the Papists and other
sects, he confirmed many weak and coumforted the afflycted, he wrote also
many things, as he had leisure and got opportunitye by stealth. And among
other things he sent many Epistles, the copies whereof are extante, to the
Citizens of London, to the Vnyuersite and town of Cambridge, to the towns of
Walden and Manchester, also to his two brethren their wives and famylyes, in
which Epistles, the sincere zeal of his Christyan heart and godliness, does
marueilously appear. At length after long labors and sorrows, he was privily
led from the counter by night to Newgate. The next day earlye in the
morninge, he was brought forth into Smithfield, with an other young manne
called Iho^ Lyefe being eightene years old, he was there burnte. At London the
first of Iulii. Anno M.D.LV.

The effect of.M. John Bradfordes examinacion before the Lord Chanceller B. of
Winchester, the B. of London and others in commission the.22. of April. Anno.
Domini.1555.
AFter the Lord Chancellor and the residew of the Queens council in commission
with him, had ended their talk with master Farrar late bishop of S. Dauies:
the vndermarshal of the kings Bench was commanded to bring in master
Bradford, who being come in to the presence of the counsel sitting at a table
he kneling down on his knee, but immediately by my lord Chauncelor was bidden
to stand up and so he did. When he was risen the lord Chauncelor earnestly
looked upon him, to have (be like) ouerfaced him: but he gave no place, that is,
he ceased not in like manner, to look on the lord Chancellor still and
continuallye (save ye once he cast his eyes to heaven ward sighing for gods
help) and so outfaced him as they say. The^ the Lord Chauncelor, as it were
amassed and some thing troubled: spoke thus to him in effect, that of long time
he had been imprisoned justly, for his behauioure at Poules cross the.xiii. of
Auguste Anno. 1554. for his false prechinge and arrogancye, taking upon him
to preach without authority. But now, quoth he, the time of mercy is
come, and therefore the Queens highness myndyng to offer unto you mercy, has
by us sent for you, to declare and give the same, if so be ye will with us
return. And quoth he if you will do as we have done, you shall find as we
have found I warraunte you. These were the sum, and even in manner, the words
he spoke. To these words master Bradford spoke, after reverent obeysaunce
made, in this manner. My Lord and Lords all, I confess that I have been
long prisoned, and (with humble reverence be it spoken) unjustly, for that I
did nothing sediciouslye, falselye, or arrogantlye, in word or fact, by
preching or otherwise, but rather sought peace, and al godly quietness as an
obedient and faithful subject both in going about to save the bishop of
Bathe now, the^ M. Bourne the preacher at ye cross, and in preaching for
quietness accordingly. At these words or rather before he had fullye finished
them the lord Chauncellor some thing snuffed, and spoke with an admiracion, yt
there was a loud lie. For quoth he, the fact was sedicious as you my lord of
London can bear witness, you say true my lord, quoth the bishop of London. I
saw him with mine own eyes when he took upon him to rule, and lead the
people malypertly, thereby declaring yt he was the author of the sedicion.
Hear John Bradforde replied, and said: that notwithstanding my lord bishops
seeing and saying yt he had told, was the truth, as one day quoth he, my
lord god almightye shall reueile to all the world, when we all shall come and
appear before him. In the mean season because I cannot be believed of you, I
must, and am ready to suffer, as now your sayi^gs: so whatsoever God shall
license you to do unto me. I know, quoth my lord Cha^cellor then, thou haste a
gloriouse tongue, and godly shows thou make, but all is lies that thou
do. And again, I have not forgotten how stubburne thou were when thou werte
before us in the Tower, whether thou wast committed to prison concerning
relygion. I have not forgotten thy behavior and talk, where through, worthily
thou have been kept in prison, as one yt would have done more hurt then I will
speak of. My Lord (quoth Bradforde) as I said, I say again, that I stand, as
before you, so before god, and one day we shall al stand before him, The truth
then will be the truth, though you will not now, so take it. Yea my lord (quoth
he) I dare say that my lord of Bathe (M. Bourne) will witness with me, yt I
sought his sauegard, with the peril of mine own life, I thank god therefore.
That is not true, quoth the bishop of London, for I my self did see thee, take
upon thee to much. No, quoth Bradforde, I took nothing upon me, undesired
and that of master Bourn himself, as if he were here present, I dare say he
would affirm it, for he desired me, both to help him to pacify the
people, and not to leave him till he was in safety. And as for my behauioure in
the Tower, and talk before your hohours, if I did or said any thing that did
not beseme me, if wherein your lordships would tell me: I should and would
shortly make you answer. Well (quoth my lord Chancellor) to leave this matter,
how say thou now, will thou return again, and do as we have done, and thou
shalt receive the Queens mercy and pardon? M^ lord, quoth Bradforde, I
desire mercy with gods mercy, but mercy with Gods wrath, god keep me from,
although, I thank God therefore, my conscience does not accuse me that I did
or spoke any thing, wherefore I should need to receive mercy or pardon. For all
that ever I did or spoke, was agreinge to Gods laws, and the laws of the
realm at that present, and did make much quietness. Well quoth my lord
Chancellor, if thou make this babli^g rolling in thy eloquent tongue, being
altogether ignorant and vain glorious, and will not receive mercy offered to
thee: know for truth that the Queen is minded to make a purgacion of all
such as thou art. The Lord quoth Bradforde to fore whom I stand as well as
before you, knows what vain glory I have sought, and seek in this behalf. His
mercy I desire, and also would be glad of the Queens favor, to live as a
subject without clogge of conscience, but otherwise the lords mercy is to me
better then life. And I know, quoth he, to whom I have committed my life: eue^
to his hands which will keep it so, that no man may take it away before it
be his pleasure. There are 1^. hours in the day, and as long as they last, so
long shall no man have power thereon. Therefore his good will be done, life in
his dyspleasure is worse then death, and death in his true favor is true
life. I know well enough, quoth my Lord Chauncellor, that we should have
glorious talk enough of thee, be sure therefore yt as thou have deceived the
people with false and deuilishe doctrine: so shalt thou receive. I have not
deceived, quod Bradforde, the people, nor taught any other doctrine, then by
Gods grace I am (and hope shall be) ready to confirm with my life. And as for
deuilishnesse and falsenesse in the doctrine I would be sorye you could so
prove it. Why (quoth the Bishop of Duresme) tell me what you say by the
ministracion of the communion, as you now know it is: My lord (says
Bradforde) here must I desire of your Lordeship, and of all your honors: a
question, tofore I do make answer to any intergatorie or question, wherewith
you now begin. I have been.vi. times sworn, yt I should in no case consent, to
the practysing of any iurisdiccion, or any authority on the Bishop of Romes
behalf, within this realm of England. Now therefore (before God) I humbly pray
your honors, to tell me, whether you ask me this question, by his authority
or not? If you do I dare not nor may not answer you any thing in his
aucthorite you shall demand of me, except I would be forsworn, which God
forbid. Have thou been sworn.vi. times quoth master Secretarye Burn, what
offices haste thou borne? Here is an other lie, quoth my Lord Chauncelor.
Forsooth, quoth Bradfoode, I was thryse sworn in Cambridge, when I was admitted
master of Art, when I was admitted fellow in Pe^brock Hall, and when I was
there, the Visiters came thither and swear the University. Again I was sworn
when I entered into the mynisterye, when I had a prebende given me, and when
I was sworn to serve the King a little before his death.

Tushe quoth my lord Chauncelor, Herodes oaths a man should make no conscience
at. But, quoth Bradford, mi lord, these oaths were no Herodes oaths, nor no
unlawful oaths, but oaths according to gods word, as you your self have
well affirmed in your book de Vera obedie^tia. My lords quoth an other of the
counsel, yt stood by the table, M. Rochester I wene, I never knew wherefore
this man was in prison before now, but I see well, that it had not been good
that this man had been abroad. What so ever was the cause he was laid in
prison I know not, but I now see well, yt not without cause he was, and is to
be kept in prisone. Yea, quoth Secretarye Bourn, it was reported this
parliament time by the Earl of Derby, that he has done more hurt by letters,
and exhortinge these yt have come to him, in religion, the^ ever he did when he
was abroad by preachinge. In his letters he curses all that teaches false
doctrine (for so he calls that which is not according to that he taught) and
most earnestly exhorts the^ to whom he writes to continue still in that
they have received by him, and such like as he is. All which words diverse
others of of the counsel affirmed, whereunto the said master Bourn added
saying, how say you serra (speaking to Bradforde) have you not thus
sediciouslye written, and exhorted the people. I have, quoth Bradford, written
nor spoken any thing sediciouslye: and, I thank god therefore, I have not
admytted any sedicious cogitacion, nor I trust never shall do. yea, but thou
haste written letters, quoth master Secretary Bourne. why speak thou not,
quoth my lord Chauncelour, have thou not written as he says. That, quoth
Bradforde, I have written, I have written. Lord God (quoth. M. Southwell) what
an arrogant and stubburne boy is this, that thus stoutlye and dallyengly,
behave himself before the Queens counsel. whereat, one looked upon an other,
with disdaynefull countenance. My lords and masters, quoth Bradforde, the
Lord God which is, and will judge us all: knows, that as I am certain I
stand now before his majesty, so with reverence in his syghte, I stand
before you unto your, and accordyngly, in words and gesture I desire to
behave my self. if you otherwise take it, I doubt not but God in his time
will reuele it. In the mean season, I shall suffer with all due obedyence,
your sayings and deeds too, I hope. These be gay glorious words, quoth my
Lord Chauncelour, of reverence, reverence, but as in all other things, so
hrrein thou do nothing but lie. Well quoth Bradforde, I would God the
author of truth, and abhorrer of lies, would pull my tongue out of my head
before you all, and show a terrible judgment on me here presentlye: if I
have purposed or do purpose, to lie before you, whatsoever you shall ask me.

Why then, quoth my lord Chancellor, do thou not answer? haste thou written
such letters as here is objected against the? As I said my lord (quod
Bradforde) that I have written I have written. I stand now before you which
either can lay my letters to my charge or not, if you lay any thing to my
charge that I have written, if I deny it I am then a lier. we shall never have
done with thee I perceive now, says my lord Cha^celor, be short, be short,
wylt thou have mercy? I pray God (quoth Bradforde) give me his mercy, and if
therewith you will extend yours, I will not refuse it, but otherwise I will not.
Hear was now much a do, one speaking thus and other speaking that, of his
arrogancye in refusing the Queens pardon which she so louyngly* did offer
unto him. whereto Bradforde answered thus: my lords if I may live as a quiet
subject, without clogge of conscience, I shall heartily thank you, for your
pardon, if otherwise I behave my self, then I am in danger of the fault. In
the mean season, I ask no more, but the benefit of a subject, till I be
convinced of transgressio^. If I cannot have this, as hitherto I have not had,
gods good will be done. Upon these words, my lord Chauncelor begone a long
process, of the false doctrine, wherewith people were deceived, in the days of
king Edward, and so turned the end of his talk to Bradforde, sayi^g, how
say thou. My lord, quoth Bradforde, the doctrine taught i^ K^^g Edwardes
days was gods pure religion, the which as I then believed, so do I now more
believe then ever I did. And therein I am more confirmed and ready to declare
it, by gods grace even as he will, to the world, then I was when I first came
into prisone. What religion mean you (quoth the bishop of Durisme, in King
Edwardes days? what year of his reign? Forsooth (quoth Bradforde) even that
same year of his reign (my Lord) that the king dyed and I was preacher.
Hear wrote master Secretary Bourn I wotte not what. Now after a little
pawsyng, my Lord Chauncelloure begins again to declare, that the doctrine
taught in King Edwardes days, was heresye using for probacion and
demonstra^ion thereof no Scryppure nor reason but this, that i^ ended with
Treason and Rebellion, so that (quoth he) the very end were enough to
improve, that doctrine to be naught. Ah my Lord (quoth Bradford) that you
would enter in to Gods Sanctuary, and mark the end of this present doctrine,
you now so magnify. What meanest thou by that (quoth he) I wene we shall have
a snatche of rebellion even now. No (quoth Bradforde) my lord I mean no such
end as you would gather, I mean an end which none sees but they yt enter
into gods Sanctuary. If a man look but on present things, he will sone deceive
himself. Hear now did my Lord Chauncellor offer again mercy, and Bradford
answered as before, mercy with gods mercy should be welcome, but otherwise he
would none. Whereupon the said lord Chancellor did ring a little bell be like to
call in so^e body, for there was present none in manner, but only these before
named, and the bishop of Worcester. Now when one was come in, it is best,
quoth master Secretarye Burn, yt you give ye keeper a charge of this fellow.
So was the vndermarshall called in. you shall take this man to you, quoth my
Lord Chauncelor, and keep him close, without conference with any man, but by
your knowledge, and suffer him not to write any letters. etc. For he is of an
other manner of charge unto you now, then he was before, and so they departed,
the said Bradford lokyng as cherefully as any man could do, declaring
thereby, even a desire to give his life, for confirmacion of that he has
taught and written. And surely (if he do) so his death will destroy more of
the Philistines, as Sampson did, then ever he did in his life, God almyghtie
keep him and al his fellows bound for the lords sake. Amen.

The effect of the second examinacion of John Bradforde in the temple of S.
Marie Oueries, before the lord Chauncelour and diverse other bishops
the.xxix. day of Ianuarii.1555.
AFter the excommunycacio^ of Iho^ Rogers, John Bradford was called in, and
standing before the lord Chancelour and other bishops set with him: the said
lord Cha^celor spoke thus in effect. That wheretofore the.22 of January, they
called the said Bradford before the^ and offered unto him ye Queens pardon,
although he had conte^ned ye same, and further he said yt he would stiffly and
stoutly maintain and defend therronious doctrine holde^ in ye days of king
Edward the.6. yet in co^sideracio^ that the Queens highness is wonderful
merciful, they thought good eftsoon to offer the same, mercy again before it
be to late. Therefore (quod my lord Chancellor) now advise you well, there
is yet space and grace tofore we so proceed, that you be committed to the
seculer power, as we must do, and will do, if you will not follow thexample of
M. Barlowe and Cardmaker who^ he there commended, adding oratoriously
amplificacions, to move the said Bradford to yield to the religion presently
set forth. After the lord Chauncellors long talk, Bradford began on this sort
to speak. My Lord (quoth he) and my lords al, as now I stand in your sight
before you, so I humbly beseech your honors to consider, that you sit in ye
sight of the lord: who as David does witness is in the congregacions of
judges, and fittes in the myddest of the^ iudgeing. And as you would your
place, to be now of us taken as gods place: so demonstrate your selves, to
follow him in your sittyng, that is: seek no giltlesse blood, nor hunte not by
questions, to bring into ye snare, them which are out of the same. At this
present I stand before you, guilty or giltlesse: if guilty, the^ proceed and
give sentence accordinglye, if giltles, then give me the benefit of a subject,
which hitherto I could not have. Hear the Lord Chancellor replied and
said, that the said Bradford began with a true sentence: Deus stetit in
sinagoga. etc. but, quod he, this and all thy gesture, declares but
Hypocrisy, and vain glory. And further he made much a do to purge himself,
that he sought no giltles blood, and so began a long process, how that
Brodfordes fact at Poules cross, was presu^ptuous arrogant, and declared a
taking upon him, to lead the people. which could not, but turn to much
disquietnes, quod he, in yt thou, speaki^g to Bradford, was so prefract and
stout in religion, at that present. For ye which as thou wast the^ committed to
prison, so hitherto haste thou been kept in prison, where thou haste written
letters to no little hurt to the Queens people, as by the report of therle of
Darby in the parliament house, was credeblye reported. And to this be added, yt
the said Bradford did stubbernly behave himself, the last time he was before
them, and therefore not for any other thing now I demand thee of (quod he) but
of and for thy doctrine and religion. Mi lord (quod Bradforde) where you accuse
me of hipocrisy and vain glory, I must and will leave it to the lords
declaracio^, which one day will open yours and my truth: and heartye
dealinges. In the mean season I will content my self, with the testimony of mine
own conscience. Which if it yielded to hipocrisy, could not but have god my foe
also, and so both god and man were against me. As for my fact at Poules
cross, and behauior before you at the Tower, I doubt not but god will reuele
it to my comfort. For if ever I did any thing which god used to publyke
benefit, I think that, yt my deed was one: and yet for it I have been and am
kept of long time in prison. And as for letters and religion I answer (quod
Bradforde) as I did the last time I was before you. There diddeste thou say
(quod my Lord Chancellor) that thou would stubbernli and manly maintein
therronious doctrine in king Edwardz days. My lord (quod Bradforde) I said
the last time I was before you yt I had.6. times taken an oath, yt I should
never consent to the practicing of any Iurisdiccion on the bishop of Rome his
behalf, and therefore durst not answer to any thing should be demanded
so, least I should be forsworn, which God forbid. How be it saving mine
oath, I said that I was more confirmed in the doctrine set forth public in
king Edwardes days, then ever I was, before I was put in prisone, and so I
thought I should be, and think yet still I shall be found more ready to give
my life, as god will, for the confirmacion of the same. I remember well (quod my
lord Cha^celour) that thou made much a do about a nedeles matter, as though
the oath against the B. of Rome were, so great a matter. So others have done
before thee, but yet not in such sort as thou have done. For thou pretendist
a conscience in it, which is nothing else but mere hypocrisy. My conscience
quod Bradforde, is known to the Lord, and whether I deal here in
hipocritally or no, he knows. As I said therefore then my lord, quod he so
say I again now, that for fear lest I should be perjured I dare not make
answer to any thing, you shall demand of me, if my aunsweryng should consent,
to the practysing of any iurisdiccion for the.B. of Rome, here in England. Why,
quod my lord Chancelour, did thou not begin to tell, that we are Dii and sit
in gods place, and now will thou not make us answer? My lord, quod
Bradforde, I said you would have your place taken of us now, as gods place,
and therefore I brought forth that piece of scripture, yt ye might be the more
admonished to follow God and his ways at this present, who sees us all, and
well perceyueth, whether of conscience I pretend this matter of the oath or
no. No, quod my my lord Chancellor, al men may se thy hipocrisy: for, if for
thine oaths sake thou do not answer, the^ would thou not have spoken as
thou did, and have answered me at the first. But now me^ may well perceive,
yt this is but a startynge hole to hide thy self in, because thou dare not
answer, and so would escape, bli^dyng the simple peoples eyes, as though
of conscience you did all you do. That which I spoke at the first (quod
Bradforde) was not a replicacyon or an answer to yt you spoke to me, and
therefore I need not to lay for me mine oath: for I thought, perchance you would
have more weyed what I did speak, the^ you did. But when I perceued you did not
considre it, but came to ask matter whereto by answering I should co^se^t to
the practisinge of iurisdiccio^ on the B. of Rome his behalf here in England
and so be forsworn: the^ of conscience and simplicity I spoke as I do yet
again speak, yt I dare not for conscience sake answer you, and therefore I seek
no startinge holes, nor go about to blind the people, as God knows. For if
you of your honor shall tell me, yt you do not ask me any thing, whereby my
answering should consent to the practicing to ye B. of Romes iurisdiccio^ ask
me wherein you will, and you shall here, yt I will answer you as flatly as ever
any did yt came before you. I am not afraid of death I thank god, for I
look, and have looked for nothing else at your hands of long time. But I am
afraid when death comes. I should have matter to trouble my conscience by the
giltines of perjury, and therefore do answer as I do. These be but gaye
glorious words, quod my lord Chauncelour, full of hypocrisy and vain glory.
And yet do not thou know, quod he speaking to Bradforde, yt I sit here as
B. of Winchester in mine own dioces, and therefore may do this which I do,
and more too? My lord, quod Bradforde, give me leave to ask you this question,
that my conscience may be out of doubt in this matter. Tell me here coram deo
before god, all this audyence being witness, that you demand me nothing, whereby
my aunswering should consent to and confirm the practice of iurisdiccion for
the B. of Rome here in England: and your honor shall hear me, give you as
flat and as plain answers briefly, to whatsoever you shall demand me: as ever
any did. Here the lord Chauncellor was wonderfully offended, and spoke much,
how that the B. of Romes authority, need no confirmacion of Bradfordes
aunsweringe, nor no such as he was. And turned his talk to the people, how
yt Bradforde followed craftye covetous merchants: which, because they would
lend no money to their neighbors, when they were in need: would say, that they
had sworn often, they would never lend any more money, because their
credytours had so often deceived the^. Eue^ so thou (quod he to Bradford) do
at this present, to cast a mist in ye peoples eyes, to bleare them with an
heresy, which is greatter, and more hurtful to the common wealth, pretend
thine oath, whereby the people might make a conscience where as they should
not. Why speak thou not? quoth he. My lord (quod Bradford, as I said I say
again, I dare not answer you for fear of perjury, from which God defend
me: Or else I could tell you, yt there is a difference between oaths. Some be
according to faith and charity, as ye oath against the B. of Rome. Some be
against faith and charity, as this, to deny my help to my brother in his
need. Here again ye lord Cha^cellor was much offended, still saying, that
Bradford durst not answer: and further made much a do to prove, that ye oath
to ye B. of Rome was against charity. But Bradford answered, that how so ever
hrs honor took him, yet was he, assured of his meani^g, that no fear but ye
fear of perjury made him aferd to answer. For as for death my lord (quod he)
as I know there ar.12. hours in the day, so with ye lord my time is appointed.
And when it shall be his good time, then shall I depart hence. But in the mean
season, quod he, I am safe enough though all the world had sworn my death.
Into his hands I have committed it, his good will be done. And, quod Bradford,
saui^g mine oath, I will answer you in this behalf, that the oath against the. B
of Rome was not nor is not against charity. How prove you yt, quod my lord
Cha^celor. Forsooth, quod Bradford, I prove it thus: That is not against
charity, which is not against gods word: but this oath against the bishop of
Romes authority in England is not against gods word, therefore it is not
against charity. Is it not against gods word, quod my Lord Chancellor,
that a man should take a king, to be supreme head of the church in his
realm? No quod Bradford (saving still mine oath) it is not against gods word,
but with it, being taken in such sense as it may be well taken: that is
attributing to the kings power, yt soueraintie in all his dominions. I pray
you, quod the lord Chauncelour, where find you that? I find it in many
places, quod Bradforde, but specially in the.13. to the Romans, where Saint
Paul writes: every soul to be obedient to the superior power. But what
power? que gladium gestat, ye power verily which bears the sweord, which is
not the spiritual but the temporal power: As Chrysostom full well notes
(quod Bradforde) upon the same place, which your honor knows better then I.
He (Chrysostom I mean) there plainly shows, yt bishops, prophets, and
apostles owe obedience to ye temporal maiestrates. Here yet more the Lord
Chancelour was stered and said, how that Bradforde went about, to deny al
obedience to the Queen, for his oath, and so (quod he) this man would make,
gods word a warrant of disobedience. For he will answer the Queen on this
sort, that when she says now swear to the B. of Rome, or obey his
aucthoritye. No, will he say, for I am then forsworn, and so make the Queen
no Queen. No (quod Bradforde) I go not about to deny all obedience to the
Queens highness, by deniyng obedience in this part, if she should demand
it. For I was sworn to king Edward, not simply: that is, not only concerning
his own person, but also concerning his successors. And therefore in denying
to do the Queen's request herein, I deny not her authority, nor become
dishobedient. Yes, that do thou (quod my Lord Chancellor.) And so he began
to tell a long tale, how if a man should make an oath to pay a.Cli. by
such a day, and the manne to whom it was due, would forgive the debt. The
debtor would say, no, you cannot do it, for I am forsworn the^. etc. Here
Bradford desired my lord Chauncellor, not to trifle it, saying: yt he wondered,
his honor would make solemn oaths (made to god) trifles in that sort. And
make so great a matter concerni^g vows as they call it, made to the bishop for
marriage of priests. At these words ye lord Cha^celour was much offended, and
said he did not trifle, but (quod he) thou go about to deny obedience to
the Queen, which now requires obedience to the B. of Rome. No my lord (quod
Bradford) I do not deny obedience to the Queen, if you would discern
between genus and species. Because I may not obey in this, to reason, ergo I
may not obey in the other, is not firm. As if a man let one sell a piece of his
inheritance, yet this notwtsta^dyng al his inheritance is not let or sold. And
so in this case, all obedyence I deny not because I deny obedience in this
branche. I will none of those similitudes said the lord Chancellor. I would
not use the^ (quod Bradforde) if that you went not about to persuade ye
people, I mean that which I never me^t. For I my self, not only mean
obedience, but will give ensample* of all most humble obedience to ye Queens
highness, so long as she requires not obedience against god. No no (quod my
lord Chauncelour) al men may perceive well enough your meaning. There is no
man, though he be sworn to the king, does therefore break his oath, if
afterward he be sworn to the French king and to the emperor. It is true my
Lord (quod Bradforde) but the cases be not like. For here is an excepcio^:
thou shall not swear to ye. B. of Rome at any time. If in like manner we were
sworn, thou shall not serve the emperor etc. you see there were some alteracion
and more doubt. But (quod Bradford) I beseech your honor, remember what ye
your self have written, answeringe the obieccions here against, in your book
de vera obedientia. Vincat modo domini verbi veritas. Let Gods word and the
reasons thereof bear the bell away. Hear the lord Chauncelor was throughlye
moved, and said still, how that Bradforde had written sedicious letters, and
perverted the people thereby, and did stoutly stand, as though he would defend
the erroneous doctrine in king Edwardes time, against all men, and now (quod
he) he says, he dare not answer. I have written no sedicious letters (quod
Bradforde) I have not perverted ye people. But that which I have written and
spoken, yt will I never deny by gods grace. And where your L. says, I dare not
answer you: yt al me^ may know I am not afraid, saui^g mine oath, ask me what
you will, and I will plainelye make you answer by gods grace: although I now see
my life lies thereon. But O lord (quod he) into thy hands I commit it, come
what come will: only sanctify thy name in me, as in one instrumente of thy
grace. Amen. Now ask what you will (quod Bradford) and you shall se I am not
afraid by gods grace, flatly to answer. Well then (quod my lord Chauncelour)
how say you to the blessed sacrament? do you not believe, there Christ to be
present concerning his natural body? My lord (quod Bradforde) I do believe
Christ to be corporally present, in his sacrament duly used. Corporally I say,
that is, in such sort as he would, I mean Christ is there corporally
present unto faith. Unto faith (quod my lord Chaunceloure) we must have
many more words to make it more plain. you shall so (quod Bradford) but first
give me leave to speak two words. Speak on, quoth my lord Chancellor. I
have been now a year and almost three quarters in prysone (quod Bradforde) and
of all this time, you never questyoned with me hear aboutes, when I might
have spoken my conscience frankely, without peril. But now you have a law to
ha^g up and put to death, if a man answer, freely and not to your appetite. And
so you now come to demand this question. Ah my lord (quod Bradforde) Christ
used not th^s way to bring men to faith. No more did the Prophets or the
Apostles. Rembee^r what Barnarde writes to Eugenius the Pope: Apostolos lego
stetisse iudicandos, sedisse iudicantes non legi. Hoc erit illud fuit* etc.
Here the Cha^celor was appeased as it seemed, and spoke most gentlye, that he
used not this means. It was not my doing, although some there be) quod he)
that think this to be the best way. I for my part (quod he) have been
challenged for being to gentle often times. The which thing the B. of London
confirmed, and so did almost all the audience, that he had been ever to
mylde and to gentle. At which words Bradforde spoke thus: My Lord, quod he,
I pray you stretche out your gentleness, that I may feel it, for hitherto I
never felt it. As soon as be had spoken thus, the lord Chancellor (belyke
thinking Bradforde would have had mercy and pardone, as Cardmaker and
Barlow had) said, that with all his heart not only he, but the Queens
highness would stretche out mercy, if with them he would return.
Return my Lord, quoth Bradforde, God save me from that going back. I mean
it not so: But I mean, quoth he, that I was three quarters of a year in the
Tower, without paper pen or ink, and never in all that time nor sithe^, did I
feel any gentleness from you. I have rather looked for, as I have hitherto
found, extremity. And (quod he) I thank God, I perceue now, you have kept me
in prison thus long, not for any matter you had, but for matter you would have.
Gods good will be done. Here was now, diverse, telli^g my lord it was diner
time, and so he rose up, leaving Bradforde speaking, and sayi^g, that in ye
after noone they would speak more with him. And so was he had into ye vestry,
and was there all that day till dark night, and so was conveyed again to
prisone: declaringe by his countenance great joy in god: the which God
increase in him.

The effect and sum of the last examinacion of that faithful instrument of
God John Bradforde in the Church of Saint Marie Oueries the 29. day of
Ianuarii.1555.
AFter the excommunicacion of Laure^ce Sau^ders, John Bradford was called in,
and being brought before the Lord Chauncelour and other bishops there
sittinge: the Lord Chancelour began to speak thus in effect, that Bradforde
being now eftsoon com before the^, would answer with modesty and humylitye,
and conform himself to the Catholyke Church with them. And so yet might he
find mercy, because they would be loath to use extremite. Therefore he concluded
with an exhortacio^, yt Bradforde would recante his doctrine. After the lord
Chancellor had ended his long oracion, Bradforde began to speak thus. As
yesterday I besought your honor, to set in your sight the majesty and
presence of God, to follow him which seeks not to subvert the simple by subtle
questions: so, quoth he, I humblye beseech every one of you to day, for yt you
know that giltles blood will cry vengeance. And thus, quoth he, I pray not
your Lordship to do, as one that takes upon me, to condemn you utterly herin,
but that you might be the more admonyshed to do, that which none does, so
much as he should do. For our nature is so much corrupt that we are very
obliuious and forgetful of god. Again, quod Bradford, as yesterdaie I
pretended my oath and oaths against ye B. of Rome, that I should never consent
to the practicing of any iurisdiccion for him, or in his behalf in the realm
of England: so again this day lest I should be perjured. And last of al, as
yesterday the answer I made was by protestacion and saving my oath: so would I
your honors should know, that mine shall be this day. And this I do that when
death, which I look for at your hands, shall come: I shall not be troubled
with the giltines of perjury. At these words ye lord Chancellor was wroth, and
said that they had given him respite to deliberate until this day, whether he
would reca^t the heresies of the blessed sacrament, which yesterday (quod the
lord Chancellor, before us you vttred. My lord (quod Bradforde) you gave me no
time of any such delyberacion, neither did I any thing of the sacrament, which
you did disalow. For when I had declared a presence of Christ to be there to
the faithful: you went from the matter to purge your self yt you were not
crewel, and so went to dinner. What, I perceive (quod my lord Cha^celour) we
must begin all again with thee: d^d I not yesterday tell thee plainly, that
thou made a conscience where none should be? Did I not make it plain that
the oath against the Bishop of Rome was an unlawful oath?

No (quod Bradford) In deed my lord you said so, quod he, but proved is not nor
never can do. Oh lord god (quod the lord Chauncelour) what a fellow art thou?
Thou wouldeste go about to bring into the peoples heads, that we, all the
lords of the parliament house, ye knights, Burgiesses, and all the whole, is
perjured. Oh what an heresye is this? Here good people ye may see what a
Churlishe heretic this fellow is. If I should make an oath, I would never
help my brother, or lend him money in his need, were this a good answer to
tell my neighbor, desyringe my help that I had made an oath to the
contrary, I could not do it? Hear the lord Chauncelor made much a do,
and a long time was spent about oaths, which were good and which were evil, he
capciously asking of Bradford often answer of things concerning oaths, which
Bradford would not give simply, but with distinccio^, whereat the lord
Chancelour was sore offended. But Bradford still kept him at the baye: that the
oath against the B. of Rome, was an unlawful oath, using thereto, the
Chancelors own book de Vera obedientia* For confirmacio^: at the length they
came to this issue, who should judge of the lawfulnes of of the oaths. And
Bradford said, the word of God, according to Christ's own words. John.12.
saying: My word shall judge. And according to the testimony of Esai.2. and
Micheas.4. That gods word coming out of Jerusalem shall give sentence amongst
ye gentiles. By these words my lord quod he, I will prove the oath against ye
B. of Romes auctorite, to be a good, a godli, and a lawful oath. So thereof the
lord Chauncelor left his hold, sayi^g yt as ye other day he p^te^ded denial of
the Queens authority and obedience to her highness: so did he now. But
Bradford, as the day before proved, that obedience in this point are particular
to the Queen's highness. If she should demand an oath to the.B. of Rome being
denied, it was a general denial of her authority and obedience to her, no
more (quoth he) then the gift or lease of a sole piece of a man's inheritance
proves, a sale, gift, or lease of the whole inheritance. And thus much a do
was made about the matter. The lord Chancellor talking much, and using many
examples of debt, of going out of the town to morrow by oath, yet tarying till
Fridaye and such like, which triflinge talk Bradford did touch, saying,
that it was a wonder, that his honor did wey conscience no more in this, and
would be so earnest in vows for marriage of Priests, made to bishops, and be
careless for Solemn oaths made to God and the prince. Summa this was the
end, the lord Chauncelour said, the Queen might dispense with it: and did
it to all the whole realm. But Bradford said, the Queens highness, could do no
more but remitte her right. And as for the oath made to God, she could never
remytte. For as much as it was made to God. At which words the lord
Chancelour chafed wonderfully, and said that in plain sentence he slandered
the hole realm of perjury: and therefore (quod he) to ye people, you may se how
this fellow takes upon him, to have more knowledge and conscience, then all the
wise men of England, and yet (quod he) he has no conscience at al. Well (quod
Bradforde) my lord let all the sta^ders by see, who has conscience. I have been
a year and a half in prison, now before all this people declare, wherefore I was
prisoned, or what cause you had to punish me* you said the other day in your
own house, my Lord of London witnessing with you, that I took upon me to
speak to the people vndesyred. There he sytteth by your Lordship, I mean my
lord Bishop of Bath, which desired me himself, for ye passion of Christ I would
speak to the people, upon whose words I coming in to the pulpit: had like to
have been slain with a naked dagger, which was hurled at me, I think, for it
touched my sleaue. He eftsoon prayed me, I would not leave him, and I
promised, as long as I lived, I would take hurt ye day before him, and so went
out of the pulpit, and at length brought him safe to a house. Besides this: in
ye after noone I prech at Bow church, and going up into the pulpitte, one
wylled me not to reprove ye people for ye fact (for quod he) you shall never
come down alive if you do it. And yet (quod Bradford) notwithstanding, I did
in ye Sermond, reprove their fact, and called it sedicion, at the least.xx.
times. For all which my doing, I have received this recompense, prison a year
and a half and more, and death, now which you go about. Let al me^ (quod
Bradford) now judge, where conscience is. In speking these words: there was ye
e^deuored to have let it, but Bradford spoke on, and let the^ speak what
they would. And the lord Chancelour said, yt for all his fair talk his fact at
ye Cross was naught. No (quod Bradford) my fact was good, as you your self
did bear witness with me. For when I was first before you in ye Tower you your
self did say yt the fact was good, but, quod you, the mind was evil, well
then quod I, my lord, in that you allow my fact and condemn my mind in it, I
can not otherwise declare my mind to man the^ by saying and doi^g, god, I
trust, one day will open to my comfort what my mind was, and what yours is.
Here the lord Chauncelour was offended and said, that he never said so, I
(quod he) had not so little wit, I trow, as not to discern betwixt meaning and
doing, and so brought forth, little to ye purpose, many examples, that me^
construe things, not by the meaning of man, but by their doings. But when
this could not serve: then comes he to another matter, and said, he was put
in prison at the first, because he would not yield, nor be confirmable to the
Queens religion. Why (quoth Bradford) your honor knows, that you would not
then reason with me in religion, but you said a time should afterward be found
out, when I should be talked with al. But (quod Bradford) if it were as your
lordship says, yt I was put in for religion, in yt my religion was the^
auctorised by the public laws of the realm, could conscience punish me or
cast me into prison th^rfore? Wherefore let al me^ judge in who^ conscience
wants. Here comes forth M. Cha^berlain of Woodstocke, and said to the Lord
Chancellor, yt Bradforde had been a serving man, and was with M. Harington. True
(quod the lord Chancelour) and did deceive his M. of.27 pounds, and because of
this, he went to be a gospeller, and a preacher (good people) and yet you se
how he pretends conscience. My lord, quod Bradford, I set my foot to his foot
whosoever he be, yt ca^ come forth, and justly vouch to mi face yt ever I
deceived my M. And as you ar chief justices by office, in England, I desire
justice upon them yt so slander me, because they cannot prove it. Here my lord
Chauncelour and M. Chamberlain were stroke blanke, and said they heard it, but,
quod the lord Chancellor, you have an other manner of matter then this, for
you are an heretic. yea, quoth ye B. of London, he did write letters to. M
Pendleton* which knows his hand as well as his own* your honor, quoth ye
bishop to the lord Chancelour, did se them. That is not true, quoth Bradforde,
I did never write to Pendleton sith I came into prisone, therefore I am not
iustlye spoken of. yea but you indicted it, quoth the B. of London. I did not,
quoth Bradforde, nor know not what you mean, and that I offer to prove. Here
comes a another, I trow they call him M. Allin one of the Clarks of the
counsel, putting my lord in rememberance, of letters sent into Lanke^shire. It
is true, quoth the Lord Chancellor unto him, for we have his hand to show. I
deny ye quoth Bradford, yt you have my hand to show, of letters sent into
Lankeshire, otherwise, then before you all I will stand up and prove the^ to
be good and lawful. Here was al answered, and therefore the lord Chancelour
began a new matter. Sir, quoth he, in my house the other day, you did most
contempteously contempne the Queens mercy, and further said, you would
maynteine the erroneous doctrine in king Edwardes days, against al men, and
this you did most stoutly. Well (quoth Bradforde) I am glad that al men see,
you had no matter to imprison me before that day, iustlye: now say I, that I
did not conte^tuously contemn ye Queens mercy, but wolud have had it with
gods mercy, that is, without saying and doing any thing, against god and his
truth* And as for maintenau^ce of doctrine (because I cannot tell how you will
stretche this word maintenance) I will repete again yt which I spoke. I said
I was more confirmed in the religion set forth in king Edwardes days, then
ever I was, and if god so would, I trust I should declare it, by giving my life
for the confirmacion and testificacion thereof. So I said then, and so I say
again now, quod Bradford. As for otherwise to maintain it, then pertayneth to
a private person: by confession (I thought not nor think. Well (quod the lord
Chancellor) yesterday thou did mayntain false heresy, concerning ye blessed
sacrament, and therefore we gave ye respite til this day, to deliberate. My lord
(quod Bradford) as I said at ye first, I spoke nothing of the Sacrament, but
yt which you allowed, and therefore reproved it not, nor gave me no time to
deliberate. Why (quod he) did thou not deny Christ's presence in the
sacrament? No (quod Bradford) I never denied nor taught, but that to the faith,
whole Christ's body and blood was as present, as bread and wine to the dew
receyuer. yea, but do thou not believe that Christ's body naturallye and
reallye is under the form of bread and wine? My Lord (quod Bradforde) I believe
Christ is present there, to faith of ye dew receyuer, as for
transubstanciacion, I plainly and flatlye tell you I believe it not. Here was
Bradford called a devil or sclanderer for we axe no question, quod ye lord
Chancellor, of transubstanciacion, but of Christ's bodily presence. Why quoth
Bradford, I deny not his presence to the faith of the receuer, but deny that
he is included in ye bred, or that the bred is transubstanciated, If he be not
i^cluded quod the B. of Worcester, how is he then present? Forsothe (quoth
Bradford) my faith knows how, though my to^g cannot express it, nor you
otherwise the^ by faith hear it or understand it. Hear was much a do now,
one Docter starting up and speking this, another that, and the lord Chancellor
talking much, of Luther, zwi^glius, and Oecola^padius. But still Bradford kept
the^ at this point, that Christ is present to faith and yt there is no
transubstanciacion nor including of Christ in the bread, but all this would not
serve the^. Therefore an other bishop asked this question, whether ye wicked man
received Christ's very body or no? and Bradford answered plainly, no. Where
the lord Chancellor made a long oracion, how yt it could not be yt Christ was
present, except that the evil man receive hi^. But Bradford put his oracion
away in few words: that grace was at ye present offered unto his lordship,
although he received it not. So yt, quod he, yt receiving makes not the
presens as your lordship would affirm, but gods grace, truth, and power, is
ye cause of the presence, the which the wicked yt lacks faith cannot receue.
And here Bradforde prayed him not to deuorce that, which God has coupled
together, he has coupled all this together: take eat this is my body, he
says not see pepe, this is my body, but take eat. Here the lord Chancelour
and the rest of the Bishops made a great a do, that Bradforde had found
out a toy, that no man else ever did, of the conditions, and the lord Chancellor
made many words to the people, here about. But Bradford said this, My lord
quod he, are not these words take eat, a commandment? and are not these
words, this is my body a promise? If you will challenge the promise, and do
not ye commandment, may you not deceue your self? Here the lord Chancellor
denied Christ to have comanded any thing in ye sacrament, or ye use of it.
Why, quod Bradford my lord I pray you tell the people, what mode accipite
manducate is, it is plain to children that Christ in so saying commands. At
these words, the lord Chauncellor made a great toying and trifling at the
imperative mode, and fell to proposing or examining as though he should teach a
child, and so concluded that it was no commandment, but such a phrase as this,
I pray you give me drink which is no commandment I trow. But Bradford prayed
him to leave toying and trifling and said thus: my lord, quod he, if it be not
a commandment of Christ to take and to eat the sacrament, why do any take
upon the^ to command and make of necessity, that which god leueth free? as you
do in making it a necessary commandment, that once a year for all that be of
lawful discrecion to receive the sacrament. Here the lord Chancelour calls
him again Diabolus or slaunderer, and so began out of these words, Cori. 10.
let a man prove himself and so eat of the bread (the bred quod Bradford?) and
drink of the cup, that was no commandment, for then, quod he, if it were a
commandment, it should bind al men in all places, and at al times. O my lord,
quoth Bradford, discern between co^mandementes, some be general that they
bind always in all places and all persons, some be not so general as this
is of the supper: The sacrament of Baptism: of the appearing before the lord
at Jerusalem: Abraha^s offering Isaac. Here the lord Chancellor said, what say
you that Baptism is commanded: the^, quoth he, we shall have.xi.
co^mandementes. In deed, quoth Bradford, I think you think as you speak, for
else you would not take the cup from the people, seeing yt Christ says, drink
of it al. But how say you my lord quoth, Bradford, Christ says to you
bishops specially, ite predicate euangelium, go and preach the gospel, feed
Christ's flock, is this a commandment or not. Here was the lord Chancellor in
a great chafe and said as pleased him. Another I wene the B. of Durham, asked
him when Christ began to be present in the sacrament, whether before the
receyuer received it or no? Bradforde answered that the question was curious,
and not necessary, and further said as the said cup was the new testament, so
the bred was Christ's body: to him that receives it duly. But yet so ye bred
is bred, for in all ye scripture ye shall not find this proposicio^, non est
panis there is no bred, and so he brought forth s. Chrisosto^, Si in corpore
essemus Summa much a do was here about, they calling Bradford heretic: and he
desired them to proceed a gods name, he looked for yt which god appointed the^
to do. Lo (quod the lord Chancellor) this fellow is now in a another heresy of
fatal desteny, as though all things were so tied together, yt of mere
necessity al things must come to pass. But Bradford praide him to take
things as they were spoken, and not wreste them into a contrary sense. your
lordshippe (quoth he) does discern betwixt god and manne, things are not by
fortune to god at any time, though to man they seem so some times. I (quod
Bradforde) spoke but as the Apostles spoke lord (quod he) see how Herod and
Po^cius Pilate with the Prelates, ar gathered together against thee Christ, to do
ye, which thy hand and counsel has before ordained the^ to do. Here began
the lord Cha^celor, to read ye exco^municacio^ and in ye exco^municacio^ when
he came to ye name of Bradford, laicus, lay man. Why (quod he) are your no
priest? No (quod Bradford) nor never was, either priest, either beneficed,
either married, either any precher, before public authority had established
religion, but preached after public authority had established religion, and
yet (quod he) I am thus handled at your hands, but god I doubt not will give
his blessing where you curse. and so he fell down on his knees and heartily
thanked god, yt he counted him worthy to suffer for his sake, and so praide god
to give the^ repentance and a good mind. After the excommunicacion was red, he
was delivered to the sheriffs of London, and so had to the clinke, from thence
to the cou^ter in the pultry, where he remains close, without al company,
books, paper, pen or ynke, loking for the dissolucion of his body, in ye
which god grant to him his sweet mercy: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

The some of the private talk had with master Io. Bradford sithen the.29 day
of. January, by such as the Prelates have sent unto him.
AFter my first arraygnement in the church of Saint Marie Oueris the.29.
day of January, about* four of the clock in the evening, there came into
the reuestrye whither I was had after my arraigmente, and tarried there al day:
a gentleman called Master Thomas Hussy of Linclonshiere, which was ones an
officer in the Duke of Norfolkes house to inquire for one Stoni^g, and when it
was answered him by the under Marshalles officers of the kings benche, which
were there with Doctor Taylour and me, that there was none such: he came
forthwith into the house, and took acquaintance of me, sainge further that he
would come and speak with me in ye morninge for old acquaintance sake, for I
was at muttrel journey a pay master, in which he was and had often received
money at my hands. Now in the morninge about vii. of the cloak he came into
the chamber, where in I lay, and being alone with me, and set down, he began
a long talk, how that of love and old acquayntance he came unto me to
speak unto me, that which he would further utter, the effect whereof was that
I did so wonderfully (quod he) behave my self before the lord Chauncelour and
the other Bishops the other day, that even the verieste enemies I had did
see, how that they had no matter against me: therefore advised me, as though
it came of his own good will without making any other man privy or aanye other
procuringe him, as he said, that I would this day (for quoth he anon you
shall be called before them again) desire therefore time and men to confer
with all. By reason whereof he thought that al men would think a wonderful
wisdom, gravity and goodness in me: and by this mean I should escape the
danger which is nearer the^ you be ware of quod he. But I answered breiflie
and said, that I could not, nor would not make any such request, for then
(quod I) occasion should I give to the people and to all other that I stood in
doubting of the doctrine, the which thing I told him I did not, but thereof was
most assured, and therefore I would give no such offense. As we were thus
talkinge, the Chamber door was unlooked, and who should come in at the door, but
one doctor Seyton, when he saw master Hussy: what sir quoth he, are you come
before me? yea thought I, goes the matter thus? and he told me no man knew of
his coming. Well Lord quoth I to my self, give me grace to remember thy
lesson, Cauere ab hominibus istis, beware of those me^, Mat. 10 Mat. 7.
etc. cast not your pearls before doges, for I see these men become to hunte
the matter yt the one may bear witness with the other. This doctor Seyton,
after some bye talk of my age, of my Country, and such like, he began a long
sermon of my lord of Ca^terburye, master Latymer, and master Redley, and how
at Oxford they where not able to answer any thing at al, and therefore: my
lord of Caunterburye desired to confer with the Bishop of Duresme and
others. All which talk tended to this end, that I should make ye like suit
being in nothing to be compared in learning to my Lord of Cau^terburye,
which thing is most true. But I breiflye aunsuered as before I did to
master Hussy, wherewith they were neither of the^ both contented: and
therefore they used many persuasions, and Master doctor said, how that he had
herd much good talk of me, tellinge how that yesternight master Ru^corne had
made report of me, at my lord Chauncelours table at supper, how that I was
able to persuade as much as any that he knew. And I my self quoth he, though
I never herd you preach nor to my knowledge never saw you before yesterdaie:
yet my thought your modesty was such, your behauour and talk so without
malice and impacientye, that I would be sorye you should do woursse then my
self, and I tell you quoth he further, I do perceive that my Lord Chauncelor
has a favor toward you: wherefore be not obstinate but desire respite and sew
to some learned men, to confer with all, but still I keep me to my Cokoo I
could not, nor would not so offend gods people: I stood in no wavering, but was
most certain of the doctrine I had taught. Here master Doctor waxed hot and
called me arrogaunte, proud, vain glorious, and spoke like a Prelate, having
no other answer of me but that he should beware of judging, Mat. ^ Mat ^
lest he condemned him self. Howbeit this would not serve but still he urged
me showing how merciful my Lord Chauncellor was, and how charitablye they
entertained me: Unto which words I briefly showed him, that I never found any
justice, much less charity. I speak it for my part (quoth he) in my Lord
Chauncellor. And so showed how I hade ben in Prison how I had been handled and
how they had no matter now aageinst me but such as they should have by mine own
confession. But nothing of this talk moved master doctor: who went from
matter to matter, from this point to that point: and I gave him still the
hearnige and answered not because he came to have had something whereby my Lord
Chauncellor might have had seemed to have kept me in prison not causeles. When
al their talk took no such effect as they would and looked for, master Hussy
began to ask me whether I would not admyte conference, if my lord Chauncelor
should offer it me publicklye: to whom I answered this in effect, that
conference, if it had been offered before the law had been made, or conference
if it were offered, so that I might be at liberty to confer, and as free as
he with whom I should confer: then quoth I, it were some thing, but else I
see not to what purpose conference should be offered, but to defer yt which
will come at the length, and the lyngering may give more offense then do good.
Hhowbeit quoth I, if my Lord should make such an offer of his own*
voluntarines: I will not refuse to confer with whom so ever shall come.
Master doctor hearing this, called me arrogant still, proud, and what so ever
pleased him, so that I besought them both (because I perceived by them I should
shortly be called for) to give me leave to talk with God, and to beg
wisdom and grace of him, for quoth I otherwise I am helpelesse. And so they
with much a do departed. And I went to god and made my pore prayer
acordingly, which of his goodness he did graciously accept and did help me in
my neade, praised therefore be his holyename.

Shortly after they were gone, I was had to saint Marie oueris and there
tarried uncalled for, till xi. of the clock that is: till Master Saunders was
excommunicated.

Upon the.3. of February, the Bishop of London came to the Counter in the
pultrie to disgrad Master Doctor Tailor, about one of the clock at after
noone, but before he spoke to Master, Tailour: I was called forth unto him:
when he saw me, of went his cappe, and out stretched he his hand, and on this
sort he spoke to me, that because he perceived I was desirous to confer with
some learned man, therefore he had brought master Archedeacone Harpsfeld to me,
and quoth he, I tell you, you do like a wise man, but I pray you go roundlye
to work, for the time is but short: my Lord, quoth I, as roundelyl as I can I
will go to work with you, I never desired to confer with any man nor yet
do, howbeit if you will have any to talk with me I am ready to hear and
answer him. What quoth my Lord of London in a fume to the keeper: did not you
tell me that this man desired conference? No my Lord quoth he. I told you
that he would not refuse to co^ferre with any, but I did not show to any that
it was his desire. well quoth my Lord of London, master Bradforde you are
well-beloved, I pray you consider your self and refuse not charity when it is
offered. In deed my Lord quoth I, this is finale charitte, to condemn a man,
as you have condemned me, which never brake the laws, In Turckie a man may
have tought free, but in England I cold not find it, for I am condemned for my
faith so sone as I uttered it at your request, before I had committed any
thing against the laws. As for conference, I am not afraid (quoth I) to
talk with whom you will, but to say that I desire to confer: that do I
not. Well well quoth my Lord of London, and so called for master Tailor, and
I went my way.

Upon the 4. of February came one of my lord Chau^cellors gentlemen, sent as
he said from my lord as then being come from the court. This was about.8. of
the clock the eueninge. The effect and end of his talk and message was,
that my Lord his master did love me well, and therefore he offered me time to
confer if I would desire it, but as I had answered others in this matter,
so I answered him, that I would never make that suit, but quoth I, to co^ferre
with any, I will never refuse: because I am certain and able I thancke god, to
defend by godly learning, my faith. Thus with much a do we shoke hands, and
departed, he to his master, and I to my prison.

Upon the 7. of February came one master Wollerton a Chapplaine to the
Bishop of London to confer with me: Who, when he perceived that I desired
not his coming, being as one most certain of my doctrine. And therefore wished
rather his departing the^ abiding: well master Bradford quoth he, yet I pray
you let us confer a little, perchance you may do me good, if I can do you
none. Upon which words I was content to talk. He spoke much of the doctors
and fathers, of the bread in the.6. chapter of John. And so would prove
transubsta^tiation: and how that wicked me^ do receive Christ's body. And I on
the contrary part improued his aucthours, with much by talk betwixt us
both, and the keeper, who took his part little to ye purpose. Su^ma to this
issue we came, that he should draw out of the scriptures and doctors, his
reasons. And I would peruse them, and if I could not answer the^, I would give
place. And so I desired him to do my reasons, which I would make, and so
departed for that day.

The next day following in the morning, he sent me half a shete of paper
written on both sides, with no resons how he gathered his doctrine, but only
the bare sentence: Panis quem ego dabo: The bread which I will give is my
flesh. And the places in the 26. of Matthew. 14. of Mark.22. of Luke, and
the.10. and.11. to the Corinth. with some sentences of the doctors, all which
made as much against him, as with him al only one of Theophilactus except in
the after nowne he came himself, and then we had a long babbling to none
effect, and at the lenght he came to the church, and how that I shwarued from
the church. Na* quoth I, that do I not, but you do, for ye church is Christ's
spouse and Christ's obedient spouse, as* your church is not, which robs the
people of the Lords Cup, and of service in the English tongue. Why quoth he,
it is not profitable to have the service in English, and so he brought forth
this sentence to prove it. Labia Sacerdotis custodiant, legem. The lipes of the
priests should keep the law, and out of his mouth me^ must look for knowledge.
Why quoth I should not the people the^ have the scriptures: wherefore serves
this of Christ, search the scriptures. Ioh. 5.
This quoth he was not spoken to the people, but to the Scribes, and learned
men: well quoth I, then the people must not have the scriptures, which he
affirmed bringinge fourth this. E^ erunt docti a deo, They shall be all taught of
God. But must we, quoth I, learn all at the priests? yea quoth he, well then
said I, I see you would bring the people to hang up Christ and let Barrabas
goo, Luke 23
as the priests the^ did persuade the people. A which words he was so
offended: that he had no lust to talk any more. Summa I gave him the reasons.
I had gathered against transubstantiacion, and prayed him to frame his in the
frame of reasons, and I would answer them, well quoth he, I will do so, but
first I will answer yours. The which thing he has not done hitherto, nor will
not: for I hear that he is ridden into the Country.

Upon the.12. of Februarye there came one of the Earl of Darby his men called
Stephen Beiche, one of old acquentaunce to me: who showed me, that my lord
sent him to me, and willed me to tender my self, and he would be good lord
unto me. When I answered, that I thancked his lordshipppe for his good will
toward me, but quoth I, in this case I cane not tender my self more then
gods honor: then he set before me, my mother, my sisters, friends, kyndsfolkes,
and Country, what a great discomforte it would be unto the^, to dye as an
Heretic, well sir, quoth I, I have learned to forsake father, mother, brother,
sisters, friends, and all that ever I have, and mine own self: or else I can
not be Christ's disciple. And so he tellinge me, that my death would do much
hurt, and such like talk: we shoke hands. Howbeit, now I remember that in
our talk he asked me, if my lord should obtain for me, that I might depart
the Realm: whether I would not be content to be at the Queen's appointment,
where she would appointe me beyond the sea? No quoth I. I had rather be burned
in England, then be burned beyond ye sea. For I know quoth I, that if she
should send me to Paris, to louen etc. fourth with they would burn me.

Upon the.14. of February their came to me Perciuall Cressewell one of my old
acquentaunce, and one that loves my body well and my soul also, after his
religion, bringing with him, and as I learn a kynsman of master Feckenham:
who after much ado prayed me, yt he might make labor for me, a gods name, quod
I, do, you may do what you will, yea, but, quoth he. Tell me what suet I should
make. Forsooth said I, that yt you will do, do it not at my request, for I
desire nothing at your hands: if the Queen will give me life, I will thank
her, i^ she will banishe me. I will tha^cke her, if she will condemn me t^
perpetual prisonmente: I wy^ thancke her, if she will burn me I will thancke
her. Here upon he went away. And about a.xi. of the clock. He and the other
man came again, and brought a book of Master Mores making to read over, the
which book I took. But, quoth I, good Perceiuall. I am to sure setteled, for
being moved in these matters. Oh, quoth he, if ever you loved me, do one thing
for me* what is that, quoth I, at the lenght, for I would not promise, says he
to desire and name what learned men or man you will have to come unto you, my
Lord of york, my Lord of Lyncolne, my Lord of Bathe, my Lord of of
Chichester. etc. will gladly come to you: No, quoth I, never will I desire the^,
or any others, to come to confer with me, for I am as certain of my doctrine,
as I am of any thing: But for your pleasure (quoth I) and that all men may
know I am not ashamed to have my faith sifted and tried, bring whom you
will, and I will talk with them. So they went their way. And about.3. of the
clock in the after nowne, comes master doctor Hardinge the Bishop of
Lincolnes Chaplain, and after a great and solemn protestation, (when he
knew I desired not his coming), how that he had prayed to God, before he came
forth to turn his talk to to my good: he began to tell of the good opinion he
had of me, and many God give you good even, so that our talk was to none
effect or purpose: save yt I prayed him, to consider from whence he was
fallen, and not to follow the world or love it, because the love of God is not
where it is, 1. Io.
Su^ma he counted me in a dampnable state: as one being out of the church. And
therefore wylled me to take heed to myself, and not to dye in such an opinion.
what master Hardinge (quoth I) I have heard you with these ears, maintain
this that I stood in. I have (quoth he) preached that the doctrine of
transubstantiation was a subtle doctrine, but otherwise I never taught it. And
so enuyinge against marieges of priests, and much against Peter Marter,
Martyn Bucer, and Luther, which for breakinge their vows, were justly given up
into heresies quod he. I seeing him all together given up into popery, after
admonishement hereof, bad him farewell.

Upon the.15. of February about.4. of the clock in the after nowne, comes
Percyuall Cressewell, and the other man waytyng upon master Harpsfeld*
Archedeacon of London, who after gentle salutation, and many formalities
began a long oracion. How that all men, even the Infideles, Turckes, Jews,
Anabaptists, and Libertines, desire felicity, as well as the christians. And
how that every man thyncketh they shall attain to it, by their religion. To
the which long oracion I aunswerred briefly: that he spoke not far a mise.
Then goes he on, yea, but the way, quoth he, thither is not all a like. And
so he set forth, how infideles by Jupiter, Juno, The Mahumet by his Alcoran,
the Jew by his Thalmud: believed to come to Heaven. For so many I spoke says
he: as believe the immortality of the soul. And this long oracion, I as
briefly answered: and said he had spoken truly. Well then, quoth he, here
is the matter* the way to this heaven. we may not inuente any new way.
Their is but one way, quoth I, and that is Jesus Christ, as he himself does
witness: I am the way, here Master Harpsfeld affirmed and denied, and
further said, that I meant by Christ, believing in Christ, I have learned,
quoth I, to discern betwixt Faith and Christ. Albeit I confess that who so
ever beleuethe in Christ the same shall be saved. No, quoth he, not all that
believe in Christ, for some will say, lord Lord, have not we cast out
deuilles etc? But Christ will say in the day of judgment to those depart
from me, I know you not. yea sir, quoth I, you must make a difference,
betwixt believing and saying. I believe, as for example, if one should say and
swear he loved you: for all his saying you will not believe him, when you see he
goes about to utter, and do all evil things against you. well quoth he,
this is not much material. Their is but one way Christ. How come we to
know him, where shall we seek to find him? Forsooth quoth I, we must seek him by
his word, and in his word, and after his word. Very good quoth master
Harpsfeld. But tell me now, how first we come into the company of them that
could tell us this, but by Baptism. True, quoth I, baptism is the sacrament,
by the which exteriorlye we are insert and engraf^e into Christ, for I dare
not, quoth I, exclude out of Christ, all that dye without baptism, I will not
tie God where he is not bound. Some infants dye: whose parents desire baptism
for them, and may not have it. To those, quoth he, we may think perchance
some mercy God will show. yea, quoth I. those infants whose parents do
conte^pne baptism, will not I contempne utterly, because the child shall not
bear the fathers offense. Well quoth he, we agree that by baptism then we are
brought, and (as one would say) begotten of christ, for christ is our
father, and the church his spouse is our mother, as al men naturally have
Adam for their father, and eve for their mother, so all spiritual men have
Christ for their father, and the church for their mother, which church. As
Eve was taken out of Adams side: so was she of Christ's side, where out flowed
blood, for satisfaction and purging of our sins. All this is true, quoth I,
and godly spoken. Now then, quoth he, tell me whether this church of Christ
has not ben alwayies: yes, quoth I, sithen the creacion of man, and shall be
for ever. Very good, quoth he. But yet tell me, wether this church is not a
visible Chusche, or no: yes (quoth I) that it is, howbeit none otherwise
visible, then Christ was here on earth. That is no exterior pomp or show,
sets her forth commonly. And therefore to see her we must put on such eyes:
as good men put one, to see and know Christ: when he walked here one earth.
For as Eve was of the same substance, Adam was of: so is the church of the
same substance, Christ is of. I mean flesh of flesh, and bone of his
bones, as Paul says, Ephe. 5. Look therefore how Christ was visible
known to be Christ, when he was on earth: (that is by considering him after
the word of God) so is the church known. I do not come to reason, says he, at
this present, and therefore I will go on forward. Is not this a multitude? yes
(quod I) that it is. Virgi^
Howbeit, quod la^et anguis in herba You mean a sutteltie in ye word, what
visible multitude was there in Helias time, or when Moses was on the mount
Aaron, and al Israel worshipping the calfe. you goo from the matterr, quoth he,
No nothing at all said I. For I do but prevent you, knowing well where about
you go, and therefore fewer words might serve: if that you so would. Well,
quoth he, I perceive you have knowledge, and by a little perceive the more. Tell
me yet more. whether this multitude have not the ministry or preaching of
gods word? Here sir, quoth I, you go about the bushe. If you understand
preaching, for confessing the gospel: I will go with you, or else if you will, you
may know that persecution often lets preachinge* Well, I mean it so, quoth
he. Tell me yet more, has it not the sacraments, quoth I, howbeit the
mynisterie thereof is often let? But I will put you of your purpose, because I
see where about you goo. If heretics have baptized and do baptize, as they
did in saint Cyprians time: you know this baptism is baptism, and not to be
reiterated. This I speak, that the staunders by might see, that though the
poptshe church have baptism, which we receive of them: yet therefore is it
not the true church: nor never neade we to be baptized again. which thing he
saw well enough: and therefore he said, I went from the matter, adding, that
I had more errors, then one, or two. So ye say, quoth I: but that is not
enough, till you prove them. Well, quoth he, this church is a multitude, has
the preaching of the gospel and the ministracion of the sacraments, and yet
more, has it not the power of jurisdiction? Oh sir, quoth I, whether goo you,
you walk not wililey, enough you ca^ not deceive me (I thancke god): what
jurisdiction is exercised in time of persecution, i^ affliction. I mean quoth
he, by jurisdiction, admonishing one an other, and so forth. well, go to said
I, what then? It has also, quoth he, succession of Bishops. And here he
made much adoo, to prove that this, was an essenciall point. you say true,
quoth I. For if this poi^t fale you: all the church you go about to set forth,
will fall down. you shall not find in all the scripture, this is essential
point of succession of Bishops, quoth I. In Christ's church Antechrist will
sit. And Peter tells us, as it went in the old church before Christ's
coming: so will it be in the new church, sithen Christ's coming. That is,
as their were false Prophets and such as bare rule were adversaries to the
true Prophets: so shall there be sithen Christ's coming false teachers, even
as of such as be bishops, and bear rule among the people. you always goo
out of the matter, quoth he. But I will prove (saeth he) the succession of
Bishops. Do so, quoth I. Tell me quoth he, were not the Apostles bishops?
No, quoth I, except you will make a new definition of Bishops, that is,
give no certain place. In deed says he, the Apostles office was more the^
byshopes, for it was universal. But yet Christ instituted Bishops in his
Church, as Paul says, he has given Pastors, Prophets, so that, I troue
it be proved by the scriptures, the succession of bishop: to be an essential
point. To this I answered, that the ministry of gods word and ministers:
is an essenciall point, but to translate this to bishops and their
succession, quoth I: is a plain subtlety. And therefore, quoth I, that it may
be plain: I will ask you a question. Tell me whether the scripture know any
difference between bishops, and ministers, which you call pristes. No says
he, well, then goo on forwards quoth I: and let us see what you shall get
now by the succes^ion of Bishops, that is of ministres, which can not be
understand of such Bishops as minister not, but Lord it. I perceive, quoth
he, that you are fare out of the way. For your doctrine, you can never show
this a multitude, which ministrethe gods word and his Sacraments, which
has jurisdiction and succession of Bishops, to have from time to time
believed as you believe, beginning now, and so go upwards, as I will do, quod he,
of our doctrine. And therefore you are out of the Church, and so may not be
saved. Perchance you will bring me downewardes, a show to bleare the peoples
eyes, but to goo vpwardes: that can you never do. And this is the true trial.
To this I answered, that he ought to give me leave to follow the scripture
and examples of good men. Then said, yea. Well then, quoth I, Stephen was
accused and condemned as I am, that he taught new and false doctrine before
the fathers of the church, then as they were taken. Now what does Stephen for
his purgacion, but improued their accusacions. But how does he it, by goinge
vpwardes. No, but by goinge downewardes. Beginning at Abraham, and continuing
still till Esaias time, and the peoples captivity. From whence he makes a
great leap, until that time he was in) which was I think upon a four
years) and called them by there right name hell hounds, rather then, heaven
hounds. On this sort sir, quoth I. will I prove my faith, and that you can
never do yours, yea, sir, quoth he. If we did know you had the holy ghost:
then could we believe you. Here might have been answered, that Stephens enemies
would not believe he had the holy ghost, and therefore they did as they did. But
in speakinge he rose up, and the keeper called, and others that stood bye to
take his part all against me. How be it gently, without any tawntynge or
railing, only prayinge me to take heed to that master Harpsfeld speak, who
still said I, was out of the church, and did contempne it, spitt against it,
and I cannot tell what. But I still affirmed that I was most certain, I was in
Christ's church, and could show a demonstracion of my religion, from time to
time continually. And so we made an end, sainge that in the morning he would
come again unto me. God our father, A prayer ^f M. ^rad^ords.
for the name and blod of his Christ: be merciful unto us, and unto all his
people, and keep them from al false teachers, and blind guides, whereby (alas)
I fear me much hurt will come to this realm of England. God our father
bless us, and keep us in his truth and pore church forever. Ame^.

Upon the.16. of Februarye in the morning about.9. of ye clock: there came
again the said master Harpsfeld, and the other two with him. Now after a few
words spoken: we sat down, and master Harpsfeld, beginning a very long
oracio^, almost there quarters of an hour long. First repeting what, and how
far we have gone astraye, and beginnynge to prove vpwardes succession of
Bishops here in England for.8. c. years, in France, at Lio^s: for.xii.c.
years, in spain at Hispalen, for.viii.c. years in Italy at Millen, for.xii.
c. years, goinge by that to prove his church, whereto he used also succession
of byshopes, in the Est church for the more confirmacion of his words, and so
concluded with an exhortation, and an interrogation. The exhortacion, that I
would obey this church, the interrogacion, whether I could show any such
succession for the demonstraon of my church, (for so he called it which I
followed). Unto this his long oracion, I made a sherte answered, how that my
memory was evil for to answer particularlye his long oracion, therefore I
would generallye do it, thinckinge that because his oracion was rather to
persuade, then to prove: that a general answer would serve. So I told him,
that if Christ, or his Apostles being here on earth, has him demanded of
the Prelates of the church then, then, to have made a demonstracion of the
church, by succession of high priests, which had approved the doctrine he
taught: I think, quoth I, that Christ heart would have done as I do. That
is, have brought forth that which vpholdeth the church: eue^ the verity of the
word of God, taught and believed, not of the high priests (which of long time
had persecuted it) but by ye Prophets and other good simple men, which
perchance were counted for heretics with the church: that is with them,
that were ordained high priests in the church, to whom the true church was
not then tied by any succession, but the word of god. And thus to think quoth
I? 2. Pet. ^
Saint Peter gives an occasion, when he says: That as it went in ye church
before christ's coming: so shall it goo in the Church, after his coming,
but then, the pillars of the Church, were persecutours of it. Therefore the
like we must look for now. Why, quoth be, I can gether, and prove you
succession in Jerusalem of the high priests. From Aarons time, I grant,
quoth he, but not such succession as allowed ye truth. Why, quoth he, did
they not all allow Moses law: yes, quoth I. And kept it, for the books
thereof, as you do the Bible and holy scripture: but the interpretacion and
meaning of it* they did corrupt, as I take it you have done. And therefore the
persecutions they stirred up against the Prophets and Christ, was not for the
law, but for the interpretacion of it, as you say now: that we must have the
interpretacio^ of the scriptures, at your hands. but to make an end, quoth I,
death I do look daily for, yea, hourly, and I think my time be but very
short. Therefore I had neade to spend in prayer, as much time with god as I can,
(whileste I have it) for his help and comfort. And therefore I pray you bear
with me, that I do not more plainlye, and in more words, answer you long
talk. If I saw death not so nere me as it is, I would then weye every piece
of your oracion: (if you would give me the some of them,) and I would answer
them, accordingly I hope. But because I dare not, nor I will not leave of,
lokinge and prouidinge for that which is at hand: I shall desire you to hold
me excused, because I do as I do. And I hartelye thancke you, for your gentle
good will. I shall hartelye pray GOD our father, to give you the same light
and life, as I wish to my self. And so I began as to rise up. But then
master Harpsfeld began to tell me, that I was in a very perilous case, and
he was sorry to see me so setteled. Telling further, that in deed he could tell
me nothing, whether death were fare of or nere. But that forces not, quoth
he: so that you did dye well. Well quoth I? yes. For I doubt not in this case,
but to dye well. For as I hope and am cercertain, my death shall please the
Lord: so I trust, I shall dye cherfullye, to the comfort of his children. yea,
but what if you be deceived, quoth he: what quoth I, if you did say the Sone
did not shine now. Then it did shine thoroughe the wyndowe where we satt,
well, quoth he, I am sorry to see you so secure and careless. In deed quoth I,
I am more carelese and secure, carnally, then I should be, God make me more
vigilant. But in this case, quoth I, I can not be to secure, for I am most
assured, I am in the truth. That are ye not, quoth he, for you are not of the
Catholic church. No, quoth I? though you have excommunicate me: yet am I in
the Catholic church of Christ, and will be a child of it, and an obediedt
child for ever. I hope Christ will have no less care for me, then he had for
the blind man excommunicate of the Sinagoge. And, quoth I, further, I am
certain that the necessary articles of ye faith (I mean the.xii. articles of
the Creed). I confess and believe with that, which you call the holy church. So
that eue^ your church, has taken some thing to much upon her, to
excommunicate me for that, which (by the testimony of my Lord of Durisme in
his book of the sacrament, latelye put forth) was free of many an. years after
Christ, to believe or not believe: what is that quoth he? Transubstantiation
said I. Why, you are not condemned therefore only, quod he. Yes quoth I, that
am I, and because I deny, that wicked men do receive Christ's body. No, quoth
he, you agree not with us in the presence, nor in nothing else. How you believe,
quoth I, you know: for my part I confess a presence of hole Christ, God,
and man, to the the faith of the receauour. No, quoth he, you must believe a
Real presence in the sacrament. In the sacrament, quoth I? No I will not
shute him up, nor tie him to it, otherwise then faith see the and
permits. If I would include Christ's real presence in the sacrament, or
tie him to it otherwise, then to the Faith of the receauer: then the wicked man
shoalde receive him, which I do not, nor will not believe by gods grace. More
pity, quoth he: but a man may easelye see you make no presence at all, and
therefore you agree not therein with us. I make a presence, quoth I, and a true
presence: but to the faith of the receauer. What, quoth one, that stood by, of
Christ's very body which died for us, yea, quoth I, eue^ of whole Christ:
God, and man, to the faith of him that receaueth it. why, quoth master
Harpsfeld, this is nothing else, but to exclude the omnipotency of God, and all
kind of miracle in the Sacrament. No, quod I, I do not exclude his
omnipotency, but you rather do it. For I believe that Christ can accomplish
his promise, the substance of bread and wine being their still: as well as
the accidents. And, quoth I, I count it a great miracle: that common bread
should be made a spiritual bread, that is, a bread ordained of God, not for
the food of the body, but rather for the food of the soul. For when we come
to the sacrament, we come not feade our bodies, and therefore we have but a
little piece of bred: but we come to feade our souls by faith, which the
wicked waunte: and therefore they receive nothing but Panem Domini as Judas
did, and Panem Dominum, as the other the Apostles did. The wicked, says
master Harpsfeld, do receive the very body of Christ, but not the grace of
his body. No, quoth I, they receive not the body, for it is no dead carkase.
He yt receaueth it: receives the spirit, which is not with out grace I wine.
Well, quoth he, you have very many errors. you count ye Mass for abhominacion,
and yet saint Abrosse said mass. And so red out of a book written, a
sentence of saint Ambrose to prove it. Why, sir, quod I, the mass, as it is
now, was nothing so in saint Ambrose time. was not the most perte of the
Canon, made sithen by Gregorius, and Scolasticus, and others. In ded, quoth he,
a great piece, of it was made as ye say, by Gregorius, but Scholasticus was
before S. Ambrose time. I wene not, quoth I, howbeit I will not contend. Saint
Gregory says, that the Apostles said mass, with out Cannons, only with the
lords prayer. you say true, quoth he, for the Canon is not the greateste part
of the mass* The greatest part, is the sacrifice, eleuacion,
transubstantiacion and adoracion. I can away with none of those, quoth I, No I
think the same, quoth he. But yet Hoc facite tells plain lie the sacrifice
of the churce* you consider not well, quoth I, this word sacrifice, not
discernynge betwixt the sacrifice of the church, and the sacrifice for the
church. The sacrifice of the Church, is no propitiatory sacrifice: but a
gratulatorie sacrifice. The sacrifice Christ him self offered: is the
propitiatory sacrifice. And as for your Hoc facite is not referred to any
sacrifyinge: but to the whole action, taking, eating. you speak now, quoth
he, not learnedlye, for Christ made his supper, only to the.12. not
admittinge his mother, or any of the seventy disciples to it. Now the
Apostles do signify the priests. I think, quoth I, that you speak* as you
would me^ shoude understand it, for else you would not keep the Cup away from
the Laity. We have great cause to tha^cke you, that you will give us the
bread, for I perceive you make it, as though Christ had not co^man^ded it to
his whole church. From this talk he went to. show me Eleuacion bringing out a
place of Saint Basilius de spiritu* And I told him that I had red yt place
which seems not to make of eleuatio^. But, quod I, be it as it is, I have been
in Prison long, without books and all necessaries for study, and therefore I
must omit these things death draws nigh, and I by your leave, must not
leave of to prepare for it. If I could do you good, quoth he, I would be right
glad, either in soul or body for you are in a perellous case both ways. Sir,
quoth I, I tha^ck you for your good will. My cause is as it is: I thancke God it
was never so well with me: for death to me shall be life I trust and hope in
god. It were best for you to desire master Harpsfeld, quoth master
Cressewell, yt he might make suit for you, for a time, to co^ferre. Unto
which words Master Harpsfeld said: that he would do the best he could,
for he pitied my case very sore, Sir, quoth I, to desire any body to sewe for
time for me, I never will do it by gods help. For I am not wauerynge, nor I
would not that any body should think, I were so. But if you have the
charity and love toward me, you pretend, and there to do think that I am
in an error: I think the same should move you to do, as you would be done
by: as you think of me: so do I of you, that you are far out of the way,
and not only think it, but also am thereof assured. In this and such like
gentle talk we departed: he saing yt he would pray for me, others willinge me,
to desire him, to sue for me, which I did not. But I wished him as much good
as he did me. And as he was goinge and bad me farewell, he turns again and
gives me Ireneus, prayinge me to read over a certain place in it, which
thing I told him I would, although I had red it before. At the door the wife of
the house mete him, and asked him how he had done. Forsothe Masters, quoth he,
I find always one manner of man of him, as I found him, so I leave him. I pray
you sir, quoth she, do him no hurt. No quoth he, but if I can I will do him
good. At after diner the same day, master Clayden my keeper, comes unto me
from the Earl of Darbye, with whom he had dyned being sent for purposly,
about me. Now after his coming home, this was the some of his talk. That the
Earl would gladly have me not to die. And therefore he would make suit on my
behalf to ye Queens gighnes. Wherefore, quoth my keeper, you must tell me, what
you would have him to do, yt to morrow I may bring him word, as he has required
me. Marie, quod I, M. Clayden I hope I shall nead little to make many words in
telling you my suit, as I heartily thank his lordship of his good will, and
zeal, yt he bears unto me: so you know I can not desire any to make sut for
me. If of his own will he do sue for perdon, banishme^, perpetual prison, or
what his pleasure shall be for me, I were to blame, if yt I would take it
vnthankefullye. Albeit I know death, and spedie dispache were most well come
unto me, Well, quoth he, I will tell him to morrow, ye though you can not nor
will not make suit, to any to sue for you: yet you will be content, If he on his
lordshipes good will will labor on your behalf. yea, quod I, and to tell you
truth, where I perceive that others do sue for me, (meaning Perciual,
Cressuel and master Harpsfeld) I had rather my Lord of Darbye should do it:
for that my friends and the country might less be offended at him, because
he maste have the burning of me. After this talk with my keeper master
Clayden: there comes one of the Queens servants and officers, (whose name
I will not rehearse) which after a little talk fell down on his knees, and with
tears besought me, for the passion of Christ: that I would a little look to my
self, to make some suit, etc. For, quoth he, (swearing an oath) it will not be
long unto, before thou shalt be able to do more good, then ever thou
dideste. But I showing my self not unthankful for his good will: departed
from him, as one little lusting to hear such counsel. Of him I learned,
twesdaye followinge, was the uttermost day I should tarrye here. Within an
hour after this man's departure from me: the keeper master Clayden called me,
saying that he perceived, how that my friend Perciual had told him, that
master Harpsfeld had written to master doctor Martin: to be a means to the
Counsel for longer time for me. Where upon, quoth he, I think it were best
to send my Lord of Darbie word of this to might: lest he be prevented. And I
answered thus. That as he thought good, so he might do. But, quoth I, beware
I hertelye pray, that you do not tell my lord any thing, that I desire this.
For if you do, it will in ye end be more against you then with you. And he
promised the same, and so departed out of hand to the Court. Upon the.17. day
(which was sunday) in the after nowne, Perciual Cresse well sent me word by
him that came first with him, that if I would make any suit my self, or will
any to do for me. I might spead, but else, quoth he, nothing will be done, as he
p^sently has received answer of my lord Chauncelor. well, quoth I, I am at a
point, and so took my leave, lokinge still when the Sheriffs would come for
me. For I had heard over might, that one of the Guard which was appointed to
co^ueye me down, into La^kishiere: had told one that they hade warning against
to morrow for me.

Upon the.18. day (which was twesdaye) I heard that the write for my
execucio^ was called in again, and the Sheriff of La^kaishiere discharged of
me for ye present. And in the after nowne one of my Lord of Darbis men
brought me word: how that my lord had taken great pains for me, and had
kneled before, the Queen, and many more words, desiring me some thing to se to
my self now. But, quoth he, what, and how much is done for you I can not
tell, but this much I think says he, you shall have your boks, and time
enough to peruse them. Well, quoth I, I pray you hartelye, thancke my Lord
for his good will toward me, I shall (as I have done pray) yt God would give
unto him, as to my self, the which is all I can do. For doing for my self,
as I would be sorye that my lord or you, should think any waueringe in me for
my doctrine: so I would be loathe, but to do all for my self, that I can do
with a good conscience. And as for time, quoth I, and books, although I see it
is but a lingering of the time: yet I am glad of it, in this respect: yt my
lord, and others may know, I hold no opinion, but such as I dare sifte, and
abide the reasoning for, with any man. I trust, you and many others shall se,
that our doctrine is true, and therefore dare and desire to abide the light,
and all men's lokynge on, where perchance it is bruted abroad, that we are
altogether obstinate: and cannot defend it by learning, after this talk, there
was a priest called master Couppage: which began to exhort me to take the
injuries done unto me pacienlye. For, quoth he, I doubt not but if you will
come unto us: you should be more able to help many, and your friends also,
then ever you were: both spirituallye and corporallye. If, quoth I, you keep
your master Christ: I will come unto you, but other wise I know you not. This
and such like talk we had for that present, the Earl of Darbye his man
appointynge master Clayden my keeper, in the morning to come to my Lord.

Upon the.19. day, which was wednesdaye, Master Clayden came from my lord,
and in his name asked me, whether I would be content to spoke with the kings
confessor, and Alphonsus, a friar, and to send him word. Sir, quoth I, you
know, that as I desire co^fere^ce with no man: so I thancke God, I am not
afraied to speak with any man: where upon he sent my Lord word, as he
said. And so I herd nothing til the day followinge, how that my Lord of
Darbye, had sent back again, two of his me^, which came to me, saying that
they were sent to solicit my cause, but how or what way I could not learn.

Upon the.21. day, which was friday, the Archebishope of york, and the
Bishop of Chichester: came to the Counter to speak with me. When I was come
before them, they both, and specially my Lord of york: used me very gently,
they would have had me sit down, and because I would not: they also would
not sit, so we all stood, and whether I would or no, they would neades I
should put on, not only my night cappe: but my upper cappe also, saying unto
me, that obedience was better then sacrifice. Now thus standing together, my
Lord of york began to tell me, how that they were not sent to me, but of love
and charity we come to you. And I, quoth he, of old acquaintance which I
have had woith you, more then my Lord of Chichester has had. And so commended
me of a godly life etc co^cluding with a question, how I was certain of
salvation, and of my religion. Marie, quod I amittinge all formalities, save yt
I tha^cked the^ for their good will, by the word of god, by the scriptures, I am
certain of salvation, and of my religion. Very well said quod my Lord of york.
But how do you know the word of God and the scriptures but by the church?
In deed my Lord, quoth I, the church was, and is a mean to bring a man more
spedely, to know the scriptures, and the word of God, as was the woman of
Samaria was a mean yt the Samaritains knew Christ, but as when they had herd
him speak, they said now we know, yt he is Christ, not because of the words,
but because we our selfs have heard him: so, quoth I, after we come to the
hearing and reading of the scriptures showed to us, and discerned by the
church: we do believe them, and know them, not by cause the church says they
are the scriptures, but because they be so, being thereof assured, by the same
spirit which wrote and spoke them* yea, quoth my lord of york, but you know
in the Apostles time at the first, the word was not written. True, quoth I, if
you mean it for some books, of the books of the new Testament, but else, for
the old testament, Peter tells us that we have Firmiorem sermonem
Propheticum, a more sure word of prophecy. Not, quod I, that it is simply
so, but in respect of the Apostles persons, which being a live and compassed
with infirmity: attributed to the word written more firmitie, as wherewith no
fault could be found, whereas, for the infyrmitye of their persons, men
perchance might have found some fault at there perchi^ng. Albeit in very
deed, no less obedience and faith, ought to have been given to the one, then to
the other, as being all of one spirit of truth. That place of Peter, quoth my
Lord of york, is not so to be understand of the word of God written. yes
sir, quoth I, that it is and of none other. yea in deed, quoth my lord of
Chichester, master Bradford does tell you ye truth in that point. Well, quoth
my Lord of york, you know that Ireneus and others, do magnify much the
church, and allege the Church against heretics, and not the scriptures.
True, quoth I, for they had to do, with such heretics: as did deny the
scriptures, and yet did magnify the Apostles: that they were inforsed, to use
those churches wherein the Apostles had taught, and that church still had
received the same doctrine. you speak the very truethe, quoth my Lord of
Chichester, for the heretics did refuse all scriptures, except it were a
piece of Lukes, gospel. Then quoth I, the alledginge of the church, can not
be primarlye, or principallye used against me, which am so far from
denyinge of the scriptures, that I appele unto them utterly, as to the only
judge. Io.xii. A pretye matter, quoth my Lord of york, that you will take
upon you to judge the Church. I pray you where was your ^hurche this many
years? for the Church of Christ is Catholic and visible. Hitherto my Lord,
quoth I, I do not judge the church, when I discern it, from that
congregation, and those which be not in it. And I never denied the church to
be Catholic and visible, although at some times, it is more visible the^ at
some. I pray you, quoth my Lord of Chichester, tell me where the church, which
allowed your doctrine: was this.iiii.C. years* I will tell you my Lord, quoth I,
or rather you shall tell it you self. If you will tell me where the church was
in Helias time, when Helias said that he was left alone. That is no answer,
quoth my Lord of Chichester. I am more sorye you say so, quoth I: But this
will I tell you lordshipp, that the same eyes, wherewith a man might have
espied the church the^, if you now had them: you would not say it were no
answer. The fault why the church is not seen of you, is, not because the
church is not visible: but because your eyes are not clear enough to se it.
you are much deceived, quoth he, to make such a collation, betwine the church
then, and now. Very well speks my Lord (quoth the Bishop of york) for
Christ's says, Edificabo ecclesiam meam, I will build my church, and not I
do, or have buyld it, but I will build it. My lord quoth I, Peter taught me to
make this collacion, saying: as in the people there was false Prophets, which
were much in estima^ion before Christ's coming: so shall there be false
teachers now, and very many shall follow them. And as for your futurtence I
hope your grace, quod I, will not exclude thereby Christ's church not to have been
before* but rather that there is no buyldinge in the Church, but by Christ's
work only. For Paul, and Apollo, be but waterers. In good faith master
Bradford, quoth my my lord of Chichester, I am sorye, to see you so little to
mind the church. He takes upon him (as they al do) to judge the church, quod
my Lord of york. A man shall never come to certentie, that does as they do.
My Lord, quoth I, take me beseech you in good part, I speak simply what I
think: and I desire reason to answer my objections your affections and
sorrows can not by rules. If that you consider the end, and cause of my
condempnacion: I can not think, but that it should so^ thing move your
honors. you know it well enough, for you herd it, no matter was laid
against me, but what was gathered upon mine one confession. Because I denied
transubstantiacion, and the wicked to receive Christ's body in the Sacrament:
therefore I was condemned, and excommunicate, but not of the Church: although
the pillars of the same (as they be taken) did it. No, quoth my Lord of
Chichester, I herd say: that the cause of your prisonemente was, for that you
exhorced the people, to take the sword in the one hand, and the matocke in the
other. I never meant any such thing, nor speak any thing in that sort my
lord, quoth I. yea quoth my Lord of York, you behaved your self before the
Counsel, so stoutlye at the first, that you would defend the Religion then,
and therefore worthelye were you punished. your grace, quoth I, did here me
answer my Lord Chauncellor in that point. But put the case I had been so
stote, as they and your grace make it: was not the laws of ye realm on me
side then? wherefore unjustly I was punished. Only transubstantiacion, which
was had on mine own confession: was the thing, on which my lord Chauncellor
proceeded. you deny the presence, quoth my lord of york. I do not, quoth I, to
the faith of the worthy receauer. Why quoth he, what is that? the^ to say that
Christ lies not of the alter. No my lord, quoth I, in deed I believe not
such a presence. I seems, quoth my Lord of Chichester, that you have not red
Chrysostom, for he poi^teth it. Of truth my lord, quoth I, hitherto I have been
kept well enough without books, howbeit this I remember of Chrysostom, that
he lies upon the altar, as the Seraphins do, touch our lips with ye coules of
the altar in heaven, which is an Hyperbolical locucion, as you know
Chrysostom flows with them. It is to evident quoth my lord of york, that
you are gone to far, but let us come again to ye church, out of the which
you are excommunicated, I am not, quoth I, my lord: Although they which seem
to be in the church, and of the church, have excommuninicate me, as the pore
blind man was Ihon.9. I hope Christ receueth me. you deceive your self, quod
he, and here much was spoken of excommunicacion. At the last, I said my
Lord, I pray you bear with me, that which I shall simplye speak before you.
Assuredly, quoth I, as I thinck you did well, to depart from the Romish
church: so I think you have done wickedly to couple us to it again, for you
can never prove it, which you make the mother Church to be christ's church.
Oh master Bradford, quoth my lord of Chichester, you were but a child when
this matter began. I was a young man then, coming from the university, went
with the woorlde, but I tell you it was always against my stomach* I was but a
child then, quoth I* how be it as I told you I think you have done evil, for
now we are come to the wicked man, which sits in the Temple of god* that is
in the church, for it cannot be understand of the Mahumet or any out of the
church, but of such as bear rule in the church* See, quoth my lord of york,
how you build your faith upon such places of scripture as are most obscure,
to deceive your self, as though you were in the church where you are not.
Well my lord, quoth I, though I might by your fruits judge of you and others:
yet will not I utterly condemn you for ever: out of the church, for
perchance you sin of ignorance* and if I were in your case, I think not,
quoth I, that I should not co^de^pne him utterly yt is of my faith in the
Sacrament knowinge as you know, that at ye least.viii.C. years after Christ's,
as my lord of Durisme writteth: It was free to believe, or not to believe
transubsta^tiatio^. This is a toye, quoth he that you have found out of your
own brain, as though a man not believing as the church does: That is
transubstantiacion were of the Church he is an heretic, and so none of the
church, quoth my lord of Chichester, that does hold any doctrine, against
the definition of the Church, as now you do hold against transubstan^^atio^.
And he brought forth Ciprian which was no Heretic, though he believed
rebaptizinge of them, which were baptized of heretics, because he held it,
before the church had defined it, where as if he had holden it after then had
he ben an heretic. Oh my lord, quod I, will you condemn to the devil any man
that believes truly, the.12. article of ye faith, wherein I take the unity of
Christ's church, to consiste, al though in some points, he believe not the
definitions of that, which you call the church. If I shall speak to you
franckelye, I doubt not but he yt holds syncerlye the articles of our
belefe, thought in other things he dissent from your definitions, yet he
shall be saved. yea, quod they both, this is your doctrine. No, quoth I, it is
Paul, which says, that if they hold the foundation Christ, though they
build upon him. Hey straw and stouble: yet they shall be saved. Lord god, quoth
my lord of york, how you delight to leyne to so hard, and dark places of
scripture, yea, quoth my Lord of Chichester, I will show you how that Luther
does excommunicate zwinglius for this matter, so red a place of Luther, making
for his purpose. My lord, quoth I what Luther writteth, as you much pass not
of, so do I in this case, my faith is not build of Luther zwinglius, or
Ecolampadius in this point. And in deed to tell you truly, I never red any of
their works in this matter. As for their persons, what so ever their
sayings were, yet do I think assuredly, that they were and are gods
children, and saints with him. Well, quoth my lord of york, you are out of
the communion of ye church, I am not, quoth I. For it consists, and is in
faith. Loo, quoth he, how you make your church invisible, that would have the
comunion of it, to consiste in faith, yea, and like your grace, quoth I, for
to have communion with ye church, neadeth not visiblenesse of it, communion
consists, (as I said) in faith, and not in exforior ceremonies, as appears
both by Paul, which would have Vnam fidem, and by Ireneus to Victor for ye
obseruacio^ of Ester, saing that Dissonantiam ieiunii should not Rumpere
consonantiam fide. That same place, quoth my lord of chichester, has often
even wounded my conscience, because we disceuered our selfs from the Sea of
Rome. Well, quoth I, God forgive you, for I think you have done evil, to
bring England thither again, your honors know, I am plain, and therefore I
beseech you bear with me. Here my Lord of york took a book of paper, of
common places out of his bosom, and red a piece of Saint Augustine Contra
Epistolam fundamenti, how that there were many things, that did hold saint
Augustine in the bosom of the church, consent of people and nations,
authority confirmed with miracles, nourished with hope, increased with
charity, established with a^tiquitie. Besides this: there holdethe me in the
church, says saint Augustine still, the successions of priests, from Peter's
seat until this present Bishop. Last of all the very name of Catholic
doctrine does hold me. Loo, quoth he, how say you to this of Saint
Augustine, point^ me out your church thus. My Lord, quoth I, this of saint
Augustine makes as much for me as for you, although I might answer, that
al these, if they had been alleged to be so firm as you make them, they might
have been alleged against Christ, and his Apostles, for there was the law, and
ceremonies consented in by the people, confirmed with miracles, antiquity, and
continual succession of bishops from Aarons time, until that present: In good
faith, quod my lord of Chichester, master Bradford, you mark to much the
state of the church, before Christ's coming: Sir, quod I, therein I do but as
Peter teaches.2. Pet. 2. and Paul very often. you would gladly have your
church hear, very glorious, and as a most pleasante Lady, but as a most
pleasante lady, but as Christ's says, Beatus est quicunque non fuerit
offensus per me: so may his church say, blessed are they that are not
offended at me. yea, quoth I, my lord you thinck none is of the church, but
such as suffer persecution. what I think, quod I, god knows. I pray your
grace, judge me by any words and speaking, and mark what Paul says. Omnes
qui volunt, all that will live godly in christ Jesus, must suffer persecutions.
Sometime Christ church has rest here, but commonly, quoth I, it is not so.
And specially toward the end, her form will be more vnsemlye. But what say
you to saint Augustine, quoth he, where is your Church, that has the consent
of people and nations? Mary, quod I, al people and nations yt be gods people,
have consented with me and I with them in the doctrine of faith. Loo, quoth he,
how you goo about to shifte of all things. No my lord, quoth I, I mean
simplye, and so speak god knows. S. Augusti^ quoth he, does here talk of
succession, even from Peter's sea: yea, and like your grace, quod I, that sea,
the^ was nothing so much corrupt as it is now, Well, quod he, you always judge
ye church. No my lord, quod I. As christ's shep discern christ's voice, but they
judged not it: so they discern the church, but not judge her. yes that you do
sath he^ No and like your grace, quoth I, full well may a man doubt of ye Romish
church, for she obaeth not Christ's voice, as christ's true church does, wherein
quod he, i^ late^ seruis, quod I, and robs the Laytye of Christ's cup in
the Sacraments. Why quoth my lord of Chichester, Latten service was in England
when the Pope was gone. True, quoth I, time was when the Pope was away, but not
all Popery as in King Henrys days. Latten service, quoth my lord of york was
appointed to be song and had in ye Queare where only were. Clerici, that is
such as understand laten, ye people sitting in ye body of ye church prayinge
their own private prayers, and this, quoth he, may well be yet seen, by making
of the Chaunsell and Quere, so as the people could not come in, or hear them:
yea qut my lord, quoth I, both in Chrisostomes time, and also in the laten
church in saint Ieromes time, as he writteth in the preface I trow to the
Galathians, all the church says, Amen. Aunswering again mightily Amen: whereby
we may see that ye prayers were made, that both the people herd them and
understood them: you are to blame, quoth my Lord of Chichester to say that the
church robs the people of the Cup. Well my lord, quod I, turn it as please
you, all men know that the Laitye has none of it: In deed: quod I, I would
wish the church would defyne again that they might have it for my pert, if
god make free, quoth I, who ca^ define to make bound generally. Well, quoth my
lord of york, master Bradford, we lose but labor, for you seek to put away
al things yt be told you to your good, your church no man can know, yes that
you may well, quoth I. I pray you whereby: said he, forsooth Chrysostom shoeth
it. Tantummodo per scripturas only by the scriptures, and thus speaks he
very often times together, as you well know, quod I* In ded, quod he, that is
of Chrysostom In opere imperfecto, which may be doubted of the thing
whereby the church may be known best is succession of Bishops. No my lord,
quod I, Lyra full well writteth upon Matthew, that Ecclesia non consistit in
hominibus ratione Potestatis secularis aut ecclesiastice, Sedin hominibus in
quibus est noti^ia Vera et confessio Fidei et veritatis. And in Hilarious time,
you know he writteth to Auxcentius that the Church did rather Delitescere in
cauernis, them Eminere, in primariis sedibus. Here comes one of their
servants, and told them that my lord of Durisme tarried for them at Master
yorkes house, for inded it was paste.12. of the clock, upon a.4. hours they
tarried with me. And after that there man was come, they put up there written
books of common places, and said they lamented my case, and so wishing me to
red over a book, which did doctor Crome good, as my Lord of Chichester said
and wyshyng me good in words, they went there ways, and I to my prison.

Upon mondaye, which was the.22. of February about.8. of ye clock in ye
morning which was an hour sooner then was appointed. There came to the Cou^ter,
where I was in prison to Spannishe friars. Alphonsus and the kings Confeffor
(as they said) and with them two priests, which were English men, as I
wene, and when the house was voyded of other company: I was called done, and
being come before them a stool was pouled out, and I bidden sit down: which
thing I did after a sign of civility given to them. Now thus sitting
begins the Confessor to speak in latten, and ask me in latten (for all our
talk was in latten whether) I had not seen nor herd of one Alphonsus, yt had
written against heresies. And I answered that I did not know him. well, quoth
he, this man (pointing to Alphonsus) is he. Very good, quoth I. After this he
begins to tell me, how that of love and charity, by the means of the Earl
of Darbye, they come to me, because I desired to confer with them. And I
answered that I never desired there coming nor to confer with them, or any
other, but, quoth I, seeing you are come of charity, as you say, I cannot but
thanckfully acknowledge it, and as for conference, though I desire it not: yet,
quoth I, I will not refuse to talk with you, if you will. Than began Alphonsus
to tell me, that it were requisite I did pray unto god, that I might follow
the direction of gods spirit, and as he should enspire me, not being addicte
to min own self, will, and with: where upon I made a prayer, and besaught god
to direct al our will words, and works, as the wills, words and works of
his children for ever, yea, quoth Alphonsus, you must pray with your heart.
For if you speak but with tongue only God, will not give you his grace. Sir,
quoth I. do not judge lest you be judged, you have heard my words now
charity would have you to leave the judgment of the heart to god, you must,
quoth Alphonsus be as it were a newter, and not wedded to your sentence. But as
one standinge in doubt, pray and believe, and be redye to receive what god
shall inspire, for, quoth he, in vain labors our tongue to speak else: Sir,
quoth I, my sentence if you mean it for Religion must not be in a doubting, or
uncertain: as I tha^cke god, it is not even for that where in. I am conde^pned,
I have no cause to doubt. but rather to be most certain of it, and therefore I
pray god to confirm me more in it, for it is his truth. And therefore because
it may abid ye light, I dare be bold to have it look on, and co^ferre it with
you or any man in respect whereof I am glad of your coming and tha^cke you for
your coming, although (as I said) I desired not your coming, nwas willing
of your coming, or cold be co^te^t of it otherwise. Why, quod he, what is y^
matter wherefore you were condemned, for we know not, sir quod I, i^ prison
have I ben all most two years, I never tra^sgressed any of ye laws: wherefore I
might iustlye be punished. But because I fra^ckly confessed, whereof I repent
not my faith concerning the sacrament being demanded in these two points. One
that there is no tra^substantiacio^, the other that the wicked do not receive
Christ's body,* Let us quoth, he look a little on the first, do you not
believe christ's presence raallye and corporallye in the form of bread? No,
quoth I. I do believe that there Christ is present to the faith of the worthy
receauer, as there is present bread and wine to the senses, and outward man,
as for any such presence of including and placing Christ, I believe not, nor
dare not do. Why, quoth he, I am sure you believe Christ's natural body is
circumscriptible. And here he made much a do, of two natures of Christ, how
that the one is every where, and the other is in his proper place, demanding
questions here about which I answered with etiam, that is affirmatiuelye,
because they were such, as no wise man would have spente any such time about
as he did, for I never herd of any, that would have denied them. Now then,
comes he to this conclusion (which I prayed him, he would make: for else he
had forgotten) how that because christ's body was circumscriptible concerning
the humanitye in in heaven, therefore it was so in the bread. This hanges not
together, quod I, because you are here. Ergo you are at Romme, it is out of
France, because christ's body is in heaven. Io. it is in the Sacrament under
the form of bread. No wise man will grant it, quoth I. why, quoth he, you will
believe nothing but that which is expresely spoke, in the scriptures, yes sir,
quoth I, I will believe what so ever you shall by demonstracions out of the
scriptures declare unto me, he is obstinate says he to his fellow: But, quoth
he, to me is not god able to do it. yes sir, quoth I But hear the question is
of gods will, and not of his power: Why, quoth he. Does he not say plainlye
this is my body? yes, quod I, and I deny it not, but that it is to the faith
of the worthy receuer. To faith, quoth he? how is that? Forsothe sir, quoth
I, as I have no tongue to express it: so I know you have no ears to hear and
understand it, for faith seyth more, then man can utter, yea, but, quod he, I
can tell all that I believe, you believe not much then, quoth I. For if you
believe the ioies of heaven: if you believe no more then you can tell, you will
not much desire to come thither, for as the mind is more capable and
receauable then the mouth, so it conceaueth more then the tongue can express,
Christ says, it is his body, quoth he. And so say I after a certain manner,
quoth I: After a certain manner, quoth he that is after another manner then it
is in heaven, saint Augustine, quoth I tells it more plainlye, that it is
Christ's body, after the same manner circuncysion was the Couenaunte of God,
and the sacrament of faith, is faith, or to make it more plain, as Baptism,
and the water of baptism is regeneration. Very well said, quoth he, Baptism
and the water thereof is a sacrament of gods grace and sprit in the water,
closing the baptism. No sir, quoth I, away with your enclosing on the same
sort christ's body is in the bread, on which sort the grace and spirit of
God is in the water. In ye water, quod he: is gods grace by significacion: so
is the body in the bread, quoth I, in the Sacrament, you are much deceived,
quoth he, yt make no difference beetwene the sacraments that be sta^deres, and
the Sacraments that are traunseuntes, and passers by. As for example, the
sacrament of Order which you deny, though saint Augustine affirm it, is
standerd although the ceremony be paste. But in baptism so sone as the body
is washen, the water cesseth to be a sacrament. True good sir, quoth I. And so
it is in the lords supper, no longer then it is in use, is Christ's sacrament.
Here was master Alphonsus wounderfullye chafed, and speak (as often he had
done before) so: that ye hole house did ringe again with an Echo. He has a
great name of lerning. But surely he has little patience. If I had been any
thing whete: one house could not have kept us both. At the lenght he comes
to that point, that I could not find in ye scripture, baptism, and the Lords
supper, to have any like similitude together. And here (lord god) what array he
mad, how that we would receive nothing but scripture: and yet we are able to
prove nothing by the scripture, Father, quod I, for so I called him, God
forgive me if I did amysse, be paciente, and you shall see, yt by the scripture
I will find baptism and the Lords supper, coupled together. No, quoth he,
that can thou never do, let me see one text of it, and a great ado he made.
At the lenght: sir, quoth I, Paul says, that as we are baptized into one
body: so we are Potati in Vno spiritu, we have dronken of one spirit,
meaning it of the Cup in the Lords supper. Paul has no such words quod
he* yes that he has, quoth I. I trow he has not, quoth the kings confessor.
Give me a Testament, quoth I, and I will show it to you: so a priest that sat
by the^ gave me his testamente, and I showed them the plain text. Here was
now lokinge one upon an other, finallye this simple shifte was found: that
Paul spoke not of the sacrament. Well, sir quod quoth I, though the text be
plain, yet I wene the fathers do expound it so, especially (except my memory
fail me:) Chrysostom does it. Here I seeing the^ blancke: I began to tell them
how I had been handled in prison, with out book, paper, pen, yucke, and how
unjustly I had been handled, and prayed them, that as they told me their
coming was to do me good: so they would do it, and not to do me hurt,
which thing they much marked not, because of the foil they had, which I would
have suppressed. Alphonsus therefore which had the Testamente in his hand, and
turned over leaf by leaf: at the lenght he comes to the.5. to the
Corinthiens: and there red how that he was giltye, which made no difference
of the lords body, yea sir, quoth I, but therewith he says, he that eats
of of the bread, calling it bread still, and that, after consecracio^ as you
call it. And so brought forth the sentence of the.10. to the Corinthe: the
bread which we break. etc. Oh, quoth he, how ignorant are you which know
not that things retain the names they had after their conversion: as Moses
Rood. And here they called for a Bible, and so was all most a quarter of an
hour, before he could find out the place, finding fault at the Bible: because
it was Vataples Bible. At the lenght when he had found it: lord God how he
triumphed but I cooled the heat furthwith for sir, quoth I, there is mention
made of the conversion, as well as the same appeared to the sense, but, quoth I,
here you cannot find it so, find me one word how the bread is converted: and
I will then say, you bring some matter, that makes for you. At these words
he was troubled, and at the lenght, he said, how that I hanged on mine own
sense. No, quoth I, that do I not. For I will bring you forth (for.viii.C.
years after Christ) the fathers of the church, to confirm this which I spoke.
No, quoth he, you have the church against you. I have not quoth I, christ
church against me. yes yt you have says he. And so asked me what the church
was. Marie, quoth I, Christ's wife, the cheer, and seat of verity. Is she
visible, quoth he. ye that she is, quoth I, if that you will put on the
spectacles of gods word to look on her. This church, quoth he, has defyned
the contrary, and that will I prove by all the good fathers continuallye, from
Christ's Ascencension, ever, for.15.C. years at ye least, continually. What,
will you prove so quoth I, transubstantiation? yea, quoth he, that ye bread is
turned i^to Christ's body. you speak more then you can do quod I. That do I
not quod he. Then quod I. I will give place. Will you believe quod he. Believe*
quod I* is gods gift, therefore cannot I promise, but I tell you, quod I, that I
will give place, and I hope shall believe gods truth, always so good is he. Here
he found a grreat fault with me, yt I would not deserne betwixt Habitum et
actum, as though Actus, which he called credulity, had been in our power, but
this he let pass, and comes again, asking me, if he could prove it, as he
said: whether that I would give place. yea quod I, that I will. Here was called
for, paper, pen and yncke, to writ. And then I said, what and if that I prove
it you, continuallye for.viii.C. years after Christ, at the least, the
substabnce of bred to remain in the Sacrament, by the testimony of the
Fathers: what will you do, quod I? I will give place, quod he, with this, paper
came in. Then said I, writ you, how that you will give place, if I so prove,
and I will write, that I will give place if you so prove. Because you are the
aunciente, you shall have the preeminaunce. Lord God how angry he was now,
and said that he came not to learn at me, and so said here is two witnesses
(meaning it of the two pristes) and they be sufficiedt. And so here about we
had much ado to none effect: but to a plain scolding, if I had not given
place to the furor of Alphonsus, for he was very testie and hasty, and here
he dispreased Bucer, and all that praised him, with much other talk. At the
lenght, the confessor asked me of the second question what it was. Sir, quoth
I, that the wicked men receive not Christ's body in the sacrament, as Saint
Augustine speaks of Judas, that he received Panem domini but not panem
dominu^. S. Augustine says not so, quoth Alpho^sus. yes yt does he, quoth I,
and so they rose up, and talked no more of that matter, but asked me how they
should get me all the fathers and old aucthors, that prove and affirm the
bread to be turned into Christ's body. Sir, quoth I, you may sone do it,
howbeit because you shall not trouble your self: if I may have my books, I
nead no more but notes of ye places. Thus they went their ways, how they
brooked my talk: I ca^ not tell, for they bad me not farewell. After they were
gone, comes one of the priests, and willed me not to be so obstinate. Sir
quoth I, be not you so wavering. In all the scriptures cannot you find me non
est panis. yes thst I can, quoth he, in.5. places. Then will I eat your book,
quoth I, so the book was opened, but no place found, and he went his way
smiling. God help us.

Upon the.21. of March, by the means of one of yt Earl of Darby his men,
left behind my lord, his master, for ye soliting of my cause as he said to
me: there came to the Cou^ter to diner, one master Collior, ones warden of
Mau^chester, and the said servant of ye Earl of darbie, of whom I learned ye
master doctor Westone Deane of westminster, would be with me in y^ after none
about.2. of the clock, or before. At diner therefore when the said warden did
discommend king Edward, and went about to set forth the authority of the
Pope, which I with stood, defendinge the kings faith, that it was Catholic,
and that the authority of the Bishop of Rome his supremycie was usurped,
bringing forth the testimony of Gregory which calls ye name of supreme
head to be a title of yt foriner to an techrist: a woman prisoner was brought
in, where upon I took occasion to rise from the table, and so went to my prison
Chamber to beg of god grace, and help therein, continuing there still until I
was called down to speak which maisterster Weston. So soon as I came into the
hall: master weston very gently took me by the hand, and asked me how I did,
with such other talk. At ye lenght he willed auoidaunce of the chamber, so
they all went out, save master weston himself, master Collior, ye Earl of
Darbie his servant, yt subdeane of we wm^, the keeper master Clayden, and the
person of the church where the Counter is. Now then he begins to tell me,
how yt he was often minded to have come unto me, being thereto desired of the
Earl of Darby and, quod he, after that I perceived by his man, that you could
be contented rather to speak with me, then any others: I could not but come to
do you good if I ca^, for hurt be sure I will not. Sir quoth I. When I perceued
by the report of my lord servant, that you did bear me good will more (as
he said) the^ any other of your sort: I told him the^, that therefore I could
be better content and more willing to talk with you, if you should come unto
me. This did I say, quoth I, other wise I desired not your coming. Well,
quoth he, now I am come to talk with you, but before we shall enter into any
talk, certain principlis we must agree upon, which shall be this days work.
First, quoth he, I shall desire you to put away all vain glory, and not to
hold any thing for the praise of the world. Sir, quoth I, Augustine makes
that in deed a piece of the definition of an heretic, which if I can not put
away clean (for I think there will a spice of it remain in us, as long as
this flesh lives) yet I promise you by the grace of god, that I purposse not
to yield to it, god I hope will never suffer it to bare rule in them, that
strive there against, and desire all the dregs of it utterly driven out of
us. I am glad. quoth he, to here you say so, although in ded, quoth he. I
thi^cke you do not so much esteem it, as others do. Secondly I would desire
you that you will put away singularity in your judgment and opinions, sir,
quod I, god forbed yt I should stick to any singularity or private judgment
in gods religion. Hitherto I have not desired it, neither do, nor mind at any
time, to hold any other doctrine then is public, and Catholic,
understanding catholic, as good men do, according to gods word. Very well,
quod he, this is a good days work, I hope to do you good: and therefore now
thirdly, I shall pray you to write me Capita of those things, where upon you
stand in the Sacrament, and to send them to me, betwixt this and wednesdaye
next, until which time, yea until I come to you again, be assured that you
are with out all peril of death. Of my fidelity I warraunte you, therefore
away with all dubitacions etc. Sir, quod I, I will write to you the grounds I
^ene to, in this matter. As for death if it come: well come be it, this which
you require of me, shall be no great let to me therein. you know says he, that
Saint Augustine was a Manicean, yet was he converted at the lenght: so I have
good hope of you. Sir, quod I, because I will not flater you: I would you
should flatlye know, that I am even setteled in the religion wherefore I am
condemned. yea but, quod he, if it be not the truth, and if you see evident
matter to the contrary, will not you then give place? God forbed, quod I, but
that I should always give place to the truth. I would have you to pray so,
quod he. so I do quoth I, and that he will more and more confirm me in it, as
I tha^cke god he has done, and does: yea, but, quoth he, pray with a
condition if you be in it. No. sir, quod I, I cannot pray so, because I am
setteled and assured of his truth. Well, quoth he, as the learned bishop
answered Saint Augustines mother that though he was obstinat: yet the tears
of such a mother could not but wene her son: so, quod he, I hope your
prayers. (For min eyes did show that I had wept in prayer) cannot but be
herd of God though not as you would, yet as best shall please god, do you
not, quod he, remember the history hereof, yes sir, quoth I. I think it to
be of saint Ambrose. No, quod he, that it is not, and here he would have
laid a wager: and began to triumph saying. As you are ouerseen herein, so
you are in the other things. Well sir, quoth I. I will not contend with you
for the name, this I remember saint Augustine writteth in his Confessions.
After this talk he begone to tell: how that the people were by me procured to
withstand the Queen, but I badde him hang me up, as a traitor, and a
theif: if ever I encouraged any to rebellion, which thing my keeper and others
that were there of the priests affirmed on my behalf. So much talk there was
at Ephesios, bow he had saved men goinge in the carte to be hanged, such
like. The end was this, that I should send? unto him, capita doctrine of the
supper, and after wednesday he would come unto me again, and thus departed he,
after that he had droncken to me in bear and wine, I omit here, talk of
Oxford, of books of German writters, of the fear of death, and such other
talk which are to no purpose.

Upon the.28. of March came to the Counter Doctor Pendelton, and with him
Master Collior, ones warden of Maunchechester, and Stephen Beiche. After
salutacions, master Pendelton began to speak to me, that he was sorry for my
trouble. And further, quod he, after that I did know you could beco^te^t to
talk with me I made the more speed, being as redye to do you the good, and
pleasure that I can, as you would wish etc. Sir, quod I, the manner how I was
content to speak with you was on this sort, master Beiche was often in hand
with me, whom he should bring unto me, and named you amongst other. And, quod
I, I remember that I said, I had rather speak with you then with any of all
other. Now the cause I so would, I will brieflye tell you, I remember that
ones you were (as far as a man might judge) of the religion that I am of, at
this present. And I remember that you have set fourth the same earnestly.
Gladlye therefore would I learn of you, what thing it was, that moved your
conscience to altre: and gladly would I see what thing it is or was yt you have
seen sithe^, which you saw not before. Here master Pendelto^ was some thing
abashed, as appears by his fo^bling in his spech. Master Bradforde, quod he,
I do not know wherefore you are condemned. Marye, quod I, transubstantiacion
is the thing, whereof I am condemned, and also the denial of wicked men to
receive Christ's body, wherein I would desire you to show me what reasons,
which before you knew not, did move your conscience to altre: for ones as I
said you were as I am in religion. Hear again master Pendelton half amassed,
begone to excuse him self, if it would have be^, as though he had not denied
fullye transubstantiacion in deed, all though the word, quod he I said was not
in scripture. and so he made an endless tale of the thing that moved him to
altre. As far as I cold perceive, it was because he had looked to much, and
given to much diligence and estimacion, to Luther and Melancton. But, quod he,
I will gether to you the places, and send them. And here he desired me, that he
might see a Copy of that, which I had sent master Weston, the which I did
promise him. This is a some of the effectual talk we had. Besides which
talk, we had a reasonninge a little, whether evil men did receive Christ's
body. I no. and he, yea. I said they received not the spirit, Ergo not the
body: for it is no carcass, quoth I, hereto I brought out saint Augustine, how
Judas received Panem domini, and not Panem dominum, how that he must be in
corpori Christi, that must receive Corpus christi, which he went about to put
away, with idem, and not, ad idem, out of saint Jerome and how that in
cotpore Christi, was too be understand of all that be in the visible church,
although they be not in the invisible church with God, which I denied to be
Saint Augustines meaning, and said also: that saint Ieromes allegations
could not make for that purpose. Again we had talk of transubstantiacion. He
brings forth Ciprian, Panis quem dedit Dominus natura mutatus. And I
expounded Natura, not for the substance. As quod I, the nature of an herb is
not the substance of it: so the bread changed in nature, is not to be taken
for changed in substance, for now it is ordained not for the food of the
body simplye, but rather for the food of the soul. And here I brought fourth
Gelasius, whom he said was a Pope. yea marye, quod I. But his faith, is my
faith, quod I, for the Sacrament, if you would receive it. From this talk we
went to talk, wether Accidentia were Res or no. If they be properly Res,
quod I, then be they substance, and if they be substance, (in that we must
have Tetrestrem rem, and eayrthlye substance in the Sacrament as Ireneus
says): then must we not deny bread, quod I. But he said that color was
the earthelye thing, and called it an accidental substance. And so here
aboutes we had much babbling to none effect. I omit the talk we had of
my Lord of Caunterbury, of Peter Martirs book, of his letter laid to my
charge. When he was condemned of ye church, whether Dic ecclesie et ce* was of
the universal church, or of a particular church, which at the lenght he
granted of vain glory, which he willed me to be ware of at his coming
forth of the Country, and such like talk. A little before his departinge, I
said this. Master doctor, quod I, as I said to Master weston the last
day, so say I unto you again, that I am the same man in religion against
transubstantiacion still, which I was when I came into prison: for, quod I,
hitherto I have seen nothing in any point, to infirm me. At which words
he was some thing moved, and said, that, that was not Catholic* yes, quod I,
and I trust so to prove it, even by the testimony of the catholic fathers,
until Concilium Lateranense, and there abouts. The keeper master Clayden
desired him to tarry diner, which thing he denied: because had else wheare
promised. And so went his way: saying, that he would came after to me: god
one father, be with us al, and give us the spirit of his truth for ever. Amen.

In the after nowne about.5. of the clock, comes master westo^, which sent
word to the keeper, that he would have been with me* by.2. of the clock. Now
when I was come down out of my prison chamber unto him: he very gentlye saluted
me, desired the company: every man to depart, and so sat done, and I
besides him. And after that he had thancked me for my writtinge unto him: he
pulled out of his bosom the same writing, which I had sent him. The copy
whereof in English (for I did writ it in Laten) shall immediately follow this
communicacion. And before he began to read it, he showed me, that he asked of
my conversation at Cambridge sithen his being with me, and, quod he, master
Bradford because you ar a man, not given to the glory of this world, I will
speak it before your face: your life I have learned was such there always, as
al me^, even y^ greatest enemies you have: can not but praise you, and it. And
therefore I love you, quod he much better then ever I did. Now, quod he, I
will read over your arguments, and so we will conferrthe^. Such they are, that
a man may well perceive you stand of conscience, and therefore I am glad, and
the more redye to pity you. So he began to read the first, and there began
to tell, how that though the word transubstantiacion began but lately: yet
the thing, quod he, was and has been sithen Christ's institucion. And I told
him, that I did not contend, or hang upon the word only: but upon the thing
which, quod I, is as new as the word. Then went he to the second, and there
brought out saint Augustine, how that if an evil man, goinge to the devil,
did make his will: his son and heir would not say, his father did lie in
it, or speak tropically. Much more Christ, quod he goinge to god, did never
lie nor use any figurative speech in his last will and testament. Do you not
remember this place of saint Augustine, quod he? yes sir, quod I. But I remember
not that saint Augustine has those words, tropice or fyguratiue, that is
figuratiuelye spoken as you rehearse. For a man may speak a thing
figuratively and lie not, as Christ did in his last supper. After this he
went to the third, and brought furtho Ciprian, how that the nature of the
bread is turned into flesh. Here faith he that my Lord of Caunter bury
expounds nature, for quality by Gelasius, the which interpretacion serves
for the answer of your third argument, that Christ called bread his body,
that is the quality, form, and apparaunce of bread. And further quod he, the
scripture is wont to call things, as they auerr, by the same names. As Simon
the Leper, not which was so presentlye, but because he had been so. Sir, quod
I, Cipria^ wrote before Gelasius, therefore Ciprian must not expound Gelastus,
but Gelasius, Ciprian, and so they both teach that bread remains still. As
for things having still the names they had makes nothing to answer this
except you could show, that this now were no bread^ as easelye a man might
have known and seen then, Simon to have been healed and clean from his
Leprosey. After this he went to the foerth of the Cup, the which he din not
fully red but digressed into a long talk of Ciprians Epistles De aquarus,
Also of Saint Augustine, expoundinge the breakinge of bread by Christ to his.
2. Disciples goinge to Emause, to be of the Sacrament, with such other talk
to no certain purpose, and therefore I prayed him, that in as much as I had
written to him, the reasons that stablishe my faith against transubstantiacion:
so he would do the like to me, that is, answer mine by writing, and show
me moo reasons in writing, to confirm tra^substantiacio^, which he promised
me to do, and said that he would send or briynge it to me again, with in
three days. And so when he had ouerlye read my arguments, and hear and
there speak, little to the purpose for auoidynge of them, and therefore I
eftsoon prayed him to give me in writtynge, his aunsweres: he began to tell
me, how, and what he had done for Grymbolde, and how that I neade not to fear
any reproach or slander I should sustain, belike meani^g, to have me
secretly, to have come to them, as Grymbold did, for he subscribed. And
therefore I speak on this sort unto him. Master Deane, quod I, I would gladly
that you should not conceive of me, that I pass of shame of men, simplye, in
this matter: I rather would have you to think of me, as the very truth is:
that hitherto, as I have seen, nor heard nothing to infirm my faith against
transubsta^tiacio^: so I am no less settled in it. then I was at my coming
hither. I love, quod I, to be plain with you, and to tell you at the first,
that you shall find at the last. In good faith Master Bradforde, quod he, I
love you the better for your plainness: and do not think otherwise of me,
quod he, but that you shall find me plain in all my talk with you. Here he
began to ask me of my imprisonment, and condempnacion. So I began, and told
him, how I had been handled, wheare at the seemed to wounder: yea in plain
words he said, I had been handled otherwise, then I had given cause: and so
showed me, how that my Lord of Bath reported, that I had deserved a benefit
at the Queens hand, and at all the Counsels. In this kind of talk we spent
an hour almost. and so as one weary I did arise up* and he called in the keeper,
and before him bad me be of good comfort, and to be out of all peril of
death. Mary sir quoth the keeper, but it is in every ma^s mouth: that he shall
dye to morrow. Whereat, he seemed some thing half amassed, and said, he would
go before euensong, before the Queen and speak to her on my behalf. And I
think, the Queen had almost supped at that present, for it was paste six
of the clock. Before the keeper I told him again, that still I was the same
manne I was at the first, and til I should see matter to touch conscience to
the contrary: must needs so continewe. The keeper desired me, to hearken to
master Doctors counsel, and prayed. M. Doctor to be good unto me. And so
after we hade drunk together: master Doctor with most gentle words, took
his leave for three days. Now when he was gone: the keeper told me, how that
master Doctor spoke openly, how that he saw no cause why they should burn
me. Which sentence for the ambiguitie of the meaning, made me sorye lest I
had behaved my self in any thing, wherein he gathered any conformablenesse to
them in their doctrine, which god knows I never as yet did so. God our
father bless us, as his children, for ever, and keep us from all evil for
ever. Amen. Upon the fifth day of Apryll came master Doctor Westo^ to the
cou^ter about.2. of the clock in the after noone, who excused himself for
being so long absent: partly by sickness, partly for that Doctor Pendleton
told him that he would come unto me, and partly for that (quoth he) I
withstoode certain Monckes, which would have come again into Westminster.
After which talk, he told me how that the Pope was dead, and then he told
me, how he had spoken to the Queen for me, and how that death was not nere
unto me. Last of all, he excused himself, for not aunswering mine arguments
against transubstanciacion: because my coming to day (quoth he) was more by
fortune then of purpose. I would gladlye (quoth I) omittyng all other talks,
have seen an answer to my arguments.

Why (quoth he) you have remembered some thing what I spoke to you, when I was
last with you. No sir (quoth I) I never called them in manner to mind, sythen
that time, as well because I hoped you would have written them: as also for
that they seemed, not to be so material. In good faith (quod he) I cannot see
any other or better way for you, then for to submit your self to the
judgment of the Church* Marye so I will sir (quoth I) if so be, by the
church you understand Christ's church. Lo (quoth he) you take upon you to
judge the church. No sir (quoth I) that do I not, in taking upon me to
discern, I do not judge the church. yes that you do (quoth he) and make
invisible. I do neither, quoth I. Why, says he, who can see your church?
Those sir, quoth I, that have spiritual eyes, wherewith they might have
dyscerned, Christ's visible conversation hear upon earth. Nay, quoth he,
Christ's church has three tokens, that all men may look well upon: namely,
unity, antiquitye, and consent. These three, quoth I, may be as well in evil as
in good, as well in sin as in virtue, as well in the deuyls church, as in
Gods church. As for ensaumple, quoth I, Idolatry amongst the Israelites had
al those three. Chrysostom tells plainly, as you well know said I, that the
church is well known, Tantummodo per scripturas alonely by the scriptures. In
good faith, quod he, you make your church invisible, when you will have it
known alonelye by the scriptures. No sir (quoth I) the scriptures do
plainly set forth to us, the church, that all men may well enough, thereby
know her, if they list to look. The church (quod he) is like a Tower or town
upon a Hill, that al men may se. True sir (quoth I) al men that be not blind.
Visible enough is the church, but menues blindness is great. Impute not
therefore to the church, that which is to be imputed to men's blindenes.
Where (quoth he) was your church forty years ago? or where is it now?
except in a corner of Germanye. Forsooth sir (quoth I, the church of Christ
is dispersed, and not tied to this or that place, but to ye word of god: so
that where it is, there is Gods church, if it be truly taught. Lo (quod
he) is not this to make the church invisible? Poi^n me out a realm, a
hundredth years paste, which mayntayned your doctrine. Sir (quoth I) if you
will, or would well mark the state of the church, before Christ's coming,
with it now, (as saint Paul and Peter wylleth us) I think you would not
look for such shows of the church to be made: as to point it out by
realms. You know (quoth I) that in Helyas time both in Israel, and else where,
Gods church was not poyntable: and therefore cried he out that he was left
alone. No marye, quoth he, did not God say that there was.7000 which had not
bowed their knees to Baale? Lo, says he, 7000. show me seven thousand a
hundredth years agoo of your religion. Sir (quoth I) these.7000. were not
known to men, for then Helias would not have said, that he had been
before left alone. And this is plain enough, by that which the text has,
namelye, that God says Reliqui, I have reserved to me.7000. Mark that it
says, God had reserved to him self to his own knowledge, as I doubt not but
the hundredth years ago, God had his, 7000. in his proper places, though
men knew not thereof. Well master Bradforde (says he.) I will not make
your case worse, then for transubstanciacion, all though I know that we
agree not in Other matters. And I pray you (quoth he) make you it your self
not worse. If I can do you good I will, hurt you I will not, I am no
Prince, and therefore I cannot promise life: except you will submytte your
self, to the diffinicion of ye church. Sir (quoth I) so that you will defyne me
your church, that under it, you bring not in a false church: you shall not
see but that we shall soune be at a point. In good faith master Bradford,
(quoth he.) I see no good will be done, and therefore I will wish you as much
good as I can, and hereafter I will perchance come or send to you again, and
so he sent for master Weal and departed. Now after his departing: comes
the keeper master Claydon, and Stephen Beiche, and they were very hot with
me, and spoke unto me in such sort that I should not look but to have the^
utter enemies unto me, notwithstandyyng the frendeshippe, they both have
hitherto pretended. God be with us, and what matter is it who be against us.

Finis.
Imprinted at London, in Fleetstrete, at the Sign of ye Faucon by William
Griffith, and are to be sold at the little shop in saint Dunstones churchyard.
Anno.1561. The.xiii. day of May.


