TWO SERMONS, FOR THESE WHO ARE TO COME TO THE TABLE OF THE LORD.

With diverse prayers fit for the necessities of the Saints at diverse
occasions.

Carefully digested by Mr. ZACHARY BOYD, Preacher of GODS word, at GLASGOVV.

AUGUST. de doctrina CHRIST. Omnis res quae (...) non deficit dum habetur, and
non datur, nondum habetur, quomodo habenda est? I live to die, that I may die
to live.

EDINBVRGH Printed by JOHN WR^ITTOVN. Anno DOM. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY CHRISTIANS THE INDWELLERS OF THE BVRGH, AND BARONIE OF
GLASGOVV.
WELBELOVED in the LORD, The word of God is a treasure of knowledge: Psalm. 19
v. 7.
It makes wise the simple. It made David Psalm. 119. 99
wiser then his teachers. Blessed is the man Psalm. 1. 2.
whose delight is in Gods law, and who meditats on the same both day and night.
This is the wisdom of the wise; but Prover. 12. 23.
in the hearts of fools be proclamations of folly, for they know not that
Prover. 5. 21.
the LORD pondereth all their goeings.

Happy are ye, if ye can acknowledge the day of your merciful visitation:
your God has blessed you with many blessings: He has done to you amongst many
Cities, as Joseph did to Benjamin amongst his brethren, to whom he multiplied
the number of his Genes. 43. 34.
measses above theirs: But in a particular man^^ he has blessed you with the
powerful preaching of his Gospel. The Lord who in Zacharias days promised to
make the Zach. 14. 4.
Mount of Olives to cleave, that Jerusalem hid with hills might be seen by
all nations; has in this land, which was Scotia, a land of darkness, made a
way to the sight of his glory, and to you in a special manner: I pray God ye
be thankful, and that such favors continue.

It h^th been Gods providence by the occasion of the French bloody wars to
bring me amongst you: My soul (the Lord is my witness) wishes your well: In
testimony therefore of my sincere and hearty love, receive favorably these
two Sermons, with some few prayers. Take it in good part that I present you
with them.

All that is done in this envious and taxing age is liable to censure: Many
strive to stop a work at the first stop, as though the praise of any were
their prejudice: The tongues of such are armed with Psalm. 120. 4,
sharp arrows of the mighty, and with coals of juniper. Note.


* Let such know that the best reproving of others is to do better them
selves.

It is my desire that ye would accept this little, and vouchsafe it a rowme of
lodgeing in your favor, as being a testimony of love from him, who shall
always pray 1. Sam. 15. ^9.
the Eternity of Israel, to make his graces rain down plentifully upon you,
Psalm. 133. 3.
as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Zion, where the LORD commanded the blessings. So humbly taking my leave, I
entreat the LORD, in whom all Col. 1. 19.
fullness dwells, to replenish you with Ephesians. 1. 3.
all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places.

2. Cor. 9. 10.
Now he that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread for your
food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness: Not else but humbly taking my leave, I remain

GLASGOVV this 5. of November 16^8. Yours ever in the Lord Mr. ZACHARI^ BOYD.

TWO PREPARATIVE PREFACES TO THE SERMON OF PREPA^RATION.
THE FIRST PREFACE.
THERE be two things in this world, which chiefly should grieve the heart of
man: viz, sin and shame: The one is the mother; the other is the daughter:
Sin is ever full of shame, a shameful thing, great with shame as a woman
with child. Note.
* If we would kill the viper of ^inne, the mother of shame, let us be ashamed
of our sins* The shame wherewith a sinner is ashamed of his sins, kills
sin and the shame to ensue. Note.
* If we be not ashamed of our sins which is repentance, God shall by his
judgments make us ashamed of our selves, which is vengeance: In the
consideration of this, let us fall down upon our kne^s with public
protestation, that to the Lord our God belongs the righteousness, but to us
open shame and confusion of face: Da^. 9. 7.
Let us humbly confess our sins into his presence, and kiss his footstool
by a humble debaseing of our souls and bodies before him, Revel. 4. 10.
before whose feet the crowns of Heaven are cast down.

THE SECOND PREFACE.
* The fire of GOD his spirit is not a painted fire, Note.
which seems to be that which it is not: It ever has some heat, though
sometimes without flamme.

This day we are come before the Lord, for to blow at the coal: Man must
blow, and God will blow: Man blows up the spark of grace by praying servently
to God: God blows it up by the powerful preaching of the word outwardly, and
by the secret motion of his spirit inwardly. When God quickened Adam, but a dead
lump of clay, scripture says that he breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life, Genesis 2. 7.
and man became a living soul. Note.
* If the spirit of Jesus this day breath into our hearts, he shall be unto our
souls a quickening spirit, which is better than Adams living soul: For as that
soul it was deprived of all life by sin, but where once the quickening spirit
is, 1. Cor. 15. 45.
that soul can die no more: And seeing God his word is the instrument of life
and the power of God to salvation, I entreat you all earnestly to pray from
your hearts, that Christ who breathed upon his Apostles the sweet breath of
the holy GHOST would also vouchsafe in some measure to blow breath upon you,
and me at this time: The LORD blow into my heart and mouth the words that may
save your souls.

A SERMON OF PREPARATION TO THE COMMUNION.
PREACHED THE THIRD OF MAY 1628.
THE TEXT.
JOHN 6. V. 27. LABOUR not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat
which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you: for him has God the Father sealed.

THE first things of the godly man are hardest, Note.
his last things are best things, like the wine of Cana in Galilee: John. 2. v.
1.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34 v. 19.
these be his first things: But the Lord delivers them out of them all, these
be his last things.

* As the Apryle showers go before the May flowers, Note.
so must our tears trickle before our triumphs: we must sweat before we climb
up the everlasting hills, and sorrow before we sing: Genesis 49, v. 26.
We must groan before we glory, and we must fast before we feast.

THE DIVISION OF THE TEXT.
IN my text is both a fast and a feast: first a fast and then a feast: fast
from worldly things; Labor not for the meat which perishes: feast upon
Heavenly things, labor for the meat which endures to life everlasting, etc.
Seeing this day of preparation is a fasting day, J shall content me with the
first part of my text, reserving the rest unto the day of the feast.

That we may the better understand this days text, we shall first consider
breefly the whole matter of this Chapter, that thereafter we may see upon what
occasion Christ teached the people the words of my text.

THE DIVISION O^ THE WHOLE CHAPTER.
THE whole Chapter whereout J have selected this text, may be divided into
three parts.

In the first part we see a miracle of five thousand men fed with five
loaves, whereof the fragments after all were satisfied, did fill twelve
baskets: Note.
* Thus every bread did feed a thousand, and all being satisfied, more was
left at last than at the first was set down: this is unto verse 16,

Jn the second part we have a miraculous walking of Christ upon the sea of
Tiberias, or of Genezaret: For to speak this by the way, this sea was neither
the Ocean nor the Mediterranean sea, but a lake of fourteen or fifteen miles
of length, and of five or six miles of breadth: Here the most part of Christ
his Apostles were fishers, before Christ cas^ed them to that office: of this
we have from the sixteen verse unto the twenty and two verse: The occasion
of this walking was, that these whom he had fed with loaves, did go about to
take him by force, V. 15.
for to make him a King: He for to be quite of them; withdrew himself into a
mountain alone until evening: At that time the disciples entered into a ship,
and went over that sea toward Capernaum; Jesus being behind: But while after
they had sailed five and twenty, or thirty furlongs, Jesus overtooke them,
and entered into their ship, V. 21.
and immediately the ship was at the land whether they went; this is unto verse
22:

Jn the third part is set down how those men whom he had fed, followed him
over the sea toward Capernaum, and what conference the LORD had with them,
after they came to him.

So soon as they came to him, they uttered many fair words, Rabbi, V. 25.
(said they,) when came thou hither? Note.
These were very fair words; But what cared Christ for fair words? GOD
regards not flattering lips: Proverb. 26. 23.
Burning lips, and a wicked heart, are like a potsheard covered with silver
dross. Note.
* Though a man's mouth be fired with love toward GOD, if in his breast he
has a profane heart, he is but a sheard in the sight of God: All the color
of his devotion is not from the silver of sincerity, but from silver dross,
the heart underneath being nothing but like a naughty sheard: Such one day,
though they were Kings and Rulers the LORD shall dash in pie^es, Psalm. ^ V. 9.
like a potters vessel, or as we say, he shall ding them all into shardes.

I can not go forward vntouching this point. Note.
* Many can with burning lips call Christ Rabbi, whose wicked hearts are
covered but with the silver dross of hypocrisy: Judas rabbied him with a
kiss of burning lips, Math. 26. 49.
having a traitor his heart covered with silver dross: Others esteemed him as
a robber, Luke. ^2. 52.
and came out against him, Math. 27. 28.
as against a thief and a robber: Others robbed him of his garments, for while
Christ was crucified, he hang upon the cross a naked man: Robbers who came out
against him, as against a Robber, robbed him of all his clothes.

* And what shall I say of the most Note.
part of the men that came to him here Rabbied him but for to rob him of his
loaves.

To them Christ said ye follow me but for your belly: ye seek me, (said
he,) John. 6. 26.
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and
were filled.

The doctrine is this, The doctrine.
let men take good heed what moves them chiefly to serve God: If the motion
be from the belly, it will be a slow motion: Note.
* Of such may be said that which the Apostle says of the men of Candie out of
one of their own Prophets or Poets.

(...). Tit. ^. V. 1^.
That is, the Cretians, or men of Candie are always liars, evil beasts, slow
bellies.

God and the belly can not cleave one to another, Note. ^
no more then the iron of Nebuchad-nezzar his image feet could be mixed with
clay: Dan. 2. V. 43.
Nullum horum potest esse coagulum, nothing is able to make such things for to
curd and join.

* Except that we cast our belly behind our back, Note.
GOD his spirit will never dwell in our heart, nor suffer us to see his face.

* He that begins his prayer with give us this day our daily bread, Note.
has little care of Our Father which art in Heaven, less understands he for
thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory. If man could truly think that
GOD had a kingdom, he would first seek the kingdom of GOD, being assured
that GOD would cast all other things unto him.

Take no thought for your life, Math. 6. 25.
( said Christ,) what you shall eat or what you shall drink, nor yet for your
body what you shall put on.

* As for meat, Note.
consider the fowls of the air, those birds in the morning chirp before God
for meat, and the blessed LORD opens his pantrie, and gives to them their
breakfast, and after their dinner, and last of all their supper, which haueing
gotten, at night they flee to their bush, as to their bed, and before they put
their head under their wings for to sleep, they chirp a little to God again,
which is their grace after meat, and also a sort of evening prayer, whereby
they commit themselves to their makers keeping. Thus as ye see the poor birds
beg their food, yea ^the Lions seek their meat from God, and God fills
them with his blessings.

* As for clothes, behold the lillies, Note.
God himself by the finger of nature spinneth their coats Royal robs: And now
in this month of May, after a long burial, the Lord has made them partakers
of a resurrection, whereby these that once did wither, and ly under the ground
like things buried, are made to come out clothed in apparel pleasant to the
eye for color, and perfumed with savor, like the garment of Esau, Genes. 27.
27.
whose smell was like the smell of a field which the LORD has blessed.

* Merciful God, Note.
what unbelief is this, that ma^e^h man so careful for back and belly, as
though God did love the fowls and flowers better than man, for whom he sent
his own Son to die! Merciful God what a brutish stupiditie is this, that
man can think that so mighty and so merciful a God, either can not, Math. 6.
33.
or will not give, or rather cast to him that which is best both for his back
and his belly! Now let us come to the words.

Labor not for the meat^ which perishes.
HERE first I observe a doctrine The doctrine.
of wisdom for all those whom GOD has appointed to teach others: Math. 11.
22.
Learn of me said the LORD: Let the most learned sit down at the feet of
this great Gamaleel. The men to whom Christ speaks here, were men from whom
he had withdrawn him self, because he saw them worldly minded: Yet seeing
they are come to him, he instructs them: first what they should not do, and
after what they should do; yea before he came to them with instructions, he
reproves them boldly in the face, Galat. 2. 11.
as Paul withstood Peter, declaring plainly unto them that they walked not
uprightly, because they sought after GOD more for their belly, then for
himself.

The use: let us learn of Christ heerehow we should proceed with carnal men,
The use.
we whom the Lord has appointed to be teachers in his Church. Note.
* First of all we must proceed against them with reprofes proofs: malo nodo,
malus cuneus, for a hard knot, we must prepare a hard wedge. Note.
* The law with its threatenings must go before the Gospel, like a needle
making way to the threede. It is great wisdom for teachers first to thunder
down the high corruptions of nature in those that are not cast down for their
sins: Luke. 3. 5.
Every mountain and hill shall be brought low: Profane hearts must not at
the first be dawbed with fair words, but rather dashed with reproves. Woe to
them that stroke knaves heads, for that is to spill them, and to bring the
guilt of their blood upon the teachers head: when the fester is begun, the
Surgeon must cut. Note.
* The Lord himself teached his Prophet Elijah how to teach his stif-necked
people, and that by the form of his coming unto him at Horeb, for to give
warning to the Prophet of his coming, he sent before him three grimme, and
austere messengers: The first was a great and strong wind which rent the
mountains, 1 King. 19. 11.
and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord: After the wind came an
earthquake; The third was a fire: V. 12.
After those three the spirit of God came into a still small voice: It is so,
that Pastors must proceed with a stubburne people; the tempests of wrath must
blow first with a galewind, and after with fearful threatenings, the
rebellious hearts must be shaken as with an Earthquake: Jf all that move not,
the preacher must open up Hell, and let wicked souls see those unquenchable
brimstone flammes of fire smoking with fearful vengeance.

* It is so, Note.
that we must come to the trial of our selves this day in our Christian
examination: let first the wind of Gods word* threatening our sins, rent the
rocks of our hearts: After that we must feel an Earthquake: viz, a
heartquake. After that our hearts have been shaken, as with a mighty wind, and
after that they have quaked for fear, if all that work not, we must consider
the fearful flammes wherewith the wicked shall be scorcthed, the cause of
everlasting weeping and gnashing of teeth. Note.
* Such a soul as is shaken with winds, and quaketh for fear, and trembles
at the fire of God his' wrath, is most meet to meet with God into the calm.

* We must do with our selves this day, Note.
as Joseph did with his brethren at their first meeting; it is said that that
he spoke roughly unto them: Genes 4^. 30.
We must speak roughly this day against our selves, if we would have God to
speak meekly to us to morrow: * We must deest our ill thoughts words and
deeds with many a fie, Luke. 18. 13.
fie, fie: we must strike with the Publican upon our breast where all the
mischief was bredde, and must strike with Ephraim upon our thigh, Ier. 31. 19.
which carried us to the effectuating of our wicked projects: Note.
* yea, must hold an assise and justice Court within our conscience, where we
must first judge, and thereafter condemn our selves, if we would have God to
absolve us. Christ first spoke roughly to the Cananitish woman, calling her a
dog; Math. 15. 26.
but after he had made her content to creep for a crum, like a dog under
his table, he comforted her with wonderful comforts, wondering himself at her
faith.

* The order of GOD his proceeding with his own children, Note.
is first to sing of mercy, Psalm. 101. 1.
and after of judgment, if the song of mercy move not: But because of our
stubburnesse often the Lord must turn his tune, and first of all sing of
judgment: That done, so soon as by reproves and rough speeches he has
affraighted us, and humbled our hearts, he being touched with their dolours, is
so moved, that he can no more refrain from discovering himself unto us, he
cries out to our souls I am Joseph, Genes. 45. 4.
J am Jesus your brother; come near to me I pray you:

* Before this be done all our ill devises like the Egyptians must remove,
Note.
and pack themselves to the door;* As Joseph would not reveal himself unto
his brethren, Note.
so long as the Egyptians were into the chamber of the house, neither will
Christ reveal himself in mercy to the soul, so long as the black Egyptians
of reigning sins remain within the house of our hearts.

* Again let us consider here those men did only follow Christ for loaves:
Note.
They sought nothing but bread, and yet behold here they get better than
bread, viz. instructions from CHRIST, first what they should not labor for,
Secondly what they should labor for.

The doctrine is this, The doctrine.
what ever consideration moves a man to follow Christ, it is good ever to
follow Christ. Those men followed him only for their belly, and behold how he
feeds their souls by the preaching of the word, instructing them for what
they should not labor, and for what they should labor.

* J am assured that Christ never preached, Note.
but some soul gat good. He who made poor fisher men fishors of men, Mark.
1. 17.
could best fish men himself. The Apostles might cast their nets, and catch
nothing: but Christ never toiled without any taking: Though at the beginning,
while CHRIST preached upon my text, his auditors cared for nothing but their
belly: J am assured that before his Sermon was ended; some of them cast their
bellyes behind their backs, for to seek the food of their * There is not a
preaching preached but some gracious pickle falls upon some heart, Note.
like well prepared ground. Note.
* The preaching of the word is like sowing, when the sower has put his sheet
about his neck, he casts the seed from him, not thinking that every pickle
that commeth' out of his hand shall take root: No not: Some fall upon stones,
some upon the way, some among thorns; scarsly does the fourth pickle of that
which was sown come to the sheafe, for the hope of the fourth pickle the sower
will be content to loss three, the fourth by its incresse, being able to
cause him sing, Psalm. 126. 6.
when he shall bring his sheaues with him.* As the sower sings for joy while
he reapeth the incresse but of the fourth, Note.
so must the Teacher be glad if every fourth word of his sermon do good, if
the fourth person be touched: yea, which is more; as GOD for the love of one
would have spared lerusalem, so the Teacher for the love of one, though in all
his flock he should have but one good man, yet for the love of that one, let
him cast his seed of instruction, rebuke and comfort. Christ here preached
unto Belly-Gods doubtless, for the winning of some from the love of their
belly unto the love of their soul: This much concerning the men whom Christ
teached at Capernaum.

Now let us consider well his doctrine in the verse which we have red. Here
first he lets them see, what they should not do, secondly what they should
do: Labor not for meat that perishes, but laboour for the meat that will
endure and feed your souls to life eternal. Note.
* As if he should have said, if ye do the one ye can not do the other, if
ye have your heart upon the world, ye can not be careful for the Heavens, if
ye labor for bellycheere, ye will neglect the souls food, and therefore my
counsel is that ye labor not for the meat that perishes.

The doctrine is this, Note.
It is not possible that our hearts can do a duty to God, The doctrine.
if they be too bent upon any worldly thing: Caelum cupere nequimus nisi prius
terra sordescat, we can not desire the Heavens, till the earth seem vile unto
us. The heart of man will die if it be cloven or halfed. Jf one serve two
masters, one of the two shall be displeased; we can not with our eyes behold
the Heavens and the earth together: we can not look to the east with the one
eye, and to the west with the other at one time: we are not able to think that
we are into two places together. Note.
* Two several thoughts equally intended can not dwell together in one heart
at one time. Should any time be wherein the thought of any worldly thing
should over-master within our hearts the thoughts of our God? Note.
Shall the spirit of God stand like a Page for to wait upon thy worldly
cogitations, which^all should be servants to the least motions of that spirit?
God that made the world before thou was, will not be a servant to wait upon
the world which should wait upon him. A freeman will not be a drudge unto his
slave: Many think themselves free of this sin, but are not so indeed.

* A man may try the truth of this in his sleep, Note.
and that by his dreams, which as Solomon says, Eccles. 5. 3.
come through the multitude of business: As a man is exercised in the day, so
will his thoughts be in the night. If the world run in our mind all the day
long, it will certainly lodge with us all night: In our sleep it will bar
out the motions of grace.

The use of this doctrine: The use.
Let us strive to give God his own: The whole heart is Gods, the whole man is
Gods; seeing all is his, let him have all to whom all belongs, and who is
most worthy of it.

* Jf Caesar get that which is Cesars, Note.
shall God want that which is Gods? The heart must not halt between God and
Baal, as though men would give to God, to the devil the flesh and the world
their day about.

But what is this that is said into my Text? labor not (says Christ) for the
meat which perishes.

Here be good tydinges for many folks: Note.
* It would seem here that Christ discharges all trades and callinges and
that he gives all the world the vacance and the play:

* If the Master of the School should every morning, nay but every afternoon
say to his Scholars, close your books, pine not your selves any more, it is
eneugh read, they would think every afternoon like a lubile: Here then be
good news for sluggards: here is an excuse for all these that are idle.
Behold the LORDS Command: Labor not for the meat which perishes: Here is an
inhibition served against all sort of worldly labor: What then will ye say,
does CHRIST forbid men to labor? Shall this be a warrant from CHRIST for all
men to sit idle.

Indeed if this so strictly taken, were true; the Trevants, sluggards, and idle
Drones would labor, yea, fight for to maintai^e the truth of this Text. What
then? Does CHRIST discharge men to labor?

No not. Note.
* When CHRIST said to his Disciples, sleep on now, they never had so little
cause to sleep, Mark. 14. 41.
nor so great cause to wake: Consider what I say: CHRIST never teached men to
sit idle: Note:
* What ever thou be, were thou a King, thou must labor. It is the King of
Heavens precept to all the Sons of Adam: Six days shall thou labor: woe to
thee that is idle, for who is idle, he is in the School of wickedness
learning to do ill, nihil agendo male agere discimus, by doing nothing we
learn to do ill. The Souls of men are like waters, putrescunt ni moveantur,
they stink except that they be moved: All men must labor: Note.
* The law is fixed, that all the sons of Adam must pick their crummes out
of the cloddes with the sweat of their brows: Genesis 3. 19.
woe to thee that loyters while thou should labor: Arise sluggard Up, up, with
the chirping of the birds: labor, sweat for thy meat; otherwise if thou
eat, the curse of God shall go down into thy belly, Numb. 5. 27.
like the waters of jealousy, which shall make thy belly to swell and thy
thigh to rotte. Thou will say to me, Note.
I am a gentleman: and what should I do? Was not Adam a gentleman, who was
the King of the whole earth, the dear darling of God before his fall? And yet
even before he sinned, GOD would not have him to sit idle: nay his Calling
was to be a Gardener: Scripture ^aith, And the Lord God took the man and put
him into the garden of Eden to dress it, Genesis 2. 15.
and to keep it: But after that he had sinned, the Lord laid a harder task
upon him: In the sweat of thy face, Genesis 3. 1^.
said the Lord, shall thou eat bread: And yet in that time, if any sinful man
might be called a gentleman, he was one as being the first father of the old
World: Note.
* Was not Noah a gentleman? was he not the first father of the new World?
Genesis ^. 20.
and yet he labored in a vine-yeard: Scripture calls him a husband man. Was
not Jacob a gentleman? and yet he keept sheep: Note.
* Was not CHRIST a gentleman? and yet he labored for his meat with Joseph,
the Carpenter, Mark. 6. 3.
he being a Carpenter himself: He then who both labored himself and
commanded others to labor six days in the Week, forbids not men to
labor here: what can thou do, nothing? hear what a great and godly man of
our Nation said to idle drones: Note.
* Call mucke creeles: Have thou not heard me? I say it again Call mucke
creeles. What is it then that he forbids here, will you say: Note.
* I answer the labor which Christ discharges here, is, that which is done
with a carkeing care and excessive desire of any thing below: When the desire
of worldly things is more in our mind than spiritual things, when we are more
bent to get them than the spiritual, then are we such laborers as are
discharged in my Text.

* The French word which here signifies labor, Note.
gives some light to this: In the French Bible it is travaillez: As the
learned French writers think travailler, is, as who should say tres-veiller,
that is in Latin, pervigilare, to be almost altogether without sleep,
according to that of the Poet.

Nam vigilare leve est, pervigilare grave. * This labor then that is here
forbidden concerning worldly things, Note.
is, a labor that lets not a man sleep, but night and day takes up all
the thoughts of his heart: while he lies down at even, the world is in his
mind, the last of all his thoughts, and the first in the morning: This labor
is excessive care, which the Pagans to the shame of Christians have placed into
the gorge pipe of hell.

-- Primisque in faucibus Orci
Luctus and vltrices posuere cubilia curae.
* Take heed to this, Note.
ye sons of men, If the cares of the world take the sleep from you, ye
are certainly laborers, but not in the LORD his vineyard: look not for a
hire from the LORD for such labor: your minds are so distracted with worldly
cares, that ye cannot labor for the Lord, which is the chief labor that is
profitable to the soul: Unwise is he who labors so for the body, that he
neglects the soul: The counsel of Bernard, is notable concerning this

* Ad laborem cum veneris, Note.
sic temperabis opus agendum, vt solicitudo operis intention animi tui ab ijs
quae Dei sunt, non avertat, that is, When thou beginnest to labor, temper so
the work, that the care thereof distract thee not from the things of GOD: such
a labor what ever day it be upon, were it upon wedensday, is a breaking of
the Lords sabbath: * The whole week is a Sabbath, Note:
a time of rest from such labor: Were it to gather sticks with excessive care
upon Wednesdaye, is as who should work upon Sunday: * The one here is as well
forbidden in the Gospel, Note.
as the other was in the law, yea and that more strictly: * For under the law
the Priests might profane the sabbath and be blameless, Note.
that is, Mat. 12. 5.
they might labor by killing of beasts for sacrifice: But in this Sabbath of
the Gospel which is a rest from carking care, no labor of that kind is
permitted for any consideration.

The doctrine I observe here, The doctrine.
is this: There be many laborers in this world who are discharged to labor:
This world is full of such labor: Note.
* The most part of men sweat in this vineyard: Most men seek more after
earthly trashes, than after heavenly treasures. Note.
* That this is true, I shall by one argument enforce it upon your consciences:
Tell me I pray you, if his Majesty should cause proclaim at your cross,
that who in Burgh and Barronie should come to the Churchyard at such a hour,
they should have both their houses and lands made free for their lifetime, and
that without any cost: and that who came not should be deprived of the gift:
Alas who would amongst you be absent? * The creples who haunt not the LORD his
house would clinch out upon their stilts: The blind would be feet to the
creples, and the Creples would be eyes to the blind: O what a congregation
should be seen! I think that neither Church, nor Church-yarde should be
able to contain the multitude: Note.
* But alas do men so labor for the graces of GOD? There is not a preaching
but while the Bell ringeth it cries, Come to GOD his house and receive a
Kingdom, come and receive grace and glory: But I appeal to your own
Conscience how little a business will hinder you from coming for to receive
such offers.

* Mother Martha has many Note.
Children which troubles themselves Luke 10: 43^ ^
about many things, but few can learn of Marie to make choice of the best
part, which shall never be taken from them: I compare worldly men to great
gluttonous fish; they follow after GOD his benefits, as they follow after the
Schools of herring; where such Schools are to be found there are they. Note.
* Men for the most part are like the Ravens, feading upon the stinking carions
of horse, dogs, and cats, whereas like Royal Eagles, they should conveene
about the body of JESUS, according to that saying of CHRIST, Math. 24. 28.
wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together:
Eagles fly to CHRIST, but Ravens run to Carions.

An Objection.
But here some may object and say, what needed CHRIST to teach those men, not
to labor for their meat? It would seem that they followed him for to eschew
labor: They had seen how with five bread he had fed five thousand, and that
of the fragments were twelve basket full. For this cause it would appear they
followed CHRIST for bread, because they came easily by it without any labor:
It might seem that CHRIST should rather have said, ye are but idle sluggards
following me for loaves; Return home to your house, and work for your meat,
labor, labor.

The Answer.
I answer, that this labor whereof CHRIST discharges them, is to be
understood of the laboring of the mind: A carking care, an earnest and ardent
desire more than is competent for any worldly thing, either for to obtain it,
or to keep it, is that which is here discharged.

* I will put forth a Paradoxe: Note.
There be many idle men who labor more for the meat which perishes, then
these laborers, that in most painful labor win their bread with the sweat
of their brows: But how can that be?

The reason is, an idle man may be a covetous man: Note.
The greedy desire of his heart to have that which he wants, is the labor
that is here forbidden by the LORD: There be none so busy at this forbidden
labor, as some who are stark idle: They abstain from the lawful labor of
the body, while their minds unlawfully labor with laborious desires after
things which perish. Note.
* Thus as he who being his alone, said, that he was never less his alone,
than when he was alone, so may I say of such idle drones, they labor not so
much, as when they labor none: Note.
* Many while they are most idle, they are least idle, for while their body is
idle, they labor with ill desires.

Let us in the words of my text observe the wisdom of CHRIST: The auditors
of his Sermon, were men addicted unto their belly, to filthy panch pleasures:
Behold here according as he saw their sin, he fitted his reproof,
discharging them to be so careful for perishing things. Note.


* Here is a doctrine of wisdom for all Pastors, where the boil is
putrified, The doctrine.
there must they lance: Those men had a boil in the belly: The Lord JESUS
seeing it ripe, launced it with a reproof. Note.


* We all by nature from the Crown to the Sole are full of boiles and sores,
Note.
which draw to a head, which is the predominant sin.

* Some have the boil upon the brow, Ier. 3. ^.
which scripture calls a whoores forehead. Note.


* Others have the botch in the neck, Note.
which makes them stretch out their necks with lofty looks: Note.
* This was the sore of the daughters of Zion, Isa: 3. 16 17.
they walked with outstreched necks; for this cause the LORD plagued them with
scabbed crowns: 2. Pet. 2. 14.
Others have sore eyes, whose eyes are full of adultery: Note.
* Others have scabbed ears, which Scripture calls itching ears: 2: Tim. 4.
3.
Others have the water-canker in their mouth, which quenches not, Note.
but rather kindles on the tongue the fire of Hell: Iam 3. 6.
Note.
* In nothing fire and water can agree but in the hellish mouth, wherein is a
scolding tongue, sparkling out the spittle of despite: Note.
Some have a boil in the throat, whose throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 5.
10.
blasting out the most vile belchs of blasphemy: Note.
* Others have under the arm hole, the boil or brook of ill thoughts: Note.
* Some have the boil on the back, which is costly clothing: Note.
* Others like the men of our text, have the boil on the belly, which is
gluttony: Pass from the crown to the Sole, from the Catarres of the fingers,
unto the gout of the feet. Thus as ye see in man there is nothing sound from
crown to sole; but in some the corruption within breaks out more in one part
than in another: Note.
* Some persons predominant sin is the whores forehead, lance that the day,
and let out the putrefaction before thou presume to come to morrow to this holy
table: Note.
* Some have eyes full of Adultery; cast out that uncleanness before thou
look upon the LORDS bread: Note.
* Thou whose mouth is cankred with scolding, hold out thy tongue to thy GOD,
and request him to lance by his spirit and his word, that thy tongue, now thy
shame, Psalm. 30. 12.
may become thy glory: * Thou whose throat has been full of botches, hold up
the gorge-pipe to the LORD, entreating him to cleanse it from its sepulchrall
corruptions: Note.
* Thou who have under thy arm hole a bag of putrified thoughts, away with
them, cast the care of back and belly upon the LORD: Note.
* Thy care may canker thy sores, but the Lords care shall cure them.

Thus as ye see by nature we are but vile and abominable bodies: Let us
consider our selves to day: Let us view our predominant sins with all their
Dominions, Note.
even the lesser sins: let us behold our selves to day in the glass of God
his law, let us seek out our sores from the crown to the sole, and we shall
see whether or not we be pleasant guests for to sit down at the King of
HEAVEN his table.

Another doctrine I observe here concerning those men who followed CHRIST for
loaves: The doctrine.
This is it; * Seeing such a number ran after CHRIST, Note.
an abject man in the world, and that but for loaves, what would they have done
to another for dainties and delicate cheer?

* See how a loaf will make a belly-god to follow after a man like a dog:
Note.
If the giver have but a natural benefit of the worth of a loaf, he needs
no more to a natural man but a hiss. Seeing such men will thus follow for
loanes, what would they do for Kingdoms?

* Satan thought that CHRIST had been a man come to seek himself in the
world, Note:
and therefore for to allure him to come to his service, he offered him all
the kingdoms of the world: But CHRIST who knew what he had in Heaven, Math.
4. 9.
chased Satan away with all his earthly kingdoms.

* The use of this Doctrine is, Note.
that we follow the LORD for nothing so much as for himself: The use.
Indeed all his benefits should allure us to follow him, but the maine cause
of our followeing should be himself; Note.
* I am that I am should be followed, Exodus 3. 14.
for that which he is.

In their followeing Christ for loaves, The doctrine.
for which they were reproved, I gather a Doctrine of great reproof for
Scotland; While we hear of those men that followed Christ only for loaves;
like Dogs, followeing a man for bread, ye think not well of them, and
indeed they are branded here with a shameful reproach, that they followed the
Lord more for bread than for himself.

But what if we find more matter of shame in Scotland than was in Capernaum.
Those that came to Capernaum followed the Lord, because he gave to them
abundance of bread: Note.
* Scotland has run a way from the Lord because he has given to them
abundance of bread: diverse called his blessings the plague of plenty the
whole land gruged at the graces of God: many not only gave not thanks to the
Father of mercies, but cried that he would curse their mother the earth: that
henceforth she should become barren. Note.
* We have dishonored God our Father, we have cursed our Mother in this Land,
and all this was because God had multiplied our loaves: Note.
* In this we are worse than those of Capernaum: for abundance of meat made
them to follow after Christ, but abundance of meat has made us to run away
from Christ: Except that particularly we repent us of this Sin the Lord
either by another Famine more fearful then ever we did feel, or by some
foreign war shall so deprive us of our plenty, and scourge us with such a
scarcity which shall make all the ears of EVROPE to tingle.

Are there any Mothers in this land more tender hearted than were the mothers
of Israel, the daughters of Sarah? Yet some of them in their hunger, did eat
their own Children: * The little ones came to their mother, Note.
with a pitiful voice, crying, Where is bread and drink? Lam. 2. 12.
and after swoned and than died: That done the tender hearted mothers, did eat
the tender flesh of their young Children, which they nourished on their breasts:
Note.
* That which they before had fed nine moves into their bellys, they put
into their mouths and stomachs for the feeding of their bellyes; Note.
* Yea the mother which for the distress of Famine, had parted with child,
took up the child that was of a spanne long which she did eat in her great
distress: Lam. 2. 20.
Note.
* O what a scarcity behoved this to be which made the natural mother, so
far to pass the bounds of nature, and all for a spanne long of flesh.

This moved leremie the man that saw those afflictions to cry, Note.
My eyes do fail with tears, Lam. 2. 11.
my bowels are troubled, my liver is powered upon the earth.

Because we have not seen such afflictions, we think that such can not be,
neither have been, but that the lamentations of God his Book are but fained
Tragedies, or painted Sorrows invented for to make others to mourn at the
reading and seeing thereof, like Children that will weep at the hearing of a
pitiful tale.

The meat which perishes: LET us now take good heed how the Lord here
calls all this worlds cheer, he calls it the meat which perishes: Note.
* Christ speaking of all the meat that enters in at the mouth, that it
passes out again, (...), Math. 15. 17.
that is to say, is cast out into the draught, a filthy place called (...), a
seorsum sedendo, from man's sitting a part far from all company.

Take heed then, All this meat which we eat is said by Christ, to go to the
draught a place of secret filthiness: In this place of my text it is called
the meat which perishes.

Let us dwell a space upon the consideration of those words. The meat for the
belly which is said here to perish, Note.
perishes many ways. * First it perishes, even in the pleasure and
delectable taste thereof: Be it be past the throat, the taste is away, and
leaves nothing behind it, but a regrate that it would not continue: * Some
knowing the shortness of their Note.
throat, sup the strong drink, and roll the sweet morsel upon their tongue;
for by this means to make the perishing meat eternal: And yet man can not
attain to that whereat he would be: All his wiles fail him, and do what he
can, he finds it to be meat which perishes: Though his throat were a mile
long, at last peribit, it shall pass through: Last of all the greater man his
pleasure was in tasting, after the taste is past, the greater sorrow does
ensue: * This is that which makes men to come more sad from bankets than
when they go to them: Note.
They are more rejoiced with the hope of a promised pleasure, than with the
pleasure it self: Many are more glad before they come to the house of feasting
in hope of good cheer, then when they are at table enjoying that which they
hoped, because neither find they such pleasure as they looked for, and though
they found more, yet this is their sorrow; all this pleasure will last but for
a short space, the dinner with man his appetite not being able to last so long
as an hour.

* What shall I say then? Note.
All such pleasure are as Moses called our life, viz. psalm. 90. 9
as a tale that is told: Note.
* At the beginning of a tale, men hearken with some delight: a little after
they weary; but at last, they turn themselves with a tush, that is but a
tale, Is that it all?

* As in meat, so in all sorts of worldly pleasures: Note.
When they are done and perished, what can men say, but is this it all,
wherefore a man should loss his silver, his friends, his credit, his name, his
soul, and his salvation? What a fool have I been to have spent all my rents
and houses into good cheer? All the taste now thereof is away: All that meat
and drink are perished and gone.

* Another again will say, Note.
What a fool have I been to run after the pleasures of my flesh, by
blotting my good name, by scandalizing GOD his people, by showing ill example,
and by provoking my GOD to wrath? Is this all that I have bought at so (...)

(...) did eat another after that, for that same night his Soul was taken
from him: Luke. 12. 20.
Fool, (said the voice from Heaven,) this night thy Soul shall be taken from
thee.

The doctrine The doctrine.
I observe here, is, that there is nothing that is permanent here below. Note.
* There is nothing so stable in this world, but it is followed with a Page,
called perish. That which is said here of bread, may be said of any other
worldly things: Of all that we see may be said, it shall perish: What is the
glory of this life? What becomes of it.

Praeterit, imo fugit, non fugit, imo perit. It passes by, it flies away,
yea, which is most, Note.
it perishes: What is pleasure but a perishing thing, that is purchased with
pains? What is riches, and what is he that is rich? all perishing things:
Iam. 1. 1^.
The Sun with its heat withers, the grass and the flower thereof falls,
and the grace of the fashion perishes; so shall all the rich men fade away in
his ways.

* What is honor? Note.
To day a King, to morrow a carrion: Behold Ne^uchadnezar a King to day, Dan.
4. 33
and amongst the Oxen to morrow: Here to day is Pharoh, Exodus 14. 21.
a proud man in his Chariot, and drowned to morrow in the sea. Hearken and
hear Herod, Act. 12. 22.
now arrayed in royal apparel, speaking like a god, behold him at once eaten
with vermin.

I can not win through all particulars; but let us look what men love best,
and that they shall find to perish. Note.
* What is man his approbation, and all this worlds applause? What is it but a
blast of wind, now blowing from the east; and again the wind is turned clean
contrary from the east to the west: To day I hear Hosanna, Hosanna, Mark. 11.
10.
to morrow nothing but Crucify, Crucify, Luke. 23. 11.


* All the things of this world which are most lyked of, Note.
are but transitory tras^es: Let wicked men dream of immortality in things
below, all their best things their triumphs and their joys, with all their
excellency, are but shows and perishing shadows which have no abode: Job:
20. 5:
The triumphing of the wicked (said Zophar,) is short, v. ^
and the joye of the wicked but for a moment: Though his excellency mount up
to the Heavens and his head reach unto the cloud, v. 7.
yet he shall perish for ever, like his own doung: v. ^.
They which have seen him shall say where is he? He shall fly away as a
dream and shall not be found: yea he shall he chased away as the vision of
the night: Thus as ye see all things are but earthly things which perish* Note.
* And which is more those Heavens which ye see so glorious, are not endowed
with an everlasting virtue: No not: The virtues of the heavens shall be
shaken; Mat. 24. 29.
and as for the heavens themselves, Psalm: 10. 2^*
the Psalmist is plain. They shall perish, yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment.

* The use of this doctrine is twofold: first, The use.
seeing all things below are so transitory, let us not with carking care
conquesse the things that will not abide with us: Why should we toil too much
for to seek those things which nill we, will we, shall perish? let us not be
too earnest to seek any worldly thing which we want, seeing after that we
have gotten it, it will not abide in us: ye would think him a fool that would
go gather water in a sieue, or fathom the wind: Though we could grippe the
Heavens, and have the commandment of the two great iewelles of HEAVEN, the
Sun and Moon, What should we have but things that should perish? Psalm. 102.
26.
They shall perish.

Secondly as we should not labor too earnestly to conquesse any worldly
thing, The use.
neither should we be too careful to keep any thing, which either we or
others for us have conquessed: Note.
* Let men do their honest duty, but let them not labor for to keep that
which has Wings.

* I compare all worldly things in men's hands to a Wild Sparrowe put into a
Child his hand: Note.
He will hold it by the wing, and whiles by the foot, and whiles by the neb:
But in the meanetime while he is least aware, it flies out of his hand and
for all the annuell of his pleasures, yea both for stock and brocke, he has
nothing left but a regrate of loss. Note.


* So long as worldly things are stobfeathered, and have as we say but the
padocke hair, they will lie still into our hands, for a space they will tarry
with us; But tarry a little till their feathers be grown and they shall take
themselves to their flight: Note.
* Some are more prime running away with the Tewcheit or lapwing so soon as
they are hatched: They leave not so much behind them as the shell wherein they
were contained: When the foolish man thinks to find a full nest, all the
birds of his hope are away, and not so much as the shell of appearance left
behind.

* Merciful God what a stupiditie is this? Note.
we see this daily, and yet we can not considder: we see others make such
loss, we see all sorts of things perire, to perish, and pass through, and yet
we think that what we have, shall for ever tarry with us. Note:
* I compare most men to keen players at Cards and Dyce, They see others
spend all their pack before them, and yet they can not dream that their pack
can perish. This folly is seen in a greater matter more worthy to be laid to
our hearts. * We hear of death daily, Note.
and will not be wakened out of our immortal dream: If men would well
considder the mortality of this life: Iam. 4. 14.
and how it is but a vapor and as a tale that is told they would not so toil
for a tale, Psalm. 90. 9.
laboring night and day with carking cares for things which shall perish and
fly away as a dream. Job. 20. 8.


One word before I end: Dearly beloved, ye have heard how I in my weak
measure of gift, have been like * John the Baptist this day, Note.
preparing the way of the LORD, by removing out of your hearts: the thornie
cares of all worldly things, that to morrow ye may be worthy communicants,
and that the KING of Glory may enter into your hearts.

Now I exhort you in the name of JESUS, that this whole day ye carefully, and
painefully, labor in the preparation of your hearts, that to morrow ye may
be worthy guests at the table of your LORD: Labor this day I entreat you to
search out all your sins of thoughts, words, and works, whereof ye are guilty
since ye can remember: Note.
* Labor to search what good or ill intentions ye have for times to come, and
what sorrow ye have for your bygone ill spent life: Labor, labor in this;
This is GOD his work, and woe to him that shall do it negligently.

* We must first then labor for to try out our sins, Note.
after that we have found them out, we must mourn for them, we must confess
them, abhor them, detest them, and wrestle with GOD in prayer, till he seal
up the pardon thereof into our hearts: Note.
* We must in this our preparation day, labor to shake off us all the old
clouts and rags of our sins, and to put on us, all our spiritual jewels,
that therewith bee-beeing decked, we may come to morrow to the royal feast of
the great King.

* Brethren and Sisters, I entreat you to considder, that this day of our
preparation, must be a day of painful laboring with God for his favor, for
the sanctifieng of our souls, that worthily we may come to that royal feast:
seeing CHRIST and his ANGELS will be at the table, for to behold and considder
us to morrow, we must this day carefully wash, deck, and trim ourselves,
that we may be pleasant in their presence, where such heavenly eyes shall
behold us.

All this day must be spent in such labor. * If idly we neglect this
duty, we have to fear a more painful labor, viz. laborare morbo the hard
labor of God his wrath and of many painful and fearful diseases; yea, and
death it self: For this cause, 1. Cor. 11. 30.
says the Apostle, Many are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep.

The LORD grant that every one of us may in sincerity of heart labor to
prepare, and purify our selves, and that according to the purification of the
Sanctuary. Amen, 2. Chron. 19.
Amen.

A WATCHWORD FOR ALL COMMVNICANTS, BEFORE THEY come to the supper of the LORD.
AS for you Brethren and Sisters that are to communicate, to morrow ye shall
see the remembrance of that, which the Sun in the Heavens could not behold
for doole, viz. the bloody passion of our LORD.

* This passion was so sore, Note.
that the Sun, Luke. 23. 45.
the eye of the world overclouded himself, and as it were winked, until the
unspeakable torments of CHRIST'S death were past; then were the Heavens covered
with a veil of sack; then the earth shook: Note.
* The stones, the bones of the earth were rent at the racking of the bones of
GOD, the rememberance whereof should make hearts of stone to cleave asunder.

To morrow, dear Brethren and Sisters we are for to eat with Christ: * Yea
tomorrow we are for to ^ate of Christ, Note.
who is both the feast and the Feast-maker: To morrow we are all for to sit at
his table, where he will narrowly behold and clearly consider the faces of our
souls, and therefore we must take care this day that our Souls be washen
and baptized with the truest tears of repentance. * I read of James and John,
while they were vnchristned men, for to speak so, that is, not baptized, they
desired the one to sit at CHRIST'S right hand, and the other at his left: But
the LORD told them, that before such sitting down, it behoved them to be
baptized with the baptism of afflictions: Math. 20. 22.
He and he only that is partaker of this Baptism to day, shall be made
partaker of GODS Supper to morrow. As for these that are not baptized with
tears of grief before they sit down at Table, the LORD has sworn that they
shall not partake of his feast: Note.
* They may well eat panem Domini the LORDS bread, but they shall never taste
panem Dominum, the LORD bread.

It shall therefore be our wisdom, that every one of us be busy to prepare
his own heart, to deck and trim his soul before he approach unto this
TABLE, for to appear before his GOD: Note.
* As Joseph was trimmed and powled, Genes. 41. 14.
before he would appear before Pharaoh, so must every soul have the Wedding
garment, Math. 22. 11.
before it present it self before the LORD at his Banquet.

Take heed what I say: This day is our preparation day: A day wherein we must
provide that wherewith we must come before the LORD to morrow: Micah. 6. 6
Note.
* If we do well, this day must be unto us all a very painful day, even a
day of Battle against all the pleasures that ever we had in sin, since we
could discern good from ill: In this day we must try and search carefully
all the secrets of our hearts: Note.
* This is the time wherein we must keep an Assise against our selves, both
for to judge and condemn our selves: Note.
* In a word, we must all take such pains in sifting out all our bypast
iniquities, that the LORD may say of us, as he said of the woman that broke
the Box of ointment upon his head, Mark. 14. 8
She has done what she could.

Good Brethren and Sisters! What ye can do, do: What ye can not do, pray
GOD to do it, and to pardon you your impossibility: Note.
* I believe, Mar. 9. 24
(said that poor man with tears, that is all that I can do;) but I believe
not as I should, and therefore LORD help thou mine unbelief. Let us all be
earnest to entreat GOD to give us grace to do what we can do, and what we
can not do that he would pity us, and pardon us.

I read that in the days of Hezekiah, a number of the people which had not
cleansed themselves, did eat the Passcover otherwise then it was written; But
what befell them? I pray you: Many of them were troubled with sore sickness:
Note.
* But how were they cured of these diseases? It is said that Hezekiah prayed
for them: The good LORD, (said he) pardon every one, that prepares his heart
to seek GOD, 2. Chron. 30. 18. 19.
the LORD GOD of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed, according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. Now what was the fruit of that prayer? This was
it, v. ^o.
The LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

That which the Passover was to them, the LORDS Supper is unto us, even a
Sacrament appointed by GOD, for the sealing up of our Salvation: If we eat
this supper otherwise then it is written, let us look for diverse diseases:
For this cause, (says the Apostle,) 1. Corin. (...). 30.
Many are weak and sickely amongst you, and many sleep, that is, die. Let us
therefore, as we would desire our bodies health, and our souls Salvation,
prepare ourselves to meet the LORD to morrow: There is none of us I confess,
that can prepare himself, according to the preparation of the Sanctuary, nor
cleanse himself according to its purification, No Soul can be so well
prepared and purified, as GOD in his Sanctuary requires. Note.
* But this I dare be bold to say, that the good LORD shall pardon every one
that prepares his heart to seek GOD; though he be not so cleansed, as the
purification of the Sanctuary requires.

GODS word is plain, that GOD is merciful: He has sworn by his life, that
He deligteth not in the death of sinners. Note.
* He has sent his word for to tell us, 1. Cor. 11. 31.
that If we will judge our selves, we shall not be judged. * Yea such is his
mercy, Note.
that while we are chastised with sickness or death for our careless
preparation, he makes all that to work to our well, for when we are judged,
we are chastened of the Lord; 1. Cor. 11. 32.
that we should not be condemned with the world.

Now good people, not knowing if ever after this ye shall hear or I teach
another Preparation Sermon in this place, let me conclude all with that adieu of
St. Paul, said to the elders of Ephesus at Miletum, Act. 20. 32.
I commend you to GOD and to the word of his grace which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified.

Pass the rest of this day in a serious meditation of your own misery, and
of the bloody agony of JESUS our Master, Gal. 3. 13.
who out of love to us hang upon a cursed tree for to purchase unto us the
everlasting blessings of his Father: To whom with the Son of his love, and
with the Spirit of Comforts, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, now,
and ever. Amen,

A SERMON FOR THE DAY OF THE SACRAMENT.
JOHN. 6. v. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat
which endures to everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you,
for Him has GOD the FATHER sealed. THIS TEXT in my former Sermon was divided
into a Fast and a Feast: First here is a Fast, and then a Feast: The fast is
from carking care, Labor not for the meat which perishes: Fast from that:
The feast is for the soul, a banquet of meat which feeds to life
everlasting; Feast upon that: Take pains and labor for it.

This whole TEXT seems to run upon a Sabbath of rest, and upon fore working
and labor.

The first part is a Sabbath and rest from labors, Labor not for the meat
which perishes: The second has a commandment of work, Labor for the meat
which endures to life everlasting.

As for GOD his Sabbath which is a discharge of labor, a resting from toiling,
I read in Scriptures of three sorts thereof.

First there is one on earth enjoined by GOD his law, a day of rest: In it,
(says GOD,) thou shall do no manner of work: Exodus 20. 10.
This is the laws Sabbath.

The second is the Gospel Sabbath, which is a continual resting from carking
cares: This is enjoined here, labor not for the meat, etc. This precept is
for our whole lifetime: * There is not one day of the week that GOD will
dispense with any for to labor in this sort. Note.


The third Sabbath is in^o the heavens, an eternal rest from all worldly
toiling, and sweat of brows, the pains of sin: of all that are there, is
said that they are blessed: Reval. 14. 13.
yea says the spirit for thy rest from their labors.

As there be three sorts of rest, first of the law, secondly of the Gospel,
Thirdly of the HEAVENS, so there be three sorts of labor: first there is one
enjoined by the law, a labor laid upon all the sons of Adam; to them it is
enjoined six days in the week to win their meat with the sweat of their
brows: * Cursed is that meat, Note.
which is not sawsed with sweet: Bitter is that bread which is not sweetened
with the sweet of brows.

The Second labor is, Gospel labor, a continual labor. Labor for the meat
which endures: This is enjoined in the second part of this Text: This is our
spiritual exercise painful to flesh and blood in the best.

The third labor, is Heavenly, which shall be our exercise in the life to
come: Note.
* That labor shall be sweet without sweat, pleasant without pain: This
labor is an everlasting praising of GOD without ceasing, which is so easy and
so pleasant to the praisers that Scripture calls it a resting from our
labors. Romans 14. 13.


It is of the second sort of labor, whereof we have here the command: it is
an Evangelicall labor which is here commanded by the LORD: labor, (says
he) for the meat which endures to everlasting life: which the son of man
shall give unto you, for him has GOD the Father sealed.

The division of the words.
In these words, I perceive three chief things to be considered, 1. for what
we should chiefly labor, viz. for the meat which endures to everlasting
life. 2. who is the giver of this meat, it is the son of man, in these
words which the son of man shall give unto you. 3. We have to consider who
did appointe him for that office, it is set down in these words, for him has
GOD the Father sealed.

THE FIRST PART.
For what we should chiefly labor.
FIRST of all let us consider for what we are commanded here to labor,
labor (says CHRIST,) for the meat which endures, etc.

First observe here the wisdom of CHRIST, secondly the corruption of our
nature.

In this appears here the wisdom of CHRIST, The doctrine.
in that after he has discharged men to labor for that which is not worthy
their labor, he clearly lets them see for what above all things they
should labor: This is wisdom first to take ill away, and then to put good
into the place thereof. CHRIST first here takes ill out of the way, before
he bring in that which is good: He discharges toiling for worldly things,
before he speak of spiritual labor: A wise man will not sow amongst
thorns: Worldly cares are but thorns. Note.
* CHRIST here with labor not, as with a pruning knife, sneddeth away such
pricking briers; that done, he comes to the maine point, declaring for what
all men should labor, this is wisdom.

The use: Let us learn wisdom, The use.
whether we be Teachers or Scholars, let this ever be our first motion to
take first evil out of the way: The weeds must be first rooted, before we
sow good seed.

* Before the goodness of CHRIST can dwell into us, Note.
there must first be a preparation of the way in the wilderness of our
hearts. This was the use of John the Baptist his axe.

Secondly we have here to consider the corruption of our own nature: The
doctrine.
See how slow we are for the obtaining of that which is good: We will not
labor for things of worth, except that we be exhorted thereunto. We know
not our wants: We are sick of a Laodicean sickness: Revel. 3. 17.
We think that we have need of nothing: If we knew what is the worth of this
meat, which endures unto life, we would unbidden labor for it; where is the
wearied man that has need to be requested to rest himself on a bed? What
needs a man that is hungry to be desired to eat his meat while it is
before him? While Christ himself was wearied at Sichar, he sought a drink of
water. John. 4. 7.
* Shall a rich man request a beggar to beg silver from him? Note.
And yet behold here, and in diverse other places of Scripture, how we must
be exhorted with commandment after commandment, for to seek that which is
best for our Souls: Are we not here commanded to seek that meat which will
make our Souls to live for ever? We are commanded, and yet for all that we
are slow to it: CHRIST must make an Oyas for to stir up men to come, and buy
without money, that which is so precious that it can not be bought for money,
Isa. 55. 1.
Ho! every one that thirsts, Come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money: come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money; and
without price.

* If any Burgh of this Land would cry such a Fair, Note.
that all might come and buy without money, who would tarry away; and yet
though by us CHRIST has commanded a free Fair to be cried for all men to
come, and buy without money, ^sa. 53. 1.
may we not say with the Prophet, But who has believed our report? Note.
* A little invitation will make us come willingly to feast with our friend:
But to come and feast with our GOD, and feed upon this meat, which will make
our Souls to live, we need much request and entreaty. What are these
prefaces, which are now used before Sermons, but requests that we would be so
good, as to apply our hearts to eat of this meat? Should we need request
for to eat of such dainties. Note.
* This new form of spending the time in prefaces, declares plainly that w^
have begun to loath that which we should love. * This should make us to fear
that within a little space, both Prefaces and Preachings shall be taken from
us, and we brought to a fearful conclusion of misery. The use.


The use of this doctrine is, that we strive to be willing and glad to seek
spiritual things, and to labor for them. Seeing we are so careful for this
body, that it want nothing, how much more should we be careful for the
Soul, which is of greatest price. Note.
* Bodily things are like Belly things, they all perish with the body and the
belly. Let us therefore rouse up our spirits, and gird up the the loins of our
mind, 1. Pet. 1. 13.
that according to our LORD his command here we may labor for the meat
which endures to everlasting life.

In this first part of this days exercise, we have to consider two things,
first what it is to labor: secondly, for what we should labor.

As for the first, If we would know what labor is enjoined here, let us
remember what in the former Sermon was forbidden in laboring for perishing
meat: The pains forbidden in that point, are enjoined here: while CHRIST
commands us to labor for this meat of life: he wills us both to labor
with body and soul, both with heart and with hand: Nothing without or within
us must be away from GOD his service: Bless the LORD, Psalm. 103. 1
O my soul, (said David,) and all that is within me, blessed his holy name:
The body of man, and the mind of man must labor: Note.
* We must cause our passions and perturbatio^s also labor for the Soul: As
Ioshuah made the Gibeonites slaves for drawing of water for the house of his
GOD, Josh. 9. 23.
so must we make these our affections to be drawers of water, even of the
tears of true and unfeigned repentance: we must so labor for spiritual
things, that the care thereof take the sleep from us: David arose at
midnight, Psalm. 119. 62
for to labor in prayer: when Jacob keept Labans sheep, Gen 31. 40
the sleep fled away from his eyes: Note.
* Shall a man be so careful as to want sleep for to keep sheep, and shall
he not be much more careful for to keep his soul? Shall a man labor for to
please a man, and shall he not much more labor for to please his GOD? Shall a
man labor for his back and his belly? and shall he take no pains for his
silly soul? Shall a man highly esteem things which perish, and shall that
which is eternal be lightly set by?

But let us more particularly consider the properties of a good labourer.

First a good labourer must be vigilant and watchful, The doctrine.
^ar^ly rising at the chirping of the birds: he must be a house-Cock for to
waken others, and to set them on work: so must the spiritual labourer do, he
must haste himself early from the bed of down: Prover. 8. 17.
He that seeks me early shall find me.

All ye that are young make use of this doctrine: The use.
seek the LORD early ye Scholars: let this my Sermon by like the five hour
bell: Though drowsy nature would feign lie still and sleep, Note.
up, up; from the feathers; Serve GOD in the morning of thy life: Serve him
first in the morning of thy days: let the first part of the day be spent into
kneeling before his footstool: let GOD also be served in the morning of all
thy adoes: Note.
* When ever thou is goeing to any action, were it at noone, or at even, labor
a little with GOD: first, Serve him in the morning of that action: Note.
* Before thou speak of any matter of weight, up with thy heart and eyes to
the HEAVENS, saying with a sigh, LORD direct me in that which I am for to
speak: see that in all things thou first labor with thy GOD.

* The first of all things of GODS in a particular manner: Note.
GOD in Israel had the first of all things: These firstlings were but the
ceremony whereof the substance is, that all our thoughts, words and works:
begin at him, who is Alpha, the beginning of all the creatures of GOD. * It is
a strange thing of this worlds folly: All men think, Note.
that if a man learn not to be a Scholar in his youth, that it is no more
time in the age of threescore to begin his A B C: Such a man needed not to
think for to be a Minister. Do men of such an age begin any other trade or
craft? Are not your Children sent to crafts while they are young. Where saw
ye any begin to learn a craft in the age of threescore? And yet most men
think, though they have lived fifty or threescore years, like Pagans, that
upon their death bed they will easily learn to be Christians.

* The ill spent lives of many are greatly to be suspected, Note.
though on their deathbed they will seem to be exceeding humble: Such often
will have fair shows of repentance, so long as they are under the weighty
h^^d, but let them be once free of their affliction, incontinent it is seen
how they return to their old byas again, Psalm. 78. 57.
like dec^itfull bows. Who is more penitent in appearance than a thief, while
he goes to the gibbet? But let him once loose, it will be seen that he
cannot refrain,* A long contracted habit is not removed in a short space.
Note.
It is a hard task and labor to amend all the faults of our life in three or
four days sickness. Scripture makes no mention of any, but of one converted
at the last gasp, viz. the Thief at CHRIST'S right hand, Luk 23 43
which was a miracle.

Secondly as we should labor early, so should we labor earnestly, GOD
wills us not to be lazy at his service. Note.
* GOD his Servants are all of the nature of the Scraphins, they have fire in
their wings: GOD likes not the labor that is done with delays: Note.
* He can not abide the slaggards yet a little while; (...)
He is wearied of those who are weary of well doing, Mal. 1. 13
like those Snuffers of Malachie.

Thirdly, as we must labor early and earnestly for spiritual things, so must
we labor constantly: If a righteous man fall away, Ezekiel. 18. 24.
GOD says that he will no more remember his bygone righteousness. Note.
* Many now a little before, and little after the supper of the LORD will seem
to be full of devotion. Some will put their finger in their eye, and wring out
some tears, which like Popish holy water, (as they think,) shall cleanse them
from all bygone wickedness; they can droupe like a bul-rush for a day; Isa.
58. 5.
but so soon as such times are ended, then ends all their devotion. * In
such a time as this, such sinners are in a worse estate than at any time; Note.
for their sins which at other times were stricken out like filthy pocks, are
not taken away, but are stricken in about the heart a deadly disease: The less
this venom appears without, the greater is our danger: for the poison of
sin lurking within about the heart is fostered and increased with a good
conceit of our selves, that we are not like other men: This fond conceit
joining it self with the corruption of concupiscence into the heart,
overmastereth the good motions and vital spitits that are within.

In all the time of laboring for grace and good things, Note.
wicked men are as if they were in the stocks: They will begin, but they can
not continue. Note.
* Away with fair beginnings which are not backed with perseverance: Revel. 2.
25
To Thyatira GOD said, that which ye have already, hold fast till I come:
Revel. 3. 2
To Sardis was said, strengthen the things which remain: This was a sore
reproach for Ephesus, Revel. 2. 4
that she had left her first love.

The meat which endures to everlasting life.
THE thing here for which we are commanded to labor, is meat: It is
distinguished by a special property or effect, it endures to everlasting
life.

The doctrine is this: The meat which GOD commends and commands here, The
doctrine.
is sprituall meat; wherein we see that as the body of a man must have meat,
so must our soul also have meat.

The use: The use.
As we are careful for the body, so let us be more careful for the Soul:
we all lay up our yearly provision for the body: we sow, we sheere, we
heap, we kill, we mill, grind, sift, and bake, and all for the meat of the
body: what then shall we refuse to labor for the Soul, which is much more
precious than the body? Note.
* Alas too many after they have stuffed their belly remember little that their
soul is fasting: let all men be careful to labor for this meat: Note.
* When thou have refreshed thy body with GOD his benefits below, say unto thy
soul, my silly soul, my body is satisfied, but alas what have thou gotten? I
am persuaded that many pass many days, not remembering that they have a soul
within their body: * They do to their soul, Note.
that which a good man would not do to his horse, he would be sorry to let
him stand in stable a day without a ba^te: And yet how many days let we slip,
not laboring for a crumme of spiritual meat to our soul.

The Properties of this meat.
Now let us consider what is the property of this meat, for which we are
commanded to labor, it is this viz. durable: It is so durable that it feeds
to everlasting life. This meat has many good properties: Among many I shall
single out three: 1. It is a meat that is sweet. 2. It is wholesome. 3. It is
durable.

The first Sweet.
First I say this meat is sweet, more sweet than Manna, whose taste was like
wafers made with honey: Exodus 16. 31.
If hitherto thou have not known the sweetness thereof, Now, Psalm. 34. 8
taste and see how good is the LORD: David says that his word is sweeter than
the honey and the honey comb: Psalm. 19. 10.
Note.
* ^s his word so sweet? O how sweet then must he himself be, which is the
cause of all that Sweetness! O the Sweetness of GOD in this Sacrament of the
Supper! If we could taste it, we would wonder at its taste: O the goodness of
this bread which is panis domi^ius, the bread LORD: * This bread LORD carries
such a virtue with it, Note.
that it makes the bread of the LORD the outward element, to have a sweeter
relish in the mouth of the receiver, then commoun bread: Likewise that wine
being received by faith, has a more sauourie taste to the worthy communicant,
then drunkards can find in their Belshazzars Cups at their greatest feasts.
Dan. 5. 4.


* The tongue of man can not express, Note.
the sweetness of this spiritual banquet, whereunto ye are invited this day:
Is not this a banquet of love, which sweetneth all things? None must gloume here
upon another: None must have any grudge at another: This is a feast of
friendship: The spouse in the Canticl^s speaking of CHRIST his banquet, says,
Cant. 2. 4.
He brought me to the banketing house, and his banner over me was love:
Behold how so soon as the spouse came in the feasting house, CHRIST cast a
banner over her, a banner of love.

* We come to this feast, Note.
alas with banners of pride, the greatest enemy of love: Behold while this
love Banner was cast over the spouse, she fell sick into the banketing-house:
Passa est deliquium animi, she swouned for love: while one is like to swoune,
others will cry for wine for to uphold the failing spirits, so did this spouse,
while she found her self so ravished with love, that her heart began to
faint, Cant. ^. 5.
stay me with flaggons (said she,) Comfort me with apples, for I am sick of
love: See how she cried for a flaggon of wine for to drink, and for apples of
comfort for to savor, whereby her heart might be strengthened in the
sickness of love.

Now we are into the LORD his banqueting house, the feast will be ready
anon: Note.
* Let us entreat the LORD, that he would cover us all together here with the
Banner of his love, whereby we may be moved to love GOD above all things, and
our neighbors as our self, till thy Soul be inwrapped in this Banner; see
that thou come not to this Table; But so soon as thou shall find thy heart
sicken with the love of him, then make have to the Table: let thy Soul then
cry for meat and for a drink of GOD his flaggons: Cry for it, and he shall
give thee the sweetest drink that ever thy Soul drank, I say the sweetest,
for seeing the sickness of love is so sweet, how sweet must that drink be
which heals the Soul of such sickness? What I say of drink, that I say of
meat: O the sweetness of that spiritual meat!

* If a man has eaten Cannell or Anise, Note.
his breath will be sweet and pleasant thereafter: A man also who truly has
eaten CHRIST, his breath in his words will savor more sweetly than Cinnamon.

O the sweet savor of godliness, which is the savor of GOD himself. * By
the savor of your breath it shall be known hereafter what ye have eaten
this day. Note.
Ye who shortly after the Communion begin to rai^e, scold, lie, and braule,
beguile not your selves: these rotten words are but stinking belchs, which
proceed from the rotten meat of damnation: If the bread Lord, this meat,
whereof here is mention, were in such men's hearts, the savor of life would
be in their words, for words do proceed from that whereof there is
abundance in the heart.

I pray you to remember, that this meat for which CHRIST bids labor is a
meat most sweet: That which is sweet, works upon two senses often, viz.
upon the savor and the taste. We say of a flower, it has a sweet savor,
and we say of honey it has a sweet taste: The sweetness both of favor and
taste concurreth in this meat of my Text: The meat is CHRIST, who is both of
a sweet savor, and of a sweet taste.

As for his savor, it is excellent, like that of the Rose and that of the
Lilly: I am the Rose of Sharon, (said he,) Cant. 2. 1.
and the Lilly of the Valleys.

* The garments of his righteousness, Note.
are all perfumed with Celestial Musk. Blind Isaac finding a smell of Esau
his garment, Genesis 27. 27
rejoiced: Before he would bless him, he cried for savoury meat: He was
blind, and could not see it; and therefore behoved to make choice by the
savor. Note.
* A hungry man passing by a door where excellent meats are, will rejoice and
be comforted with the smell thereof; the reeke thereof will delight his heart.
If thy Soul O man, be a hungry Soul to day in this the Lords his
banketinghouse, thou shall find such a sweet savor of this meat, as shall
comfort thy heart.

* The reeke of CHRIST his body broken and prepared to be meat to thy Soul,
Note.
and the reeke of his blood coming out of his wounds shall refresh thee so,
that thou shall wonder what a virtue it can be.

All the dearest dainties of this world are nothing but stink and corruption in
comparison of the sweet savor of CHRIST his crucified body: There is in Him
the savor of the rose, and of the Lilly; Spiknard, aloes, and Cassia. Note.
* All the perfume of Heaven is in Him: It is He who makes all the HEAVENS
like a Paradise of flowers: O the savor of our SAVIOR, 2. Cor. 2. 16.
the savor of life unto life! Note.
* O that savor of life, a living savor that makes a dead soul to live a
life which can not be taken away by death.

The second, Wholesome.
WE have heard of the first property of this meat for which CHRIST wills
us to labor, it is sweet: The second is, that it is wholesome; sanctificat,
sanat, it makes holy, and it makes whole. Note.
* Holiness is only true health; This meat is both meat and medicine, for it
both feeds and heals the Soul. Note.
* In my judgment in this world there is not a more powerful m^anes for to be
cured of the disseases of the Soul, then first a reverend and careful hearing
of the word, and then a frequent and well prepared taking of the Sacrament:
Believe what I say; This I will say, behold that bread upon the Table with a
faithful eye, and a sight of that bread shall heal thy wounds.

* Shall the sight of a brazen serpent set upon a pole, Note.
a law ceremony be so powerful, Numb. 21. 9.
for healing the deadly byte of a Serpent, and shall the ceremony of the
Gospel be of a less virtue? * I will tell thee O man; Note.
if thou have any sort of earnest desire to get good here, though thou be
not prepared nor purified, 2. Chron. 30. 19.
according to the purification of the Sanctuary: Let me say more, though thou
want faith, and yet come with outward reverence, fearing to offend, if thou
droupe before GOD, taking some pains to do well, thou shall reap an outward
benefit from GOD, as health of body, prosperity in thy actions, escaping of
some temporal judgment.

* This I may enforce by reason Note.
from Scripture: All that beheld the brazen Serpent had not true faith, yet all
received a benefit: The faithful were healed* both in Soul and Body: The
wicked because they obeyed GOD by looking up to his ordinance, were all healed
of their bodily sore: Because Ahab, that was but a damned hypocrite, made a
show of repentance lying into sackcloth, he found some favor with GOD:
Though his heart was not upright, yet because he cowred and crouched outwardly
and was afraid, the LORD pitied him and praised him* 1. King. 2^. 29.
saying to Elijah, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because
he humbled himself I will not bring the evil in his days: for his outward
repentance GOD bestowed upon him an outward beneficence: The ill came not upon
his house in his days.

But as for these that are in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8. 2^.
scandalous in life and publicly profane lying in the bed of wickedness, or
sifting in the Chair of scorners, Psalm. 1. 1.
delighting in sin, vaunting and bragging of of their wickedness, taking no
pains to mourn for their offending of GOD, in the name of JESUS CHRIST I
excommunicate them from this holy Table: see that they be not so bold as to
presume to profane this blessed meat:

* Here I plainly declare unto them, Note.
that in stead of wholesome meat and drink, they shall eat and drink the
rank poison of their own damnation.

* In Judas his Soppe was the devil, Note.
or the devil entered into him after the Soppe: John. 13. 26.
A strange thing, Satan could never win in into the man, till he had gotten
that Soppe: Before the soppe gotten, he had made many onsets, but could never
get entry for to possess him so fully: But so soon as he received the
soppe, he followed it down into the man, who never ceased till he had hanged
himself: Note.
* Satan may make many onsets on a profane man, but he never finds such a
door of entrance as when he finds him taking out of GOD his servants hands
the holy meat of the Sacrament: That is to him like the Traitors Soppe: Thus
the meat and drink of the Sacrament, which by GOD his ordinance, is a most
wholesome meat, both for soul and body, by the abuse thereof, becomes an
eaten and drunken damnation.

The third, Durable.
In this our Text, we have the third property of this spiritual meat for
which CHRIST wills us to labor, it is, d^^able.

This is declared in these words which endures to everlasting life: This is
meat which passes not through: This is holy meat, everlasting meat, not
subject to corruption: Meat below must be salted lest it stink: over nights
Mannah would not keep, Exodus 16. 20.
worms entered into it: and it stanke, The Gibeonits bread being old, Josh. 9.
12.
became mouldie: Only CHRIST which is GOD his bread, endures to everlasting
life.

Here let us observe that the things of GOD are only durable; The doctrine.
temporal things below will abide some little space, but endure not; nothing
here is permanent, for we spend our years as a tale that is told: Psalm. 90.
9.
what is this bread whereon we feed from nine hours unto twelve, and from
twelve unto six? shall we call that an enduring meat?

* All the most delicate meats of this world, Note.
are but like a feast in print: most delicate meats and drinks, are there but
all in words and lines: There is nothing there indeed, which can feed: But
my flesh, John. 6. 55
(said CHRIST) is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: Temporal
things may have the name of meat and drink, but nothing is so indeed, but
CHRIST himself.

Shall I call that meat indeed, which is not able to feed me four and
twenty hours? shall I say that that is, which is ever passing through, as
swiftly as the time? Note.
* Because of the continual flux of time, time is never said properly to be
present, but either past or to come, the present being but an instant: It is so
of all temporal things below, they are not durable, but are all sick of such
a flux, that their present being in an instant is not worthy of the word of
enduring: Note:
What is man his life here, but a tale already told? So long as a tale is in
telling, it seems to be something, but when once it is told, the hearer will
say, Tush, that is but a tale; Eccles. 1. 2.
The vanity of vanities, said the Preacher and all is vanity: The course of
all things below, is in vanity, from vanity to vanity; There is nothing
here fixed and permanent: That which seems most sure, is like the strength
of our life, which as Moses sings, Psalm. 90. 20
Is soon cut off, and we fly away: All temporal things, are like the time,
ever in a flux, like sand running out of a sand-glasse, they have no abode.

But what soever thing is in GOD it is permanent: GOD his honor is permanent,
his good will is fixed, his blessing is stable, Genesis 27. 33.
like Isaac his blessing, Him have I blessed and he shall be blessed: GOD his
riches, are enduring riches: Prover. 8. 18.
Honor and riches are with me, yea, durable riches and righteousness: The
water of the well of Sichar, did quench men's thirst for a space, but there is a
liquour in CHRIST, which being drunken shall banish thirst away for ever:
Whosoever shall drink of this water shall thirst again, John. 4. 13.
said CHRIST to the woman at the Well: But whosoever, v. 14.
(said he,) shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst, But the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water
springing up into everlasting life.

Now let us observe, to what this meat is said in my Text for to endure: It is
said to endure to everlasting life.

In this meat, I find two good things, 1. It gives life where there is
nothing but death. 2. It preserves the life that is gotten: It endures to
everlasting life, that is, makes the eater thereof to live for ever.

By this clearly this spiritual meat is distinguished from all temporal
cheer, There is no temporal meat that can put life in a dead man: There is
no meat also, which can prolong the life of a man but an hour: But here is
the meat, CHRIST, which endures to everlasting life.

By this I say, CHRIST is distinguished from all other meat in this world: Note.
* Let a man walk through all Cuntries, in Europe, Asia, and Africa, in no
place shall he find either meat or medicine, that shall prolong his days
beyond the date of the most vigorous the four score year: Psalm. 90. 10.
The Mannah which was Angels food, had not this property: Your fathers, John.
6. 49
(said CHRIST) did eat Mannah in the wilderness and are dead: No Apples of
youth can preserve man from old age: Note.
* Physicitians may prattle and say.

Cur moriatur homo cum salvia crescat in horto? That is man needs not to die
if he knew the use of the herb sage: But if men could take this Savior for
saluia, they should find that men need not to die at all: This Savior, is
that spiritual Sage of Salvation? wherefore should a man die, seeing GOD has
so loved the world, John. 3. 16.
that he has given his only son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life:

Let us all therefore believe in this Savior, for wherefore should ye die, O
ye house of Israel? Let us eat him by faith: he is that spiritual Sage and
Salve, which is the only remeede against death: He who is CHRIST'S, may well,
while he goes to the grave, lay down his head for to sleep, or take a
little nap, as we say, but he cannot die, because he has eaten his
Salvation, Luk ^: 3^.
even this meat which endures to everlasting life.

The use of this doctrine is, The use.
that seeing this meat is of such worth, we be careful to labor for it: If
we labor for it, it will feed us eternally: But if we labor not for it, if
we love it not, but loath it, it shall be our death: the chief point of the
condemnation of the wicked, shall be this, that this meat was offered unto
him, but they would none of it: This is the condemnation of the world, not that
they have sinned, but because they have despised the remedy of sin: This,
(says S. John,) John. 3. 19.
is the condemnation, that light is com^ into the world, but men loved
darkness rather then light.

* Now seeing ye are presently invited to the LORDS banquet, Note.
a banquet not of dead meat, but of liuiug meat, which shall make your souls
to live for ever, my Counsel is that as yesterday, so also this day ye labor
for it: Take pains now, upon your Souls, that they may be wrought unto a
holy reverence: Bend up all your spirits, and prepare you for your GOD: see
what every man can do this day, for the Salvation of his own Soul: Let us
all together wrestle with CHRIST, as it were half middle, half man, and let us
say of this meat, as Jacob said of the blessing, Genesis ^2. 26.
I will not let thee go: Note.
* Bread in Hebrewe is called Lehem, from a word that signifies to fight,
because a man above all things earthly, will fight for his meat: If a man will
fight for the food of his belly, what should he not do for to get meat to
his Soul? Let us therefore labor and wrestle with Jacob, pouring our tears
and prayers, Hosea. 12. 4.
the armor of the Church, let us never let the LORD get rest, till we get
that meat which endures to everlasting life.

THE SECOND PART.
Who is the giver of this meat.
NOW let us come to the second and third parts of our Text, wherein I shall
strive to be short. In this second part, we have to considder, who is the
giver of this meat, The giver is called the son of man, in these words which
the son of man shall give you.

He who is called here the son of man, is CHRIST.

* CHRIST in Scripture is called the Son of three. Note.
1. The Son of GOD. 2. The Son of Marie. 3. The Son of man.

In regard of his Deity, as second person of the Trinity, He is the Son of
GOD begotten of him, from all eternity, coequall and coessentiall to his
Father, of whose glory he is the brightness, and the express image of his
person, Heb. 1. 2
the appointed heir of all things.

He was called the Son of Mary, because he was conceived in her Belly, and
borne of her.

Here he is called by himself the son of man, because he took upon him
man's nature, and became man like unto us in all things, sin only excepted:
Note.
* So soon as the fulness of time came, Gal. 4. 4.
GOD sent forth his son made of a woman, conceived of a woman, and not
begotten by a man, and yet the son of man, and the Son of a virgin, even
GOD manifested in the flesh a Son younger than MARIE his Mother, 1. Tim. 3.
16.
a Son older than Adam the Father of his Mother, a Son eternal with his
FATHER that begat him. Note.
* As in the Heaven He was Motherlesse, as GOD, so on earth He was
Fatherless, as Man, and yet the Son of Man.

Here be the three greatest wonders of the World. Note.
DEVM nasci, Virginem parer^, fidem haec credere. That GOD should be borne,
that a Virgin should bring forth a Son, that man can believe it; though in
the Creation he may have some ground: Note.
* For seeing GOD at the beginning made the woman out of the man without the
help of any woman, why might he not make a man, and hew him out of a woman
without the help of any man? He who could give a being unto nothing might
also raise a nature of some thing: but to leave this let us considder here
what is the office of this Son of man.

It is said here that he is ordained for to give to us the meat which
endures to everlasting life, in these words, which the son of man shall give
unto you.

The doctrine I observe here is, The doctrine.
that * CHRIST is the great Steward of HEAVEN, to whom the dispensation of
eternal life, and of all other good things is committed, John. 14. 6.
No man, (said he,) comes unto the Father but by me: There is nothing also
that can come from the Father unto man, but by him.

The use of this doctrine is, The use.
that we be earnest to make our aquaintance with CHRIST, if we would have
any good thing from the HEAVENS: The Children of this world, are wise in their
generation: By the proceedings of natural wise men, we may learn spiritual
wisdom.

* It is written of the men of Tire and of Sidon, Note.
that knowing that Herod was highly displeased with them, they came with one
accord to him to seek peace; for to obtain this, Act 12. 20.
they made Bl^stus the Kings Chamberlain their friend: It is so that we
should do; whether we would pacify GODS wrath raging against us, or obtain
any favor from GOD, let us first make JESUS CHRIST the great Steward, and
Chamberlain of Heaven our friend.

Again let us observe here how we get this Meat with Life everlasting. The
doctrine.
It is said that the Son of man shall give it: for two reasons, CHRIST the
Son of man is said to give life unto man.

First because in his humane nature, by death he has merited this life unto
all believers: Secondly because his humane nature is the instrument, whereby
he conuoyeth life unto us.

* As the stock sends sap up from the root to the graft, Note.
so the humanity of CHRIST, which is the stock of all the faithful, conuoyeth
life everlasting from the divine nature which is the root of all good things,
all these who are not ingrafted in him, are like that wanton widow? who is
disgraced with this, 1. Tim. 5. 6*
She is dead while she lives, that is, spiritually dead in a natural life.

The use of this is, The use.
that we be earnest with CHRIST, laboring for that meat of life, which
only He can give: I^b. 2. 4.
Seeing skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give it for this
life, Isa 2. 22.
which is but a past of breath in his nostrils, an evanishing vapor, Psalm. 78.
39.
a wind that passes away and comes not again: what should a man refuse to
do, or suffer for the gift of life everlasting?

Again, The doctrine.
in that it is said, that the son of man shall give everlasting life, or the
meat that feeds to that life, I observe that everlasting life is the gift of
GOD: That which is a gift is not a reward: All the gifts of GOD are most free
gifts: But amongst all the gifts of GOD, life everlasting is the most free
gift: Note.
* The greater GOD his gifts be, they are the frieer: for what can a creature
on earth deserve at GOD his hands on earth? If not on earth what can he deserve
in HEAVEN? On earth I must be a beggar at GOD his door for bread to my belly,
which GOD will destroy with the belly, I must seek it from GOD, not as due to
me, but as his Alms; If it be so of this meat, how much more shall it be so
of the meat of my text, which feeds to everlasting life? Note.
If man must labor for the meat of the earth with the sweat of his brows, and
yet, after all that done, must beg his bread from GOD, who can think, that
any man can merit the meat which endures to everlasting life? Let us learn of
my text, that it is the gift of GOD, in these words, which the Son of Man
shall give unto you.

The use of this doctrine is, The use.
that we thank GOD, who has brought us out of Babylon, where the doctrine of
man's merits, 1. Tim. 4. 1.
the doctrine of Devils is publicly teached, and avouched, yea, as though man
could do more than he is obliged to do. * Such men need none of GOD his
gifts, Note.
but GOD must pay to them his debts: Such men understand not what it is to come
unto the waters, for to buy wine and milk without money: Isa. 55. ^.
Let GOD himself tell the world how they are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8.
By grace, (says he,) are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of GOD: Note.
* All that a man has in this world, he will give it for this natural life,
and shall be thought no fool in so doing: Seeing this life is thought
worthy of all that we have, what can a man have, or what can he do, or
suffer worthy of life everlasting: It is best then that we say with Scripture,
It is the gift of GOD: Rom 6 23
CHRIST has done with us as Joseph did with his brethren, Genesis 42. ^5.
who found that they had the corns and their money both: such corns were not
sold, but f^^ely gifted: The LORD give us hearts to be thankful, for the
unspeakable gift of everlasting life.

THE THIRD PART.
Who appointed CHRIST the Son of man to be the giver of this everlasting
meat.
NOW in the last part of our Text, we have to considder who ^a^h appointed
CHRIST, the giver of this meat, which feeds to everlasting life, This is set
down in these words, for him has GOD the Father sealed: That he was
ordained to bring this meat to the word, the Father has confirmed it by his
own seal: (...).

A Seal is an outward sign confirming, ratifying, and giving authority to
that whereunto it is set: Thus we see that by the King his Seal, Kings
letters are made authenticke and of authority.

Let us first consider the word, and then we shall speak of the diverse uses
of a Seal, last of all we shall draw a doctrine with the use of application.

The word Seal properly signifies that instrument, wherewith Charters and
Patents are sealed, whereby they are ratified and made authentic.

It also siginfieth the Wax which is sealed, for such stamped wax, we
ordinarily call the King his seal.

Because of the diverse uses of seals, diverse things in Scripture are called
Seals, or as said to seal: Because the Seal of a Charter, is that whereby
the rights therein are confirmed and made authenticke, Sacraments have been
called seals: for by them the written promises of GOD are confirmed and made
more sure unto us: According to this it is said of Abraham Romans 4. 11.
that he received the Seal of circumcision: Because that a missiue letter
being once sealed, all that is written within the same can no more be seen,
but is a secret to all that behold it outwardly: So the things of GOD are said
to be sealed, which are hid or concealed, According to this that Book of
the Revelation, Revel. 5. 7.
which none but the lamb could open, is said to have been sealed with seven
seals.

* We have also to observe, Note.
that in Scripture, things are said to seal in diverse manners: GOD is said to
seal, and man is said to seal: of man his sealing, CHRIST speaks, saying,
John. 3. 33.
He that has received his testimony has set to his seal that God is true,
that is, He as it were subscribeth with his hand, the truth of GOD his word.

GOD again is said to seal men, and he is said to seal his own Son.

As for men who are his elect and chosen ones, GOD Seals them outwardly, and
inwardly: Outwardly, when he makes them partakers of his Sacraments, viz. of
Baptism or of the Supper: According to this, it is said of Abraham, when he
was circumcised that he received the seal of Circumcision: Romans 4. 11
Again inwardly by his spirit, GOD is said to seal, when he makes his elect
sure of his favor or of their Salvation; according to this the Apostle says
to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1. 13
In whom after that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise: The children of GOD are said to be sealed by the spirit of promise,
when the spirit of GOD within them makes them sure of all that is promised
unto them: Because by faith and good works our election is made sure unto us,
faith and good works are called the Seal of our election: The foundation of
GOD (said St. Paul,) remains sure: 1. Tim, 2, 19,
and has this seal, the LORD knows them that are his: And let every one
that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity: The foundation of GOD is
his decree, upon which the Salvation of the godly is builded: the truth
thereof, is made certain unto us by the seal of a good life, when we depart
from iniquity: Note.
* Good works are the seal of the Spirit of GOD, whereby a Soul is confirmed
that it belongs to the election of grace,

This much for clearing of diverse difficulties concerning sealing in the
Scriptures.

We have already heard how man is said to seal GOD his truth, and how GOD is
said to seal man, both outwardly and inwardly: In this my Text we have
particularly to considder, how GOD is said to Seal his Son, CHRIST JESUS, of
whom it is said here, Him has GOD the Father sealed.

The LORD JESUS as is well remarked by the excellent Divines, has been sealed
by the Father diuersely.

First he may be said to have been sealed by the Father, Heb. 1. 3
because in him was the Character, the engraven image of the Father his person,
that is, as a learned Interpreter says, Persona quae personam pairis ad
amussim refert: Sicut imago cerae impressa ad amussim refert imaginem
in^culptam sigillo: The sense is this, The person of the Father is like that
image, which is engraven into a seal of Silver or Gold, and the person of the
Son, is like that image in the wax, which is sealed by the seal of gold:
According to this, CHRIST the second person of the Trinity, is said to be
sealed into an unspeakable manner by the Father, because in him is the
essential image of the Father.

Secondly, CHRIST was sealed by GOD, when he was anointed with the oil of
grace, and gladness, above his fellows: GOD the Father at that anointing,
Psalm. 45.
powered into CHRIST man his spiritual gifts and graces without measure: Col.
1. 1.
All the treasures of grace were stored up into him: We all have received of
his fulness; John. 1. 19.
The fullness of GOD in him was a Seal, whereby both in his Words and Works
he was known to be more than man, for as by his enemies confession, John. 7.
46.
never man spoke as he spoke which was the word Seal, S. which his enemies
could not deny he did among them the works which no other man could do,
John. 15. 24
this was his work, Seal.

Thirdly GOD the Father sealed our Savior, when by his testimony from Heaven,
he declared to the world that he was his beloved son in whom he was well
pleased. Mat. 3. 17.


The Sealing properly understood here, as Beza thinks denotes two things,
first that GOD endowed him with such a verture, whereof the like was in no
other creature, Col. 2. 9.
for in him the fullness of the Godhead and essential image of the Father did
so visibly appear, John, 14. 9,
that who saw him did see the Father.

Secondly by the Sealing of CHRIST by the Father he understands a commission
from the Father, given unto him for to come to the world and reconceale all
repenting sinners to their GOD: This opinion he has from Cyrillus.

S. Chrysostom and Theophylactus refer this Sealing of the Son of man, by
the Father to the testimonies whereby the Father from Heaven declared him to
be his Son, particularly in those words, This is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.
17.
in whom I am well pleased: This also we must consider that the glorious
works of Christ, wherein the infinite virtue of GOD, did appear, were as a
Seal, declareing to the world, that God the Father had appointed that man to
be the Savior of the world,

Piscator interprets the word Sealed after this manner: Obsignauit, (says he)
est Metaphora sumpta ab ijs, qui quos mittunt eorum authoritatem obsignato
diplomate sanciunt: that is, sealing here is, a metaphore or form of speech,
taken from these that confirm the authority of these whom they send, by a
sealed charter or patent: Note.
* According to this the Father is said to have sealed CHRIST, when he sent
him with a confirmed authority to declare his will and to give gifts unto man
on earth as who were ^ent with a Kings patent, to any of his dominions for
effectuating his Majesty's business: So as one says learnedly, Note.
Obsignatio haec est approbatio and vt ita dicam authentisatio, That is, this
sealing of CHRIST, is an approving and alloweing of him by authority, for to
give that meat which feeds to everlasting life.

The doctrine I observe here, is a doctrine of comfort for all Christians: The
doctrine.
Behold here Christ our Savior, a sealed Savior, a Savior whom the King of
Heaven has sealed by giving him full commission, and power for to save all
wearied souls, that will come unto him.

The use of this doctrine is, The use.
that what ever we want in this life that is needful, either for soul or
body, let us seek it from him, with all boldness in all confidence to
receive: Behold him here sealed for to assure the world, that for this end he
is come down to the world to give life eternal to all these that will labor
for it, Romans 6. 22
in seeking it from him by humble prayers.

* When the Egyptians were distressed by Famine, Note.
they all ran to Joseph, because they knew that the King had given to him
his ring and had sealed him for to guide the whole Land: what they did to
Joseph, Genesis 41. 24,
let us do to JESUS, whom the Father of Heaven, the great KING of the whole
world has sealed and approved by words and works, John, 15, 24.
by gifts and by graces without measure: Let every empty Soul come unto him,
John. 3, 34
and receive of his fullness even grace for grace: Col, 1, 19,


The LORD grant us all this grace: To our GOD, Father, Son, and holy Ghost
be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion and power, for now and ever. Amen.

DIVERSE PRAYERS FOR DIVERSE NECESSITIES OF THE SAINTS.
Non vox sed votum, non chordula musica, sed cor,
Non clamans sed amans cantat in ore DEI.
This have I thus englished. Not voice but wish, not sounding harp but heart,
Not cries but love have in GODS ear a part.

A NOTABLE PRAYER OF THAT FAITHFVLL SERVANT OF GOD, M. JOHN BELL, Minister of
Glasgow, which ordinarily he uses before Sermon.
WE are here assembled in thy presence, O blessed Father! according to thine
own commandment, to seek thy gracious face: What are we O Lord, whom thou
should admit to come into thy presence, who not only are dust and ashes, but
also that which is worse, unclean and sinful wretches, unworthy we
confess to behold the Heaven, far less to offer and present our speeches
and prayers to thee who art the GOD of HEAVEN? Yet it has pleased thee in
mercy, to grant unto us this access, and liberty that we may come before
the Throne of grace.

Holy Father teach our hearts with a religious fear, and an humble reverence
toward thy divine Majesty, in whose sight and presence now we are: Remove
from us the impediments which are great and many, and which suffer us not to
draw so near to thee our GOD as we should, and as we would: Take from us
this veil of darkness, which still by nature covers the eyes of our minds:
Remove the foolishness, and the vanity of our worldly, profane, and wandering
cogitiations, as also that hardness and security, that deadness and dullness
of spirit, that ^urketh in us, and that makes thy holy word so often powerless
in our hearts, and fruitless in our lives.

Give us for thy good names sake, circumcised and sanctified ears: Give us
also circumcised and sanctified souls that when thou speaks unto us by thy
truth preached, we may reverently attentively, and obediently, and when we
send up to the our GOD, the Sacrifice of our supplications, it may proceed
from that solid faith and sincere f^rvencie, which be comes thy elect:
withold not from us O fountain of grace! Withold not the spirit of grace,
which thou have promised to all these that in humility do ask the same.
Remember not against us our bypast manifold iniquities, whereby from time to
time we do offend thee and gri^ue thy holy spirit.

O our GOD cast all our sins behind thy back, and look in the face of thine
anointed, our Advocate at thine own right hand the LORD JESUS: Grant for his
sake that so many as be here now present, may feel forcibly that Heavenly
fire of the inward Teacher, to come down and enter into their hearts, to
inlighten and purge them, to change and renew them more and more, till last it
shall please thee in mercy to compleete in them the work of grace, and crown
the same with endless glory.

Finally, seeing it is thy holy will, and accustomed working to employ the weak
ministry of mortal and sinful men, in carrying the great and weighty
message of thy holy word, let it please thee to strengthen and assist me, that
both in fidelity and wisdom and sincerity, I may express and utter the
Heavenly oracles, to these who in humility shall ask the same.

Waken up also their hearts and Consciences, that as good and well prepared
ground, rightly they may receive the immortal seed of thy truth, and
hereafter bring forth such good fruit as may glorify thy thy blessed name,
adorn and beautify their Christian profession, edify others by good example
of life, and certify more and more their own conscience, that they are called
effectually to be heirs of life through the Lord JESUS our blessed Savior,
in whose name, etc. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer fitted to the state of one that is near the doors of death.
QVicken us O LORD, and we will call upon thy name: Psalm. 8 18.
Let the words of our mouth, Psalm. 19, 14,
and the meditations of our heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our
strength and our Redeemer. O Father of mercyes, Revel. 1 18
which have the keys of death and of the grave, at thy command, thou rulest
all that is above and below: Thy mercy is ever above all thy works: Psalm.
130. 4,
O Lord mercy is with Thee that thou may be feared, Mercy also is with
Thee, that thou may be loved, yea and mercy is with Thee, that Sinners may
be saved: Psalm. 86. 5.
Thy word is pure and plain, that thou art plenteous in mercy to all that call
upon Thee.

Now for the sake of thy Son, let it please Thee to pardon and pity this
poor trem^ling and weak hearted sinner, now drawing near the jaws of death,
into which he is even now ready to fall; Let it please* Thee to seal fast up
in his heart, the full remission of all his transgressions of thought, word,
and work: Say unto his Soul I am thy Salvation: There is nothing that can
pacify thy wrath, or allay the qualmes of his Conscience: except only the
purging and purifing blood of thy Lamb the LORD JESUS: who came into this
world, for to save Sinners: 1. Tim. 1. 15
Let that blood of sprinkling by its divine virtue* 1. Pet. 1. 2.
make all his sins though double died in crimson color, Isa. 1. 18.
to become white like Wool and Snow: Thou who by the touching of thy garment,
suffered a* HEAVENLY healing virtue to go* out for the curing of that bloody
flux, Luk 8. 46*
bind not up now the virtues and powers of thy mercy, from this Soul sore
yerning for thy ^auour.

In this last conflict of the last Battle of his Soul, so sinewe him with thy
grace, and so support and underprop him by the strength of thy love that in his
greatest weakness, he may find thy grace sufficient for him: 2. Cor. ^1^ 9.
As his natural strength shall decay, let spiritual courage increase: Psalm.
51. 6.
Thou desire truth in the inward parts, put thou into his heart that which
thou desires. Hos. 11, 8.


O thou whose most merciefull heart is ever turned within Thee, and whose
compassions are ever most cheerfully rolled together at the thing of the
prisoner: Take notice (...) the sighs and groans, Psalm. 79. 11
of this thy Servant, now in the extremity of anguis^: Satan now is come to
his taste onset, the fear of death and the terrors of the grave, are now in
Battle array against him: Now LORD confound Satan the ring leader of all his
enemies: Suffer him not to prevail against him, for whom thy Son has
suffered death: Let his Soul know that thou have disarmed death of its sting,
1. Cor. 15. 55,
and that death is no more death, but a sleep to all the friends of CHRIST,
who has plucked out the sting thereof, John, 11, 11
Let neither the grips of death nor the greifes of the grave dismay him: Let
him know that by thy Resurection, thou have so overcome the grave, Isa. 57. ^.
that thou have made it a resting bed to each one walking in his uprightness.

How great or grievous so ever the assaults of his enemies be, make him still
hold him fast by Thee: When flesh and heart and all shall fail him, ^sal. 73,
26.
be thou then the strength of his heart and his portion for ever Behold he
has none in Heaven bu^ Thee, (...)
and there be none on earth whom he desires besides Thee: disappoint him not
LORD: Seeing he trusts in The, let his Soul rejoice in thy Comforts as one
that finds a great spoil: Psalm. 119. 162.
Make him now turn his back upon all worldly desires, as Hezekiah did when
he turned his face to the wall: Isa. 38. 2,
Make the hope of Glory so strong within him, that all that is here below,
were it never so specious or precious, may seem to him Dirt and Dung in
comparison thereof: Philip, 3, 8
As the time of his departure shall approach, so let his soul draw nearer
unto thee that gave it, Gen, 2: 7,
by breathing it into his nosthirls: So long as it shall please thee that it
remain within him, work Heavenly motions in his heart, that as the Heart
pants after the water brooks, Psalm: 42, 1,
so may his Soul pant after that River, Psalm. 46* ^4*
the streams whereof make glad the City of God. We conclude all our confused
suits, with the perfection of the pattern of all prayers, ^^ying as our LORD
has taught us; Our Father which art. etc.

A prayer at the very point of death.
NOW LORD it is time to help, when breath begins to fail at ^he last dints of
death: All diseases are from thee, and to thee belong the issues of death: Now
behold thy Servant here in the very pangs and throes thereof: The shadow of
death is now upon his eye lids: Job, 14, 14,
The appointed time of his changing is now come, that thou will, like a weauer
cut off his life from the thrum: Isa, 38. 12,
Seeing ^his change is appointed for all the Sons of Adam, let thy mercy
toward him, make him to change for the better, even from bondage, death, and
darkness to life, light, and liberty, yea and from grace to glory, Keep now
his Soul in readiness, 1* Pet, 1, 3,
that in a lively hope he may wait for thy Salvation. Genesis 49, (...).


Now Lord his last hour is come to a quarter: The task of his toil is near
an end: when all shall be finished, let him enter into the full possession of
these joys, whereof he has received the pawnes and pledges by thy favor: At
the last blast and billow of Satan's temptations, let him find his Savior
Christ to be a sure harbry for his Soul: The Soul which thou keep can
never miscarrie: Let thy grace be the staff of his strength till thou bring
him unto glory: While the eyes of his body are covered with a shadow of death,
clear thou so the eyes of his Soul, that with Stephen he may see the Heavens
open, Act. 7, 56.
and thy Son his Savior at thy right hand pleading (...)


