THE HOLY EXERCISE OF FASTING. Described largely and plainly out of the word of
God: with all the parts and causes, and several kinds of the same: together
with the most fit times, and convenient seasons, when and how long it should be
held: with the manifold fruit and commodity that redoundeth to us thereby:
and the whole nature and order thereof. In Certain Homilies or Sermons, for
the benefit of all those, that with care and conscience intend at any time
publicly or privately to put in practice the same. By Nicolas Bownde Doctor of
divinity.

Perused and allowed by public authority.



Occupy till I come, Luke 16.13. Math. 25.11. It is well done good servant and
faithful: thou have been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over
much: enter into thy masters joy. Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the
University of Cambridge, 1604. And are to be sold at the sign of the Crown
in Paul's Churchyard by Simon Waterson.

To the right Reverend father in God, and right honorable Lord, Doctor John
Iegon, Lord Bishop of Norwich, the continuance, and daily increase of all those
heavenly virtues and graces, which the Apostle S. Paul requires in a Bishop,
1. Tim. 3.2.
RIght reverend father, and very honorable Lord, besides many other weighty
reasons, whereby I have been moved to commend this simple present unto your
Lordships favor, which it is not necessary nor convenient to make all the
world acquainted with (it is enough that your Lordship privately does take
knowledge of them) it may be sufficient openly to profess thus much; That
whereas my self, with all the rest of my brethren and fellow ministers, were
in our country, and in all the rest of your L. Dioces of Norfolk and
Suffolk, the last summer enjoined by your letters sent to your officers to
that end (according to the order set down before in print, by the authority
of the Kings most excellent majesty) to come to the Church every we^ke upon
the wednesdaies and fridaies, with the rest of our people and flock committed
unto us: there and then to be occupied in prayer and fasting, to entreat the
Lord for our sins, and for the sins of the rest in this land: that so his
heavy hand, which by the pestilence was then very sharply, and that a long
time stretched out in many chief cities and towns of this realm, and namely,
of this your L. Dioces, as Norwich, and Yarmouth, and some other might be
called in at his appointed time, Sam. 24.16.
as it was in the days of king David. Whereby it came to pass, that both
here, and in many places else, there was much more preaching and hearing of the
word of God, and praying unto him, then was before, and otherwise would have
been. So that by means of the strait charge laid upon all by your L. letter,
there was much good done in this country at that time, the fruit whereof I
hope, remains unto this day. For though the book containing the cause and
order of those fasts, which was made by some of the chief governors in the
Church of England, and was authorized by the Kings Highness, did (as I take
it) not only give leave unto all places publicly to meet upon these above
named days to these ends, but did inioyne them to it: and so all men might
have taken knowledge of it, and of their duty therein from thence: especially
when the cause of it (namely so grievous, and so universal a plague) was so
notorious, that it could not be hid from any: yet it was found too true by
experience in many places, that until such time as men were further called
upon by your Lordships letter, full of great and weighty reasons to persuade
thereunto, that neither many ministers had any care to call upon their people
to so holy and necessary a service, nor the people any great devotion to come:
So slow are men unto any part of Gods service, yea though it does so greatly
concern them, especially to this principal part of it in fasting and prayer
(which has been very long out of use) that they had need not only lightly
to be called upon, but with many strong coards violently hailed unto it: though
unto all matters of the world, they are so forward and hasty, that they run
of their own accord, and none can stay them. Hereupon it has come to pass,
that a great part of the good, that this way has been done unto the people of
God, and service to his majesty, is to be imputed unto your lordships diligent
care, who did so timely, and effectually stir up men unto it: especially in
respect of those chief places and others, under your Lordships jurisdiction,
which then were greatly subject unto this visitation, as well as other parts of
this land, neither are they all of them yet free from it. Therefore these
being part of my labors at that time, they are in some sort due unto your
Lordship, by whose means I received encouragement thereunto, as others did to
the like. And I have presumed to present them unto your Lordship, that by them
you may see, and by one may judge of the rest, how ready we are, and shall be,
to yield obedience to all your L. godly proceedings: promising for my self,
and presuming of the rest that when we shall be likewise commanded (which we
expect, and hope for in time) to keep solemn days of thanksgiving for the
mitigating of this plague in so great measure in the most places, and for the
clean taking of it away in many, we will be, by the grace of God, as ready to
perform that part of service, as we have been forward unto this. And in the
mean season according to our bounden duty we will endeavor not only privately
to be thankful unto God, but upon all such days, as we have our public
assemblies, to do it in some part, and to call upon our people to be thankful
to God with us, both in heart, words, and life: least the Lord for our
unthankfulness do return upon us with the same, or some other great punishment
of his. Which we have so much the more cause to fear, unless we thus seek to
prevent it, because the late memory of so great a work, both of justice in
sending the plague, and of mercy in taking it away, is not so fresh and
effectual with all men, nay with very few, as it should: but they like to
ungracious children so soon forget the rodd, as it is off their back. And
seeing by these your Lordship may take knowledge, that by your godly incitation
many were made more painful in their callings (at the least for that time)
then otherwise they would have been, whereby also God was more honored, and
the people more instructed: your Lordship will according to that high place,
wherein God has placed you, especially to that end, take all opportunities by
word and writing still to incite all men to be zealous and fervent in the work
of the ministry: by giving all good encouragement unto the painful laborers
in Gods harvest, and by quickening up them that are any way slothful and
negligent, and by discountenancing them that are altogether careless and idle,
and by stopping up the passage unto al idol sheapherds and hirelings, who seek
the fleece and not the flock: whose right arm as it is clean withred up, and
their right eye utterly darkened so as the Prophet says they have neither will,
Zach. 11.17.
nor ability to do any good in the Church of God. That so not only the
gospel may still more and more be purely preached in this your Lordships
Dioces, (as now by the grace of God it is, and has been a long time by many
learned and great men) but that the people in all places may be compelled
diligently to frequent it: and not only themselves to yield obedience unto it,
but to have their children and servants, Act. 10.2.
even their whole families willingly catechized: that they may fear God with
all their househoulds. That so we may bless god, not only for your coming
among us, but much more for your continuance with us, and over us: and pray to
him for you (as we do, and mind to do) that the Lord will long preserve you
zealous of his glory, and careful of the good of that part of his church, over
which the holy ghost has made you ouerseer, ap. 20.28.
which also Jesus Christ has purchased, not with gold or silver, but with his
own most precious blood. That so among the rest of his good and faithful
servants, who have used their talents well, ib. 25.2^.
he may give you a full reward in the kingdom of heaven, who has said, if
thou love me feed my sheep, if thou love me, feed my lambs. ^. 21.1^.
For though the daily exercises of the word of God should be sufficient of
themselves, to purchase credit and reverence to themselves with all sorts of
people, as to the most holy ordinances of the eternal God; and the great
wantes, that are in all men, should drive them to seek to them continually as
to the means of their salvation, whereby all their wantes might be supplied:
yet such is the irreligion in many, and the want of feeling in others, that
they are no more forward unto any part of Gods service, or of the means of
their own salvation, then authority does compel them. Thus assuring my self,
that your later deeds will be answerable to these good beginnings, or rather
happy proceedings; yea that they will go far beyond them in all godly zeal,
I comfort my self, with the rest of my brethren in the daily expectation and
hope of it: praying to god, Psalm. 69.9.
that the zeal of his house may even consume you: that so you waxing old in
all well doing, Prou. 16.31.
your age may be so much the more honorable, being found in the way of
righteousness. And so not doutibng of your Lordships favorable acceptatio^ of
these my poor endeauours, I leave them to your fatherly and honorable
protection, and my self, and my service to your continual commandment, very
humbly taking my leave. Norton in Suffolk. 30. April. 1604.

Your Lordships ever humbly at commandment. Nicolas Bownd.

To the godly and Christian Reader, the daily increase of that true godliness,
which has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come, 1.
Tim. 4.8.
WHen as of late this holy exercise of fasting, was by public authority, not
without just cause imposed upon us (well-beloved fathers and brethren) I thought
it convenient, or rather necessary for that people, which then I had to deal
with (and have still) first of all to make them acquainted with the nature of
it, not so much by preaching of fasting out of some one text, (which could not
very fitly have been done) as by delivering unto them in sundry sermons the
whole doctrine of it orderly, out of many places of holy Sc^^pture, or rather
out of the whole word of God indifferently. That so they might be the more
willing to submit themselves unto it, when they did see clearly what they
should do, and ^lso that they do it in some good measure ^cceptable to God,
and comfortably to themselves, when they perceived after what manner they
should do it. And thus in making of these short treatises and Homilies at the
first I had respect only unto them. Since I considering on the one side the
great ignorance that is in most places, as of all other parts of gods service
which are ordinary so most of all this, which is extraordinary, especially
because it is, and has been so much out of use: and then waying on the other
side, that there may be hereafter great cause offered unto us again of using
this holy and excellent ordinance of god, either publicly in many places, or
privately in more, seeing that this visitatio^ of the plague does so linger,
like unto the leaprosy which sometime did hang long in the howses of the Jews,
and so does very shortly, or not at all wholly depart from some places: besides
those new chastisements, which we know not how many or how soon they may come
upon us: I thought since, that both for these, and for other causes these my
labors might be not wholly unprofitable to all those, that are well minded.
And thought I cannot be ignorant that there are many and godly and learned
sermons and treatises, both in english and latin, already extant of this
argument, and so my endeavor after them may seem superfluous: yet all things
considered, I doubt not, but that some may stand in need of these also. For as
I must needs confess, that I have read the former, and indeauoured to follow
some of the^: so I leave the learneder sort to such of them, as themselves
shall best like: only this for the more ignorant sort I have aimed at, to make
the whole doctrine of fasting easy and plain, that they might with facility
understand what god requires of them in the day of fast, and how they ought to
behave them selves therein: And to that end I have set down every thing
orderly, and at large, and therefore the more clearly: and not scholastically
and shortly (as some have done) and by that means the more obscurely,
especially unto the vulgar sort: and I have showed the practice of every
particular, out of the Scripture, setting down at large the words of every
text for the capacity of the simplest, and oftentimes for the more easines and
plainnes, having recourse of purpose to the self same texts, rather then
making choice of new, which vainly might happily have bread some obscurity
Which kind of writing if it may seem to bring tediousnes unto the learned
ears, they must consider, that first I preached these sermons to the meaner
sort, men not brought up in learning and so did apply my self in handling of
this doctrine unto their capacity, leading them on in it according to their
own pace (which is rightly to divide the word of God: and in his house (as a
wise steward) to give unto every one of them their own food in due season) and
since, even as they were then preached, I have published them for their sakes
especially, and so have delivered them as milk, for all those that are but
babes and children in Christ. And therefore if any of these shall receive any
benefit by them, I have attained unto the end of my labors, though the other
sort be not helped by them one whit. For which I will pray unto God, even as I
desire all you, to whom these presents shall come, to pray for me: and the
Lord hear us all for our selves, and one of us for an other: and his well
beloved son Jesus Christ our only mediator for us all: that we may live and
dye in his faith and in his fear: that so the same Christ may be unto us life,
and in death advantage. Norton, in Suffolk.

Your loving brother in the Lord Nicolas Bownd.

THE GENERAL Contents of the whole book, which may serve for an alphabeticall
table, to find out every thing handled in the same.
Page, 1. The 1. Homily Shows, that the exercise of fasting is not an humane
constitution, but an ordinance of God, approved in the old and new Testament,
and so how God requires it of us at this present, and for what causes. Page
26. The 2. Homily Shows, what are the parts whereof this fasting consists,
and first, which be outward belonging to the body, and to what end they
serve, as to abstain wholly for a time from all kind of meat and drink, and
sleep, and costly apparel, and such like comforts of the body: and yet what
liberty we have then in all these in times of necessity. Page. 58. The 3.
Homily Entreats of the inward virtues of the mind to be attained unto, and
professed in fasting; without the which the outward abstinence is nothing
worth: namely of true humility and casting down of our selves before God, and
wherein that consists, and how necessary it is, and by what means we may
attain unto it. Page. 94. The 4. Homily Continues to entreat of the inward
virtues of the mind; and namely of the hope that we s^oul^ have of the pardon
of our sins, upon our true repentance: and that God will give us the things
that we seek to him for: which hope must stir us up to fervent and long
prayer, and how by importunity we shall prevail with God; and what things else
may quicken us unto fervent prayer. Page, 133. The 5. Homily Does further
entreat of feruency of prayer requisite in fasting: and to the end we may
consider, what great things God has promised to fasting and prayer; and how he
has performed the same, not only to the godly, but even to the wicked, who
have thereby obtained great deliverances: yea how men by humble supplication
have prevailed with men, even with their enemies. Page, 168. The 6 Homily
Shows what is the proper time for fasting, namely, the time of affliction and
sorrow: and then how God requires it, and his servants have practiced it; and
so how the Lord requires it of us in this time of our sorrow, and how long the
time of a fast should continue: and how the same time should be spent. Page,
208. The 7. Homily Entreats of the several kinds or sorts of fasts,
whereof the one is private, and the other public: and first of private
fastings, and how to behave our selves in them: and how they ought to be
entertained into men's houses: and for what causes; and what great good may come
thereby: and what liberty the Governors have in appointing of them above all
the rest of the family. Page, 253. The 8. Homily Entreats of the second
kind of fasts, which are public: and why so called: and how all sorts ought to
come to them: and what a great fault it is for any to be absent: And then of
the cause of them, which is the wrath of God against his Church: either
present, as it is now upon us: or likely to come: which the godly have
considered in the course of Gods providence, and so have sought by fasting and
prayer to prevent it, and not always tarried till it came upon them. Page. 200.
The 9. Homily. Continues to show the causes of public fastes, namely when
the wrath of God to come has been justly feared, in respect of the great
sins, that have abounded and of the judgment of God, denounced against the
same openly by the ministers of God. And when Gods wrath has not only been
upon themselves, but upon others of their brethren, the children of God. Page
353. A direction for Prayer: Fit and convenient for all those, that being
ignorant or unacquainted with private prayer, are desirous to pray by
themselves.
The holy exercise of Fasting described out of the word of God.
HOMIL. I.
The first Homily shows, that the exercise of fasting is not an humane
constitution, but an ordinance of God, approved in the old and new Testament,
and so how God requires it of us at this present, and for what causes.

RIght wel-beloued in the Lord, whereas we have been of late commanded by the
Kings most excellent Majesty, and that not without just cause, to meet once a
week upon the Wednesday, The occasion of this Treatise.
to be occupied in fasting and prayer: because that the thing it self has
been so long out of use, that a great number have little or not at all
practiced it, yea they have not so much as been acquainted with the doctrine
of it, and so do almost not know, what it means: I thought it my bound duty
first of all to God, and then to you (committed to my charge) in one part of
the day at the least (during this time of fasting) to entreat of the thing it
self, that so you might know how to behave your selves in it, and the longer
that we shall continue it, (as having more knowledge of it) to be the better
prepared for it.

Here then first of all that we might do this that we do, not only in
obedience to our Lord and King, but especially and most of all in faith, unto
God, without which nothing (yea though it be good) can please him, as the
apostle says, ^eb. 11.6. ^sting is ^t devised (...) man, but mmanded (...) God.
we must be persuaded, that this order of fasting is not a thing devised by
man: but appointed of God, and commanded in his holy word: and therefore that
which he does necessarily require at the hands not only of others, but even of
our selves. And this we had need to be persuaded of the rather, because that
some never think themselves bound unto it, and so make no difference of times
either for fasting or for feasting, but (if they have wherewithal) all times
are alike unto them for eating, or not eating. But Solomon the wise shows,
Eccl. 3.1.
that to all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose
under the heaven, and so there is a time, wherein we are as well commanded to
fast, as we have liberty to feast: and therefore as Esra and the Levites would
not have the people to fast and weep then, Nehem. 8.10.11.
but rather to eat and rejoice when it was a time of joy: So the Prophet Esaias
finds fault with some of his time, Esaias 22.12.13.
who when the Lord called them by his word and punishments unto fasting, they
fell to feasting, and so there was (as he said) killing of sheep, and oxen,
eating and drinking. And so neither of them knew what was fit for their
several times: we must therefore be persuaded, that as there are times, in
which God of his great mercy gives us liberty to feast, and to use his
creatures, not only for necessity sparingly, but for delight abundantly, as
at marriages and other times of reioicing: so there is a time also, when he
would have us not only eat temperately, (which we must do always, even at
feasts, that we fall not to surfiting and drunkenness, but even to abstain
wholly from meat and drink, and all other comforts of this life, to those
blessed ends, for which he has ordained it.

^he Jews ^d a stan^ng fast ^erely. ^eu. 16.29.
To this end we may remember, what is written concerning fasting in the book
of Leuiticus, and namely how there it is said, that the Lord commanded the
Jews once a year, that every soul should humble it self with fasting before
the Lord in one of the great assemblies: where Moses shows or rather the
Lord by him, that this fast should be kept perpetually once a year, and in
what month, and what day of the month, and to what end, namely to humble
themselves for their sins, and therefore what must then be done, viz. that
they must abstain from all work and worldly business, and be occupied in all
exercise of Gods worship, as upon the Sabbath day, and that the Priest should
make atonement by prayer to obtain remission of their sins. And the same
commandment is set down again in as many words in the 23. Leu. 23.2
chapter of the same book, where he shows that all were bound to it, and
that they should then lay aside all their wordly business, and have an holy
convocation and therein have sacrifices and prayer, that it might be a Sabbath
unto them, as all fastes are of the nature of the Sabbathes, saving that in
them they abstain from meat, and then all things are done to an other end,
even that there might be great humiliation in them for their sins, (which two
are not so proper unto the Sabbath) and so upon their repentance God might be
reconciled unto them, and spare them; which are most excellent ends of fasting,
and a great fruit of that work, which might provoke all unto it, and none
might repent them of their labor.

And in these places though there be no mention of absteining from meat and
drink, and so they may seem not to appertain to this argument of fasting,
yet besides that all learned men do thus take them, that this was a day of
yearly fasting, even the very circumstance also of the text does necessarily
lead us unto this interpretation; for when he not only makes it a day of
abstaining from al work, and spending it wholly in Gods service publicly, but
also that the end of it should be, that they might be humbled for their sins,
and so reconciled unto God, and this humbling of their souls is principally
urged: and we know that the humbling of the body is a means to humble the
soul, and the body is specially humbled and brought down by abstaining from
meat and drink and other comforts of it: and besides we find by practice in
the Scripture, that in other times of great humiliation, the servants of God
have abstained from these things; therefore we may be assured that this is
meant in these places, and that this was their practice, that upon this day they
abstaining from meat and drink, did thus also cease from work, and were
occupied in Gods worship to this end, even to the humbling of themselves before
the Lord: and so this was the thing that was commanded them yearly to do,
even to keep a day of fast.

And there was great reason of it, There was great reas^ of it.
for in the year many great sins might be committed of al sorts, which might
justly provoke Gods wrath against them, and so they had great cause to be
humbled for them: and once in the year God might show some tokens of his
displeasure, in some of his punishments, as by raising up some enemies against
them, by sending sickness, scarcity, unseasonable weather and such like;
therefore they might think that once in the year at the least, there was
cause for them thus to humble themselves, especially when God had commanded
them so to do. For though they should thus humble themselves continually for
their sins, as they sell out, yet to help their i^fi^mitie ^hey had a set
time appointed for it, (...) do it more thoroughly. For as the^ (...) Sabbath
given them, that (...) a week they might wholly (...) ^om their labors, and
attend upon the worship of God for their good; t^ough they should every day
redee^e the time, and as they had their daily sacrifices morning and evening,
and so times for prayer. So here though all should continually be humbled for
their sins private, and mourn for them that were public, when they saw any
tokens of Gods displeasure; yet to help their infirmity herein, they had a
solemn day appointed for this purpose, that the time it self might not only
put them in mind of that, which otherwise would have been forgotten of the
most, or not so seriously thought upon: but also further them therein. And as
we find by experience how needful it is to have a Sabbath to put us in mind
of, and to further us in Gods service: (for how few do it at all, or as they
should upon the week days; and then what would they do, if there were no
Sabbath at all.) So the godly no doubt in those days did find by their own
experience, that though they had oftentimes cause in respect of their sins,
and the punishment of them to fast publicly and privately, yet if they had had
no set time appointed for it, they should very often have failed in so
necessary a duty: even as we see among our selves, that because we have no
such times appointed for us, that very few though they have great cause, do
practice it at any time. Therefore this was Gods goodness to that people, to
give them such a commandment.

How far he equity f that law ^indeth us.
Now though the ceremony of the yearly day be taken away, as many other solemn
days of theirs are yet the thing it self, that is Fasting, is not taken away:
for though we be not tied to that yearly day, yet we are bound at sometimes to
fast, and that by virtue of that commandment given to them, as well as they
were. For if we consider the end, and see the equity and reason of it, we
shall find that it binds us as much as them; and so we having the same cause
among us, which moved the Lord to inioine them this practice, must think,
that we have the same commandment also of fasting: though not at that time, and
yearly, yet at some time in a year, at the least in many years. For it being
ordained to this end, that they being humbled for their sins private and
public, and there testifying their humiliation, the wrath of God against them
either threatened justly in the law, or upon them already, or appearing and
imminent, might be turned away, and so they reconciled unto God, and spared: we
have the same cause to be humbled many ways, especially at this present, and
so now God commands us to use it: And first of all in respect of our great
unworthiness of Gods manifold benefits: for look to rhem that be public,
past and present, as the long, and happy, and peaceable reign of our late
sovereign Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, To be humbled both i^ respect of
the death of ou^ late Queen Elizabeth.
with the Gospel, and freedom from our enemies, and other plagues: and then
consider, on the other side the little fruit of them, the great unthankfulness
for them, nay abuse for them, and of Gods patience in them, and we shall see
great cause of humility, and of earnest seeking to God for the continuance of
them by fasting and prayer: especially if we well way the late great loss of
ours in the death of her Majesty.

For if David bad the people of his time mourn for the death of Saul their
King, because they enjoyed many great benefits under his government, saying,
^. Sam. 1.4.
Ye daughters of Israel weep for Saul, which clothed you in scarlet and with
pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel: then we much more
have cause to lament for her death, by whose life we enjoyed and that so long
so many inestimable benefits both for soul and body, for profit and for
pleasure: and truly it is to be feared, that her death is too lightly passed
away of the most. The Lord indeed in much mercy has most happily supplied it
beyond all our expectation, but yet that must not be forgotten; and the more
graciously and speedily he has supplied it, and yet we unworthy of the
former, the more cause have we to be humbled. For when many great benefits
come heaped up one after another, and no measure of true thankfulness and
obedience answerable unto it, there must needs come some great punishment
afterward, if it be not prevented. And so the sight and consideration of these
great benefits thus continued, with the little or no fruit at all of them,
should humble us, and so drive us to show it in fasting and prayer, that God
might forgive us, and so still continue his benefts.

Besides this, if they upon this day had cause to be humbled for their sins,
And in respect of our sins.
and for the punishment of them either present or imminent; then if our sins
be as great, and many, or more than theirs, because we have more and greater
benefits (for his Word in the ministry of the Gospel is more clearly come to
us, and this time has many things which the time of the Law had not) then
seeing to whom much is given, ^uke 12.48.
of them much is required: we having received so much in comparison of them,
and done so little for it, have more cause to be humbled than they, and so are
bound by virtue of this law to hold some days of humiliation as well as they,
though not that yearly day; especially if we consider the punishment not only
to be feared, but already upon us. For though God has given us a most
gracious and worthy Prince, yet see how there has been fear of losing him by
the desperate attempts of his traitorous enemies: whom though in their plot it
has pleased God to disapoint, and we hope, and pray that he always so will,
yet he has suffered them somewhat to break out, that all might take knowledge
of them, to be humbled for their sins, the cause of them. For he is not King
for himself, but for us; in his preservation consists all our good; in his
death the loss of us all: especially when they seek also to put out his whole
race, and to bring in some Popish, Spanish pretended heir: then consider the
loss of Religion, and the more than hazard, yea utter overthrow of our peace,
and all that we have, we should come under the popish and Spanish yoke, either
of which were intolerable, as our forefathers have learned by too lamentable
experience: therefore in respect of this also we have cause to be humbled, and
so to fast, both to bring us to it, and outwardly to declare it.

Moreover if we consider the great sickness and mortality, that reigns, and
has done a long time in most of the chief places in the land, And this
present pestilence that is in many parts of this land.
as in London where have died 2000. this last week and more; and truly this is
much, considering, how many have removed out of this city, and how many have
died before: so that it is reported, that there are certain hundred houses
standing empty: besides in most of the villages about London, and in other
cities and great towns, as in Norwich, and in many coast towns, and other in
Norfolk and Suffolk, as Yarmouth, Laystaffe, Ipswich, etc. that I speak not
of those which are in other shires, as Colchester, Cambridge, Newmarket, and
many more, that we know not. If there were nothing but this, there were great
cause to be humbled, for so manifest a token of Gods wrath, so apparently, and
so universally, and so long showed. And this moved the Kings Majesty, of his
Princely care, that he has of all his subjects, to set down this godly order
of weekly fasting. For concerning our selves, though by the free mercy of God
it be not upon us yet, ^om. 12.5.16.
yet these are our brethren, and therefore as the Apostle says) we should be
of like affection one toward another, Luke 13
and so ready to weep with them that weep. Besides, as our Savior Christ
says of them, upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them: that they
were not the greatest sinners, above all that dwelt in Jerusalem, so must we
say of these men and women, that have died of the plague, and of those places
where it has been, and is so heavy; but except we amend, we shall all
likewise perish: therefore we in them, as in a glass, are to see, what we
have deserved, and so for our own selves to be humbled also: considering that
this punishment of God upon them for their sins, (deserved also by us) is
contagious, and so may easily spread even unto us quickly, by them that come
from the places infected, as thus it has come to many places a far off
already. Therefore in respect of all these we are bound by Gods law to give
our selves to fasting and prayer: as well as the Jews were, though we be not
tied to that month and to that day.

^ugh the ^moniall (...) of the ^es fast ^broga^, yet fa^g remai^ still.
For even as, though the Jewish Sabbath be taken away, which was upon the
Satterday, yet whether we consider the end of fasting, or of sanctifying a day
of rest, we are still bound to keep one in seven, and this one that we do, and
we have as much need of it, as the Jews had: so we may say of the day of
fasting, though that prescript day be taken away, yet if we consider the ends
and causes of it, namely to humble us for our sins, we are bound to it still
upon some days, and have as much need of it as ever they had: Therefore we
must be persuaded, that now God does require it of us, and not only the king,
and so let us do it in obedience unto him principally, and conscience of our
duty.

Thus we see also, what we ought to have done, and what God required of us
often heretofore, though we have neglected it; when we have seen sin abound,
threatening Gods judgment, yea when we have seen and felt his punishment upon
us, in unseasonable weather, in scarcity and dear years, in the time of
common sickness, in the fear of our enemies, in traitors at home, and such
like: which if we had used more, as we had occasion, and the time called us
unto it, we might have looked for greater blessings, and many punishments had
not lien so long upon the people. But that that we have failed in before, let
us now make a supply of: and to that end let us farther consider, what proof
we have more, that God requires it of us.

If this yearly day upon these grounds, that we have heard, be not sufficient
to bind us, then let us remember, that besides it, they had other mooueable and
uncertain fastes, The Jews had other mooueable fasts upon sundry occasions.
which were holden at diverse times upon sundry occasions: that we seeing how
we have the like occasions among us, might know, that we have the like
commandment from God to do, as they did, and so should fall into the like
practice, and not to think it to be a thing commanded only by man, and so
indifferent, and therefore that a man may choose, whether he will use it, or
leave it. To this end consider, what is written by the Prophet Joel, cap. 2.
^el. 2.12.
Therefore now the Lord says, turn you unto me with all your heart, a^^ with
fasting, and with weeping, ^^d with mourning: where he tells them plainly,
that at that very time God commanded them to fast: in the former part of that
Chapter he had put them in mind of a great punishment of God, that was upon
the fruits of the earth by caterpillars and such like vermin, and then shows
them, what God required of them in such a case, as the only remedy, even to
humble themselves for their sins the cause of it, and to seek to him with
fasting and prayer, ^^mmanded y the Lord.
and therefore says, that God commanded them so to do: If then this was done
by the commandment of God upon such an occasion, then may we be assured also,
that other public fasts, that we read of in the Scriptures upon the like
occasions, had the like commandment from God, though it be not in express
words so set down: For if when the fruits of the earth were destroyed, he
commands them in the name of God to fast, as the only remedy to be helped:
then may we be assured, that we are commanded not only by the king, which is
sufficient to bind all men, but by God himself to do as we do, when not the
fruits of the earth so much, as men for whom they were made, By the sa^ reason
G^ comman^ us to fas^ this prese^ 2 Samuel 1.
by this pestilence and hand of God are destroyed in great number.

Thus David by the wisdom of gods spirit according to the equity of his law,
did see, that he had great cause to fast, when he heard of the overthrow that
the Israelites had by the Philistims, and so himself and his company did fast
for that great loss: accounting as it is written: They mourned, and wept, and
fasted until even for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of
the Lord, and for the house of Israel, because they were slain with the sword:
if he saw that God required it of him, when the people were slain by men, then
ought we to believe that he requires it of us also, when so many are slain
by his own hand, and he has not yet ceased, but his arm is stretched out
still, as the Prophet says. In like manner Iehosaphat the king of Judah,
9.12.21.
when the Ammonites and the Moabites, and they of mount Seir came against him,
and his people, he being but in fear of some destruction, proclaimed a
general fast, and by prayer sought unto the Lord, and thought it his bound
duty to do so, as it is said. ^hr. 20.3
He feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast
throughout all Judah: then we much more have good cause to do, as we do, and
this fast, that is now every where observed by public authority, is done
upon good ground, even by the commandment of almighty God. When besides the
just cause to fear for the time to come, we hear of so great destruction in
many places already. The like may be said of all other fastes observed in Gods
word, namely, that they have been taken up, not as a voluntary or
will worship, that it should be said of them, Isa. 1.12.
who has required these things at your hands? but as a necessary obedience
unto the commandment of God, though not given unto them in express words, yet
necessarily gathered from the equity of his law. Hest. 4.1^
As also in the days of Hester, when Haman the Jews adversary sought their
ruin and overthrow, they to prevent it, sought to humble themselves before God
for their sins, and therefore gave themselves to fasting; (as God requires
in such cases, both that thereby we might be humbled, and also that it might
appear, that we were so indeed:) and this they did, because the case was very
extraordinary, when the destruction of the whole church of God was sought at
once: So we may think that in so great calamity as this, not in one, but in
many places, and so not in one but in many parts of the Church of God, God
requires of us, that we should humble our selves in fasting, some one day, or
other.

Last of all, that we might be persuaded that God requires fasting of us as
well as of our forefathers, ^ing is ^anded ell in ^ime of Gospel (...) the
(...).
of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews, under the Gospel as well as in the
time of the Law: we shall see that it has warrant in such cases as these, as
well from the New Testament as from the Old. As when Christ was challenged for
this, ^5.33.
That his Disciples did not fast, though John and his Disciples did often: he
does so defend them, that he does not wholly put it away from them, as though
they were not bound to it in the time of the Gospel; but shows, that as yet
they were dispensed with, because Christ Jesus the bridegroom was with them,
and so it was a time of joy; but the time should come, when he should be taken
from them, and great affliction should befall them, then he requires fasting
of them, saying, The days will come, Luke 5.35
when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they fast in those
days: commanding them and all other, even under the Gospel in the time of
great affliction to fast. This time of the Pestilence is a time of great
sorrow, and of great affliction, therefore now by the Old and New Testament
we are bound to it. And so this may be sufficient to certify the consciences
of all (that are not evil disposed) That to serve God in fasting and prayer is
a thing that he requires of us: and so if there were no commandment from men
to inioyne us, yet the authority of his Word in the Old and New Testament,
and the practices of his servants upon the same ground should compel us unto
it.

HOMIL. II.
The second Homily shows what are the parts whereof this fasting consists,
and first, which be outward belonging to the body, and to what end they serve,
as to abstain wholly for a time from all kind of meat and drink, and sleep,
and costly apparel, and such like comfortes of the body: and yet what
liberty we have then in all these in times of necessity.

BEing thus persuaded of the necessity of this holy exercise of fasting, by
good and sound reasons from the Old and New Testament, and that it is our
duty to observe it, and that the Lord requires it at our hands; it
remains, that I should further declare, wherein this blessed ordinance of
fasting consists, and what are the parts and nature of it: that we being
willing to obey God in this duty, might not err of ignorance, 1. Cor. ^ 30
and so not only obtain nothing at his hand thereby, but pull his heavy
judgment upon us for abusing it. For as the Apostle says of the abuse of the
Sacrament of the Lords supper among the Corinthians, For this cause many are
weak and sick among you, and many sleep; and so that which in it self
rightly used was a means of health for soul and body, was by their ignorance
and abuse the cause of many grievous diseases and mortality among them, so it
might come to pass, that whereas by this means we seek to pacify the wrath
of God already broken out against us (which also we shall do in time, if it be
rightly used) for the neglect or abuse of it, or both, the Plague should not
only not stay, but we should further provoke the Lord to strike us.

^sting con^teth of two ^rts.
This exercise therefore of fasting consists of two parts; the one is outward,
Timothy, Tim. 4.8.
saying, Exercise thy self unto godliness, for bodily exercise profits
little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of
the life present, and of that that is to come. Where he says, that godliness,
and the pure worship of God, consisting in the inward graces of the mind: as
in humility, faith, repentance, etc. is profitable in it own nature: but
fasting and all such exercises of the body, and austeritie of life is so far
forth profitable, as they farther us in these. Therefore as the whole man
consists of soul and body, but the soul is most principal, so does this
exercise of fasting consist of these two parts, whereof this later appertaining
to the soul, is the chief. And as in the sanctification of the Sabbath there
are two things, the one to rest from all bodily labor, (appertaining to the
body) the other to sanctify that time of rest (belonging chiefly to the
soul) which is the principal end of the other: So in fasting there are these
two things to be considered, the one to abstain from all food, (which directly
concerns the body) the other is the end, why we use that abstinence, which is
to further our souls in godliness, which is the chiefest of all, and gives
life to the other, even as the soul does to the body. Therefore though
abstinence be necessarily required, yet that is not all, nay it is the least
part of this holy exercise, though the whole action have the name of that, as
being most subject to the outward sense (and so best known) for it is called
fasting: as in keeping holy the Sabbath day, to rest is the least part of our
duty therein, yet the whole day has the name of that, for it is called the
Sabbath, this is the day of rest.

The first ^art belon^eth to the ^ody, and ^onsisteth in ^he absti^ence from
^ll comfort ^f the same.
First then we are to consider what is the outward ceremony in fasting, and the
bodily exercise: and then what be the inward virtues to be adioined unto it,
and to which end the other is undertaken. The former is an abstinence for a
time wholly from all the commodities and pleasures of this life, thereby to
make us fitter for the inward graces of the mind: as to abstain from meat,
and drink, and sleep, and such like, that the body being thereby humbled and
pulled down, the mind thereby might be humbled and cast down also in it self
before God. So that this outward abstinence is therefore commanded, that we
might feel in our souls, and in feeling outwardly might profess, that we are
unworthy for our sins either of life, or of any thing that belongs to the
upholding of it, and therefore we do willingly for a time bereave our selves
of the use of them. So that upon this, and such like days, we ought to
abstain from al comforts of the body to these ends, both that we might thereby
the better feel the deserved misery of our sins, even that we are worthy of
death, and also that we might outwardly declare, and by this practice profess
the same.

Now whereas it may seem unto carnal men, Ob. God being a spirit regards
not these outward thing.
and such as measure things only by reason, that this outward abstinence is a
thing of no value, and such as God regards not, neither are we to ascribe
any virtue to that at all, seeing the Lord is a spirit, and will be worshipped
in spirit, and in truth; and again, forasmuch as in themselves meat and drink
are indifferent things, by using or leaving them they cannot make us better or
worse: Romans 14.17
for the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, but in
righteousness, peace, and joy of the holy Ghost, and therefore he that eats
or eats not, ^. Cor. 8.8.
has neither more or less, and, and so is neither nearer the kingdom of God,
nor further of from it by either of them. Matt. 15.11.
And if Christ said, that that goes into a man defiles not the man, then to
abstain, that cannot sanctify a man, and so if a man fast, he is never a whit
the holier, and if he fast not, he is never a whit the worse: and thus upon
such foolish conceits men should make light account of this holy ordinance of
God, and wholly neglect it, as too many do.

For answer unto all these, Answer.
and such like, we must remember that fasting is the Lords ordinance, and that
he does command, that we should thus abstain, as has been proved in the
former Homily out of the old and new Testament, therefore we must not leave
it undone, but think our selves bound unto it: Secondarily God that

Furthermore, seeing this outward to further us in true humility and
affliction of our souls, and has ^mmanded for the ^mbling (...) our so^les.
^eu. 16.29.
as has been showed out of Leuit. 16. where it is precisely and in express
words required, that every one should humble his soul upon that day: and so
appointed to this end, that otherwise we cannot attain unto it in that measure
that we should (for then had God appointed it in vain, which once to imagine
were most horrible blasphemy) in respect of this, God does require it, and we
cannot without neglecting of the inward virtue refuse the outward exercise. For
as the Sacrament is appointed to that end, that thereby we might effectually
remember Christ's death, according as it is written, ^ Cor. 11.16.
Do this in remembrance of me, and so we are bound to use it continually unto
his coming again, and by s^^ing (...) ar^ ^reat (...) sur^er^^ in (...)
humitie.
and use it to that end, that thereby as by an outward sign we might remember
him, and without this we cannot remember him as often, and as we should: So
the very abstinence from meat and drink being appointed of God to further us
in some inward virtues, which otherwise we cannot attain unto, or not in that
measure, though it be an outward bodily thing, yet commanded of God, and
commanded to these ends, we are not only bound unto it, but we must believe,
that it is acceptable unto God, and will greatly further us. 1. Cor. 9.25
For (as the Apostle writes to the Corinthians) Every man that proves
masteries, abstaineth from al things: that is, those, which rather run in a
race, or wrestle for the best game, were wont to abstain from all such
things, as might either hinder their exercises, or make them less able to
perform them with praise, and whatsoever strength or agilitie they had for
this purpose in their arms or legs, or any part of their body, yet they
neglected not this abstinence, and found by experience, that it did greatly
profit them, for the better brething, and othewise inabling of them to the
performing of those exercises with the best commendations: And may not we then
be assured much more, that that abstinence, which the Lord has appointed, for
the better fitting of us to the spiritual wrestling with the sinful lusts of
our fleshly minds, as unbelief, deadness, and dullness, hardness of heart,
want of feeling of our sins and the deserved punishments of them, privy
pride, want of feruencie in prayer, and such like, shall greatly further us to
these ends, even to prevail against them? and though we had greater strength
of the spirit, then we have, yet by this abstinence we shall find all things
in us greatly furthered for this spiritual warfare.

By fasting we shall s^^p the ^outhes of the papists, who ch^l^nge us for the
neglect of it.
And besides this there is another fruit of our abstinence, which is none of the
least, even that by thus using of it, we shall stop the mouths of our
adversaries the papists; who falsely boast that all fasting was in their
religion, and since the preaching of the Gospel came up, men have given it
over, as though they did open a window to all licentiousness of eating and
drinking. Wherein, though themselves were altogether void of the right manner of
fasting prescribed in Gods word, (as shall appear more fully hereafter) and
so should have pulled out the great beam first that was in their own eye,
before they meddled with the mote, that was in ours, according to the counsel
of our Savior Christ: yet we cannot deny, Matthew. 7.
that we have given them too just occasion of their slander, because we have
not used it publicly and privately as often, as we should. But again for our
defense we must remember what Christ said in the defense of his Disciples: Luke
5.34.
Can ye make the children of the wedding chamber fast as long as the
Bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, even when the Bridegroom
shall be taken from them, then shall they fast in those days. Besides, no man
puts a piece of a new cloth into an old vesture, for then the new renteth
it, and the piece taken out of the new agrees not with the old. God blessing
this time of the Gospel with sundry great benefits did many times dispense
with us, as being a time of joy and of the Bridegroomes presence: and a great
many for their ignorance were altogether unfit for it, and so in that respect
were priuileged from it for a time. But now seeing the Lord requires it of us,
more then ever he did in our time (for we have not known so great a plague)
why should we not now by the practice of fasting, both for our own good, and
to stop the mouths of our enemies, and that the Gospel might be well spoken
of, take away such occasions? Thus though fasting be but an outward bodily
exercise, yet being commanded of God, he does and will accept of it; and
tending to the humbling of us it shall be profitable to that end: and we ought
to use it also, that we might deliver the Gospel from that slander, which by
the too great abuse of their liberty in eating and drinking carnal men have
brought upon it, as that it should be a doctrine of licentiousness, and of
pampering the flesh.

Now let us consider wherein this abstinence does consist; Fasting consists
in a^staining from all meat a^ drink for a time.
and that may partly be understood by that that has been said of it already.
Here then first of all comes to be considered the abstinence from meat and
drink, which because it is one of the principal outward observations, the
whole exercise took the name of that; for it for a time from all kinds of
meats and drinks whatsoever. For so is it said of that fast which the King of
Nineue caused to be proclaimed thorowout all that city, Let neither man, nor
beast, bullock nor sheep taste any thing, ^a. 3.7.
neither feed nor drink water: where man and beast, upon both which this fast
was imposed, are forbidden all food and water, and not so much as to taste of
them. So is it said of David, when he fasted and prayed for the life of his
child begotten in adultery, That he would not eat any thing during that time,
though the Elders and chief men of his house did persuade him thereunto: for
these are the words of the text, Sam. 12.^.17.
That David besought God for the child, and fasted: then the Elders of his
house arose to come unto him, and to cause him to rise from the ground; but he
would not, neither did he eat meat with them. And so it is said of Ezra the
Scribe, zra. 10.6.
when he fasted and prayed, and mourned for the sins of them that had returned
from the captivity, even for the strange wives that were among them, he did
neither eat bread, nor drink water: so he did wholly abstain from all food,
even from that that was common, as bread and water. And to conclude, this is
that which Queen Hester Hest. 4.16.
willed Mordecay to command the Jews, when they should fast and pray for her,
that she might find favor with the King in that suit which she should make
for them: Fast ye for me, and eat not, nor drink. So the right fasting
prescribed in the Word, And is not a sober or spare kind of diet.
is not a sober use of meats, which must be always, nor yet a more sparing
diet than at other ordin^rie times, and so to eat but a little, but an utter
abstaining from evening to evening from all meat and drink whatsoever:
therefore when we profess to keep a fast, thus must we do.

Whereby it appears, that the Popish fasts, which they so greatly boasted of,
were nothing less than that true fast, which the Scripture teaches, and which
we must practice: for they brake it diverse ways, both in fullness, and also in
all delicacie of meats, which they permit unto themselves in great measure,
even upon their fasting days: and first of all they offended in superfluity
and fullness, The abuse of Popish fastes in permitting fullness of meat upon
their fasting days.
for that it was lawful upon their fasting days, as well as upon any other
day to fill themselves at dinner with all kinds of meats (flesh only
excepted) and also at breakefast and supper to fill themselves with bread and
drink as much as they would: but the word of God teaches us (and this has
been the practice of all the godly) that we abstain breakfast and dinner,
that we might fast from evening to evening. And besides this general liberty
or licentiousness rather, which they gave unto all, some of the poorer sort,
and servants, and others also would fill their bellies of purpose on Thursday
at night, and on Friday at dinner, that with less feeling to themselves they
might pass away their fast: whereas it is requisite in fasting, that we should
feel the want in our body, that by it we might be brought to feel the
wants of our souls. What an abuse was this, thus to pervert the right end of
Gods ordinance into that that was clean contrary unto it? which as we do
justly condemn in them, so we must take heed that we fall not into it our
selves; for then we should be inexcusable before God our selves, as the Apostle
says: Romans 2.1.
for in that that we condemn another, we condemn our own selves, because we
that condemn them, do the same things our selves.

Secondarily in their fasting days they did greatly offend in delicacy and
daintiness of meats and drinks: Another abuse in permitting all delicacie of
meats and drinks at the same time.
for whereas upon that day, when we do eat, we should content our selves
with ordinary and common meat, sufficient only to preserve health, because
fasting is to humble us: they did at dinner permit the use of all things saving
flesh, and so did give liberty for greater dainties, and greater stirrers up of
the sinful lusts of the flesh, then they did forbid and take away: and
besides these, which were too much, wine of all sorts was not only then
permitted, but in great plenty used: and at evening when they did especially
profess to fast, they had all dainties except flesh and fish, as spice-bread,
cakes, wafers, marmelade and sucket, with all kind of fruits, as apples,
pears, wardens, quinces and such like growing at home, and oringes, limons,
figs, and all kates else, that could be had from beyond the seas. Was not
this a plain mocking, and a ridiculous, yea more then apish imitation of their
fasting, that when they did most of all profess it for the humbling of their
bodies, and therefore did abridge themselves of many things, they did eat and
drink very plentifully of all those things, which did most of all pamper it,
and that without all scruple of conscience? So that with them it was a very
good fast kept, if at supper and dinner a man did eat no flesh, though he did
eat al other dainties besides in what kind soever: and with them it was a
great fault to eat but one bitte of flesh, even of cold meat, that was
remaining before, then to fill themselves with all dainties of meat and drink
in any other kind whatsoever: whereas we have seen, that both the nature of
the word Fasting, and also the practice of the best in holy Scripture does
require to eat nothing, but wholly to abstain.

Besides this abstinence from meat and drink, which is first and chief, In
the day of fast we ought to abridge our selves of some part of our sleep.
and from whence the whole action is denominated, there ought to be some
forbearing at that time of sleep also, for the said end, even for the humbling
of the body; that we wanting something of that also, there might not only be
a proportion and an agreement between meat and sleep, but the body this way
also might somewhat be cast down, for want of natural rest. So that though we
should never play the sluggards, and delight in sleeping, which Solomon greatly
condemns in many places of the Proverbs: Pro. 6.6. and 24.23.
but take our rest as well as our meat moderately and soberly, yet at that time
we should deny to our selves some part of our ordinary sleep, in the evening or
morning, or both, and also at noone: and now though this be a time of the
year, wherein men use to take there rest at noone, yet on the fasting day they
should abstain from it, both for the humbling of their bodies, and also that
they might redeem that time, bestowing it in some godly exercises. Thus the
prophet Joel biddes the Priests lie all night in sackcloth, Joel 1.13.
and so shows that they should continue their fast at least some part of the
night: even as it is said of David, 2. Sam. 12.16.
that when he fasted, he lay all night upon the earth: And also as Queen
Hester willed the Jews to fast for her three days and three nights: Hest.
4.16.
So that we may plainly see, that this exercise does not only take up the
day, that we might abstain from sleep then, but also some part of the night at
the least. And thus we begin over night to do some thing, as to think upon
Gods hand, and to pray, and so again betimes in the morning: and if we do
not, or cannot come to this perfection that other of Gods servants have come
unto, in their great humiliations; yet seeing they are written for our
instruction, let us come as near them as we can: and seeing men will break
their sleep early and late for the world, let them do it for the service of
God much more.

And the rather that we might be willing to abridge our selves not only of
sleep, but of meat, What liberty we have of meat and drink and sleep in
cases of necessity.
let us farther consider, that in this day of humiliation, wherein this
abstinence from these things is required; all men and women are not so
necessarily tied unto them, but that if there be any who by reason of any
defect, or infirmity of body, or age young or old, are not able to perform
it after this strict manner, that then even by the law of God they have
liberty to use so much in both these kinds, as may suffice for their health:
Math. 12.1.
For as Christ Jesus excuses his disciples in the case of necessity for
plucking the ears of corn and eating when they were hungry and faint, that
thereby they might be more fit to follow him, and attend upon his service:
verse. 5.
and as David also is there excused for eating the Shewbread, which by the
general rule was only for the Priests: So we though by the general law of
fasting, are forbidden at that time to abstain from all meat and drink, yet
in cases of necessity, when by reason of some thing in our bodies; so to do
would hinder us, and make us more unfit for the service of God, and to take a
little does further us, and make us more fit for it, if by eating or drinking
some thing we are so indeed, then in so doing have we not only not broken the
fast, but thereby attained unto the principal end of it. And again as rest upon
the Sabbath is necessarily required, yet in times of necessity labor is not
only permitted but also commanded, 1. King. 19.6.
and thus Helias fleeing 40. days together for the safeguard of his life from
the cruel persecution of Iesabell, his travel upon those Sabbaths was no
breach of the law: so is not eating a little of necessity any breach of
fasting, though it seem to be against the nature of it.

But herein we must take heed that we abuse not Gods liberality, We must
take heed that we abuse not this liberty.
and make it a cloak to our lusts, that under this color and pretense of our
infirmities, we eat and drink, and feed our selves, when there is no need.
For as it were a great fault to work or travel upon the Sabbath day, when no
necessity did compel us, because if there be need, God has not restrained
us; so in the day of fast to eat, when we have no need, because when there is,
God has given us liberty to do it. Seeing the Lord deals so mercifully
with us all, that even in the times, wherein he most restrains us, he gives
so great liberty to all that need, we must needs be so much the more
unthankful unto him for it, if we will not yield obedience to this ordinance
of his, that is, that all they which for their years, health, and strength are
able to abstain, should upon the fasting days refuse all kind of meat until
the evening, and abridge themselves also of some part of their sleep.

(...) fasting ^ur appa^ell must ^e answerale to that ction.
The third thing wherein this outward exercise does consist is, that we abridge
our selves also somewhat of our apparel: for in the using or refusing of that,
as well as of any of the former, the body may be and is easier humbled or puffed
up. The King of Nineue in that fast of his did not only command that man and
beast should put on sackcloth, Ion. 3.5.6.
but himself also arose from his throne and place of estate, and laid off his
robe and princely apparel from him, and covered himself with sackecloth, and
sat in ashes. And the prophet Joel willing the people of his time to fast and
pray, Joel. 1.13.
and showing them the right manner of it, bids them lie in sackcloth: and we
oftentimes read of sackcloth to have been used in the times of public and
private fasting: We then though we be not tied to this kind of weed, yet we
must observe the equity of it, which is to abstain from that costly apparel
and trimming up of our selves, which might puff up the body with pride, and
put on that rather, so far as it stands with decency and comeliness,
which might humble it: and so then to wear our woorst clothes, rather then our
best, or our second. For as it is said of the Israelites, when Moses brought
them that ill tidings from the Lord, ^od. 33 4.
after their idolatry with their golden calfe, that he would not go with
them, but send an angel before them. When the people heard this evil tidings,
they sorrowed, and no man put on his best raiment: it was a time of sorrow,
therefore they did not put on their best raiment: So all times of fasting being
times of sorrow, all men and women then should have off their best apparel,
and be dissolute rather then ordinarily careful in dressing of themselves: for
what curiosity can there be in putting on of a piece of sackecloth, which in
fasting was the common attire of them all?

^here ou^ht (...) a diffe^nce of our ^p^arell ac^^^din^ to (...) times.
And truly all experience both of holy Scripture and otherwise does
sufficiently show, that godly wise men and women have observed a difference
according to the time, as of other outward behavior and things, so of their
apparel: and thus as there has been a time of feasting, and a time of
fasting, so a time to come forth in their best and in their worst apparel.
For it is noted of Hester that virtuous and noble Queen, Hest. 5.1.
that at the end of the fast she put on her royal apparel, that is, such as
was meet for a Princes to be seen in, insinuating that during the time of the
fast she wore other apparel, or this change on the sudden should not have been
observed and declared. 2. Sam. 12.20.
And King David also, when the child was dead, and so no longer cause of
seeking to the Lord by fasting and prayer, for the life of it. He arose from
the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came
into the house of the Lord and worshipped; that is, he clothed himself like a
king, and did anoint and trim up himself to look cheerfully, to show that
whiles he fasted he was dissolute and careless of himself, and abstained from
all ornaments and delights. So Judith that virtuous woman, when she went to
Holophernes for the safegarde of her people, did put off her widows apparel,
that is, her mourning weed, which during the time of her widdowhood she had
worn before, which was a time of mourning, and then she did anoint herself,
and put on all manner of ornaments, which though she had, yet she did not use
them before; so she had for the several times of sorrow and joy, suitable kinds
of dressing, and did use them accordingly. Then in the day of fasting, wherein
greatest sorrow should be, and be openly professed, we should outwardly show
it in our apparel and dressing, as well as in other things; that both for
costlinesse and curiosity it should differ from other: which though they be
but outward things, yet seeing they are practiced of the godly, and tend to
this end, ^ost^inesse f apparel nd curiosity (...) dr^ssing a reat fault pon
the aie of fast.
we must follow their example. Therefore it were a great sin upon this day,
to set out our selves in pride, either of apparel, or jewels, or sweet odors
and perfumes, as flowers in our hands or bosoms, farther then necessity in
time of infection requires, or of starching, or curling and crisping of hair:
and so to come abroad to see and to be seen, and (in the days of greatest
humiliation, to lift up themselves highest, and to set out themselves as it
were to sale in all manner of bravery and delight: and then when they should
cast down themselves lowest with the Publicane to receive mercy, they should
set up the Peacocks feathers highest, as though they did not need it, or cared
not for it. And this is to be noted the rather, because that some, if they come
abroad and be seen, will not abate one hair of their pride, though they be
very sluts and slouins at home, if it offend not your ears so to call them.

And these are the outward exercises of the body, which are common to al those
that profess to keep this holy ordinance, as they should, of what degree or
calling soever they be: there is one more remaining, which is proper to all
that are married: who as they have one comfort and commodity in that estate,
even of their bodies, above others, so they are during the time of fast to
abstain from it: ^uring the me of fast ^e married ^rties are abstain ^om the
ariage bed.
for if we be debarred then of the use of those things that are absolutely
necessary for the preservation of our lives, then much more from those which
are not of that necessity, but rather for the comfort of our lives: and as all
other pleasures, delights, and recreations, which are at other times lawful,
are to be withdrawn from the body, so this also. Therefore then the married
parties with mutual consent are to abstain from the fellowship one of an
other, and from the marriage bed, as the Apostle speaks. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one an other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may
give your selves to fasting and prayer, and again come together, lest satan
tempt you for your incontinencie: whereas at other times he does wholly forbid
this abstinence, least satan should tempt them to sin by refusing the remedy
of it, so at this time he does require it to this end, that he names. And
this is so straightly required, that it is forbidden even to them that are but
newely married, as to the bridergroome and the bride, who in this have the
greatest liberty above all other: for the Prophet Joel calling all sorts of men
and women unto fasting, because the punishment then upon them was very great,
speaks even to both these by name, and not only wills them also to fast,
but to run out of their chamber, saying, Gather the people, Joel. 2.16.
sanctify the congregation, gather the Elders: assemble the children, and
those that suck the breasts, let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and
the Bride out of her Bride-chamber. And thus much of the several things, wherein
the outward abstinence consists, which is the first part of this holy
exercise, now it remains that I should entreat of the inward virtues of the
mind to be attained unto by these means which are those that follow.

HOMIL. III.
The third Homil^e entreats of the inward virtues of the mind to be attained
unto, and professed in fasting; without the which the outward abstinence is
nothing worth: namely of true humility and casting down of our selves before
God, and wherein that consists, and how necessary it is, and by what means
we may atttaine unto it.

The out^ard absti^ence is to ^urther us ^n the in^ard graces ^f the spirit.
IN the former Treatise we have showed, wherein the first part of fasting
consists: which though it be first in order, yet is last in account, and that
which in it self is referred to an other end, even to the true humbling of us
before God for our sins, which if we do not attain unto by these means, it is
not only not accepted, but further provoke the wrath of God. For God is a
spirit, and will be so worshipped, and though men judge of us after the outward
appearance, yet God looks to the heart: and when this outward abstinence has
been used without these inward graces of humility and such like, the Prophets
have justly found fault with them: and namely the Prophet Esaie. Esai. 58.3.
Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see it not? we have punished
our selves, and thou regardest it not: Behold in the day of your fast you will
seek your own will, and require all your debtes. Behold ye fast to strife
and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye shall not fast as ye
do to day; is it such a fast that I have chosen, Without the which it is
nothing worth.
that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head as a
bul-rush, and to lie down in sackcloth and ashes: will thou call this a
fasting, or acceptable day unto the Lord? and so forth, as it follows at
large in that place: Where the hypocrites complain that they had fasted, and
had that way punished their bodies greatly, and God regarded it not; but he
answers, that if they were never so weak with fasting, even like a bul-rush,
that can not hold up the head against the wind, yet because they were as
cruel and hard-hearted to their brethren, as full of contention as before, and
had not profited to the inward virtues of humility and contrition of heart,
which was the principal end of it, therefore he did not accept of it: And
indeed if we content our selves with this outward abstinence, the very brute
beasts and cattle, even the bullocks and sheep at Nineue did keep as good a
fast as we, ^ona. 3.7.
for they were covered with sackcloth, and did neither feed nor drink water.
Therefore we see what must make all our fasting acceptable unto God, even that
we be furthered by them in all such graces of his spirit in our souls and
consciences, as the Lord in such cases requires.

For as in the Sabbath bodily rest is first commanded, yet the sanctifying of
the day of rest in the holy worship of God is chief, As the rest of the
Sabbath is to be referred unto the sanctification of the day.
and that whereunto the other is referred, and without the which the other is
nothing worth; else they that sleep all day, or the cattle that are not
wrought, might keep as good a Sabbath as we. So in the day of fast, though
abstinence from meat be first required, yet in it self such bodily exercise
profits little, as the Apostle says, but is used to another end. Therefore as
if we will keep that fourth commandment, we must so rest, that having our
minds and bodies drawn from all worldly things, we might in both be wholly
occupied in gods service: so if we will celebrate a fast unto the Lord, we must
so use the outward ceremony, as thereby we might be furthered in the inward
virtues of the mind. We are then to consider what they be, for in them rests
the second part of fasting: The second part of fasting consists in the inward
grace of the m^nde.
for as it was said before, the whole action consists in two things, the one
outward concerning the body, whereof we have hitherto spoken; the other inward
apperteining to the soul, which now remains to be entreated of. And that is
all those inward virtues of the mind, and graces of the spirit, which this way
the Lord would have us furthered in: all which are so much the more excellent,
and therefore the more diligently to be labored after than the other, by how
much the soul is better than the body, and how much it is better to approve
our selves and our doings unto the Lord, as we shall do in the one, then unto
men, as we may do in the other.

These are of two sorts.
Here then we are to consider, what these inward virtues be, whereto by this
outward abstinence we should labor to be furthered: which though they be many,
yet for brevity and memories sake, we will principally consider of two. The
first is, the true humbling and casting down of ourselves before the high
Majesty of God with sorrow and grief of heart for all our sins in the
conscience and feeling of them, and of the misery due unto us for the same.
The second is the assurance and good hope that we should have, through the free
mercy of God in his gracious promises, of the pardon and forgiveness of every
one of them for Christ Jesus his sake upon our true repentance and unfeigned
turning from them: and so that we being thus reconciled unto God, shall obtain
the things that we stand in need of, and by earnest prayer (always joined unto
fasting) we make suit unto him for: whether it be the turning away or removing
from us some grievous judgment and punishment of his, or the bestowing or
continuing of some great blessing of his upon us, or upon others. And these
two, Esra 8.21.
as they be chief and principal, so they are both of them mentioned in that
fast that Ezra kept with the rest of his company. As appears in the fast of
Ezra and his company.
And there at the river by Athana I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble our
selves before our God, and seek of him a right way for us, and for our
children, and for all our substance: for I was ashamed to require of the king
an army and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way, because we
had spoken to the king saying, the hand of our God is upon al them that seek
him in goodness, but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake
him: So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was entreated of us.
Where we see how he in his return from Babylon to Jerusalem after the
captivity with many other, at such a place proclaimed a fast to these ends,
both that they might humble themselves before God for their sins, which were
the cause of their captivity, and might now hinder them from such blessings as
they stood in need of: and that they might by prayer seek earnestly unto God
with hope, that he would direct and bless them in the way, and defend them
from their enemies: So in their obedience they did aim at these two inward
virtues; first ^o be thoroughly humbled for their sins, and then by earnest
prayer to seek to God with hope, that he would give them the thing, that then
they stood in need of, even defense from their enemies in the way, and a
prosperous journey to Jerusalem. And so in this practice of theirs as in a
glass we most clearly see, whereunto this fast of ours must be referred, I
mean the outward abstinence, and what we must specially labor after in it,
namely that we may be humbled before God for all our sins, which have so
greatly provoked the wrath of God, that it may easily be seen of all; and that
we seek to him by fervent prayer for the turning away of his heavy hand that
has a long time been most grievously upon many parts of this land: if we
seek not after these and by this abstinence find our selves furthered in
them, our fasting is nothing worth, because we come not unto the chief part
of it, nor unto the marrow and substance of it, but content our selves with the
shell, and as it were the bare shadow fo it. For as it is said in the common
proverb, and as it is true in all other things, as good never a whit, as never
the better, so in this in like manner.

The first virtue is true humility, and what that is.
To speak therefore in order first of the humbling and casting down of our
selves: this humility of mind is a vile esteeming, and base iudgeing, or
thinking of our selves before God and men in respect of our innumerable great
sins, wherewith we have defiled our selves, and offended God, and provoked
his heavy wrath and displeasure against us: whereby it comes to pass, that
we are displeased with our selves, and offended and grieved at our selves, yea
are (as it were) at utter defiance with our selves, because of our sins, and
the curse of God, and all misery due to us for the same. And this humility is
contrary to that pride and hautinesse of mind, Contrary to pride.
which is in many, whereby they think too highly of themselves, and are puffed
up, and full of self love, iudgeing better of themselves then there is cause:
being also thereby ready to justify themselves before God, and men, like unto
that proud Pharisie, that Christ speaks of in the Gospel, who thus vaunteth
of himself before God through hypocrisy, and want of due examination of
himself, and also despised the Publicane who prayed by him: saying, I thank
thee O God, Luke 18.11.
that I am not as other men, extortioner, unjust, adulterer, or even as this
Publicane* whereas the other standing a far of, gives many tokens of their
humility, for he would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven; but smot his
breast, and said, O God be merciful to me a sinner. This humbling of our
souls is, and must be answerable to the afflicting of our bodies.
And this casting down of our selves in our own judgment, as it is required,
so it is very fit and answerable to the outward exercise of fasting: for
therefore do we abstain from the outward comfort and maintenance of this life
for a time, that we might have a quicker feeling of our unworthiness, namely
that for our sins we are unworthy of all of them, and of any comfort by them,
yea of life it self: and thus we bring down the body, that the mind might
be brought down, and we afflict the body, that the deserved death of soul
and body might be the better known and felt of us. We therefore abstain from
all pleasures and delights thereof lawful in themselves, that thorough
conscience of our sins, and the deserved wrath of God for them not only
present, but that that may come hereafter we might be drawn to a greater
sorrow: which inward affliction and grief of the soul if it be severed from
the other, it is as a dead carcass without a soul, yea a shadow without a
body, that is, it is nothing worth.

For this sorowing and mourning is so vnseparablie proper unto the time of
fasting, and so fitly answers to the outward ceremony of it, that the thing
it self is thus noted out by Christ himself. Math. 9.1^
Can the children of the marriage chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is
with them? Therefore unto fastin^ is always joined mourning.
but the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and
then shall they fast. Where Christ defending his disciples, that they did not
then fast, speaks of fasting as of a time of mourning: for in the one place
he says Fast, and in the other Mourn, Luke 5.34.35.
to show what we must come unto in the day of fast, even to mourn. And this
has also been the practice of the servants of God, that in the days of
fasting they have thus cast down themselves, and have not only inwardly
sorowed, but have outwardly testified the same by weeping, as indeed great
sorrow many times causes tears. For so is it said of David, when tidings was
brought him of the death of Saul, that he sorowed, and wept, and fasted* both
himself and his company. 1. Sam. 1.12
Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them, and likewise all the men
that were with him: and they mourned and wept, and fasted, until even for
Saul and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the
house of Israel, because they were slain with the sword. Here there fasting
was joined with mourning and weeping. So likewise did all the people of Israel,
when they were twice overthrown by the Beniamites, they sorowed and wept, and
fasted unto the evening; as it is said in ^^e book of the Judges. Then all the
children of Israel went up, Judge. 20.^
and all the people also came up unto the house of God, and wept, and sat
there before the Lord, and fasted that day unto the evening, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings before the Lord. And again in the days of
Samuel, when they were oppressed by the Philistims, he exhorts them to
confess their sins to God, and leave them, and seek unto God, that they
might find mercy with him; and they then fasted and prayed, and wept so
abundantly, that it is said, they drew out whole buckets of water out of
their eyes. For Samuel 1. Sam. 7
said, Gather all Israel together to Mizpah, and I will pray for you unto the
Lord: and they gathered together to Mizpah, and drew water and po^red it out
before the Lord, and fasted the same day, and said there, We have sinned
against the Lord. Thus in this fast of theirs also they confessed their sins,
and sorowed woonderfully, as appeared by the plenty of tears. And to be
short, this is that, which the Prophet Joel speaks of, and exhorts them
unto, ^^el 2.17.
as a thing necessary: Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep
between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord:
when as he had said in the verses verse. 13.
going before, Thus says the Lord, Turn you unto me with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your hearts, and
not your clothes. So that he not only speaks of fasting, as that whereunto the
Lord did then call them, but of sorrowing and mourning, which in it he required
of them. ^hese fast^s ^urs we st lab ^r this true ^ilitie (...) contrit^^ ^f
mind.
And by all these we may easily understand how greatly in these fastings of
ours we also should deiect our selves in our own eyes, and what sorrow and
grief of mind should be in us, because of our sins, and of the wrath of God
so manifestly appearing against them. And truly if every man and woman would
enter into a serious consideration of their lives past, and examine themselves,
their deeds, words, and thoughts in all the commandments of God, we might be
more humbled then we are: especially if we did wisely consider also the
punishments due to us for them, and those not only threatened, but already in
great measure upon us, by this great mortality in many places, which still
increases. Therefore let every one pray to God, that he would work this in
him, that he may have a soft and tender heart, a broken and contrite spirit,
which is an acceptable sacrifice unto him, and which he will not despise (as
the Prophet says) that is, will most favorably accept: Psalm. 51.17*
that I say, he may be wounded and pricked at his heart for his sin: and let
us all pray that this abstinence and fasting might be blessed to every one of
us to these ends: so shall it be acceptable unto God, and profitable to our
selves.

And this must be professed by our deeds, and confessed in our words.
Furthermore as this abstinence is used to this end, even to bring us to this
sorrow for our sins, which we have spoken of: so also that we might profess
to the glory of God, that we do thus judge of our selves indeed. 1. Cor.
11.24.
For as the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is appointed not only that we might
remember the death of Christ by it, verse. 26.
according as it is written, This do ye in remembrance of me, but that we
might show it forth until his coming again, as it is said in the same
place, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come: even that we look to be saved by it only, to
the condemning of all those that put their trust in any thing else: So this
abstinence is used not only to bring us to this vile esteeming of our selves
for our sins, but that in the feeling of it, we might by our practice and in
our prayers make open profession of the same: even as Benhadad king of Aram,
sent his servants girded with sackcloth about their loins, 1 King. 20.32.
and with ropes about their heads, to Ahab king of Israel, to entreat for his
life, saying, Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live, that he
might see, that he judged himself worthy of death. So the children of God in
times past by abstaining from meat and drink, did confess with their
mouths, and by this practice did openly show it, that they thus judged of
themselves, even that they were unworthy of a crumme of bread, or of a drop
of water, or of any sustenance whatsoever: and by putting on sackecloth they
professed that they were unworthy of any raiment even of the least ragge, and
therefore also but for shame they would have gone naked: and by watching, that
they were unworthy of sleep or any rest: and so of other things, as that they
were unworthy of the benefit of marriage, and of any comfort in it, and of any
pleasure or delight in any creature or ordinance of God, but that it should be
just with God, if he did cause them to spend away their days in heaviness.
And when they put dust and ashes upon their heads, that they were unworthy to
breath upon the face of the earth, or to tread upon the ground, yea so
unworthy of life, that if they had their deserts, they should be as deep
under the ground, as they were above it. And if there had been any thing else
in the world that would have represented and set forth the everlasting pains
of hell, and eternal condemnation, that would they have borne the image of in
their bodies, to testify openly against themselves, that they judged themselves
worthy of that also. that we ^ay justify ^^d and ^^ndemne ^^rselues.
And so they have in thus doing justified the Lord in that vengeance of his,
that has been either threatened, or already upon them: so far have they
been from murmuring or charging the Lord with any hard dealing against them.
As the prophet Daniell Dan. 9.3.
in the time of the captivity when in the end of the 70. years foretold by
Jeremy he prayed for deliverance, and (as it is said in the text) turned his
face unto the Lord, and sought by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and
sackcloth and ashes, and made confession of his sins, and of the sins of
all the people, in his prayer he breaks out into these words: verse. 7.8.
O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame, as
appears this day unto every man of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, yea unto all Israel, both near and far off, through all the
countries, whether thou have driven them, because of their offenses, that they
have committed against thee. O Lord unto us appertains open shame, to our
Kings, to our Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against
thee. Thus by his fasting from meat, and putting ashes upon his head, he
professed that himself and all the people were not only unworthy of any
deliverance (which he sued for) but even of life: yea that they were altogether
most worthy both of this captivity and of the shame and reproach of it, and
also of utter destruction and death it self because of their sins, which
they had committed against the majesty of God. Ezra also in the like practice
makes the same confession. Ezra 9.6.
O my God I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God,
for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses are grown
up unto the heaven.

If we will ^eape any fruit by our ^asting, we ^rust labor ^o be hum^led
thereby.
We see then that if we will keep a fast acceptable unto the Lord, we must be
humbled in our selves every one before him for our sins, and this outward
profession that we make in abstaining from all things it must be in truth, and
our minds must be answerable to our deeds: for if we abstain from the
creatures of God, and do not judge our selves unworthy of them, if we
forbear the comfort of this life, and do not judge our selves unworthy of
them also, and of life it self, all is but hypocrisy, and God cares not for
this outward show. Luke 18.13.
Therefore let every man labor to come to this, that he may be humbled in
himself, as the poor Publicane was, when he stood aloof off, and durst not
lift up his eyes unto heaven, but knocked on his breast, and said, cap. 15.21.
Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: and let him be vile in his own eyes, as
the prodigal son was, when he came to his father, and said, Father I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son. So let us judge and say of ourselves from the bottom of our hearts,
that we are unworthy of all his benefits, public and private: and most
worthy of all his punishments, even of this plague that is among us, and that
it should still continue and increase: and so let us judge our selves that he
may not judge us, or that in his good time he may cease iudgeing of us, as he
has promised. 1. Cor. 11.31.
For even as the father looks that the child should humble himself to the
confession of his fault before him, when he has taken the rod of correction
into his hand, and then he is ready to spare him, and not before: so the Lord
looks for this at the hands of men much more: and if we could have done this
thoroughly long before, we might have escaped happily this present judgment: so
if we can but even now do it, we may come out of it in time, or have it turned
into some blessing: and until then he will not cease, or if he do, he
reserueth us but to some further judgment. If then we would have any good by
this fasting, we must humble our selves, and the more we can do it, to sorrow
for our sins, the more mercy may we look for from God. Ezekiel. 18.23.31.
For he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent
and live, as he has witnessed by his holy Prophet: and the people of Nineue,
Iona 3.8.
when they turned every man from his evil way, and from the wickedness that
was in his hands, and thus humbled themselves, then God repented, and turned
from his fierce wrath, that they perished not, as Jona had conditionally
threatened before. But this point is more largely to be considered of
hereafter, when I shall by the grace of God speak of the manifold fruits of
fasting: in the mean season, now we only see what measure of humility then
God requires of us.

But if any should not only not humble himself, and be sorry for his sin, But
if we grow proud by them, then are they unprofitable and hurtful unto us.
but upon confidence of his fasting wax bolder to sin, and in a false
persuasion that through obedience given unto God in this one point, he may be
the bolder to be disobedient in another: as too many think, that because they
have done some good service unto God to day, they may at other times take scope
and liberty to themselves in sin, and so set one against another: or if
hereupon they grow proud, and think well of themselves, because they do so
and so, as some are ready to boast and say, Oh we have been at a fast to day,
but you have not, and so despise other that do not, and justify themselves in
comparison of them, like unto those proud Pharisees, that said unto our
Savior Christ, Why do the Disciples of John fast often and pray, ^uk. 5.33.
and the Disciples of the Pharisees also, but thine eat and drink? then this
holy ordinance of God is shamefully abused, and perverted from the right end of
it; and so that that should be a sovereign medicine to cure our souls, by
this horrible abuse is turned into rank poison to kill us. For that that
should make us so to sorrow for our sins, that we should unfeignedly purpose
to leave the^, makes us more presumptuous and bold to sin: and that that
should humble us before men in respect of our vileness, does make us to swell,
and puff us up in respect of our holiness and worthiness: therefore we must
take heed, that we fall not into these gross sins.

By this also it appears how far the Papists Church is from the true manner
of fasting: for they do greatly boast of their fastings, as the proud Pharisees
did before: and they make them meritorious for the pardoning of their sins:
for this is part of the penance that is inioined them to make satisfaction:
eue^ to fast so many times, upon such and such days, As all popish fasts are,
because they are puffed up in the merit of the^.
and after such a manner, more or less, strictly according to the prescript of
their ghostly father. Which fasts of theirs how well they have kept, We have
seen before, but now we say, that they make them equal with the blood of
Christ, which is only able to cleanse us from all our sins. When they then
ascribe remission of sins to their fastings, and think that partly they
deserve it thereby: and that God is bound as it were unto them for it: this
wickedness not only bereaueth them of all fruit of it, but makes them
guilty of horrible blasphemy: and so all their fasts as they were ridiculous
and foolish, placing them in those things, wherein they did not consist, so
were they most ungodly, when they made them able to merit remission of sins:
whereby it came to pass, that thereby they were not only not humbled, but
contrary to the nature of it, exceedingly puffed up by them. We then if we will
have any blessing from God by these means, must not only abstain from this
blasphemous pride, to think the better of our selves, because we do thus, as
that even by this we must labor to come to a greater measure of humility, for
our sins, then we had before, or otherwise could come unto.

Seeing then this humiliation is a special virtue and grace of God to be
attained unto in the day of fast, it is necessary to be considered, The
medit^tion of our sins, and the punishment of the is a mean truly to humble
us
what is to be done for the effecting of it: that is, how and by what means
we may humble and cast down our selves. And that is done by the consideration
of the greatness of our sins, and the grievous punishment due to us for
them: for the more that we know and meditate upon these, the more by the
blessing of God shall we be humbled: and the less we know or think of them,
the further shall we be from this true humility. For this one thing, even to
consider seriously, how ma^^e ways we have offended God, and how great wrath
and condemnation is belonging to us for it, will break our hard and stony
hearts, if any thing in the world will do it: and nothing will do it but
this, and so far forth as it brings us unto this. For let a man have never
so great a cross besides, as be he poor, or sick, or in disgrace, or have
some worldly loss, yet he may hope to recover that estate, or may think that
he has some other thing in him to recompense any or al of these losses, and
so his heart is not yet humbled: But when he sees how many ways he stands
guilty before God, and what a great account he has to give unto him, that
he sees his sins to be more in number, then the heirs of his head, or the
sands of the sea: and then how many punishments and plagues in this world, and
in the world to come are dew to him in soul and body for ever and ever
according to the manifold curses of the law of God, and his immutable justice
contained in them: this shall be able to make him cast away all his pride and
conceit in himself, or in any thing else, and to think of himself (as he is
indeed in himself) to be a most vile creature, and so to cry out of
himself, as the Apostle does, ^om. 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Now the holy spirit of God works this in us by the true understanding and
right use of the law of God set down in the ten Commandments: We are
brought to the sight o^ our sins by the true understanding and right use of
the law.
and also of the blessings promised to those that keep the law: and the curses
denounced against them that break it, which are to this end annexed to the
same law. According to which law, if men not partiallie examine themselves,
they shall see, both how many duties they have left undone, and also how many
sins they have committed against God and men. For that is as a clear glass,
to let us see the least spot or blemish in our face, that is the least sin
committed in our life: Psalm. 119.105.
and as a light unto our paths, and a lantern to our feet, to let us see how
one thing differs from another, good from evil; even as the difference of
colors is easily discerned when a light comes in, which was not before: and
to be short, it is a rule to show, what is crooked and what is straight, that
is, what is agreeable unto, or what differs from the will of God, which is
the perfect rule of all righteousness.

And we are ^rther hum^led by considering the ^romises and ^urses an^exed to
the ^aw.
Then if we come to the promises of the law, we shall see how many good
things, which God of his mere mercy had promised, and others have inioied, we
have lost through our own default, both for soul and body, for our selves and
ours; for this life also, and for the life to come; and so in what an unhappy
estate we are in in our selves: And though this be very much to humble a man
to think, thus much good have I wilfully lost, yet if we further consider the
curses not only dispersed in the whole Scripture, but specially set down at
large, Deuteronomy. 28. for sin, to to be brought upon us in soul and body and
otherwise, as incurable sicknesses and diseases, terror and fear of mind,
scarcity and famine, the sword and such like in this world, besides eternal
destruction of soul and body in hell fire after this life; these will let us
see our misery much more, that so we might feel and acknowledge what vile and
wretched creatures we be, men and women, that have justly brought upon our
selves so great calamity. We are then for the better humbling of our selves
before God, as at other times, so especially in the day of fasting to give our
selves to the serious and earnest meditation of these things, namely, of the
law of God, and that in every commandment, and apply it to our conscience:
and the appurtenances also of the same law, that is, the promises made to the
obedient, and the punishments threatened to the disobedient; and pray to God for
his good spirit, that it might work upon us, even upon our hearts, that by
this means we might come to that measure of humility, that is meet for us so
great sinners to come unto, and that he would cast us down under his holy
hand, even so low, as his own children should be: for want of which our
hearts are hardened, though our esta^e be so desperate and forlorn, as at all
other times, so even in the day of fasting, wherein greatest humiliation is
required.

And besides all this, to further us in this most excellent virtue of
humiliation, which in time will lift us up as high, as we were cast down
before, according to the Proverb of Solomon, Pro. 15.32. Especially how the
Lord from time to time has verified the same.
Before glory goes humility, we must also consider, the execution of these
judgments upon men from time to time, that we might know God to be just, and
will assuredly do as he has said, and that he has not threatened in vain,
as many men do imagine: that so we might fear and tremble, when we shall
see as it were others beaten for the like sins before our faces. And these
judgments we must well weigh both generally brought upon whole nations and
countries, Genesis 6.
as how he spared not the old world, when all flesh had corrupted their
ways, but brought an universal deluge upon it: and how he overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.
and the rest of the cities for their filthiness, yea how he spared not the
ten tribes of Israel, 2. King. 17. 2. King. 24. and 25. Lam. 1.3.
nor Judah it self, but carried them both captives out of their own country,
for their idolatry and other sins: And also his judgments particularly
brought upon private men, Genes. 25.33. and 27.33 Heb. 12.16.17. Genesis 21.10.
Gal. 4.29.
as how Esau was cast off from Gods people for his profannesse, and how Ismael
was put out of his fathers house, and so out of the Church of God for his
scorning and mocking, wherewith he persecuted his brother: 2. Sam. 18.9.
and how Absolon was hanged between heaven and earth by the hair of his head,
for rebelling against his father; Hest. 7.8.9.
how Haman was hanged up upon an high gibbet for his pride against men: 1.
King. 22.38.
and king Herod eaten up with vermin for his intolerable pride against God
and men: 2 King. 9.35.
how Ahab and Iesabell were slain for their oppression of Naboth, so that the
dogs did lick the blood of the one, 2. Sam. 12.10.11.
and devour the carkase of the other: yea how David was grievously punished for
his adultery and wrong done to Vriah; 1. Cor. 10.8.
and 23000. in one day destroyed for their filthy fornication; and to conclude
how the Lord from time to time in all ages and places has not spared men in
their sins; that so we might not only see in them what we have deserved,
but how he is ready to punish also, for there is no respect of persons with
him. And not only upon the wicked, but upon his own children.
And in all these we must advisedly consider, how God has not only punished
the wicked for their sins, but that he has not spared his own children: as
that he not only utterly destroyed those seven goodly churches in Asia,
because they fell from their first love, and did not repent in time: but also
did even cast off the Jews his own people for their contempt of his word,
Mat. 21.43.
and took away the Gospel of the kingdom from them unto this day, because
they did not bring forth the fruits of it: that (as the Apostle says) We by
their fall might fear, Romans 11.20.21.
and seeing he spared not the natural branches, we should take heed least
he also spare not us. But most of all we may see the fierce wrath of God
against sin to humble us, Even upon his own son Jesus Christ our Savior.
and his unchangeable justice in the person of his own dear Son, who taking
upon him our sins, was in all torments of soul and body pressed down with
them to the bottom of hell for a time, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.44.
no prayers or supplications that he could make even with strong cries could
deliver him, no agony or bloody sweats, that he endured in his soul and
body, could pacify it, and set him free, but he must needs bear it unto the
full; and so inded (as the Prophet foretold) he was wounded for our
transgressions, Esa. 53.8.
he was broken for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was upon
him: that so we by the law seeing our sins, and by his curses acknowledging
our desert for the same, and by the execution of them his constant and
immutable justice in them might in fear and trembling cast down our selves at
his feet: and as in fasting we have bereaved our selves willingly of all, so we
might feel, and in feeling confess that we are unworthy of all, and so come
to this most excellent virtue of humility, which is the first part of those
inward graces, which by the outward exercise of fasting is to be labored
after, and openly professed. And so much of that: now remains the other to be
spoken of.

HOMIL. IIII.
The fourth Homily continues to entreat of the inward virtues of the mind;
and namely of the hope that we should have of the pardon of our sins, upon
our true repentance: and that God will give us the things that we seek to him
for: which hope must stir us up to fervent and long prayer, and how by
importunity we shall prevail with God; and what things else may quicken us
unto fervent prayer.

THe second part of the inward virtues of the mind, and graces of the spirit of
God, which we must not only have, The second inward virtue is, the hope, that
by faith we should have of the favor of God upon our true humility.
but labor to be furthered in by this outward exercise of fasting, and to
which end we do undertake it, and which also we must openly profess, is an
assurance and full hope, that God for Christ his sake upon our true repentance
for our sins, and unfeigned humiliation for them, and forsaking of them, will
pardon them all, and will give us all those things that we stand in need of,
and we then make humble suit unto him for. So then this is also another thing,
that as at all other times, so most of all in the day of fast we must labor
after, even an increase of faith, whereby we may be raised up in our souls
through the grace of God in Christ, as high as the conscience of our sins,
and the deserved punishment of them does cast us down: and a full persuasion
that we shall obtain the remoouing of those evils (through the death and
merits of our Savior Christ) which either presently press us, or justly hang
over our heads. For as true repentance humbling us, and as it were casting us
down with one hand, both in sorrow for our sins, and confession of the same,
leaves us not in that downfall, lest we should despair, but graciously
reaches the other hand to lift us up again: and this is the right end of all
true humility, not to dismay us, but to comfort us with the hope of Gods
favor, even from thence, as it is said. Humble your selves under the mighty
hand of God, 1. Pet. 5.^5.
that he may exalt you in due time. And again, he resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble. So this solemn profession of humility in fasting
and prayer, much more does, and must so cast us down, and abase us in the
conscience of our unworthiness even of the least of Gods benefits, openly in
our practice by bereauing our selves of them for a time professing so much, as
that it does give us so much the more hope of favor from God, by how much we
do then more then ordinarily judge our selves.

So that here is another thing to be furthered in by this outward abstinence,
namely, In which w^ must be furthered, by the inward and outward affliction of
the body and the mind.
that we may have a greater hope and assurance then before, that God for
Christ's sake will be merciful unto us, because we do according to his
commandment more humble our selves then before: not for the merit or
worthiness of that, but because of the gracious promises, which of his free
mercy he has made to all those that thus turn unto him, and unfeignedly seek
him. For as the abstinence without this humiliation is nothing worth, so is the
casting down of our selves in the sight and feeling of our sins, and our
unworthiness for the same of no value or profit without this hope in the
goodness of God; and therefore as this abstinence must bring us to this
contrition of heart, so that must further us in our hope. And therefore unto
this abstinence there has been alwais adioined, as a thing inseparable,
supplications and prayers, which cannot be at all in any acceptable manner
without some hope and assurance from God, that we shall be heard. And
therefore fasting is never without prayer.
As then in all manner of fastes we must first clearly see our sins, confess
them unfeignedly, and thoroughly judge our selves for them; so must we then also
with good hope in the goodness of God for Christ's sake pray earnestly for
the full pardon and forgiveness of them, and for the turning away, or
remoouing from us all heavy judgments, which are due to us, or upon us for
the same. So that this is an other thing required of us in the day of fasting,
which we now keep, and to which end we do abstain as we do, even that with
great hope upon our great humiliation we might pray to God, to remove from
our brethren this heavy hand of his, that has a long time lien sore upon us,
and upon them.

And thus we shall find in holy scripture, that all the best servants of God
have in their fastings used solemn prayer: and whereas prayer is, and ought to
be a daily exercise of every christian man and woman, even as the Jews had
their daily morning and evening sacrifice, which were not without prayer: and
as it is said of Daniell, Dan. 6.10.
that it was his custom to pray three times every day; Yea earnest and
fervent, and continual prayers
in the days of fasting they have used a special and extraordinary kind of
prayer, differing from all other, that they have used before, both in zeal and
strength of prayer, and also in continuance. Therefore we in the days of our
fastings also should be more zealous and fervent in prayer, and also longer,
and more continual then at other times, as then we have always some special
cause to move us unto it, and the outward abstinence also should further us
thereunto. And this we read to have been the practice of the Ninevites in
their public fast, which they kept, that then according to that knowledge that
they had, they did all pray very earnestly unto God, that he would spare
them: according to that that the king commanded, saying, Iona. 3.8.
Let man and beast put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, that is, pray
earnestly unto him for mercy: as David uses the like phrase in the same
sense. Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deep places have I called or cried out unto thee, O Lord. And this
feruencie of prayer the prophet Esaias Esaias. 58 4.
required of the Jews in their fastes, when he says, Behold ye fast to
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, ye shall not
fast as ye do to day, to make your voice to be heard above: this latter part
of the verse others do read thus, (whose interpretation and judgment here I
follow) You do not fast, that you might lift up your voice on high, that is,
to God in fervent prayer, which is one special cause of fasting; and therefore
it is called a day of reconciliation, L^u. 23.27
because that then the priest by earnest prayer did seek to reconcile the
people unto God. But to return to the prophet Esaias: he finding fault with
them, that they did not fast to a right end, namely, to humble themselves, and
conuicting them plainly of the want of humility and repentance, because there
was strife, and debate, and contention among them, which ought not to have
been, neither could have been, if in the sight of their sins they had been
rightly humbled to seek unto God for mercy: says farther, that they did not
fast (as those times did require) to lift up their voices earnestly to God in
prayer; they did chide, and were earnest and aloud one with another, but they
were not earnest and aloud in prayer unto God as they should have been:
therefore whereas it is translated, Ye shall not fast as you do to day, to
make your voice to be heard above; referring this lifting up of the voice unto
loud words in contention, (as for the most part men will then be heard) others
do read it (as we have heard) you do not, or you will not fast, that your
voice might be heard above, referring it to the lifting up of the voice to God
in prayer, and in more then ordinary prayer, noted by the lifting up of their
voice: as was said before, that the Ninevites did not speak only, but cry
out, and that mightily, or with all their strength unto God. Therefore in ^he
days of ^asting we ^ust enforce ^ur selves to ^eruent and (...)
So that to fasting must be joined a most earnest kind of prayer, as the time
shall then require: and as men must not pray coldly and from the teeth outward
(as we say) at any time, so then especially they must not be weary, but
consider well what great necessity there is of prayer, both in respect of
their sins, and of the punishment of them; and so enforce themselves to an
earnest kind of long prayer: as if a man were fallen into a deep pit or well,
he would cry out aloud and long with all his strength, even until he were
hoarse, or had lost his voice, that so he might be heard, and helped, and would
not favor himself in such a case.

Thus it appears that when Ezra, and the rest that feared God with him,
fasted because of the transgression of them of the captivity, that he prayed
very earnestly and long, as we may gather both from his behavior, and from
the words that he then used, which were full of great affection: Ezra. 9.4.
for it is written of him, that he sat down astonished until the evening
sacrifice, and after the evening sacrifice he arose up from his heaviness, and
when he had rent his clothes, and his garments, he fell upon his knees, and
spread out his hands unto the Lord God: and said, O my God, I am confounded
and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God, for our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heaven, and so
forth as it follows in that prayer of his, full of all humility and zeal.
The like may be said of the prophet Daniel, who in the end of the seauentie
years of their captivity (understanding by books (as he says of himself)
and namely by reading the Prophecy of Jeremy, that the number of years which
the Lord would accomplish for the destruction of Jerusalem were now almost
expired) and turned his face unto the Lord, Dan. 9.3.
by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes: and then
how zealously and fervently he prayed, as it appears in the whole prayer, in
which he often breaks out into many passionate exclamatio^s: so especially by
the often doubling of the same petitions, which was no vain babbling in him,
full of words without any great matter, but did arise of the abundance of his
earnest desire and great feeling that he had of that which he prayed for: as
when he says; Dan. 9.15.
O our God hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause
thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that lies waste, for the Lords sake: O
my God incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the city whereupon thy name is called; for we do not present
our supplications before thee for our own righteousness, but for thy tender
mercies: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive; O Lord consider, and do it, defer
not for thine own sake, O my God: for thy name is called upon thy city, and
upon thy people. Thus both of them prayed very fervently and with great zeal,
which argued that they had great hope of obtaining their suites, otherwise they
would soon given them over, and not have been so importunate. For it is most
certain, that according to the hope that we have of obtaining any thing at the
hands of God or man, so are our desires and requests unto them more earnest,
or more cold, therefore when they prayed thus importunately, it appears that
in this great humility of theirs, And by importunity of prayer the Lord will
be overcome.
declared by their fasting and manner of it, they had great hope of obtaining
their requests of God, unto whom they did sue. And thus must we do in the day
of our fasting, I say we must labor for that measure of faith in gods
goodness through the blessed merits of Christ our Savior, that might move us
to pray earnestly, and as it were to cry mightily unto God for the removing
now at the last of this grievous plague: that though we have justly deserved
it, and a great deal more, yet for the Lords sake it would please him upon our
true repentance, and earnest seeking unto him for mercy, to turn it away.
Which if we do, then he undoubtedly will hear us in his good time, as he
has witnessed unto us in the Gospel by the Parables, both of the wicked
Judge, Luke 18.2.
who by the importunity of the widow, was overcome at the last, to do her
right; and this was propounded (as Christ himself faith) to this end to teach
men to pray often, and not to wax faint; whereupon he infers this general
doctrine. verse. 6.7.
Hear what the unrighteous Judge says: and shall not God avenge his elect,
which cry day and night unto him, though he suffered long for them? So God
will hear those that cry day and night, that is that pray earnestly and
continually: And again in the other parable of the man that came to his
friend at midnight to borrow three loves, Luke 11.5.
who though he was unwilling at the first, yet because of his importunity did
arise, and gave him as many as he would* whereupon he makes this general
promise to al those that shall thus seek unto God, that is, earnestly and
without ceasing, that he will hear them, saying: Ask, and it shall be given
you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: for
every one that asks receaueth, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened; that is, if ye seek and ask after this manner.
So by these examples we may be assured, that God will hear us for this thing,
if we pray unto him eatnestly, and without ceasing, though we have hitherto
seen little success of our prayers, for the plague is not only not taken
away, but is greatly increased every where.

He often deferreth to give, that we might be quickened up to feruencie of
prayer.
And truly the Lord does many times defer of purpose, to grant that which
we ask, and which also he has promised, and is purposed to give, that we
might be moved in the feeling of our want to pray earnestly for it: and that
the want of it for a time might quicken up our dead hearts, and dull spirits
unto greater feruencie of prayer: that also when we shall see that we have such
things given unto us, and that we have obtained them by our prayer, yea by
long and earnest prayer, we might make the more account of them, and esteem
them as we ought, and also be so much the more thankful unto God for the
same. For the Lord indeed has of his great mercy promised, that if we call
upon him, he will hear us, as we have learned even now out of the Gospel of
S. Luke, and may further learn out of many other places of Scripture besides,
as, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver
thee; and many other: but he has set down no time, when we shall see and
perceive that he has heard us, saving that it is said, I will hear thee in
due time, Psalm. 10.1.
even in affliction. Now which is the most convenient time for God to help us
in, Act. 1.7.
that we must not prescribe unto him, neither is it always meet for us to know
the times or the seasons which the Father has put in his own power: therefore
as they be best known to his heavenly Majesty, so we must leave the
declaration of them to him alone, not doubting, but that he will hear us in
due time, even in affliction. He does defer many times of purpose for good
causes: both that we might be stirred up thereby to pray to him earnestly and
continually, not doubting one whit of the truth of his promises; and that when
we have our requests granted, we might esteem of so great a benefit, and be
thankful to him for the same. For assuredly if we did always find, that
the Lord did give us every thing at the first asking (though we grant that
he gives us continually more than we ask) such is our unthankfulness, that
both we would come unto him very coldly, and pray drowsilie (for we would
make it but an ordinary matter, Therefore if we continue in fervent prayer,
the Lord will hear us at the last.
Ask and have) and also we would not so highly esteem of the things given
unto us, nor labor to be so thankful to him for the same, as our bound duty
did require. Therefore concerning all other things, and namely, this present
visitation of the Plague, the more that the Lord deferreth to take it away, the
more earnest let us be in prayer, and let not the delay of it quench the heat
of our desire one whit, but kindle it more and more, and I do assure you in the
word of the Lord, that if we faint not in prayer, but lift up our hearts and
hands still unto the Throne of his Mercy, that he will in time hear us, and
show mercy unto us; and that he will not only do so, but he will make it
manifest and apparent unto the very souls and consciences of us all.

This therefore is another most excellent use and end of fasting, The outward
abstinence must quicken us up unto feruencie of pra^
even to quicken us up unto greater feruency in prayer: for as we find by
experience, when our bellies are full, and we are in the abundance of all
pleasures and outward blessings, we are not so fit for prayer: and therefore a
sober diet, and a moderate use of all other of Gods creatures and benefits will
always make us the more fit for prayer: but when the body is pinched with
hunger, and the want of other necessary helps meet for it, the feeling of our
want shall be a means to set a sharper edge upon our prayers, to make them
more piercing, and as it were to give a wing unto them to fly aloft above the
clouds, even to make them enter into heaven, and to come before the throne of
God. We ought then in these days of abstinence thus to profit by the feeling
of the want of our bodies, so to judge our selves unworthy not only of all
that which we abstain from, but of all other things besides, yea of life it
self, that we thereby be moved most earnestly to seek to God for his pardon,
and for the bestowing of all upon us again: and by how much the more we do
so, and profess that in our selves by reason of our sins we are unworthy of
any thing in the world, by so much the more let us hope from the mercy and
promises of God, and seek accordingly that in Christ Jesus, Heb. 1.2. Romans 8.1
whom he has made heir of all things, we may be found worthy of all, and
fellow heirs of them with him, as the Apostle speaks.

And even as a man if he were condemned to death would sue earnestly for his
pardon; especially if he were lead from the judge to the place of execution,
and were also upon the ladder, and had the rope about his neck: and the nearer
he were to death, and had the very badges and tokens of it upon him, the more
earnest suter would he be for his pardon, if he could but conceive that there
were any hope of it. So we the more that by this holy exercise of fasting we
see, and profess that we are worthy of all Gods punishments and plagues, yea
of eternal death and condemnation it self, by so much the more earnestly we
must pray that God would forgive us our sins and spare us. Therefore in the
days of fasting there must be a special kind of striving with God in prayer,
and we must as it were wrestle with him therein, and never give him over, or
suffer him to have rest, until he have sent us away with some blessing: Even as
it is said of the holy patriarch Jacob, ^e must rast^e, and riue w th and in
our ^aiers.
that in his return homeward from Laban, as he did pray unto God most
fervently, so all night long he wrestled with an angel in the shape of a man,
that is, ^en. 32.26.
with God himself so appearing unto him, and he held out with him in
wrestling even unto the morning, and then he said unto him, let me go, for the
morning appears, unto whom he answered, I will not let thee go, except thou
bless me, and so he held him fast still: and then he bestowed upon him this
great blessing by changing his name from Jacob to Israel, that because he had
power, and had prevailed with God, he should prevail with men much more. So
that vision of the angel wrestling with him, and the change of his name tended
both to one end, namely to assure him, that God had heard his prayer, which he
made before, and would deliver him out of the hand of Esau, Genesis 32.11
whom he feared: and therefore whereas he was called at his birth Iaacob, that
is, one that holds by the heel, (and so ready to overthrow him) for thus was
he borne holding his brother Esau by the heel, Genesis 25.26
in token that in time he should by the power of God prevail against him, and
so also against all his enemies: now he is called Israel, that is, Genesis 32.28
a prince of the strong God, because (as the interpretation is given in the
text) he had power with God, and should prevail with men; that is, he had
prevailed with God in his prayer, as was declared unto him in the vision of
wrestling, and should prevail against Esau, and al other his enemies, but how
he did and should hereafter prevail with God, and obtain all things of him
the vision did show, namely, that he prayed so fervently and so continually
that he did not give over until he had some assurance from the Lord by his
holy spirit, that he had heard him, and would defend and bless him, according
unto his own desire, Genesis 32.9.
and the Lords promise. Thus must we also strive with the Lord in our prayers,
as the Apostle speaks to the Romans, Romans 15.30
and requires of them, that they would strive with him by prayer to God for
him: and we must put all our strength to it, as Jacob did, when he wrestled
with the angel. And to see it again more clearly in the same comparison: As a
man that wrestleth for the best game will put all his might and skill to it,
and will not give over as long as he has any thing in himself, that he might
prevail: so must we in our prayers be so earnest and importunate with the
Lord, that we rise not up from prayer, or depart away from him, until he have
blessed us: and the harder that we find it to obtain any thing because of our
sins, the more earnestly must we strive in prayer for it. Therefore now in
thee days of fasting let us stir up our selves unto prayer, and strive
against all unfitness, that might hinder us, and as for other things, so that
this great mortality might have an end, without which feruencie of prayer, all
our fasting is nothing worth.

Seeing then that feruencie and continuance in prayer is so proper unto the
time of fasting (as we have heard) and it is specially undertaken to that end:
The papists had no special prayer upon their fasting days.
we may see by this also how far the church of Rome and al Papists, are from
the true fast prescribed in Gods word, and practiced of this servants (though
they would be thought to be the only men in the world that fast and pray. For
upon the Fridaies and other fasting days there was no special time appointed,
as also not in Lent, appointed for prayer: neither did many of them that
professed fasting, come to the Church at all to that end: and if some of them
did pray upon their Saints eeuen at night, yet many did not, which were bound
to the fast: and they that did, all the rest of the day were without prayer;
and upon those days they went about their business, as at all other times,
especially unto noone, or unto eeuen-song, as they called it. Whereas the whole
day of fast is altogether of the nature of the Sabbath, both for resting from
work, and also for sanctifying of the time; and therefore upon those days,
they had holy conuocations and assemblies for the word and prayer: as in the
book of Leuiticus, ^eu. 1.6 31. ^eu. 23.27.
the yearly day of fast for the Jews is called a Sabbath of rest, and besides
it is further added: therein you shall have an holy convocation, and ye shall
do no work. Therefore when these Catholics (falsely so called) did rest in
the bare ceremony of fasting, and did not give themselves that day to prayer
more then at other times (for the most part) they neglected that, that was
principal in it, and whereunto it should be referred. And so we see, what the
Lord requires of us al at this present, and to what end we abstain, even that
we having nothing to hinder us inwardly, nor outwardly in our bodies to press
us down to the earth, our minds might be lifted up in all feruencie of prayer
unto our heavenly father in the mediation of our Lord and Savior so much the
more.

To this end we must give ourselves as much as we can to a deep and serious
meditation of that that is the cause of our fast, The serio^^ considerat^ of
our present estate will incre^^^^ feruencie (...) prayer.
whether it be any great punishment of God already upon us, or imminent and
hanging over our head, and ready shortly to befall us: or it be some grace and
blessing of God, that we want, or we are afraid to loose, that thereby we might
see, and feel in what a woeful and miserable case we are in, or should be, in
respect of that, if the Lord should not hear us, and be merciful unto us. As
we see how the people of Nineue hearing that their destruction was threatened
against them by the Lords prophet, ^ona. 3.5.
and that within a short time, even forty days, they believed God, (as it is
said in that story) that is, they were persuaded, that for their sins they
had deserved it, and also that God had sent him to warn them of it; they
therefore perceauing themselves to be in such a woeful case, the king
proclaimed a fast, and willed every man to cry mightily unto God, that is, to
pray earnestly unto him, to forgive them, and spare them: so that they did not
only pray thus fervently unto God, but the consideration of their estate
moved them unto it, which if by believing the prophet they had not
acknowledged, they could not have come unto it in this acceptable measure.
Hest. 3.13.
So in the days of Hester, when Haman had obtained a decree from the king, and
it was sealed with his ring, and the letters were sent by posts into all the
kings provinces: The tenor whereof was, to root out, to kill, and to destroy
all the Jews, Hest. 4.3.
both yoonge and old, children and women in one day, in every province and
place, whether the kings charge, and his commission came: there was great
sorrow among the Jews, and fasting and weeping, and mourning, and many lay in
sackecloth and ashes, and three days and three nights they gave themselves to
fasting and prayer: so that the knowledge of this estate of theirs that they
came unto, by hearing of the kings commission granted out against them, did
drive them to this great sorrow for it, appearing in weeping and mourning, and
it so made them to pray thus earnestly, and so long, even three days and
three nights together: which they would not, nor could have done, if they had
not by taking knowledge of the kings letters, perceived their estate to be so
desperate, and so forlorn, as indeed it was. Likewise in the time of the
Judges, when the tribe of Benjamin had twice overthrown the rest of the
children of Israel, Judge. 20.26
and had in two set battles slain 40000. of them: they seeing themselves by
the slaughter of so many greatly weakened, fell a weeping before the Lord, and
fasted that day unto evening, and asked counsel of the Lord, not only by Vrim
and Thummim, but by fervent prayer, to show them what they should do. These
then seeing themselves in so ill a case, that many of their brethren were
slain already, or that they, and themselves were like to be slain, thought
it their bound duty, to seek unto God earnestly, to turn that destruction
away, and to stay his heavy hand, and so he did.

So must we also do at this present, The lamentable estate of many in respect
of this pestilence, may move us unto fervent prayer.
that we might come to this earnestnes of prayer spoken of, and necessarily
required in such times of fasting: we must (I say) well weigh and consider of
the great calamity and misery that is among us, and in what a pitiful case
many of our dear brethren are, and have been a long time, without any
intermission, how they die daily and weekly in the chief cities and towns of
the land, both in these parts and other countries: as in Norwich above an
hundred a week, and in London above three thousand weekly, and thus it has
been many weeks together, and it spreads every where in small villages, and
threatens every where, and none can tell almost in what place long to be free.
During which time of contagion and pestilence it has come to pass, that many
have had their loving wives pulled out of their bosoms, some their provident
husbands taken from them: others have lost their parents the stay of their
lives, others are left childlesse; some have neither brother nor sister left,
master nor servant, friend, kinsefolke, nor neighbor: yea even the whole house
and family is swept clean away, so that there is nothing but weeping and
mourning, sighing and sobbing, wailing and wringing of hands, spending away
their time in sorrow without taste in any meat, or comfort in sleep, or any
thing else, looking themselves every hour when they should be smitten with the
same hand of God, and so follow to the grave them that have lately gone before
the^: we I say must wisely consider of these things, that seeing nothing before
our eyes in these times of so great desolation, but the untimely death and
destruction of our dear brethren, kindred, and friends, yea of our selves
shortly, if God be not merciful unto us, might move us to pray earnestly unto
God, both for our selves and for them: and truly if we could so consider of
these things as we ought, it might move us in greater humility before God,
and compassion toward our brethren, to power out not only at this present, but
night and day hereafter, most ardent prayers and supplications unto the Lord,
that in his blessed time he would put an happy end to so great destruction,
and that it might be sufficient unto his Fatherly goodness, that he has thus
far proceeded in judgment against us, and against them already. I say the
deep consideration and inward feeling of this common misery would make us to
be more often and fervent in prayer unto God, and not only thus publicly, but
privately also.

But I can not tell how it comes to pass (the more is the pity) through the
great hardness of men's hearts, As the feeling of all our wants will make us
earnest to have the^ supplied.
that many of us think little of it, or not so much as they should, because it
is so far from them: yet let them know assuredly, that it may soon come
nearer, God knows how soon; and in the mean season, if they will not pity
others, and pray for them, none shall pity and pray for them, when they shall be
in the like case. So then as they that are in great want of food, and see that
they have nothing at home, bread nor meat, nor money to buy any thing with, are
driven to seek abroad for themselves and for their children: and besides they
will be importunate where they come, and have no nay, their necessity is so
great* that it compels them unto it, even sometimes to go beyond the bounds of
modesty and good manners; so if we could as well see and feel this great
misery that we and our brethren are in, it would make us to be so importunate
with the Lord in our prayers, that we would have no nay at his hands, but
still stand knocking at the gate of his mercy, until he has opened, and
sent us away with a gracious answer, as David in the one and fifty Psalm
pressed down with the heavy burden of his sins did cry unto God again and
again for mercy, and would not have his mouth stopped, until the Lord had
mercy upon him saying; Have mercy upon me O God, Psa. 51.1.2.
according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy
co^passions put away mine iniquiti^^, wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin, purge me with Hysope, wash me, make me to hear
joy and gladness, and so forth as follows: where every verse almost
contains a several petition, earnestly craving mercy of God for his sins:
yea as blind Bartimaeus cried after Christ in the way: Mar. 10.46.
Jesus the son of David have mercy on me, and many rebuked him, because he
should hold his peace, but he cried much more, O son of David have mercy on
me, and would never leave calling and crying, until Christ stood still, and
commanded him to be called: so we in this case should never leave calling upon
God, until by diminishing of the plague we might see some token of his mercy.
Nay we should be like to the woman of Syrophenisse, who came suing to Christ
for her daughter, Math. 15.21
and said; Have mercy on me O Lord, the soon of David, and he by his silence
seemed not to regard her, and when his Disciples did speak to him for her, he
answered them, as though she were not to be regarded, saying, I am not sent but
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and when she came nearer her-selfe,
and said, Lord help me, then he seemed clean to cast her off, and to leave
her without all hope, ^4. 01 (...)
in saying, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to
whelps: yet for all this she would not give over, her need was so great, but
desired as a whelpe to eat of the crummes, And by earnest suite we shall
find, ^ supply in time.
that fell from her masters table: and so Christ heard her at the last, and
said unto her, O woman great is thy faith, be it to thee, as thou desire, and
her daughter was made whole at that hour: Even so our selves, though we may
seem all this while to have prayed in vain, and to have lost our labor, and
the Lord God not to regard us, because the plague is not one whit lessened,
but rather increased, yet because our need is so great, let us not give over,
but in all feruencie of prayer hold out, and wait upon God: and how? Psalm.
123. ^
Even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so let our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God until he have mercy upon us. And let every one say, Psalm.
130.5.
I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word; my soul waits on the Lord more then the morning watch watches for
the morning, and so let us encourage all Israel, even the people of God to
wait upon him: for with him is mercy, and with him is great redemption, and he
will redeem them from al their iniquities: that is, as he has many ways and
means to deliver those that be his, so he will upon their repentance forgive
them all their sins, and much more deliver from the deserved punishment of
the same.

^he consci^ce of our ^woorthi^sse must ^t hinder ^, but ra^er make (...) more
fer^ut in prai^.
Moreover that we might pray so earnestly as we should, let us further
consider our great unworthiness by reason of our innumerable sins, that
when we shall see, that whether we look to our selves, or to other, there is
no cause that the Lord should hear and help us, for we have not done our
duty as we ought, we have not profited by his word and great patience; nay
we have by the abuse of them, and by other of our sins provoked his wrath
against us, and have deserved that this deadly plague should continue and make
an end of us all: we may be importunate with him to spare us, that so, though
not for any thing that is in us, of his great mercy for Christ's sake by
opportunity he may be overcome: as we have seen by the parable of the
wicked Judge how he will be: and as we have seen how Jacob would not give over
wrestling, until he had blessed him, at the last obtained the blessing. So the
Lord seeing that we are not weary of calling upon him, though he find us
unworthy, might hear and help us. And so let not the conscience of our
unworthiness stop our mouths, and hinder our prayers, but rather move us
to be the more earnest, confessing the same, as Ezra Ezra 9.6.
does. I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God, for
our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto
the heaven: and as Daniel Dan. 9.8.
does, O Lord unto us appertains open shame, to our kings, to our princes,
and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee: yet compassion and
forgiveness is in the Lord our God, albeit we have rebelled against him: and
so may we truly say of our selves, and of our land and country wherein we
live.

And lastly for this present let us consider, that as in no other thing, so in
this most of all, none can help us but the Lord; and the con^eration of ^is,
that ^e can ^lpe us but (...) Lord.
there are means appointed for every thing, but unless he give them we can
not have them, and then also the right use and success of them is of the Lord:
so that he can not only deny them unto us, but curse them when we have them,
that they shall do us no good: so that we may truly say, My help comes from
the Lord, (...) 121.2.
who has made both heaven and earth; therefore we had need to pray to him so
much the more earnestly: for the trusting to this and that, hinders our
prayer. But the time cutteth me off from this, and so I leave it to be
supplied by the spirit of God, which is able to give you understanding in all
things.

HOMIL. V.
The fifth Homily does further entreat of feruencie of prayer requisite in
fasting: and to the end we may consider, what great things God has promised to
fasting and prayer; and how he has performed the same, not only to the godly,
but even to the wicked, who have thereby obtained great deliverances: yea how
men by humble supplication have prevailed with men, even with their enemies.

I Am at this present to proceed in that argument, To quicke^ us up further
unto fervent pra^er, we mus^ consider.
that I entered into the last day, and could not then well finish for want of
time, namely to continue further to declare, how we may attain unto that
feruencie of prayer that has been spoken of, which is so necessary in the
fasting we have in hand. Therefore besides all that has been said to this
end, we are lastly to consider, that we might be moved to pray so earnestly
as we should, to consider (I say) the gracious promises, that God has made to
all those that have, or shall hereafter at any time hold this exercise of
fasting unto him in any measure of truth; and how the same from time to time
have been performed unto them: insomuch that though the beginning of their
fast has been full of heaviness, and with much sorrow for their sins, and
for the wrath of God against them appearing in some grievous punishment; yet
the end thereof has been with much reioicing and comfort in assured hope both
of the free pardon and forgiveness of them, with perfect reconciliation unto
God, and also with good hope of obtaining of all such things, as they have sued
for by earnest and fervent prayer. First what pr^mises God has ^ade to those
that seek unto him in fasting and prayer.
And first of all concerning the promise that the Lord of his great mercy has
made to all those that seek unto him in all humility by fasting and prayer,
we may see what the prophet Joel Joel 1.4.
says. Who exhorting the people to fasting and prayer, because of that great
calamity, that was upon them, by reason that the fruits of the earth were so
wholly destroyed, (for that which was left of the Palmer-worme the Grasshopper
had eaten; and the residue of the Grasshopper had the Canker-worme eaten, and
the residue of the Canker-worme had the Caterpiller eaten: cap. 2.1
exhorting them I say, to turn unto the Lord with all their heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and to rent their hearts, and not
their clothes, and to turn unto the Lord their God: that is, not their clothes
only, according to the manner of that time in great sorrow, but their hearts
especially, that so their sorrow might be in truth, and not in appearance
only, sets before them the great mercy of god to al those that so come
unto him, saying; For the Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and
of great kindness, and repents him of the evil; who knows if he will
return, namely to his accustomed merciful dealing, and repent, that is, of
that evil, that he might further bring upon them, and leave a blessing behind
him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the Lord their God? that
is some thing to be served with, for the glory of his name, least his service
should fail* as he had complained before; that the meat offering and drink
offering was cut off from the house of the Lord, ^oel 1.7.
for which the Priests the Lords ministers did mourn.

Then we see, how the Prophet in the name of the Lord does promise unto them,
that if they would thoroughly humble themselves for their sins the cause of
this great affliction, noted by the rending of their hearts, though the Lord
had begun to punish them already, and that most grievously, yet he would stay
his heavy hand and bestow some blessing upon them: where in saying, Who
knows, or who can tell? his meaning is nothing less than to call it into
question, or any ways to make them doubt of it, but rather to consider the
hardness of the thing, and so to seek for it the more earnestly, that they
might have some hope of it: as if he had said, Seeing God is so merciful, as
he had spoken of him before, calling him, Gracious, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and one that repents him of the evil, there is no doubt of the
thing, but that if they could humble themselves as he required, and pray
earnestly, though he had begun to punish them already, yet he would repent and
spare them. As also it is said in the Prophet Jona, Iona 3.9.
by the King of Nineue (who proclaimed a fast, and willed all men to put on
sackecloth, and to cry mightily unto the Lord, and every man to turn from his
evil way, and from the wickedness of his hands) Who can tell, if God will
turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not?
which he utters after this manner, saying, Who can tell? to show the hardness
and difficulty of it; that they might cry unto God the more earnestly or
mightily, as he also wills them there. So that as from the forenamed place
of Joel, we have a commandment to fast publicly, when Gods hand is heavy
upon us, as it is now, and has been a long time, when as he thus speaks:
Thus says the Lord, Joel 2.12.
turn you unto me with all your hearts and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning, and so forth: so from thence also we have a promise (as we have
heard) that if we can humble our selves thoroughly, judging and condemning our
selves, as we ought, which is meant by renting of our hearts, as was said
before, and turn with all our hearts from our sins, even with sorrow and
grief for them unto the Lord, that he himself will in this punishment of ours
also repent, and leave a blessing behind, as is said there, that is, some
cause to praise and magnify his holy Name: and the reason, why we have it no
sooner is, that men have not all this while cast down themselves before the
high throne of Gods judgment, as they should, and unfeignedly leave all their
sins; which if men could come unto in that manner and measure that they ought,
then here is a most gracious and sure promise made unto us from the Lord by
the mouth of his holy Prophet, that he will be merciful unto us, and spare
us; which he will also undoubtedly perform, for he is Truth it self.

Therefore that we might do this that we do in faith, Which promises we must
at this present set before our eyes.
I mean continue still to fast and pray, and not give it over, or wax weary
of it, as of our selves we are too prone unto it: yea that in thus abstaining,
we might pray earnestly unto God, to stay his heavy hand, and to put an
happy end at the last unto this long and great mortality, Let us consider that
even this promise is made to us, and written for this very time, and for this
purpose, that if in this fasting every man will turn from all his sins with
his whole heart, and be sorry for them even from the very bottom of his heart:
that the Lord himself will repent of all that evil that he has begun to do
unto us; and though he has taken away many thousands already, yet he will
spare the rest, and leave some every where to praise his Name. So many
therefore among us, as do thus with true repentance turn from their sins,
to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of life, may pray with great hope
and comfort for mercy from the Lord, for the promise is made unto them,
whosoever they be: but all they that yield to this outward and bodily exercise
of fasting, but are not thus broken in their hearts, nor affected in their
souls, neither have any care so to be, as they cannot call upon the name of
the Lord with any earnestness of prayer, but all is done formally and
ceremonially of them, so they cannot have any great hope of being heard, but
shall speed thereafter.

And especially we may see plainly from the eighteenth verse of that chapter
unto the end of the same, Which promises are most certain and belonging to us,
as well as to the Jews.
how plainly and largely he does promise, not only a remoouing of that great
punishment, which was very much; and for the certainty of it, and to assure
her faith of it, speaks of it, as though it were already come, saying, then
will the Lord be jealous over his land and spare his people: Joel 2.18.
and again, ver. 22.
be not afraid ye beasts of the field, for the pastures of the wilderness
are green, for the tree bears her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do
give their force; be glad then ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord
your God, for he has given you the rain of righteousness, that is, as much
as is meet for you in this great drought: In all which words he speaking of this
benefit to come, as though it were already given them, (according to the manner
of the prophets) does show, that he had already received this promise from the
Lord, that if they did thus thoroughly cast down themselves in the guiltiness
of their sins, and conscience of their deserts, he would spare them and
bless them: and besides he would pour out his holy spirit most plentifully
upon them. And this undoubtedly is set down for our consolation, and
instruction, to show us, what in the like case we may look for: And truly it
must needs be so, for there is no respect of persons with God, and the
promises of his word though spoken unto some particular people, upon some
occasion, yet are for all ages and times, and do generally belong to all
alike, upon the same condition. Therefore when as it said to them, Turn unto
the Lord with all your heart, and rent your hearts, and when you are thus
humbled, the Lord will return for your good, and so forth, as it follows in
that place, it is spoken not to them only, but to all such, as in the like
case shall thus do: and so unto us now, that we may be assured, that if we thus
do, in that measure that we do it in truth, we shall find mercy with the
Lord, and so may pray for it most earnestly in faith, as they were willed to
do.

And the rather that we might thus do, Secondly consider the fulfilling of
these promises to al those that have used fasting and prayer.
and be confirmed in the truth of this hope, let us unto this gracious promise,
that we have heard of, join the consideration of all the fastes of the
faithful servants of God, set down in the old and new Testament, and see what
has been the issue of them, and whether they have not obtained the things,
that they have thus sued for, and if the Lord has not turned their sorrow into
joy, Isa. 61.3.
their fasting into feasting, and so has given (as the prophet speaks) to
them that have mourned, beatitie for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and
the g^rment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness. And here we may first
of all consider, what was the fruit of that fast, which the Israelites held
in the time of the Judges, when for the wickedness done to the Levites
concubine, they fought against the Beniamites, and were overthrown in the
first battle, Judge. 20.
so that there was slain that day two and twenty thousand: they fasted and
prayed, and set upon them the second time, and yet were overthrown in that
battle also; for the men of Benjamin slew down to the ground of the children
of Israel again, eighteen thousand, all which could handle the sword: then
they fasted and prayed the second time, and got the victory, when they were
thoroughly humbled: So that by fasting and prayer they prevailed against them at
the last, though not at the first, and might have done sooner, if they had
been sufficiently humbled before. As the Israelites thereby at the last
prevailed against the Beniamites.
We have hitherto with the rest of our brethren fasted and prayed often that
this grievous plague raging in many places might have an end, and yet have
not thus far prevailed with the Lord, but the people still die every where in
great number; yea it has increased greatly since we began: so that ours and
their estate is worse then it was before we began, even as the Israelites did
fall by thousands before their enemies after that they had by fasting and
prayer asked counsel of the Lord: but if we can hold out in this exercise
unto the end, and not be discouraged, though we see little success at the
first, and the more that we see the hand of God increased against us in
justice, the more we labor to grow in humility and feruency of prayer, then
we doubt not, but at the last by the event, as the Israelites did, we shall see
that we have not all this while lost our labor, and called upon the name of
God in vain. Therefore that we might with assured confidence, and good hope
persevere in this holy exercise of fasting and prayer, besides the promise of
God made unto it, which we have heard, let us set this worthy example before
our eyes to comfort us, that though the beginning has been full of so^^owe,
as it was with them, yet the end will be full of joy and consolation to our
selves and others, and to the praise and glory of almighty God.

To this we may adioine that notable and famous example, that we have in the
book of Hester: Hest. 3.6.
where it is said, that Haman for the malice that he bare against Mordecay,
sought the utter destruction of all the Jews: for he thought it too little to
lay hands on Mordecay himself alone, and because they had showed him the
people of Mordecay, he sought to destroy all the Jews, that were through out
the whole kingdom of Ahashuerosh; and to this end he had obtained a Decree
from the king, Hest. 3.13.
to root out and to destroy, and to kill them all, both young and old,
children and women in one day. Then all the Jews, at the advice and
commandment of Queen Hester, Hest. 4.16.17.
did fast and pray unto God three days and three nights, to entreat the Lord,
that she might find favor with the King, that this wicked devise might be
frustrate and disanulled: whereby it came to pass, that the Lord in whose
hands are the hearts of all men to turn, even as the rivers of waters, and who
has said that when a man's ways do please the Lord, Pro. 16.7.
he will make his enemies his friends, did so change the Kings heart, (I say)
that they had thereby not only to defend themselves, and to gather themselves
together, and to stand for their lives: but also to root out and to destroy
all the power of the people, Hest. 8.11.
and of the province that vexed them, both children and women, and to spoil
their goods: And by this mea^es the Jews ^^d overthrow the devilish pra^tise
of proud Haman.
and so also they did, and God blessed them therein* yea and Haman the Jews
great adversary was hanged upon the high gibbet, which he had prepared for
Mordecay, and after that ten of his sons also were hanged, and Mordecay and
all the Jews were greatly advanced and honored, Hest. 9.28.
and the days of weeping and fasting were turned into great reioicing and
feasting yearly. Thus we see how wonderfully God did bless them, being so
humbled in fasting and prayer before and what great things they obtained
thereby, as not only the saving of their lives and goods thereby, but the
utter ruin and overthrow of their most deadly and professed enemies: and
therefore no doubt if we could humble our selves this way, and pray
earnestly, as they did, if we were as near deaths door, as they were, and
had received even the sentence of death in our selves, as they had, 2. Cor. 1.9.
it were possible for us to escape it, and to find mercy with the Lord, as
they have done before us, and that not only for our selves, but for our
brethren, as they did. For as he has promised, that if we turn unto him
unfeignedly, in the midst of destruction, he will leave a blessing behind him
for us, as was said before out of Joel: Joel. 2.14.
so here in this people we see the truth and accomplishment of it.

Besides we may consider of that worthy example of Gods mercy this way showed
upon those that humbled themselves by fasting and prayer in the days of
Iehoshaphat, that good King of Judah, as it is set down in the second book of
the Chronicles: 2. Chr. 20.2
where it is said that the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the people of mount
Seir came forth to battle against him: and he fearing the danger that might
befall him, and his people, proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah: and prayed
earnestly to God for himself, and for them: which prayer of his is there set
down: And before they had ended their prayer, the spirit of the Lord came upon
Iahaziel a Leuite, in the midst of the congregation, who by the spirit of
prophecy did foretell the victory, saying, 2. Chro. 20.17.
Ye shall not need to fight in this battle, stand move not, and behold the
salvation of the Lord toward you: And king Iehoshaphat thereby obtained
victory against their enemies.
O Judah and Jerusalem, fear ye not, neither be afraid, to morrow go out
against them, and the Lord will be with you. And so it came to pass: for their
enemies slew one another, even the children of Ammon and Moab rose against the
inhabitants of mount Seir, to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an
end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy an other: and so
the Jews entered upon the spoil of them, and found among them abundance both
of substance, and of bodies laden with precious jewels, which they took for
themselves, till they could carry no more: and were three days in gathering of
the spoil, for it was much: and in the fourth day they praised God in the
valley of Berachah; which from that day had the name of that action, for there
they blessed and praised God for the victory, which he had given them, and so
called it the valley of blessing or praise: and so they returned home to
Jerusalem with great joy. Here we may consider the fruit of their fasting to be
this, that when by earnest prayer they sought unto God, being in great fear,
as it is said of the King, that he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord,
2. Chr. 10.3
then he made them to rejoice. So if we could thus rightly consider of this
hand of God stretched out against us, that seeing our sins to be the cause of
it, we would fear God and his wrath, and suffer it to work upon our
consciences, and seek unto God in fear earnestly to turn it away, it, might
please him so to bless us at the last, that we should have great cause to
rejoice. But very few do so lay it to heart, that they have all this while
any thing profited by it in the true fear of God, to repent them of any thing
that is past, and to determine a better course hereafter, and therefore cannot
so earnestly seek unto God as they should, for the remoouing of it, and so it
may justly still be continued, till it work in us this true fear: which God
grant that it may speedily do. But let so many as by the due consideration
of this visitation have set themselves to fear the Lord, and to seek unto him
in truth, consider how God was found of this people, and so will be of us in
his good time: and as he caused them after their great fear, to return home
with as much joy: so he may bring those that for fear have with grief
forsaken their towns and houses, sal. 126.5.
bring them home again with as much reioicing: and whereas they have sown
with tears, they may reap with joy, and going out weeping, and carrying
precious seed, might return with joy and bring their sheaues, as the prophet
speaks.

Lastly concerning this mattter we may see how the prophet Iona Ion. 3.4.
coming to Nineue according to the commandment of the Lord, to denounce Gods
heavy judgment against them for their sins, even that within forty days
the whole city should be overthrown: the King believing this fearful curse
threatened to be just and deserved, By this m^anes the Nineuites escaped tha^
destruction that was threatened against them.
proclaimed a fast to this end, that every one turning from his evil ways,
and from the wickedness of his hands, that they might cry mightily unto the
Lord, as they did: Whereupon it came to pass, that God seeing their works to be
good, and that they turned from their evil ways indeed, heard their prayers,
granted their requests, and did repent him of the evil, that he had said he
would do unto them, and did it not. Thus we see again what was the effect of
this fast which they held, (in great ignorance no doubt and much weakness,
yet in truth) namely, that the Lord seeing them sufficiently humbled by the
ministry of his Prophets, in the guiltiness of their sin, and the deserved
destruction threatened against them, and every one to forsake their evil
ways, for which he was justly offended with them: he stayed that plague, which
he had threatened, and had otherwise most certainly brought upon them. And this
also may greatly confirm our hope in this service of ours, that though for our
sins we must needs confess, that we have deserved not only this beginning
and continuance of the pestilence; but utter destruction; yet if every man
would so wholly leave his evil ways, that the Lord (who is the searcher of
the heart and reins) might see it, and take knowledge of it, and of that
repentance and amendment of life, that should be in all, and so then they
would cry mightily unto God, as these did; he would yet repent him of the
evil, which he has otherwise further determined to bring upon us, and not do
it: but might stay this grievous plague from spreading like a canker, and from
further coming into those places where yet it is not: and in those places,
that are infected with it, he might so diminish it from day to day, that it
cause not a final destruction, as was threatened to the Ninevites, and we have
justly deserved.

Therefore to conclude this one point, By this exp^ri^nce in others, we must
be confirmed in hope of God goodness to ou^ selves a^ this time.
that we might have courage and comfort in this that we do by a sure and
certain expectation of some blessed fruit of it in time, we have hitherto
seen, how the Lord of his great mercy and truth has never failed them, that
in fasting and prayer (according to his own ordinance) have sought unto him in
truth: Heb. 12.1.
that we having so great a cloud of witnesses (as the Apostle speaks) to
subscribe unto this doctrine by their own experience, might not doubt, but
that the Lord in due time will hear us as he has done them. Yea if we can
remember but our own experience, and that that our selves have made trial of
through the goodness of God, how in former times he has heard us, Much more
your own ^^perience (...) times ^^st.
when we have by fasting and prayer thus publikelie sought unto him: as when
the Invincible (falsely so called) Spanish Navy was upon our coasts, how
wonderfully upon our earnest suit and supplications every where made to that
end, not only we were preserved from that horrible destruction which they
most wickedly intended against us, but that themselves were drowned in the sea,
even the horse and him that rode upon him, ^od. 15.1.
as the Egyptians were when they came against the Israelites. And truly we may
remember, what a sudden and great fear all men for the most part were then
stricken with, and not without cause, and so how earnestly they did seek unto
God, when as there was in all places much fasting and prayer, and the people
came willingly to it: if we could do so now, when the Lord threatens
destruction to us, and to all places, as he did then (though after another
manner) we might by our own experience comfortablie lift up our heads, and
look with good assurance for the like mercy, that we found, for God is the
same, if we be not changed: when as by former experience like as David said,
when he went against Goliath to fight with him, whose great stature, and
complet armor of brass, and weapons might justly have terrified him: The Lord
that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, 1. Sam. 17.37.
and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistim: so we might all say; The same God of mercy that has heretofore
heard us, when we have in true humility sought unto him, we doubt not, when
we have sufficiently profited by this affliction, will now hear us also, and
deliver us. For indeed if we find both in the Scripture, and by daily
experience in our selves and in other, The ordina^y pray^rs ^f the faith^ull
have ob^ained great things, much more their ^astings and ^rayer.
that the ordinary prayers of Gods servants, and namely of our selves, are not
sent away empty, but that the Lord does daily according to the same bless us
and them: then these prayers which we now make with fasting, which are more
than ordinary, we may be assured shall bring great blessings upon us. When at
the commandment of Herod, ^ct. 12.5.
Peter was kept in prison, earnest prayer was made of the Church unto God for
him, and when Herod would have brought him out unto the people, the same night
slept Peter between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keeper
before the door kept the prison; and behold the Angel of the Lord came upon
them, and a light shined in the house, and he smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up, saying, Arise quickly; and his chains fell from his hands, and
so he was delivered. If then the ordinary prayer of the Church be of so great
force, and do so greatly prevail with the Lord, as to frustrate the counsels
of great Tyrants, to procure the help and presence of Angels from heaven, to
open the prison doors, and to vnloosen fetters and chains of iron: then what
shall the extraordinary prayers of the Church, even their fastings and prayers
do? Therefore we need not doubt, but if we continue to profit in humility by
this fatherly visitation of the Lord, and in repentance for all our sins, and
in continuance and feruencie of prayer; but we shall see some great fruit of
them at the last, even in that very thing, that we most of all desire.

And that we might yet be further comforted in this great heaviness of ours
with hope of some mercy from God, even that he would spare us at the last
according to our earnest desire, let us remember how when King Ahab a wicked
and very ungodly man fasted for that destruction, which the prophet Elijah
had by the word of the Lord threatened against him, 1. King. 21.21.
even that the Lord would bring evil upon him, and take away al his
posterity, and make his house desolate like the house of Jeroboam, what great
mercy he obtained of the Lord: Which fast of his, The Lord has rewarded the
wicked, that have used this ordinance but in ^utward ceremonies.
though it was not joined with true repentance, or any true knowledge, how to
serve the Lord aright, neither could be (for he was an idolatour) yet being
performed in some sort, only in keeping the outward ceremony, as putting on
sackecloth, and abstaining from meat and drink, and giving some other outward
token of sorrow and grief, that that fast of his was not unrewarded of the
Lord. For by that means he obtained that the execution of that judgment
against himself and all his posterity, which we have heard of, concerning the
rasing of him and them from the kingdom and throne of Israel, was put off and
differred until his sons days: as it is said in the words of that text,
that when he had heard what the prophet had prophesied against him, 1. King
21.27.
he rent his clothes, and put sackecloth upon himself, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly in token of mourning: and the word of the Lord came
to Elijah the Theshbite, saying, See thou how Ahab is humbled? because he
submits himself before me, I will not bring this evil in his days, but in
his sons days I will bring evil upon his house. If the Lord then did so
justify this ordinance of his in the person of this wicked man, when he did
stoop but unto the outward ceremony and bodily exercise of it, and was
altogether void of true humility and sound repentance, resting only in the
bare outward tokens of them, and had not his heart thoroughly broken by faith:
that he differred this deserved and denounced judgment so long, that it came
not in his days, which was a great outward blessing and honor upon him: how
then much more if we so use this outward abstinence as we do, Much m^re will
he do it to his servants that use it in truth.
that especially we join to it the inward virtues of humility and repentance,
and contrition of heart, and feruencie of prayer, will the Lord be appeased
toward us, and at the least be so far forth entreated, that he differ
that great wrath of his, that otherwise might break out to our utter
destruction. For if the Lord has showed such mercy to the wicked, as to
spare them in this world for a time, when they have submitted themselves to the
outward obedience of this commandment of humbling themselves in fasting,
though in great hypocrisy: then how much more will he spare his own
children, that use it in sincerity and truth? Therefore let this example also
somewhat encourage us with hope of good success that we shall find the Lord
merciful unto us in thus seeking unto him in this time of great need.

And we have great reason so to do, if we do but well weigh the dealing of
one man toward another, that when in affliction they have submitted themselves
unto them, they have found favor with them, By humble sub^ission and p^a^er
men have found s^uou^ with their enimi^s.
though they had greatly offended them before: the only hope of this has
moved them to seek after this manner even to those, which were their professed
enemies before, and they have done it not in vain. For thus it is written of
Benadad king of Aram* that when he was overcome in two battles of Ahab king of
Israel, 1. King. 20.29.
and received so great an overthrow in the latter, that in it were slain of
the Aramites, an hundred thousand footmen in one day, and so was out of hope
of any safety for himself, at the length by the advice of his servants, he
put his company into sackcloth, with roapes about their heads, and so came to
the kind of Israel, and entreated for their lives, hoping by submitting
themselves unto him after this manner to obtain pardon, as indeed they did. For
the messengers, when in this araie they came unto him, 1. King. 2^.33.
said, Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live, using all words
and behavior of great submission: and Ahab answered, he is my brother, is he
yet alive? go bring him to me: and when he came, he made a covenant with
him, and let him go. See what is the fruit of true humiliation, and humble
supplication: and if men will humble themselves and sue earnestly unto men in
hope of pardon, (...) G^d.
how much more should they do it unto the Lord, whom they have more
offended, and who has greater power to punish them: and if unto those of whom
they had no promise before of obtaining any thing, but come to them altogether
(as it were) at adventure: then much more to him, of whom we have so many
gracious promises in the Gospel to allure and encourage us: and if unto those,
which were their open and professed adversaries, then most of al unto him that
is reconciled unto us by the blood of his son, and is become our father in
him: and if unto them where we have none to speak and entreat for us but our
selves, then especially to him, where we have an advocate and mediator, 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
even Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also the propitiation for our sins:
and if unto them, of whose love we never made trial before, then unto him much
more, who (as he has first showed it above all measure in giving his son to
die for us, and that when we were his enemies) has since confirmed it unto us
many ways, that we need not doubt of it. And on the other side if so great
mercy has been thus found of men, who have scarce one drop of that compassion
in them, which is like a great deep sea in the Lord; then may we be assured
that we shall not miss of it at his hands if we continue seeking, and wait
upon him for it, as we should: and if a man has found it of his enemy, then
much more of his God to whom he is reconciled: and if where none speak for
him, but mortal men like themselves, then much more, where Jesus Christ the
son of God makes continual intercession for us. So that every way we see we
have cause to do as we do, hoping assuredly, that we shall not do it in
vain.

(...) prayer.
Therefore if the commandment of God did not compel us to the obedience of
this humble submission, as it does; yet the liberal and most certain promises
which are made to them that shall use it, and especially the experience that we
and other have found of the undoubted truth of them should provoke us to this
holy exercise of fasting and prayer: which if men will not come unto so far,
as they be able, what remains for them? and what other thing can they look
for, but that if they will not humble themselves with the people of God to
find mercy, they shall taste of his wrath with the wicked: and if they will
not weep now for their sins with the one, they should houle in the
punishment of them, when it shall be too late, with the other: and if they will
have no part nor portion in the obedience of Gods commandment given to his
people, both under the Law and the Gospel, that they should have part with
them in the promises of reward made to them in them both. Even as the Lord
himself in plain words has threatened, that they that will not afflict
themselves with sorrow for their sins in fasting and mourning at times
convenient, he will destroy and root them out from among his people, saying;
This is a day of reconciliation, Leu. 23.2^
to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God: and every person that
humbles not himself that same day, shall even be cut off from his people.

HOMIL. VI.
The sixth Homily shows what is the proper time for fasting, namely, the time
of affliction and sorrow: and then how God requires it, and his servants have
practiced it: and so how the Lord requires it of us in this time of our sorrow:
and how long the time of a fast should continue: and how the same time should
be spent.

Having showed in the former Treatises (as you have seen) that this holy
ordinance of fasting is grounded upon the commandment of God, and that he
straightly upon our allegiance that we owe unto him requires it of us, and so
it can not be left undone of us without a manifest disobedience and contempt of
his Word: and moreover, that the whole action consists both in that outward
bodily exercise of abstinence and forbearing of those things for a time, which
we have heard of: and also and especially in those inward virtues of the mind
and graces of the spirit, to be then attained unto, used, and professed, which
have lastly been entreated of: and therefore is to be observed of us after
that manner that has been declared, if we will have our service therein
acceptable unto God, and profitable to our selves: it remains to show, what
is the time proper and peculiar unto this exercise, and when the Lord
especially requires it of us. For it is not an ordinary and common service of
God, Fasting is not an ordinary service of God fit for all times.
and that which should be practiced every day, as some others are, and so it is
not fit for every time: but an extraordinary part of his worship, and of our
duty unto him, and so more meet for some times than for other. Solomon by the
wisdom of Gods spirit says in the book of the Preacher (as we have heard
before) that there is to all things an appointed time, Eccle. 3.1.
and a time to every purpose under the heaven: and so a time to weep and a
time to laugh, verse. 4.
a time to mourn and a time to dance, and therefore a time to fast and a time
to feast. So then, as it were a very preposterous thing for any to make great
feasts when they should fast, and in the times when the Lord by his word and
works of justice calls to fasting, that then they should give themselves to
all kind of cheering up of themselves: which kind of profaneness the Prophet
greatly complains of in his time, Esa. 22.12.
saying, And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call unto weeping and
mourning, and to baldness, and girding with sackcloth, and behold joy and
gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating and drinking, and mocking
the doctrine of the Prophet with these words, For to morrow we shall die: so on
the other side, it were a thing of very great disorder, We must be able to
discern between the time of fasting and of feasting.
for any to afflict themselves and to fast, when God would have them to rejoice
and feast: as we see some of those that returned from the captivity of Babylon,
of a good devotion, but of great ignorance, and so were rebuked for it. For
when in the feast of Tabernacles they did hear the Law of God read (whereof
they had been ignorant a great while) and thereby perceived, how they had
offended God, they wept for their sins, and began also to abstain from their
meat, as appears by the answer of Esra and the rest of the Levites, who said
unto them, Neh. 8.9.
This day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not, neither weep; but go
and eat of the fat, and drink the sweet, and send part unto them for whom none
is prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord: be ye not sorry therefore, for
the joy of the Lord is your strength. So that it is, as if they had said, This
is a time of great joy for our deliverance, and other great benefits of God
bestowed upon us, and therefore not of fasting. But this is the great blindness
and ignorance of many, that this way they know no difference of times, but all
are alike to them, if they may have meat.

Herein the Lord has been merciful unto us, and has directed us aright by
his word, which as it is a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105.
and a lantern to our feet in all other things, so also in this: when he has
showed us both by express commandment, and also by the common practice of all the godly in all ages, The time of affli^^ion and s^rrow is the m^st ^r^per
time of fasting.
that the time of affliction is the most fit and convenient time for fasting,
and as it were most proper unto it: when as we have cause of sorrow, either for
some great benefit, that we want, or others whom we love in the Lord, or some
judgment of God present, as most like shortly to come upon our selves, or upon
them: and as any of these be greater, so have we more cause always to fast,
and God does then require it of us especially at that time. And this is that
which our Savior Christ shows in the Gospel, where, to this captious
question of the Scribes and Pharesies, saying, Why do the Disciples of John
fast often and pray, Luke 5.33.
and the Disciples of the Pharesies also? but thine eat and drink, he made
this answer: Can ye make the children of the wedding chamber to fast, as long
as the bridegroom is with them: but the days will come, even when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those
days. Where he excuses his Disciples for not fasting at that time, because
the Bridegroom was with them as yet, and so by Christ's presence it was a time
of joy unto them; but ere it were long, he should be taken from them, and they
should want him, and there should come some great trouble upon them, which
should cause them to (...) phet, even that their deserved destruction was so
near at hand, unless they did spe^dily repent, and so put on sackecloth from
the greatest of them, even to the least of them: Thus in this time of great
heaviness they took upon them this exercise of fasting, which in the
prosperity and wealth, and flourishing estate of the city they knew not of,
neither were acquainted with it before: but now they saw that the time it
self did call them to another kind of behavior, and so they did practice it
willingly.

The like may be said of the people of the Jews in the days of Queen
Hester, when Haman, for the malice he bare against Mordecay, sought the
desolation of all them, and had diuelishly, plotted for it, that he obtained
the kings Decree in writing against them for it; which for the more speedy
executing of the same, was sent by posts into all provinces of his kingdom,
where the Jews were, to root out and to destroy them all in one day; both
young and old, children and women: Hest. 4.1.
hereupon it came to pass, that not only Mordecay himself, when he
perceived all that was done, he rent his clothes, And all the I^wes when they
mourned for the devise of Haman.
and put on sackcloth, and ashes, and went out into the mids of the city,
and cried with a great cry and bitter: but also in every province and place,
whether the king^ charge and his commission came, there was great sorrow among
the Jews, and weeping and mourning, and many lay in sackecloth and ashes.
verse. 16.
Now in this time of so great heaviness and sorrow, as was not heard of before,
by the advice of H^ster all the Jews that were found in the chief city
Sushan, were commanded to assemble themselves together, and to fast and pray
unto God by the space of three days and three nights, and she promised that
herself, and her maids would do the like: and Mordecay and the Jews did
according to this commandment. So all of them at this time seeing what cause
they had of mourning more then before, knew that now fasting and prayer was
most requisite for them: for though Haman and the king sat drinking, and making
merry, as fearing nothing; yet the city of Shushan was in perplexity, and so
had cause to do, as they did. So did the Jews also in Jerusalem and all
Judah, in the like case in the reign of Iehos^aphat, when a great army of the
Ammonites, 2. Chro. 20.3.
and Moabites came up against him, they feared greatly some overthrow, even the
loss of their lives, And when they were in fear of foreign enemies.
and goods, and all that they had, if the Lotde were not merciful to them to
defend them: and this fear of danger so near at hand, and so likely to come
upon them, caused great sorrow, for they confess and say, there is no
strength in us to stand before this great multitude, ver. 12.
that comes against us, neither do we know what to do: Then the king
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, and they gathered themselves together,
to ask counsel of Lord, they came out of all the cities of Judah to inquire
of the Lord. When they were in this distress for fear of their enemies, that
they knew not themselves what to do, they humbled themselves before the Lord
in fasting and prayer, that he would show the^ what they should do. And to be
short in so large an argument, this is that which the prophet Joel shows the
people that the Lord required of them in that time of their misery, that they
were fallen into, and that the very present sorrow, that they were justly
fallen into by reason of the hand of God lying so heavily upon them, did
require, and call upon them for at that time: for when he had spoken of the
great scarcity, that was among them by reason of catterpillers, and other
vermin, which had eaten up, and destroyed the fruits of the earth, and so for
this present affliction they had all cause to mourn, even as he calls all
sorts unto it, even them that were most senseless, saying, awake ye
drunkards and weep, ^el. 1.5.
and houle all ye drinkers of wine, and again, Mourn like a virgin girded
^ith sackcloth, for the husband of her youth, and again, Girde your selves,
and lament ye priests, houle ye ministers of the altar: (...). 1 ^.
Thereupon he gives them this charge, to sanctify a fast, and to call a
solemn assembly, to gather the elders, and all the inhabitants of the land
into the house of the Lord, ^ourning (...) ^g^ther.
and cry unto him. So he shows them that in this time of common sorrow they
had all cause to seek unto the Lord in fasting and prayer, and after^ards he
shows more plainly, that at ^his time by reason of the common calamity and
grief for it, the Lord did command them so to do: in these words; (...). 1 ^.
Therefore now the Lord says; Turn unto me with all your hearts, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, where he ioineth these two
together, fasting, weeping and mourning, and says that the Lord does require
both of them, and the one should not be severed from the other; but seeing the
Lord had given them so great cause of weeping and mourning, he would have them
seek unto him for mercy by prayer and fasting. Seeing then the Lord has with
his own voice appointed out the time, namely that the time of mourning should
be a time of fasting; and also holy men and women in the wisdom of Gods
spirit have so observed the difference of times, that as there has fallen out
any great cause of sorrow in their time, so they have put this in practice, as
we have seen by many examples: we must think, that the same commandment
binds us to the like practice, when any such occas^on of time shall befall
us, and that their practice must be our imitation.

This is, and has been a long time, of great sorrow unto us, that cause (...)
common ^^rrow we ^iue in our ^^^ne.
if we did rightly consider of things, as we should: for if there had been
nothing else, but the loss of so gracious, virtuous, and peaceable a Queen,
of whose religious, wise, and peaceable government we have had experience these
45. years, that one thing might have put sufficient sorrow into us, to cause
us to have humbled our selves before God in fasting and prayer for our great
unthankfulness, and other sins, which were the cause of it: But when unto
that loss which yet it has pleased the Lord most mercifully to supply, by
causing our sovereign Lord King James so quietly to possess his heritance of
this crown, whose royal person, and noble progeny the Lord preserve and
bless for ever) when unto this loss (I say) there has been added presently
upon the neck of it, so great a plague and pestilence, as we have not known,
nor has been heard of in the days of our forefathers, that, it should
continue so long, and in that extremity that it has done, as to die weekly so
many thousands in this land, and thus from week to week; and the same not
only to be in one chief and mother city of this realm, but also in all other
almost of account, and in towns corporate, yea in the seacoast towns also
exceeding much, so that many houses in them are left empty and desolate without
inhabitant: Especially (...) respect of this great and long continued
pest^lence.
and it is also in many villages, and small towns: so that it is dispersed
almost all the land over, especially in these southern parts, and scarcely
any shiere or country is free from it: Such a thing as almost has not been
heard of among us: So that we say of it, as the prophet Joel speaks of that
great affliction, that was in his time: who to move them to a most serious and
deep consideration of that hand of God, that was then very heavily upon
them, says on this wise: Joel. 1.2.
Hear O ye Elders, and harken all ye inhabitants of the land, whether such
a thing has been in your days, or in the days of your fathers; tell your
children of it, and let your children show it to their children, and their
children to another generation: and then he does at large describe the
calamity that was upon them: but before hand he tells them, as we have
heard, that it was such a strange thing, as neither themselves nor their
fathers had seen, nor their posterity should after them, but he memory of it
was to be kep^ from age to age, even to all posterity.

So we may say of this mortal pestilence* and pestilent mortality, that the
like was never in our days, nor in the days of our f^thers, the ol^est man or
woman that lives can not of their own knowledge make relation of the like: so
that we have great cause never to forget it, but to keep the memory of it
with profit to our selves: and also to tell it to our children and to our
childrens children, that they may think of it also, and wisely to apply it to
themselves, and so to profit by our harms: that we all the sons and
daughters of faithful Abraham may do, Genesis 18.19
as it is said of him, namely, Command our sons and our households after us,
that they keep the way of the Lord, and do righteousness, that God may not
only keep from them all his plagues, but bring upon them all that good which
he has promised to those that fear him. Seeing then that the hand of the
Lord is more heavy upon us, and upon our brethren this way, then ever we or
our fathers have felt or known it, we must needs confess, that unless we be
senseless and hard-hearted, And so, ho^ just cause th^re is of public fasting
and prayer.
we have great cause to sorrow, and to mourn, and so to know the day of our
visitation: and so to acknowledge this to be the very time, that God requires
of us fasting and prayer, and all kind of humiliation, that possibly can be.
So that if ever we should do it, now we ought; and if there be any time fit for
it, this time of so great and so long affliction, and so consequently of so
great sorrow, weeping and mourning, is most fit for it. Therefore if now we
should neglect it, and spend away the time in feasting and in all kind of
mirth and iollitie (as it is to be feared, Esa. 22.12.
that too many do) even as the wicked in former times have done, there would be
more than too great likelihood, that not only this plague should continue and
increase, but some more grievous punishment should come upon us hereafter: and
all of us must needs have just cause to fear it. In the time of the law, they
were not only commanded to celebrate the Passover yearly, but to keep it at
the time that God had appointed, and this he required so straightly, that if any
had no let and impediment (as if he should be clear, ^euit. 9.13.
and not in a journey) and yet should be negligent to keep the Passover, the
same parson should be cut off from his people: because he brought not the
offering of Lord in his due season, that man should bear his sin: if we then
do not at this time, when God requires it of us, bring to him the obedience of
fasting and prayer, and offer unto him in all humility (as the time requires)
the sacrifices of broken hearts, and contrite spirits, we can not only not
look for any mercy according to our great need, but we may assure our selves
of some further great punishment, if we be not wholly destroyed, and cut off
from his people. Therefore let us not be like unto those foolish Jews, who
knew not, nor regarded the time of their visitation, and so did not consider,
either what mercy God offered unto them, or what duties he required of them
in that time; of who^ our Savior Christ justly complains in the Gospel, and
utters his complaint out of the abundance of his love with many tears,
saying, Luke 19.42
O if thou had even known at the least in this thy day those things that
belong to thy peace, but now are they hidden from thine eyes. So we should now
be ignorant, what God requires of us at this time, and not do it.

Let us then be persuaded upon the former reasons, commandments, and examples,
that howsoever God at other times gives us liberty, to feast, and to rejoice,
and to use his benefits not only for necessity, but for delight, according to
the sundry causes of mirth (which by his blessings is bestowed upon us) he
shall offer unto us: yet at this time, it being a time of so great affliction,
and so of sorrow every where, as has not been known or heard of, which they
do best know that have been under the hand of God, and we our selves cannot
altogether be ignorant of it; let us be persuaded I say, that the Lord
requires of us fasting, and mourning, and great humiliation, that so we may
do that that we do in faith, and in obedience to his holy commandment, and
that most willingly also, that he might accept it at our hands and reward us
for it.

And here again by the way we may easily judge of the fastes held in the
time of popery and ignorance, In popery this difference of time for fasting
was wholly neglected.
namely that they were according to the blindness of that time both ignorantly
imposed upon men's consciences, and also very superstitiously obeyed: when as
they made no difference or choice of times, but without all discretion
appointed the time of Lent, and all Ember weeks, (as they call them) and every
Saints eeuen yeerelie to be fasted; let the times be then as they will be: not
considering whether the time be or shall be a time of joy or sorrow, of weeping
or of reioicing; as a time of peace or of war, a time of sickness or of
health, a time of dearth or of plenty, or generally a time of prosperity or
of adversity: and this they do, not for civil policy (as we keep them)
but of mere consciene, inioyning all men under the pain of sin, and
fearful curse of the Pope, upon such and such days, yearly to fast, even
unto their dying day; when as it may fall out, for ought that they know, that
such times may be full of causes of reioicing publicly or privately, and so
feasting were more fit for them then fasting. Even as a Physician should
prescribe unto his patient, and that yearly upon such a day of the month, or
week he should take such a purgation; when as it may fall out, that then he
is in consumption, and so had more need of some cordial electuary, or
restoratiue medicine, than of any purgations: and if any should so unadvisedly
prescribe, we would count him a fool rather then a Physician. But as he that
is skillful in his art, and conscionable toward his patient, will minister
nothing unto him, either for purging or blood-letting, but he will consider not
only the state of his body at that present, but also the time and season of
the year, whether it be the spring or the fall of the leaf, winter or summer,
whether it be hot or cold, or temperate, and accordingly he will give his
direction: But we must have a care diligently to observe it.
So the governors of the Church, (who in this respect may be called the
spiritual Physicians of our souls) in prescribing of this abstinence, and
diet as it were, for the curing of our souls, that is, for the bringing of us
to humility and repentance for our sins, must have principal regard to the
time, and to the quality of the time: as whether it be a time of sorrow or of
joy, that so they may know, which is the sit season for it: which we have
heard to be the time of affliction: and then it must not only be in wisdom
prescribed of them, but also diligently used of the people, if they will
recover the health of their souls; even as Physic must not only be
prescribed of the wise Physician in time convenient, but ^^e patient in taking
of it must not neglect the ^ime appointed by him. So that in this holy
exercise, as in all other things the godly wise, and they that look to get
any good by it, must regard what is the time, that God has appointed them to
use it: And herein they must learn wisdom of the children of this world,
who observe the times for harvest and for seed, and know what is fit for every
time: so they must know what is the time for every duty, and accordingly
practice the same.

But to proceed in this doctrine of fasting, as we have hitherto seen the time
when this holy exercise ought to be undertaken of all Christians, even the
time of sorrow for the want of some benefit, or presence or fear of some
punishment; so now we are farther to consider in few words, how long it
should continue; that is, when we see that we have cause to fast, and mind to
do it, how long the time of our fast should last: The time o^ a fast must be
longer or sh^rter according to the greatness of the cause.
And for this one point I do generally answer thus much, that it must be
always according, to the greatness of our affliction, or according to the
need, than we have to be humbled more or less, and so sometimes it ought to be
longer, and sometimes shorter, according to the discreet wisdom of those to
whom it belongs to appoint the same: this always provided, that when it is
the shortest, we must continue it at the least for one whole day: that is from
evening to the next day at the same time. In which time we must wholly abstain
from any breakefast in the morning, or dinner at noone, and from the morning at
the least to the evening they must give themselves to all good exercises of the
word and prayer, singing of Psalms, And it must be always held one day at
the least.
meditating upon their sins, and upon the present affliction and such like:
publicly and privately. And thus is the time of fasting limited unto us, in
the word of God: for Moses speaking of that yearly day of fasting, which was
prescribed unto the Jews, calls it a day of reconciliation, ^eu. 23.27.
saying, the tenth of the seventh month shall be a day of reconciliation: so
that it was not a work of an hour or two: but of an whole day: and
oftentimes in the same place he speaks of a day, and not of a piece of a
day, and further adds, that they should keep it from eeuen to eeuen,
saying, ver. 32.
This shall be unto you a Sabbath of rest, and ye shall humble your souls: in
the ninth day of the month at eeuen, from eeuen to eeuen shall ye celebrate
your Sabbath: to show that it ought to be a natural day consisting of sower
and twenty hours. And when we thus straightly require an whole day, An
excep^ion.
it is to be understood with that limitation, that we have heard of before,
wherein liberty has been granted for eating and drinking some thing for all
those persons, which through age or infirmity, or some sickness, are not able
to continue fasting so long. So that as the Sabbath is an whole day, and must
so be kept, Exodus 20.
(for it is called the seventh day) and in the creation and so since, it
consisted of evening and morning, that is, of day and night, as well as any
other: so is the time of fast; this is the least time for any ordinarily: in
some cases some are excepted, as has been said, and they may somewhat abridge
of this time, but yet the general rule is for a day. For the day of fast is
of the nature of the Sabbath, and it is also so called, and has that name
given unto it, Leu. 23.32.
as in the forenamed place of Leuit^cus* in the ninth day of the month ye
shall celebrate your Sabbath from eeuen to eeuen: where he speaks not of the
seventh day (commonly called the Sabbath) but of the yearly day of fasting,
called the day of reconciliation.

Wherein again most evidently appears the foolishness of popish fastes,
^he popish ^sts were ^t for a ^ece of the ^ay.
who did limite them not to a day, but to a piece of a day, and unto the
least part of the day, as namely to supper: so that they held it a very good
fast, if a man went to bed supperlesse upon their fasting days: insomuch
that if he took a good breakefast, and dined well with all kind of fish, and
other dainties, (flesh only excepted) and then when their bellies were well
filled took no supper, they were counted well to have kept their fast. But we
see that it must not be a fasting night, (as they commonly called it) but a
fasting day: even an whole day, until evening. Therefore if we will keep it
aright, we must abstain, not a piece of a day, as in the foorenoone only, but
until evening, and so the whole day. And this must be ordinary for all
fastes.

But if the affliction be greater, and the wrath of God appear to be more
severe, and so we have greater cause of deeper humiliation, Sometimes fast must
continue t^^ or three days together.
then the fast must continue longer: as sometimes two days, or three days, at
the discretion of those that have such cause to use it. And this appears by
the fast of the Jews, which they kept in the time of their captivity, of whom
it is said in the book of Hester, that when Mordecay sent unto her the copy
of the Kings commission sealed with his own signet for the rooting out of all
the Jews in one day, so that it was decreed that the whole Church of God
should be rased wit from the face of the earth at once: H^st. 4.1^
then she promised that she would adventure her life for them, and go into the
King to make suite for them, and that she and they might find favor with the
Lord and with the King, she willed them all to fast and pray three days and
three nights, and neither eat nor drink; and she promised that her self, and
her maids would do the like, and it is said moreover in the text, that
Mordecay went his way, and he, and the Jews did as they were commanded: So
that in this great extremity of theirs, they continued their fast for the
space of many days together: and so ought we to do, if the like affliction
were upon us. But for this present though by the grace and mercy ^f God it be
otherwise with us, yet undoubtedly in respect of this visitato^ which is very
grievous, we ought to continue our fast one day weekly, so long as it shall
be continued upon us: and so though we do not keep it ma^^e days together:
yet we may and ought to do it many days, one after an other. For seeing that
it is appointed for the time of affliction, and then one whole day at the
least is allotted for it, so long as this time of affliction shall continue, we
should not be unwilling weekly to bestow one day this way, that so the Lord
may be entreated with us at the last. And thus much for the time how long any
fast should be held.

Now further we are to consider how we should bestow this time of fasting, and
wherein we are to be occupied in the day of fast. The time of fasting is (...)
the (...) of the Sabbath.
And for the better understanding of that, we must know thus much, that the
time of fasting, how long soever, whether it be but one day, or more, is
always of the nature of the Sabbath: therefore look how we ought to bestow the
Sabbath in resting from the ordinary labors, and works of our callings, and
from all kind of recreations and pastimes much more, and come to the Church,
and be occupied in Gods service, publicly and privately, so ought we to do
upon the day of fasting. And that we might be assured hereof, first we do
read, that this day as it is of that nature, so it has that name given unto
it, for it is called a Sabbath: Leu. 23.23
This shall be unto you a Sabbath of rest, ye shall humble your souls: in the
ninth day of the month at eeuen, from eeuen to eeuen ye shall celebrate your
Sabbath: where twice in one verse Moses calls it a Sabbath. Secondly it is
called a Sabbath of rest, and they are willed to rest their Sabbath, to show
that upon that day, (as upon the ordinary Sabbath day) they should rest from
the labors of their calling: and more particularly they are forbidden to do
any kind of work upon that day: Leu. 23.28.
as it is said, Ye shall do no work that same day, for it is a day of
reconciliation, to make atonement for you before the Lord your God. And this
every person is forbidden, And therefore then we ought to r^st from the
ordinary work ^f our ^aking.
and that under the punishment of Gods high displeasure to be poured upon them
to their utter destruction, as it is set down in the next verse following: and
every person that shall do any work, that same day, the same person will I
destroy from among his people. Therefore upon this day all men should carefully
give over all ordinary works of their calling, and have nothing to do with
them, and not only from their hands, but their minds from them, according to
the same strictness that they are bound unto upon the Sabbath day. Insomuch
that if there be occasion to keep a fast in the time of harvest, or
seed-time, or any other time of business, so many as do profess to keep
it, must altogether abstain from all such works, as were otherwise not only
lawful, but necessary. Which that we might the rather most yield unto, Works
of necessity ar^ then permitted.
we acknowledge and teach, that in this day of rest, there is that liberty
granted unto us, both for the preparing of meat and drink at the evening, yea
and at other times also of the day, if it be necessary (as for those that be
weak and sickely) and for all other works of necessity, as any occasion
shall be offered, that we have upon the Sabbath days. As for example, if any be
sick, it is lawful to take pains about them, yea to ride and go for them: if
any sudden casualtie fall out by fire or water, or thieves, or such like, it is
lawful to take all pains to repress the rage and fury of them. But setting
all such cases of necessity aside, all men ought wholly upon these days to
rest from their labors; which the Lord has straightly forbidden, with the
denunciation of a fearful curse, that he will assuredly bring upon al those
that break it, even that he will cut them off from his people.

And besides this resting from work (which is necessarily required) we ought
to bestow the whole day in the public and private exercises of the worship
and service of God; We must be^tow that lay wholly on the service of God.
as in hearing the Word of God read and preached, confessing our sins, and
praying unto the Lord; and in all other means that might further us thereunto:
and most of all which may quicken us up unto true humility, and feruency in
prayer. And therefore the Prophet Joel Joel 1.15.
thus speaks of it, exhorting them to keep a solemn day of fast, says,
Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly: he does not will them to appoint a
day of fasting, but to sanctify it, and keep it holy; to show that it ought
to be kept even as an holy Sabbath. So that as the seventh day was said to be
sanctified from the beginning, because it was not appointed for the works of
our calling, but for the worship of God, Exodus 20.
and we are willed to remember it, to keep it holy: so we should think of
this day of fast, as of an holy day, and so rem^mber it, and think of it
before hand, that we take order for, and so dispose of all our worldly
business and affairs, that that day we have nothing to hinder us from
bestowing it wholly upon the worship and service of God. Leu. 23.27.
So likewise Moses speaking of the day of fast, says, It shall be an holy
convocation unto you, and you shall humble your souls, and offer sacrifices
made by fire unto the Lord: where he does not only say, that their assemblies
then should be to an holy end, as upon the Sabbath, and that they should not
meet about worldly matters, but speaks of sacrifices, as a part of Gods
worship then to be used. Therefore concerning the service of God this day to be
used; as upon the Sabbath day, besides the daily morning and evening sacrifice,
there was a peculiar kind of sacrifice appointed for that day, Number. 28.9.
namely, two lambs of a year old, etc. and so all things were then doubled,
and thus they spent the greatest part of the day in we public service of God:
so ought it to be upon the day of fast. And this was the practice of the
people of God, as we read in the book of Nehemiah, Neh. 9 1.
where it is said, That all the Israelites assembled, with fasting, Therefore
longer time then ordinary should be spent in the public assemblies.
and with sackecloth, and earth upon them; and the Levites stood up in their
place and read in the book of the law of the Lord their God four times on the
day, and they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God four times. So that
both for the exercise of the word, and for prayer all was extraordinary: and
so ought it to be among us, that we should not only do as we do, namely,
twice a day, once in the forenoone and again in the afternoon, but we should
continue both the times longer than we do, and have more exercises of the Word,
and of prayer, if we were able, or had more help: as it is said in this
Congregation of the Jews they had: for the Levites are reckoned up by name,
who spoke, even Ieshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, verse. 4.5.
Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, who cried with a loud voice
unto the Lord their God: and they stood up, and said, Praise the Lord your God
for ever and ever; and let them praise thy glorious name, O God, which
excels about al thanksgiving and praise: where we see that there were many
that prayed unto God, and exhorted the people, which could not be all at once,
because of disorder and confusion, but one after another; whereby also it came
to pass, that they were able to continue so long, even to preach and to pray
four times in the day. And thus we see, how this day ought to be spent;
therefore they that come to the Church in the forenoone, and absent themselves
in the afternoon, without any necessary cause to be approved of God and men,
do not keep this holy day of fast, as they should.

In the popish fasting days work was ordinarily permitted.
And here again we have just cause to find fault with the popish pretended
fastes, who as in many other things they swarued from the word of God, so in
this one point they came nothing near it: for upon their fasting days there
was no restraint of work, but it was lawful for them to follow their
business, as upon any other day, and they that professed to keep it most
devoutly, yet did not leave their business until noone, and then not wholly
neither, for besides dressing up of houses, preparing of linen against the next
day, if they had any work of their own to do at home within the doors,
they thought that they might lawfully do it, though it held them occupied
until night: so they made no conscience of not working. And besides this, they
had no special service upon such days, and if they had, few or none came to
it, and held themselves bound to it: but the Churches were as empty upon those
days, And the service of God was little regarded.
as upon any other: and they that were most superstitious in that religion were
of opinion, that if they came for a quarter or half an hour in the evening,
they had done as much as could be required of them, though they understood not
one word of that that was said or done: so far were they from having any holy
assemblies, or doubling of their service that day, that they had none at al for
the most part: but all was differred until the day following; as though they
should fast upon one day, and serve God upon an other, and not do them both
together. And thus much of the time, when, and how long we should fast, and
how the same time ought to be spent.

HOMIL. VII.
The seventh Homily entreats of the several kinds or sorts of fasts,
whereof the one is private, and the other public: and first of private
fastings, and how to behave our selves in them: and how they ought to be
entertained into men's houses: and for what causes; and what great good may come
thereby: and what liberty the Governors have in appointing of them above all
the rest of the family.

THe nature and thus condition of this holy exercise of fasting being thus
hitherto described out of the word of God, both that it is an ordinance and
commandment of almighty God, and not an humane constitution, and brought in
by the policy of men, and therefore that which all men must submit themselves
unto of conscience: and also that it consists in that outward bodily
exercise of abstinence from all the comfort of this life for a time, and in
those inward virtues of the mind, as true humility, and feruencie of prayer,
(whereof we have heard) and that the time fit for it is specially the time of
some great affliction, and that then it must be held longer or shorter time
according to the greatness of the same affliction, whether it be present, or
justly to be feared; and that the said time of fasting is of the nature of the
Sabbath, and therefore must be so spent of all, as usually the Sabbath is, and
ought to be, both in abstaining from all the works of our callings (things of
necessity only excepted) and also in being occupied in the several parts or
Gods worship, as the exercises of the reading, and hearing of the word of God,
prayer unto him, and all meditation and good conference that might further them
thereunto: ^he several ^undes of ^astes.
It remains now that I should in order speak of their several sorts and
kinds of fasting, that we might know, how many they be, and what they are;
that so we might use them in their several time and place, as the Lord shall
require them of us, and as we shall see that we have cause so do: and that
when we can not use the one, as there is no cause for it at all, yet we might
perceive that there was cause of the other, and so think our selves bound
unto it, and that we should not think our selves wholly discharged of our
obedience unto the Lord this way, because we can not serve him in that kind
of fasting that our selves do desire. All fastes therefore are of two sorts,
they are either private or public, The one private, the other public.
either used of one person man or woman, or of some one family and household,
or of some few private persons in one family, or out of diverse, according to
the several need that they shall find in themselves, or see to be in other:
or else used of an whole Church and congregation publicly in a town, or of
many Churches in the same town or city, and so is common to them all: or of
diverse Churches in a country, or realm according to the affliction that is,
or like to be upon a town, city, country, or realm, and that not only
their own, but some other, as their neighbor towns, or countries, or
generally any part of the Church of God, and so are moved to it, not only in
respect of themselves, but of some others, in love, and desire to succor them.
And unto both there kinds all that has been hitherto said of fasting does
truly and properly appertain, both for the commandment of God binding them
to it, and for the nature of it, wherein it consists, that it should be kept
strictly after the manner that has been said, and for the time when, and how
long it should be held, and how during that time we should be occupied; and so
it shall be sufficient once to have set them down generally, which must be
practiced of all that celebrate any fast, either public or private; and so it
shall not be needful in handling of the several kinds, to entreat of any of
the^ particularly again.

that a pri^ate fast is.
That I might speak therefore orderly, I will first speak of a private fast:
which is that that is undertaken and held by some private person, man or woman,
rich or poor, of what calling or degree soever, prince or people; or of a
private family, or some few in the same, or out of diverse households gathered
together upon their own private motion; yet orderly and in the fear of God,
according to any calamity, that shall be upon them, or they shall have just
cause to fear, or as they shall be ^ouched and moved in compassion more then
other with the calamity of the Church or commonweal, wherein they live, or
with the misery of some particular persons in the same, or of other Churches
and the members thereof. And that there ought to be such private fastes, it is
most apparent out of the Scripture: for as the Lord does by threatening or
sending public calamities, That there ought to be private fast
call whole countries and nations to a public fast, that when the cause is
common to all, all might humble themselves for it, as we have seen in the
prophet Joel, Joel 2. Jonah 3. Hest. 4.
and as was practiced among the Ninevites, and also among the Jews in the time
of Queen Hester, where because the punishment present, as of famine; or
threatened, as utter destruction of them all, was general, therefore all were
willed to fast, and all did so: So if there be any calamity upon any
particular person, or private persons, they must think by the like proportion,
that God calls them unto it, and that they stand bound to submit themselves
to this ordinance, though others do not, neither have they any such cause: or
as the Lord shall give them to see, and to feel more then other the
afflictions of their brethren, and so are more willing as fellow members of the
same body to mourn for them, then others, who through ignorance or hard
heartedness are not so well affected toward them. And of these private fastes
does our Savior Christ speak in the Gospel: Math. 6.16.
When ye fast, look not sower as the hypocrites; for they disfigure their
faces, that they seem unto men to fast: Verily I say unto you, they have
their reward: but when thou fastest anoint thine head, How we ought to behave
our selves in private fast^s.
and wash thy face, that thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy father,
which is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, will reward thee
openly. Where he condemns the hypocrisy of those, who in their private
fastes, when they came abroad would make great show of it, that they might be
thought to be very holy men; and to that end would so change by art, the
natural color and hue of their face, that they might seem lean and without
blood, as though they had greatly pined away themselves, with abstinence and
fasting: and biddes them rather, seeing it is private, hide it, as much as they
can, and to that end he wills them to look cheerfully, and to dress up
themselves well; for it is sufficient, that the Lord, who sees all things,
even those that are done in secret, takes knowledge of it, and he will reward
them openly, though they have no praise and commendation of men: as he had said
before of alms: Math. 6.3.
Let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be
in secret, and thy father that sees in secret will reward thee openly: where
he does not disallow of alms, but of their vain ostentation in it, who this
way sought the praise of great charity among the people, and says that is
sufficient, that God knows it, who will openly reward every man according
to his works.

We have a practice and example of this private kind of fasting in the person
of King David: Sam. 12.
when the Lord had stricken the child with sickness, that was begotten in
adultery of Bathshebah the wife of Vriah, because that was a particular
punishment upon himself, and he did see the hand of God upon himself very
heavy in it, according to that which Nathan the Prophet had threatened against
him before, ^auid kept a ^^iuate fast, ^hen his ^^ulde lay ^^cke.
(Because thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child
that is borne unto thee shall surely die) he humbled himself before the Lord
alone by himself, and sought unto him by fasting and prayer, that if it were
possible according to his holy will he would spare him: and this he did alone
by himself: for it is said, That he fasted, verse. 16.
and went in, namely into his private chamber, and withdrew himself from all
company, that he might be alone, and he did lie all night upon the earth: and
when the Elders and chief men of his house came unto him, to persuade him to
rise from the ground, and to eat meat, he would not, neither did eat meat with
them. So that the rest of his householde did take their ordinary food, but he
fasted: And thus it seems he did more than one day, during the sickness of
the child: for when it was dead, they were afraid to tell him of it, saying,
while the child was alive, we spoke unto him, and he would not hearken unto
our voice, that is, he would not give over fasting, though they earnestly
entreated him. So that whiles the child lay sick he continued his fasting
and prayer unto the Lord for the life of it for the space of diverse days, for
it died not until the seventh day after that it fell sick. Which godly fast
of his does show, that if any shall have any af^liction upon them, and so the
Lord give them cause of sorrow, and of humiliation more than others, or which
others have not at all, no not they which are of the same family, then they
are for a time to put themselves apart as it were from the rest, and in private
fasting and prayer to seek unto the Lord for mercy, more than others, So did
Ahab when Gods judgment was denou^ced against him.
as David did here. So is it said also of Ahab King of Israel, that when the
Prophet Elijah had sharply rebuked him for his sins, and denounced the curse
of God against him and his whole family for it, 1. King. 21.20.
saying, Thou have sold thy self to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord; therefore Behold, says the Lord, I will bring evil upon thee, and
will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth
against the wall, as well him that is shut up, as him that is left in Israel,
and so forth, as it follows in that place. verse 27.
When Ahab heard those words, he rent his clothes, and put on sackecloth upon
him, and fasted, and lay in sackecloth, and went softly. Thus because the wrath
of the Lord appeared specially against him for his sin, though he proclaimed
no public fast through his kingdom, yet he saw that it was high time for
himself at the least to practice it. So ought all other men and women do in
the like case.
Therefore if any shall have fallen into any grievous sin, as these two Kings
had, whereby the Lord by the ministry of his Word threateneth against them
some notable punishment, and their own consciences tell them, that they have
justly deserved it, or some grievous thing is already befallen them, then
they must know it to be their bounden duty to seek, to turn away the wrath
of the Lord from themselves, and from their houses, by private fasting and
prayer; and they must not only acknowledge, that the Lord requires, that they
should humble themselves before him in fasting, and so could be contented, that
there were some public fasts then, whereunto they might resort, and think
themselves discharged, because there be none, and so tarry until some by
public authority upon some occasion be commanded; but because it is their own
case only, and none others, they must see what God requires of them alone.

Reasons to persuade men to private fasting.
And truly if all men would thus do, they might prevent many of Gods heavy
judgments, which otherwise befall themselves and theirs: but often times many
sins are most grievously committed, and Gods holy law broken, not only by
some one in a family, but by diverse, both governors, children, and servants;
as adultery, fornication, and other uncleanness, drunkenness and gluttony,
swearing and blaspheming the most holy name of God, contempt of Gods word and
sacraments, besides all ruffianlinesse and prophannesse, pride, oppression and
such like, and they do not seek privately to humble themselves before God for
them, when they break out, and are justly by Gods Ministers reproved for them,
but rather they go on obstinately, and stand in the defense of the same; they
do not, I say, after some extraordinary manner of fasting and prayer seek
fervently unto the Lord, and so his judgments break out against them, and
some plague or other enters into their houses, which with their sins they
have defiled; that as the Cananites were spued out of that fruitful land for
their wickedness, Leu. 18.28.
so are they by sickness and death cast out of their goodly houses. Which
kind of wickedness committed closely in houses, as it was the principal cause
that this late plague first entered into them, so in that respect some had just
cause to begin sooner and to continue longer their private fast, then by
public authority all were enjoined unto it. For if Ahab who was an idolater,
and a wicked man did then see, that now he had cause to fast, though other did
not; then we, that are taught by the Word of God, should much more discern of
the times, and know, when in respect of our private sins and calamities
present, The good that might redound to private families thereby.
or justly to be feared, we have cause to fast and pray, though other do not.
And if Ahab in thus doing did obtain a release from this particular judgment
so far forth, that it was put off, and came not upon his house in his days,
according to that that is said of him by the Lord himself unto Eliiah: See
thou how Ahab is humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I
will not bring that evil in his days, but in his sons days will I bring
evil upon his house. Then we much more using this holy ordinance in
sincerity and truth, might put far from us, and from all ours, many grievous
plagues, which our sins have deserved. Therefore let us be persuaded, that
it is our bounden duty sometimes, not only to give our selves unto private
prayer (which should be ordinary and continual) but even to fasting and
prayer. And this is that, which we read of David again, 2. Sam. 3.30.
^hen Abner was traitorously slain by ^oab and Abishai his brother, because
not only for the loss of so worthy a captain, but especially for that great
sin in murdering him, David fast^d privately for the death of Abner.
which might procure Gods wrath against himself and his whole Realm; and that
it might appear, that he was free from his blood, he not only sorrowed
greatly for his death, and provoked the rest of the people thereunto (as it is
said of him, Rent your clothes, and put on sackecloth, and mourn before Abner:
and King David himself followed the beer, and when they had buried Abner in
Hebron, the King lift up his voice and wept besides the sepulcher of Abner, and
all the people wept) but also Dau^d the King did further humble himself by
fasting that day, because he saw more into the hand of God, and was more
touched with it: for it is written of him, That all the people came to cause
David to eat meat, verse. 35.
while it was yet day; but David swear, saying, So God do to me, and more also,
if I taste bread, or ought else till the Sun be down: so that it is written
of him, and of him alone, that in this common cause of heaviness, he not
only mourned with the rest, but fasted also, and prayed unto God (which is to
be understood, as a thing necessarily joined unto fasting, though not
expressed) for this great sin, and for fear of Gods vengeance against it.

Dan. 9.2. Daniel fasted privately in the time of the captivity.
We have also a very clear and pregnant example of private fasting, in the
prophet Daniel, who when he understood by books the number of the years,
whereof the Lord had spoken unto Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish
seventy years for the desolation of Jerusalem: and so perceived that the time
of their deliverance was drawing on, he turned his face unto the Lord his God,
and sought by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth, and after
that the Lord according to his promise would now accomplish the same. The
affliction of captivity was common, and so all ought to have sought unto God
after this manner, as well as he, as they did in the days of Hester: and it may
be that some other that feared God, did so then also in their several
families: but as we are uncertain of that, though charity binds us to hope
well of them, so we are sure, that Daniel did privately seek unto God in
fasting and prayer, both for himself, and for the people, because it is so
written of him. Whereupon we infer, that not only when affliction is
privately upon our selves, we ought thus to seek unto the Lord, but when it
is upon our brethren, especially when it is upon the church and common-welth,
and we ought then privately to do it the rather, because we should be more
touched with the common estate, then with our own particular; so that if in
such cases there be no order taken for public fasting, then they that fear
God, and know the day of their visitation, must thus privately humble
themselves before God, and mourn every family a part, Zac. 12.12.
yea and their wives apart, as the prophet speaks. And so at this present in
respect of that great mortality, that has been a long time in the chief
places of this land, So ought the god^^ to do ^n the ti^e of any ^ommon
ca^amitie, as of this pes^ilence.
if there had been no order taken for public fasting (as by the grace of God,
and the Christian wisdom of our governor there is:) yet it was the duty of
all good men and women, privately to have done it: and so must we hereafter
do in like cases: and I doubt not but some or other, yea many at this time,
did thus before this godly and religious order publicly came forth. For
though we may not disorderly undertake, and set up public fasts in our
churches upon our own private motion, but must sue for, and expect the
alowance and commandment of public authority; that al things might be done
in the house of God honestly and by good order, 1. Cor. 14.40.
according to the golden rule of the Apostle, or rather the spirit of God: yet
if any do it privately, when there is cause, it shall be both acceptable to God,
and profitable to themselves and to others, and no offense unto any. And for
this also God will remember them, and show mercy unto them in such common
calamities, as he shall bring upon the people in their time: even as the
prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 9.4.
does promise to all those that mourned in Jerusalem, for the abominations of
that time: of whom he thus speaks, that the Lord called to the man clothed
with linen, which had the writers inkehorne by his side, and said unto him, go
through the mids of the city, even through the mids of Jerusalem, And God
will spare them, and bless them for it.
and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn, and cry for all the
abominations, that be done in the mids thereof: and so to the other he said,
that I might hear, go ye after him through the city, and smite, let your
eye spare none, neither have pity: destroy utterly the old, and the young,
and the maids and the children, and the women, but touch no man upon whom is
the mark, and begin at my Sanctuary. Where we see, that they are marked out,
and spared, that mourn for the sins of their time; which must needs be
understood principally of private mourning, unto which in some one or other we
may presume was joined fasting. Therefore if when we see sin abound in all
sorts and degrees, (as it does in our time too much) which threateneth some
great judgment universally to come (as we have also felt and do still by
this present pestilence (if the governors should be careless and negligent in
their offices, and so there should be no order taken for public fasting to
turn away Gods wrath; yet they that privately sorrow, and mourn, and fast
and pray, as they then ought, shall find mercy at the hand of God, in the
day of their visitation, as these in Jerusalem did.

But to return to David, 2. Cor. 11.27. David faste^ privately for the
affliction of his enemies.
(of whom we began to speak before) as he was a very godly man, so he
did much frequent this holy exercise of fasting: that it may truly be said of
him, as it is of the Apostle Paul, he was in fasting often. And these
fastings he used not only for himself, but for others; so loving and
pitiful was he, and so full of compassion: and so touched with the grief of
others, that when they were in any great misery (as s^ckenesse, or otherwise)
and these not his friends so much, but his very enemies, he besought the Lord
for them: as we read in the 35. Psalm. Psalm. 35.1^
They rewarded me evil for good, to have spoiled my soul, but I, when they
were sick, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer was turned upon my
bosom: I behaved my self as to my friends, or as to my brother, I humbled my
self mourning, as one that bewailed his mother. Where he professes, that
though his enemies reioiced at his fall, and sought his hurt every way, yet
he was sorry for their affliction, and prayed for them continually, as though
he had carried his prayer about with him in his bosom, and this he did,
humbling himself with fasting: according to the doctrine of the Apostle, Romans
12.15
which all of us should practice. Rejoice with them, that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep; be of like affection one toward an other. And the like
practice of his we have in an other Psalm, Psalm. 69.9.
where he says, The zeal of thine house has eaten me, and the rebukes of
them that rebuked thee, are fallen upon me: And for the wickedness of the
ungodly.
I wept, and my soul fasted, but that was to my reproof, I put on sackcloth
also, and I became a proverb unto them. Where he shows that he was so
grieved with the outrageous sins of the wicked against God, as if they had
been against himself, and so gave himself unto fasting and prayer unto the
Lord for them. And truly if we had that zeal in us to the glory of God, and
love to the salvation of our brethren, that we should; we might see, that
besides this grievous plague that is and has been not only upon our enemies
(if we have any) but upon our neighbors and friends, which requires public
fasting; we had many causes to have done it privately often and long before
this, in respect of the horrible abominations and sins committed against God
and against men every where.

And that we might be moved unto it indeed, we may further consider, that we
have not only the example of men, but of godly women in this kind: who have
given themselves much unto private fasting. For we read in the Gospel of Anna
the daughter of Phanuel, who was a Prophetess, Luk 2.37.
and a widow of a great age, who went not out of the temple, but served God
with fasting and prayer night and day. Anna the ^rophetesse ^sed much private
fasting.
This holy woman living in those corrupt times a little before the coming of
our Savior Christ, when all things in the Church were out of order, did often
humble her self before God in fasting and prayer, and sought earnestly unto
God tor a redress of them, and she did not hecrein loose her labor, but had
the fruit of them; for it came to pass, that though she were a widow. and
about foure-score and four years, yet she lived to see Christ come in the
flesh, to her unspeakable comfort, and confessed him likewise, and spoke of
him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem to the comfort of many. Thus
we see how we ought to have fasted privately oftentimes before: so might we
happily have escaped at the least some great things, that have befallen us, and
obtained many great blessings, which now we have wanted: and also we see,
what we must do hereafter, if we will look to escape many evils, and enjoy
many blessings with the children of God, and that at this present we had need
to do, as we do, even to continue these public fasts, that so we might
make a supply of that, which we should often privately have done before.

Thus also in the days of Queen Hester the fast that was kept by all the
Jews in Sushan, A private fast held in many several families at once.
for the turning away of that great mischief, that was intended against them
by proud Haman, though it was common in respect of the whole Church of God in
that city, that kept it yet it was private in respect of the several places
where it was kept, namely not in any common place of assembly, but in their
several houses dispersed here and there: so that Hester Hest 4.16.
and her maids kept it by themselves, as she promised for herself, and for
them, even as the rest of the Jews were willed to do it. ^he duties of (...)
houshoul^ers herein.
So ought every godly houshoulder at the foresight of any judgment of God
like to come upon the Church, where they live, in which if any such thing
should come, they must think, that they are like to have their part, (as
Mordecay said, ^est. 4 13.
to Hester, Think not with thy self, that thou shall escape in the kings
house, more then all the Jews) to seek humbly unto the Lord, themselves and
theirs (so many as are capable of it) by fasting and prayer privately for the
turning of it away, when there is no public order taken for it, or likelihood
that there shall be And this is that, which the Apostle has respect unto, when
he thus writes to the Corinthians, ^. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another, except it be with consent for a time, that you may
give yourselues to fasting and prayer, and again come together, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinencie. Where he speaks to the married parties,
the houseband and the wife, and shows what duties they owe one to another, 1.
Cor. 7.3.
as Let the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise also the
wife unto the husband: yet for fasting and prayer they may and ought for that
time and with both their consents separate themselves. So that there may be
occasions in all times, for which the husband and the wife themselves alone, or
with the rest of their family, or with some other of their godly neighbors and
friends may and ought to give themselves privately to fasting and prayer: and
then the apostle shows, how the married coople should for a time in one duty
of theirs behave themselves one toward an other.

And truly if we had rightly considered of all things that have fallen out in
our time, and well weighed them, Private fasting ought to be entertained into
men's houses.
and laid them to heart, we might easily have seen long ago, that God had
given us just occasion, to have entertained this special part of his worship
into our houses, as well as any other, though hitherto it had little or no
intertainment at all with the most, nay they have not once so much as saluted
it a far off: And as by the grace of God we have in many houses, where the
Governors are any thing religious, private prayer morning and evening, and at
other times, private reading of the Scriptures, private singing of Psalms, so
ought we also sometimes to have private fasting. For when the Lord has laid
some grievous sickness, even unto death upon any of our children, sons or
daughters, (as he did upon David's) then should we have with fasting and prayer
sought unto the Lord for them, 1. Sam. 12.15.
as he did: For what causes, and what good might come thereby.
who have been nearer unto us, as the husband or the wife, who lie in the
bosom one of another, and are but one, even in the them away, and so has come
nearer unto us with his correction, then had we much more cause thus in fasting
to cast down our selves at his feet in the humble confession of our sins
which were the cause of it: 2. Sam. 3.35.
as David did when Abner was slain: if he did so for one that was so far off
from him, and had sometime also been his enemy, then we much more for those,
that have been near unto us, and always our friends, as of our family, and
of our flesh. And besides, when God has Psalm. 35.12. and. 69.9.
for if David did it for his enemies, then we much more for those, whose
service is not hurtful, but profitable unto us: yea, when any great out of
many houses, but many other great punishments, wherewith (for want of it) they
have been justly afflicted. Jerusalem, Ezr. 8.21.
for they proclaimed a fast, and humbled themselves before God, and sught of
him a right way for themselves, and for their children, and for all their
substance: and the Lord was entreated of them, for he gave the^ good success
in their journey, and delivered them from their enemies. So we might do it
privately, that the Lord might bless us in the weighty affairs of ours, and
keep us from all dangers that might otherwise befall us.

For though we obtain many things daily at the merciful hands of our heavenly
father by our ordinary prayers public and private: yet he has made the
largest promises of blessing unto fasting and prayer, and greatest things have
been obtained that way of all the servant of God. Math. 17.14.
For as Christ said unto his Disciples, to whom a certain man brought his
son possessed with a devil, but they could not cast him out, and they
demanded of their Master, why they could not do it: Many thing are not
obtained without those prayers, whereunto fasting is adjoined.
This kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting: that is, a most fervent
kind of prayer, whereunto fasting is to be adjoined, to quicken us up
thereunto: that it might be as it were a whetstone to sharpen our dull spirits,
and to set an edge upon our blunt hearts. So that we may easily perceive, that
some things, yea many things that we stand in need of, are not obtained, or
evils removed, without this kind of prayer whereunto fasting is adjoined. For
as some things are not to be had without a great price, nor many suits obtained
of great men without long and earnest supplication: so some things are not to
be received from God without those fervent prayers and supplications which can
not be without fasting, nor without that humble prostrating of our selves,
which is wrought in us by that means. And thus we are taught, that we ought
to have used privately this part of Gods service a great deal more than we
have done; whereby we might have brought into our houses more blessings, and
have kept out more afflictions, than now we have. But indeed the ignorance of
the most part is so lamentable, By reason of their great ignorance many are
unfit for private fasts.
that if they should not only have thus done before, but should now upon the
hearing of this doctrine hereafter determine for some good cause best known
unto themselves, to take this exercise upon them, they know not how to behave
themselves in it, or to perform it in any measure so, as it might be
acceptable unto God, and comfortable to themselves. So that it would fall out
with them, as with those, of whom our Savior Christ speaks in the Gospel,
Luke 5.36.
that they should not only not be bettered thereby, but made worse: even as if
a piece of a new garment were put into an old vesture, then the new renteth
it, and the piece taken out of the new agrees not with the old: or as if new
wine were put into old vessels, the new wine would break the vessels, and it
would run out, and the vessels would perish. By which parables he teaches us,
that fasting unfitly used of them that are not meet for it, nor only makes
them worse, but utterly destroys them. Therefore better were it for such not
to use it at all, than by abusing it for want of skill, further to provoke Gods
wrath against themselves; in which respect he excuses his Disciples for not
using this private fasting as yet, ^ut in this ^ng and ^leere light ^f the
G^spel ^gnorance ^xcuseth ^one.
though the Disciples of John Baptist did. But surely for us, this long time
and plentiful preaching of the Gospel so many years, might have made all of us
fit enough for this holy excrcise, so many as are of years of discretion: and
so this gross ignorance, and thereby wonderful unfitness that is in men does
not excuse them, as it did the Disciples, who were but Nouices in his school,
for he had been then but a little with them. Therefore we see what God
requires of us privately as any occasion shall fall out, namely that we
should serve him not only in other holy duties, but in fasting and prayer:
and therefore that we ought all of us so to profit by the public ministry of
the Word, while it is among us, that we may be fit for it, when the Lord by his
word, or by his work shall call us unto it.

But to draw toward an end, it is further to be observed concerning these
private fasts (that we now entreat of) that all sorts of men and women have not
power to appoint unto themselves, what time they will for this purpose, no
though they evidently see, that they have just cause to use it. For besides
that the man and woman are so nearly united by the bond of marriage, as by the
covenant of God, Prou. 2.17. Math. 19.5. 1. Cor. 7.5.
whereby it comes to pass, that they are no more two, but one flesh, as
Christ says in the Gospel, so that they can not separate themselves one from
another, no not for a time, and to this end, without continual consent (as we
have seen a little before:) all they that are under the private government of
others, None under government can make choice of days for private fasts
without consent of their governors.
are at the disposition of their governors, by the law and commandment of
God: as sons and daughters, men servants and maid servants, scholars, all
laborers and hired men for the time, and such like; so that none of these can
without the knowledge and free consent of those under whom they are, make
choice of what day in the week they will, to observe their private fasts in.
For seeing the day of fast is to be kept holy, and being of the nature of the
Sabbath, as has been proved before, in it they must wholly rest from all the
works of their ordinary calling from evening to evening, and must spend that
time in the worship of God; they can not at their own will and pleasure give
over these works, and so consequently not appoint unto themselves a day of
resting; but must be contented herein to be ordered by the discretion of
those, to whom they have either by the bond of nature or by some covenant
wholly addicted themselves and all their labors: and therefore they can not
make choice of a day of private fasting (for of that we speak, and not of
public, wherein both master and servant must be at the appointment of their
governor) but so far only, as their superiors shall give them leave. So
that if they can not, or will not spare their labors for a time, they are of
necessity to keep all their private fasts upon the Sabbath days, wherein
they are bound to rest from their labors, and to serve God as well as any
other: and so their masters and governors should not only give them leave to
do, but also are charged by God so to do, and have authority given over them
to that end; according to the express words of the commandment. Six days
shall thou labor, Exodus 20.9.
and do all thy work, but the seventh day it is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, in it thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
thy man servant, nor thy maid: where they are willed, not only not to hinder
them from sanctifying of the day, but to look diligently unto them, that they
do religiously observe and keep it: and so upon that day they may at any time
(the times of necessity being always excepted) without any offense to their
governors (by defrauding the^ of their services) keep their fasts. And so may
they do any day of the week else: if they have their leave; otherwise not. For
though this be a special part of Gods service, and that which he requires of
all at one time or other, yet because it is not ordinary, and the six days
are appointed for all the works of our several callings ordinarily, and they
are not their own men (as we say) but at the disposition of others, even of
their governors; therefore he has given the^ leave to break all such
purposes of theirs, as shall upon any of these days hinder them from any of
those works or services, If they do, their governors have power to break
them.
wherein they are to employ them, and use them. And so, as they may not upon
these days leave their work, and go to a Sermon here and there; which some
not ill minded might be willing to do, and so leave their masters business
undone: and thus under the color of devotion and well meaning, not only
idleness might be nourished in them, but many disorders brought into a
family: so, much less are they at their own pleasure to take up whole days
to themselves for fasting, without the priuitie and good liking of those under
whom they are: and if they should enterprise any such thing, they are by them
to be reproved and amended, according to the power that God has given them.

And herein as in some other things does the law of God take place, that is
set down by Moses: Number. 30.4
If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond, being in her
fathers house in the time of her youth, and her father hear her vow and bond,
wherewith she has bound her self, and her father hold his peace concerning
her; then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she has bound
her self, shall stand: but if her father disallow her the same day that he
hereth al her vows and bonds, wherewith she has bound her self, they shall not
be of value, and the Lord will forgive her because her father disalowed her.
Where first he says, That if any make a vow, or bind themselves with any bond
to God or man, they must keep it: but if a maid in her youth, Because this
kind of ser^ice is but voluntary.
and in her fathers house, that is, whiles she is under his government make a
vow, and when he hears it, by his silence or otherwise approoueth it, then
it is in force, and must be performed: but if he disallow of it, then it shall
be of no value, and God will pardon her, because her father has broken it. So
that they have not power, while they be under government, to vow what they
will, no not to God, as to fast, which is a voluntary service, and may be
vowed; but if they have done, the father may break it. The equity of this law
gives the same authority to the father over his sons, and to the master and
mistress over their maid servants and men servants, and binds all them to be
obedient unto the^ in such cases: especially when as the Lord himself sets
down the same law for the wife making a vow without the knowledge and
approbation of her husband, verse. 7
saying: If she have an husband, when she voweth, or pronounces ought with her
lips, wherewith she binds herself, if her husband hears, and holds his
peace concerning her the same day he hears it, then the vow shall stand, and
her bonds wherewith she binds herself shall stand in effect: but if her
husband disalow her the same day, that he hears it, then shall he make her
vow which she has made, and that she has pronounced with her lips,
wherewith she bound herself, of none effect, and the Lord will forgive her:
where we see that the spirit of God uses many words, to give us to
understand, that though they have determined never so certainly to do it, yet
they by their absolute authority may hinder them. And truly if it were not
thus many might, and would under this color and pretense sometimes of fained
holiness defraud their parents and masters of their service, when they should
most need them: but God is the God of order, and therefore having subjected
children unto their parents, and servants unto their masters, their persons and
their wills, and having commanded them to be obedient unto them in the Lord in
all things, would have them in all such matters, Col. 3.20.22.
as are but voluntary, to depend upon their wills. I confess that it is to
be granted, In duties absolutely commanded, the governors cannot restrain
their inferiors.
that in things absolutely necessary either for the glory of God, a man's
salvation, the preservation of life, the good of others, and such like: as to
worship God purely, and to be of a sound religion, and to be no heretic,
papist, sectarie, or atheist; and to be of an holy life and conversation, and
not to be profane like Esau, or like the silthie sow, 2. Pet. 2.22.
that wallowerh in the mire; and generally to keep all Gods commandments, and
to believe all the articles of our faith: these things, I say, they are to do,
yea although they cannot have their consent. For here the words of the
Apostles are in force; who when they were brought before the counsel of the
high Priests and Elders, and there by them straightly charged, that in no wise
they should speak or teach in the name of Jesus: Act. 4.18.
answered them and said, whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you,
rather then God, judge ye. So that Peter and John when they were forbidden to
preach, which Christ had necessarily inioined them by virtue of their office of
Apostleship; and so in obeying them therein, they should have disobeyed God: they
answered, as you have heard; and so did that, which God necessarily commanded,
though men forbad the^. And this must be the practice of all inferiors, when
they are forbidden any thing of their superiors, which God has commanded them
in his word, either as they be Christians, or otherwise; and here is their
defense, in so doing. But yet all these aboue-named degrees of persons,
Inferiors may make choice of the Sabbath day for their private fastes.
in their subjection though they be restrained from the choice of the day, yet
are not therefore set free from the thing it self, I mean from the practice
of private fasting, when they shall have just cause: for they may celebrate
them upon the Sabbath: in which their masters should give them leave to be
wholly the Lords servants, and so not incumber them with any service excepting
things of necessity, which are permitted even in the day of fastes. And though
there be few under government in families of that godliness and conscience,
that they are like to practice these private fastes; yet neither am I out of
hope of all, and I thought it necessary to deliver the doctrine; for it is
their duty thus to do, though the greatest part be ignorant, or make no
conscience of it. And so this shall suffice to have been spoken of the first
kind of fast, which is private.

HOMIL. VIII.
The eight Homily entreats of the second kind of fasts, which are public:
and why so called: and how all sorts ought to come to them: and what a great
fault it is for any to be absent: And then of the cause of them, which is the
wrath of God against his Church: either present, as it is now upon us: or
likely to come: which the godly have considered in the course of Gods
providence, and so have sought by fasting and prayer to prevent it, and not
always tarried till it came upon them.

THe second and last kind of fasting, Public fasts: and why they are so called.
which I am to entreat of at this time, is public or common: it is and ought
to be used not of a few, but a whole Church and congregation in a town or
city, or of many Churches in the same, or in a country the Lord according to
the bond of Christian love, that ought to be among all the Churches of God, as
among the members of one mystical body, whereof Christ is the head: and the
same calamity either presently upon them, or imminent and greatly to be feared.
So that briefly or in a word a public fast is that, which is imposed by
public authority upon all the people of that place, to be kept openly in the
common place of their holy assemblies, for some common plague to be removed
or turned away, or for the obtaining of some common benefit, belonging to the
whole body of the same Church, or to some principal member of the same.

And such is this that we have, These which we now keep are public.
and do keep this day by the authority first of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and then of those that are in authority under him in Ecclesiastical
matters, and for the well ordering of all things to be done in the Church:
unto which all sorts of men and women should come in all cities and towns. Such
was the fast that was celebrated in Niniue at the preaching of Iona: Iona 3.7.
for the King caused it to be proclaimed through Niniue, even through that
great city of three days journey, (by the counsel of the King and his
nobles) saying, verse. 5.
Let neither man nor beast taste any thing, feed or drink water: and as the
proclamation was thus general, reaching unto all, so it was accordingly put in
practice, for it is said a little before, the people of Niniue believed God,
and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackecloth from the greatest of them even to
the least of them: so that the fast was kept by all the people of that city.
The like may be said of that, that was observed in the days of Hester, for
though in respect of the places, where it was, as in their several houses
closely, it may be called private; yet in regard of the multitude that kept it,
even all the Jews and people of God in that city, and in respect of the person
by whose direction they were moved unto it even the Queen, it may truly be
called public; for it is said, that she sent this commandment to Mordecay,
Go and assemble all the Jews, that are found in Shushan, and fast for me; and
Mordecay went his way, and did according to all that Hester Hest. 4.16.
had commanded him: so this fast was imposed upon all the Jews, and all of
them kept it. And therefore all sorts of people should come to them.
And so to the observation of these fastes of ours all should come, not one or
two in a family, and say, go you to day, and we will come the next day: for
by the authority and commandment of our governors all are inioined unto it.
Exodus 20.1^
And as upon the Sabbath, because it is a day appointed for the public
service of God, all are commanded to keep it holy: Thou and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant, and the stranger that is
within thy gates: So upon these days, which are of the nature of the Sabbath,
and are also publicly commanded, all should think themselves bound unto it.
Esa. 2.3.
Therefore as upon the Sabbath day they should come together, and say one to
another, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord: so upon these days of
fasting one should call upon another. Therefore not only that is a great
fault, if any should not come at all, but if any should come for novelties, and
then give it over again; yea and if they should come seldom now and then: or
if they should come alone, and bring none, or very few of their household with
them. Reasons why all should come, and not a few only.
For besides that it is appointed by our governors, unto whom all must yield
obedience in the Lord, and they also have power and authority over all alike:
and seeing that the end of it is to turn away that wrath and displeasure of
the Lord, which is justly deserved of all; and as it is already upon many, so
it threatens and terrifieth all, why should not all think themselves bound,
to seek to have it turned away? So that no man must be so simple, to think
it indifferent for them to keep it, or not to keep it, and so make no
conscience of it: but seeing it is common in respect of the commandment of our
governors, and in respect of the cause of it, which is our sins, all should
think that they are tied in conscience to it: and so every one should stir
up themselves to be foreward, and one call upon an other, especially them of
the same household: that they may come with their companies as David did, who
says of himself, Psalm. 42.4.
that he had gone with the multitude, and lead them into the house of God, as a
multitude that keeps a feast: So that as men go to feasts not alone, but by
companies; and when a whole family is invited, they go altogether: so also
should they go to a fast, wherein publicly all of them are called unto it.
Therefore as God threatens destruction not to some few, but to all unless they
repent: and all are commanded to seek unto him, to pacify his wrath so let al
be willing to do it: especially seeing that we here, and see, that when this
judgment of the pestilence enters into an house, it takes away not one, or
two only, but sometimes sweepeth away all.

What a great fault it is, for any to absent themselves from these public
fasts.
Therefore if we make conscience of the Sabbath days, not only to come our
selves, but to bring all ours, because it is commanded by God unto all: then
ought we also to do it upon this day, which is to be kept as a Sabbath by the
commandment of those who are in Gods stead upon earth. So that they that
absent themselves, besides that they neglect the means of pacifying Gods
deserved wrath, and so in time it may justly come upon the^, before they be
aware of it; they do further provoke his displeasure and indignation against
themselves, in that they disobey so good, and holy, and necessary a
commandment of God: Therefore upon this day of fasting thus authorized upon so
good grounds for men to follow their ordinary affairs of the world, and not
to come to the Church, and here in this holy action to yield their obedience
to god and man, is a greater sin, then many take it to be. Think of it
therefore I pray you in the fear of God, and consider well, whether that the
cause being common unto all, and the commandment being given out unto all, and
the time and place appointed for all, and the sound of the bell ringing in the
ears of all, and the Minister of God ready to preach unto, and pray for all:
consider (I say) whether in respect of these all should not come, and why one
should be bound to it more then another, and one think that he may be spared
more then another. As if they should refu^ to help, to quench the fire burni
(...) in men's houses.
To a common burning all should come to help to quench it, and one or two of
an house is not sufficient, and we would justly blame them that in such a case
would not leave their ordinary work, yea though they were very poor, and
lived of their labor, and come to the place and help. And shall we not
think, that all are bound much more to lay all things aside, and to come, and
put to their helping hand, to quench this great fire of Gods wrath, which has
flamed out and burned a long time in many towns and cities, and in several
parts of the same? and like unto fire, not only consumes where it comes,
and makes the houses lie waste; but also goes from place to place, speedily
and without resistance, and so spreads further and further, so that many men
have this burning fire of the pestilent fever in their houses at once, not so
much to the wasting of their houses and stuff, as to the burning even to death
the very bodies of men, women, and children: and that with an exceeding great
flame, that none almost dare come near their houses, least they perish in the
same. Surely if there were no commandment, from men, the very love to the
lives of our brethren should compel us to it, and nothing should keep us from
it.

For what hardness of heart would we think to be in them, Not to come
argues great want of love to our brethren.
who seeing their neighbors house on fire, and others come wilingly to quench
it, they would stand still gazing and looking on, or go away about their
business, and not regard it? especially if he should be spoken unto, and
called upon for help before. So now when this great and terrible fire of Gods
indignation has most fearfully been a long time in the houses of our
brethren, and is also come nearer unto us, even to our neighbors, the houses
or towns bordering upon us: when others do come hither with fasting and prayer
to entreat the Lord for them, that he would put out this great flame, who as
he alone has kindled this fire, so he only is able to quench it: some will
carelessly tarry at home, or not bring all their household with them, and so not
yield so much help, as they might especially being called upon both by the
commandment of Gods magistrates, and by the entreaty of his Ministers, must we
not think that they have not this love in them to their brethren, that they
should? Therefore come, come, I beseech you, help, help, come all, for there
is help little enough, yea too little. For (to show it in the same comparison)
if we did see a fire, Every one ought to help, seeing that there is help
little enough.
though it had much help, notwithstanding all the water that was cast upon it,
and all the pains that men took about it, it should not only not be extinct,
but still burning, yea increasing, and the flame thereof ascending higher and
higher, and it to kindle and break out in more places, would we not call for
more help, and justly blame them that being called did not come? So when we
see this fire of the pestilence not to be ceased one whit, nay growing into
greater extremity and rage in many places, from scores to hundreds, and from
hundreds to thousands; and coming also nearer to our houses, and so our selves
and all ours more in danger and fear of it, must we not think that we lack
help, and that we had need still to call for more? and so to stir up those
that come not, or come seldom, and to call upon them that do, that they would
bring as many with them as they can, even their whole family and all the
servants in the same? And do we not see by this, that it is our bounden duty
to do as we do, that we may continue it willingly of conscience, and that we
had not need to be remiss or slack one whit, either in true humility for our
sins, or in feruencie of prayer, seeing Gods hand is not slaked, but rather
stretched out still. Therefore to conclude this point, as the commandment and
cause is public, so by our practice let it appear among us, that our fasts
are so, and not private as it were to some few.

^he cause of ^ublike fasts (...) the wrath ^f God against the church.
Now concerning the causes of public fastings, they are set down particularly
to be diverse in the holy Scripture; but for the most part and generally the
cause is expressly noted to be the wrath and anger of God against the Church, as
appears by all the fasts that we read of in the old and new Testament. And
this is diligently to be observed of us, that we seeing the same cause among
us, might know, that though we are commanded by public authority to use
them, and so all are bound to them, yet when we shall further understand, that
God himself, not man only, for this cause calls us unto them, then we
should judge, that all are bound unto them so much the more. And this wrath of
God (the cause of public fasts) is considered justly to be feared shortly; and
to whether of these two causes we shall cast our eyes, we shall clearly see,
that we have great cause to do as we do, that is, publickely to humble our
selves in fasting before the Lord. And first of all, when it i^ presently upon
them. Judge. 20.26
For concerning the former, which is the wrath of God presently upon the
Church, we read in the time of the Judges, when in two battles there were
slain of the Israelites forty thousand; this heavy hand of God being then
upon them, all the children of Israel went up, and all the people came also
unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord, and fasted
that day unto the evening: so that in this present calamity all the people
came to the fast, which was held for it in the house of God. Since this plague
began among us, by all estimation there have not so few as forty thousand died
in this land, therefore we have also as great cause to fast for this present
apparent token of Gods wrath, as they had, and so all the people should come to
the house of God to that end. Moreover, the Prophet Joel says to the people of
Judah, that seeing there was so great a famine among them, that God commanded
them all publikelie to fast, saying, Joel 2.15.
Thus says the Lord, Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly, gather the people, sanctify the congregation, gather the
elders, assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts, let the
bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber,
let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep. Where we see that because the
present scarsitie of the fruits of the earth was so great, he calls all sorts
of men and women, young and old, without exception unto public fasting, to
pacify Gods wrath, and that by the commandment of the Lord, saying, As it is
now upon us in this pestilence.
Thus says the Lord. If the anger of God appearing in the famine, was a
sufficient cause to move them to it, then seeing it appears no less, if not
a great deal more, in the deadly contagions, and mortality of the
pestilence, that we may be assured that the Lord does require the same of us
also. Again, if the Israelites when they were overthrown in battle by their
enemies the Philistines in the days of Samuel, did think that there was great
cause to confess their sins unto God with all humility in fasting and
prayer publicly, according to the direction of the said Samuel, 1. Sam 7.6.
who said, Gather al Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the lord:
and they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and powered it out before
the Lord, that is, wept abundantly, and fasted the same day, and said there,
we have sinned against the Lord; and afterward in the days of David upon
the like occasion, of whom, and of all whose company, it is said, 2. Sam. 1.12
That David took hold on his clothes and rent them, and likewise all the men
that were with him, and they mourned and wept, and fasted until even for Saul
and Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of
Israel because they were slain with the sword. Then seeing the plague
deuoureth no less then the sword, of which it is said, that it so destroieth
at noone-daie, Psa. 91.7.
that it causes a thousand to fall on the one side, and ten thousand on the
other: and seeing the wrath of God appears in the one, as well, as in the
other, though we have escaped that which we feared, namely, that we have not
fallen into the hands of our enemies; yet seeing the Lord has sent this
great scourge of the pestilence upon us which we looked not for, we have as
great cause to humble our selves with fasting, confessing our sins unto God in
prayer, In which respect we are bound to keep them by the commandment not
only of men, but of God.
as they. So then we may perceive, that seeing this one cause of public
fasting is among us, namely the sensible and apparent token of Gods wrath in
great measure, that the thing it self ought to be practiced of us, and that we
are called to it now, not only by the voice of man, but of the Lord our God,
and so every one ought to think themselves bound to it so much the more.

Furthermore the wrath of God is to be considered of us, not only when it is
(...) presently upon us, and may be felt: Secondly the signs of gods wrath to
come have been cause of public fasting.
but when it maybe descerned a far off, and when there is just cause to fear
it, as that that is near us, and ready shortly to come upon us, if it be not
speedily prevented: whereof when the servants of God have seen evident signs
and apparent tokens, they have in the wisdom of the spirit of God, sought by
fasting and prayer to turn it away, and have not carelessely tarried until
such time as it came upon them. And so that has been an other sufficient
cause of fasting unto them, namely the signs of Gods wrath by all likelihood
shortly to come upon them. Wherein they have prouidently behaved themselves,
like unto those that are wise, who being in their journey, and spying a black
cloud to arise, and so perceiving some great tempest to be at hand, have
either prepared themselves well for it, or have sought some shelter against it:
So they foreseeing by all probable conjectures so great calamity to come upon
them, have by fasting and prayer sought unto the Lord, as to the only
governor and disposer of all things, either of his great mercy to turn it
away from them, or of his infinite compassion to mitigate the extremity of it,
or to give them patience and strength to bear it, or that some way or other
they might find favor with him in it.

And concerning the signs and tokens of Gods wrath shortly to come, they have
wisely observed and considered of them diversely: As first of all in the course
of his providence, that seeing ordinarily such and such causes do bring forth
such effects and events, and therefore by the cause, as by a sign more then
probable, Which sign have been considered in the ordinary course of gods
providence.
they have not unadvisedly feared such sequels, and have seen Gods anger in
them. And namely we see that unseasonable weather, as want of rain in due
season, or too great abundance of it out of time betokens scarsity of the
fruits of the earth, and so consequently dearth and famine: preparation for
war by a mighty and strong enemy threatens the loss of men, and spoiling
of goods: the beginning of the plague portendeth great mortality, and such
like, therefore when there has been but the beginning of such things, seeing
the stormy tempest as it were arising, they have sought by this ordinance of
fasting, as by a sure refuge to escape it. And so we read that when there came
some and told Iehoshaphat King of Judah, saying, 2. Chr. 20.2
There comes a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea out of Aram,
and behold they be in Hazzon Tamar, which is in Engedi. And Iehoshaphat
fefeared, and sat himself to seek the Lord and proclaimed a fast throughout
all Judah: and Judah gathered themselves together to ask counsel of the Lord,
they came out of all the cities of Judah to inquire of the Lord. Thus we see
when this huge army of the Ammonites and Moabites, and mount Seir did but come
up against Jerusalem at the first hearing of it, though yet nothing was done,
neither were they come to them considering what was likely to be the event of
that war, if they had proceeded, and if the Lord had not helped them, he
proclaimed a fast, and did thus seek to escape that, which was like to come.
So likewise in the time of the captivity, when ambitious and cruel Haman the
mortal enemy of the Jews, so breathed after their utter destruction, that he
ceased not to cast lottes from day to day, to find out a prosperous time to
bring his mischievous purpose to pass, and at the last had got the King to set
his hand to a Decree concerning the final racing of them all out in one day;
and Mordecay had sent the copy of this commission to the Queen Hester: Hest.
4.6.
long before the bloody day of that intended massacre came, they sought unto
the Lord; And so they have sought to prevent Gods wrath and have not tarried,
till it came upon them.
for Hester commanded hereupon that they should assemble all the Jews, and
fast and pray for her, as she likewise promised for herself and for her
maids, that they would do so also: So that these before their enemies began
the slaughter, by all probability of that that was done already, seeing what
was most like to ensue, if God were not merciful unto them, to turn the heart
of the king toward the^, beforehand they sought by fasting and prayer to
escape it; and did so, as it follows in that story more at large. And so by
these few examples we see how the servants of God that have been godly wise
have not always tarried until Gods wrath in some of his punishments has seized
upon them, but the very foresight of it a loofe of has bin enough to move the^
to seek unto the Lord in fasting and prayer to escape it, or to find mercy
in it. Even as an ingenuous child, and he that is of any good disposition
seeks to his father for pardon, not only when he is under the rod of
correction, and feels the stripes, but when he sees his father with an
angry countenance coming toward him with the rod in his hands: so they
have not tarried till they have felt the smart of Gods correction upon
themselves: but the very show of his wrath coming against them, has been
sufficient to move them, to humble themselves before him, and to crave his
pardon.

In which respect also (besides that, that we spoke of before) we must needs
confess, that we have great cause to fast and pray publikly; for besides that
great wrath of God, that has been a long time upon our brethren, In respect
of Gods wrath likely yet further to come upon v^, there is cause of these
public fasts.
which is a thing present, and so ought to move; if we further consider, what
cause we have to fear our selves, our houses, and our towns, though hitherto
by the grace of God nothing is come upon us we, shall acknowledge it to be
true. And to this end we must acknowledge the nature of this disease to be very
contagious and infectiue above all other, and that it spreads from one place
to another after a special manner; and that it infecteth also after an
extraordinary kind; as not only comes to pass, that even by passing by
the^, even suddenly with the breath and savor of them that are infected, we
are corrupted: and it is a poison, and so infecteth deadly and speedily (as
all poisons do) all the parts of the body; ^f we consi^er the con^agious
nature of the plague, how speedily, and how deadly ^t infecteth.
and not so much corrupts the humors of the body (which is sufficient to
breed deadly diseases) as it infecteth the heart, and the spirits, and all the
vital parts; and therefore dispatcheth a man quickly, and kills him
speedily; and so may die suddenly, as experience teaches even in this plague,
that some being taken into a man's house over night, have been found dead in
the morning; and some have fallen from their horses as they traveled, and so
have died in the hie ways, Leu. 14.34.
which did hang in their houses and in certain vessels a long time; so it
does remain in the houses, and bedding, and garments of them that are dead a
long time after, and so breaks out at the last, sometimes a month and a
great deal more after, if good order be not taken to air them, even then,
when they thought that all fear of danger was past. All which do show what
danger we are in, though yet nothing be come unto us. And we may see it much
more, if we consider how the Psalmist compares it to an arrow that flies from
one place to another speedily, when he says, Thou shall not be afraied of the
Psalm. 91.5.
nor of the arrow that flies by day (speaking of the pestilence) so that as an
arrowe flies from one place quickly to another, so does this. Flying abroad
speedily and closely like an arrow.
For a man shall come from one place to another a great way off, and pass
through many towns without hurting of any, though himself has the plague,
even as an arrow shall fly aloft in the air, and do no hurt, nor touch any
thing: but then he shall lodge or rest in such a town twelve or twenty miles
off or more, and there he sickneth and dies, and leaves the infection behind
him; even as an arrowe shot by a strong man is there mortal where it lights,
so is this arrow of the Lord shot out by his mighty hand, who is skillful to
direct it to the place whither he minds to send it: and so we may be in more
danger tha^ we think, though we be a great way off, as a skillful archer
standing here, shoots his arrow a great way off to which shall go to, or
come from such places as are infected, as cats and dogs most of all: and
therefore in time of common plagues there is order taken in all cities or towns
corporate, (which are well governed) to kill up all dogs that are not shut up,
but run abroad, of what nature, or kind, or quality, or price soever they
be, least by coming into men's company they should spread abroad the infection:
And we read that some only but buying a dogs skin in the market, and bringin
it home, they have brought the pestilence into their house to the overthrow and
destruction of the whole family. Seeing then that it is, and has been a long
time in so many places, there is no place so far off from it, or so free, but
has just cause to fear it more or less, And therefore there is no place so
clear, whether it may not speedily come.
because there are so many open and secret ways to bring it, and so in the
ordinary course of gods providence all that have wisdom may think it likely
to come upon them in this time, if the Lord be not merciful unto them.
Therefore in respect of Gods wrath manifestly appearing in this grievous
pestilence, though not yet upon us, through the infinite goodness and mercy of
God, yet justly to be feared (as we have seen) we must think and confess,
that we have great cause by fasting and prayer to seek unto the Lord to turn
that from us before it come; which as our sins have deserved, so we see many
means, to bring it speedily upon us, as other of his servants have done in the
like case before. And thus much for this present (seeing the time cuttes me off
from the rest) of the first sign and token of Gods wrath likely to come,
observed in the course of his providence as a sufficient cause of public
fasting.

HOMIL. IX.
The ninth Homily continues to show the causes of public fastes, namely,
when the wrath of God to come has been justly feared, in respect of the great
sins, that have abounded: and of the judgment of God, denounced against the
same openly by the ministers of God. And when Gods wrath has not only been
upon themselves, but upon others of their brethren, the children of God.

THe last day we entering into this treatise of the consideration of the causes
of public fastings, have hitherto proceeded thus far; to show that the
servants of God have been moved thereunto, not only when some great
punishment as a testimony of Gods displeasure has been upon them, The wrath
of God to come, considered in sin, that has abounded, has been cause of
public fasts.
but when in the course of nature, or of ordinary means to serve Gods
providence by, there has been some likelihood of it: it remains that I
should proceed. Therefore secondarily they have considered of Gods displeasure
likely to come upon them, by seeing and observing diligently the manifold great
sins, and notorious offenses, which in their time have been committed: for
which they truly judged, and feared that God must needs some way punish them,
according to the number and greatness of the same, though he had borne with
them a long time; and the longer that of his great patience he had forborne
them, the greater and more speedy should his punishment be, according to his
justice. And this they have certainly gathered from the constant truth of
Gods threatenings revealed in his holy law, and from the continual execution
of the same upon others from time to time. Seeing then that the Lord is just
and true, and that he has threatened to punish sin so and so, as is largely
set down in the Law and the Prophets, specially the books of Moses, Leuit.
26. Deuteronomy. 28.
when they have seen sin to abound, then they have no less wisely, then
certainly concluded, that wrath is at hand, because God is offended. For even
as when all flesh had corrupted their ways upon earth, Genesis 6.
he brought in the flood of water, and drowned the whole world: and when the
cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, and their sin exceeding grievous, Genesis
18.20
the Lord rained brimstone and fire from heaven upon them, Genesis 15.16.
and overthrew them, and all the inhabitants of them: And when the wickedness
of the Ammonites and of the Canaanites was full, Judge. 2.11.
then the land spued them out: and when the Israelites in the time of the
Judges did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and served, Baalim and Ashtarosh,
the wrath of the Lord was hot against them, and he delivered them into the
hands of spoilers that spoiled them; and he sold them into the hands of their
enemies, round about them, so that they could no longer stand before their
enemies. And in the time of the Kings for the same cause they were carried away
captives into Babylon; 2. Chro. 36.15.
because the Lord sending his messengers to reclaim them from their sin,
rising earelie, because he had compassion on them, they mocked the messengers
of God, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
them, and till there was no remedy: for he brought upon them the Kings of the
Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of their
Sanctuary, and spared neither young man, nor virgin, ancient nor aged; God
gave all into his hand: And at the last for refusing Christ and his holy
Gospel, they were utterly destroyed by the Romans: so that always when sin
has abounded, the wrath of God has been near, Romans 1.18.
and ready to be revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men: and they that have been wise-hearted have observed
it: and so this has been sufficient cause to move them by fasting and prayer
to seek betimes to have it turned away.

And this they have done even then, Even then, when outwardly there has been
no show of danger.
when there was no likelihood of any evil to come upon them in respect of any
outward means that did portend it, but only their sins (the cause of it) in
respect of Gods justice, did give them cause to fear it. Thus did Ezra Ezr.
9.1.
the priest and the rest of the Jews that feared God, even a very great
congregation, when he understood, that the Priests, Levites, and the rest of
the people had married strange wives contrary to the law of God, even of the
Canaanites, Hittites, Iebusites, Egyptians, and such like: he feared some
plague to come upon them for it, and so confessed their sin unto God, and
craved pardon with all humility and earnestness in fasting and prayer: for he
rent his clothes, and his garments, and plucked off the hair off his head, and
of his beard, and sat down astonished: and there assembled unto him all that
feared the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of them of
the captivity, and so he sat down astonished with them until the evening
sacrifice: and then he tell upon his knees, and spread out his hands unto the
Lord God, and made that humble supplication for them, that follows there.
Ezr. 9.6.
And after that, he arose up from before the house of God, and went into a
chamber, but he did neither eat bread, nor drink water, for he mourned,
because of the transgressions of them of the captivity. Ezr. 10.6.
Thus though in respect of all outward things they had great cause of
reioicing, for he and many of the people were but newly returned out of their
long captivity, and were come up to Jerusalem from Babel, and Artahshaste the
King of Persia had the^ given him all his request, Ezr. 7.6.
according to the hand of the Lord his God, which was upon him: yet in respect
of the common sins of their time they sound Gods wrath, and mourned for it,
and by fasting and prayer sought to prevent it. If we then had but eyes to see,
and hearts to consider of the innumerable great sins of our time, which as a
great flood have overflowed the whole land, so that there is no place nor
calling free from the same: but as it is said of the Israelites (The Priests
and the people trespassed woonderfully) so it may be said of our time, 2. Chro.
36.14.
The common sins of ou^ time might more us to public fasting, if there were
nothing else.
High and low have woonderfully offended God: we might easily perceive, that
though there were no plague at all among us, or punishment upon us, nor any by
all likelihood to be feared; yet for our sins, the cry whe^^of is exceeding
grievous in the cares of the Lord of hosts, and is ascended up into the heavens
long ago, and calls for vengeance against us, as theirs of Sodom and
Gomorrah did: Genesis 18.2^.
we had just cause to fear his wrath, and so by fasting and prayer to seek
speedily to prevent it. For to let pass the strange marriages between the
Protestants and Papists, which without any scruple of conscience are too
frequently used, which seemed to be the only sin of that time, in the days
of Ezra, ^zr. 9.2.
that the people of God were so unequally yoked, and as it is said there, they
had mixed the holy seed with the people of the lands. To let this pass, we
may with the Prophet behold a thousand abominations more: ^zek. 8.9.^8.15.
for what peri^rie and blasphemy is there besides common swearing? what
intolerable pride in all sorts, even like unto Lucifer himself? what swelling
one against another? what envy, heart-burning, hatred, malice, cruelty,
oppression? what drunkenness, and gluttony, and surfeiting? what abominable
adultery, fornications, and all kind of uncleanness with chambering and
wantonness? as though men had clean forgotten the Lord, 1. King. 21.20.
and sold themselves to do evil. But to pass by all these things with
silence, though they be very great, let us look but to this one thing, the
general contempt of Gods holy Word, that inestimable treasure of his Gospel,
which he has bestowed upon us, even that precious p^^rle, Math. 12.43.
which when a man has sound, he should sell all that he has, and buy it:
Especially the general contempt of the Gospel in all place^
whether we consider of those places, where it is not, how it is neglected,
and not sought for of them, or where it is, how it is not there regarded; how
many have no care to preach it sincerely, and more have no care to follow it
in their lives: so that the profession that is made of it, is more for
estimation and credit, than of conscience and love that then bear to it; and
it is more in the head than in the heart, more in the tongue than in deed, more
in show than in truth. And a great number though they have had it thus long,
yet are not only not bettered thereby, but are a great deal worse than they
were many years ago. This open and manifest contempt of the Gospel, I say,
which is a greater sin than all the sins of Sodom, ^ath. 10.^.
(For it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day
of judgment, then for them) we must needs confess, that for it we had cause
long ago to fear the death of our most gracious sovereign Queen; and now
since it has happened, we may well say with Job, The thing that we feared,
^^b. 3.25.
is come upon us: and though the Lord has maruellously and beyond all our hope
recompensed that great loss, by sending so worthy a King into her room; yet
we might then have feared some other great punishment: as we see how this
plague has followed, and there was cause to fear it before, though few did
think of it; and what may be next unto this, we know not, we are sure that
much has been deserved, and so by fasting and prayer in respect of these
great sins, we had need to seek to the Lord to turn it away. And thus much
for the second cause, which might move us to fear some great wrath and
displeasure of God to be showed in some kind of correction and rod of his,
whereby we might willingly humble our selves before him in public fasting,
even the great sins that in all sorts every where abound, and most shamefully
lift up their heads uncontrolled.

Thirdly and last of all, Gods nor ^^ to come apearing i^ his judgment;
denounced, have been causes of public s^ s^ing.
concerning, this matter the servants of God in former times have wisely
discerned beforehand of the stormy tempest of Gods wrath to come, by the
fearful threatenings of Gods judgment denounced against them by his faithful
servant that have spoken to them in his Name: whom as they have been
persuaded, that they have been stirred up by his holy spirit, to speak unto
them from his mouth, and to warn them thereby out of his word, as from
himself; so they have feared the things that have been spoken against them,
and as though they did see them coming, have sought unto him by fasting and
prayer, to escape them. And this is the thing that moved the King of Niniue to
do as he did, namely, that when he heard the preaching of the Prophet Iona,
how he did cry out against their sin, and threatened Gods vengeance to light
speedily upon the whole city, unless they did speedily repent; ^ona. 3.4.
even that within forty days Niniue should be overthrown: when this word
came unto him, he arose from his throne, and laid his robe from him, and
covered himself with sackecloth, and sat in ashes, and proclaimed a fast
through the whole city (by the counsel of the King and his nobles) saying, Let
neither man nor beast feed nor drink water: that so in all humility they
seeking to God for mercy, and turning every man from his evil wa^es, they
might be spared in this which they saw, they had so great cause to fear: for
it is said, The people of Niniue believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put
on sackecloth from the greatest of them, even to the least of them: they
believed in God, and that moved them to do so; that is, they believed that
Iona, Iona. 3.5.
who thus preached, was a true Prophet, and that God had sent him to do this
message unto them, and that their sins had deserved this utter destruction
threatened, and that of his justice God might bring it upon them, and therefore
though they yet saw not how and which way it should come to pass, yet
believing these things, they fell to fasting and prayer, to pacify Gods wrath,
and to escap^ it. So that as the sound of the trumpet does warn men to prepare
themselves to battle, and to go meet with their enemies: so this preaching of
Gods servant, who lifted up his voice against them, as a trumpet, did awaken
them out of the sleep of security, and to meet the Lord, who was become their
enemy by reason of their sins; and in fasting and prayer humbly submitting
themselves unto him, to entreat at his hands conditions of peace. And truly
in this respect, if we should not in like manner seek to the Lord with fasting
and prayer, that his wrath might be appeased toward us, we could not plead
ignorance, as not knowing any cause why we should do so: ^Ve have not wanted
this ^ause of public fasting, among us.
for we must needs confess, that the faithful Ministers of Christ have often
and long ago in the pulpits proclaimed open war against us for our sins;
that is, they have threatened Gods heavy judgments against us out of his Word,
to rowse us from the drowsy security of sin.

Have we not heard it preached unto us, as it was to the Jews, that the
kingdom of God should be taken from us for our great barrenness, Mat. 21.43.
and green to a nation, that should bring forth the fruits thereof? And have we
not heard the words of the Prophet, ^sa. 5.1.
that whereas the Lord had planted among us a vineyard in a very fruitful
hill, and had hedged it, and gathered out the stones of it, and had planted it
with the best plants, and had built a tower in the mids thereof, and made a
wine press therein, and then looked that it should bring forth grapes, but it
brought forth wild grapes: that therefore he would take away the hedge
thereof, that it might be eaten up, and would break down the wall thereof,
that it might be trodden down, and that he would lay it waste, that it should
not be dug, but briers and thorns should grow up in it, and would
command the clouds that they should not rain upon it? And as this has been
threatened, so the Lord might according to our deserts, after the death of our
late Queen Elizabeth, have given us up either into the hands of some foreign
enemies abroad, or rebellious persons at home, who might have broken down all,
and laid us and the Church of God waste: Now though he has spared us this
way, yet according to former judgment denounced, he has not let us alone in
our sins, but has taken us into his own hand, by sending this pestilence
among us; which David accounted a great favor, when it was offered unto him by
the prophet Gad, 2. Sam. 24.13.
after that he had offended the Lord in numbering of the people, whether of
these three punishments he would choose, either seven years famine to come
upon the land, or to fly three months before his enemies, or that there
should be three days pestilence in the land; saying, I am in a wonderful
great strait: let us now fall into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are
great, and let me not fall into the hand of men, and so he chose the
pestilence, as a merciful visitation of the Lord: and so must we think, that
though the Lord has brought this upon us for our sins, according to that
that has been threatened by his servants, yet herein he has dealt very
mercifully with us, in that he has delivered us from the cruel oppression of
bloody men. For Gods judgments to come, for our sins have been constantly
threatened.
We must needs then acknowledge, that the servants of God have not kept silence
against our sins; but have out of his word showed, that of his justice and
truth he must needs punish us some way for our sins, unless we speedily
repent. And this as it has been always the usual dealing of God toward his
Church (to which specially he has given his word, and the Ministers thereof)
to warn them of his deserved punishments beforehand, as it is said of the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.17.
Son of man I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, therefore
hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me: so we have not
wanted this great mercy of God. For by the Ministers of our time from the
truth of Gods word we have been warned of his judgments to come from time
to time. Who though by the spirit of prophecy they could not foretell when, in
what day, or month, or year, or after what manner, either with the sword,
famine, or pestilence, as the prophets did in their time, to whom it was
specially revealed: yet out of the most certain truth of Gods word, and the
constant course of his dealing in former times, they have constantly avouched
and said, that God must needs before it be long some ways punish us for our
sins: as it is now come to pass, and as it has been preached unto the
people before.

And has not this been severely denounced against us often, Math. 3.10.
which John Baptist did against the Jews? Now is the axe put to the root of
the tree: therefore every tree, which brings not forth good fruit, shall be
hewn down, and cast into the fire? has it not been preached, that God would
utterly destroy all those that live unprofitable under his Gospel, destroy
them, I say, even by the roots? yet undoubtedly this has been often sounded
in the ears of all hearers: chap. 21.19
and that the fig tree that has nothing on it, but leaves shall be accursed
and wither, that is, all hypocrites that content themselves with a bare
outward profession of the Gospel, and labor not for the inward virtue and
power of it in their life, to the glory of God, and the benefit of others,
shall be discovered in time, and come to naught: according to the prayer of the
prophet. Do well, O Lord unto those, Psalm. 125.4
that be good and true in their hearts: but these that turn aside by the
crooked ways, them shall the Lord lead with the workers of iniquity: but peace
shall be upon Israel. Luke 13.6.
And though he be a most patient God toward al, even toward the wicked, yet
he will severely punish those at the last, that abuse his great patience: as
appears in the parable of a certain housbandman, who had a fig tree
planted in his vineyard, and he came, and sought fruit therein, and found none:
then said he to the dresser of his vinyard, Behold this three years have I
come, and sought fruit of this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why
keeps it also the ground barren? And he answered and said unto him, Lord let
it alone this year also, till I dig round about it, and dunge it, and if it
bear fruit, well: if not, then after thou shall cut it down. Romans 2.4.
So the God of patience, who thereby leads all men to repentance, or leaves
them without excuse, has waited for our repentance and amendment of life, as
the fruit of all the pains that he has taken with us in his Gospel, but
undoubtedly, if after this preaching from year to year, we remain
unfruitful, at the last he will root them up, which make the Church barren,
which is in it own nature the most fruitful place in the world. And therefore
we ought long ago to have sought unto God in fasting and ^raier, to escape
this wrath.
These and such like things have not only been preached every where, but
with great earnestness and zeal so uttered, that we might easily discern,
that they spoke not of themselves, but were thereunto stirred up by the spirit
of God, so that God warned us of his judgments by them and therefore we
should have believed them, and so have sought heretofore by fasting and prayer
to have these ^^ings turned away. For as David when ^he prophet Nathan
terrified his con^ience with the fearful denuntiation Gods judgment for his
sin, say^g, 2. Sam. 12.9
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in
his sight? therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; then he
besought the Lord, and fasted, and lay all night upon the earth, before all
came upon him: And as Ahab King of Israel when Eliah the prophet reproouing him
sharply for his sin, said unto him in the name of God, behold I will bring
evil upon thee, and take away thy posterity, 1. King. 21.21.
etc. when he heard these words, he rent his clothes, and put sackecloth upon
him, and fasted: and so both these, when they did hear from messenger of God,
what was due to them for their sins, they sought by private fasting to have
it turned away: So when the Lord every where stirred up his servants with all
zeal and feruencie of spirit more then ordinarily thus to speak unto us, and
did sing unto us the doleful song of his heavy judgments, and so with John
Baptist did mourn unto us, Luke 7.32.
that we might have wept: we should have done as the Ninevites did, Iona 3.5.
that is, we should have believed God, and his servants, and have put on
sackecloth from the greatest to the least, and so by fasting and prayer have
sought unto the Lord to turn it away: and not carelessly to have tarried till
the hand of God was upon us, as now we have done. We should have been wise,
as others have been before us, to have taken knowledge of Gods wrath to come
by the threatenings of his word, preached unto us by his servants, and so sought
to prevent them as they did.

Thus we see, A conclusion showing what cause there is of public fasting in
respect of Gods wrath appearing against our selves.
that whether we look to the time present, or to come; and therein to the
course of Gods providence, whereby (if we consider all things well) we have
more cause to fear our selves, then to be secure: or we look to sin, that
abounds every where, which being unrepented of, calls for vengeance at
Gods hand against us; or we consider this, that our sins have been sharply
reproved and Gods curse for them threatened against us by those that have
spoken unto us in his name: we have great cause to do, as we do, I mean, to
resort thus to the Church, to seek unto God by fasting and prayer: yea we
should have done it long before: and seeing that there are so many causes of
public fasting among us, we must therefore think, that the Lord requires
the thing it self at our hands. Which we shall the rather also be persuaded
of, if besides all this that has been spoken to that end, we further consider
that the people of God always making this a sufficient cause of their
fastings, eue^ the wrath of God appearing against his Church (as we have seen
before) have considered and regarded this wrath of his to move them thereunto,
not only against themselves particularly, but against others also of the same
society and fellowship of true religion, that themselves were of, through a
mutual feeling and compassion, which they have one of another, as the lively
members of one and the same mystical body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head,
The wrath of God against other chur^hes have moved the god y to public
fasting. Romans 12.15
and which he quickens by one spirit, according to the doctrine of Saint
Paul: Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, be of
like affection one toward an other. So that though they have been free from
any token at all of Gods displeasure themseues, yet when they have seen it lie
heavily upon the shoulders of their brethren, they have by fasting and prayer
put to their helping hand, Gal. 6.2.
and have sought to remove it, that they might be eased; and so have borne one
another burden (as the Apostle says) fulfilling therein the law of Christ.
As appears by the fast, that was held at Antiochia, Act. 13.2.
which was taken in hand for the great misery of the mother Church of
Jerusalem, rather then for any present calamity that was then in that city.
For it is showed in the Chapter chap. 13.1.
going before, that Herod the King raised a great persecution against that
Church, and stretched out his ^and to vex it there, and first he killed James
the brother of John with the sword: and when he saw that it pleased the people,
he proceeded further t^ tak^ ^^^ter also, and when he had caug^ him, he put
him in prison, caused him to be bound with chains, and delivered him to four
quaternions of soldiers to be kept: and what he would have done to him, we may
easily conjecture, if the Lord had not disappointed him, as it follows in
that Chapter: where is showed how this cruel persecuting tyrant, when he was
in the midst of his pride, and was contented to be saluted by his flatterers
with the name of God, saying, the voice of God, verse. 22.
and not of man, then the Angel of the Lord smote him; because he gave not
glory unto God, so that he was eaten up of worms, and gave up the ghost. Then
presently the Evangelist makes mention of this fast, when Paul and Barnabas
were returned from Jerusalem to Antiochia, and as it is most like, told them of
all the troubles that were there; and there is no mention of any special
calamity that was there, but rather of Gods great blessings, for there were
many excellent men, even Prophets and teachers, whereof some are named there:
so that it is manifest, In which respect we have cause t^ do it, for the
calamity that is upon our brethren.
that this fast was to entreat for the Church at Jerusalem. Therefore though
there were no evil at all upon our selves, upon our own persons, or any that
belong unto us, or upon our town, or any likelihood of any to come upon us:
yet this fearful and great plague that is, and has been a long time upon our
brethren in many places of this land (united unto us in the profession of the
same religion and Gospel, besides the same allegiance which we owe all unto the
same sovereign King) in many places, (I say) as in London, Norwitch,
Yarmouth, Cambridge, and such like, should move us in compassion to succor
them with our prayers as much as we can, and therefore to entreat the Lord to
remove this heavy hand of his from them, though we feel not the weight of it
our selves, and so to fast publicly for these cities and towns, as they of
Antiochia did for them of Jerusalem.

Therefore no man must think, that these public fasts which we keep by the
commandment of our governors, do concern others and not themselves, nor
say, We are all well here (God be thanked) what need we vex and trouble our
selves with any such thing before we have cause? this order is appointed for
such places where the plague is, here is none yet, neither is any near us,
Gods name be blessed for it: These are good words indeed, and I pray God, that
they may so consider of the goodness of God toward us indeed, that we may
labor to be truly thankful to him for the same. But does not the Apostle
say, ^. Cor. 12.^6.
that in the natural body by the very instinct of nature, if one member
suffer and be pained, That as in ^he natural ^ody there is ^ feeling of ^he
pain of ^ther mem^ers: so it may be in ^pirituall.
all suffer with it, and have the feeling of it? And shall not we which are the
body of Christ, and members for our part (as he says in the same place) by
the inward working of Gods spirit, be moved with the adversity, sickness,
pain, and loss of our brethren? but be so hardhearted, and void of all life
of the spirit of God, of all sense of feeling, as dead and rotten members, or
rather clean cut off from the body, that we shall daily hear of many
thousands of our brethren and sisters in Christ to be in so great heaviness
and sorrow for themselves and for their friends, and not to be moved with it?
and yet count our seules members of that body, when we shall have little or
no feeling at all of their estate. That part of the body is dead, that is
without feeling, not only of it own self, but of the other members; so we
may well think of our selves, that we are clean void of that spirit of life,
that quickneth the whole body, if in so great misery of others we should be
senseless, and not moved with it. Did not Nehemiah that worthy servant of
God, though he was in the Kings court, and in office there, and in great favor
with the King, and all was well with him, yet so sorrow for the misery of his
brethren in Jerusalem, that he fasted, and prayed for them? according as it is
written of him: Neh. 1.2.
That there came Hanam one of his brethren unto him, and some other of the men
of Judah, and he asked them concerning the Jews that were delivered, which
were of the residue of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem: and they said
unto him, the residue that are left of the captivity there in the province are
in great affliction and in reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down,
and the gates thereof are burnt with fire: and when he heard those words, As
Nehemi^h being in ^reat prospe^itie mour^ed and fa^^ed for the ^iserie of ^is
brethren.
he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed
before the God of heaven for them: which zealous and godly prayer of his
proceeding from the abundance of his sorrowful heart is set down there. And
this grief of heart which he conceived for the affliction of others did so
work upon him in this great prosperity of his own, that he was not able to
hide it, but it did manifestly bewraie it self in his countenance, so that the
king, when he waited at the table did perceive it, and asked him the cause of
it, saying, Neh. 2.2.
Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick, this is nothing but
sorrow of heart; Then he told him the cause of it, and said to the king, God
save the ^^ng for ever* why should not my countenance be sad, when the city
and house of the sepulcher of my fa^hers lies waste, and the gates thereof are
devoured with fire? Thus we see how he in all pity and compassion sorrowed
for the desolation of others: and shall we think, that we may now give our
selves to feasting, and chearing, to mirth and pleasure, to recreation and
pastimes, and to all kind of meeting to these ends, as in times past, and
have little or no sorrow at all, when our brethren in other places are in
great affliction, and many houses lie waste with the pestilence? We must do,
as we would be done unto; if we were in their case, or in any other misery,
we would be glad, that others should pity us, and in pity pray for us,
Then shall others also pity us in the like case and pray for us.
and it would be a great comfort unto us, to hear that any did so: then must
we in the mean season thus pity others, and in a brotherly compassion pray
for them; that when it shall be our own case that way, or any other way, we
might not be left to our selves, but others might do as much for us, as we
have done for them before, according to the promise of our Savior Christ in
the Gospel: Give, Leu. 6.36.
and it shall be given you, a good measure, pressed down, shaken together,
and running over shall men give unto your bosom, for with what measure you
mete, with the same shall men mete unto you again.

It is written of Vriah the Hittite one of David's worthy captains, that when
he was sent for home in policy by the King, that by going home to his own
house, the adultery that was committed with his wife Bethshebah in his absence
might be hidden: 2. Sam. 11.^
and therefore the king said unto him, Go down to thine house, and wash thy
feet: so Vriah departed out of the kings palace, and the king sent a present
after him; but Vriah Vriah departed from his lawful delights, because his
brethren were in adversity*
slept at the door of the kings palace with all the servants of his Lord,
and went not down to his house: then they told David, saying, Vriah went not
down to his house, and David said unto Vriah, come thou not from thy
journey? Why do thou not go down to thine house? Then Vriah answered
David: The Arc, and Israel, and Judah dwell in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and
the servants of my Lord abide in the open fields: shall I then go into mine
house, to eat and drink, and to lie with my wife? by thy life, and by the
life of thy soul I will not do this thing. Is this good and holy man Vriah
would not go home to his house, and make much of himself, when the King bad
him, and when there were so many reasons for it, because his Lord and captain
Ioab, under whom he served, and many other of the people his fellow soldiers
were in the field before their enemies, and so in danger of their lives, but
thought it meet in godly wisdom, though he was absent from them, to bear
part of the burden with them. So should we fall from our ^leasures in ^his
great so^ow and loss ^f others.
Then we, if we have the like compassion to our brethren that he had, should
think, that we ought to abridge our selves somewhat at the least of our
honest lawful delights, and to cut off not only all superfluity and excess,
but somewhat of our ordinary diet, and to sorrow with those our brethren, who
though they are not in the open fields and in the face and fear of their
enemies, yet are in no less danger and fear of their lives by reason of this
great plague; Psalm. 91.5.
which as an arrow flies by day, and walks in the darkness, and destroieth
at noon day, so that neither day nor night they are in safety, or without
fear, and is as deadly as the sword, for it causes a thousand to fall on the
one side, and ten thousand on the other: and so they have many fearful
days, and take little rest in the night, neither can they eat their meat
quietly, or with any comfort. So that unless we will be addicted, and live
wholly to ourselves, and care for none other, this great wrath upon our
brethren so long and so heavy, should drive us to weep with them, to fast and
pray for them: and seeing they are so greatly humbled in themselves, we should
some ways cast down our selves with them. Therefore let us set their
lamentable estate To that end we should seriously think of their lamentable
estate.
before our eyes, and let it be a looking glass unto us; let us in the fear
of God think of it seriously and in good earnest, as if it were our own case,
that we may be thoroughly moved with it: and let us not have such stony
hearts, so void of all bowels of compassion, that we should hear weekly of
the death of our brethren, and what great lamentation is made every where,
some for the loss of their husbands and wives, some for the death of their
parents and children, others for the departure of their sisters and brethren,
friends, neighbors, kinsefolke and acquaintance, and we should have no sorrow
for it at all: this were the very next way to provoke God against our selves,
and wilfully to pull the same misery upon our own heads. David was so full
of pity, that he fasted, and besought the Lord not only when the hand of God
was upon some of his own household, 2. Sam. 12.15.
as when the Lord had stricken the child that was begotten in adultery, and so
it lay sick: but also when it was upon others, even upon his enemies, Psalm.
35.13.
as he professes himself; They rewarded me evil for good, to have spoiled
my soul, yet I when they were sick, I was clothed with a sack, I humbled my
self with fasting, and my prayer was turned upon my bosom, that is, I prayed
for them continually: I behaved my self, as to my friends, or as to my
brother; I humbled my self, mourning as one that bewaileth his mother. If he
did thus for his enemies, how much more should we do it for them, who have
given us no other cause to judge of them, but as of our friends? if he did it
for some one, or a few private persons, then how much more should we do it,
when the affliction is so common? and not only to many persons, but to many
places, even the chief cities and towns of this realm.

When as Haman sought the destruction of Mordecai principally, because he
would not satisfy his proud humor in giving him that reverence, which he
required, and then for his sake the destruction of all the Jews: Hest. 3.5.
for his malice was so great, and he was so full of wrath and indignation
against him, that he thought it too little, to lay hands only one Mordecay and
because they had showed him the people of Mordecay, Haman sought to destroy all
the Jews, that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ah^s^uerosh, even t^^
people of Mordec^y* and had prevailed thus far with the king, that he had
obt^ined a commission to that end sealed with the kings ring, even to root
out, to kill and destroy all the Jews both young and old, children, and women
in one day: and Queen Hester, Hester being without danger, fasted for the
mi^ery of others.
who was a Jew herself, had intelligence of this, from Mordecay: she might
have thought that all this did not appertain unto her; she being the Queen,
and so dear unto the king, none durst be so bold, as to touch her; if all the
rest of the Jews were slain, yet she should escape: for all this she is in
great compassion affected with the sorrow and misery of the rest of the
people, and so she puts off her princely attire, enters into her secret
chamber, H^st. 4.16,
and there with her maids humbles her self before God for them in fasting
and prayer three days, and three nights together. If then it were possible for
us in this so common and dangerous contagion and mortality of many of our
brethren in so many places of this land dispersed, to have as good hope and
likelihoode of our own security and freedom from it, as this good Queen
might have had from that destruction, that was intended generally against all
the Jews; yet we should be so touched with the estate of others, that are
like to perish, So should w^ that a^e wh^^, for them that are visited with the
plagu^.
that we should seek to succor them, at the least by our prayers and
supplications unto God for them, with fasting and humbling of our selves to
that end, as she did. But especially, we should be far from that profane
security, and carnal voluptuousness, which is noted to have been in the
King and Haman, ^est. 3.15.
that they two sat drinking, and making of good cheer, when the whole City
of Shushan was in great perplexity: so we should give our selves to eating and
drinking, and all kind of mirth and iolitie, like Epicures and belligods, as it
is to be feared that too many do, when in many Cities and Towns, other are in
great distress and perplexity of mind. Yea, we are to fear that few of the
better sort, have laid this great visitation so near their heart as they
should, which is one cause, that it continues so long, and in that great
measure, that it does. Let us then put upon us the person of our brethren, and
labor to have the feeling of their estate, A conclusion showing what cause we
have to fast for our brethren.
as though it were our own: and then we shall know and confess, that if there
had been no order taken for these fastings publicly, we in love should have
submitted our selves unto them privately: but now seeing we are commanded by
the public authority of our Superiors, and that also upon so good ground, as
we have heard, that we are bound unto it so much the more. And the rather
that we might do it, we may know thus much, that they observe this fast in
Scotland for us, because now we are not only under one Religion, but under the
same government, and therefore we must account the estate of the one common to
the other, as they by this practice for their part, show that they do: if they
that are so far off, are moved with it so greatly; then we that are so
near, must needs be too senseless, and void of compassion, if we should not
by fasting and prayer seek, that so great a wrath of God, so long continued,
might in Gods most blessed time be removed and taken clean away: that so it
might please him of his infinite mercy to work that true repentance in all,
whereby he might be moved to heal all those places, that have a long time
been diseased, that there might be that intercourse of dealing between man and
man in all places without danger or fear, that has been; and that it might
not only be removed, but with the favor of God, and with the amendment of
all our sinful lives, that so it might be a blessing in deed, and not a
curse, and that we may so profit by it for the time to come, that we take that
warning, which our Savior Christ gave unto the diseased man whom he had
healed: Ioh. 5.14.
Behold thou art made whole; sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.
Which grace, God grant unto us, and to all the people of this land, for Jesus
Christ's sake: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and
one true immortal, invisible, and only wise God be ascribed from us, and from
all his creatures all honor, glory, and praise power and thanksgiving, from
this time forth and for ever hereafter, world without end. Amen.

A direction for Prayer: Fit and convenient for all those, that being ignorant
or unacquainted with private prayer, are desirous to pray by themselves.
Eccl. 4.17. Math. 6.6. Psalm. 108.1.

him in any part of your life: Psa. 40.12. and 51.4.5. and 32.5. Dan. 9.5.6.
Ezr. 9.6.15. Dan. 9.7. etc. Luke 23.41. Psalm. 130.3.

sins so much as you should do, and no more. 1. Cor. 11.31. Math. 11.28.
Luke 15.59.

Luke 18.13. Psa. 51.17. Esa. 66.2.

Psalm. 25.7.18. and 51.1.2.7. etc. Dan. 9.17. etc.

Psalm. 79.8.9. Iona. 3.8. and 1. King. 8.33.36. etc.

Psalm. 51.1.7.11.15. and 25.7. Mar. 9.24. discharged before gods judgment
seat: and that you may in the feeling of his love rejoice with an unspeakable
joy, both above all worldly ioies, and in the midst of all worldly sorrows:
and thirdly, that you may have good hope for the time to come, even in this
world most of all of your salvation; and that that may suffice you. Romans 5.1.
Psa. 51.8.12. Romans 15.13. Heb. 6.9.

Romans 7.24. Psalm. 51.10. and 2. Cor. 12.8.

spirit: and these not only generally, but some more specially by name, whereof
you stand in most need. Psalm. 119.33.34. etc. Psalm. 51.12.

These. 5.19.20. and 1. Tim. 1.19.

Psalm. 127.1. Prouer. 31.13. etc. 2. Tbes. 3.10. etc. Genesis 24.12.

namely as they may make you more fit to serve God and to do good unto others:
name some things, as not only health, wealth, friends, etc. but others, that
you at that time stand in most need of. Pro. 30.8.9. Genesis 28.20.21. Iam.
5.17.18.

Genesis 28, 20. Deuteronomy. 28.2.3. etc. Phil. 4.11.12. Math. 6.25. etc.

Math. 16.24. Romans 8.26.28 Phil. 1. 23. and 2. Cor 5.9. etc.

Psa. 122.6.7. Ier. 29 7. Ephesians. 6.18.19. and 1. Sam. 1.17.

Psalm. 103.2. and 145.1.2. Secondly for all sins, which are forgiven you; which
you have been kept from: and which you have been recovered out of. Psalm.
103.3. and 51.15. and 16.7. Thirdly for all evil and punishments, which you
have escaped above others: or which you have been delivered out of: or which
have come upon you as fatherly chastiseme^ts, and in them you have been
comforted. Exodus 15.1.2. Psalm. 107.8.15.25. and 119.67.71.

Timoth. 2.1.



Pray always, with all manner prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication, for all Saints, and for me.
Ephesians. 6.18.

An order privately to read over with great facility the old Testament once
every year, and the new twice.
CHAPTERS of the Old Testam. 777 CHAPTERS of the New Test. 260. Morning Days
of the week Evening. 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 4 2 2 5 1 2 6 1 3 7 0 The Old
Testament thus read over once in a year. and there will be two days to spare.
The New Testament thus is read over twice in a year, and there will be one day
to spare.

The PSALMS 150. These may be read over by themselves, either once in a month
or once in a quarter at the least: which is four times in the year.

1. TIM. 4.13. Give attendance unto reading.


He that is desirous to learn and remember the Word of God, that he might
live according to it, let him consider of that which is written, Psalm 119.
Part 2.
THE TEXT. THE PARAPHRASIS. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways? in
taking heed thereto according to thy Word. 1 FIrst of all be persuaded, that
the Word of God is only that rule, whereby the whole life of every man, and
that in every thing must be ordered: even the the life of a young man, who
thinks, that he has most reason for himself, why he should be exused, as
commonly he is most disordered. With my whole heart I sought thee: let me not
wander from thy commandment. 2 Then upon this persuasion give your self
unfeignedly to the reading and hearing of Gods Word, as to the means whereby he
has appointed to teach you: and pray to God in the diligent use of those
means for his holy spirit, that thereby you might come to the true
understanding of his Word. I have hid thy promise in mine heart, that I might
not sin against thee. 3 That which you have thus learned, let it not swim
aloft in your brain, but be deeply settled and hid in your heart as a
treasure, framing all your affections unto it: that so you may have it in a
readiness whenever you should use it: otherwise though you know never so
much, it will not keep you from sinning against God. Blessed art thou O Lord,
teach me thy statutes. 4 You thus profiting, give thanks to God for that which
you learn, because be it never so little, it is more than many in the world
do know: yet content not your self with it, as though you had sufficient, but
pray unto him to be further enlightened, because it is less than many others
do, and you your self should know. With my lips have I declared all the
judgments of thy mouth. 5 But above all, be careful to talk of that unto
others, which you do daily learn your self: and out of the abundance of your
heart let your mouth speak. For by teaching others, you shall learn your
self. I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
riches. 6 That you might do all these things, labor to have joy in the Word,
and in all the exercises of it, more than in any worldly thing, and be occupied
about those things with greatest delight: for in whatsoever we take greatest
delight, that will stick fastest by us. I will meditate in thy precepts, and
consider thy ways. 7 Last of all, meditate and consider of that with your
self which you have learned, and muse upon it alone, not contenting your self
with the general rules, but laboring in your conscience to make the use of
them profitable to your self, in the particular practice thereof. I will
delight in thy statutes, and I will not forget thy Word. 8 Thus doing all these
things carefully, you shall be sure never to forget that which you learn: for
though you do not always remember every thing, yet God by his spirit will call
so much into your remembrance as is needful for you to know, and then
especially when you have most need of it; as in the hour of death, and in the
day of temptation: but as you fail in all, or in iny one of these, so may you
fear to fail in the truth of this promise.

A good help for an ill memory.

