A SERMON PREACHED AT MAPPLE-DVRHAM in Oxfordshire: AND PVBLISHED at the
request of Sir RICHARD BLOVNT. By I. B. D. D. and Chapleine in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

Quoties (...), toties iudicamur. Hierom. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John
Hodgets. 1616.

ROMANS 6. 23. The wages of Sin is Death; but the gift of God is eternal
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
ALl Scripture comes from one fountain, which is the spirit of God: and
therefore all Scripture is fit to perfect the man, of God. But as in Paradise,
though there were one Fountain, yet it was divided into four Rivers, whose
waters were diversely rellished, according to the nature of the soil through
which they passed: Or as in an Instrument of Music, though one wind give a
general sound, yet by the diversity of the Pipes and Organs, the Tones are
varied: So the holy Scriptures, inspired by one spirit, have an accidental
difference, according to the nature of the Penmen of the facred Scripture.
Prologe in Iobum.


Hence is it that Gregory compared some Scriptures to Jacobs hasle rods;
partly pilled, and partly covered: other Scriptures to Achabs house of Iuory,
without any covering.

The Scripture that I have read, is of the former sort, which craves your
attention whilst it is enterpreted: craves your affection when it is applied:
And justly does it crave both; the Holy Ghost joining together Ima summis, the
highest and the lowest things, as Leo speaks. The first proposition being of
Death. The second of Life. Death, of all things the most terrible. Life, of all
things the most comfortable.

To leave an impression in you, I will compare them to the two remarkable
Trees in Paradise. The first is as the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
The second, as the Tree of immortality. The first the experimental Tree of
Death. The second as the Sacramental Tree of Life.

Both of these have a double consideration.

In the tree of death, you may consider. First the bitter root, which is
sin, and the evil fruit, which is death, the wages of sin.

In the tree of life, you may consider the sacred root, which is Gods gift;
and the happy fruit, which is eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sin the root of death. Death the fruit of sin. The gift of God the root of
life. Life the fruit of the gift of God, are the four corners of the Alter,
upon which at this time, we will offer up our sacrifice unto God.

Sin.
The first is Sin, which Saint John does define to be the breach of Gods law.
A law so much urged by the justice of God, that our Savior Christ proclaims
that heaven and earth shall pass away, but one iod or title shall in no wise
pass from the law, til all be fulfilled. One Iod, which is but a letter
amongst the Hebrews, as the grain of Mustard seed, the least of all letters,
but one point (.) of a letter. From whence the Rabines have observed, that God
changing the name of Sarai to Sara, took one Iod from her name; which that it
might not be taken from the Law, he added one Iod to Osheah, and called him
Iehoshuah.

A Law so urged that S. Paul repeates the sentence of God in a language of fear
and trembling. Galat. 3. 10. Cursed is every man that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the Law to do them. We are ( bound),
we are ( All) bound, all to ( Do) to do ( All,) all to ( Continue) to
continue under pain of a ( Curse,) a curse, which implies, Esaias 30.
a river of brimstone, and the breath of the Lord to set it on fire.

This is the sentence of God against Sin: against every Sin: against the
least Sin: whether it be a sin of Thought, or Word, or Act, or Degree, or
Delight, or Desperation, or Omission. God has concluded All Sin to be the
Root of Death and destruction.

How just then is the Complaint of In Enchiridio.
S. Augustine? Vaepeccatis hominum quae sola inusitata exhauressimus: VVoe to
the custom of sin, that takes away the sense of sin, and causes us to
fear none but unusual, monstrous, and prodigious impieties.

Common ciuility keeps many a man from redness of the eyes, the inheritance
of the Drunkard: from rottenness of the bones, the leprosy of the Adulterer:
from Iezabells dogs, the sepulcher of the Oppressor. But Covetousness, Pride,
Envy, Detraction, Bribing, Flattering, Idle-Complementing, and Fashioning of
our selves to all luxurious ambition, and foolish-vanities of the world, are
now become Free-Denisons of Court, of City, of Country, that challenges the
privilege of the unrighteous Judge, neither to be afraid of the justice of
God, nor to be ashamed in the sight of men.

I do confess, that there are Essential, and Accidental differences of
sins: Some do grieve, some do resist, some do quench the spirit of God:
But yet every sin in the own nature has the sting of a Viper, and does
wound us mortally.

Take a view, and you shall find that Adam lost Paradise for eating of an
Apple: Some say it was an Indian fig, an entising bait of sweetness. You
shall find that God drowned the world for Imaginations. Genesis 6. 5. You shall
find that Homo* Iliadot. 6.
(...), words of feathers, dalliances, chamberings, wantonness, and the scumme
of lasciviousness shall make us give an account at the day of judgment.
Bernard.
Sagitta leuiter volat, sed grauiter vulnerat: Idle words are as feathered
arrows, which fly lightly, but wound the soul deeply. Yea, you shall find
that there are sins of Gesture, Quando cum oculis fabulamur: When says S.
Augustine we c De Doctri Christia. lib. 1.
speak lewdly with our eyes: which God so punished in Lots wife, that she is
a pillar of Salt until this day. These sins, so small in our estimations, so
familiar to our corruptions, so usual in our conuersations, so glued to our
affections, they have poison in the root, and the fruit of them is death. We
read in Ecclesiastical history of Cassianus Prud. Peristeph. Him. 4.
a Schoolmaster of Children, and a Scholar and Martyr of Christ, who by the
commandment of the Tyrant, was stabbed to death by his Scholars pen-kniues.

We read in Scripture of Amasa, whose bowels were shed out by the sword of
Ioab. Of Sis^raes head gored with a nail: we read of Acha^ who was wounded in
his breast with an arrow. We read of Christ, whose side was pierced with a
spear. All these did not wound a like deeply, but all did wound alike deadly.

Spears, swords, arrows, nails, pen-kniues, all instruments of the death of
the body. Deeds, swords, looks, gestures, thoughts, all causes of the death of
the soul.

Our sins in Scripture are compared unto sands, which are very small
considering them severally, and yet the greatest ship is easily swallowed up
of quicke-sands. There is not a sin of any nature, but is as big as one of
Herod's worms which devoured Herod's bowels. Noli despicere peccata tua quia
parua sunt; August.
nam et pluuiarum guttae paruae sunt. Despise not ( Augustine) thy sins
because they are little; for the drops of rain are small, and yet they are the
bottles of the heaven, and the fountains of the Ocean.

To conclude this point. No sins are lesser then the point of those thorns
that pierced August. in Enchi.
the head of Christ. Pro quibus abluendis sanguis Christi effusus: For the
washing away of which Christ shed drops of blood in the garden, and opened the
spouts of blood on the Cross. So bitter a root is sin, that it could not be
taken away, but by the death of our Savior: And as sin is a root so bitter;
so no better is the fruit, which the text calls Death. The wages and guerdon
of Iniquity.

The wages of Sin is (Death.)
Death is the Fruit; but death as wages: For it (...).
is not a singular, but a plural death. The least sickness in the stomach,
pain in the head, ache in the tooth, consumption in the lungs, wind in the
belly, gravel in the kidneyes, are the harbingers of death, are the wages of
sin and iniquity. But to speak more distinctly. Death; says S. Augustine is
threefold. First, De (...) Dei. 1
Quando Deus deserit animam volentem: When God forsakes the Soul, that will
be forsaken. Secondly, Quando anima deserit corpus: When 2
the soul forsakes the body that would not be forsaken. Thirdly, Quando anima
nolens tenetur 3
in corpore: When the unwilling soul is manacled to the body. The first
expressed in the young man. Matthew. 8. 22. to whom Christ said, Let the dead
bury the dead. A strange speech; for a man would think that the dead were
more fit to be buried, then to bury: But therefore was it delivered by Christ,
that every Christian man may know, That a sinners body, is but the breathing
Sepulcher of a sinners soul. The second expressed in Lazarus: John 11. 39.
Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he has bin dead four days. Whose body
in life is a beautiful caske of Iuory, within four days after the souls
departure, is nothing else but a stinking and loathsome carrion. The third
expressed in Dives, Luke 16. 24. He prayed to Father Abraham, therefore he had
a Soul: He had a tongue to be cooled; therefore he had a Body.

That wretched man may know that this is everlasting Death, when soul and body
are coupled together with everlasting chains of sorrow, that they may be
sensible of their endless torment.

But howsoever these three deaths are the wages of sin, yet there is a
difference in the manner: For the death of the soul is the wages of sin, as
an act of order: The death of the body, as an act of justice: The death of
soul and body as an act of proportion.

First, there is order in disorder. Man's disorder: God does order. You read
Exodus 7. 13. that Pharaoh hardened his own heart; before God hardened the heart
of Pharaoh. Durities est hominis peccatum, obduratio iudiciu^ Dei: they are the
words of Calvin, upon the third verse, which I purposely allege. Hardness of
heart is man's sin; hardening of the heart is Gods judgment.

You read in 1 Samuel 10. 9. 10. that God gave to Saul an other heart. 1 Samuel 15.
26. Samuel said to Saul, Thou have cast away the Lord, and the Lord has cast
away thee. 1 Samuel 16. 14. The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. So you see that Saul first resisted
Gods spirit, before God sent upon Saul an evil spirit. In the very root of
Reprobation; Adam first sinned, and then God punished.

It is the Conclusion of Augustine, which shall conclude this point. Ad bonum
prior est voluntas Creatoris, ad malum prior est voluntas Creaturae.

Gods will in goodness, is the first efficient.

Man's will in wickedness is the first deficient.

Sin goes before, and Death of the soul follows in order as the wages of
sin.

Secondly, Bodily-death, when the soul is breathed out, as it was breathed in;
when the body which was composed of dust, is resolved into dust, is the wages
of sin, as an act of Justice. It is the sentence of God, Genes. 3. Because
thou Non lege naturae sed merito peccati. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 13. cap. 15.
have harkned to the voice of thy Wife, and have eaten of the forbidden tree;
thou shall return to dust, from whence thou were taken. Because thou have
eaten, thou shall return to dust. Therefore if man had not eaten, he should not
have returned to dust. Gods power was as sufficient to have translated Adam
from Paradise, without death, as to take up, Elias to heaven in a Chariot of
fire. Let no Scotist, nor Andradian, nor Jesuit bewitch you with any
Philosophical speculation, as that of Plato, (...): every thing that is
composed, In Tim^o.
must be resolved. Nor with that of Damascen (...): euerything that is made
Ortho. fidei. De long* et breui. vitae.
is subject to be mard. Nor with that of Aristotle, that every body composed of
contrary elements, disposed into contrary humors, must at length have a
natural date of corruption. For S. Paul tells you, that death is not the
dissoluing of what God created, but the wages of sin, which man committed.
Will you know the reason? You see by experience that the same Sun remains in
the same substance, and individual circle, but all sublunary bodies do
continue in succession.

If then Philosophers give probable reason of this difference, because they
say, Forma coeli tollit contradictionem materiae: The form of heaven takes
away all contrariety, and preserues them in an euiternity. Shall we think
then that Afflatus oris diuini, that the breath of De resurca^nis.
Gods own mouth, as Tertullian calls the soul, had not a celestial power in
the creation, to have eternally preserved a corruptible body from corruption?
Again, Divinity has made it plain, Genes. 2. God created two sorts of trees
in Paradise: All the common trees in the garden for eating, but one celestial
tree for preserving. Reliquae arbores erant alimento, arbor Aug. de ciuit. dei.
lib. 13. c. 20.
vitae erat sacramento: The other trees were for aliment, the tree of life was
for a Sacrament.

Examine then the cause of natural death, which is the decay of radical
humor: If then the eating of the tree of life, did not, as ordinary meat,
only refresh the body, but as a Celestial cordial, did repair the natural
sap of the body, then no question but the Angels sword that kept our first
Parents from the tree of life, brought upon them, brought upon us, Legem
moriendi, as the Fathers speak, the Law of Death and destruction. This is Gods
justice, when man defaced Gods image in his soul, to take away the power of
the soul. This is Gods justice, when man eats of the forbidden fruit, to
forbid him to eat of the fruit of Life.

In the third place, the Death of Soul and Body is the Wages of sin, by way
of proportion.

For if any man shall wonder at the severe judgment of God, that extends his
indignation to eternity, when the act of every sin is but short and
momentary. If any man shall think that there is no proportion betwixt a finite
time of sinning, and an infinite time of punishing: Let that man give a reason
of the justice of man, and compare it with the justice of God. Why is Theft by
the Laws of Man punished with Death? The time of stealing is but short, but
the punishment is for ever. Tollitur de numero viuentium. A thief, says Lege,
de ciu. dei. lib. 21. cap. 11.
S. Austen is taken from the living, and shall never again return to life:
Therefore though the act be temporal, the punishment is eternal. Again, by
the justice of Man, every delinquent is pr^portionably punished, according to
the quality of the party offended.

By the Laws of the Romans, a simple Murderer was crucified, but a Parricide
was sewed in a sack, with an Ape, a Cock, and a Serpent, and flung into the
Sea, that he might neither have the light of the Sun, nor a breath of air,
nor any to pity him, whilst he was alive; nor a Clod of earth, nor a leaf of
grass to cover him, nor any other creature to bury him when he was dead.

By the Law of Iulia, an Adulterer was beheaded: But by the Law of the twelve
Tables, an incestuous vestall virgin was buried alive.

If then the quality of the person against whom we sin, does proportionably
increase the quantity of the punishment: Man sinning against the infinite
majesty of God, deserves by proportion an infinite torment. Go a little
farther. Enquire at the bar of Heaven, why sinful souls are harried to
eternal sorrows? What did God give? Did he not create man in perfection? Did
he not give a power to live for ever? Therefore says Anselmus. Factus est malo
dignus aeterno, qui inse peremit bonum quo potuit esse aeternus: Was not he
worthy by proportion of eternal death, who lost in himself, and by himself
the power of eternal life?

Let no bastard-brood of Origin deceive you with pretense that the immortal
worm shall dye, that the everlasting fire shall be quenched.

You read in the 25. of Matthew. 46. The wicked shall go into everlasting
punishment; The righteous into everlasting life. From hence S. Augustine has
most gravely observed. Here is Death everlasting, and Life everlasting; both
equal. Therefore, Aut vtrumque cum fine diuturnum; Aut vtrumque sine fine
perpetuum: You must make either both to have an End, and then no Eternity of
Heaven: Or both to have no End, and then there is an Eternity of Hell.

I doubt not therefore but that it is sufficiently cleared by way of
explication, that the death of the soul, of the body, of soul and body, are
the wages of sin, by an act of order, of justice, of proportion. But as these
things are sufficiently cleared, so I beseech you suffer them to be effectually
enforced.

For first. If the Death of the soul be fearful, and therefore more
fearful because less sensible; as Physicians speak of Hectique feauers,
which are never discerned perfectly till they kill mortally.

We can behold a Lazar at Dives gate, and be sensible of his sores. We can
see (...), the moving rubbish of men, as Nazian. styles them, and be sensible
of their sorrows. But could we behold a Lazarus and Leprous soul, whom the
dogs of hell will not lick; could our eye balls fasten upon so loathed an
object, we would exclaim with S. Bernard: Si meipsum non inspicio, meipsum
nescio: Si inspicio meipsum far non queo: If I look not into my self, I am
like unto a frantic man that know not my own madness; If I look into my
self, I am like a desperate man, that cannot endure (...) own vildnesse.

We may learn from every Coarse that is buried, what the daughters of
Israel ^ere to learn from CHRIST crucified: Weep not for me, but weep for
your selves.

Plangis corpus quod deserit anima: Non plangis Chrysostom.
animam quam deserit Deus? Thou do bewail a body forsaken of the soul, and
do not bewail the soul forsaken of God.

S. Austen confesses that in his youth (as many wantons do) he read the Love
History of Aeneas and Dido with great affection: And when he came to the death
of Dido, he wept for pure compassion. But, O me miserum, (says the Father) I
bewailed (miserable man that I was) the fabulous death of Dido, forsaken of
Aeneas, and did not bewail the true death of my soul, forsaken of her Jesus.
How many unhallowed tears are sacrificed to the idols of our eyes, which yet
are as dry as Pumises in regard of our souls!

I will conclude this meditation with S. Austens devotion. Nihil est miserius,
misero non miserante seipsum: Nothing is more miserable, then a miserable soul
that does not comprehend her own misery.

Again, is the Death of the Body the Wages of sin? This also is a fearful
thing.

Fearful in the preparation.
Fearful in the separation.
In the preparation: For all our Life is but a consumption unto Death; sorrows
of mind, and sicknesses of the body, are but the harbengers of the grave.

Search the Gospel, you shall find one blind, another deaf, another lame. One
Lazar lying at Dives gate, another at the poole of Bethesda, a third at the
beautiful gate of the Temple. You shall find hear a Leaper crying, there a
woman with an issue of blood adoring. Here the house vntiled by the sick of
the Palsy, there the graves haunted by men possessed of Devils. Nescias vtrum
apelles vitam mortalem an mortem vitalem: We cannot (says S. Austen) tell
what to call our Life, whether a Dying Life, or a Living Death, when every day
our houses of clay do crumble to corruption.

Bodily Death is Fearful in the Separation. For it is not a Law written in
letters of incke, but of blood, bred in the marrow of our bones, and centred in
our bowels: That skin for skin, and all that man has for the safeguard of his
Life.

Never was there a great cry in Egypt, till there was a great slaughter in
Egypt: And then Magnus clamor, a great cry and Lamentation.

Never was Bethlem in woe, until Herod's sword was bathed in the blood of
infants. And then vox audita, A voice was heard in Rama, Rachel would not be
comforted.

There was nothing but carousing to the gods of gold and silver in the feasts
of Baltazar, till the handwriting appeared upon the wall; but then Mutatus est
vultus, the Kings countenance was changed, his joints were dissolved, his knees
failed, his heart fainted.

The Soul and the Body are old friends, so enchased one into another, that
they cannot part without sighing. Bos bouem requirit, says Hierome: If an Ox
do bellow at the loss of his yoke fellow; questionless then there is a
natural, and fearful Horror, when the soul is rent from the body.

And yet behold, we are prodigal of our lives, to spend them upon Harlots, as
the young man in the Gospel, who after his surfeiting with his droues of
Harlots, could not any way be satisfied amongst the herds of Hoggs.

In the 5. of John, verse. 3. There lay a multitude of impotent folk at the
poole of Bethesda: Some blind, some halt, some withered. So many sick, so
many sinners. It is plain by Christ's words: Sin no more, least a worse thing
come unto thee. Sin no more: Therefore he sinned before: therefore he
sickned, therefore Iezabell died, therefore all the world shall be dissolved.

It is the wicked man's curse, that He shall not live out half his days.
Why, does God alter his decrees? Surely no; But man having a general period
of Life, by natural constitution, that if sickness within, and casualties
without do not take away life, he may attain to the years of his Fathers.
But wicked men pull upon themselves ordinary rottenness, and extraordinary
judgments: They live not out half their days.

To conclude. Why will you die, O you house of Israel?

No man is so fearful at his Death, as the Carnal man that is Prodigal of
his life. But if this were all, the Epicure would do well enough. He would
say of his Death; Quando mors est, nos non sumus, quando nos sumus, mors non
est: When Death is, we are not; When we are, Death is not. There is
therefore another Death which imprisons a damned soul in a tormented body.
Where Death is, and Man is. Vbi anima est non viuendi causa sed dolendi:
Where, says S. Austen, the soul is not to give comfort of life; but to give
the sense of eternal Death. The apprehension of which Death, has drawn water
out of rocks, and cloven iron hearts in sunder. It is the excellent speech of
Luther. Qui nouit quid sit certare cum formidine aeternae mortis, in sanctorum
fletibus nullos excessus reperiet: He that knows what it is to strive with
the fear of eternal Death, shall find no strangenes in the affected passions
of the Saints of God.

You read of Peter that he wept bitterly. Of Jeremy that he was drunk with
wormwood. Of Mary that washed Christ's feet with tears. Of David, that he
caused his bed to swim. Of Jonas, that he cried out of the belly of hell.
Their hearts whilst they sinned, were like frozen snowballs: when they melted
with apprehension of eternal fire, they thawed out at their eyes, and caused a
flood of tears.

It is obseruable in Christ's prayer, Luke 13. 34. Father, forgive them, they
know not what they do. In the Conuerts prayer, Act. 2. Men and brethren, Quid
faciemus, what shall we do? When they crucify, they know not what they do:
when they hear they have crucified, they know not what to do.

I will conclude this point, with another passionate meditation: That a
sorrowful soul apprehending the wrath of God, and the infinite punishment due
to sin. Such a sinner goes to heaven by the very gates of hell; his sighs,
Luther.
as pillars of smoke perfumed with myrhhe, ascend up into the presence of God,
to implore mercy, being fully assured in the midst of all his fears, that
howsoever Eternal Death is the wages of sin, yet that the Gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the Tree of life, the Root whereof is the Grace and gift of God by
Jesus Christ: The Fruit eternal Life, and happiness.

Of these the time will not permit to speak largely; and yet no Tongue can
speak sufficiently.

In the Root, we may first observe that it is a Gift. Death is wages, no Gift.
Life is a Gift, and no Wages. Wages supposes Demerrit. Gift supposes no
Merit. If it be a Gift, then is it not deserved. If it be Deserved, then is
it no Gift. In one word S. Bernard has concluded it. Sufficit ad meritum
scire, quod non sufficiant merita: It is sufficient to know of Merits that
there is no sufficiency of our Merits.

A Gift then it is: but not every Gift. A gift it is, but not every way a Gift.
For first; It is Donum Dei, the Gift of God; to make a distinction from men's
Gifts. And next it is per Iesum Christum, by Jesus Christ, to distinguish it
from the common Gifts of God. First: It is the Gift of God; not the Pharisees
Gift. Math. 28. They gave large gifts to the Soldiers, to equivocate and lie
artificially: Say that whilst we slept his Disciples stole him away. But the
Gifts of God are not given to corrupt us, but to amend us. It is no Pharisees
Gift. Neither is it Dionysius Gift, to rob the temple, that they may build an
Hospital. The price of Christ was such a Gift to buy the Potters field to
bury strangers, but it is the Field of Blood until this day.

God takes not life from one, that he may give it to another. Our Salvation is
not builded upon the Angels Damnation: But in the due order of causes, he
would have all to be saved.

It is not Jacobs Gift, for fear of Esau, to pacify Esaus wrath. For whether
we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord;
whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

It is not (...), as the Greek Orator speaks, the Huksters Gift: who look for
more, for the reward of their gift, then the price of the gift: For our living
for ever, adds nothing to Gods blessedness, but to our happiness.

It is not any man's gift, which is subject to repenting, for the
unthankfulness of the receiver: For the gift of life in the Saints of God,
has this power, that as it gives Happiness, so it works thankfulness. He
that is not thankful to God, has not yet received the first fruits of Grace.

All these ways is it distinguished from the gifts, of Men: But above all
these, it is per Iesum Christum, by Jesus Christ; and so it is above all the
gifts of God: For without Christ the Sun rises upon the just and unjust.
Without Christ; Esau has the fat of the earth; Naball his Flocks of sheep;
Nimrod his Herds of beasts; Nabuchadnezzar his pile of wonderment; Herod his
robe of stars. But Eternal life, as it is Gods gift, so it is Christ's
purchase, not of gold, but of Blood; not of the blood of Goats, but of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ.

Look in every linck of the chain of Heaven: How are we predestined to the
Adoption of Children? By Jesus Christ, Ephe. 1. 5. How are we called to Glory?
By Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. 10. How are we justified? In Jesus Christ, Romans 4.
26. How are we sanctified? In Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 10. In what is our Hope?
In the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Peter 1. 13. In whom is our Peace? In
Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. Who is the Mediator of Redemption? Jesus Christ, 1
Timothy. 2. 5. Who is the Mediator of Intercession? Our Prayers are offered
upon a goulden Censure by the Angel of Covenant, which is Jesus Christ, Revel.
8. 3. He makes continual Intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. Who has
conquered Death? Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 37. By whom attain we eternal
salvation? By Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.

Our Praedestination, Calling, Justification, Sanctification, Hope, Peace,
Redemption, Intercession, the Conquest of Death, our Purchase of Life; All come
unto us by the Merits of Jesus Christ.

O then disconsolate soul, whosoever thou art, that art tossed with woes,
confounded with fears, amazed with the terrors of eternal Death. Here is
Baulme of Gilead, dropping from the Root of less: Be not disquiered (O
blessed soul) trust in God; it is his Gift, not thy Merit.

Trust in Christ, it is his Purchase, not thy Price. Trust in God, the
fountain of Mercy. Trust in Christ the Fountain of Merit: And they will
deliver thy soul from the broaken Cesterne, from the water-lesse pits, from
the windy Clouds, from the withered reeds of thy own imperfections.

God so loved the world that be gave his Son.

Christ so loved the world that he gave himself.

He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Mentitur
Johannes fiest peccatum mundi, quod non tollit Agnus Dei: It is the plain
speech of S. Hierome, that S. John the Evangelist had told a lie if there were
any sin of the world, which the Lamb of God had not taken away.

The Grace of God by the sole Merits of Christ is the sacred Root of Eternal
Life and Happiness.

But of the goulden apples of eternity how shall I speak? It is the confession
of Philosophy, that our understanding of heavenly things, is (...), as the eyes
of Batts and Owls, that cannot behold the Suns glory.

It is the Profession of Divinity, that these joys were never perceived of the
eye: Never received by the ear: Never conceived by the heart of man, 1 Corinthians. 2. Yet, as the Apostle speaks, Videmus per speculum, we see in a
Glass; as Elias, we see under a Mantell, the glory and happiness of heaven.

For what is more glorious on earth then a Kingdom? A Kingdom is promised,
Luke 12. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom. What is the honor of a Kingdom, but a Crown? A Crown is promised,
yea an incorruptible Crown of Glory, 1 Corinthians* 9.

What is in a Crown more precious then the massinesse of Gold, and luster of
Jewels? And these are promised. Aeternum pondus gloriae: An eternal weight of
glory, 1 Corinthians. 5. And our Bodies to be like the stars in beauty, 1
Corinthians 15.

But what speak I of Stars? The Scripture says, that our Bodies shall be
like to the Body of Jesus Christ, whose glory is shadowed out with the
comparison of Angels. Matthew. 28. 3. The text speaks of the Angel, that his
countenance was like Lightning, and his Raiment like Snow. Matthew 17. 2. The
text speaks of Christ's transfiguration, (the glass of his glory) that his
Face did shine as the Sun, and his Garments* as the Light.

Our glory shall not be like to the Angels, lightning, and snow; but to Christ
the sun and light of heaven. So that at the day of judgment, Leah shall not
arise with bleare eyes; nor Mephibosheth with lame feet; nor Ehud with a
withered Arm.

But the Bodies of the Saints shall arise, as so many glorious Suns, from the
Horrizon of Earth, to the circumference of Heaven.

I am swallowed up in contemplation, and must conclude with the history of the
Queen of Sheba, unto King Solomon, 1 King 10. 6. She said unto the King, It
was a true report that I heard in my own land of thy Acts and Wisdom: Howbeit
I believed not, till I came, and mine eyes had seen: and behold the half was
not told me.

First, we are farther from Heaven, then the Queen of Sheba from Solomon.

Secondly, we hear of Heaven, as the Queen of Sheba of Solomon.

Thirdly, our report is true of Heaven, as their report of Solomon.

Fourthly, you do not believe our report of heaven, no more then the Queen of
Sheba the report of the Wisdom of Solomon.

But when your eyes shall see God, and enjoy Heaven, you will confess, that
not half the Glory was reported in Earth, which you find in Heaven.

When the Queen, that is the Church, shall stand on the right hand of the
Lamb, glorious in diverse colors, in the infinite, incomprehensible varity of
happiness.

To this Kingdom, this Crown, this Eternal weight of glory, good Lord bring
us, for the infinite Mercies, for Jesus Christ's infinite Merits. Amen.

Laus Deo.

