THE LAST BATTLE OF THE SOVLE IN DEATH, Divided into eight co^ferences.

1. Volume.

Whereby are shown the diverse Skirmishes that are between the Soul of Man
on his Death-bedde, and the Enemies of our Salvation.

Carefully digested for the comfort of the Sick: By Mr. ZACHARY BOYD*
Preacher of Gods Word at Glasgow*

JOB. 14. Verse. 14. All the days of mine appointed time will I (...) my
changing come.

I live to die* that I may die to live.

Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs of ANDRO HEART* 1629*

C. R.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

DONEC^PAX^REDDITA^TERRIS^
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE MOST SACRED AND Mighty Monarch CHARLES, King of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE
and IRELAND, Defender of the FAITH.
MOST DREAD SOVEREIGN, It was wisely said by the Royal Preacher, The memory
of the Just is blessed: Prove. 1^. 7
But the name of the wicked shall rot: To have a good name both in this life
and after Death is a blessing promised unto the Righteous: But as for the ungod
lie their names become mouldie and rotten: Qui injuste (...) om^tur just
damnantur.

This consideration should rouse v^ all men to the doing of that which is good
but chiefly KINGS and PRINCES* whose lives are to be seen in Chronicles by
all ages, which come after: While other men's names within a little space are
buried in oblivion, the Chronicles the Registers of times cry unto the World,
Read and consider what sort of men such and such have been.

Of Saul it is writter, that his sin of rebellion in sparing Agag was 1 Samuel
15, 23.
as the sin of Witchcraft, and that his stubbornness was as idolatry: His
envy against David, and his consulting 1 Samuel 28 7
with the Witch at Endor shall be manifest to all Ages to come: David's 1 Samuel,
13 14.
Virtues and his Vices 2 Samuel 11 8.
are penned: Solomon's 1 Kin. 3. 9
wisdom and his 1 Kin* 11 9
folies, 1 Kin 12* 14.
Rehobo^ms contemning of the old counselors 1 Kin. 16 2^
A habs and 2 Kin. 16 *31
A haz his wickedness 2 Kin. 23 ^.
Josiah and 2 ^hr. 20, 3
Iehoshaphats goodness shall be to be seen and read so long as this world
shall last.

Note
Oh, that Kings would consider how in a short life they may soon plot the
evil which she stain their good name to the worlds end.

Note
Many may Flatter a Prince while he lives: But so soon as he is gone,
Truth which while he lived was warded, then comes out and plainly
declares to the world whether he was a wise man or a fool.

Note
There is no sin so secret, but God Ioh. 1. 47.
in his own time shall bring it to light: If King CHARLES rule well, and be
truly godly like Nathanael without guile, An hundredth years after this
Great BRITAIN shall bless the Name of King CHARLES, yea, and that till God
end Time in Eternity.

* The seven Stars of the Charles*Waine are not so glorious as shall be the
seven Letters of CHARLES in GODS Revel* 17. 18.
Book which is the Book of Life.

Though your Majesty's Body after Death lie rotten in the Grave, yet shall
your Royal Name as if it were perfumed and enbalmed, have a most sweet savor
like these Garments wherein Jacob got his Fathers Genesis 27, 27,
blessing the smell whereof was as the smell of a field which ye Lord had
blessed.

Seeing there is nothing more powerful to move a man to live well, than to
remember that he must die, and after come Grego. Mors ipsa cum venerit vinci^
tur si prius quam veniat semper timeatur.
for to reckon with his God: For this cause have I penned this Treatise of
Sickness bringing unto death where your Majesty may see the most fearful
Skirmishes, which are between the faithful Soul and the enemies of our
Salvation: For this cause have I called it, THE LAST BATTLE OF THE SOVLE. Lo,
Job. 5. 27
this we have searched, so it is, hear it, and know it for your good.

Let it please your Majesty to look upon these my Works with a favorable
eye and to take them into your Royal Protection: They were brought forth in
the Land of Your Birth, even in your old SCOTLAND, Whereof your Majesty is
now the hundredth and ninth King.

The particular place where this Book was penned is your own GLASGOWE, a
City once greatly beloved of great King JAMES your Majesty's Father of
blessed memory: * A City that looks for the like favor from your Royal
MAJESTY.

My chiefest spiritual desire is, that this may be comfortable to sick
Souls: My first temporal wish is that your Majesty would daine it with a
blink of your Favor: Let it obtain your Royal Approbation, which shall be
to it as a Passe-port, which neither Pride nor Envy shall be able with Reason
to reject: If any man be contentious, I here appell unto Caesar.

Let me be so bold as here to ask a Petition from your Majesty, which
granted, I will atcount a sufficient recompense to all my Labors.

This is it, That it would please your Religious Majesty to take a specall
care that the profanation of the Lords blessed and hallowed day be removed
from this Land: It is come to such a custom and that chiefly between
Edinburgh and Glasgow, that by no means the Church is able to refine it,
except that by your Royal authority their Market days be changed: Note*
The abuse is so great that if your godly Majesty knew it, ye could not
endure it: The keeping of this Precept is the only one which has a memento
before it, and yet it is most forgotten: It is the very Key of Religion.

Let it please your Majesty to consider what good Nehemiah did for the
reformation of such an abuse.

I contended, said he, with the Nobles Neh. 13. 17
of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and
profane the Sabbath day? Did verse. 18
not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and
upon this City? Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath.

See what Nehemiah did.

It came to pass that when the verse, 19.
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the
gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after
the Sabbath, And some of my Servants set I at the gates, that there should no
burden be brought in verse. 20.
on the Sabbath day: So the Merchands and sellers of all kind of ware, lodged
without Jerusalem once or twice: Then verse. 21.
I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall: If
ye do so again I will lay hands on you.

What wrought that?

From that time forth came they no more on the Sabbath: After he had done this
good work, he looked up to God by prayer saying, Remember me, verse. 22
O my God concerning this also, and spare me, according to the greatness of
thy mercy.

I pray God that your Majesty may reform this great abuse with that good
Nehemiah: Note
If this ye do, I am assured that Your God shall remember You concerning it,
and that he shall spare You according to the greatness of his mercy.

One thing I desire earnestly that your Majesty once at least in the day
would carefully consider these weighty words of DAVID spoken unto SOLOMON:
Think that King JAMES has said them to King CHARLES: These 1 Chr. 28. 9 Sicut
potentes po^ tenter t^r* menta patientur, sic and justi^ pr^mijs fruentur
before si recte exercue* rint potestate^.
be the words,

* And Thou CHARLES my Son know Thou the GOD of thy Father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts,
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If Thou seek Him he
will be found of Thee, but if Thou forsake Him he will cast Thee off for ever.

Now I entreat the Lord so to ingraffe these words into your Royal Heart, that
the practice thereof may appear in the outward swaying of your Scepter.

Note
Let this little Manuell of the Last Battle of the Soul be like a Page at
your Majesty's Chamber-doore with his morning memento mori: Ye Kings are Gods
because God has so called you: I have psalm. 28. 6.
called you gods, said God, but ye shall die like men: Crowns have their
compass and Thrones have their Tombs: Prince, People, great and small, all
must go to Golgotha for to make their beds in that place which Job calls
the Slimie Job. 21. 33
valley The French proverb is true.

La mort mord les Rois aussi. bien que les conducteurs des charrois.

So most humbly entreating the most high to grant to your Majesty to reign
both well and long over us, I remiane

Your Majesty's most humble most obedient Servant and Subject both borne and
sworn M. Zachary Boyd. Preacher of Gods word at Glasgow

Ad Carolum Regem.
Maxim magnorum longo sat sanguine Regum.
Accipe nunc tenues quos fert tua Scotia fructus:
Et si arbusta juvant fragiles ne temne myricas.
Another.
This Life O Prince is like an raging Sea,
Where froathy mounts are heaued up on hie:
Our painted Ioys in blinks that are full warm
Are like Raine-bowes forerunners of a storm:
All flesh with grief is pricked within without.
Crowns carry cares and compass them about.
Your State is great, your place is high: What then?
God calls you gods, but ye shall die like men.
Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Subject and Servant, M. Z. B.

TEMPVS
emblem

A LA RYONE,
MADAME,
DIEV par lagrace duquel les Rois reignent, vous a este favorable: Il vous a
fait naistre de plus Grand pere qui ait onques reign en la FRANCE voire de ce
Grand HENRY un vray fouldre de guerre: Il vous aussi a fait estre la belle
fille de plus sage Prince qui ait onques reign en la Grand BRETAGNE, lequel
ponuoit bien estre nomme IA QVES LE SAGE.

Le Roy nostre Sire estant fills de plus SAGE, and vous estant la fille d'vn
PRINCE si courageux, nous faites esperer que quand il plaira a dieu de vous
donner des enfans, ils seront and sages and valeureux: Ce que la nature ne peut
pas, dieu le face par sa grace.

Receuez d'vn bon oeil MADAME ce Bonne la mort qui done la vie.
petit oeuure: Vous y av^z LADERNIERE BATAILLE de l'ame contre tous les enemis
de nostre salut: vous y verrez comment il se faut porter en tells rencontres:
pensez a ces chooses es iours de vostre ieunesse: C'est le Conseil d'vn ROY Aye
Souuenance, dit il, Eccles. 12. 3.
de ton Createur es iours de ta ieunesse, auant que les iours mauuais vienent,
and que les ans arriuent des quels tu dies, i^ n'y pren point plaisir: L^s ROYS
and ROYNES Sont mortels comme les Isa. 40, 6.
autres: La voix dit Cry and on a respondu que crieray ie? Toute chair est
comme l'herbe and toute sagrace est comme la fleur verse. 7.
d'vn champ: L'herbe est sechee, and la fleur est cheute d'autant que le vent
de l'Eternel a souffle dessus: Solomon qui cognoissoit les femn es mieux qu
aucun autre, nous monstre que ce n'est pas Prou. 31. 30
la plus belle qui Soit digne de louange: La grace trompe dit il, and la beauty
Beauty sans bonte est comme vin e s^^ente.
S'esuanouit: mais la femme qui craint l'Eternel ce sera celle qui Sera louee:
Cest'est la fille du ROY toute pleine de gloire en dedans: Dieu de sa grace
vous Psalm. 45. 14
face tell. Ie supply treshumblement vostre Majesty vouloir prendre en bon ne
part ce petit oeuure; lequel ie vous dedie comme un tesmoignage d'vn coeur
affectione enuers vostre Majesty: Cependant ie pry le Tout puissant qu il vous
augmente de iour en iour ses graces spirituelles, and vous face la mere des
enfans* qui soyent Roys apres vous tant que le soleil durera. C'est celuy qui
de meurera toute sa vie

MADAME. Vostre tres-humble, and tres-obeissant Seruiteur and Subject. M.
Zachary Boyd.
A Glasgove le 6. de May. 1629.
A LA ROYNE.
Fille de France de Royale race,
Perle de prix dieu vous face grace:
DIEV le vuelle que ceste nation
Sans fin vous love en benediction:
Portezl' absence and de pere and mere,
Car pour eux marriage prospere
Voux produira bonne succession
* Si vous reuerez La RELIGION.
M. Z. B.

To the READER.
AFter sixteen years abse^ce into France where it pleased God to make me a
preacher of his word the space of four years: It pleased the same LORD to
visit his Church there with bloody wars, whereby many Churches and mine
also were discipated by this occasion it was the Lords will to bring me back
to my native Country.

In that troublous time I remained a space a private man at Edinburgh with
Doctor Sibbald the glory and honor of all the Physicians of our Land: But
again within a short space I was sought out by that most worthy Man our Scots
Onesiphorus even Sir William Scot of Eli: He sought me out diligently and
found me: The Lord give mercy unto his House, for he most loving lie
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of mine affliction: The Lord grant unto 2 Timothy 1. 8
him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

After my removing from him unto this City, it pleased the Lord to visit me
with sore sickness, yea, so that in September Anno. 1626. I was phi. 2. 27.
like Epaphroditus sick nigh unto death: For when I arose out of that I ever I
found in my study my winding sheet among my Books: This gave me occasion
painefullie to search and describe unto the world this Last Battle of the
August. Nescis qu^ hora (...) et mors: S^mper vigila vt quod nescis quando
veniet, paratum te inveniat quum ve^ nerit: Ad hoc forte nescis quando veniet,
vt semper parat^s sis.
Soul: I pray God to make it profitable for thine use, if thou reap a^e
comfort thereby, I entreat thee to pray for me, that the lord would grant
unto me that I may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

As for escapes in printing they are marked at the end of the Book: Excuse
them in thy favor because I remain far from the ^resse.

Vox morientis ad animam suam.
O anima mea egredere; quid dubitas? Egredere; quid times? His multis annis
Christo Domino servisti, and ad huc mortem timebis?

O anima insignita Dei imagine, decorata similitudine, desponsata in fide,
dotata in spiritu, redempta sanguine, deputata cum Angelis, capax beatitudinis,
haeres bonitatis, rationis particeps, quid tibi cum carne, qua haud aliud
vilius sterquilinium invenisti?

Augustine.
Vita haec misera est, mors incerta; si subito obrepat quo hinc exibimus? Et
ubi nobis discenda sunt quae hic negleximus? Annon potius hujus negligentiae
supplicia luenda sunt?

TEMPVS
emblem

IN OPUS CVM VIventibus tum Morientibus vtilissimum A. D. ZACHARIA BODIO
Glasguensis Ecclesiae Pastore adornatum.
AD LECTOREM. Epigramma.
FOElix qui sancte potuit traducere vitam,
Et tandem extremum Sancte obijsse diem*
Haec duo qui didicisse cupis, tibi pandit vtrumque
Hic Liber, hunc animo volue revolue tuo.
Ad Authorem Libri. distichon ejusdem.
Qui calamo qui voce doces, vitaque perenne*
Vivore, in aeternum vivito ZACHARIA.
JOHANNES BELVS Glasguensis Ecclesiae Pastor and Academiae RECTOR.

AD VIRVM PIETATE Et eruditione praestantem D. ZACHARIAM BODIVM GLASGVENSIS
Ecclesiae Pastorem de praeparatione ad mortem, postquam ex deplorato morbo
convaluisset Scribentem.
ERGO te nuper mortis de faucibus atrae
Ereptum nobis reddidit Omnipotens:
Vt Doctus moriendi artem expertusque doceres,
Qua datur aetheream transitus adpatriam:
Qui been vivendi toties praecepta dedisti
Doctrinae reserans horrea plena sacrae.
Foelix Zacharia Doctor; Sanctisima cuius
Vox pariter, Scripta, and consona vita docent
JOHANNES STRANGIVS S. S. Theologiae. D. and Accademiae Glasguensis Praefectus.

IN DIVINA INTEGERrimi viri D. ZACHARIAE BODII Ecclesiastae non e multis
meditamenta. cum e desperata valetudine ad pristinam salutem revalu^rat.
FRustra veternum sollicitas meum
Bodi Thaliae ad munta; barbitos
Obmutet, exurdante nostras
Voce Scholae str^pera Camoenas.
Iam colligendas sarcinulas monet
Quae vulsit aurem Mors modo pallida:
Laureta Cyrrhae, Musicasque
Thespiadum fugito choreas.
Tu perge Homeri carminis alite
Laudande quo te men's ammi vocat,
Qui baccare, and lauro revinctos
Castalio lavis amne crines.
Fatalis ex quo cruda Hecates manu
Attonsa pene est caesaries tibi
Fato superstes reditusque
Incolumis, renovas duellum.
De morte partam appendis adoream,
Vtque Hydra secto corpore fortior
Crevit, revixti ter triumpho
Clarior, and spolijs opimis.
Qualis Caystri fluminis accola
Morti propinquus dulciter incinit.
Melos supremum, talis ista
Naenia, qua superos remulces.
Macte indole ista, macte faventia,
Excude fructus uberis ingeni.
O aureum vere libellum
Melle sacro, and sale temperatum.
Hoc amoris ergo scribebat Io. Rayus ludi publici litterarii Moderator Edinburgi

THE LAST BATTLE of the Soul in death, divided into eight several
Conferences.
The first days conference. Of carnal and worldly temptations*
The sick man. MY Body is sick, my Soul is wounded: Gods wrath is
fearful; it burns to the Deuteronomy. 32. v. 22.
bottom of Hell* The heat thereof already makes my Soul to sweat: I can
find no Skrine or Sconce to set between me and this fire: Oh, in all
appearance I shall shortlie^ee dissolved, for to be brought before that great
Tribunal: Note
Alas, what terrors are these, Sin, Sickness, Death, the Grave, and an
unprepared Soul? I tremble all like Belshazzar: Mine heart is entangled Dan.
5. 9.
with fears: my knees shiuer, and smite one against another: Mine heart is
pricked, while I remember mine evil spent life: Note
While I had time to do good, I was of the frozen Generation: Now Gods
glowmes like Boanarges, Sons of Thunder, armed with fiery fury, make heart
and Soul to melt, and to fall down in drops within my bowls: Oh, for a
drop of water for to cool the boiling heat o^ mine heart: Is there no man
here that can afford me a word of comfort, for to uphold mine heart into this
heavy hour?


A spiritual Friend. Sir, I think it expedient that ye send for your Pastor,
the man of God, that bears the keys of ^he Kingdom of heaven: It may be
that the good God shall put some words of comfort into his mouth whereby your
wearied Soul shall be refreshed* while the chosen Servants of God speak his
words to the fainte heart, the Lord puts forth a power to enable them to
do all that wherefore they are spoken: So soon as S. Peter had spoken to the
lamed man, his feet and ancle bones received Act 3* 7.
strength: Though miracles cease now, yet this shall be true, so long as the
world stands* The effectual fervent prayer of a rightcous man avails Iam.
5. 16
much: Will it please you Sir that I go for to fetch him?


The sick Man. He shall be welcome unto me: But alas, while I might I
frequented him too little: Note
I haunted rather the company of these that delighted me with sportes and
jests, whereof now I have no comfort: Note
Because I thought I could repent hereafter, I did that whereof I may now
repent, and whereof indeed, as I fear, I shall repent but too late ^ This now
puts my Soul into the dumps: now al my foolish laughters are turned into
mourning, for I fear exceedingly to die, I tremble and toss within this bed,
GOD alone knows what shall be the end of this lingering trial: Go Sir, I
pray you, and desire the man of God to come and visit a bruised reed, and
Isa. 42. 3.
a smoking flax.


A spiritual Friend. I go for him presently: I hope before he leave you,
ye shall find this tempest of temptations to growcalme: Note
In the meane-time till he come, I pray you to remember that all your pains
are but a cross sent before to crucify the love of the world: In your
greatest distress, strive to be a Disciple of Jesus, the Author and finisher
of our Faith, who Heb. 12. 12.
for the joye that was set before him, endured the cross: Be not discouraged
in your greatest smarts* Note
For reproves Prove. 6. 13
of instruction are the way of life: In your greatest fear remember the joy
that is set before you.


The Pastor. Sir, having known of your disease by your godly friend I am
come to see you, and to impart unto you some spiritual comforts* Note
While the Soul is sore troubled, thereis danger in delay: A bruised Spiritis
like a bone out of joint, the longer it be let alone, the hardlier it is set.
If I had known of your sickness sooner, I would have visited you ere now.


The Sick Man. I rejoice Sir to see you, my Soul ever loved you: But alas,
not as I should have done: If God should but at this time spare my life, with
the help of my God ye should see me at once a far changed man.


The Pastor. Come Death* come Life, God makes all things to work to the
best of these that love him.

Gods corrections are good directions: Note
With one cross he can work two cures, first a correction for bypast
corruption, and after a direction for times to come: If God should not scourge
us betimes the reigning of the flesh should prove the ruin of the Spirit: Note
This was the utter overthrow of the Sons of Eli, God would not correct them,
because the Lord would stay the^.

As for that which ye speak concerning 1 Samuel 2. 25
the changing and amending of your life, your resolution is good: But seeing
the hour of death is uncertain, it is good that ye be presently prepared:
Death comes upon man with stealing steps: Let no man put far off the day of
his death There is great danger, that any man sooth himself with the vain
hope of this mortal life: No man can tell how soon he shall be arraigned to
compeare before Gods Bar: None said a Pagane is assured to live until the
morrow.

Note
Nemo tam diuos habuit faventes, Senec.

Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.
Note
It is good therefore daily and hourelie to be upon our Watchtower,
preparing our selves for death, which shall either be the end of all our
misery, or the beginning of our everlasting woe, delay to prepare for death,
is a strong thread in the Devils net. A man will not die the sooner that he
prepare himself to die: If a man be prepared to die, and yet die not, hoc
sibi ponat in lucro, that preparation is great advantage unto him: But if he
die, he has done that which he should have done: Note
What a dangerous venture is this to a man to delay to prepare himself to die,
because it may be that yet he may live? But may it not also be that he die?
It is a dangerous thing to perrell our Salvation upon a may be, which may as
well no be: It is fearful to be hanged over Hell with the evil twined
thread of a life that must end, none can tell, how, where, nor when. No man is
exeemed from this necessity.

Note
The post Pale Horse whereupon Revel. 6* 8
Death is mounted, caries his Rider through all Nations, Cities, and Houses;
pulling out of their beds Princes, Prelates, and private men without any respect
of persons: thus are their hopes cropped in their fairest flower: It is good
therefore that we ever be upon our guard: God offers grace to day: To day if
Heb. 3. 15
ye hear his voice: But who promises to morrow? well is him that fears
always.


The sick Man. O the terrors of Death and of the Grave! mine heart quaketh
while I remember of these last strugglings that are in death: It was not
without reason that the Pagans called it terribilium terribilissimu^, of all
fearful things, the most fearful.


The Pastor. Note
If men knew what Christ has made of Death, the living would not be so afraid
with the fear thereof, Isaiah says, that he has put it into his Stomach,
he has swallowed Isa. 25. ^.
it up in victory: A wife man will not swallow over that which he is not able
to digest: Christ has swallowed Death and has digested it perfectly: Note
Now Death after Christ's digestion, has lost all its poison, and is turned
into a sleep: The name thereof is changed, for to tell us of the change of its
nature: Dead Lazarus in Christ's language is called sleeping Lazarus, Lazarus
Ioh. 11. 11
Our Friend sleeps, said Christ, speaking of his death: He that lives and
Ioh. 11. 26
believes in me, said Christ, shall never die: Death is not death to the
Friends of Christ, but a sleep to their body, and a translation of their
Soul from a prison to a Palace: Note
As by the grace of God, it is made an Exodus of misery, so is it a Genesis of
a better life, the corruption of one thing being the generation of another:
Note
What is this, that men should so fear Death, which is the end of the foul
and co^bersome way of our Pilgrimage? Note
Has not God made death like a Chariote to a wearied man, for to carry him to
his everlasting rest? This was seen in a visible figure, when Elijah in a
fiery Chariot 2 King. 2. 11
went up by a whirle wind unto heaven.


The sick Man. All that is true Sir: But ye know that death is fearful to
all flesh: So soon as it comes, it makes a Soul liable to yield an acou^t
for all the actions of the bypast life: Note
The body and the Soul are of old acquaintance, and have not will to part one
from the other: I cannot express what a worsling I find within me; there is
such a working fear about mine heart, that I tremble to think upon it: This
makes my words to wade in tears, mine heart is cut with sobs of sorrow: O
death, the enemy of Life, is there no comfort against thee? Is there no Balm
in Gilead? Of force then must I die?


The Pastor. The woman of Tekoah said very well, We must all needs die, and
are 2 Samuel 14. 14.
as water spilt on the ground, which can not be gathered: Death is an
unavoidable passage, there is none entry unto Heaven, but by it. I will strive
to let you see before that ye enter in at the doors of Death, that your Soul
has no such cause to be afraid: Indeed I confess, that death to these that
know not Christ, is indeed a most fearful thing* according to this Satan
said, Skin for Job. 2 4.
skin, and all that a man has he will give it for his life: Note
See how a Natural man would be content that his skin were pulled off him,
if it could be a ransone for to save his life: Such is the fear of death,
that for to be free of it, a man would give his skin: Note
Agag called it a 1 Samuel 15 32.
bitter thing: Surely, said he, The bitterness of death is past: Note
The wild Gourdes shred into the Prophets pottage, for bitterness, were
called Death: So soon as they had tasted them, all cried, Death is into the 2
King. 4 40.
pot: The bitter torments of Hell 2 Cor. 1. 10
are called, so great a Death: David speaking of the pangs of death, calls
them waves: The waves of death compassed me: See how death is compared 2 Samuel
22 5.
to a raging Sea, with rolling waves: To this David subjoynes, The snares of
death prevented me: verse. 6.
Death indeed is fearful, armed with waves and snares: Note
We in our weakness make it also fearful, painting it with bare bones, with a
skul, girning with its teeth, and with its sting, like a flooked Dart, for to
pierce through the heart of man.

Note
It is true that death is bitter in it self, but he that made sweetness to
Judge. 14. 14.
come out of the strong, and meat to come out of the eater, can bring both
meat and sweetness out of death for the Christian Soul, though no thing be
stronger than death, the greatest eater of the world. One says well, that
there is in death but one bitter morsel to swallow.

The chief course that we have to tak for to win to an happy death, is that
above all things, we strive to make our acquaintance with Christ, the Lord of
life: Note
Till a man know Christ, who has disarmed Death by taking away its sting and
its dart, he will tremble at its buzze: Note
A Be that wa^teth the sting, will afray a Child with its buzze, but the man
of understanding is not afraid for a sound. Note
I am assured that the excessive fear of Death in a wicked man, is a most
powerful means for to make him die before his day, that is sooner than by
course of Nature he should have died: Though a man's day be set, yet God uses
means, Death is a distress 2 Samuel 14. 14
unto the wicked.

Let him the^ that would die in peace Luke 2. 29
make his peace with his God: Note
No man ca^ be willing to die, before his Conscience be at quiet, till God and
his Soul have shaken hands, and been friended: Note
A man that is at feed with his God, will say to death Gods messenger, as Ahab
said to Gods Prophet, Have thou found me 1 King. 21 20
mine enemy. But as for the godly man whose Soul is prepared to meet with
his God, he will say to Death, welcome Friend, take my Soul by the hand, and
draw it out of this prison, Oh, but it is wearied. O, but it longs to be free
from these bonds of mortality, combersome clogges of claye. Note
He that is assured to go to Christ, cannot die unwillingly, what cares he
to die an hour, for to live for ever? Note
I will Nazian. in vita Basil.
never fear Death, said a Father, which can do no more than restore me to
him that made me Note
To change a life that is mortal, for an that is eternal, is an unspeakable
profit.


The sick Man. But alas: By what way may I come unto that Life?


The Pastor. I am the way, said Christ, None Ioh. 14. 6.
comes to the Father but by me: Note
This way is through the valey of death: In this valey ye need not to fear,
if Christ be with you. In the valey of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23. 4.
said David, I will fear none evil: his reason was this, that God was with
him: For thou art with me.


The sick Man. I find my self Sir exceeding Psalm. 1^7.
weak, and that I draw near the doors of Death: I take great delight to
hear you: I requeast you to continue your comforts: I entreat you to call to
remembrance these special comforts ye have had, either by your own
experience, or by reading, or by Meditation: I am assured that ye have some
laid up in store for your self, against the hour of temptation: Let me hear
I pray you, what ye think best to be said to a man in his greatest fears.


The Pastor. First of all, that ye may be capable of comforts, strive to be
patient in your trouble: Acknowledge in this sickness the great mercy of your
God: In this affliction he has given to you, the wish and choice of David's
chastisement: You are not fallen into the hands of men, whose compassions are
cruel, but in the hands of God, your Father, whose bowels are full of
merciful remembrance: Note
Though a Mother should forget her Child, we are printed upon his Palms: It
is true, Isa. 49. 15
that no affliction for the present seems Heb. 12. 18
joyous: Note
Yet afterward the bitter seed of sorrow, brings forth the sweet and quiet
fruit of righteousness.

If ye would be armed against the fear of Death, my counsel is, that above
all things in the tempest of your temptations, ye have recourse unto the
bloody wounds of Christ, wherein as in the holes of the Rock, your Soul like
a Dove may find a place of refuge: Note
His wounds well may I call, The secret of the most Psalm. 91. 1
High: He who lodges there, is under the shadow of the Almighty: Note
An afflicted Soul is like a Be in a tempest, tossed to and fro: Frae once
the Be has win to its Hyue-hole, it enters into rest: The poor Soul of
a man for a space will be wonderfully tossed with tempests, and long will it
wrestle: But so soon as it can once win in at the holes of Christ's wounds,
then it enters into Rest: Note
Out of these wounds, as out of its Castle and fortress, it will boast the
Devil, Death, the Flesh, and the World: In these wounds is the Souls
strongest Tower, the secret place of the most High, where none enemy of man's
Salvation shall be able to reach unto it for to hurt it: Let your chiefest
care be to creep in into these wounds.

Note
Again, after that ye have shaken hands with Christ, and made him your
friend, consider well what he has made of Death: Christ has made it a friend
of a foe: Is not Death now a sleep? Christ's friends sleep: Sleep as ye know
is our Ioh. 11. 11
great friend: He must be a great friend without whose friendship we can not
live: As we can not live without Sleep, neither can we live without Death:
Except that we die on Earth we can not live in Heaven: Thou fool* said S.
Paul, That 1 Cor. 15 3
which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: Note
The whole course of a Christian is contained within the compass of these
words, I live to die, that I may die to live: If man will not resolve to live
for to die, he shall not die to live: Note
The course of a Christian is from a good life to an happy death, and from
thence to life yea, to life eternal: Well is the man that runs not without
this compass.


The sick Man. But alas, O my God, take me not Psalm. 102. 24.
away in the midst of my days: Alas, Sir, must I die so soon?


The Pastor. Note
The Apostle says, That we die 1 Cor, 15 31.
daily. Tunc quoque cum crescimus vita decrescit. It is certain, that so
soon as we begin to live, we also begin to die: What are all the days
of our life, but a progress unto Death, which is the putting off of 2 ^et 1. 14
our Tabernacle? Note
What is this body, but a mire of mortality? Hominiquid vita? cylindrus: What
is man's life, but a rolling thing.


The sick Man. But will the Lord take me away in the midst of my days? Has
not God promised to the godly man that his days shall be long in the land?
Long life is a thing whereof God has made promise unto these who^ he loves.


The Pastor. I answer, that such a promise is under two conditions: First of
Gods glory, secondly of man's well: Note
If God love a man dearly, he will whiles take him away in his youth, that
he may have him near to him self: Moreover God sees that which no man can
foresee, viz. the evil to come. The righteous says Isa. 57. 1.
Isaiah is taken away from the evil to come: God has indeed promised many
days to the righteous man: But if God shorten them, and take him away sooner,
what wrong has he done unto him? Note
If a Lord should give to one of his servants some cottage house of clay, with
some little piece of ground for Colewort or Cabbage for to live upon, saying,
This will I give thee for thy lifetime: But if afterward this Lord should say,
Fetch me my good feruant out of his clattie Cottage, and bring him to my
Palace, that he may eat at mine own Table for ever: Tell me, if by the change
that servant has lost: Would that servant think ye, say, No Lord, I will not
come to thy Table, for thou have promised me this Cottage-house for my
lifetime? Note
What Lord in the Land was ever troubled with such an answer?

And yet indeed it is so, that God does with his faithful servants, when
they die into the midst of their days: Note
When men are departed from this life, it is the Lord that has sent his
messenger Death for to fetch their Souls from their bodies, which Scripture
calls Tabernacles Io^. ^. 19.
of clay, unto his heavenly Mansions, there for to banquet eternally at his
Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Matthew. 8. 11
Jacob.

Now tell me, O man, what have ye lost, for to go from the Earth to the
Heavens? Is there any thing in this world of such worth, that should make you
desire to live, for to stay from your God but an hour?


The sick Man. That which ye say Sir, is very true: But how few are these
who in this world can gladly condescend to depart out of this life? The life
is sweet.


The Pastor. I confess indeed that every one has not attained unto this
high degree of grace, as to say with S. Paul, I desire to be dissolved, etc.
Yet all the Philip ^ 23.
godly will subscribe to this that all the faithful are happy who are
dissolved: Note
Though every man can not wish to die yet every man of God will say, That
Death is better than life, Death is a salve which heals us of all our sores:
Is not Death Gods messenger, sent for to pull the troubled Soul out of this
sinful world, as Gods Angel pulled Genesis 19. 16
Lot out of S^dom? Is not our life here a warfare? Note
Are we not here as Daniel was in the Dungeon among Lions? Are not we here
D^n. 6. 16 11
with Jeremy sticking fast into the Ier. 38. 6.
myrie clay? Are not we here with Israel, into the House of bondage Exodus 20^
2.
ouerburdened with sin as they were with brick? Are we not Romans 7. 24
here with S. Paul, under the body of Death? And with Joseph in the Psalm.
105. 18
stocks, not of tree, but of sin?

If it were well told a man what is here, and what he may look for in the
life to come, if he had but a grain of grace, as great as of Mustard seed,
he should easily discern whereof to make choice: Is not our life here a
wind, and a vapor Iam. 4. 14.
of vanity? But which is most of all to be considered: Is there not here a
necessity of sinning laid upon all the living? Who should not be glad to be
fredde and rid of these sinful bonds? Note
Is not this life continually sick of the filthy flooxe of sin, a most
loathsome disease? When we seek our daily bread, we must immediately
subjoyne, Matthew. 6. 11
forgive us our sins: First, as we see here, we must beg our bread, and
then pardon. Note
What then are we here, but daily beggars for the belly? The King must
beg his bread from God: In the Heavens there shall be no begging, but
thanking of God for his benefits: Who should for all that he can beg on Earth,
desire for to live out of Heaven but one hour? Note
Are we not all here under a corruptible burden, a burden of corruption, under
which the Soul is pressed as a Cart full of sheaues? So Amos. 2, 11
long as we are here, our Souls are laden with sins: Note
A Soul burdened with such baggage runs on wheels, as it were down an hill
all post haste, except that God stay it, it shall never cease, till it arrive
in Hell, where God shall break it in sunder by the tempest of his wrath.


The sick Man. But Death is the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23
who shall not fear?


The Pastor. Note
Indeed Death is such of the own nature: But God in great mercy has made
death to the godly like the Rainbow, which being naturally Genesis 9. 13
a sign of present rain, by Gods Covenant becomes a perpetual sign of
fair weather to come after that rain: Note
As through Death Christ wrought our Life, so must we be killed for to be
made alive: The glorious Resurrection must be through dust and corruption: Our
pains must go before our pleasures, Psalm 16. 11
and lashes before our laughters: After that, in come pleasures for evermore.

If we had the faith of God, we should not much fear the smart of death
which by Christ is made transitus ad vitam, a passage unto Life: Note
Let us once pass through this Jordan, and behold, we are in an instant in
Canaan.


The sick Man. All that is true Sir: No man can control you: yet naturally
all love Life: The Life is sweet.


The Pastor. How sweet is it? I pray you: Is not our whole Life trouble and
weariness? Note
What is our sleeping, our resting, our eating, our drinking, but a servitude
to the flesh? Who should not desire to be rid from such servile necessities?
who for to be free of such bondage, should not renounce his dear self, and
all the love of this irk some life? To be with Christ, is it not our best?
Yea, is it not our rest? what shame is it for Christians to dote so after this
present life, who should have learned to long after the life to come?

Note
Christ came down, that we might go up: If we desire not to go up, we
know not wherefore he came down: He came down to be a Servant, we go up
to be Lords: He came down to be hungry, we go up to a perpetual Feast:
He came down to be banished, where he had not whereupon Luke 658
to lay his head, we go up to dwell in Palaces of pleasures, into everlasting
Luke 16. 9.
Tabernacles: Note
In a word, he came down to distress, to sorrow, to pain, to misery, to
fight against our enemies, Devils, Death, and temptations, yea, he descended
unto Hell we go up to Joy, to Honor, to Light, to Life, to Liberty, to our
Father, to our Friends, to our Savior and Comforter. What shall I say more?
Even to unspeakable Glory in Paradise with God and his Angels: Note
What a folly is this, that a man should desire to be deprived of such
Comforts for a puff Isa. 2, 22.
of breath? Be glad Sir, to quite the rank Onions of Egypt, for that
heavenly Manna Sweet like Wafers Genesis 15. 31
made with honey.


The sick Man. If a man could be fully persuaded of that which ye say, I
think that hardly could he withold himself from putting hands into
himself, that so he might change for the better: If all that be, why should
any desire to stay from God but an hour? If I may desire to be dissolved, why
may I not dissolve my self. The working out of a lawful desire cannot be
unlawful.


The Pastor. No man living Sir, may absolutely desire to be dissolved, but
under condition, that it be for the glory of God, and the Salvation of his
own Soul: Note
For two respects a man may desire to be dissolved: First, for to be delivered
from the bondage of sin, which the Apostle calls, A body of death: Romans 7.
24
Secondly, for an earnest desire to be with his God, a man may desire to be
dissolved. But for no reason must a man dissolve himself, that were self
murder: Note
If we may not kill our Neighbor who^ we should love as our selves, neither
must we kill our selves, who are the rule and square of neighborly love: Note
Man in this world is as a set Watch, he must not remove, till it please him
by whom he was set, to command him to come: Note
Though lawfully we may desire death, that we may be delivered from the
body of death, which is sin; for to be with Christ, which is meekle better
Philip. 1. 23
for us, yet we must not cry for death for some triflles of worldly troubles,
as Jonah did for the lossing Iona 4. 8.
of his leafes: Our desire of Death should be chiefly grounded upon a desire
to be with Christ, and to be fredde from the spiritual bondage of our sins:
well is him that can sincerly say from his heart, Miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me Romans 7. 24
from this body of death? Note
That Soul is happy, whose desire is upon that which is meakle better for it:
To be with Christ, in Scripture style is called meakle better: What say ye
Philip. 1. 23
now Sir, does not your heart groan under this burden of sinful death? Does
not your Soul long to be out of this body, for to be with him, where it
shall be meakle better for you?


The sick Man. I take up the matter better than I did: I see by your reasons,
that there is no reason wherefore a man should desire to die, but for to be
with his Christ, and to be delivered from the body of bondage, which is a
death: But alas.


The Pastor. I see you yet Sir, into a plunge, I heard that word, Alas:
Wherefore say ye Alas? Ye look yet as one who desires to live: My words
are not gifted with persuasion; ye seem to be afraid at that word,
dissolved: What aileth you? There be doubtless some thing within that
troubles you.


The sick Man. I am sorry to go out of this world, whereunto I am chained by
diverse respects: In the cutting off of my days, I will mourn with sick
Hezekiah in the words of his doole: I Isa. 38, 10.
am deprived of the residue of my years, etc.


The Pastor. I see Sir, that ye are taking up the Lamentations of Hezekiah: I
will strive to make answer to every sentence apart: Ye are deprived, say
ye, of the residue of your years: Note
He is not deprived that has changed for the better: Note
The residue of your few years shall be turned into eternity: Note
He who sees many years, sees many miseries, and which is worse,
contracteth many sins, the cause of all our woe: Moreover, what is a residue
of life? Death is not far, when it is farthest.


The sick Man. But if I die, I shall not see the Lord Isa. 38. ^1
even the Lord in the land of the living.


The Pastor. This is your ignorance: What can man see of the Lord, in the land
of the living? Note
What can a sinner see of that great JEHOVAH here? What is to be seen on
Earth, but the Backe-parts of JEHOVAH? Into the Heavens whereunto ye now
approach ye shall see that great and glorious JEHOVAH, face to face. What are
all men on Earth, but a number of worms crawling and creeping upon a clat or
clod of clay?

But again what is this that ye call the land of the living? What is all the
Land ye see, but a dead lump of earth, where the most part of men are dead in
their sins? Do not the best part die daily, unto Sin, which death is our best
life, and yet laden Romans 7. 24
with a body of death? Note
Can ye now call this earth the Land of the living? Call me not Nahomi
pleasant, said Nahomi, Ruth. 1. 2^
but call me Marah that is bitter, for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly
with me: So may the Earth say, Call me not the Land of the living: No, rather
call me a dungeon of death, a place for the burying of the dead a place where
all must 2 Samuel 14. 14
needs die, and be as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered
up again.


The sick Man. But alas, if I die, I shall behold men no more with the
inhabitants of the world.


The Pastor. This here is your grief, that death will strik you with a
blindness, so that ye shall not be able to see any more the faces of these
whom ye love best into this world, as of Wife, Children, and of Friends of
your old acquaintance: This is your d^lour the^, that ye shall see them no
more: Note
Let such thoughts Sir, move these to mourn, who know not Death better than
that Pagan, who speaking of a slain man said,

In eternam clauduntur Lumina noctem. Virgil.


That is, Death closes man's eyes for evermore: This is most false* Note
A true Christian knows, that though both his eyes should sink ^owne into
his head, or drop out like blobbes or drops of water, yet that with these
same eyes run into water, he and none other for him shall see his Redeemer:
Though after Job. 19. 26 27.
my skin, said Job worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God,
whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold; and not another. Note
Lay this comfort to your heart: Though your eyes were eaten out with the
worms, if you die in the faith of Jesus, ye shall see God and none other for
you, and that with these same eyes ye now look unto mee^ Note
If ye be persuaded that ye shall see your God, in the Heavens, in whose
face is fullness of Psalm. 16. 11
Joy, ye have little cause of doole that ye shall no more behold man with
the inhabitants of the world: What are all the creatures of thi^ World, but
things that dwell in d^st? Isa 26. 18.
The Saints and Angels that dwell into these upper Chambers whose feet are
above ou^ head are so fa^ in glory, above all the glory of the world, as the
Heavens are above the Earth: Note
As Zebah and Zalmunah said of Gideons brethren, so may we say of all these
that dwell there, every one of them is like the Son Judge. 8. 18
of a King: What are all the Creatures below, but beggarly things?


The sick Man. But alas, if I die, mine age is departed Isa. 38. 12.
and removed from me as a Shepherds tent.


The Pastor. What is your doole? It is all then, that ye must quite your
shepherds tent. Note
Now poor man, What have ye lost? Ye shall change a poor shepherds tent
for the most pleasant Palace of your God, a life mortal, for a life that is
eternal: Note
A man brought from age of years unto eternity, is like David, a shepherd
brought from the Ewes, for to be made a King: What regret Psalm. 78. 71
should a man have, for to change a little Lodge for a London? Note
What is this life. but a daily dyeing?


The sick Man. But alas, I have cut off like a weauer Isa. 38. 12.
my life: He will cut me off with pinning sickness, from day even to night
he will make an end of me.


The Pastor. Take heed Sir what ye say: Your meaning is, that by your sins
ye have abridged and cut short your days, or that ye have prouocked God by
your sins, to take away your Life from you: Note
If it be so, that like a weauer ye have cut your days by your sins; break
off now these sins by repentance: If by your sins ye have cut like a
weauer the threeds of this mortal life, begin now by repentance to spinne
the web of a new life, some threeds of life eternal: Let now the rotten
thrummes of the vices of your life fall down to the ground:

Note
While ye have time, weaue into your life graces through graces, as warpe and
woft: Weaue on still, till from grace ye work in into the eternity of glory.


The sick Man. But alas, He will cut me off Isa. 38. 12.
with pynning sickness: I fear greatly that the pains of Death put me out
of all patience.


The Pastor. Take courage Sir: The pain shall not be so great as ye fear:
God will lay no more on you, than ye shall be able to bear: He shall weigh
all your pains in his merciful Balance, before that he lay them upon you:
He knows that your strength is not like the strength of a Whale, he
breaks not the bruised Isa. 42. 3
^eede Note
God is so bent unto mercy, that while he scourges sinners for their faults,
he is said to bring to pass, his strange work and his Isa. 28. 21
strange act.


The sick Man. But I fear his cutting: Gods cuts are very sensible: I fear
to bee^ cut off with pyning sickness.


The Pastor. Fear not* God is cunning in his cutting Note
He will not cut into the quick like an ignorant Surgeon* The merciful God
takes no pleasure to cut you off with pyning sickness but he will cut off
your corruptions with such pains: In such pains should be pleasure; Note
The bluenesse of the wound purges away Prou. ^0. 30
evil Pleasant should be that pain which is Gods Raser for cutting off man's
^ptions* Away with the pleas^es of this ^otten flesh Note
Such in the beginning though lawful, ^re burning and bloody pleasures:
unlawful end into hellish torments, fear not pyning sickness.


The sick Man. But alas, from day even to night he Isa. 38. 12.
will make an end of me.


The Pastor. I know Sir, that the night is wearisome, and that sickness some
what light in the day, waxes heavy in the night: From day to night, the
sickness increases: The remeede is this, be strong in God, whose strength is
made perfect in 2 Cor. 12. 9.
weakness: Note
If dolours increase in the night, here is a comfort, The night time is a most
fit time for prayer: The time of silence is most convenient for speaking unto
God: Note
The night time is a special time whereof God has made choice, for in it to
speak secretly unto men: It was in the night that Eliphaz saw the vision and
heard the voice of Job. 4. 13 14. 15. 16.
instruction: In thoughts, said he, From the visions of the night, wh^ deep
sleep falls on men, fear came upon me and trembling, which made all my
bones to shake: Then a Spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh
stood up it stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: An Image
was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, etc.

See how in ^e visions of the night, while there was silence, Eliphaz heard the
voice of God: Note
Let no sick man be afraid for the night, it is the time of silence, the
chief time of conference with God: Note
When Creatures are most silent, then is a time for man to speak to God, and
for God to speak to man: The din of the day marreth our meditatio^s.


The sick Man. But alas, from day to night he will make an end of me. Isa.
38. 12



The Pastor. It is better that he make an end of you, than that any other
should do it: If he make an end of you, pray earnestly for a good end: If
the end be well, all is well: Your complaint is that, from day to night he
will make an end of you: Note
Be thankful to God for his mercy toward you, in that he has given you so
long a time to repent as from day to night: Note
He might have made you sink down through the Earth Numb. 16. 32.
unto hell in a moment with Dathan and Abiram: He might have burnt you with
fire from Heaven in a thunder clappe with Corah: He might have drowned you
into the Sea with Pharaoh: He might Exodus ^4* 21
have slain you under a Tower, with these eighteen at Siloe: He Luke 13. 4
might have sent a wind for to smite the four corners of your house, while
ye had been at a banquet with Jobs Children: What Job. 1. 19.
if the goodness of God had deserted you, and taken his free Spirit from Psalm.
81. 12.
you? What if he should do so to the best of us? Certainly we^ should
either make away our selu^ with Saul by the sword, or with Judas 1 Samuel 31 4
and Ahitophel by the cord, o^ Matthew. 27. 3
with Zi^rie by the fire. Many others 2 Samuel 17 23
have in an instant been snatched away in the very swea^e of their sins.

First then, I say, That is a great mercy of God unto man, that God himself
makes an end of him, and not suffers him to fall into the hands of his
mercielesse creatures.

Secondly, in that, from day to night he delayeth, it is a merciful
patience: Take heed Sir, what I say: Count this a great mercy of your God,
though ye should die this night, thank God for his patience, that it was from
day to night, before that he would make an end of you: Note
It is a great benefit of God, to get but so much time wherein we may once
cry, Lord, have mercy upon me* Note.
No man can sufficiently esteem the high price of a days laiser unto night:
Here is the patience and the long suffering of God.

Now Sir consider, and weigh well what has been said: Is it not now your
desire, that ye be dissolved? Are ye not as yet resolved? It would seem,
that there be some thing that yet troubles you: As for the words of
Hezekiahs chattering, which has been the words of your mourning, I hope that
in some measure ye have been cleared with some contentment.


The sick Man. I confess Sir, that ye have pertinentlie made answer to all
these difficulties: But, alas, what shall I say?


The Pastor. What aileth you? Be plain with me, I pray you Sir, think no
shame to tell me what is into your mind: Note
If the Patient cover his sore from the Surgeon, the greater will his danger
be: It is an hard matter when the Patient plays false with the Physician:
Lay open your wounds, if ye would have salve fit for your sores.


The sick Man. I think shame Sir to tell you what aileth me, yet seeing I
have need both of instruction and of comfort, I will be no stranger unto you,
Note
whom I know to be a man of God, that is not curious for to ripe up secret
sores for your own curiosity, but rather for to cure them: I will not
conceal the matter from you: It is this: I have filled my Barnes, and I desire
to enjoye the fruits thereof: There is no man, but he would desire after
great pains, ^o r^ape some fruits of his labors: I vvish that Death would
excuse me for some years: This is my grief, for I must be plain with you,
mine heart cannot well accord to forsake such comforts.


The Pastor. That Sir is but a worldly temptation: What are Barnes of corn
on Earth in comparison of Gods most pleasant Palace in Heaven, wherein are
pleasures for evermore? Note
Fie Psalm. 16. 11
upon Barnes, a nest for Myce and Rattons: Would ye desire to live for to
enjoye the leauinges of vnbeastes? They begin, and as it were sit at the
first mess: Thus after that the Fowls of the Air have gotten their share,
and the Rattons have gotten their fill, poor man as it were comes after
all, and sits down at the latter meat. Note
But what are all these things, though man should enjoye them all his alone?
What can he get of them all but a belly full of meat? Note
What is the Belly to that spiritual Birthright and blessing that is laid
up into the Heavens? What is the Belly, but a thing ordained for destruction
with all that is in it? Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for the 1 Cor. 6.
13.
meats, But God shall destroy both it and them. Cast out of your heart the
care of your Belly: Note
The Belly in the Heart makes a man a monster: Let this be your chief,
care, that shortly your Soul may sit down at Gods Table with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in Gods Kingdom: What grieueth you now S^


The sick Man. God has blessed me, my Moneys are increased; and now my life
is but coming to the best.


The Pastor. Note
The richest life is not ever the best life; abundance of Moneys is no sure
token of Gods mercies: If it had been otherwise, Christ had never cast the
Bag unto Judas. Ioh. 12. 6


That churlish Carle in the Gospel, that would not let Lazarus Luke 16. 20
dyne with his dogs, how soon was his Purple pulled from him, and he made a
beggar into Hell, seeking a drop of water from him, whose scabs his dogs
had licked on Earth? Nabel like a fool is feasting 1 Samuel 25 36.
to day, and tomorrow he shall become sick, and die with an heart verse. 37
like a stone within him: What fatter then shall he be of his Feast? Note
Beware Sir, to marry your mind with your Money, lest ye be thereby divorced
from Christ: S. Augustine said wisely,

Matrimonium inter aurum and arcam est inter Deum and animam Divortium.

A marriage between our Mind and our Money, is a diuorcement between the
Soul and Christ its Spouse.

Note
It is good for us, lest that we should love this world too well, that like a
cursed Stepmother it misuse us, and rather strike us, than stroke us, as it
does with these worldly brats, who neither live, nor love a Life but this.
What think ye now Sir of this world?


The sick Man. I desire yet that God would grant me some space to live, that
I might make some better provision for my little Children: I wish that I might
live till they were better provided, within a few days if God would spare me,
I hope that I should make a conquest.

Note
Fie upon that conquest that makes a man to desire to tarry from God but one
hour: Solomon after Eccles. 2. 18.
all his conquests said, that he hated all his labor: I said he, hated all
my labor, which I had taken under the Sun: The reason is subjoyned by
himself, Because I should leave it verse. 19.
unto the man that should be after me: And who knows whether he shall be
a wise man or a fool? Yea, he proved a fool indeed, by forsaking the 1 King.
12 13
counsel of the old wise, for to follow the folly of his young fools: Note
What folly is this I play you, for a man to desire to live, for to conquise
sparingly for one that will spend it all lauishlie, crying among the
drunkards, Fill the pynt again? Note
Many children will at one cast of the dyce, cast more from them into a night,
than their fathers were able to win into a year: Note
What is great riches to the most part of Heirs, but fuel to their folly?
Note
Is it not commonly seen, that after the Father has pined himself with
scraiping together Habuk. 2. 6
this thick clay and pelfie dung, in comes a forelorne deboched Heir with
his drunke^ music, singing Very vades, We have spent more than our Philip. 3.
8
fathers have win. A little with GODS blessing is much worth: Note
Hardly can men conquise much with a good Conscience: From thence is the
prophan proverb, Well is the Heir whose fathers soul is in Hell: The gloss
is this, hardly can the father enrich his children, but by lossing his own
Soul: What a woeful bargain is this? Neither does it ever come to pass,
that the evil conquist come to the hands of them for whom it was appointed:
Note
After that the Worldling by hook and by crook has taken with the angle, and
has caught with the net, and gathered in his dragge, all that is about him: At
last it comes to pass, that after he has well ladned his Boat, and is come
near the haven, there comes a blast of judgment which ouer-turneth all into
a moment: Note
Thus in the highest of his hopes in sight of the Shore, ladned and fraughted
with the fruit of all his labors of his lies, his guile, and deceit, he
goes down to the bottom of the depths, so that none is able to rescue him:
Thus after that, first he has made shipwreck of his conscience, he also makes
shipwarcke of all his goods, and so is he deprived of his imagined profit: Note
What though his ship should come in? What though all should prosper for a
while? Note
Let Micah steal his mothers silver and turn it into gods, and get a Priest,
and bless himself, when he has done, thinking that all shall prosper now:
But Danites.
ere it belong* some of the race of the Genesis 49. 17
Adder by the way, shall come and tak away his gods: And if he run out to
follow for his own, they shall either scorn him with what aileth Judge. 18. 23
thee? or shall boast him to keep silence, saying, Let not thy voice be verse.
25.
heard among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou loss thy life
with the lives of thine household.

Note
Let no man bless himself with Micah because he has gods at home: Note
Though men by many means may become rich, and think that they shall leave
great wealth unto their children, God can by as many means disapoint them, as
by blood, by shipwreck, by fire, by water, by war, by banqueroupts, by plea,
and by piracie, etc. He who to day was swaggering in his Silks and swimming in
his wealth speaking of nothing but of thousands, within a little space behold
him again, and lo, all is changed: The poor man he goes and no man
regards him, he is hungry, nacked and cold, but not so cold as the
charity of these that may help him: These who were wont to eat at his table,
desire no more to see him: The thoughts of old obligations are to them lik
letters of Caption for to enforce the^ to give some what to their old
distressed friend: But cold are such comforts: Here, behold Sir, as in a
glass, what vanity into these transitory things, which men think to make
permanent to their posterity: Note
But let a man be rich till he die; After that he has spoiled others to make
himself wealthy, shall his children be his Heirs? No, not: The wealth of
the sinner is laid up Prove. 13. 22.
for the Just: See how God makes a Worlding to be as it were a drudge or a
pack horse for to gather with the sweat of his brows, that wherewith the
righteous man may be sustained: Note
As he made the Ravens to flee and fetch flesh for the nourishing 1 King. 17 16
of his Servant Elijah: Note
Some tims also it will befall otherwise, that thewe alth of the sinner shall be
laid up for one worse than himself, that all the world may see, and behold,
what vanity there is in such carking care: Note
O, will some say, if he that is dead saw such a man in his house, Master of
all his labors, What would he now think? Note
Thus God in a manner making deboched bare men like lean Kine prey upon the
Genesis 41. 3
wicked, who while they lived, would Judge. 9. 9.
not with the Olive leave their fatnes for to be Kings in Heaven, lets the
world see what folly it is to put their trust in such transitory trashes.

What say ye now Sir? Are ye now free of such earthly temptations?


The sick Man. I am miserably vexed with this world: Worldly things, do
what I can, run ever into my mind, and trouble me with carking cares.


The Pastor. Note
So long as a man's heart is clogged with this clay, he has no power to stir
hand or foot to heauen-ward: There is both gall and guile in earthly
mindedness: Well is him, whose Soul can sore far above this Region of
corruption, for to mind above all things the things Col. 3. 1.
that are above.


The sick Man. My mind alas, is like Martha, busied Luke 10. 41
about many things, or rather buried in many things.


The Pastor. But Christ said, One thing is necessary: Note
He that said it, is that which he said; even that, One necessary thing. Note
We may pass to life eternal without any other thing: But there is such a
necessity in Christ, that without him we can do nothing: Without me, said
he, ye can do nothing: Christ is that Luke 10. 41
Best part, Mary's choice: Well is that Soul, that makes him its part: He is
only that which shall never be taken from us* But what worldly thing is
that, that as yet troubles you?


The sick Man. Mine heart Sir, is ouer-burdened with the weight of many cares
concerning this Life.


The Pastor. Note
Our Savior has set down a particular Precept concerning that, Take heed,
said he, to your selves, Luke 21. 34.
least at any time your hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life: Note
Such cares may snow down white hairs upon our hairie scalpe: But it is
only the godly care, the care of the Life to come, that works Repentance
never to be repented of: But come to the pa^rticulars.


The sick Man. I have lately bought some heritage, my servants are plowing
it, before I die I would wish once to reap the fruits thereof.


The Pastor. To be worldly minded is death:

Note
The command is gone foorth', none can plead ignorance: Love not the world, nor
the things of the world: Ioh. 2. 16.
Well is him that so lives here, Luke 20. 35
that he may be counted worthy to enjoy that world: Note
It is no time now Sir to think of ploughes, ye must now leave all, for to
follow Christ, 1 King. 19 21.
like Elisha, who left his plowing for to follow his new vocation: Take now a
kiss of your dearest friends, and follow this great Elijah, the Lord Jesus,
the Chariot of all his chosen, and the Horsemen of his Israel.


The sick Man. My Lands are labored, the Harvest draws near, there is a
plentiful croppe upon the ground, Corns and wheat, and all abound.


The Pastor. There is no solid comfort in Wheat or in Corn, but only in
Gods countenance: Note
I compare all worldly things to the Tallow of a Candle, and spiritual
things to the flamme thereof: If the Candle be right set, that the flamme be
vpmost, the Candle will shin clearelie, and give light: But if ye turn the
Candle, and hold the flamme down, it shall at once drown in its own tallow:
Even so if the Soul of man be well set, that spiritual thoughts be vpmost,
and worldly considerations sanctified, which have been melted and strained
from their dross be under, that Soul will shine in holy life before men: But
if the flamme of the Spirit be turned down, it will drown under the drops
of such earthly tallowe: By this at last, all our light dies out like a
Candle, so that our hearts that were once enlightened, become lik a dampish
dungeon.

Note
I confess, so long as we are here the fire of the Spirit within the best of
us, is like ignis in materia, fire in an earthly matter, from whence comes
ever some filthy reeke: But when once we shall be above all places,
whereunto no reeke can reach, this spiritual flamme abstracted from all
earthly matter, shall shine most clearlie into the presence of God for ever.
Are ye not yet Sir resolved? Is not your desire now to be dissolved?


The sick Man. The world is yet still in my mind: I have taken much pains
into it, and am now but beginning for to get some ease: I have builded an
house, gladly would I dwell some space into it: Mine heart is sore, yea, it
bleeds for to leave this Lodging, and never to come to it again: I had trimmed
it for my pleasure, and now behold, shall I be disappointed?


The Pastor. There is no great matter of grief Sir, when a man changes for
the better: Note
What are all the sieled Palaces of Princes on earth, but like the house of a
Spider? How soon are Job. 8. 14.
they all sweept away with the besome of vengeance, when God is angry? What
are all our dwellinges on earth, but Dungeons in a dunghill? Let not your heart
Sir be on your house: It is now time to mind the things that are above: Eye
upon clay and stones: Note
What are all the royal Palaces of the world to these stately houses above,
whereof the floor or pauement glisters with thousands of Stars, as with as
many golden nails, o^ twinkling Dya^onds: There the Sun and ye Moon the two
great Jewels of Heaven, shall be under your feet, which are now above our
head. What is within, no mortal tongue can tell: S. Paul saw there
something, but 2 Cor. 12 4
he never revealed it, neither was it lawful for him to declare what he had
seen: Note
This one thing we may know, seeing the outside of Heaven is so beautiful,
how pleasant must it be within? Heaven is like the Kings Daughter, whose
whole beauty is within: There is profit, Psalm. 45. 13
pleasure, health, wealth, honor, happiness, beauty and bless: In a word,
there be things that eye never saw, neither ear heard, yea, which never
could enter into the heart of man.


The sick Man. But alas, must I then forsake all my wealth, and so leave all
my treasures behind me*


The Pastor. Note
Such treasures are but traitors, though they be counted gods: God said to
Magistrates, I have called Psalm. 82. 6
you gods: But he never called gold god: To call gold god, is Ashdodien
language: Gods of gold must be forsaken, for to go to the God of Glory: Note
What are all these worldly things whereon natural men so do gaze? What are
they, but idols lying vanities? To overcome the love of such liars, is the
triumph of Truth: Note
If God's Ark be within our heart, such Dagons will fall down: Turn therefore
your eyes from such clay, and mind the things that are above: Many gather
riches Col. 3. 1.
as he that earneth wages to put it into Hab. 1* 6.
a bottomless bag: Note
The first lesson of Christianity is self denial.


The Sick Man. How is it then Sir, that a man must go through this world for
to come to Heaven?


The Pastor. Note
Even as the Israelites desired to go through the Land, of Sihon the King of
the Amorites, for to come to Canaan the figure of Heaven* Let me go through
thy Land, said Numb. 21 21,
Israel, We will not turn aside into the fields, nor into the vineyards,
neither drink of the waters of the wells we will go by the Kings high way,
until we be past thy Country. Note
It is so* that we must pass through this world, for to come to that
heavenly Canaan, we must not turn asid into the fair fields of pleasure, nor
drink our selves drunk in its vineyards: But we must follow directly the
rule of Gods Law the King of Heavens high way, that so we may enter into
Canaan. What say ye Sir? Is it not time to be resolved?


The sick Man. Mine heart is pined within me: It is like to break for
sorrow, when I look to my little Children, Who shortly shall be fatherless:
Alas hard shall their estate be, when I shall be away, who will take care of
them?


The Pastor. That which Christ said to Peter, Matthew. 14 31
may be said to you, O man of little Faith, why have thou doubted? Has not
God promised to show mercy unto thousands of these that love him? Note
If the King of this Land should now come himself to your bed-stocke and say
James, or John, here I give to you mine hand before God and good witness, that
I shall be a Father to your Children after you, and shall so provide for them,
that they shall want nothing that may do them good: If ye heard such a man
make such promises, I think that ye should not be in pain for the estat of
your children: And yet what is a King but a man? But so it is, that all men are
lyares, Psalm. 116. 11.
or may lie: But God who can not Heb. 6. 18
lie, has given his Hand and his truth to the faithful man, yea, has
oblished himself by an oath, and has taken Heaven and Earth to be witness,
that he shall never forsake the godly man nor his seed, his promise is to
thousands: If ye Exodus 20, 6
believe God to be true, rely upon his promise: Let not the care of Children
trouble you any more, prepare your self for God, and let Death be welcome:
Put your house to an order in time: Discharge your self of all worldly
burdens: denude your hands and your heart of all temporal affairs, that your
Soul have nothing to do, but to wait upon your God: Note
It is not time to be combered with the world, while the whole heart should
be taken up with heavenly meditations: It is now high time to think
earnestly upon that life, whereunto ye are going by Death: It would seem Sir
that ye are not contentas yet for to remove: What can this be that troubles
you* should not your heart rejoice to go unto your God?


The sick Man. I find contrary draughts within me: Your words indeed Sir
begin to work upon mine heart, and to draw up my Soul toward the pleasures
that are above: Note
But again I find the desires of this life like weighty paisses drawing me
down to the ground again: This is my regret: Alas, must I then leave this
world, and the light thereof, and never see it again any more? Shall I behold
man no more Isa. 38. 11
with the inhabitants of the world? Shall I never see after this into the Land
of the living any of all these whom I have loved so well?


The Pastor. Note
Sir, it shall be your far best to suffer the love of Christ swallow up the
love and all other considerations of worldly things, as Moses his serpent
swallowed up the serpents Exodus 7. 12
of the Magicians: Note
What ever seems pleasant into this world unto the natural eye, it is but by
juggling of the senses: If we have the grace of God, this grace shall be
indeed like as a four nooked Clauer, is in the opinion of some, viz a most
powerful means against the juggling of the sight: If we could seek this
grace, it would let us see the vanity of such things which beguile the
natural senses: Note
The eye of a man's Soul is betimes like the eye of a man come out of a bilious
fever, all things seem to him to be yellow, because of the bile which have
perverted his sight: Note
Satan can forge temptations like glass, of whatsoever color he pleases,
wherethorow all things seem to be of the color of his temptations: Through
one glass a man's own spouse will seem to be filthy: Through another a
bordel-whore will seem to be pleasant: Through one the world will seem to be
glorious, through another the brightest heavens will seem to be but clouds:
Through one, fables will seem to be Scripture, through another, Scriptures will
seem to be but fables* Through one if a man feast as Christ did, he will
seem to be a glutt^n, Luke 7 34
through another if he feast with the Baptist, he will seem to be a devil:
verse. 33.
The chief gripe of your temptation is in this, that if ye were once dead, ye
shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world: Ye are far
beguiled into the sight of the wo^ld, wherewith ye are so ravished: Note
Change your Spectacles, and all that is below shall seem to be of another
color: Note
If your Soul could once sore up toward Heaven, the love of the Earth and
earthly things would fall from you, as did the Mantle of Elias, when he 2
King. 2. ^3
was rapt and ravished up unto glory.


The sick Man. Note
But ye know Sir, that it is very hard not to be sore grieved to go out of
this world, Non amplius visur us neque videndus, neither for to see any more,
nor yet to be seen: Note
Who without tears can say his adewes to all his joys, pleasures, and
contentments that are here? When I once shall be carried out of my house, ye
shall see me no more: Henceforth ye and I will speak no more together: I
departing from you, must go to the place of silence, among stink and worms:
Who canwithout displeasure say to all worldly joys, farewell?


The Pastor. It is best that ye turn your back unto such naughty things, as
Hezekiah turned his back to the stock, and his face to the wall, that he
might confer with his God: It is great folly to be so fond upon such
transitory trashes: What is so pleasant in this world that should allure us to
it? Are not all things inconstant here below? Note
There is nothing that stands at a stay, but either it is coming in or going
out like the Tide: Note
There is no creature but while it begins to wax it also begins to
waine: A child of the age of a day has less time to live at Eauen, than he
had in the morning: Since he came out of the belly, from the morning unto
eauen he has made a days journey in the way to his grave: In ipso ortu
vergimus ad occasum: Our arising up is but a course to our fall: Note
The degrees of a man's life, are as as many stepp unto his death: All that we
see below is in a continual whirling from a beginning to an end: The course of
all the Creatures below is in a trance of transitory trashes: Note
I can but teach you with words* as John baptized with water: Luke 3. 16.
It is only the Lord who can persuade.


The sick Man. I take delight to hear you, I pray God to persuade me:
Continue I pray you into that discourse concerning the vanity and inconstancy
of vvo^ldly things, ripe them up, and open them wider, that I may see them
within the bowels.


The Pastor. The vvisest among men preached, Vanity of vanities, and all is
vanity: Eccles. 1. 2
All things are vain, and all things cry unto us that we are vain, So vain
a thing is man: Note
The Trees, the Herbs, the Flowrishes, the Fruits, the Fishes, the Beasts,
the Spring, the Summer, the Harvest, the Winter, the Air, the Water, the
Earth, the Heavens, are all appointed teachers by God, to tell man of his
changing: Note
Their line is gone out Psalm. 19. 4.
through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world: All that have
eyes and ears may hear, and read their doctrine, that here is nothing
permanent: Note
One creature calls to another, Let us leave this World: See we not how we
melt away by drops, for to be dried into dust: Moses says, that we spend
our Psalm. 90. 9.
years as a tale that is told; a strange speech for to declare the vanity of
long life so much desired: while a tale is in telling, it seems to be
something, but when a tale is once told, these that have heard it will in end
say, That it is but a tale: So long as man's life is lasting, it is like a tale
that is in telling: But so soon as Death the end of all comes, it is but
like a tale that is told: Thus as ye see all man's life in Scripture language,
is called but a tale: Note
All the times of our life past, present, and to come, are turned at last into
a fuimus, we have been: We that live now, let us remember our case, Ecce
tempus nunc futurum quo dicen^ nos fuisse, The time shall be shortly that man
shall say of us that we have been: And thereafter a time shall come that none
shall know that ever we had a being: Note
Our life is like a sparkle fleeing out of the fire, which dies out into the
flight, it failleth before it falls.


The sick Man. These be words of great power, I find now some working
thereof within mine heart: I pray you continue.


The Pastor. We have none abiding here, Note
We all both young and old post swiftly away to the grave, the last bed wherein
every man must sleep, we are long of coming to: But how soon are we pulled
down? Our strength says Moses, is soon cut off, Psalm. 90. 10
and we flee away: Note
We are like the Ye which thaweth sooner than it froze: Note
This is the Law of all flesh, Prince, People, Poor and Rich, all must go to
Golgotha: The Preacher says plainly, There is no discharge in Eccle. 8. 18
that war.

Note
Though a man in the morning be proud like a Peacocke, with lifted up
feathers, if Death come before the night come, he must lay down his head
among dead men's Skuls: What a thing is this, that within an hundredth years not
one of us all that are here shall be left alive, no not in this great City,
wherein we live? Note
Are we not all as water spilt upon the ground, 1 Samuel 14 14
which can not be gathered up again* What memory is now of these tha^ are
past? And what shall be said o^ us, when we are gone? It is o^ far best
then to follow our God* and to turn our back upon all suc^ lying vanities.


The sick Man. I requeast you Sir, not to be wearied: Proceed I pray you into
tha^ purpose, that I may learn what vanity is into this life, which is so*
much desired.


The Pastor. Note
Man's life into this world is but a Pilgrimage and a race not of great length;
for man that is borne of a w^man, 2 Timothy 4. 7
Job. 14. 1.
has but a short time to live: Note
Jacobs answer to King Pharaohs question concerning his age, was few Genesis 47. 1
and evil have my days been? Note
What is man says one but Vermis crasti^ moriturus? a worm that will die to*
morrow: Note
David puts the length of his days between his little finger and his
thumb: My life said he, is Psalm. 39. 5
like a span long: some get but an inch, consider well I pray you Sir, seeing
it is so, what is it then of your life, which is but of the length of a span
what though it were an ell of length? Note
Is not Methusalah with his many hundredth years as well in dust, as as he
that lived but a day: Note
Other have given place to us, and we must also give place to others: To me to
day, to thee tomorrow: There is no lodging for immortality upon the Earth*


The sick Man. My Soul rejoices to hear you Sir, proceed I pray you.


The Pastor. We have no great cause to desire to sojourne on earth: Note
What are we here on earth but like poor beggars shute down to the lowest
chambers of the world? This low Cabul, that is dirtie.
contrie may well be called Cabul, as Hiram, by disdain called the dirtie
cities of Solomon: Be glad no^ Sir for to leave this earth, a dirti^ dwelling:
Note
Step up the Staire eue^ Genesis 28. 17
the Ladder of Iaacob, that ye may mount up to your God, for to see what he
is doing above: Well is you who shall hear shortly the music of Angels into
that Palace whose pauement is the roof of al^ mortal dwellings: O if ye kne^
what is there! Fie on our ignorance Note
The Children of God in this worl^ are like Lords children, sent out to be
fostered into little Cottages o^ clay, when they are sent for by sickness and
death; their Fathers messengers they weep to come home to their Fathers
Palace, because they know not these many pleasant Mansions that be in their
Fathers house* But after that they have once trye^ what it is to be in Heaven
with their God, they shall wonder (...) their childishness: Note
Be not Sir l^ these fort of men that cannot abid^ to hear speak of Death,
but even sicken at the name thereof, or wax wroth at the speaker, as Ahab,
fumed 1 King. 22 8*
at the Prophet, because he spoke not good things unto him.


The sick Man. Hezekiah spoke more wisely, while he was threatened by the
Prophet, Good, said he, is the word of the Lord: 2 King. 20 19.
I pray you to continue your purpose concerning death: Note
It is good that we remember our latter end.


The Pastor. Note
Indeed Sir the thoghts of Death are helpefull and healthful to the Souls of
men, to be corrections for their corruptions: Such thoughts keep ever God in
our sight: They are like a strainer, wherthrough the thoughts, words and
works of men are purified: Hardly can a man think of a sho^t life, and
think evil, as hardly can he d^eame of a long life, and think well: Note
All the sins of Gods Church in Icrem^es days were imputed unto Lam. 1. 9
this, that she remembered not her end: Note
We for the most part deceive our selves with the opinion of long life, and
so did they who are dead already: O how gracious would one day be to these
now, who while they lived, did scorn at these words, Redeem the Time! But
Ephesians. 5. 16
their ma^ket time is now past: Gods Fair was ended before they could
understand what it was to buy without money: Well is the man who, Isa. 55. 1.
while he has time, so lives to dye, that he may dye to live: If our life
be good, our death cannot be evil: Note
To the godly man death is a comfort, as being a medecin for all his
diseases; a cure for all his cares, Revel. 14 13
a rest^ from his labors: But in this is his greatest joye that by it the
filthy flooxe of sin is dried up into an instant: * By it also the prison
door is opened that the Soul like a Dove may fly up to its God: The
consideration of such Eccles. 7. 3.
things made Solomon to preach, The day of death is better, than the day that
one is borne: He spoke the truth, for the one is the beginning, the other is
the ending of all our woe and misery.

Now Sir, before that I proceed any further, I pray you to tell me what ye
think now of this world. In this as I remember was your last temptation
grounded, that going out of this world, ye should no more see nor be seen:
Note
I have let you see as in a glass, what vanity is in it, yea, that all is but
vanity of vanities, the very abstract of an abstract, or for to speak so,
vanity fined and quintessenced out of vanity, which I may call the spirit or
quintessence of vanity. Now Sir tell me what ye think of this world, wherein
gods must die like men? No worldly Psalm. ^. 7.
thing below in the day of need will be able to keep touch unto us.


The sick Man. Fie, fie on my faults, and my folly: Note
I foolishlie once thought that I should feather a nest into this world, that
should never be pulled down: Mine heart has been so bent toward this
vanity that I have neither moved foot nor finger toward eternal Life.

Note
It is true that I have been nourished and brought up into this world like a
Child into a rural cottage Note
I like a Child thought that there was no better: Jonah was Iona. 4. 7.
angry for to quite his Gourd: Note
The greatest pleasures that are here being well weighed, are but like the
shadow of that Gourd, euanishing and worme-eaten pleasures: All such comforts
are but slender, they fail man in his greatest need.


The Pastor. Note
Though worldly pleasures be sweet for a space to these whose portion is into
this Life, yet as Abner said of the devouring Sword to Ioab, It will be
bitterness in the 2 Samuel 2. 26.
latter end: In all the gourdes of worldly pleasures are worms of pain,
which shall make them to wither.


The sick Man. That is most certain: Note
well is him that has turned his back to all such lying vanities: So long as
a man is in nature, not reformed by grace, he is but a stranger from heaven:
The love of the world in his heart like a moth, cats out all liking of Heaven.
Note
I have been too long alas, sucking the breasts of this Nourse, whereout of I
have drawn nothing but the swill of wickedness: Blessed be my God, who has
sent this affliction for to waine my Soul from the love of all things below: I
begin now to incline for to return to my Fathers house in Heaven, where, as
I hear, it shall be much better for me. Oh, forlorn Son that I am* who
have wandered so far from my Father!


The Pastor. I thank God, Sir, for these good motions, flesh and blood cannot
teach such lessons: But one word I have observed into your speech, ye have
said, that ye begin to incline to go home to your Father: Are ye not as yet
fully resolved? Desire ye not indeed presently to be dissolved? Note
Is it not your greatest desire to flitte from this body which is but a Booth,
a Shop, or Tabernacle Job 4. 19.
of clay? Note
Is not your Soul wearied to sojourne into such a reekie Lodge? Is not your
heart panting after God, l^ke an Heart, panting after the water brooks? He are
ye not your Soul crying within Psalm. 42. 3.
you, O when shall I come and appear before God? Note
A small feeble inclination to go to God is not sufficient, ye must now come
to a steadfast resolution: He who is not resolved, is not ready for to be
dissolved: Ta^ courage, be not dashed into this danger, declare your mind
freely, be not nice, there be none here but friends.


The sick Man. I am so pyned with sickness, that hardly can I make answer:
Note
Oh* but I am pressed with an heaui^ hand: I fear much my last hour: My Soul
is sore troubled.


The Pastor. Learn of Christ in his trouble: Now, said he, is my Soul
troubled, Ioh, 12. 27
and what shall I say? Father, deliue^ me from this hour: But for this cause
verse. 28.
came I into this hour: Father glorify thy Name: As he did, so do ye: Note
He fearing the hour was earnest with God in prayer for to be delivered from
it; and yet most humbly submitted himself unto his Fathers will: So do ye:
If ye fear greatly that hour, pray fervently, that God deliver you from it
and yet notwithstanding, let God have all his will of you: His will shall eu^r
be your well.


The Sick Man. But alas, my pains are great: Note
my breach is like the sea: Gods rod upon me is torn with stripes, and worn
to the stomps: In my torments I both fear and feel his wrath: If he loved
me, would he scourge me with such scorpions?


The Pastor. Whom God loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom
he Heb. 12. 6.
receives: By this ye see plainly* that he will receive none to himself,
but those whom he is minded to scourge: Note
This scourging whereof ye complain, is Gods loue-token, telling you that he
is minded for to receive you: Woe ^o the Child whom the Father will not
correct: God commands loving Fathers to chastise their children till they
cry: His command is also, that they be not hindered for their cries: Chasten
thy Son, said Prou* 19. 18.
God, while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying: So long
as there is life, there is hope: While God chasteneth you, it is a token that
there is hope: Note
Woe to that man, whom GOD disdaineth to strike: It is a sore word when a
Father or a Master says to a Child I despair of him, there is none hope, I
give him over, and will strik him no more: It was a fearful word that God
said to the rebellious Israelites, I will not visit your Daughters when Hose.
4. 14
they are harlotes, nor your Spouses when they are whoores: That is, I will
correct them no more, but let them run headlong to their own destruction:
Woe to him whom God will not correct: Note
Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus cum non irascitur, God is most angry, when
he seems least to be angry: The wicked are most fearefullie plagued, when
God spares them most: Let not therefore your sore pains discourage you, but
rather comfort you, as being a special token that God will receive your Soul
Note
What reckes what this Carrion suffer, if so be that God receive the Soul?
Shall I not drink of my Fathers Cup? said Ioh. 18. 11
Christ: * To drink of a Kings cup it would be thought an honor. See then
what honor is in the affliction of the godly, thereby they drink of the
King of Heavens cup: This is also a token of our friendship with Christ, when
we drink with him of one cup: Men will not drink of one cup with their
enemies. Rejoice then Sir, to drink with Christ in your Fathers cup Note
Though this cup be bitter at the brimme, the bottom will have a pleasant
farewell.

Think well upon this Sir, and possess your soul in patience despare never
of Gods mercy, though he seem to be angry, depend upon him, trust into
him, though he should slay you: Note
In confidence of h^s Love rest and sleep in his bosom, hang on him, save his
honor by trusting in him: If this ye do, I assure you, that ye shall dye
sweetly, resting into his arms.


The sick Man. I find Sir my pains greatly to increase.


The Pastor. Be of good comfort: Note
If your pains increase, God will increase your patience with your pains, he
is merciful, and will surely strengthen you in the weakest hour: Gods
strength is made perfect in weakness: 2 Cor. 12. 9.
In the mean time, be fighting out the good fight manfully: Note
Hold up your hands with Moses against Amaleke: Pray fervently to your God,
that he would cast into Exodus 17. 11
your memory all the good things that ever ye heard or read, wherewith your
Soul as with a rempart may be guarded against the hour of temptations: Pray
oft-ten with Christ, Father deliver me from this Ioh. 12. 27
hour: What say ye Sir? It appears that there be some thing into your mind
yet that vexes you.


The sick Man. This Soul of mine is very loath to depart from this body:
Note
They be of old acquaintance, happily long shall it be before they meet
again, Friends cannot be but sorry while they shed.


The Pastor. That is natural to all: But grace in the Godly must rule
Nature: Note
We must gladly leave all for to go live with Christ, we must deny our
selves for to confess him: we must desire to be dissolved, for to be with
him; he who loves any thing better than him, shall not be found worthy of
him: Your Soul, say ye, is sorry to go from the body: Note
What are our bodies for the present, but prisons of clay? Let them go to
clay, till the day of the Resurrection come, when those painful prisons shall
be turned into pleasant Palaces: Note
What reckes of an inch of time here on Earth* in respect of eternity in
Heaven? Should a man's heart so itch after an inch of Earth, that he would
desire to tarry from Heaven but an hour?

The Soul must turn its back upon the body, for to turn its face unto the
God of Glory: This is but a childish temptation: Note
It is for women and children to weep, at the taking of adewes, chiefelie
while these that depart are going to a better condition of life.

Because the day draws toward Evening, it is now time for me to remove: I
hope God willing to come again the Morrow, and to visit you, that I may
minister unto you some Spiritual comforts: In the mean time, seeing your
mind has been so perplexed with carnal temptations, concerning Life, Lands,
Children, and Riches: Cause read unto you this night in mine absence the Book
of Ecclesiastes, from the beginning unto the end, where ye shall see as in a
glass, the vanity of all these things, wherewith your Soul now is most
enamoured. If ye have time, cause also read unto you Job 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

Before I go Sir it shall be best that I recommend you unto God by prayer.


The first Prayer for the sick Man.
O LORD, in whose hands is the gift of the Spirit of groans, inspire our
hearts at this time, that with an heavenly disposition we may fall down
before thee upon the knees of our Souls, quicken our dead and drowsy hearts
to the performance of this duty of calling upon thy Name: Thou is not close
handed to these that seek thee in sincerity, we are ashamed, O LORD, even
we all who are here before thee on the Earth thy Foote-stoole, we are
ashamed for to face the Heavens, the Throne of thy Majesty: Our hearts are so
fully fraughted with all sorts of sins, which like most filthy streams flow
from the first fountain, or rather puddle of our original sin, which we
have from the Loins of Adam: We are all infected with this spiritual
Leprosy; there is nothing that can wash us and make us clean, save only the
Jordan of the blood of Jesus; Besprinkle our consciences, O LORD, with the
virtue of that Blood, which cries for better things, than the blood of Abel:
Seal up thy Love in our hearts by the blood of the Sealed man, whom Thou the
Father did seal and appoint to bring Life eternal Ioh. 6. 27.
to the world: In him thou art well pleased: In his Name, and for his Love we
beg thy favor: He himself has told us, that what we shall ask thee in
his Name, we shall receive it: O Father of mercies, remember the promise of thy
Son.

In confidence of his Command we take the boldness at this time particularly
to put up our prayers unto thee, for this thy diseased Servant toss^d to and
f^o with diverse temptations: Satan the enemy of his Salvation, the fear of
Death, the love of the world and of worldly things have set themselves in
Battell-array, like armies between his Soul and the entry of Heaven.

They have maliciously ensnared his heart, and taken his affections captives
with the immoderate love of perishing things: Oh, how has he been bewitched
with the seeming sweetness of such vanities!

O Thou LORD JESUS, the LORD of Life, encourage him so with thy lively Spirit,
that he may be bold, courageously to face Death and the Grave: Put these
interrogations in his mouth, O Death, where 1 Cor. 15. 55
is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? Cause thy Spirit whisper in his
ear, that thou have put out the life of Death: Cast into his rememberance the
words wherewith Thou boasted Death, and the Grave, O Death, I will be thy
plagues, Hose. 13. 14
O Grave, I will be thy destruction.

Let his Soul know that the Grave is a Bed of rest, for all these Isa. 57. 2.
that die in the LORD, wherein they rest from their labors, being at ease in
peace, without any toil or turmoile: Work in his heart a desire to be
dissolved, for to be fred from the sinful bonds of mortality, for to go
dwell where he shall never anger the Lord again: Let the Love of Christ waine
his heart from the desire of any abiding here.

O dear JESUS, who was both buffeted, slain, and buried for to save man, set
the print and stamp of thy mercy upon this Soul. Sever all his thoughts from
all that is earthly, whether it be Life, Lands, Children, Houses, or
whatsoever other thing may allure him for to sojourne here in a strange Land,
wherein we are all strangers from God, whom we cannot see here but behind:
Untie his heart from the love of this his native soil: Purge him of this
out-bearing humor.

O LORD, flesh and blood will never teach a man to renounce his dear selte,
and such other carnal things, wherewith he is in fantasy: The earthly
mind is so lumpish, that it wearieth to think of thee, and of the pleasures
of thy Palace: A carnal heart is ever rouing and wandering here about this
worlds business: Martha is a mother of many Children, who trouble themselves
about many things: But few are these that with Marie can fold their heart for
to sit down at the feet of JESUS for to make choice of that best part, which
should never be taken from them: Thou to who^ nothing is impossible, draw this
Soul unto thee, make the bent of his affection to be upon thee.

O great JEHOVAH, thou have heard and seen how carnal temptations have teared
the Soul of thy Servant this day in the bed of his languishing: Immoderat
cares for things below have deprived him of all rest and joys which he should
have in thee: We must confess to thee, and from his heart he acknowledges
to be true, that his mind has been too bent upon such perishing shadows,
which can not be gripped: Such trashes of no worth have taken too much room
into his heart.

He who is not content to quite all for to come to thee, is not worthy of
thee.

But, LORD; if man's Salvation were grounded upon the sand of his own
worthiness, such a building could not stand against the winds and floodes of
temptations: But his Salvation shall never be branled* because it is builded
upon the everlasting and most sure Rock the foundation of thy Church.

O LORD, we fail all in many things: If hitherto this thy Servant has not as
he should, minded the things which are above, but lodged in their place, the
desire of things below, now in thy great mercy inlighten his mistie mind^,
and be merciful to him in the thing: Make the flesh now to cede and give
place unto the Spirit: Let the heavens come in with the pledges of thy Love,
which no mortal arms can fadome: Come with thy Spiritual and divine motions
and fill therewith the chambers of his heart where earthly thoughts had their
abode: Make his Soul to inuit thy Spirit, to come in, Saying with Laban, Come
in thou blessed of Genesis 24. 31
the Lord, wherefore stand thou without?

O dear JESUS, direct so all his thoughts, that he weary himself no more
with the desire of that which sooner or later heee must ^orgoe: Why should
thornie cares for dust and clay choke the good motions of thy Spirit? Let no
such care cumber him any more for foolish fading commodity: Dissolve this glue
by which his heart is tied to the ground: In thy Light let him see Light,
whereby he may perceive how frail and fickle are all such transitory
trashes, which being too much loved, both cool our zeal and clogge our
affections, so that they can in no wise soar up toward thee.

O blessed Savior, in whom is the very pith and sweetest marrow of Gods
mercies, make thy servants here to love thee above all things, in heaven or
earth: Make his heart to say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Make him to love
thee for thy self, and not for thine only, which is but an hired Love: Put
in thine own hand at the hole of the door of his heart, and let some drops
of the Mirrhe of thy mercy this night fall upon the handle of the Bar* that
his Soul being affected therewith* may run out of the Chamber of sleep for
to seek him, who loves his Soul, even his blessed Savior, the LORD JESUS.

Be merciful to all thine afflicted members in the Church militant, fighting
under the bloody Banner of the LORD JESUS CHRIST: The Church is thy Spouse
keep her as the Apple of thine eye, make all her members with one mind and one
mouth, to glorify thy Name.

Bless our gracious Sovereign, the Kings Majesty with thy best blessings:
Adorn him with spiritual Graces and gifts, wherewith he may please thee in
his whole carriage, both Ecclesiastice and Civil: Make Justice and Judgment
the habitation of his Throne; make Mercy and Truth go before his Face:
Bless His Royal Match, make thy mercy to be shed abroad in Her Heart: Cloth
Her with the Royal apparel of Christ's Righteousness: Let readiness to hear
the Preaching of the Word be Her Eare-ring, and good Works in Her Hand like
golden Rings upon Her Fingers: Write upon the Tables of Her Heart the Love of
true Godliness.

The LORD be merciful to the Commonwealth of this Land protect It from the
rage of foreign Enemies: Let never thy protection depart from this Land: Let
it be like that Bed of Solomon, Threescore Cant. 3. 7. ^ 8
strong men are round about it, of the valiant men of Israel: They all handle
the Sword, and are expert in war* every one has his sword upon his thigh
for the fear by night.

The LORD be gracious unto us all, who^ are here upon our kneees before Thee:
What we have said to Thee on earth, LORD hear Thou in Heaven,: Let this
afflicted Soul have a proof of thine own Truth, that the effectual prayer
of the Righteous Iam. 5. 16.
avails much, LORD hea^ us for the sake of him who is righteousness it self,
in whose most perfect Prayer we close up allour suits, saying, Our Father which
art, etc.

The Peace, Grace, and Mercy of our GOD, be with you Sir for ever: I hope
that by Gods Grace I shall see you early in the Morning.

The sick Man. The LORD render to you according to his gracious promise made
to all these that serve him in sincerity: A great blessing requires great
thanks: I never deserved such kindness at your hands: The less deserving be
in me, the more deeply do I hold my self bound unto your love: I pray you
Sir be as good as your word, come again earelie in the Morning: The Spirit of
JESUS go with you.


THE SECOND DAYS Conference. Of spiritual temptations.
The Pastor. GOD save you Sir: How have ye rested this Night? Have ye found
any working of Gods Spirit within you, since our last conference? Is your mind
so at quiet now, that ye may boldly say, with Simeon, Now let thy servant
depart in peace? Luke 2. 29.



The sick Man. Note
Alas, Sir, Satan's temptations are like that Serpent of Learn called Hydra,
which had fifty heads, whereof one being cut off, two sprang up in the place
thereof: I take that serpent to have been but a fable: But that which I say
may be written for an History: Many heads of temptations have ye cut off
with the sword of Gods word: But now I think that for every head cut off, two
are sprung up in the place thereof: Note
All my temptatons hitherto have been but upon the skin like the scratch of a
pin, wrinkles but not wounds: All my troubles hitherto has been but
matters of trifles, viz. Fear for my Life, fear for my Children, fear for
the Grave of this our muddie mortality, and for other such trifles and
trashes, unworthy for to trouble a courageous Spirit: The Spirit of a
courageous man, said Solomon, Prove. 18. 14.
will bear his infirmity: But the wounded spirit who can bear it? Note
well is the child of God in his ^orest sickness for while his body is sick,
his Soul is sound: His God in great love will make all his bed in his
sickness, and Psalm. 41, 3
strengthen him into the bed of languishing: Note
He whom God loves is armed with Faith and patience, all his troubles are but
outward scrappings upon the skin: The temptations wherewith I am lashed are
spiritual woundings for my sins, which never troubled me before: I heard
oft-ten of such troubles, but I never knew before this time what such things
did mean: Think ye Sir that the Spirit of a godly man can be thus wise
troubled? I hear David crying in his mourning, There is no soundness in my
flesh, neither Psalm. 38. 3.
is there any rest in my bones: But what reckes of flesh and bones, if the
Spirit were free?


The Pastor. The most godly that ever lived, have suffered spiritual
wounds: Christ the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2. 10
said, That his Soul was sad even Mar. 14. 34.
unto the death: Note
Job cried, that h^s Spirit was drunken up with the poison of Gods arrows, The
arrows of the Almighty, said he, are Job. 6. 4.
within me, the poison whereof drinks up my Spirit: See how that holy man of
God complains that his Spirit was like a drink drunken up by the poison of
Gods arrows. Note
By this ye see that spiritual wounds are alloted to the dearest of Gods
Elect, so that they are not exeemed from inward blows: Note
Trouble of Conscience is the disease of the innocentest Soul.


The sick Man. That satisfies me not: Note
As for Christ, the blows which he suffered in his Soul, were blows of
satisfaction for the sins of others: As for Job these blows were blows of
probation and of trial, for to let the world see that he was not an hypocrite
that served GOD for rewards, as Satan did allege: But it is not so with me,
who am a bond slave of corruption: I suffer for my 2 Pet. 2.
sins, which are ever before me: The fainer I would forget them, they flow
the faster into my rememberance: Note
The voice of my Conscience follows me with hue and with cry. Though God
has spared thee long, thou have not been bettered, look now for vengeance
after so long delays: I can make no answer, I can not deny, but God has
spared me long: In this is my greatest fear: Note
The higher a stroke be fetched, the longer it is in coming: But the higher
it be lifted, the heavier it will fall.


The Pastor. I answer to that which ye said first, viz. that Christ's
sufferings are no comfort to you, because they are blows of satisfaction: Note
The afflictions of Christ were of diverse uses first of all, for to make
payment to Gods Justice for our sins: Secondly, he suffered, that by his own
experience of sense he being expert what it is to suffer, might assure us
that he is both a merciful and a faithful high Priest, For in that he Heb.
2. 13
himself has suffered being tempted, Non ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco.
he is able to succor the^ that are tempted: Thus the Apostle declares
plainly afterward, We have not, said he, an high Priest which cannot Heb.
4. 15
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: But was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin: Note
This experience which he had of our misery, is called his learning, Though
Heb. 5. 8
he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered:
He also suffered, for to be an example unto us.


The sick Man. I understand not well these words that Christ learned obedience
by his sufferings.


The Pastor. Note
The words indeed seem obscure: The most Learned think that Christ is said to
have learned obedience by his sufferings, because while he suffered he felt
indeed how difficile a thing it is talem obedientiam Deo praestare, Piscator.
Calvin.
to yield such obedience unto God: others say, that by his sufferings he joined
to his divine knowledge ye practice of his passions: that which he had before
only in contemplatio^ is now also known unto him by suffering that which he
knew: Note
Others say. That he learned obedience by his sufferings, that is, Re ipsa
expertus est quid sit patrem habere cut p^rendum Beza.
sit, He knew by Experience what it was, to have a Father to whom obedience
was due: Thus Christ while he learned obedience by his sufferinges, has
teached all the faithful to suffer patiently.

As for that which ye said concerning Job, that his afflictions were only
blows of probation and of trial; ye deceive your self, they Lam. 3. 39
were also for his sins: Whenfore is the living man sorrowful? said Jeremy,
The answer is peremptory, man suffers for his sins.


The sick Man. Note
That seems not ever to be true: While Christ's Disciples saw a man that was
blind from his birth, they asked Christ saying, Master, who did sin, this man
or his parents, that Ioh. 9. 2.
he was borne blind? Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his
Parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him: Oh, that I
were that borne blind, that I were not afflicted for my sins, but that the
works of Gods mercy might be manifested in me!


The Pastor. Note
These words of Christ are not to be taken so strictly as though God would
lay any affliction upon a man in whom is no sin: This could not stand with
the Justice of God: If Adam and his Children had never sinned, not one of them
could have been stricken either with blindness, or deafness: Note
This blind man then was not afflicted for his sins only, or especially, or as
if he had been a greater sinner tha^ others, but chiefly this disease came
unto him, that the works of Gods power and mercy might be made manifest by
his cure: Note
So David was sore afflicted for his adultery and murder, but chiefly for to
stop the mouths of these enemies of God, whom he by his scandle made to
blaspheme: Note
God as ye see may afflict you for your sins, and yet not chiefly for them;
but for to take a trial of your patience, or for to make others fear to sin
when they shall perceive by you, how great pains a godly Soul will suffer
before that it can be well reconciled unto God again.


The sick Man. I confess Sir that ye speak with the tongue of the Learned:
Note
But for all that I find such temptations tumbling within me, that I may
Ierm. 12. 5
compare them to the swelling of Jordan: My sins, alas, hudge in greatness,
stand up like mountains between me and my God: They are so high that they
hide Heaven from my Soul: What shall I do Sir? If ever ye helped me, help
me now with your comforts.


The Pastor. Note
Though these mountains be high, yet ye must clime the mount with Moses, if
ye would see Canaan: So long as Moses was in the valey, he could not see the
typ of Heaven: We must all clime up the Hill: We cannot see Christ before we
be lifted from the Earth: We are all but men of little stature like Zacheus:
Luke 19. 3.
We must therefore up the tree with him, and up the mount with Moses, before
we can see either Christ o^ Canaan that place of promise: Ye are sorry for
your sins: But sanat confessio morbi: A sin well confessed is healed: But
what sins be these Sir whose tops reach so high that they hide the Sun
from you?


The sick Man. Alas, for the sins of my Youth; my Riot and my Drunkenness,
my Romans 13. 13.
Chambering and my wantonness, my strif and envy: Fie on my Fornications, and
Adulteries, my lying and deceiving Hypocrisy: Note
So I had a lamp of profession, I cared not for oil in it, my chief care
has ever been for the outward shell of my duty, but never for the Kernel:
Gods graces in me have been like a pure liquor in a fustie vessel.


The Pastor. I am glad to hear of these buffets of your Conscience, such
grief is from grace: I know what shall be the event, even Repentance never to
be repented of: But say on


The sick Man. Note
This is my greatest grief* that I sinned into the light with Absalom* 2 Samuel
16. 22
even in the clear Sun shine of the Gospel: Now may I well be ranked with
these who counted it pleasure to riot in the day time: It were 2 Pet. 2. ^3
more easy for me to number the sand than my sins.


The Pastor. Note
There is no sin either of omission or commission, in the light or in
darkness, that can hinder God to be merciful to a sinner, if the sinner can
repent: God who is infinite in mercy can forgive the riots of the day, sins
of knowledge as well as night sins; which are sins of ignorance: Note
There is one sin of ignorance which shall never be forgiven, even to
despair of Gods mercy: What ignorance is this, that any Creature should
think it self more sinful, than God can be merciful? Note
To make our sins to ouerreach his compassions, were to make the Center to
contain the Circumference: If your sins be in number like the sand, Gods
mercies are without number: Note
The greatest number that man's brain can invent either by telling, or by
ciphering in comparison of that which is infinite, is not so much as a drop
of a Bucket compared to the great Ocean.


The sick Man. Note
I have alas, been an impudent sinner, who with my sins have buffeted my God
on every side: It were now righteous with God that he should buffet me with
his judgments: I slept in sin, and could not be wakened: While Christ's
Cock crowed, my Soul lay fast asl^epe: Yea, while he crowed again, I had
past the third deny all: And though I was forewarned, I had none hoe in evil
doing: While God was in my mouth, he was far from mine heart: O that bloody
scarlet scrole of so many iniquities.


The Pastor. Note
As ye reason with your self, and with me, so let it please you to reason
but a little with your God: Come now, said the Lord* and let us reason
together: Though your sins be Isa. 1. 18.
as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimsin,
they shall be as woll: Note
There is no sin so red though it were double dyed, but the virtue of Christ's
Blood can cause it cast its color.


The sick Man. Note
I have no Faith to apply any salve to my sore: I hear your explication of
Gods mercies: But there is none application within me: What better will a man
be that ye set much meat down before him on the Table, if he cannot eat
it?


The Pastor. Note
Many have sit down at Table having their appetit so bound up at the first,
that they abhorred to see meat, and yet little and little have been brought on
first to taste, and thereafter to eat a little, last of all, one piece
brings on another, till they recover their appetit: This is but a disease in
your Soul, which makes it abhor all comforts, as it is said of these that
are bodily sick in the Psalm, Their soul abhors all Psalm. 107. 18
manner of meat, and they draw near the doors of death: What was their
remedy? Earnest prayer to God: Then they cried unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he delivered them from their distresses: Man's extremity is Gods
opportunity. Be of good comfort Sir, have the Faith of God within you: Be
earnest in prayer, and God shall deliver you from all your fears.


The sick Man. Oh, that I had Faith: Oh, that I could pray! I find my griefs
to grow: I spoke never in earnest till now: All other temptations before were
but for carnal things: They were all but sport, in comparison of this of my
sins where with my Soul is pressed and borne down: Note
I take this to be the forebrunt of endless plagues and pains prepared for
the damned: I abhor my self, fie on me: What am I, but a dead Sardian,
Revel. 3. 1 15.
or which is worse, a lukewarm Laodicean neither cold nor hot, a fit
provocation of vomit to my God: It is a vvonder if by this death he vomit me
not out of his Church, for to cast me into Hell: Now what pleasure can I have
of all my sins, where of I am ashamed? Note
All the joys of my bygone life being joined together, counteruaile not the
least part of my present pain.

Alas, Sir, how can I gladly draw near the doors of death, while there be
such impedimentes between me and the doors of Heaven.


The Pastor. I love these lamentations: Note
It is good that a Soul be sensible of sin: Woe to that Soul that is past all
feeling: Blessed be God, that has wakened you out of the slumber of your
sins: Note
Gods wrath ever follows drowsy consciences, for to give them up to the
spirit of slumber, or to sporting spirits, that make men to sport themselves
with their own 2 Pet. 2. 13
deceiuings: Note
It is good that in our afflictions, we consider well the cause; for Affliction
comes not out of the Job. 5. 6.
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground: leremie in this is
plain, Lam. 3. 39
Man suffers for his sins: Note
It is your part to make a careful search for the capital sin, which as ye
think may chiefly be the cause of so great a wrath: Till Achan was found
Israel Ios. 7. 16.
could not stand before their enemies: But say on Sir, let me hear you to
Amen.


The sick Man. God has set all my sins in order before me: I see nothing
but a burning wrath, which Scripture calls, Heb. 12. 29.
a consuming fire: Note
Mine evil thoughts which I ever thought to be free, stand now up in battle
array against mee^ O Lord, why have Isa. 63. 17
thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? I
have no comfort within my Soul: Note
I hear a clamor within my conscience crying unto me, What part or interest
can thou look for in the Kingdom of him whom thou have so highly
dishonored? How can thou be of that number that belongs to the election of
grace? I find my conscience raging within me lik a swelling sea, except some
calm of mercy come, my Soul shall be swallowed up with some fearful surge:
Alas, Sir, what is your counsel: All that is within me is into an vproare,
despare is working within the bowels of my belly.


The Pastor. Note
These secret throwings in the belly are but Gods secret reproues, tokens of
his Love: Note
Such secret checkes are like the rebukes of a Father, taking his Child apart
to some quiet chamber for to admonish him: This is Gods customable doing with
his own Children, if by their open and scandalous sins, they have not moved
ye enemies of God to blaspheme, he will take them to the secret chamber of
their heart, and there apart as it were, after that he has barred the door,
and put all out, he will tell them what they have done: Note
Joseph would not tell before the Egyptians how his Brethren had sold him: But
while he revealed himself to his Brethren, he commanded all others to go
forth: Cause every man, said he, Genesis 45. 1.
to go out from me, and there stood no man with him, while he made himself
known to his Brethren: Note
God would not reprove Job before Elihu and El^phaz his uncharitable friends,
but a part out of the while wind: Job. 38. 1.
After that he had rebuked and scooled his Servant Job in the secret whirle of
the wind, and hade made him to acknowledge his faults, he came to his
friends and told them Job. 41. 7.
that his wrath was kindled against them: Note
After that Peter had thri^e most shamefullie denied his Master Christ, who
heard him so perjuredlie lie, would not reprove him openly before the wicked,
but only turned his eye with a look toward him: With that secret look
which no man perceived but Peter himself, he gave him such a secret check
and nippe of reproof, that Luke 22. 62.
incontinent he went out, and weeped bitterly: * Ye shall find at last Sir,
all these temptations that trouble you within, are but God, taking you apart,
and telling you with Joseph, what ye have done: God is now in the whirle wind
working secretly with you as with Job, till ye be humble in dust and ashes:
Note
All this bitterness which ye find within, is but from a Loue-looke of
Christ, that ye may be saved by weeping bitterly for your sins: Note
Be of good comfort Sir, all these troubles within are but God out of love
whispering some reproofs into your ear for some bygone faults.


The sick man. I wish that it were so: Note
But O, what a stir is this within my Soul? I think those words of God in
Ierimie to be directly said unto me, Thine own wickedness shall correct
Ierm. 2. 19
thee, and thy backslidinges shall reprove thee, know therefore, and see that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and
that my fear is not in thee.


The Pastor. Note
While the dregge and mudde of a melancholious mind is stirred up from the
bottom with grievous temptations, the sinner must spare to judge, till the
Soul be settled: Let that muddie mind of yours first be settled, and ye
shall shortly see that matters are not as they seem to be: When Christ said
to Matthew. 16. 23
Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, it was a speech of glouminesse: But O the
sweet gloumes of Jesus more sweet than the worlds smiles: Let that righteous
reprove me, and it shall Psalm. 141. 5.
be as oil which shall not break mine head: Note
God may seem to be angry at his Darlings, but yet in great love he has
locked up their Salvation, and made it sure in his unchangeable decree.


The sick Man. Mine heart is pricked with pains and grieved with grief: This
is the mischief, I see none out-gate, my Soul is environed with temptations.


The Pastor. The words of S. Peter are comfortable, The Lord knows how to 2
Pet. 2. 9
deliver the godly out of temptations: Note
If your temptations be great, here is matter of joye, ye have a God who
knows how to deliver you. There is no temptation so deadly but God knows
how to cure it: Note
A touch of the garment of Christ's righteousness will anon dry up that flooxe
of blood.


The sick Man. I am so tossed, that I am not able to touch it: Note
I am like a ship in a tempest, seeking its Haven, but cannot come by it;
whiles I am bl^wen to this side and whiles to that side: Thus being driven
hither and thither as with contrary Tides, mine heart quaketh, and my
conscience is in a qualme.


The Pastor. Christ, who in the days of his flesh rebuked the winds, will
calm Matthew. 3. 16.
such qualmes, that your conscience may be at rest: * Though the rolling sea
rage, so that it make the Mariners to reele to and froe, and stagger like
drunken men, yet when they cry unto the Lord, He makes the Psalm. 107. ^ 29.
storms a calm so that the waves thereof are still: He who can still the
waves of waters, can calm the most stirring surgesse of temptations: Note
It is written of the Mariners, that while in the temptest all their cunning is
gone, their last refuge is to their prayers, Then they cried unto the Lord in
their trouble, and he delivers them from their distresses: If your distress
Sir, be like the tempest which cannot be with stood by care or cunning, run
to your God by prayer, confess fully and freely your sins: Suffer no
starting holes or hollownesse in your heart: But work it to sincerity, use
all means for to be friends with your God: Seek earnestly from God, for
the sake of his Chirst, the peace of Conscience.


The sick Man. So I do: Note
But alas, while I seek peace, I hear from God as it were that voice of Iehu
to Iohoram* horseman saying to my Soul, What have thou to do with peace? get
2 Kin. 9. 18
thee behind m^e: What wonder that God be angry with me, who was never
careful to please him? Note
My Soul like a Night-Owle has hated Light, and loved darkness: Such is the
weight of my transgression that I am like to finke through the sward of Gods
wrath: Note
This checketh me sore, that while I sinned, I strove to ouermaster my
conscience arraigning me for my wickedness: When I think of this, ^ think
shame to face the Sun and the Moon.


The Pastor. Note
The more ye be ashamed of your sins, the less ye need to fear
everlasting shame: The Pharisee Luke 18. 11
thought no shame of him self, but bragged of his worth, the Publican could
not face the Heavens for shame: Your part shall be with the Publican, who
returned justified unto his house: He who condemns himself, shall go home
to Heaven with the justice of his God. Cry unto the Lord in your trouble.


The sick Man. I am not able to speak, the force of temptations is like to
shiuer me in pieces: All that is within me is in a fearful vproare: Note
O how fear^full is the rack and gibbet of an evil conscience: The black
scrole of my sins which of before seemed to be enroled, is now unfolded and
laid open, wherein every letter seems huge, great like a mountain: Every
day is a death unto me, all my counts are out of order, there is not a string
in mine heart in a right tune: What are sinners, but stubble? Gods sentence is,
Burn them: Note
Alas, that while I sinned, I weighed not the following woe: I have brewed my
grief, and now I must drink in sorrow.


The Pastor. Note
One thing I perceive Sir, that your grief must have vent, till ye have
disburdened your self with tears and complaints, ye can not admit any
comfort.


The sick Man. There is no doloure lik to my doloure: The arrows of the Lords
wrath are within me, whereof my Spirit drinks the poison.


The Pastor. Note
These arrows are not arrows of wrath, but of warning, like the arrows of
Jonathan, shot for to drive David from the fury of Saul: Note
Hear the Spirit crying with Jonathan, Are 1 Samuel 20. 37
they not beyond thee? Gods arrows are flowen over you, are they not beyond
you? There is no danger.


The sick Man. Note
My sins which once seemed little like mots, begin now to swell, and to
become thicker than mountains: I have no peace within: In my Soul is kindled
an unquenchable fire, in it is the fuel of everlasting burnings: Note
Often have I posted off my sins in the lump with a slubbert general
confession: Now rests nothing within me but fear distrust and qualm^s of
Conscience.


The Pastor. Be strong in God Sir: Hope in his mercy, believe in him, though
he should stay you: Note
If ye will not Isa. 7. 9.
believe, says Isaiah, surely ye shall not be established: While the woman
of Canaan was making request to Christ for her Daughter, she found Christ at
the first to be very harsh and sour, in calling her a Dog: But that little
blast being once blown out for the humbling of her Soul, she heard
incontinent these words of comfort, O woman, great is thy Faith: Be it unto
thee Matthew. 15 28.
even as thou will: Note
Gods face may seem grimne for a space, but there is but a moment in his
wrath: though he should slay you, yet must ye trust in him: In your hurt ye
must hope for his help.


The sick Man. Note
My strongest hope is but a stinging fear: My greatest confidence is but
trembling of conscience: Note
It seems to me, that there is one knocking at the door of mine heart and
crying in a voice, Is Faith here? Is love within? Is one called the fear of
God into this place? Is the Spouse of Christ in this heart? Alas, what can I
say, having such an ouglie Soul within me? Can Christ the Spouse of the
Church love such a Soul as mine, which is like a bleare or squint eyed Leah?
can the dark night beguile him, that he should take such a loathsome Leah for
a beautiful Rachel?

Note
If Death now overtake me, I look for fire and faggot, the fuel of
everlasting burninges: Oh, my Faith faints, and mine hope houereth: What say
ye Sir? Does not your heart pity to see me in such a plunge? Note
Yet for all this I must justify God: All this is righteouslie come upon me,
though his wrath should so settle upon me, that thereby my bones should be
crushed like these eighteen who were slain under the tower of Siloe, Luke 13.
4
to God should belong righteousness, but to me open shame and Dan. 9. 8.
confusion of face.


The Pastor. Note
Shame of face for sin is the beginning of grace in a sinner; wait upon the
Lord a little, and he shall make his mercy to appear like a morning light,
at the break of day all the night shadows of temptations shall flee away, and
Christ the Sun of Righteousness, shall arise and Mal. 4. 2.
shine upon your Soul with his blessed beams: This shall make your Soul like
a Bird on a bush wellcomming the morning with a song for joye that the night is
past.


The Sick Man. Note
Satan alas, has so hood-winked my Soul with my sins, that I cannot get a
sight of mercy, the sense of my sins gives mine heart many a cold pull: I
fear to die in despair: What say ye Sir? Does not your heart pity me?


The Pastor. The Lord pity you, and give me an heart to pray for you: The
Lord put the words into my mouth, that may comfort your comfortless Soul in
this Iingring trial: Have patience in your pain, sin is like a rotten
tooth, the deeper root it has in the jaws, the more painful it is in the
drawing. Continue Sir to discover your sore; if the boil of such corruption
be ripe, I shall lance it, that such filthy matter may be cleansed away: I
pray God so to direct me, that I may prove a Surgeon cunning in this cure; if
there be any thing as yet that troubles you, conceal it not, if ye think
that my comforts may be helpful unto you: Note
Many are more ashamed to confess a fault, than to commit a sin. What is
this that grieueth you now Sir?


The sick Man. The wrath of God affrayeth me; Note
His anger is like a Lion, which can not be tamed: My sin is past, but
punishment is to come: Note
Terrors cry out of the fire, Thy pleasures now are ended, now thou must suffer
pains: From the top of the pinnacle of all thy preferments, come down to the
dungeon of darkness, because thou have fallen down before the god of this
world, go down, go 2 Cor 14. 4
down to him, whom thou on earth have worshipped: These be the terrors of
God, standing in battle array against me, which make me to fling all
comfortes from me: My Soul is possessed with a slavish fear.

Note
Indeed I must confess, that I am much beholden unto God, for so large a time
of repentance: But alas. I have neglected it, yea, and obstinatlie have kicked
against my Maker: Note
So now I find by doolefull sense, that I remain into the guilt; my Soul is
so sick with this that I cannot tell: Note
All comfortes are unto it like a dead potion into the stomach which has no
virtue to work: God thinks me not worthy of comfort: For while I was in
prosperity, I was so covered over Isa. 29. 10
with the spirit of slumber, that I would not be warned nor wakened by the
voice of Gods Trumpeters, sounding judgments, as sons of thunder, Note
Because I misregarded Boanarges the Sons of Thunder, God will not daine me
with a Barnabas, a Son of consolation. Now behold Sir, what grieueth me,
what say ye for my comfort?


The Pastor. Note
I rejoice from mine heart not in your grief, but in that ye are so grieved
for your sins: God in mercy by such sorrow does whet up your desires after
him: Note
The Child by a knock and a fall knows his own weakness, and perceives
the need of his Nourse: I rejoice to see you humbled with the sense of your
sins under the hand of God, I am comforted to see you humbled, let this
humility be a comfort to your self: It is good to be of a humble and contrit
Spirit: To whom will Isa. 66. 2.
I look? said the Lord, even to him that is of a contrit Spirit, and trembles
at my word: Note
The more a man be humbled he is nearer to be justified: The Publica^ a little
before he was justified, was knocking upon his breast, and crying to God for
mercy to him a miserable man: Note
The more humble a man be, he is the Luke 18. 13
farther from the dint and danger of Gods judgments.


The sick Man. By your discourse Sir, it would seem that a cast down Soul
with its own unworthiness, is in less danger of judgment, than these who
are high lifted up in their own conceit.


The Pastor. It is most certain: Note
The humble and ye proud are like these seeds that were sown in Egypt, when
the plague of hail came, the Flax and the Barley Exodus 9. 31
were smitten, says the Scripture, for the Barley was in the ear, and the
Flax was bolled: But the Wheat and verse. 32.
the Rye were not smitten, for they were not grown up: The wicked in time of
wrath are lik Flax and Barley, because they are lifted up, they are smitten,
they are in the ear, yea, and bolled in their pride, and therefore cannot
escape: But as for the humbled heart of the godly man, it is lik the Wheat and
Rye, the best corn: It is not smitten because it is not grown up, but lies
humble before the Lord: Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni:
Humiliation makes the Lion to spare his adversary: God is pleased and
pacified so soon as he sees a man humbled in heart: Ahah had killed 1 King.
21 19.
and after also had taken possession Note
Yet so soon as he humbled himself in Sack, though all his humility was
but outward, the Lord looked upon him, and would have Elijah to see it also,
See thou, said the Lord verse. 29.
to his Prophet, how Ahah has humbled himself before me: Because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring this evil in his days.

Bless God Sir, for your humbled heart, yet rely never upon any grace that is
within your self, let Gods mere mercy alone be your strength and your stay:
Note
The least opinion of our own worth is a frost which nippeth Repentance in the
blossom.


The sick Man. Think ye Sir, that before a man win to Heaven, that he must
be racked and riuen as I am with fearful temptations?


The Pastor. Note
Before the most part of the Elect can enjoy these joys that are above, they
are not only racked with pain, but also as it were racked through hell: There
must first be an hell in the conscience with the sense of our sins, we must
have a sight of wrath, before we enter into Gods Rest: Note
Heaven is not win with a wish: Christ says, that it suffers violence, and
that the violent Matthew. 11. 12.
take it by force: Through many tribulations and afflictions we must enter
into it: The Crown is after a course of crosses.


The sick Man. I am haled away with the strong stream of temptations: I
cannot think, that if God loved me, he would suffer me to be thus way
tread under foot like dust, with such fearful temptations: O how fearful
is the cross upon the Conscience!


The Pastor. These whom GOD loves best, he chasteneth: Note
The loving Mother will run upon her dearest Daughter with her feet, if she
perceive her to be given to folly: God treads not upon his own, but for
profit: Note
The Godly are like Saffron or Camomile, which grow the better the more they
be trodden down: Grace must gripe Nature till it gasp.


The sick Man. Mine heart is strained and squised with grief: O the heavy
weight of my sins, which hang so fast on! Note
I am like a tired horse that feign would be rid of his burden.


The Pastor. To be tired of sin, is a token that ye shall be shortly
delivered: Note
He who is tired with sin, is tired, not to be a drudge of sin: Note
Sin is not heavy to the Wicked, because it is in them as water in its own
element, though it be of weight, yet it weighs not: Well is the wearied
Soul, it has Christ's promise of ease: But woe to them Matthew. 11. 28
who with Laodicea, have need of no thing: For the most part, men are drowned
in drowsinesse: Security is far more dangerous than despair: As was sung of
Saul and of David, so may be here, Despair has slain her thousand, but
Security her ten thousand: Many are not wakened till they be so wakened,
that their judgment and senses are lost.

It is a fearful curse for a man to bless himself, while he should mourn
for his sins: Such as bless themselves, while the Lord pronounces the
words of the curse, The Lord will not be merciful to that Deuteronomy. 29. 20
man: Note
Security has shaken hands with Hell and Death: But well is him who fears
always: Note
He is greatest in Gods sight, who is least in his own eyes.


The sick Man. But alas, Sir, my conscience speaks home, that I have been a
stranger from my God: O but I am wearied, how shall I be delivered from this
burden of bondage?


The Pastor. These who are ladened and wearied, may hear Christ in his Gospel
crying unto them, Come unto me Matthew. 11. 29.
Go to him who cries so lovingly, Come: Strive above all things, to get a
sight of your Savior, by the eye of Faith: Urge upon your heart a deep
meditation of his mercy, his merits are able to cure our maladies.


The sick Man. Note
There is such a mist between me and the Messiah, that it is not possible for
me to see him. Oh, that my eyes were cleared with Gods Eyesalue, that I might
clearelie be hold Revel. 3. 10
him!


The Pastor. Note
The great desire ye have to see him is a sort of sight: Note
All men see not Christ alike: All go not up to the mount with Peter, James,
and John: Matt. 17. 1.
All see not God face to face with Moses: Exodus 33, 11.
All men lay not their head in Christ's bosom, with his best beloved Ioh. 13. 23
Disciple; Be not discouraged: though ye cannot win so near to Christ, as ye
would: Note
If ye cannot win to him for to embrace him, as Simeon Luke 2. 8,
did strive to touch the border of his garment behind with ye finger of faith
Luke 8. 44
and it shall stay the bloody flux of your Sins: Note
Ye sigh for a sight of Christ * A sigh for a sight of him, is a sight of him
indeed: Note
He who would be found of these that sought him not will be much more found of
these that seek him, and sigh for him: Be of good heart: Note
Though for a space your spiritual day be mistie, yet at last your drumly sky
shall be cleared: Note
Christ is not ever absent, while he is not seen: The Sun as we see will be
covered with a cloud, and the Moon will be under wake, but incontinent
thereafter, the clouds being ouer-blowen, we enjoye their brightness and
their beams: What shall be able to separate a Christian from the Love of his
Christ? Note
What then shall be able to make a Christian soul despair? Shall Damnation?
No, For Christ Gods* Luke 2. 30.
Salvation is ours: Shall Hell? No, For our Christ has Revel. 3. 7.
the keys both of Heaven and of Hell: Shall the World? No, For Christ has
Ioh. 16. 33.
overcome the World: Shall the Law? No, For our Christ has Matthew. 3 15.
fulfilled the Law. Shall Death? No, For our Christ Ioh. 14. 6.
is the Way and the Life: Shall the Fathers wrath? No, For Isa. 63. 3.
He has trodden the wine press of his wrath for you, and for all repenting
sinners: Note
All Scripture points at him, saying, Isa. 30. 21.
This is the way, walk ye in it: Run Sir to him, and he shall deliver you from
all your sins, and from all your fears: Strive to curb your own
corruptions which are so broodie within you.


The sick Man. I cannot alas, be quite of my sins: I strive to run away
from them, but the faster they follow me, like curre Dogs that are so
accustomed to follow their Master they will not be boasted home again: Where
ever I go with my thoughts above or below, my sins follow hard after me:
Note
Though I threaten them, though I boast them, yea, betimes entreat them to
depart, their answer is, We are thy works, we will go with thee. This
puts my Soul out of peace and order, and thrusts me away from Deuteronomy. 13.
10.
the Lord; my God: I have been long seeking and sighing for comforts: But as
yet I can espy none appearance.


The Pastor. Comforts sought sought, and sighed for, are not aye seen at the
first: Note
Elijahs servant went up the hill Carmell eight several times to espy some
appearance of rain: The first seven times he could see nothing, and at the
eight he saw but a little cloud of comfort: Behold said he, there arises a
little cloud out of 1 Kin. 1^. 44.
the sea, like a man's hand: A little after that, the heavens were blake with
verse. 45.
clouds and wind, and there was a great rain.

Note
Hold your face Sir a little space with Elijah between your knees, and 1 Kin.
18. 42.
cast your self down upon the Earth, as he did, that is, fall down in all
humility of Soul before your God in prayer: That done, send up your prayer
the spiritual spy unto the top of the hill: Note
Send it again and again, ever till it espy some little cloud of comfort: If
your Soul take pains in prayer till ye perceive but an hand breadth of
mercy, at last Gods comfortes shall rain down in great abundance upon your
wearied Spirit: What shall I say, if ye will not be informed ye cannot be
reformed.


The sick Man. Indeed that is a pleasant and fit comparison, worthy to be
printed with a Note on the margent: It has been well adapted by you* Oh, that
it could be as well applied by me: Oh, that the Lord, whose love expels
fear, would strengthen my weak Faith with an handbreath, of his mercy: O for
such a little cloud of comfort, it would lif^ Heb. 12. 12
up mine hands which hang down, and strengthen my weak knees: But in steed
of such a comfortable cloud, I see nothing but clouds of w^ath, ready to
fall and become a deludge of vengeance: from my birth, I must not dissemble, I
have dallied with my God, and have despised the gracious day of his
visitations: Note
And now all my comforts resemble to the Eagle, that takes her to her wings,
and flies aloft high into the Sky, from my sinful reach: O fear! O horror!
O the multitude of my transgressions! how shall I be quiet?


The Pastor. The best way to be quite of sin, yt it reign not in us, is to
bend up our hearts to Christ, who is Emmanuel, Isa. 7. 14.
God with us: Though all be worthy to be damned, yet there is no condamnation
Romans 8. 1
to these that are in Christ: Note
He is that heaue-offering, which we must ever hold and heave up like a
buckler between Gods wrath and our sinful Souls: In what case find ye your
Conscience to be for the present?


The sick Man. One deep calls to another deep at the noise of Gods water
Spouts* Psalm. 42. 7
My sorrow is like the Sea, it ebbeth and it flows: As I have swimmed through
one deep temptation, I fall into another that is deeper: My brain is turned
with a whirling giddiness.


The Pastor. Note
There is no such deepnesse either in our sins or in our troubles, but the
mercy of God in Christ shall be able to ouer-reach it by innumerable
fathomes: S. Paul said, that he was assured, that neither high nor depth shall
be able to separate us from the love of God.

Note
Though affliction rain down upon us like water falling from spouts, they may
well wash us, but shall not be able to drown us: Note
A godly man should not be afraid for a spo^ full of bitter waters: Note
Though the waters of the sea roar and be troubled* Though the Mountains
shake with the swelling thereof, yea, though the surges thereof should boast
the clouds, here is the faithful man's Psalm. 46. 4.
comfort, There is a river the streams whereof shall make glad the City of
God: Note
Though the Mediterranean Sea, yea, the great Ocean with its surges, should
boast Gods Jerusalem, a little river or brook, a Kidron of Gods grace sending
out streams of comfortes like the waters of Siloe shall make glad the City of
God.


The sick Man. Note
But how shall I pass through to Canaan, behold, before me what floodes of
iniquities ouerflowing Ier. (...)
their banks as in the swelling of Jordan: Such fearful floodes ru^ between
me and Heaven (...) place* appointed for my (...)


The ^our* Note
(...) ^oake with the garment (...) Christ's righteousness will divide the
floodes of Belial, as Elisha divided the Jordan by striking it with the mantle
of Elijah, that he might 2 King. 2. 14.
safely pass through: Note
Christ's merits are like the Arc, which made the Jordan to go back, for to
make Ioh. 3. 16
a way for Israel unto Canaan: Note
Our hearts like the Priests, must stand hard by the side of this Arc, till
all our affections the Lords Armies be come through the swelling Jordan of Ier.
12. 5.
grievous afflictions.


The sick Man. While I behold my self, I abhor my self: Note
The eye of my God sees me, and what am I, but like a bemired Dog trodde by
Satan into the puddle of perdition? Alas, when good motions came into ^e
heart, I crosed them with my lusts* Now cursed be my lusts.

I am so filth^* that I abhor my self, my sins are so (...), that nothing
is able to make them (...)


The Pastor. Know ye Sir what God said of old in Isaiah? Come now, and let
us ^sa. 1. 18.
reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow, though they be red l^k crimsin, they shall be as vvoole: If ye could
but reason a little with God, ye should find this to be true: There is no
sin, which Christ's blood is not able to purge: Note
What ever your sin be, if ye can repent, he can forgive: Note
Christ can do any thing butthis* he cannot save him that will not repent:
Seeing ye know him to be infinite in mercy* have all your recourse to him;
Note
Take once a proof of his mercy: Humble your self at his feet, and see
whether or not there be mercy with him that he may be feared.

Note
The servants of Benhadad knowing that the Kings of Israel were merciful
Kings: Put sack-clot^ upon 1 Kin. 20. 31.
their loins, and ropes upon their heads, for to seek man's mercy, which also
they found: Note
Shall man find mer^ into the narrow bowels of a man, and (...) he bound the
holy One of Israel? Note
Christ who is not only true, but Truth it self has said, Whatsoever ye
shall ask Ioh. 14 12.
in my Name, that will I do: Note
He who is true may lie, but Truth can not lie.


The sick Man. That is truth: While I consider your comfortes for the
distressed Soul, Note
I think that all your purpose points chiefly at Christ, as though he
alone were the ground of Grace: Let me hear I pray you more at large, what
Christ is unto us.


The Pastor. He is Emmanuell, God with us, Matthew. 1. 2^
God with man, God in Man, God-Man: In Him God and Man, are but one Person: Our
life is hid with Christ Col. 3. 3.
in God: Note
Because we did eat of the forbidden Fruit, He was hanged upon a cursed
tree: He has borne us such a love as is unspeakable: Note
What tongue (...) form words sufficie^ ^or to express the least part of the
same?

By the conduite pype of his Humanity Grace for Grace has been conueighed to
our graceles Souls, who can express his Love, he loves us to the end, and
of his Love there is none end.

Note
This I will say, That he has borne to man such a love, that has made all
mankind like a Banquerupt, so far unable to pay the principle, that though
man should love his Savior withal his might and his mind, yet should he not
pay so much as the interest of so great a love: No, though he should give his
body to be brunt for the honor of his Name: No, though he should for his sak
have his name if it were possible, scraiped out of the Book of Life: Note
Though all our Souls should suffer for his honor the everlasting pains of
the damned, all these pains were not to be counted the interest of his pains
for us: Note
It is more that a Prince get a deadly hurt in a Battle, tha^ that a thousand
common Soldiers were slain: Note
It is more that the Prince of Heaven suffered upon the cross but an hour,
than that a thousand worlds had been cast into a thousand hells, for to be
tormented for ever Note
There is no proportion in suffering between the creature and him who was both
God and Man into one person.

Note
O then, what can be the interest of that principal love, that moved God to
die for man? Note
Let this be like a Bell ringing for to waken your drowsy Soul: Let your
Soul like John lean upon the blessed bosom of Jesus: Have ever your eye upon
this Mercie-seat.


The sick Man. Is it only then in Christ, Sir, that Salvation is to be
found? All Scripture would ye say, does leauell at him.


The Pastor. The Scripture is plain: There is Act. 4. 12
none other Name given under heaven among men, whereby we must be saved* He
is full of the bowels of love; He is that only Savior, pointed out by both
the Testaments: Note
Like as the two Cherubims, though severed one from another, yet looked one
toward another, and both upon the Mercy seat: Even so the Old and New
Testament look one toward another, and yet point at one and the same Christ,
the marrow and kernel of man's Salvation* Note
All Religion is in this, that we know Christ: This is man's Salvation, to know
Christ and him crucified: Note
By 1 Cor. 2. 2
his Blood the Bill and Bond of the Law, is crossed and cancelled: Note
He is that Carcass whereunto all faithful Souls like Eagles must resort:
He Matthew. 24 28
is our refuge against the dint of Gods wrath: The Spouse could not come up
from the wilderness, but by leaning upon her beloved, Christ. Cant. 8, 5


Note
As the Propitiatory covered the Tables of the Law, that were in the Arc, so
Christ covered our sins against these Tables: Note
As the cloud covered the Israelites from the fight of Pharaoh hotelie
following after them, so Christ's righteousness like a cloud covered us from
the judgments of God his fiery wrath pursuing us.

Note
Let men cover themselves never so carefully, still some part of them shall
peep bare, until Christ come with the covering of his righteousness.

Note
If by the temptations of Satan your Soul has been ruffled or galled upon
the sore: The best balm that ever dropped from the pen of Gods Spirit upon the
leaves of his Sacred Book, is the History of Christ's Bloody passion: There
we may see the dearest mercies that ever moved the relenting bowels of Gods
tenderest compassions.

Note
Behold the Sacred Blood of that unspotted Lamb, which saved the Souls of
those that spilt it.

Note
If ye be pined with Corrasius of terror, in him are Cordials of
compassions, the only salve for the sores of the Soul Note
Though ye were covered with scarlet abominations, Isa. 1. 18.
here is virtue whereby ye shall be made whiter than the snow: Note
Did he not pray for them, yea, did he not save them, who by bitter railing,
discharged upon him the utmost of their gall?


The sick man. Such men at last were pricked in Act. 2. 37
their hearts they truly repented: Note
Their sighs and sobs were supported and sinewed with the strength of Grace:
Such men became godly indeed: But I did never pass the pitch of formal
piety: I ever desired more to seem godly, than so to be: I have been
betimes sore shaken with awful terrors: Note
But I never yet could say, that the softening blood of Jesus did melt my
marble heart.

Note
What ever had I, but some light of reason and glimmerings of general grace,
which cannot soar so high, as to conuoy the soul to the doors of Heaven? Note
The word of saving grace implanteth it self into the heart of the godly man:
He only is furnished with a resolute and vnswayed uprightness.

Note
Alas, alas, alas, mine heart is thrown with a sore wringing: There is a large
harvest for Hell, many called but few chosen.


The Pastor. What shall I say? Note
Man's thoughts are framed into a sinful mould Note
The silly sons of Adam are wonderfully tossed with the contrary Tyd^ of
Satan's temptations: Some he benumeth with the sweetness of Sec^ritie, others he
troubles with the tartennesse of terrors: Note
O but Satan's Balow is sweet to the Soul in the craddle of Security! But O
how dreadful shall he be when he appearing grisly and fierce unto the
Soul, shall waken it with a cry and a glowre saying, Damned soul come out to
fire, and faggot, come out to vnqueancheable brimstone beams, come out to
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Note
A man after this manner wakened in conscience, is like a man wakened out of
his sleep on a sudden: At the first he is in such a maze, that till he be
better wakened he cannot well understand what is said to him: All his thoughts
are into an hurly burly: Then his outward rebellions, and his inward
repynings, with all his abominations seem to fall down upon him like clouds
of blood: Note
There be no comforts that can settle his fears, till the Spirit of grace
appear unto him in the calm.

Look up with your eye Sir, and seek a blinke of the face of Jesus: He
only is the Prince and Price of our Peace, our joye, and our liberty: If the
Son make us free, we Ioh. 8. 36.
shall be free indeed: Wrestle with him, use violence in an holy boldness:
vis Deo grata.

In him are the lasting treasures of mercy and immortality: Note
He it is only who can make this biting Conscience to be toothlesse, he
only can command this raging sea: I know Sir, that your sorrows are sore,
and my Soul pittieth you, for I see you in the very pangs and terrors of the
new birth: I perceive your Soul gasping for grace, as the dry and thirsty
ground for drops of rain.


The sick Man. O the boisterous blastes of temptations, able to make the
tallest and deepest rooted Cedars to stagger, yea, the Sirion to skippe like an
Unicorn: What shall I do?


The Pastor. Seeing Christ alone is our protection and perfection, let all
your courage be in him: Note
In him ye must be valiant, for none but the valiant can by violence enter
into the Kingdom of God: If a man know Christ well, he shall not be
discouraged though he were cast into a raging sea of temptations: Note
Though a man were cast into a gulf of twenty fathom deep, if he can keep
his head aloft, he cannot be drowned: Note
So as long as Christ our Head is above, we his members may well be dowked,
but we cannot be drowned: All Christian comforts run upon him like the
title of a Book, wherein is contained the substance of the whole.

If Christ Sir be yours, ye cannot perish: He who is rooted in him, can
never be rooted out.


The sick Man. But how can Christ be mine, seeing I am but a bag of
corruption and a body of Death? What has mine heart been, but like a vipers
belly, filled with a deadly brood? Miserable man that I am, will Christ ever
daine to look upon such a vile wretch as I am, who has turned my Christian
liberty in a fleshly license.


The Pastor. These who are least into their own eyes, are in greatest account
with him: Note
When ye hear of the wandering sheep brought home, and of Matthew. 18. 13
the lost groat found, and of the forlorn Luke 15. 8
Son returned to his Father: Luke 15, 18.
Ye should cast your figure and say, Of whom is this written but of me? for
whom is it written but for me?

Note
If ye stick fast by him, no perrell shall make an hair of your Matthew. 19.
30.
head to perish: Be of good comfort, for your life is hid with Christ in God.
Colos. 3. 3



The sick Man. I am so vile, that hardly darre I presume to think that Christ
would die for such a filthy rotten creature as I am, who from the sole of tbe
Isa. 1. 6.
foot to the crown of the head, is filled with botches, boiles, and
putrefying sores: Note
When I behold my self into the glass of Gods Law, I abhor the monstrous face
of my Soul: Note
I am one of those in whom Satan has parbreaked, and spewed the spawne of all
sorts of sin: Of all sinners, I am the first: Note
For I have not sinned of ignorance, but of knowledge, against the light of my
mind, against the voice of my God, against the workings of his Spirit, and
against the cries of mine own Conscience: This is my greatest fear, that I
have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace. Heb. ^0. 29
This strikes widest wounds into my Soul, and makes all the bowels of my
belly to wamble. O fie, fie, what a filthiness is within this heart of* mine:
Note
The small moats move not thicker in the Sun, than sins of all sorts have
reeled to and froe in this wicked heart of mine, which is nothing, but a nest
of Spiders, and a cage of corruptions.

Note
O what a shameful discovery should this be, if mine heart were as well
seen as my face! If all the monsters of my meditations were set in open view,
if the eyes of men could spy out what thoughts have been within my breast
since I was borne: If all the men of Afric a place most fertile of Monsters,
were taken to be witness, they would plainly declare that the Earth cannot
bring forth such Monsters as are bredde into the heart of man.

Note
O the great mercy of God, who to the end that man may live with man, has
hid the heart of man from men! O my God, though thou have sieled the eyes of
man, that he cannot see within my breast, thine eyes, which see our thoughts a
far off, perceive most clearlie all my bygone abominations. To Thee alone
belongs the discovery of a closed heart: Would I be dashed if the eye of a
sinner took me at an evil turn, and shall I not be ashamed when I remember
how the eye of my God has followed me in all mine evil ways?

Alas, my dear Pastor, ye speak much to me of Christ and of his death, but
what portion can such a vile stinking creature as I, have with Christ? I have
delayed all to the afternoon, and now my Sun is ready for to set: The black
night of darkness is posting upon my soul.

My Soul refuses all sorts of comforts: I think that it shall die in the
very grippes of such bloody temptations: Behold, and consider if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow.


The Pastor. Note
I know Sir, that no sort of men are sooner or sorer touched for their sins,
than are the best children of God: Satan is most busy to blow at the coal of
their corruptions.

Note
And again, there be no sort of men more ready to appropriate to themselves
the comforts of God, than they to whom they least belong.

But yet Sir, seeing ye are sick in Soul, ye must not refuse spiritual
Physic: Christ is the only comfort against the guilt of sin: Note
His blood is the only trayacle against the poison of this pest: Note
But can any comfort avail to him that will not receive it? As meat set upon
the Table cannot nourish, except that it be put into the mouth, and from
thence be sent down to the stomach: So, neither can the words of comfort
feed the heart, Nitraijciantur in viscera nostrae animae Bernard.
and transeant in affectiones nostras, except that they enter into the bowels
of our Soul, and pass through unto our affections: Your Spirit is so knappish
and way-ward, that it will not admit the most solid comforts: The mark of
Christ's Lambs is an eare-marke: My sheep hear my voice. Ioh. 10. 27.



The sick Man. But think ye Sir, that I can be one of Gods, who have been
so great a sinner? My Soul is sick to the death with surfets of sin: Can
Gods Spirit abide where there is so great corruption? Note
Can two Guestes of so contrary nature, dwell together in one man?


The Pastor. They may indeed, though they cannot agree: Note
Grace and corruptions may be into the heart of a man, as Israel was with the
Iebusites, Hiuites, and Perezites, into Canaan: But as Israel wasted these
Nations by little and little, so the Spirit of God with grace by little and little
rooteth out, wastes, and foileth these nations of sin that are within us:
But not all at once. Note
Lest we should grow idle, and roust for want of such spiritual exercise.

Note
The heart of a godly man is like the house of Abraham, where Isaac and Ismael
lodge together: Though for a space they tarry together, at death the old
scorning Ismael shall be cast out: He shall not inherit the promise with
Isaac the laughing man.

Note
If Sir ye find a wresling within your heart, some new working, which once
ye did not perceive, it is a token that grace is conceived in your soul: Note
After that a woman has conceived, she will find some times a working about the
heart, provoking to vomit: It is so with ye heart of a regenerat man, so soon
as grace is conceived into it, it will ouercast til it cast and vomit out many
filthy corruptions: Note
Though Jacob be little and weak and at the first seem not to be a peregall
unto the rugh man, who is full of strength, yet at last he shall catch him by
the heel, and ouerturne him in a moment: Wait but a little, and ye shall be
utterly out of the reach of all the powers of Hell.


The sick Man. I tremble all with fear, that the Lord cast me off and banish
out of the Land of the living this filthy festered Soul.


The Pastor. God is more merciful, than man can conceive him to be: Can a
mother Isa. 49. 15
forget her Child? that she have no compassion? says the Lord: Note
A loving Father will be loath to cast his Child out of doors in a deadly
disease: If these who are evil can give Matthew. 7. 11
good things unto their Children, how much more will that Father who is
goodness it self, give the holy Spirit with all other good things to these
who will seek then? cry to God in prayer.


The sick Man. Note
Alas, the sorrow of mine heart lameth the liberty of my tongue, my words
cannot express the groans of my grief.


The Pastor. Though ye be not able to utter words, sigh with your heart
unto God: Note
God heard Moses his sighs, like cries: Why cryest thou to me? Exodus 14. 15
said God to the sighing man: Note
A sigh out of a soft melting heart, is a powerful prayer before God.


The sick Man. I am both sinful and senseless: Though I have sinned most
hainouslie, yet I find no melting in mine heart: Note
All the tears of my repentance within me are become like a frozen moisture:
I cannot so much as wring out one drop thereof: Note
Oh, that they were so melted, that they might rush out at the floodgates of
mine eyes, that thereof I might with the sinful woman make a bath for the
feet of my Lord! Oh Luke 7. 44
that mine heart were formed into another mould! Note
Oh that I could in his presence drench my Soul in a shower of tears! O how
precious is the sense of a revealed and a reconcealed God! Note
I find my self so ycie and cold, yea, so benumbed and blockish, as though I
were void of all sense of grace: What can this be?


The Pastor. Note
He who finds himself benumbed is not altogether senseless: Note
In such a man there must be some stirring of the pulse of a spiritual life:
A dead man knows not that he is dead, no more does a dead soul: A seared
conscience feels not defertions: Note
That man has the beginning of grace, who can say from his heart, I have no
grace in my self, but only to find that I have no grace.

Note
This we must all know, that the best of Gods Saints will be troubled with
temporal desertions, as Jonah was, while he was wrapped with waves and with
weeds in the bottom of the sea: Out of this belly of hell they will cry to
God, Why have thou made us to err from thy ways? Isa. 63. 17
and hardened our heart from thy fear? Note
Most godly Souls may swarfe in sin, but they cannot die in their sins: Note
A spiritual man may be do^ked in a sea of sin or sorrow, but can never be
drowned: At last God shall Iona. 2. 6.
make him sing with Jonah, Yet have thou brought up my life from corruptions, O
Lord, my God: Note
The spiritual life and light which God has once put into the Soul of man,
can never be totallie extinguished: Gods graces and his gifts are without
repentance: To. 11. 29.
Judas from horror may rin to the halter, but Peter cannot perish.


The Sick Man. Think ye then Sir, that a man cannot fall from the grace of
God, if once he has been received in Grace? Note
may not Grace like some plants for a space take root, and thereafter wither?
May not God begin a good work into a man, and after leave it imperfect?


The Pastor. Note
Gods working in the godly is not like the doing of him that begins to
build an house before he Luke 14. 29
count his cost, but is not able to finish it: I am confident of this very
Philip. 1. 6
thing, said S. Paul, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: Note
Gods spiritual gifts and graces which are without repentance, come never
within the compass of Gods Reuocation. * 1 Samuel 10 24
God will make Saul a King, and again 1 Samuel 15 11
repent that ever he was crowned, and thereafter will put him from his
kingdom: He will lend out a Mat. 25. 28.
Talent and after take it back again: Note
He will give to man a tongue, and thereafter make him dumb: He will Luke 1.
20.
give Health, Wealth, Riches, and Job. 1. 21.
after take all back again: The Lord has given and the Note
Lord has taken, may be said of al things except of his spiritual and
special graces: These he gives once, but never takes them back again: Note
Sin indeed will waken and diminish the sense and feeling of their operation,
but can never take them quite away. Note
Grace in a godly Soul will be Isa. 42. 3.
betimes like flax smoking without a flamme, or like embers under an heap of
ashes: Though all seem to be dead out, yet there is some little secret spunke
within which shall never be quenched: Note
New sins I confess are very dangerous, they will wonderfully impair the
sense of mercy into faithful Souls, yea, so that to their judgment the
Spirit of God will seem altogether to have forsaken them, Note
But yet into their most desperate-like-cry there is a My of Faith in their
prayer, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken Mat^h. 27 46
me?

Note
Grace in a godly Soul will be like sap into an Oak or Elm in the frostie
days of December, hid close within the bark: Note
While Christ the Sun of righteousness remoueth Malach 4. 2.
his hot beams from the faithful Soul, the Soul drouppeth like an Herb
into a winter day.

Note
Grace like sap runs in to the heart and there lurketh for a spoke: Note
But again, so soon as this Sun begins to return with the heat and
health of his countenance in a new Springtime, then will appear again first
bude, then blossoms, then flourishes, and after fruits: That which was hid of
before, is incontinent perceived: Note
As seed now cast into the ground seems to be a dead thing, and yet has
life in it, so is Gods grace alive and quickening when it seems far
otherwise: Note
In a sown a man lives, though he seem to be dead.

Note
The life of God in a man can never altogether be choked with sin: Our
misery is not able to ouer-reach his mercy.

Note
A sparkle of fire should be more able to burn up the sea, than man's sins
for to dry up the blood of his mercy: Note
Where grace is begun a man may fall, but he can never fall away.

Note
If Sir, ye have found once the life of God within your Soul, ye have
received a sure pledge and pawn of immortality, say to your Soul, And now my
Soul return unto thy Psalm. 116. 7
rest.


The sick Man. There is no rest within me: I am alas, as a man upon a raging
Sea, tumbled and tossed with such fearful temptations, which make all the
bowels of my belly to wamble.


The Pastor. Sea sickness Sir, is sore while it lasts: Note
But many seek this sickness for to cure them of a worse: Take courage; God
has embarked you into this temptation, for to cause you cast out some
corruptions which lie and lurk about your heart. Note
Be content to tarry a little space upon the Firth, till the filth of you
stomach be clean purged away: Assure your self that all this sore sickness
shall work your health in the latter end, which shall cause your to sing, For
his mercy endures for ever. Psalm 57. 1.
In the shadow of Gods wings make your refuge, until these calamities pass
over.


The sick Man. I am ever in great doubt of my self.


The Pastor. Note
Though ye doubt of your self, ye must not doubt of Gods kindness and
compassions: Note
If ^e doubt that God can be merciful to your sins, ye deny your Creed
wherein ye see forgiuennesse of sin to be an express Article of Faith.

Note
Though for some space ye be troubled with doubts, at last ye shall know by
his Spirit within that Christ was no more willing to suffer for sinners, than
he shall prove both willing and able to save you: Gods custom is to choose
the hardest way for the best end, partly for to prove his power, partly for
to try our trust.


The sick Man. I wish it be so: But for the present I find a fear within me
which makes my Soul to tremble: Note
I ever think that hardly can it be that the Spirit of God would dwell into
mine heart, which is a very cage of corruption: Note
If the men of God, when they see bordels, abhor them, and go by them, shall
not the Spirit of God much more pass by me, yea, and abhor me, who of mine
heart have made a most filthy stew: Note
Moreover, Satan is busy with his Bellows blowing at the juniper coals of
Gods wrath, that against me may be kindled a consuming fire.

Note
The frown of a Prince may be the favor of God: But when God frowneth, who
shall show favor? Note
O what a cry is in the dumb choppe of the conscience!


The Pastor. As I perceive ye are in the storm of temptations: Note
As the ship in a tempest goes with a low sail, So is it good and most sure
in the tempest of temptations to take down the top sails of our own worth.

Note
But yet Sir, in your humility beware to disprise and set at naught the graces
of God that are within you: Virtue stands in the midst: Note
As the Publican would not brage vainlie with the Pharisee, that he was not
like other men, so neither would he desperately say with Cain, Mine Genesis 4. 13
iniquity is greater, than that it may be forgiven.


The sick Man. Note
Alas, Sir ye know not what weight hangs upon mine heart: ye are not privy
unto my secret sins which I think shame to utter: O these gnawings of my
wormish Conscience: hardly can ye imagine what filthy thoughts have been
into my heart, since I came into this world: Hitherto they have all been hid
from mine eyes: Note
But now I think that I see all my sins set in order before Psalm. 50. 21
me: My Soul is poisoned with the stink of such corruptions* I abhor my
self, and what wonder that God abhor me?


The Pastor. Note
The more a man abhors himself, God who is mild and merciful, loves him
the better: It is good for a man to stink in his own nose: Note
A wicked man may be well compared to the Latin Cimex French Punaise Tree,
Lice that stink most vilelie, and yet feel not the stink of their own
breath: Laodicea thought her self happy, and yet God said, that he would spew
her out of his mouth. Revel. 3. 16


Gods thoughts are not man's thoughts: Ye complain Sir, of the filthiness of
your bygone thoughts, it is well done: But here is your comfort, Zach. 13, 1
Now is that fountain of God in Zachrie opened to the house of David for sin
and for uncleanness: Note
Though through sin ye were lepper in soul as Na^man was in body, the Jordan
2 Kin. 5. 1.
of Christ's Blood is able to make you clean: Note
The precept is not of hard practice, Wash and be clean, believe 2 Kin. 5. 10.
and be saved.

Note
If ye would have the Spirit of God to take a Chamber into your heart, keep
your heart clean: Gods house must be a clean house, it must often be
sweept: Note
If the dust or dirt of sin defile the pauement thereof, it must first be
watered with the tears of repentance: Note
The stoure and dust must be laid with holy water, and then we must sweep
out all filthiness with the besome of godly revenge. This doing Sir, God
shall delight to dwell in you.

Note
If Satan blow at the juniper Psalm. 120. 4.
coals of your sins kindled with sparkles of fiery wrath, run with the
Bucket of Faith to the Blood of Jesus which is only able for to quench that
flamme.


The sick Man. My cheeks are watered with tears trickling down both day and
night: * my moist eyes are soked in this salt brimie water: O but they are
comfortless tears.


The Pastor. Note
God at last shall make them comfortable like the bowl full of dew, Iugde. 6.
38.
which Gideon wra^g out of his Fleece, Gods sign of Isreal's Salvation: Have
patience a little Sir, and your waterie eyes shall receive the other drye^
sign of the fleece, all your tears shall be dried and wyped away, so that
ye shall never weep any more: The hour is fast coming, that God shall wipe
away your tears, the Revel. 21. 4.
waters of your weeping after that there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh: To
him alone in Jesus must ye have all your recourse, on him alone must ye rely.


The sick Man. I wot not where to go: I can neither sit, stand, nor lie:
Mine heart alas, is hardened, yea, hard like the heart of the Leuiathan, which
Job. 41. 24.
is hard like a piece of the nether millstone: I think that such hardness is
from the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 13



The Pastor. Note
It is a sort of softness when we feel our own hardness: He who has begun
such softning will bring his own work to perfection in his appointed hour: Note
The seeds of grace are like Corn, they are not ripe the first day they are
sown, but ripen by degrees: From this is that saying, Grace requires space,
or in space comes Grace.

A reprobate sense is not so near at any time, as when it is least suspected
and most neglected: Say in all patience with the Prophet Micah, I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, Mic. 7. 9.
because I have sinned against him: He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon you: He will subdue your iniquities, and cast them in the
depths of the sea.

Hold up your heart toward the Father of Lights, the giver of every good
gift: Let your foul flee up to the Throne of his Grace.


The sick Man. My Soul is not fit for fleeing to the Heavens: Note
It is lik a pulled foul that wants the feathers: It may well nod with its
head, and make a mint with the stumpts of its wings, but can by no means hoise
it self from the Earth. All my comforts are clipped from me: Sins heavy like
milstones, are hung about my neck: Oh, that I were cast into the sea with my
sins, there to be buried for ever far, if it were possible, from the
presence of my God: Since ye came to me mine heart was not in such a plounge
of misery as it is now: There is nothing within me but wrath and woe, warring
against my Salvation: Gods heavy hand has distressed mine heart wonderfully.

Note
My Soul is so besieged with temptations that it may well be called, Magor
missabib, fear round about: Ier. 20. 3.
This I fear that my name be crossed out of the Book of Life. Revel. 3. 5.



The Pastor. I remember of a wise counsel which a learned Divine gave to a man
sore assaulted upon his deathbed with the temptations of the devil: Note
When thou art tempted of Satan, said he, and see no way to escape, eue^ the^
plainly close up Luther.
thine eyes, and answer nothing to his temptations: But commend thy cause to
God: This said he, is a principal point of wisdom, that we must follow in
the hour of death: That is, That we daine not to give Satan an answer but
say with Michael, The Lord rebuke thee Satan. If thy flesh tremble and fear
to enter into another life, and if it doubt of salvation, if thou yield to
these things, thou hurtest thy self, therefore close thine eyes as before and
say with S. Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and then certainly Christ
will come unto thee with all his Angels and be the guider of thy way.

Note
At the entry of the red Sea, when Israel environed on both sides with
mountains, having the sea before and the Egyptians behind, could see no means
of escape: Then Moses Exodus 14. 14.
said to Israel, The Lord shall fight for you and ye shall hold your peace:
That is, ye shall seal up your thoughts in silence, and let God be doing So
do ye, be silent for a space, daine not Satan's temptations with an answer,
fear not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the LORD: Note
As Moses said of the Egyptians, so will I say of all your temptations Exodus
14. 13
within a short space, The Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see
them again no more for ever.


The sick Man. Oh, that with Job I could lay mine Job. 40. 4.
hand upon my mouth, and with Jacob Genesis 49. 18
wait for Gods salvation: But alas, I am laden with iniquity: Satan
besieges Isa. 1. 4.
me so that I cannot keep silence: Satan has laid down a bloody libell
before me whereunto he urges me to make answer.


The Pastor. If ye must needs make answer, learn that notable speech of
Bernard Bernard.
on his death bed: * About an hour before his death, he being as he
thought, presented before the great Tribunal of his Judge, where he found
himself seuirelie charged with the accusation of Satan, forsook himself for
to rely upon Christ alone: I freely confess said he that as thou affirmest, I
am most unworthy, and that by no worthiness of mine can I merit eternal
life; Note
yet I am assured that my Lord Christ has a double right to heavens glory,
one by heritage, and another by conquest: The first is sufficient for himself,
the other is for me, ex cujus donojure illud mihi vendicans, non confundor,
which by right of gift I claim and challenge and shall not be confounded: Upon
this Rock ye must cast the anchor of your soul: The Lord is able to do unto
us above all that we can ask or think.

Take courage Sir: Note
Let Satan make out his process; your dear and loving Brother is both your
Judge and your Aduocat.


The sick Man. Oh that I could take that counsel and keep silence, waiting
till the Captain of Salvation bring me through Heb. 2. 10
this red sea of bloody temptations: Oh that I could lay hold upon that right
of heaven, which Christ has conquered: But alas, I can find no ground or
warrant in mine heart that such a conquest can belong to me, for I know that
in me dwells no good things. Romans 7. 18



The Pastor. Note
The greatest foe the faith of the godly has and the chiefest cause of their
trembling and troubled heart, is that often they seek in themselves grounds
and warra^ts of Gods favor, as though the Lord could not love them unless
there be in them such virtues as in every point should be: Note
Because they want perfection, they think they have nothing: By this means
Satan shakes silly Souls to and fro like Reeds with the winds of distrust:
Make the right use of such temptations, let them draw you from your self, for
to rely only upon the mercy of your Lord: Note
Be earnest to find Gods mark in your Soul, even Sanctification the
Salvation mark whereof the marrow is Christ's satisfaction: From this mark,
press toward the mark, for Philip. 3. 14
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.


The sick Man. Feign would I have grace so to do: But out upon me, I have
taken such surfeit of sins, that I find my self void of all grace: Note
O death, death, death, doolefull is that separation of a Soul dead in sin
from the I^phes. 2 1.
body dead for sin.

I am so defiled and deformed that while I remember judgment, it makes me
all to shake and to shiuer: Fie on me a graceless creature wallowing in a
mire of misery: Oh, but for a dram of Gods grace! Oh, for the greatness of
the pickle of mustarde seed thereof!


The Pastor. He that desires grace is not altother graceless: It is Gods
goodness that has given you this small and weak desire of grace, in this
Gods good hand is upon you: He who gives grace to desire grace, shall give
also grace for grace: God often gives to a man above his hopes, I Psalm. 21. 4.
sought but life, said David, yet the Lord gave him to be a King: God who in
sickness gives you the desire of grace, shall before ye die give you grace
for grace, a grace which at last shall make you to sing: I sought but grace,
yet God has given me glory: Note
If ye feel and fear his wrath, seek the more earnestly for his mercy: Note
This was that good counsel which Zephaniah gave to Israel before the decree
of wrath come out Seek righteousness, seek meekness, Zepha. 2. 3
it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger: Christ's cry is,
Seek, Matthew. 7. 7
Ask, Knock.

Note
Seeing God desires to be asked he longs to give; seeing he desires us to
seek him, he desires to be found; seeing he desires us to knock, his
desire is to open: Note
God is more rich and liberal, than we are poor, His hand is wider for to
give gifts, than our heart can be for to receive: Note
He who will not believe that God can be merciful to him, is twice in the
wrong to God After that he has broken the law of his Justice by offending,
he is not content except that he wrong his mercy by distrust: Note
Gods delight is to be with the Children of men on earth, as also to have them
with himself in heaven.

Now Sir, being assured of the love, embrace this Lord with all (...) arms of
your affections: Note
Seek earnestly the Spirit of Grace, for he is powered on thirsty grounds: I
will power water, said the Lord, upon Isa. 44. 3.
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground.


The sick Man. Oh, but for one drop of that water: Oh, that my Soul were
watered with the dropping bowels of his mercy: Note
In the mean time my bones with sorrow are dried up like an hearth: The
terrors of the Almighty stick within mine heart, and my Spirit sucketh out
the vennome thereof: I think that I am in the very gorge pipe of hell: If
this wrath continue* doubtless it shall be my bane.


The Pastor* Note
Gods wrath is fearful I confess, but God will not be long wroth with his
Children* I will not, Isa. 57. 17
said the Lord, contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: For the
Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made: Note
So soon as man begins to be wearied of his Isa. 63. 9.
sins, God begins to be wearied of his wrath, yea which is strange, In all
our afflictions he is afflicted. There is but a moment in his wrath, but his
mercy endures for ever.

Note
There is such a mercy in God, that in comparison thereof all the mercies of
men are but scrofe and scumme, a myte of his mercy, shall remove the
mountains of your misery, in Christ is a mine of mercy.


The sick Man. I know that it is so: But I as yet have no sense of such a
mercy Note
While I seek and cry for help, God either answers not at all, or when he
makes answer, it is like that which Elisha said to Ioram, seeking 2 King. 3.
13.
comfort upon extremity, What have I to do with thee, get thee to t^ Prophets
of thy father and mother, a^ desire them to help thee, get thee (...) thy
pleasures and profits, and preferments, which in forsaking me, thou did so
eagerly pursue: This makes all the wounds of my remorse to blead afresh.


The Pastor. Note
As Samuel took the voice of God to be the voice of Eli, so many 1 Samuel 3. 5.
take the voice of a temptation to be the voice of God: We must try the
Spirits: Satan is crafty: Note
He 1 Ioh. 4 1.
can wind himself wonderfully into the heart of men, some times by sleepie
security, some time by fearful despair: Note
While he entiseth unto sin, he makes God to speak nothing but mercy to a
sinner.

Thou may sin, will he say, and repent again: Note
But while he accuses for sin, he makes all Gods words to be words of
wrath, that the sinner may be swallowed up with despair. *Tak heed Sir, who it
is that answers to your cry: Though God should draw you through Hell, be ye
still assured of Heaven: His wrath is but for a moment, but his Isa. 54. 8.
mercy endures for ever.

Note
Settle your heart in the secret of God, lest it be carried away with Psalm.
91. 1.
every light wind and gale of temptation: Seek out of your self in Christ
the grounds and warrands of your Salvation.


The sick man. I fear greatly to be ouer-blowen, and that I make shipwreck
of the 1 Timothy 1. 19
faith upon most fearful banks and dangers, such a boisterous gale did ^
never feel.


The Pastor. While temptations are most terrible to our feeling, they are
often least dangerous: Note
Shallow feas are full of broken waters, while deeper though more terrible are
of a softer swelling, carrying the burden more safely above. Tak courage the
most godly heart must encounter with many thorters: The Lord humbles the
hearts of his Saints, lest that in a vain conceit of their own worth they
should ouer-weene themselves: Note
Think well upon that which I say, a red-warre in the Soul Judge. 18. 7
is better than a sleepie laish Security: Away with Labans mirth, his Genesis 31.
27*
songs and his Tabrets.

Flat opposition is not so dangerous as a covered agreement: Take to heart this
my counsel, Though the Lord Isa. 45. 15.
should s^ay you, yet put your trust into him: God is not ever gotten at the
first: verily, said Isaiah, thou art a God that hiddest thy self, O God, of
Israel, the Savior.


The sick Man. I understand not what such hidding means: O the fearful
Tribunal of God, whose eyes of fire see Revel. 1. 14
all the ways of man: In his Balance he pondereth all his goinges: Gods
Prou. 5. 21
mercy I know is a good staff to stay upon, but it is far from mine heart
and hand. I am not like these sinners which but trip and stumble, and rise
again after a snapper, my fall i^ with my full weight; the milstons o^ his
wrath are hung about my neck* which bear my Soul down to the bottom of
Hell, I find now the Deuteronomy. 32. 22
truth of that saying of the wise* His own iniquities shall take the wicked
Proa. 5: 22
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.


The Pastor. What shall I say? as truly said the wise, By sorrow of the
heart the Prou. 15. 13.
spirit is broken: Seeing ye are acquaint with the speeches of the wise
remember that counsel of the wise* Trust in the Lord with all thine heart*
Prou. 3. 5.
and lean not to thine own understanding. I pray you to be plain with me,
What is this that makes you li^ a reed shaken with the wind, wherein Matthew.
11. 7.
lies the strength of your temptations?


The sick Man. I will not conceal the matter from you: This is it, mine own
heart absolueth me not: Note
while I put mine hand into mine own bosom, Oh, how liprous pull I it out
again? My Conscience gives me a terrible twetch: * Incessantly it cries
out guilty against me: What shall I say then, to that of the Apostle, If 1
Ioh. 3. 20
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart? Is not this the true
sense of these words, If our own heart condemn us, much more will God
condemn us, who is more mighty than our heart? Note
In this I find my self amidst the thickest throng of fearful temptations,
wrapped in the wrath of God: Note
This temptation is like a fresh post-horse* for to carry me to damnation, it
is of Satan's saddling.


The Pastor. * Indeed Sir, the judgment of a man's conscience is a lively
image of the judgment of God: It is certain, that whom the conscience
condemns into this world, him shall God condemn in the world to come: And
again, whom the conscience shall absolve into this world, him shall God absolve
into the world to come. Note
The Conscience is Gods Judge within: But this ye must know yt it is not time
for a Judge to give out sentence while his wits are troubled, or while he is in
a mood or passion* Note
A wise Judge will not be sudden, but will take time to consider well the
cause before he pronounce.

Note
A Conscience that is troubled should not sit down in judgment Note
As one appealed from drunke^ King Philip to sober King Philip, so must a
sinner appeal from his Conscience in a qualme, to his Conscience in a calm.

Note
Moreover, every voice that is within a man, is not the voice of his
Conscience, but of some temptation shrouded under the coat of the Conscience,
like Jacob clothed with Genesis 27. 15.
Es^us garment: While Jonah was but in the belly of a fish, his heart cried,
that he was in the belly of Ion. 2. 2.
hell: Satan has a deceiving Prospect or dioptre for sin: At the one end
sin and judgment appear to be far off, little like Midges: But while the
instrument is turned, these midges appear like mountains: Sin in the doing
is like Zoar a little one, but in repenting it is like Nineueh hudge and great:
It Ion. 4. 11
seems before the door of mercy like a Camel at a needels eye.


The sick Man. But think ye Sir, that the Conscience of a man which God has
set within him as an Judge, as a Watch, and a Witness, yea, as a thousand
witnesses, can fail at any time.


The Pastor. It is certain, that while the Consciences of men are well
wakened, and not troubled with terrors of temptations, they are into ye
breasts of men, verily Gods voice declaring to the Soul what God has
concerning it, ratified into the Heaven: But ye know that many a man's
Conscience will be mightily troubled: Note
Sometimes it will be darkened with Ignorance, so that as Samuel took Eliab
for David, it will also take him to be appointed to be a King whom the Lord
has rejected: Note
Some times it will not know what ailleth the Soul, no more than Elisha knew
what ailed the Shunamite, 2 King. 4. 27
while she fell down at his feet: Note
Some times it will be fast asleep like Jonah, while he snorted Ion. 1. 5.
in the hatches.

Note
I compare the Consciences of the godly and of the wicked to men in a dream:
One man that is lain down in his bed, hungry without his supper, will dream
that he is at a feast making good cheer: But while he awaketh, his Soul is
empty, his dishes flee away with his dream: Note
It is so that it fares with a wicked man, whose Conscience is in a dream:
He will imagine that assuredly there is nothing but Heaven for him: Note
He will think with the hungry dreamer that he is ready presently to sit
down at table, even at that Table with Abraham, Matthew. 8. 1^
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: Now while he is even at the sitting
down, which is at the hour of his death, his Conscience wakeneth, and he is
found empty: Thus all his dishes fl^eth away with his dream.

Note
Again, another man shall dream of fearful things, viz. that he is in the
midst of his enemies ready to be slain: If any be waking in the bed with
him, he will hear him into his sleep sighing and sobbing with a sore moan:
But so soon as he is wakened, he finds himself in surety lying upon a bed
of down: Note
It is even so that it will often fare with a godly man, whose Conscience is
in a dream: Note
His heart will be burdened with grief as with a night mare: He will imagine
that God is become his enemy, and that assuredly he will cast him into hell:
Note
Now while he thinks that he is even at the fall, and while for fear
thereof in his sleep he is making his moan: God in mercy wakeneth him
softly, and lo, he is lying into the arms of his God: Note
At last it fares with the godly and the wicked as it fares with Pharaohs
Butler Genesis 41. 13
and his Baker after their dreams, the one was restored to his office, but the
other was hanged.


The Sick Man. Note
I wish at God that my Conscience were in such a Dream, and that all my
troubles were but some spiritual night Mare, a disease that is cured by
wakening the Soul that sleeps: Note
I know that the spiritual senses of the Soul may be some times covered with
a veil of gross dullness: But I cannot suspect or surmise that this can be a
dream: Behold, I speak, I hear, I see, I savor: How then can this be a
dream.


The Pastor. Note
He who dreameth, will think all that: He will think that he speaks, that
he hears, sees, and walks, and runs and leapeth over brinkes or
ditches, while indeed he is snorting upon his bed: Note
Yea, in his dream he will think that his dream cannot be a dream, but that
surely he is broad awake: This cannot be a dream, he will think even while
as he dreameth.

I know Sir, that your body is surely awake, and not dreaming: But in all
appearance your Soul is in a slumber: The Lord waken you softly in his mercy.


The sick Man. Note
If I dream, the Lord vvaken me soon out of this dreadful dream: I am
filled with a world of woes, every thought is as it were a thorn thrust into
mine heart: Note
My fears are like the fevers, they go by fits: Note
A little since I thought that my blood was calmed, and that I had some respit:
Of my sins I had but a shallow sense, but now behold, a new fit of greater
force, which makes all the powers of my Soul to shiuer: Note
All my sins are in Gods quarrel, up in arms against me: Gods wrath
follows me with a full fail, and charge me a fresh with bloody blows.
* While I was but breeding this fever, I was but chained with worldly
enchantments: All my trouble was but for Bairnes, Lands, Children, Houses, and
other perishing pleasures, triffling troubles, which I could not for a long
space resolve to forsake.

Note
But now is pain in stead of pleasure, a sour and bitter sauce, prepared for
Adams sweet Apple, fear, shame, and remorse: Note
What recks to want pleasure, if so be there were no pain: I would not give
a flee for the world, and all the pleasures or profit that therein is, if I
could once be reconciled to my God: Note
Mine heart is like an Anuile whereupon the Lord strikes most fiercely with
the hammer of his wrath: Note
There is not a power of my Soul, which is not laden with blows: Note
All my distresses hitherto have been but light skirmishes, now I am come to
the maine Battle: My Soul is hunted to and fro like a Partridge on the
mountains: Who is on my side? Who?


The Pastor. The Lord is with you, though ye perceive him not: Note
This is incident to the faithful, not ever to know when God is with them:
Note
Gideon was a man renouned for his Faith* he was one of the Catologue of the
faithful, and yet while the Angel Judge. 6. 12
said unto him, The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of valor, he answered,
verse. 13.
Oh, my Lord if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?

Note
See how the man of God knew not that God was with him.

Note
Take courage Sir, seeing the skirmishes are past, and that ye are come to the
maine Battle, God shall be your maine help: Come out against all your
enemies, as David 1 Samuel 17. 45
came out against Goliath, in the Name of the God of Battles, and Lord of
Armies: Note
There is no Corslet of proof against a stone cast out of a sling in the Name
of the great JEHOVAH: Resist the Devil and he shall flee from Iam. 4. 7
you.


The sick Man. Gods wrath has heat the fiery Furnace on seven times more
tha^ it was of before: I am so dashed with ye sense of my sins, and so pierced
with stinging fears, yt thereby all the powers of my Soul are shaken: Note
Hithereto I have been crossed with care, for my life, and for my Children:
What care I now for my dearest Children? Would to God that I might give my
first borne for Micah. 6. 7
my transgression, and the fruit of my womb for the sins of my Soul.

Note
Behold, here a poor distressed and distracted sinner, who knows not to
what hand to turn him: All the enemies of my Salvation pursue me with hue and
with cry: The great God of Justice has set up a Gibbet into my Soul. All the
terrors of the Lord muster against me: Note
I am galled and goared with sinful fears, as Egypt was plagued with Flies
and Frogs: Mine heart is filled with dismaiednesse, my belly trembles, and
rottenness is entered into my bones: Note
While I had time to repent I willingly wallowed into the mire of sin,
wherein now I necessarily stick: Note
Fear drives, Hope draws, I am tossed like a Tenice ball: O the straitness
of that account, which I am shortly to be called unto! O that terrible
Tribunal! O these chains of darkness, in which sinners shall be reserved
unto Gods last Sessions: Note
Who can stand in such a tempest, where the creature has a combat with God and
with his wrath, hand to hand? I am stricken with such amazedness, that I know
not where to find any true refreshment* Note
This makes death to me as a King of fear: Note
All the sins that ever I did commit, seem to me malicious blows which I
have set upon the face of my GOD* Hardly can I think that such a Cain or
cursed Cham as I, ca^ ever enter into Canaan* Think ye not this to be true? I
find this to be truth: There is no peace says my God to the wicked. Isa. 57.
21



The Pastor. Note
These be but temptations of Satan, who is seeking for to fifth Luke 22. 31
you as wheat: Pray Christ that he would pray for you, that your faith fail
not Note
There is full power in Christ for to lock up the jaws of that roaring Lion:
He at last shall discover unto you those Gunpowder plots.


The sick Man. I know that there is sufficient power in Christ for to save
me, but I doubt of his will: Note
If Christ were minded to save me, would he not give me an assurance to be
saved? This temptation passes through the bark to the bone.


The Pastor. Our assurance is not perfect into this life: Note
We are all here like a Ship tossed with contrary Tides into a raging Sea.

Note
As the weather beaten Bark is driven with many contrary courses before she
can win her Haven* so has the Soul, many toes and froes, before it pierce
to the Skes for to enter into Heaven: Note
God gives to no man here all good things at once, but some we receive in
hand, and some in hope: Note
This hope is the Christian Souls plight anchor in the swelling Seas of
temptations: While all that is present is full of trouble, Hope fetches
comfortes from the times to come: Note
While it is foul, we hope it shall be fair: While we are sick, we hope
for health: While we prouid for our Children, we hope they shall do well:
While men write Books, they hope they shall do good: Note
While the Mariner saileth through the raging waves, he hops to come home
again, he hops for vantage: Note
While the Sower, casts his seed from him, he weepeth, but Hope comfort
him, that he shall receive again a plentiful increase. Note
The hope of ye pleasant Spring is a comfort in the cold Winter Note
The hope of the Day is the long Nights comfort: Note
Deaths special comfort, is in hope that we shall all meet again: Well then,
Sir, seeing it is so, the comfortes which we have not received as yet in hand,
receive them in Hope, wait upon God, and wait upon him still: Note
While all your senses are silent, Hope shall come with Help, assuring you
that at last ye shall prevail: Note
Let the devil do his worst to dismay you, stick ye fast by this Hope which
shall never fail you: yea, though God himself should seem to be your
enemy, yet say to him with Job, Though thou should slay me, yet will I trust
in thee.


The sick Man. That Sir, is of very hard practice: For if the Lord of Life
put out the life, who shall put it in again? mine Hope is small, if it be not
lost: I fear to feel shortly that which shall be without either end or ease:
Note
All sorts of temptations come hail shot upon me: Note
I am laid open to all the blows of Gods wrath: I am lik a wind-waued tree
loose at the roots: Note
Mine heart quaketh, my Soul pants; my conscience is in a qualme: What can
such torments be but very Posts and forerunners of everlasting pains? Note
What can they be but the very smoke of Gods wrath coming before a fire that
shall burn to the bottom of Hell? Note
The Deuteronomy. 32. 22
fear of this clogeth so my Conscience that I cannot think but such terrors
be the very earnest of eternal woe: This makes my liver to roll in my
body: O that mercy might be Bartered for Money.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, such terrors are such of their own nature, even
the smoke of a kindled wrath, never to be quenched. Note
But unto the godly, their nature is changed by grace: Such tremblings, and
shakings, such thunders, and earth quakes, fears and fires, are but the
preparations of the Soul for to meet with its God into the still and calm
voice.

Note
After this manner as ye know* the Lord came unto his Servant Elijah: Before he
came to him, he prepared his way by three fearful Messengers, First, by a
wind which rent the 1 King. 19 1^.
mountains and brake in pieces the Rocks; Secondly, by an Earthquake, which
made all to shake under him; Thirdly by a fire: Note
All these came before for to terrify the man of God, that by that means he
might be the better prepared to meet with his God in the calm. Note
Before Christ would show himself to the world, he sent two austere
Messengers before him, First, Moses with a fiery Law, and last the Baptist
like a Carpenter with a sharpened Axe in his hand* for to hew down every
fruitless tree that marred the ground: Note
After them came the meekness of the Lamb of God, crying, Come unto me all
ye that are Matthew. 11 28
wearied and laden, and I will ease you. God will not be merciful to proud
selfe-sufficient men.

Note
Take Sir these blastes of temptations to be but the Lords wind of preparation:
Note
These heart-quackes are but earth quakes: Note
All your other fiery temptations are but fire from Heaven, Posts from GOD in
haste for to give you warning of his coming: Note
By such warnings the Lord will waken you, lest with the wicked in the slumber
of security, ye should sleep still in your sins, or with scorners should
smooth them over, and jest them away, as though the sins of men should never be
sentenced, nor their life examined: Note
Be of good comfort Sir, your sharpest temptations which Satan has whet upon
the whet-stone of his malice, by Gods grace shall be to you like the Baptistes
Axe for to hew down all superfluities of wickedness within you: Note
It is good that God snedde the unfruitful and rotten branches of our life,
that in our hearts a way may be prepared Psalm. 24. 7
for the King of glory.

Note
Ye must also know Sir, that such troubles and tempests, are but a preface of
Gods presence, as, Hearken Psalm. 81. 8.
and take head Israel, was set before the Law: Suffer therefore patiently
the Lords rebukes: Let Psalm. 141. 5
the righteous smite me, said David, and it shall be a kindness, and let him
reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break mine
head: Note
These fears Sir, that trouble you, are nothing but Gods reproves: * Take
them as a kindness, yea, and as an excellent oil, which shall neither break
head nor heart for your hurt: Note
The nature of oil is not to break* but rather to heal that which is already
broken: God by such trubles inte^deth to refine you: Have patience but a little
in your griefs: Yet a little while, and they shall be no more: Note
The night is darkest while the dawning is nearest: Note
while the fever it at the hight, the cooling sweat is at the door of the
poares: Note
While the Mountains are on both hands, and Pharaoh behind, and the Sea
before, then let Israel stand still, Exodus 14. 13
and see the Salvation of the Lord: Note
These Egyptia^ temptations, are but for to chasse you to Canaan with hard
bondage, from a Land where Exodus 8. 26
it is counted an abomination to offer Sacrifice unto God: Note
So soon as the rod of God shall strike upon that Sea, it shall make way, and
ye shall safely pass through: The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall
Exodus 14. 14
hold your peace: And what then? The Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye
shall see them again no more for ever: God will afflict his own, Isa. 28. 28
but not destroy them: Bread Corn is bruised, but God will not break it, with
the wheels of his cart.


The sick Man. I have looked for such comforts, but alas, they are long in
coming: In the mean while, my Soul is all aghast, I taste nothing but gall
and worme-wood, mine heart is filled with sorrow: Note
My breach is lik ye sea, all my worldly sweetness is turned into worms of
Conscience: My tears trickle down both day and night, and yet God delayeth to
send me comfort: My God shake off the sins which hang so fast on.


The Pastor. Have patience Sir, but a little, and comfort shall come: Note
Before ye reap your fruits ye must first till and sow the ground: Note
The seed time is a sorrowful time: Man sows Psalm. 126. 6.
his seed in tears: Note
But again while he remembereth that except he sow, he shall not reap, and
that as he sows, so shall he reap, he casts from him his seed
liberally down upon the ground, smilling with his watered cheeks of sorrow
in hope of a plentiful increase.

Note
Think it not strange Sir, that in this seede-time of grace ye sow in tears:
Comfort your self in this* that joye shall arise out of your sorrow: Note
While ye sow in tears, think not your labor lost: Note
Out of your greatest sorrow shall spring your truest joy: As at the rising of
Christ our Lord was a Earth quake, so at our regeneration which is the first
resurrection, there is an heart-quake: Be not discouraged, though the hand of
God be heavy upon you, his stripes will work to your well: Note
As an Horse or a Mule being once well lashed with a whippe does ever after
fear, if he hear but ye Bell which is tied to the whip: So men, if he has
been once well scoured and scourged with Gods rod, he will so tremble at the
sound thereof, that he will fear to anger the Lord again: It is good that God
mingle the tartness and terrors of the Law with the sweetness of the Gospel.


The sick Man. I am so confounded with shame that I cannot face the Heavens:
Fie upon my filthiness, my course is backward from my God.


The Pastor. It is an evil token when for sin there is no shame in the
sinner: This Scripture calls a Whoores forehead: Ier. 3. 3
Note
In this Lot his elder Daughter bewrayed her self, and show that she was not
touched for her sin of Incest: For after she had committed vilanie with her
father, she as it were shamelessly bragged of it, by calling her son Moab,
that is, Of my father, Genesis 19. ^ 37.
that his name might cry to the world, The father of this child begat him upon
his own daughter: Note
Shame ever follows sin, if men be not ashamed of sin, which is
Repentance, God shall shame them for sin, which is Vengeance: As for your
backward course, a few steps backward, will make you advance further in your
leaping.


The sick Man. I fear exceedingly: I fear to loss both Soul and Salvation.


The Pastor. Let Faith moderate your fear: Note
When Jacob thought that he had lossed Joseph, and was in great fear, for
Benjamin, even then found he both Joseph and Benjamin: Look often unto God and
ye shall find him with David to be the light of your Psalm. 43. 5
countenance.


The sick Man. God has opened the floud-gates of his wrath against my Soul:
O the deepenesse of my troubles!


The Pastor. Note
The Soul in deepest troubles Genesis 7. 13
is like Noah's Arc on the waters, the higher it was tossed, the nearer it
approached to the heavens: Note
Little Boats of little burden are but for shallow waters: But great ships of
greater lod are sent unto the depths: Note
The deepnes of your temptations, Sir, declare that God has laden you with
many graces: Note
Brauest Captains are put to the Front and forebrunt of the choke: Note
Best Christians are battered with most bitter temptations: God who suffers
them to be tempted, knows what they can do, and therefore to encourage
others by their example, he puts them to a proof, for to let the world see,
what his grace can work in weakness, at last ye shall Psalm. 66. 2.
say, We went through fire and water, but thou have brought us to a wealthy
place: What say ye Sir? Begins not your heart to rejoice? Be glad, Sir. and
say to God with the Psalmist, All my springs shall be of thee.


The sick Man. I have little mind of springs, the Apostle said wisely, Is
any man mirrie? Iam. 5. 13.
let him sing: Mine Harp and Heart both are out of tune: The Psalm. 137. 2
Harp of my joye is hung upon the villowes: Note
My fingers can guide no more this wirbling instrument: Note
All the joye of my light, and the light of my joye is quenched with
unspeakable grief, as with a dampe.

Note
Mine heart is like a moth eaten cloth, all rent with temptations and eaten out
with the worm of Conscience, like that worm which did eat away the pleasures
of Jonah: By its Iona. 4. 7.
byte all my joye is fallen down like that Gourd: All the good that ever was
within me is boulted out, Satan has sifted me: I think presently that I
am at the very mouth of Hell, ready to fall down to the bottom thereof.


The Pastor. Note
The way to Heaven is near by the gates of hell: The way to Psalm. 16. 11
pleasures for evermore, is paued with pains: David first cried to God, de
profundis, out of the depthes, said he, Psalm. 130. 1.
have I called to thee: But afterward he praised him in excelsis, with the
highest Organs of laud, even with loud Cymbals, yea, high sounding Psalm. 150.
5.
Cymbals.

Note
It was well said by one, Quo acerbior miseria eo acceptior misericordia, the
sowrer the misery, the sweeter the mercy: Let the hope of that sweet mercy
which is to come, sweeten the tartenesse of your present terrors: Note
He who can bring light out of darkness, and who brought water out of the
fiery flint, can make the sweetness of his grace spring out of the gall of
bitterness: Woe to him whom God will not correct: Hos. 4. 17
This was a sore word Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone: Pray God that
he never let you so alone: Bless God for this chastisement: Though for a
space ye be in the fearful depths of temptations* Let nothing make you to
despair, Christ the most solid Rock of your Salvation shall turn all such
surges into froth.

Note
While Jonah was in the belly Iona. 2. 2.
of hell, and all the billows of Gods wrath passing over him, yet would he
not despair into that hell, but being tumbled up and down there, he
trembled in his believing, and believed in his trembling: Note
Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight: There Iona 2. 4.
was his trembling: Yet I will look again toward thine holy Temple: There
was his believing: And the Lord spoke to the Fish, and it vomited verse. 10.
out Jonah upon the dry land; these were the fruits of his Faith.

Note
Learn Sir of Jonah, not to despair, were it in the belly of hell: Though
for a space ye as it were go down with that Prophet to the bottomes Iona. 2.
6.
of the mountains, the time shall come that ye shall sing to God, yet have*
thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God: Note
God for a space for the sins of his chosen, for his glory, for his praise,
for proof* for example, and many other reasons may be ecclipsed from shining
to the silly sinful Souls of his Turtles: Note
But there is none obscurity that shall be able for ever to restrain from
them ye Celestial influence of his blessed beams of comfort: In a little wrath
I hid my face from Isa. 54. 8.
thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer.


The sick Man. But alas, mine heart is al^eadie wounded with incurable wounds.


The Pastor. In Christ is your remeede Note
If ye be wounded, there is health in Mala. 4. 2
his wings for the healing of your wounds: Though for a space such wounds be
sore in your feeling, yet fret not: Note
Ye would gladly suffer all that and more, if ye knew how many stripes
Heaven were worth: Though Christ tarry, yet he will not tarry. He is more
sensible to our sores than we can imagine: Note
Believe him while he speaks: These be his words of sense, He that
touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye.

Note
Be of good heart Sir, Christ shall be the Judge of our sins, who was judged
for our sins: He to whom all judgment is delivered, was delivered for us
unto death: Ye say, that your heart is wounded, let this be a salve for your
sore, a broken heart is the very heart of repentance never to be repented of:
Note
The heart which was never wounded for sin, is deadly wounded with sin:
Note
The heart which was never wounded for sin, has never known the virtue of
Christ's wounds, the only remeede of sin: Be of good courage in this good
fight, like the Church* 2 Timothy 4. 8
who for her valor in spiritual warfare, is compared to the troops of horses
in the Chariots of Pharaoh. Cant. 1. 9


Now seeing the day grows to an end, after that in my prayer I have
recommended you to Gods protection and direction, I will leave you until
morrow. Let us pray.


A Prayer for the sick Man, tossed with spiritual temptations.
O LORD, how terrible art thou, when thou art angry at thy creatures? Who can
stand Heb. 12. 19
before thee, a co^suming fire. When thou is prouocked, the Earth shakes and
trembles, the foundations of the hills are moved: When thy wrath is kindled,
smoke Psalm. 18. 8.
comes out of thy nostrils, and out of thy mouth comes a devouring fire,
whereby coals are kindled.

O the terror of these everlasting Job. 42. 10
burnings! Who darre approach unto thee? Who shall be so bold as to stand
before thee, seeing there is none so fierce that darre stir up the Leuiathan,
one of thy Vassals, whose scales are his pride, whose eyes are lik the eye lids
of the morning, and who by his neesinges makes a light to shine, and kindles
coals by his breath*

O GOD, most gracious, make thy North wind to awake, and blow Cant. 4. 16
upon him for the cooling of his conscience parched with fiery temptations:
Change thine angry countenance toward this silly cast-downe Soul, sore
tossed and troubled with spiritual tempest: O hear our earnest suit and be
not deaf toward us: O let the bright beams of thy mercy disperse and break
through the cloudie glominesse of thy wrath* Let the clear sky of thy favor
appear unto this darkened spirit, that in a holy boldness, he may come unto
the Throne of thy grace.

Thou have said, Lord, Anger is not with me: Thy word plainly affirms that
there is but a moment in thy wrath: In wrath thy custom is to remember mercy:
Forget not so good a custom. O remember here a sinner, vexed with thy wrath:
Break not this bruised reed, neither Isa. 42. 3.
quench this smoking flax, but kindle up the lurking sparkle: Make thy
strength perfect in his weakness, 2 Cor. 12.
make thy Mandrakes to give a smell, Can. 7. 13
that his Soul may be refreshed with the savor of life unto life.

Take from him all hardness of heart: Suffer not his Conscience to be seared
with sin, neither too sensible of sin, lest that he loss his patience:
Give him a soft and a yielding heart for to admit the comforts of thy Spirit:
O take out of his breast the hard marble and flintie heart of Nature, and put
in the place thereof a fleshie and melting heart, with a tender and feeling
Spirit Open his eyes with thine eye-salue, that he may see thy mercy through
the crosse-barred gates of so fearful temptations: As the weight of thy wrath
has made his Conscience to bleed, so let the might of thy mercy like Balm,
cu^e and cover the wounds of thy wrath: O GOD of pity* pity this poor
Soul weeping in secret at thy feet: Pity this Spirit which is filled with
heaviness: Sore sorrow, O LORD, is entered through all the powers of his
Soul, even to the dividing of Heb. 4. 12
the joints, and the marrow of his bones: Put these words of comfort in his
mind and mouth, that thou retainest Mica. 7. 18
not thine anger for ever, because thou delightest in mercy.

O sanctify the force of all his paineful temptations, that they may work to
his well, let him know that thou have an hand in all his troubles: Psalm, 141. 5
Let him say, Let the righteous smite me and it shall be a benefit: Yea,
though thou should slay me, yet will I trust in thee.

Good GOD, give him not over to the raging evil of his own corruptions:
Suffer not his Spirit to be overwhelmed with the burden of temptations, but
with the temptation give him an out-gate: Make the Spiknard of thy mercy send
out a sweet smell, whereby his fainting heart may be comforted. Give him
victory over all the enemies of his Josh. 10. 10
salvation: As Ioshuah made his men of war to set their feet upon the necks
of their enemies, and tread them under foot; even so, LORD, make this thy
weak servant to set his feet upon the necks of these sins, which like
Kings have swe^ed their sinful Scepter in his heart: Thou who made a Cake of
Barley Judge 7. 13
bread to tumble upon the tents of Midian, and over turn them, thou can
easily work great works by weak means: It is thy custom to make thy
strength perfect in weakness: Let this poor sick Patient here have the
proof of the practice of thy custom: Let his Soul like a Dove enter in at
the cliftes of the Rock, let it creep in by the wounds of Christ unto his
blessed bowels, there to be warmed with Gods most fervent love.

Whether shall he go? LORD, to whom shall he make his moan, but to thee?
Whom has he in heaven but thee? O LORD, now the day is far spent and the
wearisome night approaches: Before we go let us obtain our suit, that thou
would make thy wrath to relent a little: Let not our prayers be powered out in
vain, we will not admit a refusal, and therefore set us not off till another
time, abandon not this troubled Soul.

Thou who have said unto man* Prou. 3. 2^.
Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and come again, and to morrow I will give
thee, if thou now have it: O LORD, practice thine own precept, we are here
come not for to buy but to beg thy mercy for thy distressed Servant: Thou
cannot deny but thou have mercy, for this is ever true, Mercy is with thee:
Seeing then, LORD, now thou have it, we urge thee with thine own directions,
say not, Go and come again to morrow, I will give thee. By such a delay thou
should but enhance his grief: Alas, LORD, what rest shall his wearied Soul
get all this night, if thou delay and drift him until morrow?

O come, come, and power into his heart the comfortable bowels of thy
compassions: Power into his Soul the powers of thy Spirit, whereby he may be
revived, and go softly, the rest of his time in the bitterness Isa. 38. ^5
of his Soul. Refresh his parched Conscience with the dew of thy grace: Dear
Father, for Christ's sake, let not hardness of heart creep any more upon him:
Receive him softly into thine Arms this night, and cause his spirit to rest
into thy bosom: Whether he sleep or he wake, make all his thoughts to run
upon thee: In the darkness of the night make thy love like light to break in
upon his Conscience, as Prou. 4. 18
the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day: Seeing
Satan the lord of the night, the prince of darkness, is most combersome in the
night, we entreat thee, that thou would shield and preserve him by thy
merciful and powerful protection: Make his Soul to stand upon a continual
watch, that it may be ready with a well furnished Lamp for the coming of
his Lord: Make the day of thy mercy to break, and all the shadows of
temptations to flee away: O Father, hear and help, for the sake of the
dearest blood of thy Son, the alone purger of the Soul and the chief
softner of hardened hearts be thou a Sanctuary unto this troubled Soul:
Create upon him a cloud and smoke by day, and Isa. 4. 5.
the shining of a flaming fire by night, join the direction of thy fire with
the protection of thy cloud: O give now thy blessing unto this halting man:
Souple and loosen his stiff and stupefied joyntes, that being drawn by thee,
he may run after thee: Fence and guard his soul by thy grace, till thou
bring him unto glory: O Jesus, pray thou for him, whom Satan has sought to
winnow, let him be found as good corn upon thy barn floor, unto the praise
of thy heavenly glory of thy divine grace

Bless thy beloved Church universal, purge her from all Shifmes and divisions
which breed great thoughts of heart: Deck and decore her with purity and
unity. ye two most precious spiritual jewels of thy Spouse, make her fertile
like a broodie Vine.

Direct our gracious Sovereign in all his ways, Guide him by thy Counsel,
Psalm. 73, 24
and afterward bring him unto glory: Bless his Royal Match, the Queens
Majesty, make her a Nu^se mother in Israel, a blessed Mother of blessed
Children: Bless all ye Estates of thi^ Land; bless thy Ministry, adorn^
their breasts with thy Vrin and thy Thummim thy light of doctrine and
perfection of life. Bless us all who are here humbled before thy face this
night, while our bodies shall go to bed for to rest, grant that our Souls may
go rest in the arms of thee our most loving GOD and Father: To thee with thy
Son and the Spirit of Grace we give all praise and glory for ever. Amen.
Cause read unto you this night wh^ ye awak Psalm. 6 Ps. 49. Ps. 102 ps. 130 The
grace of God and the peace o^ his Spirit be with you.

The sick Man. The Lord direct you Sir in all your ways: I look ye shall
return the morrow earelie: Think upon that where we left at last: I look that
ye shall clear that matter more a^ large at our next meeting: My God be with
you.


THE THIRD DAYS Conference. Of spiritual temptations.
The Pastor. THE Lord bless you Sir, according to your^d sire I am come
again to visit you in your bed of languishing.


The sick Man. I was looking for you, for since ye left me yesternight I may
say with Jacob Sleep departed from mine Genesis 31. 40
eyes: My conscience all this night has been like a boiling pot: Note
O but weak man is borne to many sorrows! his days are few and evil: The
best of them is builabour and Psalm. 90. 10
sorrow: But let us now begin where we left.


The Pastor. Our last conference, as ye may remember, was concerning Christ,
in whose wings, I said, was health for healing of your wounds: Note
I declared unto you, that he is so tenderly touched with the feeling of our
sores, that he has declared that these that touch us, touch the apple of
Zach. 2. 8.
his eye: Has this been the matter of your nights meditation?


The sick man. That which ye have said of Christ, Sir is true; There is indeed
health in his wings, and help in his hands: But alas, Christ will not be
helpefull but to these that are of a strong Faith: My Faith is both faint and
fectlesse, nothing but a smoke of Faith.


The Pastor. Note
Christ has said plainly, that Isa. 42. 3
he will not quench the smoking flax* S. Peter was not a man of strong Faith,
when in his voyage to Christ upon the sea, he began to sink: Said not
Christ unto him, Thou man Matthew. 14. 31*
of little Faith, why have thou doubted?

Note
The Lord reproved him for the weakness of his Faith, but never coost him off
for the littleness thereof.


The sick Man. That was another matter, Christ was with his Apostle Note
There was virtue into that hand, wherewith he gripped the sinking man, as was
virtue Mar. 6. 56
in his garment, while the hemme thereof was but touched: Such a weak Faith as
mine, cannot reach up so far as to touch him into the Heavens.


The Pastor. Though your faith be weak, and that Christ also be bodily
absent, yet be not for that disquieted, his Godhead is present: Note
He himself has said, concerning his bodily presence, that it was expedient
for us Ioh. 16. 7.
that he should go away: As for the weakness of your Faith, pray God to
strengthen it: Note
Faith though it be little yet it is of great force, a grain Luke 17. 6
of it will cast a mountain into ye sea*


The Sick Man. Let me see I pray you Sir, any particular example of a weak
Faith saving any man.


The Pastor. Of this in Scripture we have a cloud of witnesses: I shall let
you see two, one in substance ye other in type or figure: Note
That of Peter in the New-Testame^t is substantial: Christ called him a man of
little Faith, and Matthew. 14. 32
yet by that Faith, though little, he was saved: Note
The other is in the old Testament, in the type and figure: When the Israelites
were bitten with the fiery Serpents, their only refuge and remeede was to
look up to the brazen Serpent: This was the Numb. 21 9
very type of a Soul stung with sin, beholding Christ with the eye of
Faith: Note
Of these who beheld that Serpent of brass, some were bleared, and other some
had weak eyes: But the weakness of their sight could not hinder the cure: Note
Nay, the old man with his dimmed eyes beholding as through a mist that type of
Christ, was as soundly cured, as he whose eyes were in their greatest vigor:
Note
The meat taken with a paralitique and trembling hand, will not refuse
nourishment to the body, no more than if it were taken with a stable hand:
Observe Sir, what I say, Note
Faith is the eye of ye soul whereof the Israelites eyes were but a figure,
Christ is the truth of the brazen Serpent: Note
Though this eye be dimmer in some, yet if it see, the Soul shall be saved:
Faith is the hand of the Soul, Christ is the food: Note
Though this Faith tremble, Christ trembles not: Note
The palsy is not into the food: Be of good courage Sir, fear not this
trembling fear, the work of Salvation cannot be wrought out, but with fear
and trembling: Note
When Philip. 2. 2
the work shall be ended, all trembling shall cease, and Faith shall be
stable, then the Soul shall be made free from all palsy pain.


The sick Man. Oh, that I were but sick of such a palsy pain! Oh, that I
were assured to have any grain of true Faith! Alas, I am undone: Note
This wretched heart of mine is so wrung with wrath, that there remains not
within it so much as a drop of grace: All my spiritual moisture is spent,
all the faculties of my Soul are so racked, that my tongue cannot utter my
grief and smart: Note
Is there no Balm in Gilead for a sorrow* beaten sinner? Oh, through excessive
pain my Liver is rolled within me: If I find no remeede, my Soul shall
shortly bleade to death, my pains exceed, my sorrow is extreme, through the
tortours thereof my Soul is compelled to roar: Oh, Lord, turn thy wrath in
mercy, and thy Justice seat in a Throne of grace, and pardon the sins which
more and more ripen thy wrath against me: Mine heart is rent and harrowed with
grief, what salve can I find fit for such sinful sores? The more I thrust
grief out, the more it throngeth in.


The Pastor. The sovereign salve for such sores, is to get a sight of Christ,
who bare all our sins upon his battered back, which was torn with
merciless strippes: Christ in that plight is the most fit object for the eye
of a troubled Soul: Note
There is no salve for the sore of sin, but ye sight of him who is the truth
of that brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 9.
the object of the faithful eye: Note
This remeede among all others is like the master Be, the best of all the
hyue: * Though ye be like Zacheus a man of little stature, Luk 19. 3
so that ye cannot see Christ over the multitude of your sins, yet run before,
climb the tree of the Cross, and behold him: Note
No, rather behold him now upon the Cross fixed upon a mount high above, that
all may see him, even upon mount Caluarie: Luke 23. 32
Behold him there treading death under his feet: * Though there be a mount of
dead men's scules; there is no dead scule so high, but Christ may be seen
above it: Note
Christ is ever nearest in the hotest skirmish: He is the sea and the seat of
mercy: If ye can seek, ye shall find no scant of mercy into him, ye shall
wonder at his love when ye shall relish his kindness.

Note
To Christ then, yea, to Christ alone must ye run and forsake all, as the
Mariner, while all his cunning Psalm. 107 27
is gone, runs to God in the tempest: Note
In him is Balm for all wounded spirits, there is no gash so deep, but his
blood can cure it: As all rivers lead to the sea, so should all comfortes guide
us unto Christ: Note
While he was in the days of Heb. 5. 7.
his flesh there was no misery that could withold sinners from him, neither
lamenesse, nor blindness, nor deafness, nor devils, could stay any from him,
nor stay him to do them good, he healed them all: Note
Never a man came back from him, saying* I have sought to this God in vain, I
came to him, but he could not help me: Or as the father of the lunaticke,
said, I Matthew. 17. 16.
brought him to thy Disciples, and they could not cure him: Note
To him may all heart broken sinners say with the Prophet, My flesh and mine
heart Psalm. 73. 26
fails, but thou art the strength of mine heart and my portion: Note
Flesh and friends, health and wealth, and all will fail us, but Jesus will
never fail us: Note
Man's extremity is his opportunity* By him alone the Soul of man has light,
liberty, and life: All other helps and hopes are but vain: Note
As no water could wash and cleanse 2 Kin. 5. 10
the leprosy but one lie Jordan, so nothing can wash away the leprosy of Ioh.
1. 28
sin but the Blood of Christ, the Lamb of God, which is a spiritual Jordan
for washing of leper Souls: Note
In a word in all our stormy troubles Christ Jesus is a firm Rock of refuge
which repelleth and turns into froth, all the waves of most te^pesttuous
temptations: Note
By his Blood alone our Souls are both healed and hallowed, upon the right of
your redemption, suit the remission of your sins: Be not abashed, he who
has Christ, needs not to fear.


The sick Man. If I were one of Christ's, would he leave me thus wise
comfortless* Note
He is the Sun of Righteousness, in Mal. 4. 2.
whose beams as in a spring time I was wont to rejoice: But now he is gone
down: Note
My Soul is benighted, and I am affrighted with grudginges of despair. Oh,
that mine eyes of flint were melted into tears! O smite my flintie heart with
the rod of thy mercy, that it may make tears the water of repentance to gush
out at the Conduite pypes of my mourning eyes: O what a palpable darkness!


The Pastor. Comfort your self with hope, waiting till that Sun arise
again upon your Soul: Note
Suppose a man created upon the earth as Adam was at the first, if he should
see the Sun set, he would be afraid at that first darkness, thinking that
the Sun were gone down, never for to return: But knowing by experience yt
he is ordained by God, a Ruler for to rule the day by intercourse Genesis 1. 16.
of the night, while he sees him set, he is content, because he looks for
his rising again: If the year were ever Winter which makes all things to die
and wither, we would all die for sorrow * But now in the deepest snowes and
most hoarie frosts, we have some sparkle of joye kindled by the hope of the
approaching Spring.

As is in these natural things, so it is in spiritual: Note
Christ the Sun of Righteousness will seem to the Soul Malc. 4. 2.
to set under the night cloud of some fearful temptation: In such a case the
sinner will think that he shall never see God again: Note
But for all that, after some hours of darkness, appears Roseis aurora
quadrigis, Christ that Day* spring from on high, Luk* 1. 17.
which the Soul like a Bird on a bush welcometh with a morning spring: After
deepest discomforts come dearest comforts

Have patience Sir a little, till the night of your temptation be past* After
a little open the window, and ye shall s^e the Sky of day, then again* behold
that Sun, which seemed to be lost* arising with his blessed beams, with a
loving and life giving countenance: Be not discouraged, though Christ absent
himself, it shall be but for a space, until the Can. 4. 6.
day break, and the shadows flee away, Note
All his absence from the godly, is but like that which he said to his
Disciples, Yet a little while, and ye shall not see me, and again, a little
while and ye shall see me: Note
It is of his help, as of Habbakkuks vision, Though it tarry wait for it,
because Hab. 2. 3.
it will surely come, it will not tarry: Be stout and courageous, the
bitterest of your temptations are but the sweet gloumes of a Father.


The sick Man. I am pricked with the poisonous rarowes of Satan's spyte: I
doubt if God would be so rough to one of his own Children as he is to me:
Note
Fathers strike with the rod, but I am scourged with Scorpions, wherewith ye
Lord is now auenging the quarrel of his covenant: Oh, that Leuit. 26. 25
ever I came to this wretched pass.


The Pastor. Ye are impatient: * There is nothing in all your affliction, but
Psalm. 141. 5.
the smiting of the righteous, which ye should account a kindness: Such
smiting is but smiling, in effect a love token, Whom I love I chasten, Gods
corrections are balm which shall not break your head.


The sick Man. I am both bruised and broken, my pains surpass my power,
Satan with his snares and fetters has confined me to a wretched slavery, my
soul is out of temper: Trembling of heart Deuteronomy. 28. 65 Deuteronomy. 32. 25.
and sorrow of mind: And terrors from the Chamber assault me on all sides: O
but the passage to glory is rough and boisterous. Behold how I sweat for
pain, as one roasted with a fearful flamme.


The Pastor. In that heat is a comfort: The style of the godly is to be
called* Brands plucked out of the fire: Is (...) this a brand taken out of the
fire? Zach. 3. 2.
said the LORD, in Zachary: This manifests that a godly man for a space
may be scorched upon kindled coals, but God incontinent rescueth him, as a
man will catch quickly at that which he would not have burnt: God will never
leave his own to the full rage of a stinging Conscience: Let all men have
patience while God works: Note
If for sins he punishes his deadliest enemies, why should he not also for
sin correct his dearest Children? If man uncontrolled may sing Psalm. 101,
(...).
of mercy and of judgment for to keep his house in order, shall not God have
his will to sing what song he pleases unto his own creature Note
Let the cracking Law-musicke of Sinai be ended and then God shall rejoice
your heart with the sweet melody of the Gospel: Note
If while God in this your trouble in a manner is mourning unto you, ye lament
for your sins, he shall in the end make you to dance at the piping of his
Gospel: Note
From Sinai he shall bring you unto Sion, where all your pains shall be
turned into pleasures.


The sick Man. All pleasures are far from me for the present: A world of
pleasures are dear bought with one pang of Conscience: Gods wrath has seized
upon me for to dragge my Soul down to the bottom of hell: It runs ever
into my mind that I am guilty of the sin against the holy Ghost: This I
take to be the mark, that such as once a^e guilty of that sin, cannot be
renewed again Heb. 6. 6.
by repentance, this mark seems to be in me, for as yet for all the holy
words I have heard out of your mouth, I find no renouation, though Gods
goodness by you has led me to repentance, I have not been moved: But after
mine hardness and impenitent heart I have treasured (...) unto my self wrath
against the day of Romans 2 5.
wrath: This spoileth me of outward peace and inward joye: What can this be
but ye sin against the holy Ghost, which shall neither be forgiven in this
world nor in the world to come? I pray you Sir, to let me know what a fearful
sin that is which Scripture says, Shall never be forgiven: Let me hear of
its name Mar. 3. 28
and nature.


The Pastor. This sin Sir, of all sins is the most fearful, as being a
sin of highest nature: In Scripture it is called Blasphemy against the holy
Ghost: Because Matthew. 12. 31
there is no pardon for it, it is called, A sin unto death: Christ 1 Ioh. 5.
16
himself declared this plainly* verily said he, I say unto you, all sins
Mar. 3. 18.
shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and blasphemies, wherewith soever
they shall blaspheme, but he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost has
verse. 29
never forgiveness.


The sick Man. These words seem strange that all sins shall be forgiven to
the sins of men and also blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme,
whether against ye Father or the Son, but that there is no forgiveness for
blasphemy against the holy Ghost: By that speech it would seem that there
be blasphemies against God, which are not against the holy Ghost: By that also
it would seem that the holy Ghost is greater than the Father or the Son,
for what ever blasphemy is uttered against them it may be forgiven, but as
for that where with the holy Ghost is wronged, it is an inexpiable stain of
it, there can be had no remission: Before ye proceed, clear me of this
difficulty.


The Pastor. The like of these words are also Matthew. 12. 31
in S. Matthewes Gospel, All manner of sins and of blasphemy said Christ,
shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven unto men: To this is subjoyned in the verse following,
Whosoever speaks a word again the Son of man, it shall be forgiven verse.
32
him, but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall never be
forgiven him.

By this at the first blinke it would seem indeed that it were not so
dangerous to offend the Father, or the Son, as the holy Ghost.

Wherefore, ye must consider that this sin which is called, the sin against
the holy Ghost, is no less against the Father, and against the Son than it is
against the holy Ghost.

Note
But it is called the sin against the holy Ghost, because it is a most high
rebellion, and stiff standing out against the peculiar work of the Spirit,
which is to inlighten the mind, and bow the will and affections, that man by
repentance may be brought home again unto his God.

Note
As the Creation is ascribed to the Father, and Redemption unto the Son, so
is illumination and conversion of Souls (...) to the holy Ghost, though all
these e^ternall Opera trinitatis ad extra sunt communia.
actions of Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification be common to all the
three Persons of the Trinity.

Understand then, that the reason wherefore this sin is called, the sin
against the holy Ghost; it is because it is against that energie and
efficatio^s working of conversion, common to all the three Persons, but
particularly ascribed to the holy Ghost, as our Creation is to the Father,
and our Redemption to the Son.

Note
When man stiflie and stubburnlie sins against the remeede of sin, how can
that sin be remeeded? It must of necessity be a sin reremeedilesse. A
sin past all remeede is a desperate disease.


The sick Man. Let me I pray you hear more clearelie what this sin is.


The Pastor. It is an universal apostasy from a known Truth with an eager,
^nest and malicious persecuting of the same, by both secret and open hostility.


The sick Man. I know that many of the learned call that sin an universal
apostasy from the Truth, but I never could well understand that.

The Pharisees are esteemed to have been guilty of that sin, yet I cannot
read that they had made an universal apostasy from the truth of doctrine:
Christ said, that they sat in Moses chair, which did signify Matthew. 23. 2
that they had kept some thing of Moses his Doctrine, though miserably mixed
with the leaven of their traditions. Mar. 8. 15


Thus as ye see their apostasy was not universal: * Saul did not altother
renounce the religion of Israel 1 Samuel 10. 11 1 Samuel 22. 18.
though after he had been among the Prophets, he killed the Priests.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, that doubt is not without great difficulty:: Note
Mine opinion concerning that, is that who out of malice and despite renounceth
and persecuteth any fundamental point of religion, which he has before known
and approuen, is by consequence guilty of that universal Apostasy: Note
My reason is founded upon the Apostles rule, Whosoever shall keep the whole
Iam. 2. 10
Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: Note
That is, who ever he be that makes no conscience of one sin, makes
conscience of no sin: If for the fear of God you darre not murder, how
darre thou then, if thou fear God, commit adultery? or how darre thou
steal or lie.

Note
Even so he out of malice and despite, renounceth any maine ground of the
Truth, which he has once known and professed, and after that
contemptiouslie with a lifted up hand persecuteth the same, he in my judgment
has drawn upon himself the guiltiness of an universal Apostasy.

Note
If by this universal Apostasy were only understood an actual, public and
total renouncing of God and of all Religion, with railing and raging, such
sinners should not be (as indeed they are) most difficile to be known.


The sick Man. I perceive by the definition of that sin, that it is not
common to all the Reprobates.


The Pastor. No not: But only to these who have been enlightened with some
knowledge of the doctrine of truth, and after begin maliciously to persecute
the same.


The sick Man. But think ye that any man would be so beastly as to
persecute a known Truth: I cannot think that the Pharisees who are said to
have been guilty of that sin, did ever know Christ to be come from God, for
had they known him, they had not 1 Cor. 2. 8
crucified the Lord, the Lord of glory.


The Pastor. Indeed these words are true of many, but not of those doctors
which made Christ to pronounce so many woes against them: Note
They and their accomplices knew what he was, and wherefrae he came: Ye Ioh.
7. 28.
both know me, said Christ to them, and ye know whence I am.


The sick Man. Merciful God, how could they then pursue him with such spite
and bitterness? I think that by that knowledge as by a bit their most
headstrong corruption should have been snaffled and curbed.


The Pastor. Note
Man does not despite to the Spirit of grace at ye first, but by little and
little like clay before the Sun: his heart is ha^dened by the deceitfulness
of sin.

First, a man will know the Truth, and will love it with some sort of fervor
for a space, after a little this love begins to lessen and grow cold, while
at last it is turned into hatred: man being fallen in love with lies, which
fill his bowels with a boiling hatred of the Truth: From thence comes a
persecution and a final desertion, a just recompense of reward 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10
due to all these that will not receive and keep the love of the Truth, that
they might be saved

Note
If the poor Pagan for abusing Romans ^. 25
his natural ^ite, by changing the truth of God into a lie by Gods just Romans
1. 28
judgment, was given over to a reprobate mind; what wonder if they who Heb. 1.
6.
having once been enlightened fall away, be never possibly reneued again
unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and
put him to an open shame? Such men go about presumptuouslie to grind the face
of all godliness.


The sick Man. I see then that in the sin against the holy Ghost, there
must first be a knowledge of Gods Truth, and then a wilful rebellion against
it with a lifted up banner.


The Pastor. The Apostle is plain: If we, says Heb. 10. 26
he, sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth,
verse. 27.
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment, and fiery indignation.

Note
The poison of that sin is in ye word, wilfully after a preceding
knowledge: While Peter denied his Master it was not wilfully, but for fear of
his lif: Soul persecuted most bitterly, beyond measure, said he, I
persecuted the Church of God, Galat. 1. 13
and wasted it, but God had mercy on him, for it was in his ignorance. 1 Timothy
1. 13.


Note
These two great men rode so near unto that unpardonable sin, that between
Peter and it was nothing but wilfully, and between Paul and it was nothing
but ignorantly. 1 Timothy 1. 13



The sick Man. Knew ye ever in Scripture or out of Scripture any that fell
into that sin.


The Pastor. Note
In the Old Testament Saul fell into it, and therefore the Lord discharged
Samuel to mourn for him: 1 Samuel 16. 1.
* In the New Testament Judas was guilty thereof, and therefore Christ would
not pray for him: While he Ioh. 17. 12
prayed his holy Father to keep through his own Name the other Apostles, he
would not speak a word for the lost son of perdition: In that he practiced his
precept, There is a 1 Ioh. 5. 16
sin unto death, I do not say, that he shall pray for it.


The sick Man. Is this sin so great that Gods mercy cannot be able to
overcome it.


The Pastor. Some think that it is called, irremissible, because that it is
forgiven with exceeding great difficulty: But certainly there is no
remission for it: Note
The cause is this, God will not be mocked with men, neither will he suffer
his Justice to perish for the salvation of any, for seeing he that despised
Moses Law, died without Heb. 10. 28
mercy under two or three witnesses: Of how much sore punishment suppose verse.
29.
ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of grace?


The sick Man. I desire to know how men fall into such a desperati niquitie.


The Pastor. Note
Such men having received some general graces of God in a reasonable great
measure, first vnconscionablie begin to neglect them, suffering these
sparkles of goodness to die out, after that they have shaken out of their
mouth, the Bridle of restraining grace while it is cast loose, lying upon their
maine, they plod on from one sin to another, till shame be past the shed
of their hair, so yt they be passed all feeling.

Note
The Spirit being often grieved and the heart made hard with a custom of
sin, whereby as with a canker the noble buds of the Spirit are fretted and
blasted at last the Lord in his justice rolleth up ye sinner, and wrappeth him
into a reprobate sense.

Note
Thus men by neglecting the inward secret checkes of the Spirit, and by
harboring privy inward r^pinings, boiling lusts, murmurings, grudgings, and
unthankfulness, the crafty empoysoners of grace, as at last come to this
point, that all the good things they seemed to have are most licentiously
dissolved into a publ^ck prophanitie, whereby they vpbraid the Spirit of grace
to his face, and that with base and scarrell jests, yea, and often with most
filthy belghes of blasphemy.

That once done, all their grace clearelie melts away like snailes, lik the
fat of Lambs, or lik the winter ice which once being thawed flows away, and
is seen no more: All such things be forerunners posting before the prince
of sins, even the sin against the holy Ghost, which is among all sins
Luke 11. 15
like Beclzebub among the devils.

Note
Observe again, I pray you, how the unquenchable fire of this unpardonable
sin is kindled: While man suffers diverse sins to lie dispersed in his heart
at their natural liberty, without controlement, Satan most craftily by some
cunning slight as by an hollow burning glass, so concentrats and unites them
together like fiery beams that they set on, fire the whole body of man's
corruption, whereby as by a powder plot the Soul is blown up in blaspheming,
even up unto the very Ephesians. 2. 2
bosom of the prince of the air. Well is the man who from his youth is 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22
sensible of all appearance of evil.

Let us then take heed, and consider how this sin again the Spirit of grace
creeps in sensibly upon the heart of man, ordinarily this sin follows a
long custom in sinning, as the head incurable Scirrhus in the lever, affected
with the dropsy, cummeth after many surfites. Thus according to that old
saying, though a created testimony.

Sero medecina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.

Note
O happy they who curb their corruption in time before they get edge and
vigor.


The sick Man. While a man is in this life may it not be known if he be
guilty of this sin.


The Pastor. Very hardly: for as Agrippa was Act. 26. 28
almost persuaded to be a Christian, and yet never came from almost unto
altogether, so will a man almost fall into this sin, and yet be rescued, as
a man will be for a space in the hight of a fever, that ye will neither know
whether he be dead or quick: Many have been revived at the putting on of their
winding-sheete: Note
Even so it will be in the sickness drawing unto this sin, which is a sin
unto death: Some will seem to be dead in it as a man into an Apoplexy, and
yet it will be seen that they will arise and repent: Of this assertion I take
Manasses for a warrant, for after that he had known the truth and had
persecuted the known Truth, making the streets of Jerusalem 2 Kin. 21. 16
to run blood, yet says the Scripture, while he was taken among the
thorns, and bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon, In his 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before
the God of his fathers.

Note
A man's flesh whether on his cheek or hand cutted to atacke being taken in
time while the flesh and blood are yet warm, will again stick to and receive
the life almost lost: If such be the force of Nature, how much more powerful
are the workings of grace, except the^ that a man after knowledge be as Paul
was Act. 26. 11
in his ignorance exceedingly mad in the persecuting Truth, I darre not
define his sin to be past remeede.


The sick Man. Indeed Sir, these be very clear similitudes which illustrat
our purpose wonderfully.

But seeing as ye think, no man can certainly know the particular man, that
is now guilty of this sin, how is it yt we are forbidden to pray for such a
man: If any man, says S. 1 Ioh. 5. 16
John, see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall pray for
him, but there is a sin unto death: I do not say, that he pray for it, so
soon as such a man dies, without remeed he must in all post haste gallop from
the land of the living unto the abhorred region of everlasting death. To what
end serves this inhabitation, if no man can know assuredly who is guilty of
this sin?


The Pastor. Note
The opinion of the most learned, is that in the time of S. John, the gift of
discretion was given unto the Church, whereby both sooner and surer they might
discover the damnable sin: Note
As for us we can hardly well perceive it, but by final impenitencie and
most fearful despair, whereby such miserable Apostats who have revolted from
the Truth, declare at last with Julian, that the God of Galilee has fully
and fearfully overcome them: Till that appear, let us beware to judge
rashly, seeing Peter speaking to Simon Magus, seems to set before Act. 8. 2.
him a certain possibility to be saved; a perhaps, that the thought of his
heart might be forgiven him.


The sick Man. Now it appears by all your discourse, that the sin against
the holy Ghost is a reuolting from the Truth, with a most wilful
persecuting: I thank God, my Soul is free of that.

But tell me I pray you, may not a man be free of that most heinous sin,
and yet be damned? It would appear that many Reprobates are free of that sin.


The Pastor. It is most certain, for it is only the sin of these who have
known the Truth of Gods word, and has made a fearful revolt from it with a
persecuting hatred against the same: Many who have lived in a true profession,
have denied God in their life: There be but too many whose hollow hearts are
covered with outwardnesse like a potteshard over laid with silver dross. Prove.
26. 23.



The sick Man. Alas, that puts my Soul in terrible fear, for this is my
conscience in a qualme, I have professed with great show, and that without
substance: I have been one of Satan's reuellers, having a smilling countenance
but a bleeding Conscience: Gods judgementes have stayed till my sins was
ripe: Note
When the fire is kindled, woe to the stubble: There is no place now for to
escape: In Heaven, in Earth, and in the Sea, Gods hand will find me out: Fie
now on all my greatest pleasures, the Darlings of account: Though I have not
sinned that sin against the holy Ghost, which God cannot forgive, I am
guilty of sins which God will never forgive: O these eyes of fire, ten
thousand times brighter than the Sun, what sin is able to escape them? what
glistring golden shows of outwardnesse, shall make you to dazzle, and ye
everlasting eyes?


The Pastor Man had great need to be ware that his tongue walk not without
a bit: There is no sin, but God can forgive it, if the sinner could repent,
the Sea of his mercy is bottomless: As for that that God will or will not it is
too great presumption for man to define: Note
Ye continually flit from one temptation to another, whereon ye feed like a
Flee happing from scab to scab: Ye often seem desirous to shift the comforts
of the Spirit for to go seek a knot in a rush, a difficulty where none is.
Be earnest in prayer, sigh to God, for the assistance of his Spirit, that ye
may be capable of comfortes which ye Tempter most enuyeth unto you: Note
When the silly Soul would fainest hear the words of spiritual peace, then
cries he red-warre, stirring up temptations like the fowls that cumbered
Abraham when he Genesis 15. 11
should offer sacrifice: Take heed to your self Sir: Note
The Serpent now is more crafty than when he pointed Adam to another tree,
for to deprive him of the Tree of life: Resign Genesis 3. 24.
up your self in all holy obedience to the will of your God: I can never
persuade you to tak heed to that which I say: Note
Between a good tongue, and a bored holy ear, is an happy harmony, such
music is melodious, but a deaf ear makes a dumb tongue: Beware of the
Spirit of giddiness, which makes the Soul to run round as it were in a
Circle of needless doubts.


The sick Man. I entreat you Sir, for patience, 1 Samuel 1. 15
for I am one of a sorrowful spirit, as Hannah said to Eli, a fiery wrath
lurketh in my breast, which makes mine heart to groan: Pity me Sir, I pray
you, for now I am come to the arraignment, and am called to the bar like a
Crane or a Swallow, so Isa. 38. 14
do I chatter: The voice of the Preacher did often glide by my faults: But now
Gods Spirit speaks home, and sets all my sins in Psalm. 50. 2.
order before me: Now must I end my years in the bitterness of my Soul: Isa.
38. 15
Note
Well may I say with that godly Matron, Call me not Nahomi, that is Ruth. 1.
2^
pleasant: But call me Marah, that is bitter, for the Almighty has dealt
very bitter lie with me.


The Pastor. Note
That which is most bitter is often most wholesome: Gods course with the godly
is from the bitter to the Sweet: Note
When Israel in their progress had removed from Mara, Numb. 33. 9
they came to Elim, from a place of bitterness they came to refreshing
fountains of waters, and to pleasant palm trees: Note
All this world is but a Mara, a place of bitterness: Note
Let us have patience but for a space, till we ariue in Elim up into the
Heavens, where we shall dwell among most pleasant palms, and drink of the
wholesome springes of the well of Life, even pleasures for Psalm. 16. 11
evermore: The Amen, the faithful and true witness has promised.


The sick Man. My troubles are far from such pleasures: I fear that such
troubles be but the forerunners of a greater tempest: This makes all the
bowels of my belly to wamble.


The Pastor. Note
Nay, by the contrary take them as I have already said to be messengers
posting before the calm: Note
It is good as ye know to see every season like it self: Note
The Christian life in this world must be like the Winter season, subject to
frosts and to snowes for killing of weeds and of worms: Note
If the earth and men's bodies be not nipped with cold, great are the evil
which ensue: Note
The earth becomes barren, and man's body become sickelie and subject to many
diseases: Note
It is even so with the Soul, if it remain not here in a wintrous estate,
laid open to the tempests and nipping colds of temptations profitable for to
mellowe and to rot the fellow ground of the heart, there is no great appearance
of any good spiritual harvest: Note
But if the winter tempests of afflictions come whereby the weeds and worms of
the conscience are killed, then may we look for a pleantifull harvest of Heb.
12. 11
the quiet fruit of righteousness: God in mercy shall step with his
merciful feet through the fields of our heart, and his steps shall drop
fainesse: Psalm. 65. 11
Note
Let such hopes comfort you in this wearisome winter of your afflictions: Note
All Gods gloumes are but like winter clouds, or like the louring of the Sky,
fair weather will be nixt, let such tempests fall but in there own season:
Happy is he whose heart with such boistrous blastes is not swaide awry.


The Sick Man. O what a longsome winter is this, wherein I can not once see
the Sun Mal. 4. 2.
of righteousness, neither feel the heat of his beams, the comforter that
should relieve my Soul is far Lam. 1. 16
from me.


The Pastor. Let not that discourage you Sir, hear what Christ himself the
bottomless fountain of all comforts, Ioh. 16. 22
says, I go away for a while, and ye shall be sorrowful, but I will come
again, and your joye shall none be able to take away: If ye find Christ to
be absent, comfort your self with the hope of his return: Note
His absence is but for a little: Note
While the day is at the shortest, and the Sun farthest from us in the dead
of winter, we are comforted with this that the day at once will grow longer,
and that the Sun will return to us by the degrees, by which he went away:
Note
Your day now, Sir, is at the shortest, tarry but a little and ye shall
shortly perceive a Spring Ianuar of joy, after this dead Dece^ber of
distresses: Note
The more wintrous the Season of the life has been, look for the fairer
Summer of pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11
Have patience a little: The Evening of your sorrows is almost past, the day
is at the breaking, your reward is a bright morning star of Reul. 2. 28.
joy: Note
At the dawning of these joys your night cloudie and darkest dolors shall
decease: Note
God with some ray or beam of his reconcealed face, shall lighten you the way
to heavens glory.

Note
This sinful life of man is like a surgefull sea, tossed with many blasts and
billows. Whiles the floodes and waves of wrath, so catch a man till all the
bowels of his belly begin to wamble, all that is within him will be in a
strange stir while he is as it were Iona. 2. 2.
with Jonah, down in the belly of hell, at the roots of the mountains,
having for his best garland the weeds wrapped about his head, in such a pitiful
plight, he will be tempted to say to God with Jonah, I am cast Iona. 2. 4.
out of thy sight, so darkened will the eye of his Conscience be.

But if so be that in the jaws of his anguish with Jonah, he can say to his
God in his deepest plunge, yet I will look again toward thine holy Temple
(which I may call the godly man's Pole, the directer of the Christian course)
he shall be saved: If while his Soul faints within him, he can with the
weak eye of Faith behold that Pole of peace, and with the Mariners in the
Psalm, cry unto the Lordin his trouble, the Psalm. 107. 28
Lord shall deliver him out of his distresses: He who by speaking unto the
Fish, made it to vomit out the prisoner, by a word of his mercy shall hale him
out of such seas of sorrows, and shall softly and swiftly bring him through the
swelling surges to the haven of peace, rest and quietness, even of pleasures
for evermore: Wait on a little, and your God shall store Psas. 16. 11
you with spiritual comforts.


The sick Man. But Oh, for the present, I am in the extremity of anguish,
which any created nature can possibly endure.

Note
My silly Soul is lashed with a severe whip of double cords knottie at the
end: Gods custom is to handle his own nicelie and softly like glasses for
fear of crackes: But I am crushed under the milstones of his wrath, which are
ready every hour to settle down upon my Soul, for to sink it from the
brimme to the bot tome of hell.

O the length and breadth of that flying roll and volume of wrath, that is
coming upon me for to curse Zach. 5. 3.
me with the Thief and the swearer.

There is such a freting canker into sin, that in my judgment, if it could
reach unto the very stars, it should make them to roust by staining their
brightness and polish color: I think that if sin could attain thereunto
it should rotte these fair celestial bodies.

In my judgment it should strike the Sun and Moon the two eyes of the world
with a catarict suffusion or with a sort of gutta serena, so that the world
should go blind. Note
All this woe is most justly befallen me, because while Gods long suffering
invited me to repentance, by delaying the day of my death, I turned his grace
into wantonness, while I was threatened by his Justice, I strained and racked
his mercy beyond his truth and promise: I wonder not now that Gods judgments
make me to reele to and fro, and stager like a drunken man: But here is my
grief, and most piercing pain: I cannot think that GOD would suffer any of
his own Children to be chaissed with such bloody bickerings and not
incontinent run to his help: Can a Isa. 49. 15
mother forget her Child? though she should, God cannot forget these that are
his: Gods wrath continues still against me, my sins are mounted up to his
ears with a noise, and he has taken notice: Behold, and consider, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow.


The Pastor. These be the pains of new birth: Note
In such spiritual travailing the Soul will be in a wonderful distress,
like Rachel of whom it is written Genesis 35. 17
that in travailing, She was in hard labor: The hardest labor of the first
birth is soft being compared to the labors of the second: No sorrow in the
flesh is able fully to express it: Note
I see a shadow of such sorrows in that mourning of Hadadrimmom in the valley
of Megiddon.

This is a mourning joined with fasting, making man and wife for a space to
shed beds, that the man may mourn in one place and the wife in another. The
family of the house of Zach. 12. 12
David apart, and their wives apart: The family of the house of Nathan apart,
and their wives apart: The family of the house of Leui apart, and their wives
apart: The family of Shimei apart, verse. 13.
and their wives apart: All the families that remainc, every family verse. 14.
apart, and their wives apart.

Note
All this mourning is wrought in man's heart by a Spirit which Zachary Zach.
12, 10
calls, the Spirit of grace: Behold, and see Sir, what it is of this your
great grief: It is a sure token that the Spirit of Grace has been powered
upon your Soul: Too too many vndera smilling countenance have a smarting
Conscience, while the wieked laugh their heart is sorrowfull-Rejoyce in such a
tribulation, after this short seede-time of sorrow, if ye can have patience,
ye shall reap the quiet fruit of righteonsnesse, after the Heb. 12. 11
dark cloudie night of sorrow, the day will dawne: Note
At the breaking of the Sky a star of comfort shall arise which shall never
set under a night cloud of waterie tears.

Man naturally is so impatient, that he cannot wait in a stayed temper, till
the Lord has ended his work.


The sick Man. I understand not such working: Note
I ever heard preached that God was merciful to his own, and that he did
proportion even at an hairs breadth, their trials and troubles to their
spiritual temper, never surcharging any above their force, in their greatest
darkness his custom is to lighten them the way to relieve with some ray or
beam of a fatherly favor: But mine heart is altogether soacked and sacked
with sorrow: Mine heart is nothing but a gulf of grief.


The Pastor. The hand of our God is wonderfully in his works: as for us, we
cannot work upon a Creature but by the help of another: Note
As for God, while he works, it often befalls that either there is nothing
or that which would seem to be contrary to his working.

Note
In the Creation he brought some thing out of nothing, from nobeeing he
brought a being: He would not make something of some thing, but made all of
nothing: God would not build upon another foundation: Note
Once he destroyed the world with rain, now says the Lord, I shall never do
it again: But how shall a man know it? even by his Rainbow, a certain sign
of rain* Note
Behold, how in the Heavens he sets his rain armor for a sign of peace
to the world declaring that he will no more shoot down a deludge for to
drown the Children of men: Note
Before that God would send down fire upon the sacrifice of Elias for the
trial of the true God, he appointed the ditch about it, first to be filled
with water: God is ^ Kin. 18. 33.
best known in the contrary means: So Christ would open the blind eyes by
spittle and clay, which naturally are more fit* to put out the sight than
put it in: By the heauing up of Moses weak hands, helped up by others: God
made choice to overthrow Hamalek rather then by the sword of Ioshuah: By the
bluenes of Prove. 20. 30
the wound he purges away evil: Christ by death overcame Death and purchased
life: In wrath he remembers mercy, where mercy would seem to be
forgotten: He first kills yt after he may make alive: His strength is made
perfect in* weakness: 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Out of the seed of tears* he brings an harvest of joye, apply all this
to your self: Note
Before that God make a new Creation in you, he will let you see first that
there is nothing in your self whereof to make it: Note
Though God for a space has opened the Windows of his wrath and powered down
upon you deluges of troubles and as yet seems to bend his Bow for a new shot:
If he were of mind to shoot he would not show his Bow: Behold, and see a
sign of peace, a Bow without a string: Note
Though it were bended, as a token of war by Gods merci^, it betokens
peace: While the ditch about the sacrifice of the he^r is fullest of water viz
when all is swimming with abundance of tears, God then shall be most ready
to answer by fire.

Note
Be of good courage Sir, let Christ's mortar lie style upon your eyes until
his work be finished, that ye may recover your sight* Note
Though clay blind-foldeth, his spittle inlighteneth.


The sick Man. I am but a lumppe of clay shut up under unbelief: I cannot
practice your precepts: I have a will to do so: But I find stronger powers
within me leading this Will into Captivity: What can this be? can both good
and evil tarry together in one heart that is Gods?


The Pastor. That is most certain, Note
There is both fish and dross in Gods net, both corn and chafe in his barn
both Wheat and darnall in his field, both Sheep and Goats in his fold: To
will is present Romans 7. 18
with me, said Paul, But how to perform that which is good I find not.


The sick Man. Note
While I behold such floods of temptations my brain is so troubled with
dizinesse that all seem to go round: My Soul is like a Land lying frin the
sea, which is beaten with billows and with waves on all sides, mine head is
giddie while I behold the strict stream of such tumbling waves.


The Pastor. Note
The temptations and troubles of this world may well be compared to a River
that runs with a quick stream: Note
If while ye ride through ye ever look down upon the stream your head will
wax dizie indeed, so that ye shall be in danger of a fall: But those who know
what it is, ever behold the yonder brinke fixing their eyes upon that which
moves not Note
It is so that we should do while we pass through the swift running streams
of temptations, we must not fix our eyes upon the stream which runs but
upon yonder immouable shore of eternity, where we mind to land after that
we have waden through the combersome foord of this life: In hope against hope
rely upon Gods mercy: Challenge your interest therein through Christ's bloody
merits.


The sick Man. Note
While I desire to do so the arrows of fearful temptations come upon me with
poisoned points: I hear a voice within me crying, What have thou to do with
the shore of eternity? thou who have wearied thy self in the way of
wickedness, and have spended thy whole life into black dismal days, by
making others to mourn in black, thou shall never wear the white garments of
Christ's righteousness, neither in grace nor glory: Oh, that mine heart were
in a true spiritual temper! Oh, that it were seasoned and softened with the dew
of Grace! Oh, where shall I hide me, until these calamities be Psalm. 57. 1.
ouerpast?


The Pastor. Note
Your Soul Sir, within you is like a man in a ship tossed with a tempest as
the Disciples on the Sea, fearing to drown, cried to Christ, Master, save us,
for we perish^* So Matthew. 8.
do ye; though for a space he seem to sleep, careless of your salvation,
he shall show himself broad awake at your cry: Behold, he that keeps
Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep: Psalm. 121. 4
Note
My counsel is that ye wrap and infold your silly Soul in his bloody
merits, as in a close warm garment that shall keep you safe and sure against
the wind and weather of all temptations: Note
I like your fears better than the security of these who thinking that they
sleep in a sound skin, care not whither judgments blast or mercy bless: If
the Hypocrite content man, he cares not for God: All his best things are but
form and outwardnesse, he has a form of knowledge, he also has a form of
godliness: Note
In this form he sleeps, not troubled with any check or counter-blast of
Conscience Wait ye upon Christ.


The sick Man. Note
Christ has forgotten me* If he had mind of me, would he suffer my Soul
thus to be eaten away with the bloody gangrene of an evil Conscience? happy
are the Psalm. 73. 5.
wicked, for they are not plagued like other men.


The Pastor. Nay, unhappy are the wicked what ever their estate be: while
they study to vvorldly joye encompassing themselves with carnal contentments
it is for nothing but that as the devils desired, they should Matthew. 8. 29.
not be tormented before the time: In such false joys they are led
hoodwinkt to destruction: While God suffers his own for a space to be
afflicted, it is no token of forgetfulness, nor yet of uncomfortable
strictness: Did he not suffer his own Son to suffer, till he cried, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken Mar. 15. 34.
me? God in great mercy to us has set out his own Son as a patrene of
patience, for to let all the godly see, that seeing he has torn with bloody
whipes the back and shoulders of his only Son, that no man should tak
exception to drink in the same Cup, as also that no man should despair or
take in evil part to be chastened of the Lord: But 1 Cor. 11. 32
when we are judged, says the Apostle, we are chastened of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with the world: Note
Many will suffer legs and arms to be cut from them into a feaster, for to
save the rest: What reck what the body suffer if so be the Soul be saved?
what ever affliction ye suffer in body or mind, it is for the salvation of
your silly Soul, by such pangues, your God will prevent ye pains of hell:
Note
In your greatest griefs, God is but practicing his own precept of saving
Souls by fear, whereby they are pulled out of Iud. 5. 23.
the fire: The Sorrows of the godly end in joye: But as for the wicked they
are like the Sea, whiles tossed, Isa. 50. 20.
whiles tumbled, but ever inwardly disquieted.


The sick Man. Is this then the estate of the godly here to be betimes
crossed with most fearful temptations, whereby as with an Ocean sea they
will seem to be ouer-vvhelmed?


The Pastor. It is certain, for many are the troubles Psalm. 34, ^
of the righteous: Note
Christ dearest here are lik Lillies among the thorns: Can. 2. 2.
Note
This life are the Winter of their affliction: Note
They are a groaning genaration, Turtles crouding with sighs and groans which
their tongues cannot express, while Abraham began to sleep, lo an horror
of great Genesis 15. 12
darkness fell upon him.


The sick Man. But in such anguish of heart will they not have some bosom
comforts? salt Sea water strained through the earth becomes sweet: At the
greatest sense of wrath will they not aye have some hope of mercy though for a
space they have swimmed down the current of the times shifting their sails to
the turning of every wind.


The Pastor. They will be in great distress: Note
Their Soul will be shaken like a sea full of surges, tossed with contrary
Tides: Note
As for their comfort it will be lik the smoke of flax without a flamme: Note
In their deepest temptations they will have some bosom secret graces into
the heart as cmbers under an heap of ashes: Some times in all outward
appearance they will be so douked that they will seem to be drowned: Note
While they are all under the water with Jonah, as it were at the roots of
the Iona. 2. 6.
mountains they will think, and so also will others think, that they are
in the belly of hell: Note
This is their estate, while for a space they are borne down with the
weight of wrath and with the burden of their sins, they are as it were
many fathom deep under the water: But so soon as it pleases God* for to
remove that weight, incontinent they come up to the brimme of the water,
because there is breath and life within them.

Note
So long as there is life in a man, he may well at the first plunge go down
to the bottom of a Poole, but incontinent he mounteth up again, because
there is a Spirit and breath within him. But if he be once dead, he
sinketh down like Lead unto the ground: Note
It is even so with the wicked and the godly, the wicked are dead in the
waters of affliction and therefore with Pharaoh and his army they sink
down like Lead into the mighty waters: But Exodus 15. 10
as for the godly, though heavy weights of sin for a space hang fast on, yet
because the Spirit of God, a Spirit of life and of breath is within them, they
may well at one plunge or other douke down, because of the weight of their
corruptions, but incontinent they come up again: Note
By virtue of the Spirit as by Cork they are carried above, and so at last
swim through all the waves of their troubles and temptations, till they come
to the shallow, where they may set their feet upon a Rock, even the Rock
Christ.

Note
When Jonah was cast into the Sea, who ever thought that he should come out
again? yet hear: how the drouked man sang at last, Yet have thou brought up
my life from Iona. 2. 6.
corruption, my Lord my God: So little was his hope once, that he said, being
in the belly of hell, The earth Verse. 2.
with her bars was about me for ever

What hope of change can we Iona. 2. 6.
have of that which we call, For ever? * See what little hope that Prophet had
for a certain space, before that God would bring his life from corruption: Note
What out-gate could the poor man see into such a dark dungeon into the
belly of the Fish, down at the roots of the mountains into the bottom of
ye deep?

Note
That which the silly man could not see, God saw: He whom the Ship could
not save, was saved in the belly of hell: He who could save Jonah, in the
water, could save his servant Sadrach and his fellows in she fire: Note
While these three poor men were bound in their coats, their Dan. 3. 21
hosen and their hattes, and cast into that fearful Furnace, there came in One
that afraid them all, a fourth man. even the Son of God, which by an
absolute soueraignetie loosed ye other three, so that they all four in the
Kings sight walked up and down together without any hurt: Note
All the miracles of the old Testament were but types and figures of Gods
mercy and spiritual blessings under the New: Note
The passage of the Israelites from Egypt to Canaan, was a type of our walking
in this world* unto that Canaan that is above: Note
The Egyptians behind, the Sea before, the Mauniaines on every side were but
types of our spiritual enemies: Some like Egyptians behind, are chaissing us,
some like Mountains on every side hedge us in to keep us from escape: Some
before like a Sea are before us, between us and Canaan: Christ is a cloudy
Pillar which Exodus 13. 21.
in the day time is darkness, and comes between us and the rage of the
Egyptians of this world, so that for mist they cannot see us: Note
In the dark night of our tribulations he goes before us in a pillar of
fire, for to be a light unto our steps: Note
At last, after we have passed by many mountains of miseries, and are come to
the red sea of temptations, even to the last temptations on our death* bed,
where all our sins red like scarlet Isa. 1. 18.
stand like a red sea between us and the place of promise, God by the rod of
his merciful power, gives that sea, such a blow that all its billows make
room to let his people pass through: Note
Then all mourning is Exodus 15. 1.
turned into music: Moses sings with the men and Mi^ian with the verse. 20.
women: Nothing is heard there but songs and sounding Timbrels: Many a ^ore
sigh had they before they came to this Song: Note
Many a pitiful look gave they back to Pharaoh, breathing out rage behind
them, they q^aked lik an Hair that hears the bark of the Dog, breathing to
be at it: But while at last they saw themselves bounded with an enemy that
boasted them with drowning, then God in their greatest fears sent a powerful
deliverance: Note
Behold, here as in a Cart ye draughts of the Christian man's journey unto
Heaven: Read into it, That through many tribulations we must enter into Act.
14. 21
the Kingdom of Heaven, even through burning Rivers of Brimstone.


The sick Man. But alas, they come through all their troubles and were at last
delivered: But I see none appearance that God will do the like to me: I have
been prodigal of the peace of my Conscience, my sins doubled do daily
ripen Gods wrath against me: In all liklie-hood Gods decree is gone out, that
I should porish: * My Faith fails me, Hope is flowne away: Oh, for that
peace in believing. Romans 15. 13



The Pastor. As by bitter Succorie the burning blood is cooled and refreshed,
so by such bitter bloody blows, the pride of life is subdued and hemmed
within a compass: Note
By such to^turing and tormenting fears: The good Lord is working for your
well that thereby he may drive you from all selfeconceate^nesse and partial
ouervaluing of your own worth: Note
It is Gods custom by such means to doublem as zeal, to blow at the smoking
flax; Isa. 42. 3.
till the weak reeking sparkle of grace be kindled into a bright burning flam.
By such troubles and temptations the good Lord keeps your Soul in
watchfulness: Note
Many in this world sleep soundly in their sins, being fully stuffed and
swelled therewith, and for all that never waken, till they be wakened in ye ^re
of Hell: Note
Others who are troubled with some inward checkes, runne^ to Tauerns for to
drown their sorrow for sin, by pouring in of strong drink: Others think to
smoke it out by the ^eeke of Tabacca: Some run to the di^ne of the world
among loud laughters.

Note
As the Israelite^ in Tophe^ sounded their Drums, that they should not bear
the squeeles of their Infants burning in the fire, so so go some about by ye
noise of sports and worldly joys to deafen so their Souls, that they should
not hear the shrighes of their troubled Conscience: Note
But all such comforts and companiourie are like that red wine, giving color
in the cup, and moving Prove. 33. 31.
it self aright: But what is the end of all? Note
Such things may seem to cool and refresh for a space, lik as when a burnt
finger is dipped into cold water, where one quality encirculoth another: But
shortly after that little an^iperistasis is past, in come doubled dolours with
all the anwels of the principal sum, at last all such drunk comforts bite
like a Serpent, Prove. 33. 32.
and sting like a Cockatrice, as does the drunkards best claret wine.

Note
Well is that Soul which God in mercy exercises daily either with one
cross or other, not suffering it to be rocked and lulled with Satan's balowes
in the cradle of Security.

Rejoice then in tribulation, put all your trust in God, yea, though he should
slay you, inwarpe your self in the Mantle of his mercies: Rely upon him with
vvho^ nothing is imposible: He who can make the great Camel pass through the
needle Mar. 10. 25
eye, can open the narrow gate, and let your Soul enter into his Rest.

Note
Learn of the Father of the faithful to believe in hope against hope: Romans 4.
18
God thinks himself most glorified when men believe in him, while there is
least outward appearance: His delight is to allure in the Hos. 2. 18.
wilderness, where is least appearance: Forget never that courageous words of
Job, Though he should slay me, yet will I trust in him: Note
Not to have Faith, except we feel and see, is to be faithless with Thomas
Ioh. 20. 25
while he said, that he would not believe till he was assured by the two
vvitnesses of his senses, viz. Sight and Feeling: Note
Christ out of pity granted to him contentment of ^enle, but with a sore and
a nipping check, Because thou have seen me, verse. 29.
thou have believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believed: If
ye would be blessed, believe before ye either feel or see: He who brought
meat out of the de^ourer and light out of darkness, can inlighten your mistie
mind.


The sick Man. What then would ye me to do Sir, while within and without I
can perceive no token of comfort, none appearance of favor? seeing he has
hid his countenance from my Soul, what think ye best that I should do?


The Pastor. Note
Do as Isaiah did, I will, said he, wait upon the Lord, that hides his Isa.
8. 17.
face from the house of Iakob, and I will look for him: God is like a Mother
Isa. 49. 15
that cannot forget her Child: Note
She may hide her self a little, and let it get a knock, that it may fear
and learn to beware of greater dangers: Note
Though God gloume in outward countenance at the faults of his Children, yet
in his heart are ever thoughts of peace and of mercy.

Of this David produced two Psalm. 72. 11
witnesses, Once I heard, said he, yea, twice, that mercy belongs to God:
Note
Once in all appearance he heard this read or preached by the Prophets, and
another time by the Spirit the inward teacher of the Soul: Note
Behold how the Spirit and the Word, once yea, twice, both outwardly and
inwardly have testified that mercy is with God, yea, as a thing which most
properly belongs unto him: In your more sober mood and cold blood, ye
shall confess this to be true: Note
God for a space will seem to be uncouth: He, as Naomie bade Ruth return
home with her Sister ^rpah, will bid a sinner go seek his comforts in his
bypa^t pleasures: But if with Ruth he see him steadfastly minded he will
incontinent leave off such speaking.


The sick Man. I know that God is full of mercy; Of this the Devils did never
doubt: Note
Within the compass of his compassions is mercy for a thousand worlds, but
what is that to me? How shall I come by it?


The Pastor. The Scripture is plain, Ask, said Mat. 7. 7.
Christ, and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find: Stick to him with a
truly Christian and vnshake^ resolution.

What ever ye shall seek from the Father in my Name, said Christ, he will
give it unto you: If ye believe Christ to be true, practice his precept: Note
Take once but a proof of his promise seek in the Name of Jesus whatsoever
thing may do you good, and see whether or not God shall prove faithf^ in his
promise: * Before that a man will distrust another, he will first at least be
beguiled once: Note
Upon Christ's words then with freedom of Spirit, Ask, seek, and knock, and
see whether or not your Soul shall be answered with these three viz,
receiving finding, and opening: Note
There is a worthy history in the Gospel which points at this that we
should do what Christ Commands, though there be little appeara^ce of any good
success: After that Christ had teached the people out of Peter's ship, the
Sermon being ended, the Lord said, unto Simon, Launch out into the Luke 5. 4.
5.
deep, and let down your nets for a draught, Simon answered, said unto him,
Master we have toiled all the night and have token nothing, nevertheless at
thy word I will let down the net: What ensued upon his obedience? they enclosed
such a multitude of fishes yt for the weight thereof their net brake, the
abundance was so great that they beckned to their partners which were into
another ship, that they should come to help them: And they came and filled both
the ships, so verse. 7.
that they began to sink: Note
Let your wearied Soul learn of Peter to obey Christ, though they had toiled
all the night and had taken nothing, and had lost all hope of any taking, yet
at Christ's word they let down the net.

Note
Christ in his Miracle would not cause the fish to leap into their Ship, but
he would have them to launch and labor, yea, and seek help of others: Note
Moreover, before Christ did this, they had toiled all the night before,
without any profit: Note
Christ came not to abrogat the Law by feeding idle men, but he came to
fulfill the Law, and to give a blessing to these that did eat their bread in
the sweat of their face: Genesis 2. 19
Note
Trust first in God, Sir, and at his word launch in the deep: Note
Labor in the sweat of your face, seek, ask, knock, and be assured to
find Revel. 3. ^ 14.
and receive, for yea, and Amen has spoken it: Note
Though your sins be great, if ye believe his word, he has given both his
word and his oath to forgive, two immutable Heb. 6. 18.
things wherein it is imposible that God should lie. O the unlimited and
boundless bowels of his mercy.


The sick Man. I have already rapped at the door of grace, but I have gotten
none answer: Note
God will not cast up his gates to let in such a rotten ra^call as I am: The
dinne of temptations within me is like the rumbling of a Linne, wherein waters
rush with a ^oise: I by my sins have grown so heavy upon the Lord* that I
press him as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues: While I pray, Christ
lets not on him that he either hears or sees me.


The Pastor. Though at ye first prayer ye receive not, yet cry again, and
again: Note
The poor receive not alms at your door at the first cry, and therefore they
cry again, and again, till their alms come: Note
That Cananitish woman that came from the costs from Tire and Sidon for to
seek help of Christ for her Daughter troubled with a devil, was not heard at
her first prayer, she received none answer at all, at the second she received
a very hard answer, viz, That he was sent unto others, than to the like of
her, viz. Unto the lost sheep of the Matthew. 15. 23. 24.
house of Israel. At the third prayer she received the hardest answer of all,
viz. That she and her Daughter verse. 27
were but dogs, to whom the Childrens bread, did not belong: What did she
then? Note
She took the buffet for the bit: We are but dogs, said she, why then, let
us eat the crumbes: At that word Christ could refuse her no more, but gave
her all her will, O Woman, said he, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even
verse. 28.
as thou will: Note
Though while ye cry, Christ make none answer, yet cry again: If he call
you a dog, cry for a crumbe: Note
Often his comforts are folded in his Judgments: S. Paul prayed th^ise before
God gave to him an answer: While the angel of the Devil did buffet him, 2
Cor. 12. 7
he cried for help once and again, after the third time God made answer
that his grace should be sufficient verse. 9.
for him: Jacob got not his blessing at the first suit, no not, at last it came
to worsling, and weeping, and wresting, he wept and made supplication, Hos. 12.
4
and then the Lord blessed him: Did not Christ himself in his great agony
pray, and after one prayer, pray again for the removing of the painful cup?
Note
If ye have prayed M^tin. 26 42
pray yet again, were it in the same prayer, as Christ did, of whom it is
said* That again he went away and prayed Mar. 14. 39
and spak the same words: God may let his own cry, and cry aga ne, but he
will not let them cry ^ill they be confounded: At last when his time is come,
he will arise to their help: Note
He can not sit the importunate cries of wearied spirits: Note
Because of the importunity of the seeker that neighbor in the Gospel could
not get his friend refused, the one friend came to the other friends door,
but for the lend of three loaves tor to set down before another friend, who
was in his journey, came late unto his house: A friend Luke 11. 9
of mine, said he, in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set
before him: From within the other answered, that he should not trouble him,
because the door was shute, and his Children were with him into the bed: I say
unto you, said Christ, Though he will not rise, and give him* verse. 8,
because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity* he willrise and
give him as many as he needs.

The spiritual use of this is subjoyned unto the verse following, Ask and it
shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, etc. Note
Because of the earnest suit of the poor Widow, the evil Judge who neither
feared God, nor respected man, was forced to do her justice: Note
These things are written for our learning, not to take a refusell from our God
in any thing that may be good for our Soul, man's importunity in seeking, is
Gods opportunity in giving.


The Sick Man. These things cannot be written for me: What does Christ care
for me? have not I tread under the filthy feet of mine affections that
precious Blood? Have not I counted that Blood f the Covenant as Heb. 10. 29
an unholy thing? My Spirit is in a fear that it has done dispight unto the
Spirit of grace: Note
This is the chief gash and wound of my Soul, this is a gangrene, which
eats out mine heart, the temptation is come from the bark to the bone.


The Pastor. Note
If ye were guilty of that sin, ye would not be so grieved for it: Note
These who do despite unto the Spirit of grace, mourn not for that siane as
it is an heinous offense against God, but as it procures the wages of
everlasting woe: Note
In such a man the fear of judgment is greater than the hatred of sin:
Judas could say, Oh, I have sinned in betraying the Matthew. 27 4
innocent Blood: The fear of judgment, and not the love of Christ made him
bewail his treason: The sin against the holy Ghost is not so great, but God
could forgive it, if the sinner could repent: Note
The bosom of Gods mercy is not so straightened that it cannot receive a sinner
because of the hudge greatness of his sins: There was no disease which
Christ could not cure in the days of his flesh: But because of the unbelief
of men, in some parts he could not do many miracles: Note
Observe a strange word, spoken of God by God himself, He could not do? Note
Unbelief in a manner puts the Almighty in a sort of weakness, so that
he cannot do: Note
As there was no sickness but Christ could care it, if men could believe, so
there is no sin, but God can forgive it, if man can repent: Note
If any sin vnpar doned lie still, and bear upon the Soul of man, it is
because of his unbelief: * Be earnest with God, that he would increase your
Faith: Note
Be of good courage, Sir, though many be the Psalm. 34. 19
troubles of the righteous* yet here is his comfort, the end of that man is
Psalm. 37. 37.
peace: Your Soul is traveling in the pains of the new birth: Let the Spirit
of Christ be doing, till he end the work of your Salvation within you: Note
There is sweet in his gloumes, and love in his look, even while he seems
to be angry: Note
He who with a silent look, first pricked, and then healed the heart of
Peter, shall at last after your troubles wipe away your tears, and ye shall
weep no more: Note
The look of our Lord* is a working look: Note
Our beholding is but by reception of spaces, but Christ's looking is by
emission of graces, which like streams of heat and light come from the Sun,
the worlds eye, with a most powerful influence.

Be of good courage, Sir, be not dismayed in your afflictions: Note
Such is the courage of Christ's Spouse that she calls all her troubles but
Cant. 1. 6.
a look of the Sun, a little black bleink wherewith the outward skin is
only made duskie: Note
Christ's will is that we suffer here such flea*bitings, that we may know
what he has suffered for us in saving us from eternal woe. Fix your Faith
in his merits, which are the only Oil that makes all things easy, even a
most precious restoratiue for a languishing and sorrow beaten Soul.

Be wise and ware, by your doubting to confine the boundless mercies of your
God, believe and be saved, this is the truth of the Gospel.


The sick Man. But the Law of God is of a great stricknesse; it binds all
the senses and all the thoughts and imaginations of the heart to a perfect
obedience under ye pain of Maranatha: This thought straineth hard mine heart,
and wringeth it together into a narrow room with a predominant power.


The Pastor. Note
Indeed Sir, the Law of God, strikes upon all that is in man, and oblisheth
most strict to a perfect and sincere obedience, for not only discharges it
actual Murder, Adultery, Theft, and such like, but also the counsels, and
plots, and desires to practice such villainies: Note
Yea, not only such plots, which are forbidden in the Commandment, which
forbids the evil action, but also the least desire of ill, though detasted
and abhorred with speed: Note
The tenth Command which is last, requires such a purity into the heart of
man, that it will not only have it to be clean of gross evil thoghts fed
and petted with yielding and consent, but also it requires that it be free of
the least impression of any evil thought: Note
The Soul of man is like a Cristall looking Glass: If a man but blow upon it
with his breath, at once it is darkened with a duskie skumme, wherewith it is
dimmed that till it be sweept, the image of a man's face will not appear into
it: Note
So it is of sin and of our Soul, the least affection or inclination to sin
is like a dim skumme upon the face of the Soul, caused by the stinking
breath of the devil: What is a filthy temptation? but afflatus illius impuri
Spiritus, a breathing of that unclean Spirit? Thus as ye see God indeed
requires a great purity to be in his creature, for the hammering down of
the pride of flesh, puffed up with vain and ouerweening conceits: Note
His Law requires that his Children be so clean that there be not so much
as the breath of evil upon them for to darken or make dim the polish of their
cristall color.

Note
But here is our comfort, there is an hand in the heaven* that is able to
sweep away all our sins whatsoever, and make our Soul were it never so
roustie, to become clear like gold new come out of the furnace: Psalm. 68. 13
Though ye have lain among the pottes yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. Let not the rigor of
the Law affraight you: Christ is he who has fulfilled the Law: Note
He has nailed that hand writing upon his Cross, and so has made us free of
its rigor: Sin reigns not in a godly heart, but so long as man is here,
sin has in him some poisonous and pestilent * Note
roots: If we do not what we can to employ his graces faithfully, for to
render his Talents with some profit, he shall say unto us, Matthew. 25. 23.
faithful servant come and enter into thy Masters joye: Be of good heart,
after that Gods anger like the Moon is come to its hight, it shall begin to
waine as it began to wax: After a full flood shall come a low ebb.


The sick Man. What then think ye best that I do while I am environed with
so many troubles and temptations?


The Pastor. Note
Your best is to run ever unto Christ in whom alone is virtue for to cure
your filthy flux: Let nothing hinder ^ou in the way till ye be at him: Note
By his blood he shall present you harmless and guiltles before Gods
Tribunal: Though swarms of temptations wherein is Beelzebub the master flee
buze about you, be not astonished: Note
Hold on your course, till ye come to him: Though many troubles lie into your
way, gird up your loins and run with courage through this snakie field, having
your feet shod with the preparation Ephesians. 6. 15.
of the Gospel of peace: Let grief be a whet stone unto grace.


The sick Man. Note
If I should now run to Christ, think ye that I would be welcome to him, after
that I have sported so long, and solaced my self in security, in the soft and
green way of fading pleasures: Note
While his precious word was preached, I like the crafty Psalm. 58. 4.
Adder closed mine ears, as from the voice of a charm: But think ye that
he can love me, who is one so unworthy to be loved, a lazy drousie drooping
drone, altogether carlesse in the work of my salvation.


The Pastor. There is a great misconceit of God in most men's hearts Note
Some there be who with amplifying conceats, make the way to Heaven broader
than the Scripture, like the Pharisees broad Philacteries or shaking ribbands:
Matthew. 23. 5.
Others again, as Balaams Ass thrusted his master to the wall in Numb. 22. 25
a room way, with less reason than the Ass, they thrust aside upon the
walls of doubts or despair, as though Gods mercies were so narrow that no
possibility were for to pass through: By this means they fasten upon God, an
impossibility to forgive: But to come to the point, your question is, if I
think that God can love you, who is so unworthy to be loved

I think it verily, and I am persuaded: Note
God, I confess, cannot love sin in man, but he may love man in sin: Note
God inuiteth not these whom he loves not: Come unto me, says he, all ye
that are Matthew. 11. 28
wearied: Note
Your weariness cries unto you, that which was said to the blind man, Be of
good comfort, Man. 10. 49*
arise, the Master calls thee, an humble confession in the mouth, is the
speech of contrition in the heart: God has sworn that he likes not a
sinners death. He is more glad to find us for to help us, than we can
rejoice to find him for to be helped by him: Note
Who can think but he is glad to find us, that took such pains to seek
us, that not caring for the unwholesome and noisome night air, came to our
door having his head full of dew, and his Cant. 5. 2.
locks full of the drops of the night? which is more, such was his love and
liking of us, that for to save our life he would die a cursed death: The last
words of your complaint are that ye are one who is unworthy to be loved.

* I had rather hear a sinner calling himself wretched and unworthy with the
Publican, than boasting Luke 18. 13
of his worthiness with the Pharisee: Note
The swelled hydropie words of thanksgiving that we are not lik other me^, are
a sure toking of a deadly and incurable disease: Man naturally goes about to
lessen and impair his faults, yea, often rather than he will cry guilty he
will fasten his folly by consequent upon his Maker: Adam said, The woman which
thou gave me, G^n. 3. 12
gave me of the tree, and made me to eat: Note
Many are carried down the muddie stream of ouerweening their own worth. Our
greatest worthiness is in the sense of our own unworthiness, and in the
seeking of Christ's worthiness: Note
That man is worthy before God, who finds himself unable to do that which
is worthy, and unwilling to do that which is unworthy: Note
The very strife and battle between grace and nature in theregenerat, is a
victory in Gods eyes: A broken imperfection, if it be sincere without guile,
is put up in his merciful count book, for a perfection indeed, such is the
mercy of God, while we mislike our selves: Note
These were the wisest words of Agur, in Gods account, Prou. 30. 2
when he said, I am more fool^sh than any man: S. Paul was never more dearly
beloved of God, as when he hating himself called himself the first of
sinners: Note
Cast your eyes off your self, and look unto God your strength and your stay:
Prou. ^8, 10
The Name of the Lord is a strong tower the righteous runs into it, and is
safe.


The sick Man. O that I could practice your precepts! O that my God would
inspire me with such a blessed and lively vigor of his Spirit, that might
quicken my Soul to everlasting life! O that it would please my God, strongly
to refresh me with the comfort of his countenance! But alas, out of this most
filthy puddle of my heart arise such filthy vapors which so ouer-cloud the
Sun of righteousness, that I am Mal. 4. 2.
not able to behold his face: while he did shine upon me, his most bright and
unspotted beams were fully darkened: Note
The more the heat of his word did beat upon me, the more my conversation
became stinking and loathsome like a carrion cast out before the Sun, this I
cannot deny, at the rememberance thereof I find my self charged afresh upon
the Conscience with terrors and vexations: O the dead slubber of security,
wherein I have sleept unto this hour! my custom ever was to post over my
sins, in the lump with a general slumbert confession.

There is nothing within me but matter of fear, I feel my faith fainting, I
fear my sins, I fear the wrath of God, I fear the force of Satan, the
king of fear: Note
I may be well be called that which Jeremy called Pashur, viz.
Magor-missabib, Ier. 20* 3.
that is, Fear round about, yea, I not only fear, but I feel a fearful
wrath: Note
My stubburnesse and stony heart has brought upon my Soul Gods brazen hands:
Note
Now is he doing to me that which of old he threatened against these that
were like me, If ye walk stubbornlie Liuit. 26. 27
against me, I will walk stubbornlie with you: In my youth I was guided by
the guise of times, my delight was to go with the drove, now I am lost, being
cold dead frozen in the dregs of my uncleanness.


The Pastor. The force of temptation wringeth such words out of you, as though
ye had none hope at all: Note
Your Soul Sir, is like the Moon into an eclipse: Note
There be darkness and changing of colors for a time, because your sins
like an earth come between you and the beams of Christ, the Sun of
righteousness: Note
I have seen the Moon in her eclipse for a space as though she had not
been at all into the heavens, but as she darkened by little and little, so
after the greatest darkness was past, the light returned by degrees.

Despair not Sir, of an infinite mercy, let not your heart be wasted with
weariness: Though the earth of your sins which in comparison of Gods mercy
is but a point, ouershadow the Soul for a space, while it is in this low
region, the time shall come that God shall mount your Soul above the circle of
the Stars whereunto the shadow of such an earth is not able to attain: Note
Though God for a space walk stubbornlie with you, he is not stubborn: When
ye shall begin to walk humbly Micah. 6. 8
with your God, God shall walk no more stubbornlie with you, but shall deliver
you from all your fears: Build your self upon your holy Faith. Iud. v. 20



The sick Man. I may well say with Job, My stroke Job. 13. 2.
is heavier than my groaning: Whereon can my Faith lay hold? Note
God is armed with wrath, and Satan is armed with despite: Note
I see nothing for the present but blows and bloody battles, most dreadful
fears tear in pieces mine heart strings, and suck out the inmost of mine
heart blood.


The Pastor. Though there be many adversaries, yet Christ is with you: Note
Make all your boast of him who is the Captain of your Salvation: He has
Heb. 2. 20
win the field, he has tread under foot principalities and powers, and has
led Captivity captive: Note
He Ephesians. 4. 8.
whose Faith is founded upon him, shall never be confounded: Note
His fresh bleeding wounds are cuer filled with compassions: * Though God by
our sins be moved to show some wrath, here is our great comfort, There is
no condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to these that are in Christ: Believe ye not the Scriptures? I know ye
believe: If Christ be with us, who shall be against us? Note
These who think that their sins ouer-reach Gods mercy, make the Center to
compass about the Circumference: Though he should receive a world of sinners
in the bosom of his mercy, it will not for that be the more straightened: O
the unspeakable compass of Gods compassions.


The sick Man. I doubt not of the infinite compass of his mercy, but whether
or not he will show that mercy to such sinners as I am, this often troubles
my darkened and droopping Soul.


The Pastor. Note
To show mercy to most mise rabble persons, is most familiar to Gods Nature: *
He never executes judgment till we egg him and enforce him unto: Note
For this cause, where he punishes, he is said, To (...). 28. 2^
doc his work, his strange work, and to bring to pass his act, his strange
act: He has sworn by his life, that he takes no delight in our death: Note
Our God is not rigorous against these that would feign do well: No not, but
lik as a father that pittieth his children, Psalm. 103. 13. 14.
so the Lord pittieth them that fear him, for he knows our frame, he
remembers that we are but dust: Note
Our God will not exact strictly a perfection in the life of his Children: Note
If we have an affection to do well, though we cannot affect it, he will
accept it: Note
A godly Father has said well concerning this, Deus magis delectatur affectu
quam effectu, that is* God is more pleased with the affection of a man than
with the effect it self: Note
Christ thought more of the poor woman's mites, than of rich men's millions, and
Luke 21. 2.
that all because of her good affection: Well is the Soul in whose bosom it
lodges.


The sick Man. Note
But the good affection must ever be followed with some effect: * Mine heart
has been nothing but a filthy puddle, a false Fox hole: The more I dig into
this dung hill I am the more confounded: O what a jewel is a good Conscience
co^ered up into the heart of a Christian! It is like a precious pearl in a
Ring: I am ashamed to come into Gods presence while I look upon my sins.


The Pastor. Shall the sick man be ashamed to lay out his sores to a secret
and wise Surgeon: Note
It is good to think shame of sin before we do it, for to abstain from it:
It is also good to think shame of it after it is done, for to repent us of it:
But we must never think shame to confess it: Note
This is the craft of Satan, he ta keth away shame from man at the commission
of sin, and restores it again to man at the confession of sin. Note
That which he has once taken away from a man by forged cauillation like
Zacheus, he* though in a worse sense, refloreth him fourefold: Note
A wicked man after that he has sinned, has fourefold more shame to confess
his sin before a Congregation, which indeed, should be his honor; tha^ he
had at the committing of sin the only cause of shame: Note
If he had been as ashamed to commit sin privily, as he is ashamed to
confess it publicly, he had never taken pleasure into sin.

Note
Men of widest Consciences whose hearts are s^uft and engrossed with wickedness,
will often I confess seem shame* f^st before men: Note
In the presence of a carnall^ eye, they will strain the g^ate like ^e
Maidens, which cannot eat at Table where they are seen, their throat is so
narrow, that hardly can any meat pass over, quasi vero: O but in secret
greatest gluttons, devouring black bread embrued with yesterdayes broth.

Note
She that but pitissat sippes before the Sober can skip at the scols with her
Comers, till she be sick with healths.

Even so it is of such sinners, most modest they are and shamefast while they
are seen: The gnate of a light vain word they cannot digest if men have heard
it, but in the mean time in the polluted thoughts of their profane hearts,
they are filthy Iud. v. 8.
dreamers, and if secret occasion serve; without shame of God they will swallow
Camels, making no bones: Note
Though their sin be never so huge in greatness, even Adultery, the wrack
of most famous Families, if they can strain and pass it with a close
conueyance, their heart will say of it as Lot said of Bela, Is it not a Genesis
19. 20
little one? Note
Well is that Soul which while it is tempted to sin, has ever an eye upon
its God, saying with Joseph, Now behold, my God sees me, and he is a
witness of this my doing: How then can I do this Genesis 39 9.
great wickedness and sin against God?

As for that ye say now that ye are ashamed to come before God, while ye
look upon your sins: It is good sir that ye think shame to come into Gods
presence, because of your sin, but think not shame in Gods presence to
confess your sin: Note
Sin whether secret or confessed is evil, but the confession of sin is ever
good, Gods word is true, If we confess our sins, he is faithful Ioh. ^. ^.
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: Note
Trust in God, Sir, rely upon his merciful bowels, who out of his great
compassions has said, I have Job. 33. 24
received a ransom: God loves those that are feelinglie affected, and wakened
out of the slumber of Conscience.


The sick Man. But think ye verily that God will be merciful to me?
whose Soul has been but a soil for weeds.


The Pastor. Note
I think that ye your self should think none otherwise: A good man, says
Solomon, is merciful Prou. 12. 10
to his beast: Note
It is a beastly thing for a man, to think that God will not be more
merciful to his Soul, than any man can be to his beast: Note
God was more offended at Cain for despairing Genesis 4. 13
of his mercy, than for killing of his brother: Note
Judas kindled Matthew. 27. ^.
more Gods wrath for the desperate hanging of himself* than for the betraying
of his Lord that was hanged by his treason: Note
He who offered his mouth to receive a kiss from Matthew. 26. 49
that Treatour, had never refused him mercy, if he had sought it with a
repenting heart: Because profane Ahab had but a show or ^ King. 21. 27.
outward scroofe of repentance, having Sackcloth nearest his skin, the Lord
spaired him all his days, to let men see what he will do to true repentance,
seeing he is so gracious unto that which is but an outward likeness thereof.

Note
There is no sin that offends God more highly as distrust: Note
Here is the great injury of doubt or despair, it makes the sin of a
little Grasshopper to ouer-reach the infinite mercy of the most High, as though
man a little clat of clay, could be more sinful, than that infinite Majesty
can be merciful: Happy is that Soul which God has singled out in time for
to make it loath its best loved pleasures: God delights to take up a seat in
a bruissed heart, sorrow beaten for displeasing of its God.

Take a good heart, Sir, ye have to do with a God, whose Name and Nature is
mercy, a God whose mercy Psalm. 10^. 4.
is great above the Heavens, yea, and over all his works: Note
That which Psalm. 145. 9
over reaches all Gods works, may easily ouertoppe all your sins and
iniquities: Note
God will have man with his narrow bowels of mercy to forgive his brother
seven times in a day, if he shall return seven times in a day, Luke 17. 4
saying, It repents me: Note
If God requires such mercy of man whose bowels in ye widest are not of a
span breadth, what shall he do, whose compassions are rouled together into
bowels broader than the Sea, yea, wider than the heavens? If ye can repent Sir,
God can forgive: When man cease to spurn, God begins to spare.


The sick Man. I take God to witness, that I am sorry for my sins, and so
ashamed* that with the Publicane I cannot lift Luke 18. 13
up mine eyes to the heavens: Note
I would be content to kiss the ground a thousand times for to get but one
kiss of the feet of him, who is the on^ lie help of the conscience, and the
health of the countenance: I find myself deep to the Chine in a gulf of
misery: Tell me truly Sir, I pray you: Thinkeyee that if with a mourning
heart I confess my sins to God, that he will have pity of me? I am sore
perplexed, the deep thoughts of mine own guiltiness strike men with such a
set silence that I am not able to utter my grief: My fear is that I be of
the family of hell, an hair of horror and utter woe. Be free with me, I
pray you, Thinkeyee that such an hord of misery as mine can ever meet with
his mercy.


The Pastor. Note
It is great ignorance Sir, to think that any misery of man can over reach
the infinite power of his pity, and boundless compass of his compassions: It
were more easy to turn the Sun from his course, than God from showing
mercy to repenting sinners, both his Name and Nature is mercy: See we not
out of what myres of misery Gods mercy has delivered repenting sinners: Note
In Scripture we may read long Catologes of pardoning sins: Consider well I
pray you, think deeply upon the mercies of your God: Note
Look well what he has done to others: Could the adultery of 2 Samuel 11 4.
David, the incest of Genesis 19. 33
Lot, the drunkenness of Genesis 9. 21
Noah, the murder of Genesis 34. 25.
Simeon and Leui, the persecutions of Act. 8. 3.
Paul, the perjurie of Matthew. 26 74.
Peter, or any other like sin hinder God to be merciful to the^ so soon as
they repented? * Wherefore wereall these pardons printed into God; Book, but
for to tell all ages that no man were he never so sinful* should despair of
the mercy Ezekiel. 33: 11.
of his God: As I live, says the Lord, take no delight into the death of
sinners* but rather that they should repent and live: These be his own words:
If words bear no weight* behold effects, God has so loved the world, Ioh. 3.
16.
that he has given his only Son, that whosoever belieueth in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life: Note
This is not a verbal love when a man gives his best beloved for to die for
another: Note
God has not spared his only Son, that by his satisfying sufferings, his
Justice being paid, he might show mercy to man his poor unworthy
creature, not only the Father has loved the world, but also the Son out of
unspeakable love was as desirous to die for man, as the Father was to send him:
This out of his own mouth he declared that no love could ouer-reach his love,
No Ioh. 15. 13.
man, said he, has greater love than this, than when a man lays down his
life for his friend: Note
The highest of man's love is to die for his friend: Note
But Christ's love was greater, he died for us even when we were his enemies:
Note
In another point, behold the love, of Christ scarcely, says the Apostle* for
a righteous man will one die, Romans 5. 7. ^.
yet per adventure for a good man some would even dare to die: But God
commends his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us: Note
Who shall doubt of this love which the Lord has registered on earth with the
dearest blood of his only begotten Son? Note
There is such a love in the Father, and such a love in the Son, and such a
love in the holy Ghost toward the Salvation of man, that all the heavens are
filled with love of our well, so that at the conversion of one sinner Luke 15.
7.
on earth, there is more joy among the Saints and Angels, than for fourscore
and ninteene righteous who need not repentance.

* If Sir, ye would have the heavens to rejoice, cast your self into the
arms of your God, with these words, Lord, do with me what thou will, though
thou should slay me, yet will I true in thee: If ye would see the picture of
Gods mercy, ye must draw aside the curtain of all carnal surmises.


The sick Man. Oh, that I might cast my Soul into his Arms! But how can I
do this? The Lord has turned his back on me, shall I cast my self Heb. 1^.
29.
into a consuming fire? At the first sight of his angry face my Soul will die
for fear.


The Pastor. Men often are deceived: So soon as Manoah had seen the Angel,
he Judge* 13. 22*
said, to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God: But his
wife answered more wisely, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he verse. 22.
would not have received a sacrifice from us: As she said to him, so say I to
you, If the Lord were pleased to kill you, he would not have given his Son
in a Sacrifice for you: * I is a greater love token, that God has given his
Son in a Sacrifice for you, than that he should receive any sacrifice from
you

It is the Apostles argument* that since God has given unto us his own Son,
he will not refuse us any other thing that may do us good, Christ alone is
the sinners refuge, he is a Rock of comfort which cannot be shaken, a Rock
which commands all seas of sorrows the pole of our peace. Be earnest in
prayer with God, cry till he hea^e.


The sick Man. I am wearied with crying to God, Psalm. 22. 2.
my prayers may be called, The voice of my roaring: But what shall I say? I
cry, but there is none that makes answer, God has covered himself with a
cloud, that my prayers should not pass through, he has stopped his ears
that my prayer should not be heard* This is a most fearful blast and blow in
his bloo die battle.


The Pastor. Deceive not your self, often our prayer framed and followed by
the Spirit of grace is heard, though the fense of grant be not yet brought to
us: God for causes will let a time go between, seeking and finding: Dan. 9.
23.
After this the Angel spoke unto* Daniel. At the beginning of thy prayer God
heard thee, and now I am come to tell thee: Note
See how a space will interceede between Gods hearing of man's prayer, and man's
knowledge that God has heard him. Though ye as yet know not whither God has
heard you or not, ye must not infer that God has not heard you at all: Note
Wait on a little with Daniel, till God think it time to send you a Messe^ger
for to tell you that he has heard you, yea, that he heard you at the
beginning of your prayer: till th^s Messenger come, depend wholly upon Christ's
good will: Let all your trust be in him, who is your most faithful Advocate
for to plead your cause: Note
He will be a Guide to all these that seek him: and a light to all these
that see him, and life to all these that love him: Though a Mother should
forget her Isa. 4^. 15
Child, the Lord will not forget his own, whom he has printed upon the
palms of his hands: Many Mothers think it enough to bear and bring forth
their Children, that done, they send them out a fostering unto others: Note*
But Christ not only is as a Mother bears and brings us forth by the
second birth, but also feeds and fostereth us upon his own breasts as a
loving Osea. 1^. 3
Nurse, I have, said he, carried Ephraim as a Nurse in mine arms: Note
Be of good comfort Sir, let the joye of Christ relish all your sorrows, he
was the man of grief, that he might Isa. 53. 3.
bring joye to the world, he was beaten with stripes, that of his stripes he
might make physic for sick Souls, by his stripes we have health: Note
In a word his flesh was pierced and bored that in these holes there might be
a City of refuge for sinful Souls, pursued with the tempest of Gods wrath,
the auenger: Note
Woe to him that makes an idol of his own sufficiency, as the Thunder
chiefly beats the highest steeple heads so does the fire of Gods wrath
strike at the hight and top of proudest spirits.


The Sick Man. By the most part of your speech Sir, I think that your chief
comfortes against Death and all other troubles, are grounded upon Christ's Blood
and his wounds*


The Pastor. That which I say Sir* is true: Note
When as all things will forsake us and fall from us, Christ will stick and
stand fast by us, that I speak truly, I darre be answereable for it in the
presence of my God: Note
As ye must one day make a reckoning to God, of that which ye hear, so must
I that self same day give an account of that which I teach: My Sermons must be
read before him that sent me to preach, for he will know how I have fed his
Lambs: * If I build upon Note
Christ the fundamental Stone, the perles and precious Stones of Christ's 1
Cor. 3. 21
passions, I shall get a reward: But if I build upon him Stubble, Hay, or
verse. 14
Wood: Because I hold fast the foundation, he will save my Soul, when he
shall try my Doctrine with the fire and light of his word: But because I
builded upon him the combustible light Stubble and Hay of humane words, of
wordlie eloquence, I shall be saved very hardly, as by the fire of great
affliction: Note
For this cause knowing the great danger, I wish that all my comforts to you
and all others be only of Christ, who is both our surety and our Savior:
Note
He in love swallowed the bitter pill of death, the cure of all our diseases:
After that, for our cause his face had been covered for our blasphemous,
spittle and his back battered with bruises, he continued in his love, and for
our cause would be hanged upon that stinking l^ll Mount Caluarie, suffering a
death which God had blasted with a curse.

Note
I will tell you plainly, Sir, that there is no meditation so comfortable to a
wearied Soul, as that which is concerning the bleeding wounds of Jesus, the
vanquisher of hell: Note
His wounds are as many windows wherethrow we may see the unspeakable
abundance of our Lords love.

Note
Let men run from East to West, from South to North, they shall find no
place of auoydance from the fie^ie wrath, but only into these his wounds,
which well may be called, The refuge or Sanctuary of a troubled Soul. Here
is liberty for a Soul that is enfolded into the snares of Gods judgments:
Note
Here is a hiding place against the evil day: Here is the hole of the Rock
the window of the Arc where Exodus 33. 22. Genesis 8. 9.
poor Souls like Doves, that can find no footing, may enter in: * Here is a
City of refuge for chaissed sinners: The people that dwell Isa* 33. 24
therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: There be wide bounds within the
compass of his compassions. Seeing Christ is such an One, run and hie you as
fast as ye can unto this Rock of refuge: Note
He who shall be founded thereon, shall never be confounded: Note
Take up all the matter in a word, the righteousness of Christ Jesus purchased
unto us by his Blood, is the only cure and cover of our sins: Note
All other things are but like fig-leaues too short and thin a cover, like
these cutted coats of David's servants, which covered 2 Samuel 10. 4.
not their buttockes.

Note
How darreanie rotten stinking attainted flesh attempt to attribute any worth
unto it self, in the atchieuement of that Pearl and peerless work of man's
Salvation, whereof Christ Jesus is ye only Author and actor.

Many who would seem in this world to carry away the Garland of godliness,
are hanged in this snare: Away with such a pang of pride and elevation of
Spirit.


The sick Man. I see now Sir, that Christ is only the Salve which is able to
heal the sores of the Soul, the blisters and bitinges of our Conscience: I
see that his Blood is the only liquour of that Fountain of David for sin
and uncleanness: Note
But I Ezech. 33. 1.
am so defiled with wilful wallowing in the puddle of sin, that hardly
think I that ever he will daine to look upon such a bemired Dog as I am,
who have followed the swing and the sway of the most filthy: Of me it is
written, Let him that is filthy be filthy still.


The Pastor. Let not that discourage you: * Ye cannot be ignorant in what
estate he found his Church: At the first before he married her, he found her in
her first birth, a cast away, a bloody brood, a misshapen creature, with a
long Navel uncut, unsalted; Ezekiel. 16. 5
and not swadled, lying in the open field to the lothing of her person in the
day she was borne: Yet all that made not him to loath her: Note
But after that by two commands of life, he had bidden her, Live live, whereby
she got verse. 6.
strength, he decked her, and swear unto her, and entered into covenant with
her and she became His: Behold and wonder at the love of our Lord, the Spouse
of our Souls: Note
All our filthy and bloody deformities could not scarre him from the love of
our Souls: If any be defiled with sin and uncleanness, let them come to
him, who will not refuse to wash them: He is the only lauer of the Church:
Note
There is nothing pure, but that which he has purged: It is he alone who has
repaired all our ruins: Listen unto his voice, crying to all sorrow beaten
sinners, Come unto me.

Think often upon this, Sir, if ye desire comfortes in your distress: Note
The great work of man's redemption finished by the Blood and death of God, is
a work worthy of continual wondering: As for the work of the Creation, it
cost the Lord but his Will and his Word: Note
But the work of man's redemption was a costly work, it was chargeable to
God, it cost him the best thing that he could give, even the lif of his Love,
our Lord: Note
O what a mercy! O what a lively Love! The meditation of this work should
work in our heart a loving compulsion and a compelling love: Note
The thought of this made S. Paul to say, The love 2 Cor. 5. 14
of Christ constrains me: Note
What shall a Christian man fear, having Christ his Brother to be both his
Aduocat and his Judge, his Surety and his Savior? Note
Was not his blessed Body displayed abroad upon the Cross, with his arms
spread, a crying jesture, a jesture crying with a voice, Come unto me all ye
that are Matthew. 11. 28
leadened and wearied? Note
Oh, that we were sick for the love of him, who died for ye love of us! Note
Oh yt we were wounded with love, when we remember his precious wounds, from
which gushed out the streams of our Salvation: Note
Flee Sir, to the holes of this Rock, flee to the bores of his wounds, run
not with Adam unto the shrubbes for to hide your self from God, here is your
hiding place in the Lords deepest wounds: Note
He is the fortress of your Faith, our strength and our stay, the only
help and ground of all our hopes, our warrantable justice: He only is the
body of all spiritual comfort* all other things were they never so specious,
are but show and resemblance: Shroud your self under his protection, and throw
no more your self upon temptations, whereby ye may be disabled from manfully
fighting out the good fight, followed with a Crown, filled with massines of
glory.


The sick Man. Now well is me that ever I heard tell of Christ: Blessed be
the day the Son of God was borne: But alas, where are the holes of that
Rock, where my wearied Soul may enter in?


The Pastor. Lift up your lumpish thoughts, seek first to the nail holes in
his feet begin humbly, creep in into these lowest wounds, and there for a
space settle your abode, kiss his sacred Feet, wash them with the true tears
of repentance, wype them with the hairs of your head, from thence look up,
and come to the nail holes of his Hands: Note
Be busy there like a Be, suck out of them the Honey of Heaven, from thence
go to the Spear hole in his side: Note
Let your Soul sit down there, and crowd like a Dove, ever till Christ let it
in into the hole of the Rock, the place of its everlasting rest: Note
If once the faithful Soul Christ's Turtle win in into the fortress of his
wounds, from thence it will boast all the enemies of its Salvation: From
thence will it cry to the flesh, crouch: There it cares not for the Serpents
hissing, nor for the Cockatrices den, Isa. 11. 8.
nor for the Graves gaping, nor for Deaths dungeon, nor for the Popes
Purgatory, his pardons, his dirges, and his Trentals, which bring fat
morsels to Baals Priests: Christ is mine, will he say, He is to me
advantage both in death and life: Note
As Genesis 8. 9.
the Dove found no footing till she came to the Arc, so the Soul can find no
rest, till it come to Christ: I^ ever totters, til it lean upon his Love.
Happy is ye Soul yt is secured with ye seal and secret impression of Gods
favor.


The sick Man. If I had faith, to believe, all would be well: I acknowledge yt
there is sufficient help in Jesus, but such a help is only for these that are
strong in faith, my faith is both faint and fecklesse.


The Pastor. Christ has said plainly, that he will not quench the smoking
flax: S. Peter was Isa. 42. 3.
not a man of strong faith, when he began to sink down into the Sea: Said
Matthew. 14. 31
not Christ unto him, Thou man of little Faith* why have thou doubted? Note
He reproved him for the weakness thereof, but cast him not off for the
littlenes thereof.


The sick Man. That was another matter: Christ was with him, Christ took him
by ye hand: * There was virtue in ye grip of Christ's hand, as was in the hem of
his garment Luke ^. 44
while it was touched: Such a weak Faith as mine cannot mount up so high as
that it may reach unto Christ into the heavens.


The Pastor. Though your faith be weak, and Christ also be absent in body,
yet be not for that disquieted: he is present in his Godhead: As for the
weakness of your faith, pray God to strengthen and increase your faith: Note
Faith though little, is of great force, a grain of it is able Matthew. 17. 20
to remove Mountains, and cast them into the Sea.

I pray your Sir, to entreat God for a fixed heart, for as I perceive, endless
are the mazes of Satan's circular temptations, which vnavoidablie, if they be
not barred out by grace, wind themselves into man's heart with a sly and
crafty insinuation.


The sick Man. O man of little faith that I am, if I had Faith, I would
believe that I had it, if I had Faith, I am persuaded that I should have Peace:
Being Romans 5. 1.
justified by Faith, we have Peace toward God: That Peace I seek, and
cannot find: These troubles wherewith I am tossed plainly argue that my Faith
is failed.


The Pastor. I answer, that who ever are justified by Faith, they also have
peace toward God, though such a Peace be not ever felt: That which a man
feels not, is not ever absent: Note
A man in a trance knows not that he lives, and yet he is not altogether
deprived of life: The tree seems to be dead in time of Snow and frost, and
yet it has life, and sap at the root: These then that are justified by
Faith, have Peace, but their peace is not ever sensible, but often is disturbed
with fearful temptations.


The sick Man. I desire to know of you what is that ye properly call the
peace of Conscience.


The Pastor. I take the qualmes of Conscience chiefly to proceed from a
sense of Gods wrath kindled for some sins of commission or omission: Note
Satan also with his billows blows at this fire, yea, often while God is
pacified, he assaulteth the silly Soul with false fears and counterfeit
alarums.

Note
Now when by the virtue of Christ's intercession the fire of Gods wrath is
quenched, the Conscience of man begins to settle and grow calm, and in
stead of accusing us any further, it begins to excuse and acquit us before
the Tribunal of our God: Note
Upon this does ensue a pleasant calmenes, quietness and rest, in the Soul
of a sinner.

Though this Peace be sore envied and often troubled by Satan's railing and
^aging, yet the Soul having peace with God, is at last after a little space
made free of all its fear^, and is made sensible of that truce and atonement,
even of that Peace which passes all understanding. Philip. 4. 7



The sick Man. I would earnestly learn of you how a man whose Conscience is
troubled, may recover that Peace which once he had.


The Pastor. The best method I know, is that a man ripe first up his
Conscience, and spy what mot of sin is fallen into his Conscience, which is
the eye of the Soul: Note
The eye being hurt will water and power out tears, so must the Conscience
be sore grieved for offending of God: Secondly, out of this grief it must
sigh before the Lord in feruant prayer, first, for forgiveness chiefly of
that sin, which lies heauiest upon the heart: Thirdly and last of all, the
Soul must suit earnestly for the restoring of that joye.

After this manner David did proceed in that penetentiall Psalm: First of
all, he was exceedingly grieved, which grief did burst out in words watered
with tears, Have Psalm. 5^. 1
mercy, upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, etc. Thus after
he had cried for to be washen, and purged with Hysope, he cried that verse. 7.
God would restore unto him the joys verse, 12.
of his Salvation: Above all things let such a person be often groaning to
God in prayer, for to catch some blinke of Gods reconcealed face in Jesus his
bloody wounds: Note
That blood of sprinkling is the only Salve for the sores of the Soul. To
all this let not these helps be neglected, viz. that such troubled Souls
make use of good Books, by whose help their devotion may be roused up, for
to remember the days of old: Note
My chief counsel is that such persons fix steadfastly the eye of their
Faith upon Jesus bleeding on the Cross, whereupon he paid our ransom, and
triumphed over all the enemies of our Salvation: This is the truth whereof
Israel had the typ in the brazen Serpent, which healed all the be holders: My
counsel also is, that such troubled persons frequent the Sermons of powerful
Preachers, and seek conference with them, whom God has stamped with a
powerful gift of Teaching and integrity of life, men who have had great
experience in the ways of God, and who have smarted themselves at other times
by such fearful nipping checks, men who are not ignorant of the Devils
devices.

It is said of Christ himself, the Orient and Dayspring, That in all Luke ^.
78. Heb. 2. 17
things it behooved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: For verse. 18.
in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. See how it behooved Christ himself for to suffer temptation,
that he might be able to succor us in our temptations.

While the troubled sinner is in doing all these duties, he must carefully
watch over all his ways, that by no sin either in thought, word, or deed he
grieve the Spirit of God again: For a new sin thrust upon the heart, will
make all the closed wounds of the Conscience to gap and to bleed afresh: A
Soul that is become relaps shall find God harder, to be entreated, than of
before, not without much ado shall it get peace, that after by any known sin
it has quarrelled again the Spirit of comfort.

But indeed, he or she whose Conscience has been once well lashed with
Gods whip, and battered with his blows, had rather run throw a fire, than
anger the Lord again: At the first appearance of a temptation they will start
for fear, and with a sigh will cry to God with a trembling voice, O my God,
how should I think this wickedness, let be to do it? Who knows the power
of thy wrath? According to thy Psalm. 90. 11
fear so is thine anger.

Note
Too too many in this Nation affect this sickness of Conscience, as being
only the disease of the holiest: This they will utter as ye would think with
bleeding groans before men; while indeed they are but scorning the world*
sporting wantons, laughing under a painted mask of misery: Their tears are
praeficarum lachrymae, tears without trouble, water sold for the wind of man's
praise: They are spots in the Church, which make the ways of God to be evil
spoken of, such open a wide door unto Atheism.


The sick Man. Fie upon hypocrisy, God will not be scorned, there is nothing
so secret but at last it shall be made manifest: I am assured, that who for to
ca^ch men's applauses, feign a mourning for their sins, the Lord shall suffer
them to fall either in some scandalous sin, or other fearful inconvenient,
whereby they shall be forced in earnest to mourn to their shame: In my judgment
there is no such bitter and comfortless mourning as is that of these for their
manifested sins, who once did most feign deep groans for catching of
applauses.


The Pastor. To such may well be applied that of the Prophet, Thine own
wickedness Ier. 2. 19.
shall correct thee, and thy backslydings shall reprove thee, know therefore
and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts.

Let no man sport in secret sins, were it in a thought, for that which
Eccles. 10. 20.
has wings will declare the matter.


The sick Man. I have often been seeking out the reason wherefore the wicked
in the world for the most part, know not what trouble of Conscience means:
What think ye?


The Pastor* Their heaven is on earth: David seeing their peace and
prosperity, did bear them at envy, yea, so that his feet were almost gone:
They are not in trouble, said he* in trouble like Psalm. 73. 5.
other men, neither are they plagued like other men, etc. Even at their death
he could perceive no bands of any vehement pains, after that the whole space
of their life, they had enjoyed morethan their heart could wish:

Note
How ever it be that they prosper in this world, yet certainly if a man will
go and seek God in his Sanctuary, there he shall tell him verse. 18.
that he has set them in slipperie places, and that when he awaketh, verse.
20.
he shall despise their image: There is a hell for them after the heaven of
this earth.


The sick Man. I would gladly be instructed of you, that I might discern
between the true solid Peace of conscience which the godly enjoye, and that
senseless benummednes of the wicked, wherein they being deceived, cry, Peace,
peace, even while God is 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
putting the fiery lunt unto the mosine of their sudden destruction. Let me
hear of the peace both of the one and other. I think all men should study to
mark the difference.


The Pastor. The Reprobates who have their portion in this life, will seem
indeed to have that true Peace of Conscience, because nothing within troubles
them: Note
Their peace indeed is nothing but a dead benum nednesse of spirit, their
Conscience being Seared, is not capable of feeling.

I shall give you two special marks whereby ye shall discern a true Peace
and quietness of Conscience from the dead benummednes which the wicked have.

First, a Conscience which has Gods Peace is awful of sin, wittinglie and
willingly for a world it would not despite the Spirit of grace: Note
But the wicked who is in a false peace, flitteth from sins to sin, as a
Fly from scab to scab, laying all his burden securely upon the broad
shoulders of Gods mercy.

Secondly, the seared dead Conscience of the wicked has but a part of that
which is called Peace: Their hearts will be senseless of all evil, they will
have no war within, no sorrow is there: Note
But as they have no spiritual sorrow for their sins committed, neither have
they any spiritual joye for the sense of their sins remitted.

Here then know the true Peace of God in the Conscience: Note
The unspeakable grief for sin is assuaged, the fearful qualmes are
calmed, the raging and roaring tempests are allayed, the swelling seas are
fallen and ebbed, God is come in the calm, not only for to wype away the
tears of sorrow from their eyes but also for to fill their mouths with
laughters of joye: Note
So not only are they void at last of the sense of most terrible horrors, but
they are sensible of a joye which will make them to dance with David before
the Arc, yea, to laud the Lord at a Stake, amidst tarry poudered flames of
fire. This is that continual feast which cheareth the godly Soul amidst the
bloody bickerings of Satan, and burning persecutions of merciless
missacrours.

Let all men try their Peace at this Touchstone, if not only they find their
former pains lessened, but also a joye in GOD, whereby their Soul is feasted
with such contentme^t, that for all ye gold of Ophir they would not loss it,
their estat is doubtless happy: Note
Who ever he be that finds this, he may sing to GOD, Glory be to God in
the highest heavens, peace on earth, and toward my Soul good will.


The sick Man. Blessed be God who has enlightened your eyes for the spying
out of that remarkable difference between the true and false peace of men's
Conscience: Ineuer heard it so clearelie discussed.

Note
O but Satan is ever busy to mar this Peace of the godly, who will not war and
wage battle under his colors. I have seen these who are now godly before
their conversion to be very vain, light, and wanton sinners, while they thus
did run ryote in sin with the wicked world, I have seen them most mirrie
and solacious company, I often wondered to see them dance and sing, roar and
revel: I could see no bands of sorrows in their life: They never complained
of Satan's malice against them.

Note
But so soon as once they began to love the Preaching of the Word, and to
loath the carnal pleasures which once they loved, I have seen them again so
courbed down with grief and mainelie crossed, as though it had no more been
they: Satan lets them nor rest, neither night nor day.


The Pastor. In that is no wonder, Satan will be very loath to trouble his
own: So soon as he has lulled them asleep into the credle of security, he
will be very careful that none waken them: Out of a counterfeit love he
will adjure the watchmen, by the Roes and by the Hindes, that they Can. 2. 7.
waken not his beloved, till he please: Note
He will say of him, as Christ's Disciples said of Lazarus, but in another
sense, If he sleep, he shall do Ioh. 11. 12
well* See how careful Satan is for the rest of his own, lest that being
wakned, they run away from him: Note
This Christ himself in the days of his flesh made clear by a similitude,
When said he, a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace.

Note
So long as Satan like a strong armed man keeps the palace of a wicked man's
heart his alone, so that none be welcome but he, he will let that man be,
lest that by troubling and disquieting his peace, he grow sorry and mislike
his service: But if once he perceive the Soul to shrink, seeking an occation
to be quite of him, he will put all the powers of hell in arms and vproare,
and will drive furiously 2 King. 9. 20
lik Iehu for to regaine it again, into his kingdom: Note
While a Thief or a murderer is in the stocks fast in fetters, the Iaylor
will be merry, and will sing besides him, as though he were his friend, but
if the most secret hour of the night he hear him knocking off his bolts, and
perceive him to have escaped, he will waken all the city, and pursew him
with* hue and with cries: Note
Satan is like the Iaylor, a peaceable spirit so long as the Soul is fast in
his fetters and clogged with his bolts in a deep dungeon: Note
But if once he perceive that the Spirit of Jesus has, as the Angel did to
Peter in the prison, smot him on the side and raised him up, making all his
chains to fall from him, and that the man arises up quickly, and girdeth
himself, and binds on his Sandales, and casts his garment about him as
Peter did, for to run and follow his God, it is a wonder how that cruel
Spirit will roar* and rage like a Bear Prou. 17. 12
bereeued of her whelps: If he get a grippe of the poor man, he will
cause him roar with gasping groans, till God come with an helping hand.


The sick Man. Indeed Sir, ye by your both plain and learned discourse have
dispelled ye mist of many difficulties.

The last difficulty wherein my Soul did stick as ye may remember, was
concerning my Faith, which I concluded not to be, because I had no peace of
Conscience, This did mar and deface all my comforts: My ground was from the
Apostle, whose words are, That being justified by Faith, we have peace Romans
5. 1
toward God: I have heard you declare that a man may have Faith and yet for
some space not to be sensible of that peace.

O my God, let thy mercy be closely applied to my Soul, strengthen my Faith,
that I may grippe and apprehend it with a sure and everlasting hold: Oh that my
soul might lie down in that peace that passes all understanding: I am sore
troubled with a weak and wavering heart, which is yet tossed, and swayed to
and fro with doubts and difficulties lik a feather in the wind.

Alas, Sir, I complain of the weakness of my Faith: That Faith must be
strong, which is able to draw down Salvation from the heavens, and batter
down strong holds and overthrow principalities and powers, and conqueare, and
subdue, tame, repress, and repel our strongest corruptions.

Let me see I pray you any partiticulare example of a weak Faith, whereby any
at any time have been saved* by the Light of Gods word dispell this mist of
ignorance: Make me free of this shrewd temptation.


The Pastor. That of Peter in the New Testament Matthew. 14. 31
is remarkable: Christ himself called him, A man of little Faith, and yet who
doubts of his Salvation? The other example in the Old Testament was in type
and figure, when the Israelites were biten with the fiery Serpents, their
only remeed was Numb. 21 9.
to look up to the brazen Serpent: All this was a type and figure of a Soul
wounded with sin, looking up unto Christ with the eye of Faith: Note
Now it is certain, that some in Israel were bleared, and some of a weaker
sight than others, but the weakness of their sight could not hinder the cure,
nay, the old man with his dimmed eyes beholding as through a mist that type of
Christ was as soon and soundly cured, as he whose eyes were in their
greatest vigor: Note
The meat taken with a paralitick and trembling hand will not refuse
nourishment to the body, no more than if it were taken with a strong and
stable arm: Note
Faith is the eye of the Soul whereof the Israelites eyes were but a figure:
Christ is the truth of the brazen Serpent: Note
Though this eye be dimmer into some, yet if it see, that sight is Salvation:
Faith is the hand of the Soul, Christ is the food* Though this Faith tremble,
Christ trembles not, the palsy is not in the food.

Be of good courage, Sir, fear not this trembling fear, the work of
Salvation cannot be wrought, but with fear and trembling: Though ye Psalm. 6.
5.
fear, yet despair not, there is me^cie with God in a unspeakable measure:
Note
In one Psalm it is said, again and again, unto six and twenty times, that
his mercy endures for Psalm. 136.
ever.

This mercy I confess, is whiles concealed from the godly, for ends best
known unto their heavenly Father: Note
Who is he that often shall not spy at diverse times his mind to be dulled
or ouer-cast with some cloud of Milancholie: Note
While this humor domineeres, Satan makes choice of it, for therein to set a
seat for grimme and grievous temptations. Note
While he perceives the body to be troubled and distempered* he quickly
afresh represents unto the veiw of our Soul the greatest and most greiuous
sins of our unregeneration, and that into their fullest and foulest shape: By
this means deep gashes and wide gappes are made in men's Conscience.

Be strong in God, Sir, save his honor, by putting your trust in him: Note
Shall Gods word cry to man, six and twenty times, that he is a merciful
God; and shall man doubt of such a mercy? If such mercies were but for some
days, ^nners might think that in some dismal days of the year mercy by no
means could be found? But behold, the musical twne of Gods mercy, is upon
an everlasting Note for his mercy endures Psalm. 13^.
for ever.

He who doubts of Gods favor after so many testimonies may provoke the
Lord against himself: Note
Moses by his doubting at Meribah, made the Lords wrath to wax hot against
him: While he should have spoken to the Rock he scourged Numb. 20 8.
the Rock more with these words of doubt, shall we cause water come forth*
verse. 10.
than he did with the Rod: That Rock was Christ: Moses while by doubting he
scourged the Rock, he scourged Christ, for that Rock was 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Christ: Who would ever have thought that Moses with his Law Rod would have
scourged Christ the substance both of Law and Gospel?

Who ever he be that doubts thinking that God either cannot, nor will not
be merciful unto him, so far as in him is he scourges the Lord Jesus, as
these who by their evil life are said to crucify to themselves Heb. 6. 6.
the Son of God afresh, and to put him to an open shame.

Believe and be saved: God is both mild and merciful: Is not his Command
directs unto man that he show mercy with cheerfulness? Is he Romans 12. 8
not called the Father of mercies? Is it 2 Cor. 1. 3
not written, that he is a God rich in Ephesians. 2. 4
mercy? O these bleeding bowels of compassions* What said he at last, while
he saw the great affliction of Ephraim? How, said he* shall I give Hos. 11. 8.
thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver the Israel? How shall I make thee as
Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? After these four, How, how, how, how,
Mercy in a manner did turn about h^s heart with such a force, that he cried
out, Mine heart is turned within me, my repentinges are kindled together: If
mercy be not in his divine breast, where shall it be found?


The sick Man. All that ye have said, Sir, concerning the mercy of God in
Christ belongs on lie to repenting sinners, who have bewailed the errors of
their life, but not to such a varnished hypocrit as I am, who have remained
fast rooted in the rottenesse of must filthy corruptions, which I had never
care to curb or control.

My secret sins like a consuming canker, have freted out the very heart of
Grace: Note
From my Youth I have wandered from the way of happiness, and have been like
an idle Beggar in the way ready to go which way so ever the staff fell.

My greatest fear now is, that I have too long delayed the day of my
repentance, what know I if God will forgive a man so grievous sins not
repented of, till he come to his deathbed? Note
Hardly can I think that in so short a time a man can bind up friendship
with his God, with whom he has been at feed his whole life time.

O merciful God, melt my marble heart: Put into my breast the precious pearl
of Faith: O that with unspeakable groans of grief for my By past evil spent
life, I might redeem the time which I have so lauishlie misspent: Oh, that the
moisture of my body were all melted into tears, if thereby I culd be persuaded
yt my silly Soul were already utterly out of the reach of all the powers of
Hell: I have too long most vainelie sported my self in Mesech, and ruffled in
the tents of Kedar: Note
If I had not so long delayed to return to my God, my Soul already in hope
should be feasting upon the joys of eternity.


The Pastor. Note
Indeed Sir, it is a very dangerous thing for to delay repentance to the last
gasp, or to one Gods mercy, as many do, who never lay down the weapons of
rebellion, till they can sin no more.

Oh, that men would understand their danger! Note
Are not our enemies both strong and near? Hannibal ad portas, the Devil is
at the door: Note
But such is the madness of many, were their Souls never so soiled with
sin, that if once they can get out but these few words, God be merciful to
me, they think that they shall be in heaven before their feet be cold:
Such men think that in death it is easy to consure the Devil with a word.

It is but folly to put Salvation upon such hap-hazard as many do: Note
But yet ye must know that he that made the Time, will not be subject unto
Time, the King of Time is Eternal: GOD is eternal, and has all Times at his
command: Note
There is no Time that can hinder him to be merciful to a sinner, at
whatsoever time he shall repent: Note
For this cause Christ for to let the world see that he can forgive when a
sinner can repent, he took from the Cross the Soul of a condemned Thief,
and after that he had absolved it, he carried it to Paradise: God has Luke
23. 43.
said, That at whatsoever time a sinner shall repent, that he will put away
his wickedness out of his rememberance.

Fra once he has said the word* he cannot take his word again: He is
constant in all his ways, and therefore never says and vnsaith one thing: Has
he said, and shall he not do Numb. 23 19.
it: Note
If ye can but wait a little* ye shall find all the fierceness of his fur^e
to be turned into the fullness of his favor: * He who shall seek him
earnestly, shall not receive an empty answer: There is mercy in heaven, for
an hell of conscience upon earth: Cast all your cares aside, cast your self
into the arms of your God: Cast thy burden upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22
and he shall sustain thee: Be strong in the Faith of God: In hope believe
Romans 4. 18
against hope, though for a space your Spirit be distempered, yet still rely
upon the mercy of your God: Go not off this, that the Blood of Jesus was shed
for you, and that Christ has paid your ransom: What ever Satan by his
temptations suggest unto you, believe him not: Take my counsel I pray you,
Sir, that I speak the truth, here I darre take it upon my Souls Salvation.


The sick Man. I thank God from mine heart, that ever I heard you, your words
are full of comfort: O how indebted am I to ye mercy of my God, who has
unlocked the bowels of his love toward me At our first meeting I found my
self inuolued with much misery and mischief but since I have heard you, I
find, I bless God, some stirring of God, Spirit within mine heart, mine heart
before this time has been lik that Altar at Athens, wherein was engraven in
great Letters, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD: I heard often Act* 17. 23
of God, but I never knew him truly until now: This is the infancy of my
regeneration: I have been too long a stranger from so good a God: My Soul now
rejoices after many toes and froes: Note
I find mine heart loosed from the cartropes of my sins, and linked unto my
Savior with stronger chains than of before: There be better motions within,
than ever I did feel before this hour.

O thou who is Love, let my Soul 1 Ioh, 4. 8
be possessed of a sound and constant love to thy most merciful Majesty: Bring
my Soul from the shadow of Matthew. 4. 16
death to the light of thy countenance, O Lord, my strength and my Psalm. 19. 14
Redeemer.

O Lord of Hosts, give me strength Isa. 1. 9.
and courage to fight out this Christian 1 Pet. 5. 4
fight, whereof the victory is glorious, and the reward a Crown of
immortality: Inspire mine heart with the life of Grace: Note
If thy care had not hitherto preserved my Spirit, my Soul had long since been
drowned in a sea of sin and sorrow: There have been such lecks, into mine heart
that except the Lord in time had pumped it with repentance, my Soul long since
had made ship-wracke of 1 Timothy 1. 19
Faith.

O how much am I beholden to my God, who has taken longer day with me, than
within any others, from whom before they were provided, he has demanded his
due: Blessed be my God, who has made me free from the frenzy of Spirit, by
appearing unto me in a greater calm: The feeling of his wrath past, I hope
shall be a sauce for to sharpen my blunted love toward him in all times to
come, with undaunted constancy.

I perceive now that the day is darkened, and that the night approaches: Oh,
that I might continue conference with you, but least I should weary you, from
the best of my bowels my dear Pastor I bid you farewell.

I look to morrow for a new conference, for with many difficulties mine heart
is yet troubled and tossed: I requeast you before ye go, to help me with
your prayers.


The Pastor. I bless God, who has begun to intermingle the sweet honey of
some comfortes with the bitter gall of painful temptations: Note
GOD who has begun to make you his his Prentice in Grace, shall an one make
you a free man in Glory: Note
As Ministers must first sit at Gamaleels feet for to learn, before they sit
in Moses chair for to teach, so must Christians first be humbled with
temptations on earth, before they be honored with exaltations into the
Heavens.

Note
Well is the man that is truly humbled by GOD, and made a fool in his own
eyes; for he which thinks himself wise, is a fool, ipso facto: Note
All natural wisdom without Spiritual humility is like ouernights Manna
which did no good, but mould and fust: God by diverse temptations, first carnal
and after spiritual, has besieged the corruptions of your nature, and has
battered down the strong holds and fortified Castles of your imaginations and
reasoning the high things which exalt themselves against the knowledge of GOD:
Before he leave you, he shall bring into Captivity 2 Cor. 10. 5
every thought of your heart to the obedience of Christ: According to your
desire we shall bend our knees to GOD in prayer, that ye may spell his love
out of such a Fatherly correction, and learn in time to stay your self upon
his kindness and good will.


A Prayer for the sick Man.
O LORD, of Mercy, whose bowels are turned within thee, when thou beholdest
the grief of the godly; Be here present for the relief of this thy poor
distressed Servant: His eyes are steadfastly fixed upon Thee, as Psalm. 123. 2
the eyes of the hand maid are fixed upon the hands of her Mistress.

Behold, LORD, and hear his amazed broken heart, braying after Psalm. 42. 1
thee as an Heart panting after the Rivers of waters: Pity this silly Soul
which is like the dry ground gaping for drops of Rain.

Oh, LORD, his strength is d^yed up like a Pot shard, his tongue cleaves unto
his jaws, and thou have brought him into the dust of death: Let the sweetest
comfortes of thy bleeding bowels be powered into his broken heart: Make the
joyful Light of thy countenance break forth upon his drooping and cloudie
Conscience: O strengthen his silly Soul in this heavy hour: Pacify the
pangs of his remorse, that he may lay hold upon the merits and mercies of
thy Son JESUS.

Come gracious GOD, with thy strength for his succor: Satan a most bitter
enemy, has besieged his Soul with most fearful temptations. There is no
mischief which could be devised, but he has m^stered it and set it in
battle arraye against him: While he had health and youth, this enemy was the
chief entiser of him unto sin, by bearing him in hand, that it was an easy
thing after many sinful pleasures, enjoyed to return unto God, whose favor
and kindness might be procured by and by without any labor.

But now, Father, while he sees his day declining and the Sun of his life
near its setting, of an Entiser he is become an Accuser, striving by all
means to cause him make shipwreck upon the banks of despare: Night and day
he vexes and teareth his Soul by whispering into his ear most impudent lies
against thy Truth, viz. That he is so miserable, that thou art not able to be
merciful unto him: He suggesteth most craftily that it is in vain for him to
sue to thee for thy grace, that there is none hope of mercy left for such a
sinner, that there is none access unto the Throne of Grace, for the prayers of
Heb. 4. 16.
such a miserable wretch; and that it is no purpose for him to pray.

But what? LORD, thou who art Truth it self, will thou suffer this father of
lies to trouble still thy Servant? Ioh. 8. 44
Will thou heareanie longer thine infinite mercy thus reproached and reviled,
as though thou were not able to pa^don the faults of thine own poor
creature? What is that to say but that God shall cease to be that God whose
mercy is above all his works?

O LORD, most merciful, can the sinful scarlet redness, and the Crimsin
color of man's corruptions be ^o dyed that it cannot be washen away with the
Blood of thy Lamb? O seal up the sense of thy love in his heart, make thy
Spirit to whisper in his ear, that mercy is with thee, that thou may be both
feared and loved.

Shall any thing. LORD, withhold the heart broken sinner from Heb. 4. 16.
the Throne of Grace? Is not this the voice of thy Spirit, Come unto Matthew. 11.
28.
me all ye that are wearied and ladened with sinned? Is not thy promise
written in thy Book, that thou will ease them?

O most loving Father, even in despite of Satan, and his most despitfull
suggestions, make his Soul bold and confident, that it may adventure it self
to the merciful Throne of thy Grace: Clear and cleanse his eyes from the
Spiritual goare of sin, that with Simeon he may Luke 2. 30. 31
see thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

O dear JESUS, deliver his Darling from the power of the Dog: Incline thine
ears and hear the grievous groans of this poor prisoner: Make him a
prisoner of hope: Turn thee now about and refresh his wearied heart with a
blinke of thy mercy: Show him the light of thy Countenance, and he shall be
saved: Enlarge his heart, that thy Graces finding a spacious room; may
plentifully harbor in his soul.

Alas, LORD, what shall we say? if thou shall say to him, I have no delight in
thee: Behold, here he is, do to him as shall seem good in thine own eyes.

Thou have not forgotten, neither can thou forgette, but that thy delight is in
mercy: Where sin does abound, shall not there thy Grace abound much more?
Thou, LORD, have often bathed this silly Soul in most bitter brimie tears:
Thou have hid thy self from it, and it has been troubled: Now amid the
vexations of so many temptations, blinke upon him with a reconcealed face.

O GOD of Battles, in this Bartell of the Soul send down thy strength for to
guarde him against the assaults of Satan, who pursues him so eagerly with
most sharp and fearful af^aultes, like a Dog hunting after a silly
straggling sheep. Though for a space thou suffer him to be buffeted with a
messenger of Satan, yet let him know that thy Grace shall be sufficient for
him: Let 2 (...). 12. 7.
thy right hand hold him up, and let thy gentleness make him great: Renew his
heart with the power of thy Spirit, and reinuest him with the image of thine
holiness, which once he lost in Adam: Cast his Spirit again in thine own
mou^d.

At last, LORD, put Satan to silence, let thine own Spirit speak unto this
Sick in his inward parts: Say unto his Soul, I am thy Salvation: Make thy
good Spirit of comfort to whisper in his ear, that thou a^t well pleased, and
that thou have received a ransom: Such words of mercy will be a blessed
Balme^, whereby thou shall heal this sorrow beaten Soul, stung with a check
and smart for his sins.

Though. LORD, he has but some poor beginnings of Grace in a time we
confess when thy graces in him should have been ripe; for that glory which
is now shortly to be revealed unto him; yet notwithstanding, let it please
thee of thy mere mercy to pity and ^don: Remember thy mercies of old which
were never wont to break the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking Isa. 42.
3.
flax: If thy great mercy be not his strength and stay, he must needs be
overcome: For whom has he Psalm. 73. 25
in Heaven but thee? Or who is on earth whom he can desire besides thee?

O Thou, whom his Soul loves, tell him where thou make thy flock to rest at
Noone in the greatest heat Cant. 1. 7
of affliction: Seeing he seeks after thee only, let him be refreshed with
thy comforts; for why should he turn aside by the flocks of thy companions?

Consider well we pray thee, LORD, how been he has vexed and d squieted with
many fearful temptations: now at last come with thine helping hand, come and
abate the force and fury of all his enemies, whether within or without, subdue
their raging and reigning power, that when the hour of his departing shall
come, he may with Simeon depart in peace: Stand, LORD, fast by him, forsake
him not in this perelous time: Let thy Spirit guide and lead him in the Land
of righteousness: Let thy grace be unto him a Sun by day and a Moon by
night: Take all impedimentes out of the way, bridle and so curb all his
unruly affections, that they may fold under thine obedience: Suppress all his
carcing and heart dividing cares, whyp out of his heart all treacherous
temptations: Embalme his heart with the sweetness of thy new fresh graces:
Settle in his Soul, that godly sorrow which cause Repentance never to be
repented of.

This silly Soul, LORD, has been fearefullie tossed to and froe with the
waves of thy wrath: Let it please thee to command a calm: Settle thou his
heart, and stablish it with thy free Spirit. Psalm. 51. 12


Merciful GOD, thou knows how Satan has sought to sift and Luke 22. 31.
to winnow him; but of thy mercy thou shall never suffer his Faith to fail:
Build upon the Rock which cannot be shaken: Through thy favor give him peace
in believing, and joye in the holy Ghost, that by the grace and power of thy
Spirit he may finish his course with comfort.

Let in now be made manifest that his life has been hid with Christ in God:
Thou who have numbered his Col. 3. 3.
hairs, observe his grief and his groans, pity the crouding of thy
Turtle-Doue: Tak thou to heart the anguish of his Spirit.

Behold, LORD, how he renounceth himself, desparing of his own worth: Give
him grace to flee to thy promises, that as in the fearful and perelous path
of this val^y of death, he looks for nothing but hell torments and pain for
his own sake, so he may assuredly look for heavens glory, even pleasures for
Psalm. 16. 11
evermore, and that for thy promise sake, for thy Names sake for thy Christ's
sake in whom thy Soul is best pleased: Make the bones which thou have bruised to
rejoice: Leave him never to himself, LORD, till thou have made thy graces now
blooming in his heart, to become type for thy glory.

LORD, bless thy beloved Church which is hated of the world, She is now
pricked with persecutions as a Lilly among the thorns: Let this Cant. 2. 2
comfort Her in all Her distresses that thou shall never forsake Her: But that
through many tribulations thou shall bring Her unto Glory: Lord, pity and
pardon the unthankful Church of this Land: Bind Her unto Thee by the union of
Faith, and fasten every one of our hearts to another by the bond of love;
left at last by our misdemeanour, thou be forced to root us out of thy good
Land as a fruitless Nation.

GOD be gracious to our dread SOVEREIGN the Kings Majesty, guard His Royal
Person from the rage of His enemies. Infatuate their plots: Make giddy their
brains, discover their enterprises: make Him the Man of thy right Hand: Anoint
His Head with the blessed drops of the Oil of thy Grace and gladness: Make
Him an humble Homager to JESUS, who has written on His thigh the King of
kings: LORD give Him Grace according to His Place Psalm. 45 10


Say unto His Queen, Hearken, O Daughter, and consider and incline thy ear:
Make her to forget her own people, and Fathers House: In stead of Her old
acquaintance, give her Children, whom thou may make Princes on the Earth:
Above all things we entreat Thee to discharge upon Her Soul the beams and
brightness of saving Knowledge.

Bless all the Nobility of this Land: Make them truly Noble Act. ^711.
like the men of Berea, who were courageous for the Truth.

Make every one of us faithful in our place and calling: keep our Souls ever
waking and waiting for thycomming: Preserve us from slumber of Conscience, and
deadness of heart, that living according to thy law, we may be in this wicked
world godly professors, like burning and shining Lamps for to show light
unto others.

We all here, O gracious Father, relying upon thy promised readiness to help
thy little Ones, and to listen to their cries, have powered out our Souls in
thy presence, we entreat The from the sincerity of our inward parts, that
of thy Fatherly indulgence, it would please Thee to vouchsaf a favorable
audience both to these and to all other our most humble and godly desires, and
that for JESUS thy dear Sons sake. To whom with Thee and the Spirit of Grace
be all glory and honor, world without end. AMEN.

Cause read unto you this Night, Psalm 38. Psalm. 39. Psalm 40 Psalm. 41. Psalm.
42. Psalm. 130. Isa. 38. Isa. 53. John 16.

Let the end of every day remember you of the end of your life: Though every
day of ourage should Ioshu. 10* 12
be as long as that day of Ioshuah, when at his word the Sun stood still in
Gibeon, yet it would be night at last.

The Lord teach us to number our Psalm. 90. 12
days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, and to well doing.

The grace of Jesus and the peace of his Spirit rest with you, and comfort you
in all the groans of your grief: The Lord turn your smoking flax into a
burning fire of zeal: The God of all mercy and compassion refresh your weak
and wounded heart with the softest o^le of his saving grace: Nothing Sir is
impossible to your God, who of a brui. sed Reed can make a pillar of Brass,
which the prince of the powers of darkness shall not be able to shake: I
entreat the Lord to give you such Grace that may lead you unto the face and
presence of your GOD: Be more and more earnest with your GOD, that he would
inspire your heart with Life, Spirit, and motion, that thereby ye may be
made fit for that blessed associatio^ with Saints and Angels, far from the
crossing checkes of Conscience.

THE FOVRTH DAYS Conference.
The Pastor. ACcording to your desire, Sir, I am come again this morning for
to visit you, and for also to reap the fruits of yesterdayes conference.

This is the sweet fruits of a godly Prou. 14. 32
life, It has, says Solomon, hope in the end: I pray God to bless you with
such an hope, whereby in hope against hope, ye may cleave fast unto Romans 4. 18
your God, find ye the storm of your temptations alayed? has the Spirit of
God given edge and vigor to these comfortes which ye heard yesterday? Have
ye put on a Christian courage with a resolute and contented patience to abid
the blessed will of your God?


The sick Man. Well is the man and blessed, yea, thrice blessed is he whose
transgressions Psalm. 32, 1
is forgiven, whose sin is covered, for he is free from that sting of
Conscience that will for ever torment the Soul of the ungodly.

All this night I have been sore cumbered with many spiritual temptations as
ye have heard: My Soul for a space has been wonderfully perplexed: The
spirit of man alas, is but too ingenious to debar it self from glory: Note
It is a wonder how this should be in such a glorious Noonetyde of the Gospel
hitherto, Glory be to God, ye have comforted me much; ye have handled my
sores with the soft and smooth hand of a most wise and charitable discretion,
wisely have ye singled out comfortes most expedient for the cure of my Soul:
Now seeing by your former discourse I have reaped comfort, let me be so bold
as to entreat you to declare breaflie how a man may know by the workings of
the Spirit within, whether he be a Reprobate or one of Gods chosen Ones: Note
It is no time for me now to be beguiled: Men which look to die, have need
to look well what they do.

I desire earnestly to be instructed touching the diverse workinges of the
Spirit into the wicked and the godly: My chief desire is to make my Salvation
sure.


The Pastor, I shall do what I can to give you contentment in that point. The
matter indeed is not without difficulty: But yet the Lord God will do Amos.
3. 7
nothing which he will not reveal unto his servants the Prophets, so far as
is needful for his glory and the well of his People: Mine help is in the
Name of the Lord, that made Heaven Psalm. 124. 8
and Earth.

The Spirit of God in man has two sorts of operations: One general another
special: As for the general common to all men, by the Spirit the wicked will
say, Jesus is the Lord, I know Jesus. said the Devil to the Act. 19. 15
sons of Sceuah: * By this Spirit also the wicked will refrain from outward
scandals yea, they may preach, yea, prophecy with Saul, Cajaphas, and Judas,
so that they will 1 Samuel 10 11
be wondered at, like Soul among the Prophets, or lik Simo^ magus, to whom
Act. 8. 10.
the world for a space gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This
man is the great power of God: Many having but this superficial glistering of
grace applaud and content themselves thinking that they are wise, while they
indeed are fools.

By this Spirit also they will taste the good gift of God but an one they spite
it out again: * Meat tasted in the mouth only, and not let down to be
digested in the stomach, is unprofitable for nourishment.

Note
By this same Spirit also they will be enlightened, so that they will love the
dear Saints of God, and will reverence them as King Herod Matthew. 14. 3
did John: Note
But here is their stay, they have ever an Herodias, which they will not
forsake: Some one reigning sin or other like pestilent canker cleaves fast
unto them and bears rule into their mortal bodies: Either one sin or
other, secret or public must be their Darling: Note
And this again, like a mother, sin must have a dancing daughter, called,
Hatered of reprove, whose chiefest suit is, that the preacher, were he an John,
either want the head, or else be silenced.

This is the very border of the wicked ma^s progress with all his might and
maine in the way to glory: Further I cannot see that he can win but only
to a taste in the mouth of the goodness of Gods gifts and to a certain or
rather incertaine, liking of that which is good, which at last shall loss the
head with the Baptiste, before he loss his pleasures with Herod: Thus as ye
see many are deceived with the false flashes of an evil grounded assurance,
that they are in the ready and right way to Heaven, when as indeed they are
but faggots prepared for ever lasting burnings.


The sick Man. There be one passage in Scripture which has often affrighted
my Soul, in it I see a Reprobate to man such a progress in the way to Hearen,
that hardly can I think that ever I did match him: Note
The Apostle says, 1. That he will be enlightened. Heb. 6. 4.
2. That he will taste of the heaue^lie gift. 3. That he will be made partaker
of the holy Ghost. 4. That he will taste the good word of GOD. 5. That he
will taste the powers of the world to come: And yet for all that he shall fall
away, so that he can not be renewed by Repentance, and so shall die a
Reprobate, and last after death, shall be carried with the wicked into the same
stream, till he fall down into the gulf and poole of perdition.

I entreat you Sir, to give me some light for the clearing of these words,
for often have they troubled my Soul, and dryuine it deep into the dumps, *
At the first view of these words it would seem that a man may get seisin of
Heaven, and yet thereafter be diss^ised by some sins and iniquities and
deprived of all hope of eternity.


The Pastor. The Lord inlighten my mislie mind that I may clear these your
doubts to your well and contentment.

I confess that at the first sight of these words I my self was amazed; so yt
I did wonder how all that could be: Indeed at the first view as ye say, it
would seem that a man may get seisin of Heaven and yet thereafter be
diss^ised by one sin or other, whereby all his former vert^es shall loss
their grace: Note
But let a man lift up his heart to God in prayer, and thereafter consider well
the words and weigh them in the Balance of the Sanctuary, he shall easily
perceive that a Reprobate may be endewed with all these gifts, and after all
be debarred from entering into glory.

In the words ye have observed five difficulties, unto which God willing I
shall make answer severally. First of all, it is said that the Reprobate who
is but a Belly blind, will be enlightened: For to stand under this, ye must
first consider that into that place of Scripture the Apostle speaks of
Apostats, that is, of men that have forsaken the true Religion, which once they
did profess, for to become professors of lies, me^ who have revolted from the
Truth after that the windows of their Soul were shute close, for to barreout
the Light and that willingly and of set purpose.

Note
First then it is said, That they were enlightened, that is, once they knew the
Truth: For knowledge is light: Note
But because that having light, they wanted love, God sent them strong
delusions to believe lies: Note
S. Paul speaking of these that had but the light of nature, the twilight of
reason, said, That they were enlightened in such a sort that thereby they knew
God. But because that when they knew God, they Romans 1. 21
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, how grievous was their punishment? Note
A little after, both their sin and their punishment is more plainly ser
down: Even, sai^th he, as they did not like to retain God verse. 28.
in their knowledge, God gave them over in a Reprobate mind: Note
That is, he put out and quenshed that little light of Nature which once they
Matthew. 16. 28
had, as he took the Talent from the idle man that rolled it up into a
napkin: Note
The greater that light be within a man if it be abused, the greater is the
punishment which is for to ensue: But to come to that Light wherewith a
Reprobate brought up in the Church may be enlightened: Note
The Light of knowledge within a man who has not the love of the Truth, is
but like the light of a blazing Comet, which shortly dies out, and fills
the world with a pestiferous stink: Note
An Apostate on earth is lik a Comet in the heavens, a star but in appearance:
Such men with all their apparent eminences of zeal and dazeling shows be but
blazing stars, such as the Dragon is said to sweep down with his tail. *
S. Jude calls them wandering Iud. v. 13.
stars, they keep not their Station,

Note
They are Planets in their motion* and Comets in their substance, not fixed in
the heavens, but kindled meteores in the air which seem to be in the
heavens, and therefore they loss at last their light, so that as S. Jude
says, To them is reserved blackness of darkness: Such may have the spirit of
illumination, for the good of others, without the Spirit of Sanctification for
the good of their own Souls. Note
Though they have some light of knowledge, yet in love and life they walk by
the dark side of the cloud with the Egyptians: Note
There is Love and Light in the life of all true Israelites, *whose course is
by the light side of the fiery Pillar: Note
The wicked for the most part are with the Sodomites, either stricken with
Genesis 19. 11
blindness, or if they see, they see as these Syrians saw that came to
apprehend 2 Kin. 6. 19
Elishah at Dothan, they saw indeed, but their judgment was so troubled, that
though they saw, yet they could not perceive, till out of Dothan they were
entered into Samariah, the city of their enemies: Note
That was the figure whereof this is the substance, Hear ye indeed, but Isa.
6. 9.
understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not: O how the eyes of the
Soul of man are dimmed with the mistie vapors of vanity; through which it is
hard even for the godly often to see any glimmerings of grace.

But to the purpose observe well what I say: Note
The godly and the wicked will both be enlightened: But the godly is
enlightened like a star fixed into the heavens, whose light is firm and
constant. But the wicked enlightened is but lik a blazing Comet, which for a
space will have a greater glaunce, than a true star into the eyes of the
ignorants: Note
But the learned Philosopher knows it to be nothing but a bundle of filthy
matter kindled into the Air, which shall shortly be quenched: Note
Thus as ye see the wicked like a Comet will be kindled with some strange
fire, he will be so enlightened, that he will give light* unto others for a
space with his hoarie beams: Note
But this Siella crinita, hoarie star, because he is not fixed into the hea
uens by faith, he not being in the same Firmament with the Sun of Mal. 4. 3.
righteousness, within some few Months he dies out, leaving nothing behind
him but the pestiferous smoke and stink of an evil name, and of filthy
scandales, a cause pest, where* with many are infected: Note
Thus as ye see many like a Comet or a Candle, will for a time blaze with
beautiefull brightness, being full of godly shows, without any life of
grace, but at last dye out with a filthy smell: The twilight of Nature is no
light but darkness.

Note
Let therefore every man try his Light, by his love: Note
Though a man should know Christ never so well, if he cannot say to him, as
Peter said, Lord, thou know that I love Ioh. 21. 17
Thee, the light of that man shall not continue, but soon or since with one
sin or other it shall be put out as with a dampe: Note
Then many shall wonder what can be word of such a blazing professor, when
they shall see all his rootlesse graces withered and wasted.

Now Sir, examine well your self: Note
If ye find a love in your heart with your light, a love of God, not so much
for his benefits as for himself, who is most love worthy, be not affrighted
to hear that Reprobates may be enlightened: Note
All their graces at the best are rootlesse, glorious glances, foolish flashes
euanishing in a moment.

Let me yet a little illustrate the matter, that it may appear how Reprobates
are said to be enlightened?

The Godly and the Reprobates are both said to be enlightened, but diversely:
the Godly are enlightened like the Sun, but the wicked are like the Moon: In
the Sun as all know the Light, is rooted and fixed, so that not only does
it show light unto others, but also it has light within it self: Note
As for the Wicked, they are enlightened like the Moon, which shows light
unto others being dark within, like a Glass which in the sight of the Sun
will glance with some beams, unto others having no light within it self: Note
In this the wicked also are like the Moon, that while they are in plenilunio,
in their fullest light, in ye midst appears some black spots: In the
greatest light of the wicked, if men can look up, and behold, they shall
perceive often one gross sin or other, where the light have no reflexe,
which is like the black spot of the Moon.

Thus as ye see all the light of the Wicked, is but in an outward reflexe,
whileas they are dark within: But the Godly are like John the Baptist, whom
Christ called a burning and a shinning light: Not only Ioh. 5. 35
shine they outwardly unto others, but also they burn within themselves, like
these Disciples, whose hearts while Christ spoke, did burn within Luke 24. 32.
them in going to Emaus, these were their words, Did not our hearts burn
within us, while he talked with us by the way?

Note
The Wicked may well blaze without, but never burn within: God may so
dispense, that like a burning Glass they may make others to burn, while like
the burning Glass they remain themselves cold, or at the best but lake warm:
Now I think that all men may easily perceive how the wicked are said to be
enlightened.

Such men I confess are hard to be known at the first: Note
A man at least for a month must be acquanted with the Moon before he can know
that it is but a dark body, which has no light in it self, but borrowed and
outward: A lifetime is not often sufficient for to try Hypocrites
transformed, like Satan, into Angels 2 Cor. 11. 14
of light: Such Moon-men beguile many with outward reflexes.

Though these which are outwardly adorned with such colors, bless themselves
with Laodicea, as having Revel. 3. 14
need of nothing, yet their sins by the hand of Gods Justice are written in
the Register of their Conscience, yea, deeply engraven as with the pen of a
Dyamond.

Thus Reprobates cannot now understand because their Conscience^ are seared and
sensles: they are in such a Slumber and benummednes of Conscience, that they
cannot consider nor make a sound search into the state of their Souls: Note
Nay, though they could, they would not for fear, that there by they should
be enchained to melancholy, a mar mirth of all their carnal delights.

Note
Of such I will say something, (I pray God that it may chasse them to seek
sincerity) Except that such who care only for colors and shows of
godliness, for to be well thought of among men, except, say I, they turn to
God with true sound and timely Repentance, in my judgment hardly shall they
escape some fearful and remarkable judgment, even in this life: Cannot God
appoint them to be his own executioners for to be Burriors to themselves?
After that, in his wrath he has kept an assise in their Conscience, and has
made them with Judas to cry out guilty against them selves, he can make them
hang up themselves in the loupe of a cord, for to be spectacles of his wrath
before the world: He can make them poison themselves, or power out their life
with their blood by sword or by knife: Note
This judgment shall cry to the living, Thus shall it be done with him who
dallies with his God.

If he escape that: Note
Woe, woe, woe unto him on his deathbed, where Satan with hellish malice and
bloody cruelty shall wou^d him with his empoysoned darts, which he shall
fasten deeply in his Soul: Then with many a sore sigh shall he cry, that he
is enthralled in the snaires and fetters of the devil: Some I know will win
out of this world without any seen blot or blow for secret blo^s, they will
die also with some formal and perfu^ctory appearance of repentance: Others
will die in a quiet drowsiness and so poor like Nabal: Many a^ye see may die
without any seen sign^ of Gods wrath: But in the day of the Lord, God shall
pull that painted vizard off their face, for the discovering of all their
abominations, and that before the face of all Saints and Angels, who shall
wonder to see all the filthiness which they in their life could so cunningly
color and cover, with most painful painting: Then men's applause and the
worlds praise, which they did once under the color of unhallowed zeal most
eagerly pursue, shall by no means avail them; for the righteous Lord with a
gloume of his justice shall banish them to the loathsome dungeon of the
bottemlesse pit.

Thus after they have carried the matter smoothly for a time by juggling
dissimulation, at last all their abominations are set in open view.


The sick Man. I find my self satisfied concerning that doubt of the
inlightening of the Wicked, who as I see are stark blind, grossie and
palpablie ignorant in the mysteries of Salvation. Now teach me what this is,
that he will taste of the heavenly gift: How can unsanctified mortality be
capable of celestial benefits?


The Pastor. By the heavenly gift I understand the favor of God and eternal
life*

Note
The wicked man, whose portion is only in this life, will taste these things,
that is betimes he will find a certain sweetness in God: Note
The most wicked man that is will at one time or other lift up his eyes to God,
yea; and think himself much beholden unto God: But all this goodness is but
lik the morning dew; it has none abiding, a sound of fear is ever into the
wicked man's ears: * As a man Hos. 6. 4.
may taste poison and yet not be the worse, because incontinent he spitteth it
out again; so a wicked man may taste good things; and yet not be the better
because that after he has tasted them, he lets them not over his throat,
but spitteth them out again: Note
That which he has tasted with the one ear, he spitteth out at the other
care: Note
The good words may flow a little into his brain and rinne into his memory, so
that there of he may prattle like a Paroquet, but nothing goes down to his
heart, which I may call the stomach of the Soul: Note
If a man should but taste food, were it never so fit of it self for to feed
he should not be able to live thereby: It is even so of the wicked spiritualy:
They cannot live by tasting of graces, where God has not opened the heart as
he opened the heart of Lydea, there is nothing Act. 16 14
but a tasted grace: Let me yet clear the matter.

Note
The wicked will get a taste of heaven, as the godly w^ll get a taste of hell:
Note
In this doing, I observe a secret Justice, and a secret mercy of God: It is a
mercy for the godly that they taste the bitterness of wrath here, that they
may esteem the more of heavens glory here after. Note
The baser our estate be before we he exalted, we shall think the more of
honor when it comes: What am I, said David, being but a shepherd, that I
should marry a Kings Daughter? Who am I? said he, and what is my life, or my
fathers family in Israel, 1 Samuel 18. 18
that I should be Son in law to the King Note
If David had been a Kings Son, he could have well thought himself an
equal match for a Kings Daughter: But while he considered his own base
estate and the baseness of his fathers family, he thought himself so
ouermatcht, that he wondered at such honor, which made him say, Who am I?
What am I, said 2 Samuel 9 8
lamed Mephibosheth, that I a d^ad dog should sit at the Table of a King?
Note
The greater adversity a man be come out of, the more sweet is his
prosperity when it comes: Note
The tempestuous by past blasts of Winter commend the beauty of the Spring: *
Bring me a man who is daily accustomed to good cheer, to a Banquet, and
little shall he think of it, because such is his ordinary fare: But, O if
bread was not sweet to that hunger bitten forlorn, when he came home from
his husks!* I think that the godly in heaven Luke 15. 16.
shall remember of the bitter taste of wrath they felt on earth, which shall so
ravish them with joy of their changed estate, that no tongue shall be able to
express: Note
But again, here is Justice and wrath for the wicked: God in this life gives
unto them a taste of his sweet thing: Some common spiritual confections he
puts into their mouth, whereof they find some heavenly relish; Note
I am of this opinion, that while they shall be in hell, the remembrance of
that sweet taste shall never go out of their heart, which shall be a most
powerful means for the increasing of their smart: Note
What a sting was this unto the gl^tton in hell, when Abraham, Luke 16. 25
said to him, Son remember that thou in thy lifetime receiuedst thy good
things? Note
Ye may see here that the wicked have remembrance in hell of what good
things they have received on earth, which is an hell in hell.

Thus as ye see God in Justice and and in wrath will let the Wicked here on
earth taste his good things, for the increase of their woe thereafter: Note
By the sweet taste they had of God on earth while they lived, they know now
in Hell, which is a * Note
part of their torment, what joye the godly have in Heaven: Note
And again the godly by that bitter taste of wrath which once they felt on
earth, shall know, which shall wonderfully increase their joye, what torments
the wicked suffer in hell, from which the Lord in his unspeakable mercy has
made them free.

By this as ye perceive both the godly and the wicked taste here both of Hell
and of Heaven: The godly taste of Hell, that Heaven, may be to them ye sweeter:
The wicked taste of Heaven yt Hell may be to them ye sower: God loves not the
wicked, but hates them as he hated Esau: Note
For this cause, while he gives them a taste of his good things, it is that
while they shall be in easlesse and endless torments, they may remember how
sweet a God they have despised, and how sour a Satan they have served.

Note
All these good things which are jointly in the wicked man, are but lik fair
attire upon a leperous body, or like jewels about the neck of an hanged man:
He has nothing but the dead portraiture of an Israelite indeed. Ioh. 1. 47.


Note
But in all this time while under the shows of godliness, he is drinking in
iniquity like water, a dreadful sound is in his ears, for he knows that
the day of darkness is ready at his Ioh. 15. 16
hand: God at last in great wrath shall run upon him, even on his neck, upon
verse. 23.
the thick bosses of his buckler, because he did cover his face with fatness,
and made collops of fat on his flanks, not caring for the leanness of his
poor Soul: * Woe to these who content with bare tasting of graces, in wrappe
themselves i^ clouds of hypocrisy.


The sick Man. My Soul Sir, rejoices to hear you speak: Note
I perceive now by your speech that the wicked will get a taste of spiritual
good things into their mouth, but that from thence nothing comes down to
their heart, because the passage is stopped.


The Pastor. It is even so: Note
Quod non deglutiunt multo minus concoquunt, That which they cannot swallow
down, less can they digest: Note
The hearts of all men are naturally fast shute for to hold out God. Christ
found Cant. 5. 2
the door of his Spouse barred, when he came, neither would she open it,
till the favor of his Mirre had verse. 5.
wrought upon her heart: At the best of men's hearts he must often stand and
knock, again, and again: But as for the wicked man's heart, it has no
entry for grace, not in all his Psalm. 10. 4.
thoughts: The heart of a Reprobate is like a Pesthouse, closed up: Lidiahs
Act, 16. 14
heart was closed, till God opened it: Note
Thus as ye see the wicked may for to speak so, get a mouthfull of Gods good
things, which they will taste as it were roll up and down with their tongue
lik a sweet morfell with some sort of pleasure: Note
But at once they loath that which they loved, and spit out these heavenly
confections: Thus doing they are said to do despite Heb. 10. 29. ^
unto the Spirit of Grace. O but the hollow heart of man barboureth many close
corruptions.


The sick Man. Now Sir, I pray you proceed: Let me hear some thing
concerning the third difficulty, which is that a Reprobate may be made
partaker of the holy Ghost: How can this be? Note
This seems to be very hard and knottie, that a man can be a Reprobate, a
limb of Satan, and one of the family of hell, and yet ^ made partaker of the
holy Ghost: Let me understand what is that to say.


The Pastor. Note
By the holy Ghost in Scripture are often understood the gifts and graces of
the holy Ghost: According to this it is said, that these of Samariah received
the holy Ghost, after Act. 8. 17
that Peter and John had prayed for them, and laid hands upon them, they
received the holy Ghost, that is spiritual gifts: it was for to have a power to
give such gifts that Simon Magus Act. 8. 18
offered money to the Apostles* Note
Whereas then it is said that Reprobates are partakers of the holy Ghost, it
is to be understood of such gifts that are common both to the Godly and
Wicked: The best temper of their religion, and the highest pitch of all their
holiness, is nothing but outwardnesse and formal Christianity.


The sick Man. I Desire earnestly to know what common gifts these be that
the holy Ghost will bestow upon a Reprobate.


The Pastor. A Reprobate may carry the matter smoothly for a time: Note
He may wonderfully in wrappe himself in godly glancing shows, so that he
can not be espied for a space, by a juggling dissimulation he will even bleare
the eyes of the Prophets which are Gods Seers: Note
When he is clothed with a coats of forms, men will think that under such
forms be ye true substance: While he has that (...) Romans 2. 20
(...) form of knowledge, and that (...) form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5
me^ who see not as God sees, will tak him to be some great Divine, while
indeed all the graces he has are but forms and outwardnesse, without any
life or root of sound inward sanctifying grace: All such forms in end prove
stark naught.

Note
A Reprobate may be a teacher of Gods word, a builder of Gods House like
Noah's Carpenters, who builded the Arc, and yet drowned into the floode: Note
He may blaze like a Comet with colorable pretenses of piety, and show light
unto others for a space, yea, so that with most glorious glances he shall make
men's eyes to dazzle, and yet shall at last die out, leaving nothing behind but
the smoke and stink of an evil life like the snuff of a Candle, when there
is loathsome reeke without a flamme: Note
An Hypocrite may be a man of a mild and merciful disposition, yea, zealous
in appearance, without any seen blot or blemish: By his hypocrisy he may do
good to others. Men seeing him, will stand in awe to offend, thinking him to
be a sincere man: Note
A Reprobate will be like the man that bears the Lantern in the dark
night, wherewith while he gives light unto others, he is least enlightened
himself: Note
While others by that light will see the best and cleanest way, he himself
and Lantern together will fall into a mire. Note
Thus after that his light is quenched in some scandalous puddle, the followers
know what a man he was:

A Reprobate may have immunitie from gross and in famous sins, he may be a
man of great gifts, wondered at by many as was Simon Magus, Act. 8. 9.
to whom all gave heed, from the least to the greatest* saying, This man is
the great power of God: Note
A whole peoples applause is no sure token of Gods favor.

Note
As Sirion which is Hermon, was called by Moses Sion, so may a godly man both
think and call an Hypocrite Deuteronomy. 8. 48
a chosen vessel* Note
Of such a man often may a Godly man say, as Elisha said of the Shunamite lying
at his feet, The Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me: Note
The godly and wicked are sibber unto other in outward shows, than Sirion and
Sio^ are sibbe in syllabes: Nay, in outwardnesse and glorious glances, the
wicked bear the Bell, because their greatest care is cunningly to manage and
eagerly to catch such vain applause.

Note
The high stature and fair face of Eliab deceived the Seer: Surely, 1 Samuel
16. 6
said he, the Lords anointed is before him, and yet for all that the voice
come out from God, declaring that God had refused him. verse. 7*


That which is like unto another is not that whereunto it is lik: There is but
an H between Sibboleth and Shibboleth, and yet the loss of that Judge. 12. 6
Letter cost the Ephramites their lives at the passage of Jordan. The want of
that note of Aspiration made them to loss their breath with their life: Man
under a mask of mildness may deceive men with fair words, as Ioa^ 2 Samuel
20. verse. 9.
did Amasa; but God well knows the Gal^lean accent, though Peter should deny
with an oath.

The craft of Hypocrites is wonderful: Note
While they walk in a ploding course of glorious shows, being fast nailed
unto outward formalitie, they will wonderfully bleare the eyes of men, so that
they will out-steppe the best in low louring and counterfeit cruching, who
would not have thought Ahab a true repenting man, while sick in 1 Kin. 21. 27
sack he went sof^lie with sack cloth nearest his skin? Man's eyes are
easily, easily jugguled with soddered shows: But God who sees not as man 1 Samuel 17 6
sees, looks on the heart: They that see such painted men, as they
themselves also, may think that they are already possessed of the Kingdom of
grace, and also entitled to the Kingdom of glory, while indeed they are but
profane men of seared Consciences, seeking for nothing but popular appla^ses
for the advancement either of their profit or preferment or reputation and
worth: By some worldly respect they ever are carried on the by, whereby they
ever come short of sincerity.

Note
Woe unto them even when all men shall speak good of them: Note
For a space they may well think in their own fond conceit, that they are
stored with all the riches of Gods graces, like Beggars in their sleep
dreaming that they are tumbling themselves amid great heaps of gold: O but
when such awake they are not only empty of their imagined good, but filled
with sorrow for being deprived of that which they had in their imagination, the
greatest ground of their contentment: Thus all comforts shall be sweep from them
with the besome of utter desolation.

O the deceitfulness of man's heart! Who can know it? said Jeremy: Ier 17. 9.
Note
What eye can pierce and pass through all the wyles and windings of this
juggling sin of Hypocrites, which having nothing but (...) a form of
godliness, which bear yt world in hand that they are scalded and burnt with
the zeal of Gods House: The best things yt are in such are nothing but civil
outwardnesse clothed with colorable pretenses of piety, without any
justifying faith in the heart, or renewing power in the Soul, wherein is the
practice of piety.

What shall I say more? a Reprobate as ye see may be both courtesse and kind,
solatious in conversation, a man beloved of his neighbors, yea, such a man may
drive out his days without any seen blot, or outward scandale: Hypocrisy may
be so small spunne, that no carnal eye can perceive it

Such a man also may have some troubles of Conscience, some secret checkes of
remorse for his bygone folies, even Judas his (...), repenting or
forethinking: But his Soul was never acquainted with traueling and hard labor
in the new births which is borne with that (...) eue^ an universal change of
mind, will, and affections which is only peculiar to the godly.

I will yet say more, a Reprobate while he possesses a true doctrine though
but outwardly, he may ^aue the gift of prophecy with Saul and Cajaphas yea,
of miracles, and also of healings, of helps in gouernaments and of diversities
of tongues: Note
Behold, how a wicked man may be a Preacher, and a Prophet, or among 1 Samuel
10. 12
the Prophets, and a worker of meracles: Have we not cast out devils in Matthew.
7. 22.
thy Name? shall many say to Christ at the day of judgment; to whom Christ
shall answer, Depart from verse. 32.
me for I know you not.

All these good things may a man have, and yet be a stranger from the life of
God: * Though such outward things have a glorious appearance and be great in
the eye of the world* yet they are no sure token of Gods love: Note
Did not Christ call Judas, Matthew. 26 50.
Friend? All the common gifts and graces of the wicked, are nothing but like
the friendship that was between Christ and Judas, whom Christ called friend,
for to let him know that the greater was his sin: Such for all their
glistring shows are strangers from the life of God, holden fast under the
power of the first death, and yet none so much as they are puffed up with a
conceit of imaginary perfection, so powerful is the deuilish influence of
pride: The greater Gods gifts shall-be into the wicked, yt greater shall be
their woe.


The sick Man. I hau^ heard, and am satisfied concerning yt the wicked may be
made partaker* of the holy Ghost: I pray you to discuss the fourth
difficulty, which is, That ^ man may taste the good word of God, and yet be a
Reprobate.


The Pastor. He will indeed Sir, taste the good word God, as I have exponded
that he will taste the heavenly gift: Note
He will taste the good word of God, That is, he will understand the word, he
will take pleasure to read it, and to hear it preached, with some flashes of
comfort, whereby he will be moved to harbor some good meanings and
intentions, not only that, but also he will do many things as Mar. 6. 20.
Herod who heard John gladly, and did also many things: Note
But such a man hatheuer some herodias a darling sin secret or known, which
he would prefer to the head of John the Baptiste: Note
While he is in the Church it may be he hear the word with some gladness,
yea, and vveete his cheeks with tears at the preaching of Christ's passion,
but let him go from thence to his Banketing, a dancing of a daughter of this
Herodias, viz. Some little tickling joy of his Mistress, and predomina^t sin
will make him to forget all that was preached: A small requeast of some
dancing devil will make such a man, if he be of power, to lay the Preachers
Mar. 6. 28
head in a platier.

Note
There be many who while they hear the Word preached in the Church, are
like a Siffe or Riddle into the water, so long as they are in hea^ing, they
seem to be full of Gods word, even to the brim: But so soon as they are once
departed, all that they heard runs out, and they to their old by as again.
The best thing that are in the wicked are to God, as who for a sacrifice
should cut off a Dogs neck, or offer Swynes blood.


The sick Man. This is a strange matter, this world as I see, is like Sardis.
Thou have a Revel. 3. 4.
few names in Sardis* which have not defiled their garments: The Godly are as
the shaking of the Olive, Two or three Berries in the top of the vpper-most
Esa. 17. 6.
bough. Christ called them well, The little Flock. Great as I Luke 12. 32.
see is the deceitfulness of sin: Note
I thought when I saw a man or a woman, hearing the word with great attention,
and vvhiles with tears, that these could not be but the Lords chosen and
dearest Ones: And yet I see that a man may hear the word with great
appearance of godliness, yea and think the Word most sweet for the time,
yea, love and reverence Gods Messengers, and yet for all that be kept short of
the state of Grace.


The Pastor. All that is true, for Herod reverenced John for a space, and
heard him gladly: Simon magus believed Act. 8. 13.
with a temporary faith: And Esau Heb. 12. 17
though he wept and sought the blessing with many tears, yet could find no
place in his heart where he could lodge true Repentance.

Many are endewed with painted Graces, which having but the face and not yt
heart of grace, are mere hypocrisy: Even vices masked with ye appearance of
virtues: Such formal holy persons come far short of being in Christ Jesus,
in whom all true goodness is most lively incorporate.


The sick Man. I have heard you Sir, discuss very pertinentlie four
difficulties, the fifth and last, and greatest is behind: Often have I wondered
what could be the true sense and meaning thereof, the words are these, He
will taste of the powers of the world to come? What can a Reprobate have to do
with the world to come? I understand not well these words.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, they want not difficulty: Some of the Learned think
with S. Chrysostom, That by the powers of the world to come are to be
understood, the powerful working and miracles under the Gospel, which in
respect of the Law was called, The world to come, as if the days of the
Gospel were the days of a new world, since Christ that Day spring from on Luke
1. 78
high, and most glorious Sun of Righteousness did appear for to inlighten
Mal. 4. 2.
every man that comes into this world: But in my judgment that be more
subtle, than solid: Note
I had rather think that Reprobats are said to taste of the powers of the
world to come* when they find some sort of sweetness in God with a kind of
desire to be out of this world, for to be with God into the Heavens: Note
Such a desire betimes will make their hearts flutter up toward these
heavenly Mansions Note
But such fluttering desires wanting the feathers of Faith, incontinent come
short, and fall down again with a jumpe: He has not a settled constancy
nor well grounded resolution. God at some times will let the Wicked see some
glimpse of his glory, as it were a lightning that passes most swiftly away,
which for a little space in the dark night lets a man see that which is
before him: But so soon as it is past, his eyes become more dazeled and
darkened, tha^ they were of before: such powers are but painted powers: They
are indeed like the living powers as an Image is like a man, but they want the
heart of godliness.

Thus according to my knowledge in a serious and impartial search is all the
wicked man's progress toward the kingdom of glory. All the best graces that
he has, are but glances of graces and dreams of glory, even extreme
poverty, glorious sins, beautiful abominations.

These be Gods limets, who has said to him, as he said to the proud waves,
Hitherto shall ye come and no further: Note
Such a man in his best estate and conceit is but an Hypocrite lurking under
the Canopie of a counterfeit profession: His best estate is both broken and
bankerupt in spiritual things: Note
For a space such a man may go pleasantly like a Ship before the vvind; but
at last down comes a blast of judgment, and sinketh him down irrecouerablie
into the bottom of hell.


The sick Man. I am glad to have heard the solutions of these five
difficulties, which often did trouble my mind.

By all your discourse I perceive that the Reprobates at their best, feel but
some general good motions, and that all their persuasions, that they shall at
last come to heaven, are nothing but imaginations, and vain dreams of glory:
Note
Many in mine opinion are deceived in this world, who like these that dream,
think they awake, while they indeed are fast asleep: Many in this world as I
see, think to be saved, whose thoghts shall prove to be but dreams: Some
obscure printes of unsound joys, though for a space they may be of good
acceptance with the most godly, and clappe their own hands, as if they were
in the passage to Paradise: They are in end disappointed, because they want
true inward holiness, without which no man shall see Gods face.


The Pastor. It is most true Sir, for^s men for the most part desire to be
flattered by others, so tak they delight to flatter themselves, feeding upon
fond fancies and fantasies, lik Hypochondriackes, or brain sick, who cannot
be persuaded, but that they are Kings, while indeed they are but Beggars.


The sick Man. This is a terrible disease: Note
But to leave the Reprobates, and come to the Elect, I desire now to know of
you what be that special spiritual working, which is only peculiar to the
Elect and chosen Ones of God: I vvish to hear of the proceedings of Gods
Spirit working into the hearts of the godly unto their Salvation: The godly
I am assured are of a more noble and heavenly temper full of the Spirit of
Grace.


The Pastor. Note
In my judgment where the Spirit of God works to the Salvation of the Soul
of a sinner, before it come to a full persuasion and hight of assurance, there
is first a tempest of wrath against sin going before the coming of God in
his mercy, viz. A shaking wind, a trembling earthquake, a burning fire, which
lik three grimme posts come running before to tell that God is coming into the
calm.

Note
Before that God show his presence into the still voice, he proceeds by
steps and degrees: First he rebukes the sinner of sin, and wakeneth his
Conscience with some sight of his iniquities, and with some sense of that
wrath which sin has deserved: From this arises a great heaviness into the
heart, which breaks forth both in speech and countenance, so that the
world which know him of before, will vvonder at his change, as if he were a
creature cast into another mould* Note
After that God has thus prepared the Soul of men with thundering tempests
and tremblings with blasts and with burnings, and thereby has made them more
afraid of sin, than they were of before of sin it self: At last he comes
unto them into the calm of his mercy, and first gives unto them grace to
flee all occasions of sin, and after that, to hate the very garment spotted
with the flesh* Note
He Iud. v. 23.
who in despite can gnash his teeth against that wherein once he took
pleasure to displease his God, is not a sholler of flesh and blood, not a
natural man that is content with ciuell outwardnesse. Note
After that the Spirit has wrought a detestation and hatered of sin into
the heart, he puts a cry into the heart for mercy, with sighs and sobbes
which cannot be expressed: Note
Some times these sighs will break out into such words that both speaker
and hearer will vvonder vvherefrae they come.

Note
After that, the Spirit in his motions by a sweet and silent inspiration,
goes forward in his progress into the heart by little and little, with Life,
Light, Liberty, and peace of Conscience, even that peace which passes all
understanding, and so cannot be expressed in humane words: Now am I come Sir,
as ye hear, ad metam non loquendi, that I can say no more: Note
It were but folly for me to dyue so deep in Gods workings, as for to take
unto me to declare unto you that which passes all understanding: Note
The new name into the white Stone, is known to Revel. 2* 17
none, but to these that have received it: Though he that has this name know
it himself, yet he cannot vttter it: It is like these words of Paradise
which S. Paul called unspeakable. 2 Cor. 12. 4.


Now for to sum up breaflie all that has been declared in a more large and
ample discourse, I shall observe three things which are only rooted in the
godly heart, and a^e altogether strangers from the Reprobates.

Note
First where true grace is, there is a remorse and painful grief with many
sore sighs, for all by gone slips: By this as by a Bitte or Bridle the Soul
of the godly man is kept from backesladings and scandalous stumbling relapses.

Secondly, he has a present quick feeling of these sins, which of before he
counted but little and veniel: If it be sin* he will say no more, Is it not
a little one? Note
A ^ye for luc^, Genesis 19* 20
or for sport yea, a light idle word will check him at once in the
Conscience, though he were persuaded that it were never known to any. Last
of all, by a long practice in well doing he acquireth in his Soul an
habitual tenderness, whereby the former good motions are so confermed and
strengthened, that it is a pleasure to him to do well: Off this arises the
gracious and most sweet temper of the good Conscience* which is to his Soul a
perpetual feast: This is the Christians progress in true godliness, which is
never so calm in this world* yt it can be said to be without troubles, which
maike the way unto glory: Thus much for the proof of the point in hand.

Note
Only this I desire you to observe, that such spiritual workinges go by
degrees^, like a River that is waxing, like an Herb that is growing, like a
Day that is but dawning* or like a Victory but beginning: At last comes now
full Flood* now is perfect grouth, now is Noone*day, now have I foughte^ the
good fight, and 2 Timothy 4. 8
now I look for the crown of righteous nesse: This being all finished,
therepenting sinner enters into glory, the place of full contentment, where
the restless eyes of man's desire shall rest from peeping or prying any further
for any greater felicity.

Thus briefly by way of compend have I declared unto you: But all this is not
so soon done as said: B^tter be the Battles of a Christian before he can
come to this rest: There be bloody battles against the Devil, bloody battles
against the World* bitter and bloody battles against the corruptions of his
flesh: Many a stroke will he give upon his breast with yt Publican many
astroke will he give upon his thigh, crying Ier 31. 19.
with Ephraim, ^ye, What have I done? Note
S. Paul was pricked with a thorn in the flesh, and buffeted by a devil, 2
Cor. 12. 7
before he got the Crown: Note
Christ himself speaking of himself* said, Ought not Christ to have suffered
all these Luke 24. 26
things, and so to enter into his glory?

It is easy to hear this short discourse of words: Note
But what pains are into the second Birth: The pains of the first Birth are
so piercing, that the very pains of hell are compared unto them: And yet I
have known women who by their own confession, have traveled more into the
second birth than ever they did in the first: Note
Many would be content to dye for to be borne again: This flesh of ours is
ill to die, yet it must die, and be mortified, at the birth of Ichabod where
is the glory? The first words that this new creature learneth to speak is, 1 Samuel 4. 2
Where is the glory? Note
At the first it seeks after Gods glory, as the newborn Babe at the first
seeks after yt dug with the tongue and the lips: * It is the best food of a
regenerate Soul to set our Gods glory, as it was our Saviors meat to do
his Fathers will.

After all that, the Soul makes a procession in well doing, never standing at
a stand, but ever going forward, though some times more slowly: The way to
glory is from grace to grace: Note
Many foullie deceive themselves, because that they forbear one sin or
other, whereunto at other times they have been most slauishlie addicted, they
think themselves reformed men, and that if Death should come, incontinent the
doors of Heaven should go wide open to the walls, for to let in their^ souls
with their forms of godlinesse^ 2 Timothy 3 5
Such are so high in their own conceit, that they think to be after death
cannonized Saints.

Of this sort be so many, that Scripture calls them a generation: Prou. 30.
There is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness.

In him who is truly a child of God, the strongest corruptions of the flesh
must be snaffled and curbed by the Law of the Spirit: Note
It is not enough to beat down one sin, or two, or many, as many will do,
but reserve aye some, one or other* for which they must pray with Naaman, In
this thing the Lord 2 Kin. 5. 18
pardon thy servant.

Note
Let no man deceive himself, there is no place in Heaven, but for him or her
whose study is applied to an universal sincerity of all their ways.

Let it be that Cain was not a Thief: But did not God curse him for his
murder? Let it be that Judas was Genesis 4. 11.
free of many sins, yet because he way a Thief, and a Traitor and Ioh, 12.
6.
died so, he was damned. Let it be that the Pharisee was not an adulterer
Luke 18. ^.
as he bragged, yet his pride was the bane of his Salvation.

Note
He that makes not conscience of the least sin, is guilty of the greatest:
According to this God himself says, That who fails in one, fails in all:
If for God and for Conscience sake, a man abhor the great sins of murder
and adultery, and such others of not orious rank* for these same sakes he will
abstain from lesser sins, otherwise it is but some worldly respect, either
for shame or loss, which like a restraining grace, withholds him from
matching the same: Many will neither kill, nor commit adultery, and yet will
make no conscience to slander, or lie either in sport or earnest, or by hook
or crook catch that which is not their own. Who ever he be, who without
controlement loses the reins to such petit sins, has never as yet set
his foot forward in ye way that leads to life: the Spirit of grace as yet
has made no residence into him: The Spirit he has, is but a sporting Spirit
deceiving him with ^ies: The surest note of the Spirit of the grace is a
sanctified study, and endeavor to an universal sincerity in all our ways;
of thought, word, and dead, which will be I confess often with great
weakness and failing, for in many Iam. 3. 2.
things we offend all.

Now Sir, what think ye of all that has been said? according to the
knowledge that God has given me, I have cleared your doubts: If my discourse
has done you good give God the praise, yet would I know what all these
words has wrought in your heart.


The sick Man. I bless God for that which I have heard: Note
By Gods Grace I have caught some hope of a better life: The desires of mine
heart begin to enter the confines of eternity: I find the motions of the
Spirit of Grace vvorking into my Soul the great work of Salvation: I am now
refreshed with the sweet streams of spiritual comforts: I find now my
Soul lifted up toward God, and I find the love of this world falling down
like the Mantle of Elijah: I 2 Kin. 2. 13
think that I go now more sweetly and swiftly to my God, with a more holy
and heavenly desire, than ever I did heretofore: Your comfortes Sir make me
to hyefaster: Note
I take this to be a new worke-man-shipe of grace: Note
I hope shortly to be at the up shot of all my troubles: Note
I find within mine heart some kindled joye, which I take to be the pawn
of pleasures for evermore: The Spirit Psalm. 16. 11
of God like a Dove has brought unto my Soul a comfort like an Olive Genesis 8.
11
leave assuring me in some vveake measure, that the floode of Gods wrath is
asswadged upon my Soul: What shall I say? The best of Gods blessings are
behind: Oh that now my Savior were into the clouds: I had rather die, than I
should live for to anger the Lord again: Alas, that mine heart has been so
gleued to the ground like a shell-Snaile fastened on the wall. Seeing Sir God
has wrought so well by you in this great work of my conversion; I entreat you
to continue in some good purpose, that my mind may still be kept bended upon
that which is good: Note
If ye leave off to teach me, my mind will but wander in vanity. O Lord,
work all my thoughts to holy and heavenly meditations.


The Pastor. Blessed be God who has given you such a resolute and contented
mind: See what ye desire me to speak chiefly of at this time.


The sick Man. Note
Seeing I am shortly for to leave this world and to go to the Heavens, for to
take out of mine heart * Note
the least root of regret to quite this world: I pray you Sir, to say
something of the vanity of this world, of the last Judgment, and of the joys
of Heaven, where shortly I hope to be: Let me hear how I shall loss
nothing in the change: Strive Sir, I pray to kindle and blow up the dying fire
of my devotion, help me to go from strength to strength* till I be in Zion.


The Pastor. The Lord put such words into my mouth, which may be able to
win your Soul up to Heaven, and to weane it from all worldly pleasures.

First for to speak but a word in general concerning this world. Note
What is it but a piece of earth, made barren with Gods curse, whose fruits
without sweatie labors, are but Gen 3. 8.
thistles and thorns?

As for the vanity of the world, seculum speculum, This world is a glass
wherein a drumlie eye may see its vanity: He who was wisest in it, speaking of
it, after that he was tired with trying its pleasures, preached that it was but
vanity of vanities, a Eccles. 1. 2
very Idea, that is the abstract of vanities, which are the abstracts of
things that are vain: Note
So according to Solomon's Text all that we account most substantial, is but
an abstract of an abstract, as if a man should dream that he dreamed, which
should be the dream of a dream: Note
This is like yt vanity which Habak* kuke calls very vanity, wherein Heb.
2. 13
are some few flashes of deceivable comforts.

Thus as ye see the life of man in this world is nothing but a fardle of
vanities, shadows and dreams, a bundle of displeasing pleasures, vain in
inside and outside too: Note
Our greatest pleasures here are but a mixture of misery: They are soon
marred like a mistuned song: Note
The flees in the plague of flees were not so thick in Egypt as vanities are
in this world, for which the most part of the world exchange the happiness of
their Souls: These who are most glorious in worldly pomp, are constrained to
say at last with that King in Homer: * The great God has imprisoned me with
cares: O happy they who are free of such dangers, are secured in cottages of
clay.

After that man has been upon the top of his pomp, and is come to the
vertical point of his pleasures after which he has hunted with great
eagerness of heart: He must come down and be curbed with pains of diverse
diseases, distressed till he be turned in to dust.

Note
All his pleasures, profits, and prefermentes shall slide away like a shadow:
They shall pass like a Poast passing by, like water lift up with a sife, or
sand with open fingers. As the ship passes over the waves, its trace, not
being able to be seen on the brim, or as the foul mounting to the Sky,
piercing the Air, so that no mortal eye can perceive any token of her
passage, though the ear hear the noise of her wings, so shall it be of all
earthly things, when once the inch of this life being ended, our mortal Soul
shall be dislodged out of this clay, all earthly contentments then shall be
like a Bird, of whose flight no token can be found after for a space by the
shaking of her wings, she has parted the air in a greater heminencie of
going: In all our greatest pleasures be lurking sorrows like serpents among
the grass, which makes way to a fairing man to step back or start aside.

Oh, that we were wise! What shall I say? In this transitory life we are
miserably blind folded, because we love not the heavens, God lets us dote
upon the earth: It is righteous with God so to do: Of Psalm. 117. 23.
all this we must say, This is the Lords doing, it is marvelous in our eyes:
Oh, that we could consider! in these last days of this world, there is come
upon the world a plague of vanity, like a plague of flees, whereof pride is
Beelzebub the master fly, which buzzeth in most men and women's heads
commanding other legions of vanities full of fretting sorrows, or of false
flattering pleasures wherewith the silly Soul is fettered: Note
The whole life of man is enclosed in Mesopotamia between two rivers of
tears, First we mourn at our Birth, and last others mourn at our Burial:
Nascimur flentes morimur gementes: Note
The whole bounds of our life is enclosed between weeping and groaning: Note
At the first sight of the light we weep, and last at the closing of our eyes,
we gasp out our life with a groan: What shall I say? So soon as we are
borne, we are gone like a shadow when it declineth. Psalm. 109. 23


Oh, that we could consider that there is nothing here which is not mixed with
some spyce of vanity. * If we had eyes to see, we would say, What is below
in this Region of corruption without corruption or contempt? Note
Within us, without us, above, us, about. us, all is out of order: The powers
of the heavens are shaken, the Air about our heads is full of tempests and
flashing meteors! the world is waxed old, and is come to its decrepite age: The
last days are days of diseases, the companions of old age, all is wrong. The
Church is sick of Sects: The Sea is full of Pirates, and the Land of Robbers,
yea, and of sins and sickness unknown to former ages: The Godly are as sheep
among wolves. Matthew. 10 16, Psalm. 55. 6


O that I had wings like a Dove, for then vould I flee away and be at rest*

Note
Here is nothing but Mesech and Kedar, where there is nothing but Psalm. 102. 5
w^e for the godly which dwell therein: Note
Where shall a godly man live, or in what state shall he live? or how shall
he live? but he shall be battered and besieged with much toil and turmoyle?
Note
If he be wealthy, he shall be envied: If he be poor, he shall be
despised: If he be wise, he shall be accounted crafty: If he be simple,
he shall be called foolish: Note
All that is within us, all that is without us, yea, and in our selves are
ready to betray us, and to give us up into the hands of our enemies: Note
The eyes behold, that vanity may come in: The ears hearken like open floode
gates to let in streams of vanities for to drown the Soul: The false heart
within, that keeps the keys of all the senses, while the Soul is sleeping,
brings in upon it like a Delilah, a number Judge. 16. 21.
of cruel Philistims: Note
Thus the strong men of Israel is made a jest and mock unto the uncircumcised
that belong not to the covenant.

This whole world is but a world of vanity? The wise man Solomon the mirror
of wisdom, and wonder of the world, was sent into this world as a spy: from
God for the well of man: Note
By his wisdom his mind ran through the world like a Pilgrim from country
to country, yea, like a Be from herb to herb, for to taste them. He
confidered all the trees from the Cedar to the Hyssope, 1 King. 4. 33
for to prye into, and pierce the pith and virtues of all things abroad, for to
take through notice thereof: After that he had thus wandered, being come home
again from his pilgrimage, the world flocked about him, to search what he had
heard and seen abroad, and what he thought of the world, and of all the
glory thereof: Note
What news, Solomon? did the Worldings say, whose heart is like a Ferret in
the earth: What have thou seen or heard? Solomon contracteth all his News
into a Line,

Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity.

All these things which are soloued, I have looked into, would Solomon say,
but I have found nothing but vanity from the bark to the bone: Note
In Trees is vanity, in Herbs is vanity, as well in the Cedar as in the
Hyssope: In Silver is vanity, in Gold is vanity, in Jewels is vanity, in
Honor is vanity, in Clothing is vanity, in Strength is vanity, in Wisdom
is vanity, in Beauty is vanity: In a word, all is full of vanity, yea, all
is vanity, yea, vanity of vanities: All the creatures says Romans 8. 20
the Apostle, the spy of the New Testament, are subject to vanity: Note
For the sin of man, all the Creatures have lost that glory and liberty,
which once they had, and are become slaves under a base bondage, under which
they groan as a woman in travel: All earthly comfortes which spring out of
sinful pleasures fail and fad like grass.

* Alas, what is here, that should move a Soul to desire to sojourne here,
but a moment.

Note
This world is a Tenise of* temptations, wherein the silly Soul like a ball
without any ceasing is tossed from wall to wall, as one wave of the Sea rusheth
upon another, being carried with a gale of wind, so do^ all sorts of
sorrows here as in a moved sea swell, roll, and rage with most fearful
rushinges upon man* till he be turned into froth.

Note
It is a wonder how the eyes of man should be so bleared, or rather juggled,
that any thing below^ should make him to say as they (...) on Tabor, who knew
not what they Luke 9. 33
said: It is good for us to be here, and yet who is he that is not dulled
and darkened with the clouds of folli^

Is not this world a wildernesse^ the way's thereof are rough an^ crooked, Note
Man's best things hee^ are like the Hartechoke, whereof the most part is
unprofitable leaves* Note
Our joys are joined with sorrowe^ checker work, white and black, lik^
Lillies among thorns.

Note
Our hopes here are vain, the profit is false, the pleasures are passing,
the labors are loss, the promises are but lies: Note
The whole state of this Prince of Creatures is here but a banishment, here
and there he stumbleth, where he thought best to stand, where he purposed to
take his rest, there he finds his ruin: No worldly comforts are to be
trusted into, they are like the staff of a broken reed, whereon if a Isa. 36
6.
man lean, it will go into his hand: Do what he can, some painful
splinter or other shall be fastened in his flesh: Note
There is nothing on Earth which can be managed with such cunning, that it may
be without cumber: The proudest and Ioftiest waves of men's designs, are
easily broken into foame: Note
Gods favor is the surest Sanctuary, nothing within the compass of this
created world, can yield to man solid comfort or contentment, nothing can
possibly fill the boundless desire of his Soul: Note
Such a divine sparkle can never cease rising, til it bejoyned to that great
SHADAI, Exodus 6. 3.
GOD all sufficient, till the Soul be at Him, it can never be settled, but
is ever tossed, whiles to the right hand and whiles to the left: Now it is
ravished with joye, and in an instant again it is surprised with amazement:
Note
What ever it enjoys here, it cannot be content, but is ever foolishlie
peeping and prying beyond all that which it has affecting with a strong
strain, greater riches, high honors, and preferments, which I may call, The
guilted glorious* miseries of mankind* Woe, woe, woe dwell into that house
where such things are not sanctified to their owners.

O that I could cunningly ripe up with a Razour this worlds vanity, that we
might see it within the bowels! O what depth of discomfort should be there
seen, if we had eyes to see: All the pregnancie of man's Spirit, all the most
rich indue mentes of his mind, without the sanctifying Spirit of Jesus, become
but an idol of self conceit: Note
As for all other outward things, in the very turning of an hand, and closing
of an eye, they often remove insalutato hospite, not taking their good night:
Inconstancy is the poison of our pleasures.

Though a man even now were never so happy in his own conceit, how soon may
the Lord send a change? Note
He can make the fruit of all his labors to be like an untimely birth, for
whom the Mother has suffered many woes, and yet could never enjoye a sight
there of alive.

The greatest glory of this world, is like Hills which seem highest a far
off.

Note
Men in their solie may sav as David said in his prosperity, I shall Psalm. 62.
6.
never be moved: But, O folly! There is nothing permanent here: Man is tossed
up and down as the Locust, either with discountenance or disapointment,
breaking into foame his projects upon the rocks of disgrace. All is turned
about with a continual change: There is no Time but it passes, there is no Day
but it darkneth, there is no Fruit but it rotteth, there is no Flower but it
faddeth, there is no Force but it fails, there is no Strength but it
weakeneth, there is no Beauty but it withers, there is no Garment but it
wears, yea, the Heavens themselves Psalm. 102. 26
wax old, as does a garment* Note
Behold, how all that is above us, beneath us, about us, is full stuffed with
vanity: this at last shall worldlings know to be true, when their laughter
shall be madness in their own eyes: It is a wonder how men are so blind in
this glorious Noone tide of the Gospel.

Note
All that is most esteemed in this world, the fools Paradise, is chiefly of
those, 1. Strength, 2. Honor, 3. Riches, 4. Beauty, 5. Pleasure, 6. Wisdom,
7. Children, 8. Long life, of these things may no man say with Niobe.

Excessere metum mea jam bona.

I need not fear to loss them.


The sick Man. I desire to hear you discuss the vanity of these eight
things severally, for which men strain the utmost vain of their wits, as if
in this region of corruption such things were able to stretch themselves unto
eternity.


The Pastor. All such things are but broken staves of reed; not to be relied
upon: Note
To natural eyes indeed such things are so glancing, that they like a star
new created in the Sky, will make them to gaze, yea, often it befalls that
the prosperity of such things enjoyed by the wicked, will not only draw the
eyes of the Godly upon them, but will be eyefore unto them. I was envious at
the Psalm. 79. 3.
foolish, said David, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

Let us relish these eight things a little, and orderly try what is their
worth.


1. STRENGTH.
As for Strength, if Samson the strongest now could speak out of his Grave, he
would teach the living that it is but a vain thing.

Note
What a vain thing is this, which in the highest degree that ever was in man,
might be shaven from him Judge. 16. 19
with the locks of his hair?

Let a Fever but seize upon the strongest that ever breathed, before it leave
him, it shall teach him to know that all the force of flesh is vas nitie: Note
Reuben who was called by his Father, The man of his might, and Gen 49. 3.
the beginning of his strength, and the excellency of power, is in the verse
verse. 4. ^
following, called, unstable as water: The Philistims great man, ye strength of
Philistia, the terror of Israel, was felled down with a stone out of a
Shepherds scrippe and slung.

There is no solid strength in flesh, but he who is strong in God, of him
shall be said, as was said of Genesis 49. 24.
Joseph, His bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hand were made strong
by the hands of the Almighty GOD of Jacob.

2. HONOR.
What is Honor, which men in the hight of Spirit desire with the strongest
strain? Note
What is it, but like a King in a play? when the play is done, the ornaments
are taken from him: To day man is a King, and to morrow a Carrion.

Note
The greatest pomp of King Agrippa, and his of Queen Bernice, is called in
Scripture language, a mere fantasy, or euanishing show: He came down with
his Queen, says S. Luke (...), that is, he Act. 25. 23
came down with great fantasy.

As honors are changeable like a fantasy, so often change they men so that
they become phantasticke: Honores mutant mores, Honors change manners, but
oftest to the worse.

If men knew the vanity of this point, they would not so eagerly hunt after
that wherein there is no contentment.

Note
After that Alexander had fished the whole world with his herrie water-net,
what found he? but folly and euanishing shows, whereof the most pleasant
relish was like the white of an Egg wherein is no savor.

Note
Kings which are the most honorable men of this world, are gods in Psalm. 82. 7
name but not in Nature: I have said, Ye are gods, but ye shall die like
men-King Herod's flatterers cried that he was god, but Death belyed them, crying
that he was but a man, a Act. 12. 22
god that could not resist the worms, often that which is highly esteemed
among Luke 16. 15
men, is an abomination in the sight of God.

Note
God likes not ever best these to whom he fills a full cup of temporal
felicity: He whom God has elected to be a King in Heaven, is often hid,
like Soul among the stuff, 1 Samuel 10. 22.
or like Corn among Chafe.

Note
I have observed in reading the Book of God, that few Kings either of Judah or
of Israel received any great praise from Gods pen, which can neither feign
nor flatter: Truth will yield no ground, though it should meet a Tyrant in
the face.

Note
O fainting flatterer! who darre not preach but to pleasethy Prince, Who art
thou, that thou should fear Isa. 51. 12
a mortal man, which shall be made as grass? By a wise, grave, godly
reproof thou might have saved his Soul, in whose blood thou have embrewed thy
self either by fearful silence, or flattering eloquence.

Note
O how dangerous is the high estate of Princes, unto Princes themselves: They
are followed with such applause, that often they are made to forget what they
are: I have called Plas. 82. 6
you gods, is the flatterers Text, he cannot pass this point, his Glass is
run, and Time is spent before he can win to the other part of the verse, But
ye shall dye like men.

Let us hear what God himself speaks of the Monarchs of his own people.

Except a very few, there is not one, but he is either branded with 1 Kin. 11
6
this, And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, or with this, And he
followed 2 King. 13 2.
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin.

Note
Honor will not abide with Kings, except that they abide with God: While
Nebuchadnezar was boasting of his Buildinges, even while the word was in the
Kings mouth, Dan. 4. 31
there fell a voice from Heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezar; the kingdom is
departed from thee. No King stands so strong in his prosperity, but God can
shake him and lay him on his back: Note
King David of this got an afterwit. In my prosperity, said he, Psalm. 30 6.
I said, I shall never be moved. But so soon as God began to hide his face,
and he began also to be troubled. verse. 7.


* That is notable which Isaiah Isa. 14. 13.
says concerning the King of Babylon, who in his fond conceit did reach the
hight of heaven, as being at league with all contrary powers. Thou have said in
thine heart, I will ascend verse. 14.
into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I will ascend
above the hight of the Clouds, I will be like the most High.

What says God to that? It shall not be so, O Lucifer. Son of the Morning,
I shall take thee at the trip, though thou should soar above the Skies of
heaven, yet thou shall verse. 15.
be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit: They that see thee shall
narrow lie look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that
made the earth to tremble, and that did shake king: doms? Note
This is the end of all flesh, irreuocablie concluded by the KING of Kings
decree. Dust thou art, and Genesis 3. 19.
unto dust shall thou return: Note
The way of greatest Monarchs, is from the Palace to the Pit: Were a man Psalm.
30. 9
never so high in Honor, he must say at last with King David, I go the 1
King. 2. 2.
way of all the Earth.

Note
If Princes in their pomp could practice Memento mori, Self-conceit should not
be able to poppe in it self with pufts of pride, which make many to quarrel
with the reprouers: He is like a Phoenix, who being in Honor, can digest a
reproof, and find it good with Hezekiah, who while he was sore threatened,
said, Good is the word of the Lord: O how 2 Kin. 10. 19
easily do fail flattering words cogge in themselves, by sly and crafty
juggling into the hearts of these that are in high places: Tell them yt all
goes well, and that this world shall last, and that in their prosperity they
shall never be moved, such Preachers will please: But if a Jeremiah come in
with his woes, some Pashur shall not miss him upon the Ier. 20. 2.
cheek: Ahab could not abide to hear good Micaiah: Wherefore? 1 Kin. 22. 8.
I hate him, said he, for he does not prophecy good concerning me: In this
was all the distemper: But vviselie and godly was it replied by good
Iohoshaphat, Let not the King say so.

Well is that King who in his honor reputeth this his greatest Honor, to
honor him, from whose Grace he has his Crown: his praises shall not be
silent, while he shall lie in the place of silence, sleeping into slyme.

The Lord make the praise of our Gracious SOVEREIGN to sound like that of
Josiah: And he did that* which is right in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 22 2.
and walked in all his ways and turned not aside to the right hand or to the
left* AMEN AMEN.

What shall I say more of the vanity of Honor and Preferment among men? I am
assured of this, that it is no sure token of Gods love, for even they that
work wickedness Mal. 3. 25.
are set up: Of these oftest is said, O they are made, even while they are
mad.

Note
The most naughty and most unworthy, whose valorous acts and virtuous deads
no man can record: have often found a room where they may drink in a full
cup of temporal happiness, many will wonder to see them step with a grave
and stayed civility: Have not many seen such in Kings Courts with great
applouse run up without any rub, as it were to the top of Tabor; where to
many who knew them before in a base estate, they will seem to be
transfigured. Luke 9. 19


Note
The Liars and the Flatterers will gather about the Gallant, and were it not
the fear more of Lyce than of God, while he speaks, they would cry, The
voice of God Act. 12. 22
and not of man: While he is thus wise in his greatest pride, princely
mounted, gallopping upon the highest hills, imperiously dominearing, and
reuelling in the world; down comes a thunderbolt with fiery flashes, of a
divine wrath; ouer-turning and down throwing horse and man from the steepest
of all his Preferments. Thus to all, at last he becomes a spectacle of
amazement.

Note
Take up now our Minion with all his honors, which once he did so eagerly,
hunt after. The fairest blossoms of his glory, are blasted as with mildew.

Behold now, all his honors rolled in the dust, the higher he was mounted,
the greater is his fall: who but Haman to day, thryuing in this world, and
raising up himself a Paramour of a Prince? By his outward gliste^ing he
makes men's eyes to dazzle: Now he has ye wind at will, and saileth as he
pleases with flaunting sails amid his greatest jollitie: But tarry a little,
look up to the weather-cocke: The wind is turned, Le Marquis d' Ancre en soit
tesmoin.
the head is where the tail was: Haman is disgraced, his lovers are Apostats,
no man darre avouch him, his honors is taken from him: This is his Princes
will, Caput obnubito arbori Est. 7. 8.
infoelici suspendito: Cover his face^ Note
And seeing he was the chief of a knot of knaves, let him have ye highes^
Est. 7. 9.
pin of fifty cubits high: By thus he becomes a man of high degree.

Note
Thus he to whom once many were glad to hold the baso^ as to a darling of
account, proves at last to be one of this worlds fools, which care not what
be their end so that their way be pleasant.

Note
At last, after all such pleasures, profits, and prefermentes, the ungodly man
with great shame, with a ^rou. 10. 7
rotten name, is grieved and gaul^d with sorrow: Though he both chafe and
fiet, yet of necessity must he pack him to the abhorred Regions of Death.

This is no new thing under Heaven; and yet alas, how few are these that in
their carriage can considder that he that thinks he stands, 1 Cor. 10. ^2.
should take good heed, lest he fall.

Note
Prosperity strikes most men blind on this eye, until the current thereof
be cut* or crossed with some disaster. Note
While men are exalted, hardly can they dream of a change: Satan is ever
most busy to stickle and stricke the bargain between them and Death, and
Hell, and all sort of disgrace.

Let us also say some thing of the Levites which are the King of Heavens
favorites, and if it may be said, his best beloved Minions: Their Honor is
great; if with the shining Vrin of sound and solid Doctrine, they join the
Tummim of a good life, the Lord allows on them 1 Timothy 5. 17
double Honor: But if either by a foul decay of Grace, they be Loiterers and
will not Labor or labor in Doctrine, but not in life, their double Honor
shall be turned in double disgrace.

Note
Of all Levites the Lowne Leuite is the greatest.

There is nothing but it may be good for something, but unsavory Salt is
good for nothing: While other Luke 14. 34
most heinous sinners shall swim like Cork on the brimme and upper swarde of
Hell, these that have poisoned these whom they should have seasoned both with
life and doctrine, Exodus 15. 10
shall lik Egyptian Lead sink down to the lowest of the Gulf.

Thus as ye see Honor in whomsoever, if it be without true Godliness; is l^k
a fair woman, wanting Discretion, whom wise Solomon compares Prou. 11. 22
to a jewel of go^d in a Swynes snowte* This all flesh will either subscriue or
put their hand to the Pen in token of consent, except these that look upon such
outward things with the unhallowed eye of prophannesse.

But to leave all particulars: What is all the glory of Nations? If all their
glory and excellency whatsoever, were put in one Scale of the Ballence and
Vanity in the other, Vanity should weigh them down: Note
David in his time put them in the weights together, after he had well
considered the matter, he gave out sentence, saying, Surely men of low degree
are vanity and me^ of high degree Psalm. 62. 9.
are a lie, if they be laid in the Balance they are altogether lighter than
Vanity. See how Vanity is too heavy a weight for men of low and high
degree: If ye would make even weight, out of vanity must be sought that which
Habakkuke calls, very vanity, Hab. 2. 13.
even Solomon's vanity of vanities: Eccles. 1. 2.
Put in that lightest vanity into the one Scale, and men of all degrees in the
other, then shall the tongue of the Balance stand even.

What then shall we say of the glory of all Nations? Note
It is well compared by the Prophet unto the drop of a Bucket, and to the
small dust Isa. 40. 15
of the Balance: To tell us that no worldly thing can be balast in Gods
Balance, no more than the lightest dust can be of weight into a Scale of man's
Balance, which is most easily blown away with the least blast of breath.

Great is the vanity of the greatest: Note
From the Throne the King himself must come down by death for to go sleep
in slyme. To Gods God has said, Ye shall die like men.

Thus as ye see all earthly Honor, for which is so much strife and debate,
all worldly pomp and glory which me^ so hungerlie hunt after, is but like dust
driven away with a pu^t of breath.

Note
Let men in Honor be in his best estate: Man in his best estate is altogether
vanity: The whole course of man's life is but a Mine of misery, and a very
fardle of vanities: That thereof which is most stable, is but a flash and away.
Note
Let Gods vine trees keep their wine, and his figs their sweetness, and
his Olives their Judge. 9. 15
fatness, but let the Brambles catch crowns: This was the event and issue of
the Parliament of Trees at the crowning of their King.

Well is the man that may line and lurk: Who knows the weight of Crowns,
the lodging of greatest Honors would never daine to desire them.

3. RICHES.
Now let us come to Riches* what are they? a swift vanity, which with wings
fly away like an Eagle. Prou. 25. 5


I compare the most part of rich men unto Spiders, which spend their very
bowels in weeuing a web wherewith they may catch a flee.

Note
What is all the glory of Riches, but like a feast in print? all sorts of
meat are there, all sorts of wine are also there but only words and lines:
There is nothing there indeed that can either flake the hunger o^ quench the
thi^st of the wearied man, no not after that he has labored night and day,
might and maine, to attain contentment.

Note
This world is rich in pr^ffers, but of petit performance: Man for a space like
a Ship before the wind are rich laden, may glide gladly over the sea of this
world*with a full sail: He may get Ladies sailing, as we say, and that in a
wonderful quietness, but a little after such calm, Alcedonian days are
past, even while he is swimming in his wealth, blessing himself, as who but
he, up gets a tempest, and down comes a blast, behold, a little from
the Shore in sight of the Haven, in the hight of his hopes, and he is tumbled
headlong down to the bottom of the Gulf. Let this be a lesson unto all,
not to say with David in his prosperity I shall never be moved: Psalm. ^0. 6.
Shall this be man's felicity, which daily is in reverence of Wind, and
Wave, Pirates, and Perrels.

Certainly it is none happiness for man here to have this wicked world at
will: It is Gods custom Gen 17 39
to give the fatness of the Earth to the men of this World* Note
These only be ye things whereof they have an assigned liferent with that
rich man in the Gospel, to whom Abraham after Luke 16. 25
his death cried down, Remember that in thy lifetime thou receiuedst thy good
things: Note
At Abraham's requeast GOD refused not to make Ismael vvealthie in this world:
Concerning Gen* 17. 20
Ismael, said the Lord, I have heard thee: Lo, I have blessed him* and will
make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly: Twelve Princes shall
he beget. The bitter teates of profane Esau were comforted with the fatness
of the Earth; Genesis 27. 39
and with the dew of heaven from above. Christ cast first the bag unto Judas*
Ioh. 12. 6.
and after gave him a sop, for to let the world know that neither money Ioh.
13. 26
nor meat, are sure tokens of Gods favor.

The wicked men of this world are content with such things, because their
heaven is upon earth, they have their portion in this life.

As for the Godly though with Jacob they have but a staff in their Gen 32. 10
hand for to go out the way* they will be content if so be that GOD will
give them bread to eat and clothes Genesis 28* 20
to put on.

* Alas, that we cannot consider that by such heaped up treasures Romans 2. 5.
men often heap up to themselves treasures of wrath against the day of 1 Timothy
16 19
wrath: Happy they who lay up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life.

If we could with a fixed and sanctified eye behold all these things for
which men do under go such pains by afflicting their Souls, we should
easily perceive our earthlinesse, when we loss such things, which we love
(and who can keep them?) it breaks the very heart of all our contentments.

What are all such things I pray you, even while most pleasinglie and
plausiblie they are enjoyed to the full in the most fertile plains of plenty
and pleasures of this world*

These whose cup does ouerflow, in whose coffers are wadges of Gold, can
best, if they would, declare the vanity of such transitory things, they know
with what cumber they are conquered, and with what care they are kept: Note
Nay, man keeps not them, but they keep the mind of man in care.

Cura facit canos. Care changes hair.

Note
A peevish worldling is a warded Wretch, entangled with golden fetters, his
Palace is but a prison of carking cares, in scraping together he takes
pleasure into pain* before his end he cannot perceive his folly* Note
But still he gads by Sea, and by Land, seeking upon the Sea and upon the Earth
an heavenly felicity, till at last frustrate of all his hopes, he falls
down into the Grave with a jumppe.

Note
Thus as ye see such is the treason of our Treasures: They come like
deceitful dreams, and pass away like vanishing shadows: One lie things
Spiritual have a sure and lasting root.

Note
Alas, in that our heart is least wherein it should be most, and most in that
wherein it should be least: Fools that we are, we all earne wages to put
into a bottomless bag* Hag. 1. 6.
Such wages are often given in keeping to most vvorthlesse men, as Judas got
the bag to keep. Ioh, 12. 6.


Oh, that men's hearts were fixed on the lasting Treasu^es of immortality: Oh,
that we could learn in time this sound Divinity, that all that is under the
circle of the Moon is but flat vanity and vexation of the Spirit of man,
which continually vvanders up and down at random, seeking its felicity in
that where it is not to be found.

Note
Well is the man whose hearts desires are bounded and confined within the
secret compass of contentment.

4. BEAVTIE.
What is Beauty, but as one faith well, a color and a temptation? The color
fades, and the temptation ^nareth: Note
Behold, her who within these forty years seemed a perfection of Beauty, a
rauisher of eyes; behold (...) now in her fourscore, with her vvrinkled
cheeks, and her glasse^ eyes, and her rotten teeth, and her stinking breath:
Note
Behold, and say with a sigh, Favor is deceitful, and prou. 31. 30
Beauty is vanity: But she that fears the Lord shall be praised.

Note
There is nothing more fadding than flesh; and yet man will not consider;
while his eye is quick, and his lips rudie, and his color lively* he
cannot think of changes, neither by age nor sickness, such a foolish conceit
is bredde in the heart: Out of such a Beautiful sleep he cannot be vvakned,
til God with a shout cause preach him to be Grass: The voice Isa. 40. 6.
said cry: The Prophet said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and the
goodness thereof as the flower of the field: The grass withers, the flower
faddeth, because the Spirit of the Lord blaweth upon it: Surely the people is
grass: By this the Lords public Oyas, all fleshly beauty is cried down,
as being but a beguiling color, and a snairing temptation: Fie on men and
vvomens folly* care for color is but vanity: Here is beauty Psalm. 90. 17
without fard: Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: Note
All other beauty is lik an Almanac whose use is but for a year: It is but a
bait for catching of unstable Souls.

5. PLEASVRE.
As for all the Pleasures, we reap in earthly things, I compare them to
fruits eaten before they be ripe, which first set the teeth on edge, and
thereafter cause diverse and deadly diseases.

Note
There is no pleasure here without a Page of pain* at its back: Our vveedes
and our flowers grow up together, the best often is borne down by the vvorst.

Note
What I pray you are all the foolish pleasures of this world, but as we
ordinarlie call them pass times? Has man so long a time to live? Or is his
journey from Earth to Heaven so easy or so short that he may have leisure for
pleasures and pass times? Is man's short life so wealthy of time that it must
be passed into passe-times? Must we not in end come to count and reckoning for
our evil and well spent hours*

Moreover, what are the most part of all earthly delights? The most excellent
are but noble miseries, the fairest are but farded lik the face 2 King. 6. 30
of Iezebel, only an outside or outward scroofe of pleasure? What I pray you
are all carnal delights, but the lymetwiges of the Devil, wherewith the
silly Souls of sinners are ensnared and entangled?

What shall I say more? Note
All the pleasures that are below may well be compared to a smokie fire in a
f^ostie day whereof the smoke is more hurtful than the fire is helpefull: All
the joys which are here, are but reekie pleasures purchased with tears, where
with the eyes of men are made bleared: Prou. 14. 13
In laughing the heart will be sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is
heaviness: Worldly pleasures but darkeneth the Reason, and deceive the
Senses: Voluptates carnales sunt putida and putrida, both stinking and rotten:
Only the pleasures of Heaven are pure, perfect, and perpetual: All other
things slide away like water.

6. WISDOM.
What is all the Wisdom of this World? Scripture says, that it is but folly
before God: Note
It may well 1 Cor. 3. 19
be compared to the Letters which Vriah carried against himself: If it be
not sanctified, it is in the bosom 1 Samuel 11 14.
^ message against the messenger.

Note
Knowledge and pregnancie of Wit stored with all moral virtues, without Gods
fear are witness against the man himself, in whom they are: They will stand
up and testify against him* that he understood his Masters will, and yet
would not do it: Note
Woe to that back in hell whose heart on earth was full engrossed of worldly
wit: He that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten
with many strips: Away with that Soul whose understanding is great swelled
with knowledge, but lamed in its practical powers, wherein is the working of
the life of true Christianity. Many in this world are much counted of their
natural ^it, but wherein I pray you do most men spend their wits and break
their brains? Is it not to be great in this world? In the mean time they are
so spirituallie brutish, that they care not what they be, o^ where they be in
the world to come*

Note
Such fools are like Fishers that leave main seas for to fish in shallow
puddle* As I began this point so I end it, all natural wit* is branded
with this, that it is but folly before 1 Cor. 3. 19.
God: Let your Soul disavow and disclaim it, that ye may be wise in God:
Gods wise man to worldly wise, is but a silly Gods Fool.

7. CHILDREN.
Note
As for Children, their conception is with sickness and over* casting of
heart: Their birth is with pains like the pains of hell: Their bu^iall is
with tears, after many a wearisome night: Such pleasures are painful
pleasures: Apples of So dome are rotten within.

Note
But let us suppone that, lik noble branches they live and come to men, yea, to
gray hairs: They are our Heirs, the end of all our painful drudgery and
careful conquests* Note
Though a man had conquered unto them the whole world, he must look upon his
conquest with a sigh, and say with the wife Man* As for him that comes after
me Eccles. 2. 19
who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, and yet he must be
master of all my labors: Man may conquise Lands to his Children, but Thrift,
and Wisdom cannot be bought: The most thriftie is often the father of the
most for lorne.

What a vanity is this? Note
Certainly who would weigh well all the pleasures of Children with the pains
past, and the fears for time to come, should find all the pleasures light like
wole, light like Belshazzar: Dan. 5. 27
But his pains should be found to be like Pharaoh and his Army, that sank
Exodus 15. 10
down like Leads in to the might it waters: Note
Such light pleasures are soon ouerswayed with leade^ pains: Note
Too great pleasure in Children, is but a childish pleasure: The best of it is
of ten laden shortly after with a lumpish cross, which has need of a Simon
for to bear up the end of it for Luke 23. 26
the help of the bearer.

Alas, the hearts of most men are too too much taken up with that which may
be termed the sickness of Eli, or fathers folly, which hardly 1 Samuel 3. 13.
can suffer controlement, or contradiction: They are so in love with their
Children, that though they by a lewd life make themselves vile, they vvil not
restrain them* Their minds are so given to them, that they are grieved to
grieve them with fathers reproves: But at last out-commeth the voice of
judgment, When I begin 1 Samuel 3. 12.
I will also make amend.

8. LONG LIFE.
Last of al, if there be any thing that would seem to be desired, it should be
Job. 2. 4.
long lif all that a manhath he will give it for his life: Note
Though these be the words of a Liar, yet most men will put their hand to the
pen and subscribe the truth thereof: Note
All that most men have, as Strength, Honors, Riches* Beauty, Pleasure*,
Wisdom, Children, and all will they give for their Life: But what is this
life? were it never so long, but a season wherein poor men is tired with
toils? What is it but a long martyr dome, and a stormy time of tears? What
is this life? Let S. James answer, It is, said he, but a Iam. 4. 14.
vapor. Nubicula est cito evanescit: Nascimur flentes morimur gementes: It
begins with tears and ends with groans: What is life? Let Job Job. 2. 22.
answer, Mylife, says he, is wind. What is life? Let Isaiah answer, It is
but a breath in our nostrile. What Isa. 2. 22.
is life? Cry, said the Lord to Isaiah, What shall I cry? said Isaiah, Cry, All
flesh is grass. * What is life? Isa. 40. 6.
A tale that is told, says Moses: Psalm. 90. 9.
Note
What is it? A flitting shadow, a bubble in the water, a deceivable dream,
the working of a weeuers Sh^ttle which by winding here and there vnwindeth it
self to an end: Note
Our life like the shadow on the Dyall insensibly steals away.

See what it is of the vanity of this life: Note
It is begun with weeping* and maintained by sweatting, and at last ends
with a gasp: Mors vltima linea rerum: Thus man's life like the beautiful Apple
of Sodom, so soon as it is touched, is turned into dust.

What should move a man to desire many days? Note
While a man desires many days, he desires that which he desires not,
viz. old Age: What is old Age, but many days? Are not the old man's Eccles.
12. 1
days called. The evil days, and the years of which he says, I have no
pleasure in them? What has he then? will ye say, if he has no pleasure?
All sorts of pains old Age sets on foot all the sorts of diseases. The Guts
and the Grauels, and diverse Defluxions, with many other maladies run upon him
and write a Calendar in his bones, vvherin his pain full itchings like
Astronomers declare to him what weather it will be to morrow.

Note
Thus as ye see, manslife is but an irksome occupation and an hour of
tediousness, and to be short a very compend of misery, casie to be
understood without any commentary of long discourse, if we were scholars
willing to learn.

Note
May not men see how all that is below is sick of the flux? for nothing is
permanent: He only fitteth sure, who can say with David, Mine heart is fixed,
O Lord. Psalm. 108. 1


What shall I say more of this whole world? Note
Let men think of it what they will, this is the constant truth of an
uncreated Testimony, this present evil world: It is Gal. 1. 4.
so evil that it is said to lie in wickedness: The Lord never suffer out
Souls to be its Bed fellows: such a Bed is a bloody bed, like that of
Iezabel: Note
A nest wherein is no rest, but terror, of Conscience.

Before I end this point concerning long life, let us roll a space this short
meditation in our minds.

What is in this world so worthy that it should be so eagerly desired?
Continually while we liuewee are in fear of Death, for this cause seek we
Physic, Mirth, and Music, and all for to b^rre Death to the door: And yet
fools that we are, cerius out citius, soon or since we must all draw near
to the Psalm. 107. 18
doors of Death: There is no discharge in this war.

Every man in this life has his appointed time, wherein night and day he must
wait till his a^ange come. Job. 14. 14


Note
Men's days are distributed unto them like hours seuemilie divided upon the
Horologe: Some must live but till One, another unto Two, another unto Three:
The Palm turns about and with its finger points at the hour: So soon as
man's appointed hour is come, whether it be the first, second, or third, there
is no more biding for him: Nec prece ni^ precio, neither by price not prayer
can Death be moved to spare him but an hour, no not. Note
As the sound of the Clock Bell ringing, his last hour passes away with all
speed, and turns not again, so must the poor man at Death with all haste
pack him out of sight and no mo^e be seen upon the land of the living. Isa.
38. 11


His hour being sounded, he must with all haste remove, that another might
take place: One of whom none can surely say, He shall Eccles. 2. 19
be a wise man or a fool.

Then all that the silly man had painefullie provided, must be given to him
whom the father often in his life beholding* said with a sigh within himself,
Behold, him for whom is all this drudgerie; behold him for whom is all my
toil, and turmoyle, Who knows whether Eccles. 2. 19
he shall be a wise man or afoole? yet shall he be master of all my labors.

Now happy and thrice happy they whom GOD in mercy remoueth in time from
seeing heartbreak of folly, and deboched manner of their godles posterity:
Scripture accounts this for a singular benefit to the Righteous* when he is
removed, that he should not see the Isa. 57. ^.
evil day to come

The sick Man. Alas, of our follies! While we should seek GOD and our Souls
Salvation with the strongest strain and power of our Soul, by the corruption
of our Nature we are carried on the by: We live here in a sink of sin: The
older the world grows, it grows the worse: Every Age in its foolish dotage,
comes in with the own guise, scorning former phancies with greater follies,
yea, with foolish phrancies of which this predominant, that the wisdom of
God, which in all times seemed folly to the wicked, did never seem such a
folly as it does now, from the upper brimme of sin the world is come to the
dregs: The image of the worlds vanity is like that of Nebuchadnezars all
gold and silver in the up most parts, but in this last and most corrupt age we
are come to the clay: Note
If we be wise, we must seek a new world in this old world, for this will
never grow a better. As the love of Veniso^ wan Isaac to bless one for
another, so if we love this world, with a blind love, for a morsel of its
Venison, we will preferie it to Gods blessing: All the days of this wretched
life, we remain in a fools paradise. But I leave this.

I desire your earnestly Sir, that ye would let me hear something more
concerning old Age, which is a thing that every man desires to come unto, as
if it were the best time of life.


The Pastor. In this point appears the vanity of man and the weakness of his
wit: Every man would live to be old, and yet no man desires to be old: Let
men say what they will, I speak of natural men, all men desire to live long,
which is to be old, and yet they desire to remain young: * Their wrinkles
and their gray hairs the companions of old Age, the end of their desires are
un welcome unto them: Note
Then would they turn back again, that with the Eagle they Psalm. 103. 5
might cast their Bill, whereby they might renew their youth: Note
Hear old Nestor, who as Poets record, had lived three ages, a surfeit of
years: Hear him with his wish.

O miht praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos.

Like a foolish Pyla^ while he is at the mouth of his Harberie, he would
raise up the Sails for to turn to the tempestuous sea again: Note
See how the old man if he get but a fair Sun blinke of a weeks health
after clouds returning after the rain, Eccles* 122.
how he will rejoice, as though it should never be foul weather again*

Men may pyne themselves with desire of days: But do what they can their life
is like one that saileth, whether he stands or he sits, whether he
watch or sleep, he is ever upon his course.


The sick Man. Let it please you Sir, to continue in that discourse.


The Pastor. Solomon in the last lecture of the Book of his preaching lets
the young man see the vanity of many years.

Note
In that place is most clearelie set down how old Age the end of our
appointed time is enwrapped Job. 14. 14
with a cloud of miseries, as being a time whereunto like waves in a Sea, one
trouble arises upon the neck of another, the latter being ever worse than
the former, till at last fluctus decumanus, the last and the greatest waves of
Death come and sweep the man away: The imaginary sweetness of all earthly
contentmentes, is closed and concluded with a bitter Farewell.

Note
In that Lecture the Preacher brings in the old man like a Skellet whereat in
the presence of all young men he points out all his infirmities, saying unto
the young Ones, Behold, if such a life be so much to be desired.

First of all, he points at his Eccles. 12. 1
days calling them, The evil days, 2. Note
He touches his years, calling them, Years without pleasure: 3. Note
He speaks of the moist, raw and rainie winter of his cold old Age, the
days of sorrow, wherein clouds return after the rain: As one defluxtion
has rained down, another is arising like a cloud: 4. He points out all
the imperfections of his body: When old Age is come, then the keepers of the
house tremble, verse. 3.
that is, the hands which keeps the body become sick of the palsy, they
tremble, so that they can not carry the cup to their head:

Note
Then the strong men bow themselves, their legs are not able to bear them:
Note
Then the grinders cease, their teeth rotte and become mouldie, so that they
can eat no bread: Note
Then they wax dark that look out at the windows, their eyes become bleared
and blind: Note
Then the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the verse. 4.
sound of the grinding is low, when the teeth the mouths grinders are rotten,
the lips which are the doors of the street of the mouth are shut, so that
the old man cannot speak so distinctlie as of before: Note
Then shall he rise up at the voice of the Bird, old men cannot sleep, he
must rise so soon as the Birds begin to sing, or his sleep is so unfound,
that the chirpe of a little Bird will w^ken him: Note
Then shall all the daughters of singing be abased neither can an old man
sing himself for lack of voice, neither can he hear others sing for
deafness, so both his wind pipes and his ears the daughters of singing are
abased: Note
The^ shall verse. 5.
he be afraid of the high thing, he dar climb no more, he is no more for
Stares and upper Chambers: * Then fear shall be in the way, while they walk
they tremble as one that is afraid to fall: Note
Then the Almond tree shall flourish, their gray hairs grow white like the
flourishes and blossoms of an Almond: Note
Then a Grass Hopper shall be a burden, they are so weak, that they can
bear nothing, their knees are weak as water, so that they are a burden unto
themselves: See how the weight of a grass hopper which is little greater than
a Be, is a burden to the man of years: Note
Then shall the verse. 6.
silver cord be loosed, and the golden bowl shall be broken, his Sinews
shall become slack, and his Gall shall break: Note
Then shall the pitcher be broken at the well, the veins shall draw no more
blood out of the well of the Lever: Note
Then shall the wheel be broken at the Cisterne, his Lights become so ^otten
and riuen, that he can no more draw any breath with his broken Bellows: Note
See how Death steals upon us with insensible degrees.

Note
Behold, O young man the anatomy of thy self, when thou shall have gotten
thine hearts will of years: Note
Here is thy portrature drawn before hand: Painters can portray but according
as they see; but times to come are present unto God: Here is thy portrature
for the days of old age that is to come: Note
Behold thy self in it before hand, a receptacle of maladies: See there thy
balde head, and thy bleared eyes, and thy deaf ear, and thy wrinkled face,
and thy rotten teeth, and thy stinking breath, having thy body bowed and
crouched with thy third foot into thine hand: Note
Of thee may be put out a Riddle, What is it which having three feet, walks
with one foot into its hand, I shall assoile it, It is an old man going with
a staff: To this let me subjoyne another: What is it that has his stomach
into a Booste, and his eyes into his pocket? It is the same, viz. An old man
fed with boost Confections, or cured with continual purgations, having his
Spectacles his eyes of glass, into a case: His days are days of drowsiness:
All his pleasures are out of tune and temper. Note
Behold how this proud and lofty creature is so curbed, withered, and
wrinkled, that it has nothing but the vgelie shape of a creature.

Note
Thus after as in a dote he has tottered some space about at last he falls
down to dust, and dust ^neth Eccle. 12. 7
to the earth as it was: That is petere principium: Note
Then all his devises and his discourses, all his arguments and his syllogismes
for Riches, Honor, and preferment, infer a conclusion which is but petitio
principij, a sort of argument scorned by the Learned, as being an argument
declaring the weakness of ye Disputer so after we have spended our wits with our
words, all our dispute at last is found to be but upon trashes and triffles,
or as we say, de lana caprina: At last all comes to this, that we are in
end found to have been neither in mood nor figure, but only jangling and
cangling, and at last returning to that where once we began.

Thus he who in his youth stepped stately upon the ground, who having the
world at wish, was wont to brag it out with the brauest, with big and darring
words, after that in his life he has been tossed with losses, cares, and
crosses, he lies down^. into his green and growing bed, that dust may
return to the earth as it was.

Note
The Sun at night seems to lie down, in a bed of darkness, but like a
Giant in the morning he arises with force of light: But man once dead shall
not awake till the heavens Job, 14. 12.
be no more.

Note
A man in his youth with a profane and seared Conscience may swallow over
Camels of pleasant and profitable Man. 23. 24
sins without any pain, his heart being secured with a slumbe^ing and
superficial quiet: But so soon as the time of the rotten Age comes, all the
sweetness of the sins of his youth is turned into gall and worme-wood, the
Conscience of his by past evil spent life doggeth behind him.

All the dregs and dross of dolouis fall down upon this time: Then the
mirth of youth is turned into mourning: This is the nature of sin, the joye
thereof ever ends into sorrow: Who does not see how the mirth of youthful
lusts passes away with the fair blossoms of youth? after yt comes old age,
life the time of the fall of the leaf, a time of deadly diseases: After that
man in his youth has drunken at the brimme the clearest pleasures of sin in
his old sickly age, when he has greatest need of comfort, then must he
drink the doolefull and drumblie dregs of sorrow.

This is the course of man's pilgrimage, in this valey of tears: We come
weeping into this World* where we walk through troubles and temptations,
whereof except that God be more merciful, the end shall be bitterness,
brimstone fire.

Alas, for our benumbed heart: Oh, that we were sensible of our own misery,
and could weigh what it is to toil into this world, a wilderness of woe! What
is here that should tie our heart from the love of Heaven? If we would
speak with Scripture, we would say, that a thousand years in Heaven are but
like one day on earth, and again, if we would speak with truth, we must
say, that one day on Earth seems longer than a thousand years in Heaven: Note
Dolor and grief prolongeth that which is made short by joye and pleasure:
Note
An hour in a painful prison is longer than a week in a pleasant Palace:
Note
Let me speak a Paradoxe: A Child of a day is of a thousand years of age, 2
Pet. 3. 8
older than Methushelah: Why? A day on Earth is like a thousand years in
Heaven for length: Fie, fie, on our foolish vanity, that we cannot consider:
Note
A Child of a day may be content with a day of life, and say, if he could
speak, I am full of days, yea, full of years and full of labor, I wish to
be in heaven, where a thousand years seem not so long as a day, yea, where
Eternity it self shall never seem to be too long: Note
Eye upon too great desire of days, while we live on earth, as worms we
creep on it: In death we creep in it.

Note
Man's heart on earth, is like a tooth in the jaw, the deeper root it has, the
more pain it causes, when it is in drawing out with the Turkesse Note
A heart fixed to the earth and nailed to the ground either with pleasure or
profit or desire of years cannot be rugged from thence without renting of its
filme: Note
If man's heart be set upon long life, he shall never want the disease of
the feaze of disease, the messenger of Death: A feeble fit of a fever will
put him in a maze of amazement: Note
In a word, do the best he can, all the days of his life are but labor
Psalm. 90. 10
and sorrow: Note
The best man that lives, so soon as he begins to live, must say with a
sigh, All the Job. 14. 14
days of mine appointed time will I wait till my changing come: See I pray
you, how the life of man as with loose reins and a laid down head is ever
in a course like a swift Dromedairie, posting to a change.

Note
Behold, Sir, how foolish this world is, that gappeth so for many years,
that all that men have Job. 2. 4.
even to their skin, they would give it for their life: Note
See and consider how the old man is besieged with dolours and diseases on all
sids, some set on his eyes, some on his ears, some on his teeth, some on his
tongue, some on his legs, some on his lights, and some on his liver: Note
See how all sorts of diseases is like flesh f^es prey upon the old man, not
leaving a free bit of him from the sole of his feet* to the crown of his
head: See what a gostlie sight it is to behold such rattling bones covered with
a wrinkled skin: Note
Now after that he has coughed and spitted on a space some few years, being
a burden to himself, and a cumber unto others, at last he sickneth and takes
bed, and falls into the hands of Death, which holds him with fearful
grippes: Note
Then Death comes with a cold sweat ouer-running all his body, looks him
grimme in the face: Note
Then his jaw bones begin to hang down, and his face to grow pale, and his
cheeks wan: Then his eyes water, their stringes break, his tongue faltereth,
his breath shorteneth and smells of earth, his heart lifts, his throat
rattleth, his joints stiffen: After that Death has made a breach with the
shot^es of great artilerie whereby it has beaten and broken down all the
noble parts of the body, Death comes in like a strong man, and grippeth so
the heart of the poor man, that by diuerses gaspes he makes his
heart strings to leap asund^: *That done, the ruinous house of man falls,
and his Soul leapeth out with his gaspes, which in an instant must compeare
before its Judge, either Matthew. 25 34. 41.
for to hear, Come, or Depart. Let your attention yet go a little a long with
me.

See what it is of old age: Note
Consider how feeble it is, being a burden unto it self, a time unfit for
any affair: And yet most men in their youth swynishlie wallow in uncleanness,
thinking, to keep the old years for the amending of their life and for all
other spiritual adoes, as repentance and returning unto God, as if a man
being for to go a far and foul journey, should lay the greatest burden
upon the weakest horse: Prou. 12. 10
A good man regards his beast, how much more should he regard himself: Note
What regard is here, when a man in his youth rolleth his original sin,
like a snow-ball among actual sins, to such a huge greatness, that in his
strongest youth he is not able to move it, and yet delayeth, thinking that
when he is old he shall easily remove it and remeede it: The sins of
youth draw upon old age deadness of heart and dullness of zeal: It is good
that man with a watchful eye hold in perpetual jealousy the cunning
slightes and windings of the deceit of sin in youth: And therefore, while it
is youth time, while God calls, while the wind serves, while the Sea is
calm, while the Ship is sound, let us set forth in time to sail toward
the port of Salvation, and the harberie of Grace in Glory: Note
O vain man, who in thy youth turns the grace of thy God into wantonness,
and thinks to come home to God again when thou is old, what shall God do
with thy blind lame old age? Is that a sacrifice for God? Offer it unto thy
Governor, says Malachie. Mal. 1. 8.
If a blind or lame beast will not please a man, what shall God do with that
which is more blind than a beast. Note
The King of Babylon commanded Dan. 1. 4.
Ashpenaz the master of his Eneuches to make choice of Children in whom was no
blemish, and such as had ability in the^ to stand in the Kings Palace: What?
shall the Devil get the finest flower of our age, the strength of our days,
and the ability of our Soul, and thereafter shall God, the King of Heaven,
be served with the blind 2 Samuel 5. 6
and the lame such as the very Soul of Danid did hate? Note
It is good before hand to be furnished with Graces, which may be as ye staff
of our old age? *If we spend our strength in our youth at the service of God,
he shall never cast us off in our old age: Note
But what shall I say? nothing will waken foolish Virgins while they sleep,
Matthew. 25 11
till that shrill voice be heard, The Bridegroom is come: Note
When it is no more time, me^ who contented themselves with counterfeit shows
and deceiving shadows, arise, run, and seek for Oil, which they shall not be
able to get, either for buying or begging.

Note
By all this my discourse Sir, ye may perceive that the long date of days
brings men unto dotage, and after dotage unto dust from thence he came.

Note
Man of few years is foolish unto forty, a little after that folly has left
him, dotage succeeds which understands no Precepts.

In this Map of the old man's misery, ye may see whether or not man have
cause to be greedy of many years.

Note
Though the world were not vain, yet ye see that man is but vanity in the
world: Let all men here lay aside such doting vanities, that bring too
doolefull miseries.

Let all flesh learn that: Note
Nothing out of God can afford sound joye and contentment: Note
If a man want God, were he an Emperor as high indeed, as the King of
Babylon was in conceit, even above the stars Isa. 14. 13.
of God, his life shall be crossed with these th^ee shrude companions, viz.
The grief of things by past, the pains of things present, and the fear of
after claps.


The sick Man. The thought of such things begin to waine mine heart from
the love of all things worldly: I pray you yet a little to continue in that
purpose concerning the vanities of things below. Note
The meditations thereof lik sharp and keen spurs should prick and stir us
forword from the love of this unto the love of these lasting things which are
above.


The Pastor. The sight of this world is like that vision of Ezechiel, wherein
is often said, Turn thee yet again, and Ez^k. 8 13
thou shall see more abominations, than all these: So say I Sir, Turn you yet
again here, and ye shall see greater vanities than either these of Strength
or of Honor, or of Riches, or of Beauty, Pleasure, Wisdom, or long Life:
Behold a vanity, which is the cause of all these vanities, viz. Sin and
iniquity where* unto we are all subject so long as we live in this world the
region of corruption, where if a man stand on Gods side, he shall become the
drunkards song with David, or a byword with Job among the chidren of Beliel.

Note
Look through this world, and consider sin in all sorts of men, and sorrow
following ever sin at the heels: In this place behold David Psalm. 6 6.
making his bed to swim with his tears for his adultery: In that place
again, behold Peter weeping b^tterlie for his denial: In this place Luke 22.
92
again, behold Lot, vexing his righteous 2 Pet. 2. 8.
Soul from day to day, for the unlawful deeds of the wicked: In that place
behold S. Paul groaning under a dead body of sin, even a body of death: No
man is able to Romans 7. 24
hunt all the corners of man's corruption: From particular men let us come to
whole Churches, defiled with spots and blemishes: Note
Here is the Church of Ephesus, which has Revel. 2. 4.
left her first Love. Note
There is Smyrna where some of Gods best servants are cast into prison: Here
again verse. 10.
is Pergamus defiled with the doctrine verse. 14.
of Balaame, and of the Nicolaitanes: In Thyatira the whore Iezabel sat as a
Prophetess teaching and seducing verse. 20
Gods servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
idols: Revel. 3. 1.
Sardis had a name to live, and yet was verse. 15.
dead: Laodicea was neither cold nor hot, so that God threatened to spewe her
out of his mouth: Note
Among all the seven Churches only Philadelphia Revel. 3. 10
kept the word of his patience, and yet her life was not without fear to verse.
11
loss her Crown: Behold, I come quickly, said the Lord, hold that fast which
thou have, that no man take thy Crown: Note
But long since having neglected this precept, she is bereaved of that comfort
and Crown: Note
Where now are all these most flourishing Churches of Asia? where now are all
these Churches of Grecia most glorious in Constantius days? Because they held
not fast that which they had, they have all lost their Crown: By dear
Experience have they learned what vanity is.

Note
Behold and see how this world is like a working sea, wherein sin like a gall
wind or strong Tide carries many tribulations and destructions * Note
from Country to Contrie* Note
All is made thereby subject unto changes lik the Moon, Crowns have their
composse and triumphs have their tombs: All our sweetest things in end prove
but honied poison.

Thus all that ye see here below is unconstant: Note
The greatest kingdoms are turned about as with whirling wheels: The Kings
upon its spokes are marked upon this ditt^ (...) Regnabo, regno, regnam; su^
(...) sine regno.

One Prince is lying upon his back, another has a spok in his hand climing up
the Wheel: The third is upon the top: The fourth is fallen, having his heels
up and his head down: Note
All the things of this world are divided into four: Either they lie low, or
they climb, they stand, or they are fallen: The poor man is lying upon his
back without any help or hope: Another is fall of climbing conceits: The
third being there where all would be even upon the top, the higher he is
mounted the greater is his fall: Note
He then falls, that another may stand in his place: while he again is
lifted up he must stand with fear and hear, Let him that 1 Cor. 10 12.
stands take heed, lest he fall: Note
At last also to him the ha^dwritting comes forth, that in Gods, balance he
is found wanting, and that therefore Dan. 5. 27
his kingdom must be taking from him: Then all the pleasures of his wine and
of his whoores, then all his feasting, his mirth, and his Music is turned
into a trembling fever, which makes all his joyntes to shiuer, and his knees
to smite one against another: Behold, and consider, how the glory of Kings,
the gods of this Psalm. 82. 6.
world is brought to destruction.

Though their heads be golden, their feet are but of clay like Nebuchadnezars
image: Gods little stone cut Dan. 2. 34
out without hands, is able to bruise and grind in powder, their Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron, and Clay, for the allaying of the pride of their peacocke
feathers: He can let them see the blackness of their feet: None of them can
stand before the wind of that voice: Return ye Children of men. Psalm. 90. 3


Though their honors which they do broach with so bold a face were reared
above the highest clouds, and exalted above the starrie Sky yet must they
descend at the Evening of their life, and make their bed with the beggars in
the dust.

Thus after they have drunk up the pleasures of this world as Behemoth the
River of Jordan, they at last Job. 40. 23.
find all to be but vanity and change: Note
When their hour is come, they must quite all, and make resignation of all
into the hands of a new succession, for to go dwell in the Land of darkness
and shadow of death: Note
Who knew the weight of their Crowns, they would never be so sick for them,
as King Ahab was 1 Kin. 21 4
for Nabothes vine yard.

If of any man may be said, this is most true of him who is in highest Job,
14. 22
places, While his flesh is upon him, he shall have pain, and his Soul
within him shall mourn: After that for a space he has feasted with
Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 2.
and fatted himself against the day of slaughter with Wheat, Wine, and Oil,
at last shall he know, but too late, that no Feast is continual, but that of
a good Conscience.

* Oh, that great men while their minds with David are beastly, would Psalm.
73. 22
with David go to the Sanctuary of God, for to learn that if great men be
not good men, though they were Kings, they are set in slipperie places.

Note
Seeing Kings and Kingdoms are but vanity, what is that on earth that is not
vain? There is nothing that can stretch to eternity below.

Note
In this world all men are strangers in their birth Pilgrims, in their life,
and at last lik combersome guests by death they are thrust out at doors: The
language of Tabor was that* It is Luke 9 33.
good for us to be here: But the language of heaven proclaimed that Peter
knew not what he said: Strive to keep ever your heart loose from the earth:
Revel. 15. 1
The glassie sea, of this world is never without tempests.

Note
He that would have his Soul wained from the love of this world, let him
remember but these six things: 1. What he is in himself: 2. What is within
him. 3. What is above him: 4. What is beneath him. 5. What is before him: 6.
What is behind him.

Note
Man in himself is but dust and ashes, a cage of corruption: Thrice with one
breath is he called, Earth, earth, Ier. 22. 29.
earth! Earth by creation, sustentation and corruption, says Bernard: Within
him is a blind mind, a perverse will, and most vile affections, Genesis 6. 5.
yea, so that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart are only evil
continually: Above is a weighty vengeance, hanging by a small twined thread
of Gods patience: Below him Matthew. 12 45
is a fiery furnace and the smoking brimstone gulf of everlasting burnings:
Against him Satan and sin with their legions posting to and fro, so that
when one departs, it is but to fetch seven others worse than himself: Note
Before him is nothing but misery, volumnes of woes, and lamentations: Those
be his Day-booke: Behind him pale Death follows with stealing steps: Note
See what a mass of misery like an hudge army besetteth and besieges the
whole course of the life of man, till death at last come with the dead stroke,
and separate the Soul from the lumpish heaviness of clay: Then they that die
in the Lord are blessed, yea, says the Spirit, That they may rest Revel. 14. 13
from their labors. But because the day is already spent, ye shall now
carefully think upon that which has been said.

It was a special property required in Sacrifices fit for God, that they
could chewe the cude: I leave Leuit. 11. 7
that which ye have heard unto your nights meditations. I pray God that by his
Spirit he would conuoy into the substance of that which your ear has received.

Before I leave you, let us all bend our knees unto God in prayer, that it
would please his Highness to blinke down upon you with a reconcealed face:
His boundless and bottomless mercies did never yet know how to break a
bruised reed, or quench a smoking flax.

Let us pray.


A Prayer for the sick Man.
O LORD the GOD of the Spirits of all flesh, the preserver of men, in who^ is
both power for to save and to destroy: Thou art the true Teacher of Israel:
Thou have the keys of Heaven, of Hell, and of the Grave: Come and cast the
arms of thy mercy about this sorrow-beaten sinner: Rejoice him with the
comforts of thy Spirit: Inspire him with holy motions, and with the life of
Grace, till he be made partaker of the divine 2 Pet. 1. 4
Nature. Thou have already made his heart to melt within him at the sight of
his transgressions: Thou have set all his sins in order before him: This is
out of thy great mercy, whereby thou would not suffer him to freeze in the dregs
of his corruptions: Now at last, LORD, after thou have refined him in the
fiery furnace of temptations, send him relief, refresh his Soul, and cool
it with thy comfortes: Let thy Spirit come unto him with glad tydinges, that
all his sins are forgiven him.

Oh, what sorrow of heart has he had since he has felt the power of thy
wrath! His poor two eyes have been like two fountains of tears trickling
down both day and night* The apple of his eye has ever been droping down,
the salt brimie and bitter tears of sorrow: Oh, how bitter lie has he wept
since this battle began? Has he not powered out his heart like water before
thee, in bemoaning his transgrassions?

Now, LORD, for thy mercy sake make him free of all excessive grief: Behold
him with the tendrest eye of thy compassions: Rid him of all gripping griefs
of Conscience: Settle in his heart a godly sorrowwhich may cause repentance
never to be repented of: Be pleased toward him: Turn thine angerie face from
the bloody color of all his transgressions, and look upon the perfect and
unspotted righteousness of thy Lamb, whose blood has blanched the red Crimsin
sins of Isa. 1. 18.
the world. No flesh, O LORD, is able to stand before thee, when thou art
angry, for what is man* which is consumed before the moath? He dwells into
an house of clay, and his Job. 4. 19.
foundation is in the dust: When it shall please thee, he must lie down into
his growing bed, and there say to corruption, Thou art my father, Job. 17. 14
and to the worm, Thou art my mother and my sister. O, who shall stand when
thou shall say, Return ye Children of men. Psalm. 90. 3.


O gracious GOD, pity this creature that was once formed to thine own image,
which once lost, thou have repaired with the Blood of thy Son: Stamp his
heart with thy lively Image and coin it with thy countenance: Insinuate thy
self into his Soul, and compass him with thy comfortes: Let thy poor
Servant here who has been most fearefullie tossed and scorched with fiery
temptations, find a spiritual cooling and refreshing, in thy merciful bowels:
Temper so the Spirit of his mind, bow his will, and incline his affections,
that his chiefest delight may be in thee: Cover his silly Soul under the
shadow of thy Wings, until all these calamities be ouerpast. Refresh this
paunting Soul braying after Psalm. 42. 1
thy water brooks. Give him a new heart, put within him a new Spirit, take
this stony heart out of his breast and in the place thereof put an heart of
flesh.

By thy word, O LORD, we have let him see what the vanity of this world is,
how unconstant are all things below, and how they are turned upon a whirling
wheel: O make his heart consider that there is nothing here on earth that can
bring solid contentment unto the heart: What are the best of our days on
earth, but labor and sorrow? Is not our life a vapor, a breath? are Psalm. 90
9.
not our days consumed as a tale that is told?

Make the consideration of such naughty things below move him so much the
more to mind the things Coll. 3. 1.
that are above: Let him know yt in the surging waves of this worldly Sea
there is no permanent peace, so no cross shall come upon him unawares: Teach
him by practice and experimental feeling of thy Graces, that thy strength is
made perfect in weakness: Let him feel that it is a fruit of thy lone, that
thou suffers him to be afflicted: Sanctify his sorrows, and make them to
lead him unto the face and presence of his GOD.

By the loathing of things earthly, work in his heart a love and a liking of
things heavenly, an ardent desire of thy celestial dainties: Let him know yt
so soon as he shall come to thee, that with thy face thou shall fill the
desires of his Soul, for in thy face is Psalm. 16. 11
fullness of joys O thou to whom nothing is impossible, lift up his Soul to
Matthew. 19 16
affect that happiness so that earnestly his Soul may desire to see that day
when he shall be clothed with the long white robe of Christ's righteousness,
even the innocence of thy dear Son Jesus: Cover him Lord, cover him with
the golden fleece of thy righteous Lamb: Parsume him with the sweet savor of
Christ's merits, thy mercies: Let the Blood of his Advocate pl^ade for his
pardon: Nail all his sins to the Cross of thy Son Jesus. Rid out of his
heart all doubts and difficulties, draw his eyes from looking upon himself,
make thine own self the object of his sight in the mirror of the Gospel,
wherein as with open face he may behold as in a 2 Cor. 3. 18
glass, the glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Seeing a good man is merciful to Prou. 12. 10
his beast, how much more will thou be, who are mercy it self?

Thou who art most plenteous in mercy, unlock we entreat thee the treasures
of thy mercies and affoard unto thy servant such graces whereby he may come to
thy Glory Send a Seraphin for to kindle hi^ Isa. 6. 6.
zeal and affection toward thee* Publish and proclaim unto his Sou^ that thou
art pacified, and that tho^ have received a ransom.

These days by past, LORD, thou ha^ him trained up with diverse fearefu^
temptations, whereout of let it please thee now to give him an out gate* O put
thy quickening Spirit within him, that by the force of thy life he^ dying unto
sin, may live unto The^ who art our life, and lengthening of our days: Thine
ear has heard the heavy groans of his heart, which have made thine heart
to be turned within thee: O now let thy compassions be so kindled together
that he may in all boldness come to the Throne of thy Grace, permit him such
familiarity with thee, whereby he may cast his burden upon thee. Psalm. 55. 22


Give him, LORD, a full resolution to submit himself always to thine
appointments, that his heart never any more repine nor grudge at thy
proceedings: By the finger of thy Grace frame fully his heart for the
following of thy will.

Gracious Father rouse up his Soul and raise up the good motions of thy Spirit
within him: Make him in mercy to grow in Grace, which may work a deep
detestation of all bygone slippes, whether secret or known, with an eager and
earnest striving to be renewed in the Spirit of his mind.

O thou whose bowels rumble loud with compassions, pacify and calm all the
clamours of his Conscience: Thy mercy is most magnified when it relieueth the
extremest misery: Thy light is most precious when it shines into the depth of
discomfort and darkness: O pity and pardon him, besprinkle him with the
Blood of virtue, that being purged from all carnal and spiritual
vncleanneste, he may grow up unto full holiness in thy fear, and so may end
his life in thy favor, the surest Sa^ctuarie of a troubled Soul*

Pity the distressed members of thy Church: Many a time have they Psalm. 129.
1. 2. etc.
afflicted her from her youth: The plowers plowed upon her back, making long
furrows, let them all be comfounded and turned back, that hate Zion:
confound all hatchers of Here^ies, let them be as the grass upon the house
tops, which withers before it grows up, wherewith the Mower fills not his
hand, nor he that binds sheaues his bosom: Protect Her by thy cloud by day,
direct Her by night by the pillar of fire, let never the bright star of thy
Gospel go down, which points out unto us the Savior and Salvation of our
Soul O righteous LORD, thou have just cause against this Church to make Her
Sun go down at noone, and darkness to surprise us in the clear day, with
a sudden and inevitable sin prizall and destruction: () GOD, bless us with an
holy union, and banish far off the Devil of division.

Bless our gracious SOVEREIGN the Kings Majesty: Make him to joy in thy
strength, and greatly to rejoice in thy Salvation: Direct His Heart and His
mouth by thy Spirit, and give him his hearts desire, and withold not the
requeast of his lips: Give to Him the courage of David, and the wisdom of
Solomon. Be favorable to His Royal Match: Inflame Her Heart with the love of
thy dear Son Jesus: Let all Her desire be to know him crucified: Make Her an
happy Mother of happy Children, even a blessed Mother in Israel.

Bless our Nobility, make them noble like the men of Berea* so that they may
have courage for ye Truth And seeing, LORD, that as we may see in this our
dear Friend, man is like to vanity, and that his days are as a shadow that
passes away: Take us to thy school and teach us to number our few and evil
days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom and to well doing.

Let it please thine Highness to grant us these out suits for the only sake
of Jesus, the Author and finisher of our faith, the very Anchor of our Soul,
the only stay and staff of our hope, the end and rest of all created
desires, the true substance of ceremonial shows and shadows.

To Him with Thee and thy Spirit of Grace, be praise and thanksgiving, glory
and dominion, now and evermore, AMEN.

If your sleep in the night be interupted cause read unto you ye Book of
Ecclesiastes, the strong enemy of all worldly vanity: Moses his psalm which
is ye ninty Psalm shall be meet for your meditations, cause read also the 1
Pe^er chap. I.

The LORD sanctify all your spiritual exercises, to the comfort of your
wearied Soul: The GOD of all mercy bless the little spark of Grace
enkindled by his Spirit in you, till it spread into a big flame: GOD with a
little Dew of new Grace can so bl^sse and prosper another Grace already
given, that He will make it, though so little like a grain of mustard to
grow toward a tree.

Bless GOD, who has not suffered you to tread the fearful and desperate
path of these who from the beginning of their life unto the end have been
nothing but disturbers of peace, waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame,
and casting up mire and dirt upon the shore of their whole couersation.

The LORD edge the little measure of your weak Faith, with a longing desire
after fullness of persuasion: And season your heart with saving Grace. The Lord
make his most Sacred and powerful Word so to enter into the secrets of your
Soul that it may strike a dead stroke at the sweetest of your sins, that
your sins being slain, your Soul may live, and have a portion in Gods new
Jerusalem, till ye come there, the LORD guard you with an invincible troop of
his blessed Angels. The Love of the Father, the Grace of the Son, with the
Peace his Spirit be with you for ever.

THE FIFTH DAYS Conference. Of the last Judgment.
The sick Man. OVanity of vanities, O vanity, of vanities, all is vainity:
this whole night I have dreamed of vanity: I think that my Dreameproceedeth
from vesterdays Conference, for Solomon says, that a Eccles. 5. 3.
dream comes through the multitude of business: Note
Well is the man that is well occupied in the day, for in the night such
business makes an impression into his Spirit: An evil doer in the day
cannot often dream of good into the night: Note
Happy is the man that has made the Lord the only level of his life: What
hours can it now be? I long for a sight of my loving and comfortable Pastor.


The Pastor. Here I am Sir, come again for to see what progress ye have
made into your Christian pilgrimage: Ye^ heard yesterday of the vanity of all
things that are below: I desire now to know how your heart has been affected
since.


The sick Man. I have Sir all this night d^eamed that this world is but
vanity, a lifting up for a fall, a race unto a ruin* I see now that all the
profits and pleasures thereof are but lik a rotten Nut, when men think to
crack the kernel they find nothing but worms with rottenesse and bitterness
which prouocke the eater to spit. O how the pure and clean streams of divine
grace are stained with ye stirring of ye foul puddle of corrupt nature.

I am greatly oblished to my God, who has given to me such patience in my
sickness, that I have been able to hear that heavenly discourse which ye had
yesterday concerning earthly things: This life as I perceive is nothing but a
toilesome task of cares, the best of our time is but labor and sorrow, our
ease is a disease, and we rot in our rest: Mine heart is no more in this world
He is but a fool, and so shall he feel who ever he be that is too bent for
the transitory trashes thereof.

Note
Here is not our rest: Rest here is not our best: As water by standing
becomes stinking, so the Spirit rotteth by carnal rest: The ease of the flesh
is the disease of the Spirit: If we be without God in the world, Eccle. 2. 17
in our well we shall find but woe, in our wealth but want, in our love but
Prove. 14. 13
l^cke, in our mirth but moan: In laughing the heart shall be sorrowful, and
the end of that mirth shall be heauiness^ Without God in greatest compan^ is
greatest melancholy.

He whose eyes the god of the Ephesians 4. 4.
world has not blind-folded, may easily perceive that all that is here is
but vanity which vexes the spirit Note
What folly is this to take pleasure in such perishing things, which can bring
no comfort at the conclusion of all, when dust must return to the Eccle. 12. 7
earth as it was?

Oh, that we were wise to consider that while we are here, we are compassed
about with a body of sin, in a world of wickedness: All sorts of evil in
this world with eager pursuit persecute the Soul of sinful man, all the
depthes of Satan and policies of Hell concure into this work.

Now Sir I entreat you seeing ye have spoken so heavenly of the earth, that
it would please you to say somewhat concerning the last judgment and the
j^yes of Heaven.


The Pastor. Such a matter is very unpleasant, yea, very fearful to a
natural man: It is written that while as S. Paul reasoned Act. 24. 25
of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix, who was but a
natural man, trembl^d all while he heard him, and therefore desired him to
leave off preaching any more, and to go his way till a more fit and
convenient time: Note
Though the wicked tremble at this discourse, yet it is comfortable and
profitable into ye godly: Note
I wish at God that I had that tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50. 4.
that thereby I might produce these reasons of S. Paul which he uttered while
he reasoned upon this matter before Felix.

This Sir ye must first know that the day of Judgment shall be a great day a
day of Law* when all the Sons of Adam must compeare before the eyes of him
who sees our thoughts a far off, even to the very depths of our heart.


The sick Man. First of all, I desire to hear of the time that Christ shall
come into the Clouds for to judge both quick and dead.


The Pastor. As for the particular time of that great and glorious coming of
the Lord, no man can define when it shall be whether in the night or in the
day, at midnight or cock-crow: It was a time hid from Christ himself as man,
while he was here in the days of his flesh, neither thought he shame to
tell it: His words and his counsel concerning that, are of great weight: But
that day, said he, Mar. (...). 32
and that hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither
the Son, but the Father: Now what was his Counsel thereupon? Take heed,
said he, watch and pray, verse. 33.
for ye know not when the time is: For the Son of man is as a man taking a far
verse. 34
journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to
every man his work; and commanding the Porter verse. 35.
to watch: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house
comes, at Even or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning,
lest coming suddenly he find you verse. 36.
sleeping: And what I say unto you, I say unto you all, watch. S. Peter says,
2 Pet. 3. 10
that he shall come as a Thief in the night.

Note
By all this it evidently appears that no man can design the particular
time of the coming of the Lord unto Judgment: No tongue can tell whether his
coming shall be in the night, or in the day, in the morning, or in the
evening, at the prayer, or at the preacing: * Watch ye therefore, said
Christ, and this he doubled again, And what I say unto you, that I say unto
you all, watch.


The sick Man. What can be the cause wherefore God has kept up to himself
the particular knowledge of that great day?


The Pastor. Note
God in great wisdom has hid from all flesh the time of his coming, as
he has concealed from all men the hour and form of their death, that all
may strive to be ready at all times.


The sick Man. Though this Day be not particularly known, think ye not
but it is very near?


The Pastor. S. James in his days said, The Iam. 5. 8.
coming of the Lord draws near.


The sick Man. But since he said that, it is more than a thousand and five
hundredth years, and yet all things remain even as they were, have I heard
some men say.


The Pastor. Note
These be the words of them 2 Pet. 3. 3
whom S. Peter calls Scoffers: Knowing this first, says he, that there
shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts: And
saying where is the promise of his coming? verse. 4.
for since the Fathers fell a sleep, all things centin^e as they were from the
beginning of the Creation: Note
This is as much as if they had said, If there were a God indeed for to come
to judgment, he would not be so slack in his coming: But what says S.
Peter ^o that? The Lord is not verse. 9.
slack concerning his promise (as some me^ count slacknes) but is long
suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to Repentance.


The sick Man. I see now that no man can be certain at what time Christ shall
come, It is a secret which God has kept up from all the living into his own
bosom.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, it is such a secret tha^ may not be searched: Christ
after his Resurrection, said a wise word Act. 3. 3.
to his Apostles, It is not for you (...) know the times or the seasons which
the Father has put in his own power: Note
This is the wisdom of God, who has concealed such things from the knowledge
of all men as well learned as vnlea^ned, as well Kings as Subjects, that all
flesh at all times be in readiness when the Lord shall come to judgment: This
made the Lord so carefully to waine his Disciples to watch.


The sick Man. The Lord grant that we may ever have our loins girded and
ou^ Candles in our hands, waiting for the Luke 12.. 35
coming of that Lord.


The Pastor. That should be our daily prayer* Note
This should teach us not to lie down to sleep, like foolish Virgins, Matthew.
25 3
without Oil in our Lamps, le^ before we, waken the Bridegroom come upon us
unprovided, and enter in his Chamber, while we shall be seeking that which we
shall not find.


The sick Man. Now Sir, I pray you proceed and declare to me how the Lord
shall come down from Heaven for to judge this world wherein we dwell.


The Pastor. He shall come down not as King Agrippa and his Queen Bernice
came down (...) with much Act. 25. 13
fantasy or vain show, which is nothing indeed but a foolish fantasy:
But, O the unspeakable Glory that shall be seen at the coming of the Lord.


The sick Man. I requeast you earnestly to continue into that purpose, for it
affects mine heart very much.


The Pastor. I read in the Gospel that while Christ was sitting upon ye Mount
of Olives, his Disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us when shall
Matthew. 24 3
these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and the end of
the world? Christ's answer was, That they should take heed that no man deceive
them, because, said he, many shall come into my Name, saying, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many.


The sick Man. But did he not declare any particular signs or tokens that
should appear before his coming?


The Pastor. The Lord has declared that before that great and terrible day
come, The Sun shall be darkened, and the Matthew. 24. 29
Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of heaven shall be shaken.


The sick Man. I wish to hear the exposition of these words, for they seem
to be full of difficulties.


The Pastor. Some think that these words are but an allegory of the
callamities that were to befall to the Church and to the whole world before the
coming of Christ: Others of the Learned tak these words to be spoken
properly: And for to clear their opinion to be true, they allege the words
of S. Peter as a Commentary upon Christ's words: The Heavens 2 Pet. 3. 10
shall pass away, says he, with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up: And a little after he subjoyneth, Looking for and hasting unto the coming
verse. 12.
of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.


The sick Man. These be wonderful words of wonderful works, ye will be
so good as to make them m^e clear.


The Pastor. Note
First it is said, That the heavens sh^l pass away praeteribunt, not that they
shall be turned to nothing, or shall ^o pass away yt they shall be no more, but
they shall pass away in that they shall be changed: Note
According to this the Psalmist speaking of the heavens Psalm. 102. 26.
says, That all of them wax old as does a garment: As a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed: Note
Though in our lifetime because it is so short, we cannot sensibly perceive
any decay in the heavenly influences, yet it is certhat taine the heavens are
but cretures ordained for the service of man, creatures subject to fail,
wear, and wax old be.


The sick Man. What a change Sir, think ye that, that shall be?


The Pastor. It shall be a change altogether for the better: All the
Elements shall be melted as mettell into a furnace whereby it is refined:
After that they are melted they shall be ^ast into a new mould, for to receive
such a ^orme as it shall please the most High to give unto them.

Note
I compare all these great creatures of the world, as the Heavens and four
Elements to an old piece of money stamped so long since, that hardly can it
be known who^e superscription is in it, all the Letters being worn off with
the using: Note
It is even so of the Heavens and of the Elements in these latter days: It is
so long since they were stamped, that the letters of Gods name upon them are
grown dim and are not so legible as they were wont to be: But in that last
day the Lord shall make the old Heavens and this old Earth all to melt into a
fire, and thereafter shall stamp them like a new stricken Crown: Then he
shall give them such a temper that they shall never wax old any more: Note
Gods first impression on his creatures has by sin been dimmeded and
darkened, but this secunda cura, the second coining of these creatures shall be
so durable that nothing shall be able to deface it: For God then shall be All
in all: Note
Then Tempus edax rerum, Time that eats all things, yea, all times, as
years, months, days, nights, hours, lik floods shall all run in into the
sea of eternity, where they with all such unconstant things shall be
swallowed up in victory.


The sick Man. What is that to say, That the Heavens shall pass away with a
great noise* What sort of noise shall that be?


The Pastor. Note
The word in the original is (...), which the French has termed auec un
bruit siflant de tempeste, that is the roaring of a tempest, which comes with
such a thudde, that it casts down both Trees and Houses, making all to
shake, and also lifting up dust and straes and all in the air as with a whirle
wind: Erasmus terms it, In morem procellae, like a Tempest: Note
Such a Tempest was never heard since ye world was founded: It shall be a
Tempest which shall shake the world of its foundation. Above and below all
shall be shaken with such a roaring and cracking tempest, that no mortal
heart can conceive: The Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, the Air, the Sun,
the Moon, and Stars, shall be so shaken with that tempest as though they
were but pickles of dust, and carried with a whi^le wind: My mind is in a maze
to think upon the greatness of that day: Note
My pen while I have been writting of it, has fallen out of my hand, so have
I been ravished with admiration of that day: O what a day shall that be when
all that ever God made shall be set on fire? The Heavens being set one
fire, says the Apostle, shall be dissolved, and the Elements being set on
fire shall melt with feruant heat. Isa. 51. 6.
Isaiah says, That the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke: What fearful
tempest must that be which shall put all the world into a burning flamme? All
shall be set on fire, the Heavens above, the Earth beneath, the waters also
must be burnt and melted into that wonderful furnace: By this fire all things
must be purged.


The sick Man. It would seem by Scripture that those heavens which are now,
shall be altogether abolished: The Lord says in Isaiah, Lo, I will create
new Isa. 65. 17
Hea^ens and a new Earth, and the former shall not ^ee remembered nor come into
mind. To create a thing is properly to make something of nothing: What then,
shall the Heavens and Elements which are now be red^cted to nothing?


The Pastor. It is most certain that they shall not be put to nothing, but
according to their earnest expectation they shall be delivered at the last day
from the bondage of corruption into the Romans 8. 21
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

Note
It is not Gods custom so to reward his old servants, as to put them from
their being, that so he may be quite of them: Note
As for that which Isaiah says, that he will create new Heavens and new
Earth, and that the former shall not be remembered, it is not to be
understood of the last day: The Lord by these words did only declare this
to that people, that he would so alter and change the state of his Church at
the coming of the Messiah, that it should seem to dwell into another world.


The sick Man. I took ever that passage otherwise, but I hold that exposition
best: But behold what S. John says concerning the Heavens, the Earth, Revel.
12. 1
and the Sea, I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, for the first Heaven, and
the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. What is that to
say?


The Pastor. Note
The first Heaven and the first Earth are said to have passed away, not that
their substance was no more, but as one says well, because alia ejus videbatur
facies, it was so changed that men would think that it could not be that
cloudie Heaven and clattie Earth which was before: The Sea also was no more
such as it was before.


The sick Man. But S. John sath, That he saw a Revel. 20. 11
white Throne and One sitting on it, from whose face the Heaven and the Earth
fled away, and there was found no more place for them: By this it would seem
that they shall be altogether abolished.


The Pastor. I answer yt they shall not be abolished, but they are said to
flee away from the face of God, as most learned Divines think, ad declarandum
eorum terrorem and animum ad fugam paratum, for to declare their fear to
compeare before the face of so great a Majesty, till they be forbished and
scoured of the roust of their vanity whereunto they have been made subject,
they think shame of their uncleanness before such eyes of purity: Note
It is said, That there was no place found for them not that they wanted a
place, but because of such a Majesty, they did go about to hide themselves:
It is well said by a Learned interpreter upon these words, Quorum locus non
reperitur, illa latent and occulta manent, whose place is not found, they lurk
and remain hid, not that they shall want a place, but because no man can
find out by searching what shall be their place: By this is only declared
that till the Heavens and Elements be reneued, they shall in a manner go and
hide themselves from before ye face of that heavenly Majesty, as a ragged man
who thinking shame to compeare among those who are richly arrayed, withdraws
himself unto some dark corner that he should not be seen, till he be better
arrayed: After that all shall be made clear and clean by the fire, they
shall appear before God in their appointed place.


The sick Man. Think ye that it shall be a long time before that all can
be refined by that fire, as also before that the dead be raised up and
gathered together.


The Pastor. * All this shall be done in a moment: 1 Cor. 15. 51
In the twinkling of an eye the dead shall be raised, and the living shall be
changed where ever they be found, whether grinding at the Luke 17. 31
Mile, or walking in the fields* or lying in their beds, they must all
compeare either for to be taken or to be forsaken, all other things shall be
speedily dispatched.


The sick Man. O but he is a great God who by 2 Pet. 3. 7.
his word keeps in store the Heavens and Earth which are now, reserving them
unto fire against the day of Judgment: Great must he be who shall kindle
such a fire: Now after that this fire shall be quenched, what shall be done?


The Pastor. After that by the fire the Lord has cleansed all his creatures
from their roust, and scoured them from all their dross, he shall form them
by his word the breath of his mouth: Note
As a maker of Glasses, by the blast of his mouth forms as he pleases the
soft melted liquour taken out of the furnace: Note
But whereunto can we compare the most High in his most wonderful works? Note
The^ the Heavens which of before he had rolled up like a scrole, shall be
unfolded, and put out of their roll, and the Earth being purified and fined,
shall be made a Lodging for righteousness, according to his 2 Pet. 3. 13
promise, says S. Peter, We look for new Heavens and new Earth, wherein
dwells righteousness.


The sick Man. What is that to say, That righteousness dwells into the new
Heavens and into the new Earth? These words seem to be difficile.


The Pastor. The opinions of men are diverse concerning the sense thereof,
some think yt Righteousness shall dwell in yt new Heavens and new Earth,
understanding by Righteousness, the righteousness of Christ: According to
this S. Paul's greatest desire was that he might be found in Christ, Not, said
he, having mine own righteousness Philip. 3. 9
which is of the Law, but that which is of the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness of God by Faith: Others by a Metommie understand that
righteousness dwelling on the new Earth, to be taken or all faithful and
righteous men who shall be the Citizens of that new Heaven and of that new
Earth: Note
O if we knew the glory of these new things! they would surely ravish our
hearts, so that we would all cry, Come Lord Revel. 12. 17
Jesus come: Note
These new Heavens shall never be ouer-cast with clouds, there shall be none
ecclipsing of light any more: Note
As for the new Earth, there shall be no more sweat of brows: All toiles and
turmoiles shall cease: Sin the cause of all our woe shall be no more there:
Note
The most barbarous and barren part that is now on earth, shall be more
pleasant than ever was Paradise, for then God shall be All in all: Note
All the Earth shall be lik that Holy of holies, but without a partition wall*
Exodus 26. 33
In that Holy of holies in Canaan, none but one, and that but once in the
year might enter: But in the new Heavens and new Earth all the Faithful
shall have their perpetual residence, where they shall follow the Lamb
whither-so-euer it shall please Revel. 14. 4
him to go: There shall they for ever be courting his countenance.

Note
Fie that men will not live well for a little space, that they may live with
the Lamb for ever, among these pleasures for evermore: Fie Psalm. 16. 11
that men for stinking pleasures should loss the comfort of these places
wherein nothing but righteousness shall be able to dwell.


The sick Man. Seeing the heavens and the earth shall be made new, ye think
that they shall change for the better.


The Pastor. That is most certain: They have in their own kind been
obedient servants unto their God, and God shall also glorify them with a kind
of glory which his Wisdom shall think fittest for them: The heavens Psalm.
102. 1
like a garment are waxed old at Gods service: Note
God will not cast off his old servants, but after their service he will
reward them: Note
If their cloths be worn at his service, he will give them a new coat: Note
If their first powers be shaken, he will put new powers into them again: Note
It was truly said by the father of lies, Job. 1. 9,
That none serve God for naught.

Note
It shall not be for naught that the Heavens by their motions, and the Earth
by its birth have declared the glory of God omnipotent.


The sick Man. But is it possible that such creatures have any knowledge while
they serve God, that he will reward them at the last day, that thereby they may
be encouraged at his service?


The Pastor. Note
They have indeed a certain secret instinct from GOD, which works in them a
sort of longing for the last day, which shall be the day of rewards, the day
of their deliverance: In this the Apostle is Romans 8. 19
plain, For* says he, the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the verse. 20.
manifestatio^ of the Sons of God: for the creature was made subject unto
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that verse. 21.
has subjected the same in hope* because the creature it self also shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God. Note
For this cause the whole creation is said, To groan and to travel together
until now. verse. 22.



The sick Man. O the great secrets of God! I pray you Sir, to let me
understand these words by some brief exposition* First what is that which he
calls the earnest expectation of the creature which waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God? What creature is that? What expectation can
that be?


The Pastor. By the creature are not understood these little creatures, as
Frogs, Flees, Midges, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes: Note
Such creatures have none expectation of better things to come, for in the
world to come there shall be no use for them: Note
But by the the creature is to be understood the whole world, viz. The
Heavens and all the Elements, as Earth, Fire, Water, Air, which now are all so
knit in love, that every one as it were takes another into its bosom: Note
Because they are so fast coupled together and so near to other* that nothing
can come between them, for this cause as if they were all but one thing, they
are called in the singular number, the creature*

Note
As for it expectation, it is called by the Apostle (...), a stretched out of
the hand: In which word the waiting of the world for the coming of the Lord,
is set out like a woman standing upon her tip-toes stretching out her head for
to see if she can see her husband coming a far, whom she looks and
longs for hourelie: Note
See how lively the Apostle declares the secret instinct of the worlds
desire for the coming of Christ Jesus: In a most powerful word he lets us
see the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Elements, all as it were a man or a
woman standing upon their tip-toes, and holding up their heads for to see if
Jesus be coming according to his promise.

All the Faithful who are the Spouse of Christ* groan within them Romans 8. 23
selves, sighing till they see their Savior in the Clouds, so also this
creature has the own groans and sighs till Christ come for its deliverance:
Note
And as the Churches desire, makes Her to cry, Come Lord Revel. ll 17
Jesus come, so in this creature there is a secret instinct and earnest
expectation which moves it in the own language to cry for Christ's coming.


The sick man. What understands the Apostle while he says, That the
creature was made subject to vaniue* not willingly but by reason of him that
has subjected the same in hope? First how is it said, That it is made subject
to vanity? Can the Heavens and the Earth be said to be subject to vanity?


The Pastor. The most Learned think that by this subjection of the creature
to vanity is to be understood, ejus fluxa and evanida conditio, that is a
condition subject to change, corruption* wearing away, or waxing old: As for
the Earth, it is evident, as for the Heavens, Scripture is plain, They wax
old as does a garment: Psalm. 102. 26
Note
This is the vanity of these creatures: Here is also another vanity
whereunto they are subject, in that they are made servants to these that will
not serve God who^ they serve.

That the beautiful Sun should furnish light to these that delight in
Spiritual darkness, it is a vanity and a drudgerie whereunto the Sun is
subject: That the Earth should bea^e and bring forth fruits for to feed the
black mouths that blaspheme its Maker, is a great vanity whereunto it is
made subject: Note
The Sea groaneth under the Ships of Pirates and Robbers: Note
See what an vproare was in that Element for Ionahs rebellion: Note
So long as he was in that Ship, Gods scourged the winds with his word of
command: The winds scourged the Seas, the Seas scourged the Ship wherein
Gods Rebel did lie till he was cast out: Note
The Sea ever seethed with the fire of Gods wrath, the waves ever tumbled up
and down breaking one upon another with rushing and roaring, till it took
order with the rebellious man, there was no resting for its waves.


The sick Man. But how is this that it is said, that the creature is subject
to vanity but not willingly* It would seem by that, that they obey God but
against their will.


The Pastor. The Heavens, or Earth properly have neither a willing nor a
nilling, but only a secret instinct, which is like a will: Note
This secret instinct which God has put into his creature is that, Omnis
natura conservatrix suiest, every creature strives to keep and maintain it
self: Now while by God it is made subject to such changes, weakening and
wearing, which is against the working of that instinct, it is said in Scripture
language to be subject to vanity, but not willingly.

Neither for that must we think that the creature in that rebelleth or
repineth against God in any wise, as if it had a will striving against Gods
will, no not: Note
But in some measure it may be said to have an instinct like that will of
Christ at the drinking of the bitter Cup: Christ's Natural instinct was that
the Cup should pass from him, and yet for all that his prayer was, Not my
will Matthew. 26. 42
but thy will be done.

Note
It is even so in some manner of the instinct of the Heavens and of the Earth:
They naturally shrink from bondage and abuse, as also they incline to keep
themselves from corruption and vanity, neither for that is their will
contrary to Gods will: He who is called a servant should not care for it: But
yet if he may be made free, the Apostles direction 2 Cor. 7. 21
is, That he use it rather: The sick man may will life, and seek cure for to
preserve his life, though Gods will be that he die, if so be that he submit
unto Gods will his whole desire, as Christ did, even while he desired the
Cup to depart which he knew to have been put into his hand for to drink
it: Note
A will that is diverse from Gods will if it be subacted, and subjected unto
Gods will, may be free of sin: Note
So the Heavens and the Earth are subject unto vanity, but not willingly,
because they incline to be free of the bondage of man's corruption: But seeing
it is their Lords will that they bear the burden, and be subject to such
changes, they become subject, but withal they are ever groaning and longing
for their redemption: Note
As a woman in travel naturally desires to be delivered, and yet submits
her self to Gods will, as naturally these creatures of God have an instinct to
be delivered from the burden of their bondage: But seeing their instinct or
desire to be made free, is not so soon effectuate, neither can be, before
the world end, the Lord their good and kind Master for to encourage them under
the burden of their bondage, lest* they should faint, has given unto them
another secret instinct, which the Apostle calls their hope. Romans 8. 20


For to clear this to you in a word: Note
There is in this world groaning under the corruption of the wicked, a certain
instinct like Hope. whereby it looks for to be made free from the bondage
and burden of this corruption, as a woman in travel is comforted with hope of
deliverance: This is that whereat the Apostle points, when he says, that
God has subjected the creature in hope Romans 8. 20



The sick Man. In my judgment vee speak pertinentlie: In that difficulty I
have full satisfaction: But what is this that is subjoyned unto the verse
following? I understand not the words well. They are these: Note
The creature at last shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the Children of God: What is this liberty of the Sons
of God? or how can the Heavens and the Elements be said to be made partakers
of that liberty which belongs to the Children of God? I confess mine
ignorance here, in this point I desire to be instructed.


The Pastor. This is the liberty, whereof they shall be partakers with the
Children of GOD, they shall then have all their will, they shall no more be
subject to that whereof they would desire to be* free: Note
Not willingly shall be no more in them in all their subjection: Note
They shall be no more slaves to serve sinners, but shall serve God and his
Saints which is true liberty: Thus in so far as they shall be free of all
that foresaid bondage, they are said to be delivered into the glorious liberty
of the Children of God: Note
This shall be a part of the liberty of Gods Saints in Heaven, not to be
subject to the wicked any more, not to weary nor wax old, all this shall
they have commond with the creature: Note
But O what a glory shall the Children have greater than all the creature
shall receive! Even a far more and exceeding weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17



The sick Man. I will not now inquire concerning that weighty glory, I
reserve it to afterward God-willing: One thing I desire to know, whether or not
the Lord shall come down before the World shall be refined with fire, or if
it shall be after.


The Pastor. In my judgment before that the Lord come down, ye Heavens shall be
new, and the earth and all shall be new: As a City before the entry of a King,
prepares all before hand, makes the ways clean, and causes sweep off the
streets the dung-hils, so all the steertes of the Heavens* and of the Air, and
of the Earth must be made clean before the coming of the Son of man: Note
While in the days of his flesh he entered into the City of Jerusalem in
quality of a King, riding upon an Asse-Colt, all the streets were covered
with clothes and green branches of trees, so that the foot of his Ass
scarclie culd touch the ground, all that was there range with the Matthew. 21* 9
sound of Hosanna, Hosanna: * Even so in my judgment when that great Lord
shall make his entry into the world as a King from Heaven, the world shall all
be made new, it shall look with another face then it does at this day: Note
If our gracious Sovereign King CHARLES, (whom I pray the Lord to bless with
a prosperous reign) were coming from London for to enter into this City, we
would all cloth our selves in comely apperall, we would receive him with * Note
great applause, all shouting, GOD SAVE KING CHARLES. Would we do this to a
sinful man Whose Isa. 2. 22.
breath is in his nostrils? What think ye then shall these creatures do,
whose necks are yoked under the bondage of corruption ever till the Lord IAH
our God come down Psalm. 68. 4.
riding upon the Sky with sound of liberty for evermore?

Mine heart here fails me while I think of that great applause and welcome
to the world that Christ shall get when he shall bow the Heavens and come
down into the Air: Shall he who in the days of his flesh, in the days of his
disgrace, was so honored at his Royal entry in Jerusalem, not be much more
honored at his Royal entry into the world, which is groaning after that
hour of his coming, as a woman in travel, earning after the hour of her
delivery: At his second coming, all his ways shall be prepared, and the
Hosanna Hosannahs of Jerusalem shall be turned into Halleluiah Halleluiah: Note
Before Christ came first to appear among Luke 3. 4.
men, he sent a Messenger to prepare his ways: The voice of One crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the verse. 5.
way of the Lord make his paths straight: Every valley shall be filled, and
every hill and mountain shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth. Note
Seeing in his humility his ways were prepared before his coming, there is
greater appearance that before he come back to this world again with his
millions, this new earth and all shall be prepared.

Note
It is a disgrace for a City to be cleansing streets, while the King is
already within the ports: It is but rusticke manners to sweep an house after
that an honest man has entered, whereby the dust that is under his feet is
carried up to his hat and between his shoulders.


The sick Man. It is your opinion then that all shall be cleansed with a fire
before the Lord come down.


The Pastor. It is indeed: And it seems also to have some ground into
Scripture, for Christ while he was declaring in the Gospel the things that
should be fall before his coming, having Matthew. 24 29
said, That the Sun and Moon should be darkened, and that Stars should
fall from Heaven, which declared the change of this world: In the next verse
he declares that after that appeared the sign of the Son verse. 30.
of man in Heaven.


The sick Man. According to your discourse it would seem that before the
coming of the Lord, at the renewing of this world, there shall be a strange
stir among all the Creatures.


The Pastor. That is most certain, and that both above and below: S. Luke
says, That there shall be signs in the Luke 21. 25
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the Earth, Pressura
gentiu^, distress of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the waves roaring:
Men's hearts failing them for fear, verse. 26.
and for looking after these things which are coming on the Earth; for the
powers verse. 27.
of Heaven shall be shaken: The^ shall they see the Son of Man coming in a
cloud with power and geart glory.


The sick Man. All these words be words of great weight: It would please
you to give me the intepretation thereof.


The Pastor. In these words the Evangelist lets us see how this big old
world shall be broken down for to be made new again: Some of the Learned
expound these words by way of similitude taken from man the little world,
while as he is old and failed, the humors of his body like elements are
troubled and shaken together: His two eyes like the Sun and Moon are
darkened, and his other senses like the Stars fall down and decay: His mind
and his reason lik heavenly powers are shaken, so at last man like an old
house all decayed, falls down into his dust: Note
As this little world decays, so does this great world, wherein we live,
all is failing about us, above us, till at last the very voutes of heaven
shall be rent, (...), with a noise and shall be melted with fire, and as it
were cast into calmes whereout of shall come a new world, which shall never any
more wax old.


The sick Man. That is well said for the general: I perceive now that the
Lord by his infinite power shall spread the Heavens like paper or par^hment,
and that they shall be melted like metal: Let me now (...) these words of S.
Luke as they are written into his Gospel* First he says, Thi^ there shall be
sigues in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars: What signs shall
these be?


The Pastor. Some of the Learned think that these signs shall be (...) whereof
God from these heavenly bodies shall make a show unto then upon the earth:
Some think that this is spoken of great and strange ^clipes that shall go^
before that day. Some think that there shall be such a great and glorious
light that shall go before Christ's coming, that both Sun and Moon shall
be darkened as the Stars in the morning are dark (...) at the rising of the
Sun, so that they cannot any more be seen, being obscured by a ^ater light:
Some by an allegory refer these great ecclipses to great learned men, great
lights in the Church making defection and Apostasy from the Truth.


The sick Man. But S. Matthew, says That the Matthew. 24 29
Stars shall fall from Heaven.


The Pastor. These words also be diversely interpreted: Some by these fallen
stars understand glorious professors of the truth falling away by Apostasy,
such Stars are these whom the Dragon is said to draw down with his tail:
These be the words of S. John, And Reave. 12. 3
there appeared another wonder in Heaven, and behold a great red Dragon* And
his tail drew the third part of verse. 4.
the stars of heaven* and did cast them to the earth: Note
By these stars as a learned man says well, are understood these whose names
in outward appearance were written in Heaven, lik the Angel of Sardis who had a
name to be living, and yet was Revel. 3. 1.
dead: Note
Wicked men for a space may blaze like Comets and seem to be stars fixed in
their orb* and yet at last prove to be nothing but a bundle of filthy
matter, like these shote stars, that come not from Heaven but from the Air,
whereof the Devil is the prince: Others are Ephesians. ^* ^
of the opinion that this be spoken of the stars of heaven, viz. That they
shall fall down.


The sick Man. But seeing one star is so many times bigger than the whole
Earth, as Philosophers esteem, how can they fall? Or if they fall, whither
shall they go?


The Pastor. One answers very well to that, that it is very difficile to
pronounce, but the day of the Lord shall reveal all: Note
In my judgment by the falling of the stars with other such like things, is
understood the decaying and passing away of the Heavens which shall in that day
as S. Peter 2 Pet. 3. 10
testifies, pass away with a noyse^ Note
An house while it is old, and ready to be taken down, will all be full of
cliftes and riftes, so that the old ^yling that was once fast joined together
with nails will begin to cling, and then to gape, the nails also will become
loose and hing out* All signs and tokens of an hasty ruin: It shall be even
so of that heavenly house, when it is decayed and near a fall, the stars
which are like golden nails into the ^yling of the world, are said to be
loosed and to fall down, for to declare the falling and ruin of the world:
Some think that the Stars reallie shall fall down like the leaves of a tree
nipped with a winter frost: S. John speaking of that strange change and
perturbation that shall be both above and below before that great day* says,
That the stars of heaven shall fall down unto the earth, even as a Reave. 6.
1^
fig* tree casts he^* untimely figs, when she is a shaken of a mighty
wind*

In these words we see first the infinite power of that Majesty who shall
shake the fixed stars out of their firmament, again observe that the stars
are said to be shaken like vntimlie and green figs, and not like figs
that as we say are drop ripe, which drop down of w^ll without any violence*
Note
By this it would appear that this world might stand longer than it shall stand
I think that if ye Lord should suffer ye heavens to turn about some hundredth
thousands of years, that then the stars should fall down to the earth, nor
like green figs, but like fruit that is ripe at the falling* But the Lord
as we see will shake the starres^, ere they be ripe* and that as some think
for the Elects sake: For the Elects sake, said Christ, these days Matthew. 24*
22.
shall be shortened In the Greek it is (...), decurtabuntur which is to
shorten or mutilat.

I know that the most Learned interpret these words of the calamities of the
Jews which God would not suffer to be distressed for many years.


The sick Man. Mine heart wonders at these words of the Revelation concerning
the stars which shall fall down to the earth like untimely figs shaken
with a mighty wind: I think your observation thereupon very pleasant.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, the words are wonderful, but the work shall be more
wonderful: Note
For in all appearance 2 Pet. 3. 12
the heavens being dissolved, that is, all shaken asunder and the stars shaken
loose falling down to the earth, and all the Elements being melted together,
in all appearance, Stars* Sun, and Moon, Clay, Water, Fire, and Air,
shall become for aspace like a Chaos a confused lump or mass without form as
they were Genesis 1. 2.
at the first, and that till the God of order has refined and purified all by
his refining fire. Some think otherwise, but the day of the Lord shall reveal
all.


The sick Man. That shall be a terrible work: Note
Now let me know what S. Luke understands by these words* That upon the
earth shall be distress of Nations with perplexity.


The Pastor. Note
That is, men of all Nations shall be so troubled at the sight of such
things, that like a man in a strait they shall not wotte to what hand to
turn them, even as David was when he said, I am in a great strait, 2 Samuel 24.
14
that is, perplexity: As for that which S. Luke says of the Sea, viz. The sea
and the waves roaring, by these words he declares that the sea shall be all
stirred to the bottom, so that the^ waters and all shall be muddie an^
drumblie: Note
The word Salum turened here, (...), signifies properly* mare turbatum, a
raging troubled and tempestuous Sea.

All these things that shall appear* are called, Fore runners, sent before to
tell all the Faithful that when they shall see them, that they lift up their
heads and look up for to see their Redemption that is near* S* Luk compares
the time of all these things that appear before the Lords coming to the
spring time, when trees begin to budde, When the buds Luke 2^. 30
shoot forth, says he* ye^ know that Summer is at hand: So likewise ye*
verse. 31.
when ye see these things come to passe^ know that the Kingdom of God is
nigh at hand.


The sick Man. All these foresaid things be bu^ buds as I see forewarning us
of the Summer season* wherein the Lord shall come: But what is that which S.
Matthew says, that after all these Matthew. 24. 30.
things shall appear the SIGN of the Son of man in Heaven* What is that
which he calls the SIGN of the Son of man in Heaven? What SIGN think
ye that to be, that shall be seen in Heaven after that the world shall be
made new?


The Pastor. The interpreters vary much in their opinions concerning this
Sign what sort of Sign it should be.

Some think that it shall be the sign of the Cross upon which the Lord
hang: This SIGN as some think shall be seen into the Air before the coming of
the Lord: Such a sign as some write, was that which Constantine saw in the
Air while he was going to battle against the enemies of Christ: With this
sign was heard a voice uttered in these words IN HOC SIGNO VIN^HS.

Others think that by the SIGN of the Son of man, is to be understood
Christ Himself, who is called, The Sign of the Son of man, as Circumcision
in Scripture Language is called, The sign of the Circumsion. Romans 4. 11


Note
I incline rather to think with Beza that, that sign shall be some great
Majesty and unspeakable glory above all compass of comparison glorious,
which shall appear, whereby the coming of that Lord shall be known to all,
not to be the coming of a creature, but of Him who is Lord of all the
creatures, having a name above all names: Philip, 2. 9
Note
The Kings and Princes of the earth while they are among the multitudes of
their Subjects by some glistering jewel will be discerned from all the rest,
or by the great respect that is carried to their persons, by these that are
about them: Note
All sheaues fell down before Joseph's sheaues: Genesis 37. 7
So all creatures at his approach shall fall down before him: Note
As before Genesis 41. 43
Joseph, in his progesse was a cry Abrech, how the knee, so at the coming of
this Lord the Angels in a manner shall cry, Abrech: At his Name every knee in
Heaven and Earth and under the Earth shall bow* Note
Before, behind, and above that Body of God both white and ruddie Cant. 5. 10
the chiefest among ten thousand, shall be such a glory and throng of
Majesty as shall be a certain sign* that it can be none other but the
Prince of Eternity, he being among his most bright and glorious Angels like a
Sun among the Stars: The words of the Earth cannot bear such a
signification as may express the glory of this Sign.

Note
Mine heart is without me while I think upon the glory of that Lord, whom
all cyes shall see* that day with his golden Head and bus^ Cant. 5. 11
Locks: Christ shall be clothed in his triumphing apparel with such a
brightness, that the Moon shall be confounded and the Sun ashamed, as these
who being clothed in course raiment, are ashamed to be seen among these who
are pasmented with gold: Note
In a word, at his presence all powers shall shake, and all creatures at his
b^cke shall obey.


The sick Man. After that, that Sign shall appear: What think ye shall be
done?


The Pastor. When Christ the desire of all Nations Hag. 2. 7.
shall be ready to come, He Matthew. 24 31
shall send before him* his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they
shall gather his dispersed and despised Elect from the four winds, from one
end of Heaven to the other* S. Paul says* That the Trumpet shall 1 Thessalonians. 4 16
(...), and the dead shall arise: This shall not be a brazen Trumpet, but a
^stiall, which shall found so shrill with a princely noise* that all the
creatures on Earth; in Heaven, and Hell, shall hear it.

Note
S. Paul has three notable sayings concerning the sound that shall be heard
at Christ's coming: First he says* That he shall descend 1 Thessalonians. 4 16
with a shoute, Secondly* With the voice of the Archangel, Thirdly, With the
Trumpet of God.


The sick Man. The remembrance of that shout makes mine ears to tingle and
my heart stringes to tremble: What a shout think ye that, that shall be?


The Pastor. Some think that it shall be a great noise and dinne, such as is
heard into hudge great assemblies: Note
It may be a shout of victory or of praise: Note
The Angels and millions of Saints, who sing his praise continually, cannot
keep silence that day: They shall be all about Christ that day shouting for the
joy of that desired day: Note
The word shout in the original is (...), which properly signifies that
sounding voice which the Mariners use to others, every one for to move another
to row: Others think it to be like a cry of Soldiers, qualis est militaris
convasatio, while they trusse all their baggage for to remove.


The sick Man. For what cause chiefly shall this shout be? To whom shall it
be directed?


The Pastor. It shall be chiefly for the Glory of God: Note
It shall be directed to the dead, who are to be raised up by the power of
God, and by the means of his Servants the Angels, who at the raising up of all
creatures shall shout like Mariners, heauing up that which is heavy by force of
their arms.

Note
What Archangel that shall be or what shall be that voice: One says very
well, Dies Domini revelabit, The day of the Lord shall reveal it. The Lord
prepare us for it: O what a Glory when Christ shall appear with hands as gold
rings Cant. 5. 14
set with the Berill; and with a bright Belly over laid with Saphires.


The sick Man. Is it your judgment that Christ the Judge of the World shall
come down from Heaven with a great Majesty?


The Pastor. It is certain, of the day of his coming again may well be
said, that which was said of his first coming, This is the day which the Lord
Psalm. 11^. 24
has made: In that day he himself shall come down in a Charet of a Cloud
as he ascended into a Cloud: All the Glory of Heaven shall be seen that
day: The Father shall be there in unspeakable Glory: The Holy Ghost shall
be there with unspeakable Majesty: All the Saints and Angels shall be about
Him like burning Lamps and glistring Suns.


The sick Man. What passage of Scripture lets us see clearlie the Glory of
his coming to judgment?


The Pastor. That passage of Daniel is very formal (...) beheld, said he,
till the D^n. 7. 9
Thrones were cost down, and the Ancient of days did ^ite, ^base Garn^ was
white as snow, and the Hair of his Head lik the pure wool* (...) Throne was
like the (...), and his wheele^ as burning fire* A fie^e stream issued, verse.
10.
and came foorih from before him, tha^ sand thousands ministered unto him* (...)
ten thousand times (...) thousand stood before him: S. John faith, that the
number of them was* ten thousand Revel. 5. 11
times ten thousand, and thousand (...) thousands: Note
Let these brutish (...) phemers here by (...) way ^ak a (...) son, who say*
That if many be dam^ ned God shall ride with a thin Court, words (...) to be
scourged with a thousand hels: Away ye barking blasphemers, God has no need
of you nor of your like: Note
He who could of stones raise up seed unto Matthew. 3. 9
Abraham, and make stones to cry, Hosanna, Hosanna, needs not want multitudes
of these that will sing his praises: Note
But has he not Angels in Heaven already, who are in number ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands: But though they were none but
himself, is he not that great SHADAI, God al sufficient who has Exodus 6. 3
need of none, of whom all have need? If I were hungry, said he, I would
not tell thee* for the world is Psalm. 50. 12
mine and the fullness thereof.


The sick* Man. This would I learn of you, viz. If when the Trumpet of the
resurrection shall blow, these that are then living shall die first.


The Pastor. The Scripture says, That they shall be changed: This change
which 1 Cor. 15.
shall be into the twinkling of an eye, shall stand unto them in stead of
death: In that is the word fulfilled, It is appointed to all men once to die.
Heb. 9. 27



The sick Man. Think ye that these that then shall be alive, shall win first
to Christ? It would seem that they have a fore start of these who are rotten
in the Grave.


The Pastor. The Scripture is plain: This we say unto you by the word of the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15
that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them which are asleep.

Some gather upon these words, that these who are dead shall prevent them who
are alive, and shall be sooner at Christ than they, viz. That Adam and Eve shall
be with the first, and in the first rank, and so that at that Conuention
these who first were dead shall prevent them that shall be alive: But that
has no sure ground in Scripture, for though it be said, That these who shall
be alive shall not prevent these which are asleep, it will not follow that
these which are asleep shall prevent these which are alive: The Apostle
himself says, That we shall 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16
all be caught up together in the Clouds: As for who shall be foremost, Dies
Domini revelabit, The day of the Lord shall declare it.


The sick Man. I see the^ that your opinion is that all flesh that day must
arise and compeare before God, and that none must be excepted. But how is it
that the Godly only by Christ are called, The Children of the resurrection?
Luke 20. 3^
By that it would appear* that none shall arise but ye members of Christ?


The Pastor. It is most certain that all shall arise: All that are in the
grave shall Ioh. 5. 28. 29.
hear his voice, and shall come forth they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation. As for the Godly, indeed properly they are the Children of the
Resurrection, because they shall arise willingly out of their beds, and
because by the virtue of Christ's Resurrection they shall arise, he being the
Head and they the members, which must follow after that Head. As for the wicked
they shall be scourged out of their Graves, the force of wrath shall draw them
out, that as Malefactors they may come and hear their doom pronounced against
them.


The sick Man. I hear you say according to Gods word that all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: If that be, where
shall the little Children that died without Baptism be? The Roman Church
teaches that such go to a prison where they shall never see the face of God:
Shall not their bodies come out of their Graves? If the Heavens and the Earth
pass away, what part can they be in where they shall not see Gods face?


The Pastor. Indeed Sir your reason refuteth that error sufficiently: For
certainly their bodies must come out of their Graves: It is not possible but
in that day they shall see Christ.

No^te
Truly to put such into an everlasting prison for such a cause, were to blame
the Lord himself of injustice: The Lord has said, The Ezekiel. 18. 20
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father: What if the father by
negligence shall neglect to cause baptize his Child? shall the Child for his
fathers negligence be clapped up into everlasting prison? If that were, should
not the proverb be true, The fathers have eaten sower grappes, Ezekiel. 18. 2
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge. It was well said by Bernard.

Non privatio Baptismi sed contemptus Bernard.
damnat.

That is, not the want, but the contempt of Baptism condemns: If any
condemnation be, the Father who contemns, and not the Child who contemns
not, shall be damned.

S. Ambros speaking of Valentinian, Orat* funeb* de obibitu* Valent.
who disceased before he culd come to him for to be baptized, said,

Quem regeneraturus eram amisi, sed ille non amisit gratia^ quam poposcit.

That is, I have lost him whom I was for to regenerate, but he has not lossed
the grace which he sought: Note
None but baptizers of Bells will be against this truth.


The sick Man. I am well satisfied in that point: I wonder much how men
should go so far astray: Where shall these bodies of little Children be in
the day of the Resurrection* if they shall not compeare before Christ the
Judge? I think this argument can hardly be answered unto.

Another difficulty here may be moved concerning Baptism, which the Apostle
takes as an argument 1 Cor. 15 29
to prove the Resurrection: What shall they do, says he* which are baptized
for the dead, if the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the
dead? The words seem very difficle.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, they want not difficulty. Some interpret the words
for the dead, That is, Vice and loco mortuorum. The custom was among the
Christians as S. Ambros records, that if any dyed without Baptism, some of
the living came to the bed where they were dead, or to their Grave, and there
were baptized for them: Chrysostom and Epiphanius declare that this was a
custom among the Marcionites, which they reprove as a vain invention*

Others interpret these word^ of these who on their deathbeds were baptized,
that thereby all bygone sins might be purged away.

Others interpret, To be baptized S. Chrysostom.
for the dead, That is, in the faith of the Resurrection of the dead: For these
who were to be baptized, first did rehearse the Creed, and when they came to
the Resurrection of (...) dead, at these words they were baptized.

Others of the Learned take the Luther.
words (...) about the dead* The custom being of old, that Bucanus.
these who were baptized, were baptized about the Graves, where the Piscator.
dead did lie, for to testify that they did believe the Resurrection from the
dead.

Some by baptising here understand that washing and ablution of dead bodies:
After this signification* Cups are said (...) to be Man. 7. 4.
baptized or washen: This washing of the dead bodies before their burial, as
some think, was common to the Jews, who in hope of the Resurrection, did both
them and make them clean: This was also a custom among the Pagans* to wash
and anoint the dead bodies: Such were called Pollinctores*

This also appears to have been done in the days of the Apostles by the
Christians: In the Acts it is written of Tabitha, that being dead, Act. 9. 37.
they washed her* and laid her in an upper Chamber: All these baptizings and
washings, were in hope of the Resurrection* As for the Pagans, they wrought the
wroke as Peter on Tabor spoke, not knowing what he Luke 9 33.
Ioh. 18. 14,
said, or as Cajaphas prophesied* not understanding the prophecy which he
preached: This by the most Learned is approved.

Others interpret to be baptized for dead, not for the dead, or about the
Graves of these that are buried* but for dead, say they, that is, as dead to
sin, for to destroy and mortify sin, which is the chief end of Baptism:
This say they, is a maine argument for to prove the Resurrection: For if there
were no Resurrection, to what purpose should men crucify their sins?

Note
Behold how these few words: To be baptized for dead, has troubled so many
brains: Where we may learn the shallowness of man's wit: God with that
little Greek (...) has given all the Doctors of the Church a task that may
teach them humility, an Antidote for to cure our swelling knowledge.


The sick Man. That which ye say is truth: Oh* that men were wise in this
point* that they could consider the weakness of their wits.

But to come to our purpose concerning the Resurrection: Many a time have I in
my Spirit wondered at the greatness of that work.


The Pastor. It shall be a great work indeed* Note
But if any Saducean spirit would doubt of it, it must also doubt more of the
creation: I take the creation to have been a greater work: It is more to have
made our bodies of nothing, than to gather their dust together which is now but
dispersed: This was a Fathers argument.

Vtique idoneus est reficere qui Tertul.
facit: quare miramur? quarenon credimus? Deus est qui fecit: Considera
authorem and toll dubitationem.

That is, It is easy for God to make over again that which he has once made,
why marueill we? yea, why believe we not? God has made all: Consider the
Maker, and doubt no more.


The sick Man. Let me hear something out of Scripture concerning this point.


The Pastor. There be many most famous passages for the probation of that
great work, both out of the old and New Testament: I know, said Job. 19. 25
Job that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth, and though after my skin* worms destroy this body, yet in my
verse. 31.
flesh, shall I see God* whom I shall see for my self* and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me.

Daniel is clear in this: Many of Dan. 12: 2
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake: Some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

The Prophet Ezekiel by way of similitude setting the deliverance of Israel,
points at the Resurrection, Ezekiel. 37. 12
Behold, O people, says he, I will open your Graves and cause you to come up
out of your graves.

Christ in the New Testament made numbers of the Saints to come out of the
dust of death: What they were, no man can tell their names, whether it was
Moses, or Joshua, Samuel, David, Iosaphat, Josiah or who, no tongue can tell:
But this we know, that after Christ arose by the power of his Resurrection,
he made many to come out of their Matthew. 27 52
Graves: The graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose,
and came out of the graves after his Resurrection, verse. 53
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many.


The sick Man. O but that was wonderful! Think ye that after that, they did
return to their Graves?


The Pastor. The most Learned esteem that they never did return back to
dust, but that they waited on Christ until the day of his Ascension, in which
day they did accompany him up to the Heavens, where with their Head Christ,
they were received into Glory, with the great applause of all Angels and
Saints, whose Spirits above are desiring continually to see the day when
Soul and body shall be joined for to be glorified together for ever.


The sick Man. After that the dead are risen and the living changed, what
think ye shall immediately follow before we meet with the Lord himself?


The Pastor. In the judgment of some so soon as the dead shall be raised and
the living changed, before that we shall meet with Christ into the clouds,
there shall be a sore mourning both among the Godly and the wicked, for the
piercing of that Lord: Every one of the Godly in that day shall Genesis 41. 9
say as the Butler said to Pharaoh I (...) remember my faults this day.

Such a mourning was never heard since the world was founded, as shall be heard
that day for a space* Christ himself has declared this, saying, Then shall
all the Tribes of the earth Matthew. 24. 30
mourn, when they shall see the Son of man coming into the Clouds: All
shall be aghast at the first sight of that Isa. 57. 15.
High and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity: S, John says, Behold, he
Reave* 1. 7.
comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: And all the Kinrides of the Earth shall wail because of him.

The Prophet Zachary compares this mourning to the mourning of Zath* (...)*
(...)*
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, for the death of good Josiah.

Some think that only the wicked shall mourn in that day: In my judgment
it is the most true opinion: Others by reason of these foresaid passages,
think that all both Godly and ungodly at the first sight of Jesus, shall
uaile with great lamentations, while they shall behold him whom they have
pierced.

Note
All at the sight of him who was pierced for and by our sins (...) plangent,
that is, shall strik their breasts with their hands, the sign of great doole.

After that the Lord has suffered his to mourn for a space in his sight, He
shall incontinent command them to come, and by virtue of his word they shall
all as with wings fly up into the Air, there for to meet their Lord, Note
The strength of their heart, the joye of their glory, the desire of their
eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds.

So soon as they shall come to Revel. 21. 4.
him he shall wipe all tears from their eyes: Note
Then shall these mourning Mordecais put off the Sackcloth of their doole, for
to be arrayed with the Kings royal apparel, the Revel. 7. 9
White linen of heaven, the glorious Liuer^ of Christ Jesus: Note
These having Revel. 4. 4.
celestial Crowns upon their heads, shall glaunce in glory like shinning
Matthew. 13 43.
Suns, that all that ever took breath may see Esth. 6. 9
how it shall be done to them whom the King of Heaven will honor: Note
When the Godly shall see themselves so powerfullie delivered from so
fearful dangers, they shall cry to Christ as the Israelites said to Gideon*
Judge. 8. 22
Reign thou over us, because thou have delivered us: According to their desire
he shall reign over them in all prosperity: Then shall his Cant, ^5. 11
curled Locks be fully dried of the Cant. 5. 2
Dew and doole drops of the night of all afflictions.


The sick Man. When the Lord shall come to Judgment, in what place think ye
that he shall sit down as Judge for to pronounce his sentence?


The Pastor. It is thought by some that Christ and all his Angels shall come
down to the Earth, that the sentence may be pronounced in the presence of the
wicked, who for fear of distress and destruction, like creeping worms shall
strive to hide themselves under Rocks and Mountains, for to cover themselves
from the face of the Lamb: Glad would they be for Reave. 6. 16
to have the cliftes of the rocks, and the secret place of the Grave for a
Shelter in that day: Note
That shall be a day of trouble and of treading down, Isa. 22. 5.
a day of perplexity, and of crying to the mountains: Then shall the Wicked
in fearful qualmes of grief being haltered with horrors, wish that the
Rocks and Mountains would skippe like Rams for to leap upon Psalm. 114. 14.
them, that thereby they might be hid from the Lamb.

But from that Royal Presence there shall be none escape: * The Angels of
great power shall hail them away by force before his great Tribunal, where
all the evil they have committed and all the good they have omitted, both
public scandales and secret sins, shall be ripped up and set in open view
before all the world to their perpetual infamy.

This is the truth of Gods word: Judge nothing before the time, said S. 1
Cor. 4. 5
Paul, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsel of the hearts.

Note
O merciful God! what is this? What can foolish man think in himself while
he concealeth his since Behold here it is written, that at that day God shall
make manifest the counsel of the hearts: The world says often that Thought is
free: Note
But behold here how the very evil thoughts of the wicked in that day shall be
spread out and laid in broad-band before the face of God, of Angels, and of
men.

Note
What an aw^and should this be for to make us watch better over our most
secret thoughts, seeing in that great day before so many famous witnesses, GOD,
Saints, and Angels, the most secret counsels of the heart shall be made
manifest?

Note
O then, then, shall the black Mores hiddes and Leopardes spots clearelie
be seen: Then shall all the hid murders and all the counsels thereof be
made manifest: Were he a King, he shall not be able to cover himself: Then
shall all the hid Fornications and Adulteries, yea, the very plots and
counsels for such things, though not effectuate, all shall be brought to
light: O ye most vile hearts, in that day ye shall be vnboweled and
anatamised before the eyes of all that ever breathed on earth.

Note
What think ye, O sinners, who will not remember this? Will ye not think
upon this, that the day is fast coming, except that by speedy repentance ye
prevent the wrath, God shall discharge upon you the thunderbolts of his
vengeance? Vengeance shall beat upon your brains and breasts wherein your
sins were bred.


The sick Man. Note
Oh, that men were wise for to lay such meditations nearest their heart, alas,
such thoghts in our hearts are often but raw and evil digested* We oftest
miss the corn and choose the chafe, such are the follies which are ever
afloate in our brains.

But to come to the maine purpose which we have in hand, let me see what
warrant these have in Scripture, who say, That Christ shall come down to the
Earth for to sit in his last Assise.


The Pastor. They ground their Assertion upon the words of Job, who says, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and Job. 19. 25
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth: In the French version
it is.

Il demeurera le dernier sur laterre.

That is as our o^version has, He shall stand the last upon the earth.

By this it would appear that Christ the Judge shall come down to the Earth,
where he shall have a Judgment seat for to Note
do Justice upon that Element where sin did most abound.

Other learned Divines think otherwise, viz. That Christ's Throne whereupon he
shall sit that day, shall be erected in the Air.


The sick man. Seeing some are of that opinion that Christ shall judge, he
being upon the earth, what place think they that he shall choose for to sit
down into?


The Pastor. As for the particular place where that last Judgment shall be
given, some think that it shall be into the ^ire over the valley of Iehoshaphat,
near by the Mount of Olives, which is not far from Jerusalem: Their chief
ground is, from that of Joel: I will, said the Lord, gather all Nations in
Joel. 3. 2.
the Valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there: There will I sit
to judge the Heathen round about.

The opinion of some is* that where Christ was crucified and put to open shame
and railed upon* there shall he chiefly in that day make manifest his Glory.

Note
This great Judge in all appearance shall judge the world in righteousness,
and convince the world of sin and of righteousness, where he himself was
most vnrighteouslie judged and condemned.

Many of the Learned School men think that he shall come down Act. 1. 12.
toward the mount of Olives: Their ground is this, That Christ ascended from
the mount of Olives, and that there the Angels said unto the men of Galilee
that were gazing up toward heaven, that as they had seen Act. 1. 11.
him go into heaven, so should he come again.

These be probable conjectures: But in my judgment no man can assuredly tell
in what particular place this great Judge shall sit down for to pronounce
his Judgment: This is most certain that he shall come down: Behold he
comes, says S. Iud. v. 14.
Jude, with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him.


The sick Man. After what form think ye that Christ shall come down from
Heaven at doomes-day that great judicial day?


The Pastor. In the most glorious form that is possible to him, with whom
nothing is impossible: That glorious King shall be accompanied with all the
Armies of heaven.

Before him in die illo decritorio, in that judicial day, shall be heard a
shout a voice of an Archangell: The most shrill Trumpet of heaven shall sound
so high with a rebounding noise that the dead in their Graves shall awake and
arise out of their beds like sleeping men that are wakened in the morning
with the sound of the Drum, or fifth hour Bell: At that sound all the dead
must come out of their Graves, as men after sleep arising out of their beds:
Note
None then must lie still with the Sluggard, who turning himself on his bed as
a door on its hinges, says, Prou. 24. 33
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep: No, not: At the first shout, at the first voice of the Archangell* at
the first blast of the Trumpet, all shall arise and compeare before the face of
that Judge in the day of that great general Assembly, when God shall comfort
his own, and make a speedy riddence of the wicked* whom he shall denoure by
the fire of his jealousy: None shall be able in that day to award his blows:
There shall be such pains which no damned Soul shall be able to avoid, or
abide: But the Godly most gladly like Eagles about Matthew. 24 28
dead body shall flock about their Lord.


The sick Man. I hear by your discourse that the LORD shall come down in
great pomp and magnificence: After that he is come down into his Charet with
his thousand thousands, what shall be done next?


The Pastor. Daniel says, that the Judgment Dan. 7. 10.
shall be set and the Books shall be opened: After that Christ by his power
has cast down all the little thrones of Emperors and Kings, he himself
shall sit down upon a Throne of infinite Majesty: His Garments shall be
white as snow, and his Hair like pure wool: This is said by Daniel, for to
let us see that the Judge of the world shall be upright and spotless in his
Iugdement: To this is subjoyned by the Prophet, That the judgment was set.


The sick Man. I understand not well these last words* What is that to say,
That the Judgment was set?


The Pastor. Note
It is in the Hebrew Dinaiethib: In the Latin Iudicio considonte, or as Arius
Montanus has turned it Iudicium sedit, that is* The Judgment sat down, that
is, as who would say, The Session sat down.

Note
By this Judgment some of the Learned, understand Christ and his Saints with
him, as Assessours* in that jurie all sitting, Christ for to judge, and they
for to approve his Judgment.

Note
This then know, That when the Son of man shall come in his Glory, Matthew. 25
31
not with a scornful Reed in his hand, but with a celestial Scepter, he
shall separate the Godly and the wicked one from another: His God* head which
in the days of his flesh did lurk, shall in that Session most ardentlie
appear with such a brightness as shall make the eyes of devils to dazzle.

The Judgment being thus orderly set, the Books shall be opened.


The sick Man. What Books are these which shall be opened?


The Pastor. S. John speaking of that last Session Reave. 20. 12
day, says, I saw the dead great and small standing before God, and the Books
were opened, and the dead were judged out of these things that were written in
the Books according to their works.

Your desire is to know what Books these be which shall be opened in that
great Day: In my judgment there shall be two Books opened that day: Note
The first is that golden Book of the Godly called, Revel. 20. 12
The Book of life, which in the Chapter following is called, The Lambs Revel.
21. 27
Book of life: These whose names are written in that Book, are said in
Isaiah, to be written among the living Isa. 4. 3.
in Jerusalem. This is that Book whereof Moses spoke when he said to God, If
thou will not forgive this Exodus 32. 32
people, blotte me I pray thee out of the Book which thou have written: This
may be called, The predestination Book, which is kept in Heaven: Rather
re^oyce, said Christ to his Disciples, Luke 10. 20
that your names are written in Heaven.


The sick Man. Think ye Sir, that God has any matteriall Book, wherein
the names of his Saints are written?


The Pastor. No, not: Note
But as one says well Infallibilis Dei memoria and aeterna ad vitam* electio,
liber dicitur: That is, The infallible memory of God, and his eternal
election unto life, is called a Book: Wherefore that? Will ye say, because
that which is written in our Book is most surely kept: If we have a thing to
day in our memory, we may forget it incontinent: But if it be well written
in our Book, we are sure of it: Note
According to this God for to show unto his dear Ones how well he remembereth
them, he says, That he has written Isa. 49. 16.
them upon the palms of his hands: This is that Book of rememberance, Mal. 3.
6.
whereof speaks Malachie.

One of the Learned calls well the Book of Life Symbolum electionis, the
sign or badge of our election: Note
This is that which the Prophet Ezekiel calls, The writting of Ezekiel. 13. 9
the house of Israel, and secret of the Lord.


The sick Man. But how is it said, That this Book shall be opened?


The Pastor. The Book of Life or of predestination is said, to be opened when
it shall appear to all the world, who they are who^ God has predestinate: Note
So long as the Godly are here, they are Gods secret Ones no more known to
the world, than a man is able to read that which is within a closed Book.

While it shall be seen by all what they are, then that Book is said, To be
opened: When these off-scourings of the world, the most despised among men,
shall be seen upon Thrones shining like Matthew. 13 43
Suns about their God, Mal. 4. 2
the Sun of righteousness, then shall all the wicked read as in an open
Book, that these whom they once did despise, were truly the Saints of God.

Note
The Book of predestination is like that Book of the Revelation, which was so
fast sealed that no man could open it, but the Lion of the tribe Revel. 5. 5.
of Judah, without the force of a Lion, such seals could not be lifted up.


The sick Man. I have heard concerning the Book of the Godly.

Now let me know what be these Books wherein were written all the works of
the wicked, according to which S. John says, that they shall Revel. 20. 12.
be judged: Note
By this it would appear that all the sins which they in their life did
commit under the curtain of darkness shall then be set in open view: O the
deep displeasure of our God: Happy they who are highly in his favor: I
would gladly know what a black bible is that which is called, the Book of the
wicked.


The Pastor. Note
When Christ the Ancient of Dan. 7. 9.
days sitting upon his Throne, ready for to judge the wicked, shall be upon
the touch of their trial, the Books Revel. 21. 27
of accounts shall be laid open: The Book of the Godly is but one Book
called, The Book of the Lamb, and the Book of Life* But as for the wicked
Revel. 120. 12
while the Scirpture speaks of them, it speaks of Books in ye plural
number: The Books* were opened, Reave. 20. 12
says. S. John, And the dead were judged out of these things that were
written in the Books.

Note
By these Books some understand the Law of God, and their own Conscience:
Their bosom Book like Vriahs Letters* containing their own death: Let me
also add^ unto these two a third Book, ei^en the Book of the Gospel.

First of all, the Lord shall open his Law Book unto the wicked, where they
shall see what they have done, that God has forbidden, and what they have not
done, that he has commanded: Note
At the breach of every command they shall see curles of Woe, woe, woe,
annexed like the reekie tail of a Comet* which are nothing but the smoke of
Gods wrath.

After that with sore sighing and grief of mind they have read through all
the Book of the Law, and have clearlie seen what filthy breaches they have
made, to them shall be presented the Book of the Gospel, wherein they shall
see that they have sinned against the reemeede of sin by refusing grace
offered unto them, and by treading under their unclean feet the precious
Blood of the Lamb, the price of their Redemption.

Note
Though the wicked shall indeed be judged according to their works, yet the
maine cause of their condemnation shall be, because they would not believe in
the Son of God: For this cause the Gospel which is yt Book of Faith, shall be
Gods chief Book of Judgment, according to this S. Paul plainly says, That
in that Romans 2. 16
day God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.

Note
Now lest the wicked should think God any wise to be vnrigh* teous while
he judges, the third Book, like Joseph's Cup where by he Genesis 41. 5
did divine, shall be produced, even their bosom Book, the Book of their
own Conscience, the Book of Nature and of Nations, which every one of them
had in keeping within their breast, since they could discern good by evil: Note
What ever they have spoken, wrought, or thought, there shall they find it
written, in most black Characters, and as it were subscribed with their own
hand, so that they shall not be able to have a face for to deny, no more tha^ a
man can deny his own hand write.

Note
The Letters of that Book shall be printed with so great a Character that all
the Godly who shall be Christ's Assessours in that Jury, for to pass their
Verdict upon them shall see easily a farie off all the shame of the wicked,
which was once closse* covered under* vanished colors of great godliness.

O in that day all their filthy thoghts and crafty conueyances, and secret
conspiracies, and hid murders, and adulteries, and all other mischief, the
unhappy cockle and darnell of their hearts, whereof they were secretly
guilty, shall be set in open view before GOD, Angels, and men: All their
faces shall be covered with the filthiness of their menstruous clouts: All
their sins both known and secret, shall God set in order before them, that all
eyes of Psalm. 50. 21
men and Angels may behold their abominations: O short so^r sweet pleasures,
with long everlasting tails of sorrow.

Note
O but the Saints of God shall wonder in that day to see so many whom they
while they lived judged in Charity to be godly and well set persons: O, say
I, but they shall wonder to see them in ba^e bondage, among the black band,
having the Books of their Consciences blotted with so many Items of i^lle and
wicked thoughts, which in this life could never be taken within the walk of
humane justice: Note
After the Items of their vile thoughts, shall appear the Items of idle and
wicked words: After all, shall be seen the most filthy Items of their most
vile and abominable works, which they thought had been buried in eternal
oblivion: The dashing tempest of Gods wrath shall wash out all the varnished
paintings of their hypocrisy*

Merciful GOD* what shame in that day shall come with confusion upon all the
faces of the wicked* When such secret sins as hid murders, by Sword or by
poison, hid adulteries, incest, stolen inches and false weights, and all other
such iniquities whereof this world is full, and that under a fair color and
show of godliness, when all these hid sianes* say I, shall be singled out
and shall come to light, the Godly whom they once reputed precise fools and
simple Fellows, shall wonder at the sight thereof: Note
Then shall they point at such persons, saying among themselves, Fie, fie, out
upon him, out upon her, Ohshame: who could have thought that ever he had been
such a man, or that she had been such a woman? was this the life that these
dapper and delicate persons did lead under the fair color of such a glorious
profession? Ah stinking hypocrites, formal Pharisees with your sodered shows,
to whom poor poor Publicans seemed to be no body, because while ye sinned,
God kept silence ye thought that he was altogether such a one as your self:
But Psalm. 50. 2^
now he shall reprove you, and shall set all your sins in order before you:
It shall be clearlie proved unto your faces and false hearts, that ye were but
painted Tombs and whited walls: The Lord in his fury shall hurl you out of
your place* He in his rage shall push you all down like a rotten and
tottering wall* Nothing shall be able to dazele or deceive the eyes of your
Judge.


The sick Man. The Lord be merciful to my silly A prayer
Soul: The Lord cast all my sins behind thy back, and bury them in the
bottom of the Sea.

It is evident then as I see that all secret sins shall come to light in that
day, and shall be seen written with Letters great like mountains* for to be
seen by the eyes of all these that ever took life, and that to the everlasting
shame and infamy of these who in the days of Gods patience, turned his grace
into wantonness.


The Pastor. It is most certain that there is nothing which shall not be
seen that day: Note
All the closse corruptions where* with the wicked were stuffed and swelled,
shall be set in open view, all the wicked shall be known, yea, every
mothers son of them, shall be clearelie seen unmasked and vnwizored, yea,
stripped stark nacked of all their cloakes of craftiness: What have they
thought or wrought, it shall be sought and found: The Lord by the light beams
of his eyes* Sons of thunder, and of lightning, shall seek and scearch
through the secrets of all hearts, after that manner whereof Zephaniah has
written: Zepha 1. 12
At that time, says the Lord, will I search Jerusalem with lamps, and visit
the men that are frozen in their dreg^* and say in their heart, The Lord will
neither do good nor evil: Then shall be seen who sported in Meshech* and
who ruffled in the tents of Ke^ar* contented themselves with painted and
gilded graces.

After that the Lord has found out with this light all their abominations and
has set them in order before them, then shall he cry, Ah, I will Isa. 1. 42.
case me of mine adversaries That said, he shall fling contempt upon their
faces. The wicked then shall be so pined with such pinches, yea, so
astonished, as yt no tongue can express: They who while they had time to repent,
would not shed a tear for to get Gods mercy, would then, when the Sunshine
of their glory is past, be glad to please God, by powering out the dearest
drops of their blood into tears, wherewith they might bath the feet of Jesus.

Note
O the terrors of that day: That day shall be most fearful, it shall be
like a day of Battle, wherein nothing is to be heard but noise, squeaking and
yellings, nothing to be seen but gaping of wounded men, and tumbling of
garments into blood: al these who on earth were rotten at the heart shall be
ranked in the number of that bashful band.

O what unspeakable fears and tremblinges shall then seize upon these wretched
souls: In all parts they shall be wounded: Three restless plagues, Sorrow,
Shame, and Fear shall continually nettle them, till an heaped treasure of
wrath come rushing upon them with breath of kindled Juniper: Satan shall
continually flesh in their face, fire whose flammes shall beefed with rivers
of Brim stone kindled with an everlasting wrath: The great God with the Hammer
of his vengeance shall strike through the rebellious loins of their pride, and
shall break the iron sinews of their obstinacy: Note
Then would they give a world for an hole in heaven for to relish the least
pleasures that be there: No tongue of man or Angel can fully express the
least part of these woes: Note
Many millions of their earthly pleasures shall be dear boght with one
minute of such pains: Their best shall be the ^rie contrary of that which
they like best: For all shall go to all: Reeling shall be their rest, and pains
their pleasures, mourning shall be all their mirth, and their Bone music
shall be but gnashing of teeth, even in the presence of their Judge before whom
they shall stand lik abominable monsters, and spectacles of amazement: Note
Thus as is well said in the Psalm, The way of the wicked he turns up Psalm.
1469
side down: At the first dash he shall break in pieces the claspes and haspes
of their foolish hopes, wherein once boldly they did sin, that grace might
abound.


The sick Man. O how fearful shall their condition be, while like Tinder
before the fyrereadie to be consumed, they shall stand araigned before the
Bar of Gods justice, with the volumes of their sins written in Letters
great like mountains, so that every eye may read them.

Note
The Lord as I think out of a sower, severe, and imperious austeritie, shall
behold that cursed band with glauncing eyes of vnuterable wrath, wherefrae
shall come nothing but wild fire, brim-stone, and gunpowder, for the
everlasting firing of their Conscience.

Note
Not only shall the Lord behold their vilanies, but to all eyes that ever saw
sight, he shall anatamize their guilefull hearts wherein all their most
filthy plottes and devices shall be seen unto their everlasting shame and
infamy: O what shame and confusion of face: O what fears and tremblings,
shall seize upon these who on earth for a point of their hose would be at
daggers dr^* wing with the greatest.

Then shall these who were bold to sin in their life, despising God, and his
threatenings: Then shall they shake and quake like a man whose neck is laid
upon the block waiting for nothing but the dead st^ok from the instrument of
death: The^ (...) their comfort shall be turned (...) confusion: Then shall
they know how foolishlie they conceived an imaginary Hell, while pressed down
under a sinful load, the wrath of God like a Mile-stone shall cruch them
down to the deepes of despair, where one sorrow succeeding, shall forever
press at the heels of another.


The Pastor. O these unspeakable terrors! It is most certain that Belshazzar
never Dan. 5. 6.
did speak, so while he saw the hand writting on the wall, as the wicked
these doolefull wights shall do when they shall stand before God with the
Books of the Law Gospel, and of Consciences, laid open before them: Horrors
shall be heaped upon them with terrors and torments, whereof a created Nature
can be capable: O then what g^ashing of teeth and volumes of woes! They shall
be so soacked in tears and facaked with sorrow, that who shall see them,
shall see the ve^ie image of Death, and yet none shall pity them: There shall
they stand script stark n^cked before their ludge, ^ik criminals upon the
pannell, looking for nothing but present condemnation both of soul^ and body,
which God shall make the eternal fu^ll of everlasting fla^es: The Soul and
body combined mates in misery, shall mourn for evermore.


The sick M^n. O Lord, season my Soul with the graces of thy Spirit, revive
it with the A prayer
spiritual vigor: Let me live the life of the righteous, and let mine end
b^e like unto theirs. Numb. 23. 10


I have heard you Sir with great attention declare that when Christ shall sit
down to judge, he shall separate the wicked from the Godly as Goats from the
Sheep, and that Matthew. 25 33
the wicked with all the host of hell lapped up in that same bundle of Luke
22. 30
condemnation* shall s^and at his left hand, and that the Godly shall litte
upon Thronos at his right hand.

Now I desire to know of you what shall be the case of the Godly at the
right hand before that the ludgement be pronounced.


The Pastor. It has been told you that the Wicked who on Earth made the
world to tremble with their boisterous brags, shall at Gods Left hand be
standing in disgrace, discount, and discountenance with their Judge: There
shall they stand all trembling, having before them the Book of the Law, where
they shall see all their Sins, of Thoughts, Words, and Works: While their
guilted Consciences shall be crying guilty within them at the sight of the Law
Book of their transgressions, the Lord for to aggrauate their grief, shall
present before them the Book of ye Gospel, where they shall see how by unbelief
they have sinned against the remeede of sin: Note
With these two shall be joined the Book of their Consciences, ratifying unto
them that what is contained into the other two Books, is an undoubted truth:
At the reading of these bloody Books, as ye have already heard, their
Consciences shall be ^ortured with unspeakable amazement and fear: Their
Souls all aghast, pricked and perplexed, shall yawne for a drop of comfort,
which no creature above or below shall be able to affoorde.

Now ye desire to know what shall be in that time the estat of the god^lie
Christ's right hand, before that the Judgment be pronounced.

It is certain that they all in great Glory, wearing the shining Crowns of
immortality, shall sit upon (...) being more bright, than the Sunn^ at the
noonday: In judgment they shall pass verdict on the wi^ked: They shall all
in that summ^r process sit as Christ's assessours, for (...) judge the Angels,
that is* For to approve Christ's judgment pronounced against the Devils the
evil ^gels and against all that cursed crew of the Reprobates, who in their
life living under maskes of mischief, branded them with the nik-names of
puritanisme, proud hypocrisy, glorious singularity, and pha^^astick
precisenes who in a word, in hight of stomach ruffling and swashing, did tread
upon Gods Turtles, accounting them the most vile off-scourings of the Earth.

O but the wicked who on earth were swelled with self conceit, shall wonder to
see these to be the Assessours of their Judge in highest favor with God,
whose life once they counted madness: O what a wonder shall it seem to the
worldly wise, when they shall see these simple Ones, whose life they loathed,
whom they counted fools on earth, al decked and adorned with rarest jewels, so
high set upon Thrones with the most glorious Angels of God: O how shall they
whom their life reposed in Amos. 6. 4
beds of Yvorie, be amazed to behold Gods Matthew. 10 42
little ones so brightlie Matthew. 13 43
shining like Suns with glistering Crowns and glorious Garlands possessing
fully Wealth, Honor, Health, and Hearts desire, yea, pleasures vnparalleled
by any that heart of flesh can wish.

Note
The wicked beholding this, shall be swallowed up with grief and groans, for
then shall they remember how on Earth they have drowned the good motions of the
Spirit in vain ryots, profaneness, and revillings of good fellowship.

I say again, that the wicked who once in their swaggering humor, and
accursed gallentnes, were wont to brave it out with the best, with the great
contempt of Christ's little Ones shall Matthew. 10. 42
wonder, and wonder again at the sight of these whom God in that day shall
honor: Note
Are these they, shall they say, whom some times we had in derision, and of
whom we made a pa^able of reproach? Are these the men and women whom we in
hight of stomach disdained to behold? Behold, now we see that they are
indeed that which on earth they were called, even Saints, Gods most excellent
ones. Psalm. 16. 3.


Certainly the glorious glaunces of these blessed and beautified bodies,
sitting all in royal apparel shall strike the wicked in a wonderful maze,
while they shall behold such jewels of joye, they shall be stricken into the
dumb dumppes of saddest melancholy: O the folly of such miserable
muckewormes, who count it now an heaven to creep and crawle in oyled and
buttered paths of carnal prosperity! But in short to proceed in this purpose
orderly.

When all things shall be put to an order, the wicked being at the left, and the
Godly at the right hand, in my judgment there shall be a great silence, that
the Judge may have audience: All men shall beestedfastlie looking for to hear
what GOD the LORD shall say: Then God Isa. 28. 7.
shall lay judgment to the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet: The^ shall
the Lord rise up as in mount Perazin, and shall be wroth as in the valley of
Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his
act, his strange act: O that clear and bright shining Eye, which nothing in
that day shall be able to escape!


The sick Man. To whom think ye that Christ in that Judgment shall first
address his speech? Whether shall he speak first unto the Godly, who in a
sacred violence did tak the Kingdom, or to ye a Matthew. 11 12.
wicked, who in the days of their flesh did sleep most softly in the downs
of security, caring for nothing, but their Purses and their Paunches?


The Pastor. The Lord shall speak first unto his own, who are the chosen
generation, 1 Pet. 1. 17
the royal Priesthood, the holy Nation, the peculiar people: * To these
sitting at his right hand, first shall he say with his Lilly lips dropping
Cant. 5. 13
sweet Myrrh: Come ye blessed of my Matthew. 25 34
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from thee foundation of the
world.

Note
At the hearing of these words of their Lords most loving inuitation, all their
senses shall open like floode gates for to receive unspeakable Joys.

What tongue can tell what joy Revel. 21. 9
the Lambs Bride with her purple Cant. 7. 5.
Head and Doves Eyes, shall have when She shall see with what a Bridegroom Ioh.
3. 29.
She shall be matched that day.

After yt the Lord has comforted Matthew 25 33
his own, he shall turn him to the Goats, that bashful band, trembling at
his left hand: Note
Before that he open his mouth to speak, he shall behold these brute
beasts made to ^ Pet. 2. 12
be taken and destroyed: With fiery looks, with kindled eyes, sparkling
fury, and rage, and fl^shes of lightening, he shall behold these devils
droiles, doolefull creatures: In his countenance they shall read the
Characters of awefull terrors even of the horrors of hell: At the first sight
of that angry Majesty, with brent brows and his stern countenance, a
Torrent of terrors shall violently rush upon their Souls, dashing them with
a dazzling astonishment. Then shall they wish in these flamming horrors vexing
them to the quick, that mountains would fall above them for to hid them from
such angry eyes: The^ shall they know how foolish they were in their lifetime
to think that while they sinned, the Lord was but a stock or a stone which
could not perceive them.

Note
O that glauncing wrath, which like fire shall greaslie appear in the eyes of
that Judge, ten thousand times brighter than the Sun* The glaunces of that
fiery fury shall so dazzle the sigh^ of the Reprobate, yea, shall so dash
them, that they shall not be able to abide his countenance* No, not; though
their eyes were of steal, or of iron, nothing then shall stand in the gappe
against the irruptions of such a fierce and fiery vengeance.

Note
While these profane men lived on earth in a blazing prosperity they thought
their mountain so strong, that they could never be moved: In their lifetime
they lived in gladness: At their end they deceased fairly in the eyes of ye
world: They seemed Saints, because that in Psalm. 73. 4
their death were no bands: But O the terrors that abide them.

Note
At the first sight of their Judge a Torrent of terrors shall most violently
rush upon their Souls standing in an heavy dumpe and waiting on their
dreadful doom: While they live here, the stone of their heart is like an
gravel stone, so bedded in the bladder, that it cannot be painful: Little
dream the wicked now that such fearful and hellish horrors are preparing
for them: But O their everlasting woe is presently in hatching and hammering:
It is nearest to the birth while the wicked are most secure: Sudden destruction
is nearest, while the preaching of peace are doubled by crying, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3
Peace and saftie.

Note
Happy is the man to whom the Lord does vouchsafe the grace in this world to
waken out of ye drousie slumber of sin, for to repent in time? Woe to these in
whose hearts ye long forebearance of Gods wrath has wrought a more frozen
coldness and presumptuous security, wherein being lulled, they are carried in
a most sweet and sound sleep, to places where their eyelids shall never be
refreshed with rest any more: O how shall they fling and cry, when they shall
feel themselves stung and galled upon thesore.

Note
After that the Lord has browbeaten them with the biggest looks of his wrath,
and has terrified them with his piercing eyes of fire, and after that he has
disclaimed all interest that ever he had into them, Cant. 2, 15
he shall cause take these Foxes that spoiled his vines: That done, he shall
vnsheath the flamming sword of his Genesis 3. 24
vengeance with these most fearful words of excommunication, Depart Matthew.
25. 41
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels* In that fire like dry chippie burne-wood they shall burn, but in this
they shall be like Salamanders, that they shall never be consumed. By that
most fearful blast of wrath the LORD shall chase them all away from before
his face as the chafe of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling
thing before the whirle wind: Note
The mighty Lord lowering with a dark and cloudie countenance, shall then in
great fury lay about him with the heavy hammer of his judgments, and that
with full weight: With one stroke, without any iteration of strokes, from the
best strength of a divine Arm: He shall bring down their hairie scalpes to
the lowest dungeon of Death, even to everlasting burning brimstone beams,
which no mercy shall be able to cool or quench: There shall they drink in
cups of wrath for ever.

Note
If these miserables could be put out of pain upon the sudden, they should
not be altogether comfortless: But the merciless vengeance of Gods wrath
shall add leisure and lingering to their dying life and living death, that
sensibly they may feel death in a life of intolerable sufferings: No mercy,
no pity, no regard shall be had unto them, no, not but the Lords justice
shall charge the edge of his flamming sword upon the heads and hearts of these
doolefull creatures of infamous rank: These fearful blows of Justice shall
be without any mixture of mercy* Note
He who created them without any labor, shall destroy them without any loss:
Snaires, fire, and brimstone in that day shall rain down upon the hairie
scalpe of every one which in their lifetime did go on in their sins without
^emorse: In this perplexity and anguish besieged with judgments both felt and
feared, shall they sla^d before their Judge all trembling and waiting upon the
sentence of that doolefull doom.


The sick Man. What shall become of the wicked after that the Lord has
dischairged them his presence any more, by commanding them to depart?


The Pastor. Note
So soon as the Lord has pronounced these words of
euerlastingexcommunication, they shall all incontinent go down to Hell in
heaps, for to be scorcht and parcht with the everlasting burninges of a
devouring wrath: They who have been intrapped in their sins, shall be entombent
in Gods plagues. There shall be no more abiding for them, in his presence: they
shall be chassed from their God, unto everlasting exile in dungeons of Devils and
of darkness* where they shall be pestered with unspeakable doole in floods of
fire, wherein they shall wail and yele for ever.

Gods most heavy vengeance lik Judge. 7. 13
a Barley Loaf tumbling from above, shall thrust them down and crush them
altogether like the Tents of the Midianites: Satan then with all the spite he
can shall lay on load with milstones of miseries hung about their necks: He
shall draw them down with chains of curses to the dungeons of darkness: Thus
Hell with a gaping gulf shall swallow them all at once: They shall go down
most fearefullie with grappling Devils with squeeles and roaring voices, which
being heard by the blessed ( in whose eyes and sides they once were pricks
and thorns) shall rouse up their hearts wonderfully to rejoice and sing with
such an high tune that shall make the whole world to resound with a rebou^ding
noise.

Mine heart trembles to think upon these torments which the wicked shall
suffer into the fiery Lake after their departing from before their Judge: All
words fail me, I find my conceptions too weak in thinking upon that
infinite wrath: Note*
O then these who enjoyed once all the pleasures which could be purchased on
Earth, shall want all the good which they can desire, and receive all the evil
which they can deserve: Note
They shall for ever be dying in a life which shall never end, that they may
dye continually, and that in utter darkness, where Sun never shined, where
Day shall never dawne: because that in the days of their flesh on earth they
would not so live to die, that they might die to live, they shall for ever in
the Hell dye to live, that they may living to dye, a living death and a dying
life a life and death of woes.

These miserable creatures shall be so perplexed, that they shall both grieve to
live and fear to dye: They shall desire absolutely neither death nor Life,
and yet in a manner shall they wish for both, but all in vain: The full bended
Justice of God shall give no truce to their tears, nor place to their plaints.
Unto all these terrors of Gods wrath shall be joined, another fear, even Satan
the king of fear, he in most bitter spite shall besiege these trembling
Souls with unspeakable terrors: Note**
For he shall stare them in ye face with most grizlie forms and terrible
representations: He in great fury shall hunt out upon them most fearful
gnawing worms which shall feast on their Consciences. The thoughts of such
things should pierce, as I think* even unto the very center of leared
Consciences.

O but the assurance of happiness in many is false and misgrounded: Obstinate
sinners, whose hearts are hard paued with obstinate rebellion, think now yt
they shall never see that day, because God now keeps silence* Psalm. 50. 21
they think that he is lik unto them: But the slower Gods hand be in coming
on, the fadder and ^orer shall his stroke be: While the wicked most securely
snort in their sins, dreaming of saftie and surety, even then their
judgment lingreth not, and their damnation is not in a slumber: This 2 Pet* 2.
3
shall they know by sense and feeling when Gods most fiery jealousy shall
break forth upon them like the sorrows of a woman in travel: No sorrow can
be here like unto their sorrows: Fire* chains, rackes, and lashing whips
cannot express the shadow of one infernal tor tour: All the woes that ever
were heard on earth are nothing to the least of these vnpittied plaints.


The sick Man. I have one question for to propound to you: It is concerning
the order of Christ's proceeding into Judgment: What reason is there think ye
that the Judge in that day shall first absolve the godly, by bidding them Come
with his Fathers bl^ssing, before yt he speak a word unto the wicked, whose
hearts in their lifetime for the most part were sealed up by the spirit of
slumber.


The Pastor. I find two probable reasons, first because the great God of
mercy is more bent to show mercy toward his creatures, than to power
vengeance upon them, and that for to teach all Judges to execute Justice with
Gravity and grief.

Behold here how our God, while he is even come unto the last periode,
gives unto the wicked who in their life with Whoorish foreheads, Ier. 3. 3.
out faced the Sun, behold, I say, how he gives them a certain respite*
and a delay from Hell in that space while he is speaking unto the Godly: And
yet the more slowly he strikes, the surer shall he set his blow, which
shall shake every sinew of their body and each power of their Soul.

Note
The other reason wherefore he speaks first to the Godly such words of
comfort and of coming, is that the wicked who in the days of their vanity
combined sport with spite against him, may see how good a God he shall be to
all these which have served him here in Faith and truth. Note
O what shall the trembling Souls of these vvorldlre brates that would not
serve Christ in their life think when they shall hear that Lord so sweetly
in so sweet heavenly and honey words, say unto al his Saints his dearest
Darlings, whom they as outcasts despised Matthew. 21. 30
on Earth, Come ye blessed of my Father, come and be all Kings, with me for
ever more: Come from the ^awes of Death to the joys of an ever blessed Life:
Such words shall make the hearts of the Godly to dance and leap within
them for joye; but shall make the hearts of the wicked to droope and to bleed
for sorrow.

O what would Dives in the fire boiling Lack then give for to be in the place
of Lazarus! Note
Many Kings of Princely but profane blood, which have borne the Crown and
swayed the Scepter above the heads of many thousa^ds being drunk with
idolatric: Note
Secret murder of their Parents for to sit upon their Throne, shall the^ spue
and fall, but shall never rise again: They all drenched in a poole of wrath,
shall wish in that day that they had wept and vvypt the feet of Le^s with the
hairs of their head, yea that they had been borne Beggars, having the Faith
and fear of Jesus. My heart trembles to think how so many thousands who
deemed and dreamed once to be saved, shall with damned Devils rush down to
the snakie poole of perdition, because like Swyne in their life they trampled
under feet the precious pearl of mercy, purchased by the Blood of Jesus.


The sick Man. After that ye sentence shall be pronounced, whether think ye
that the wicked shall first go to pain, or the Godly unto pleasure?


The Pastor. It would seem by the words of the Gospel, that the wicked* that
base brood of corruption, to whom Christ has spoken last, shall first go to
torment: After yt the doom is given Matthew. 25. 46
out with a roaring thu^der, it is said, and these shall go away to everlasting
punishment, but the righteous unto life eternal: After that the wicked are like
chafe chaissed away to brimstone beams, the Arms of Christ and the Gates of
Glory shall stand wide open for to give entrance to ye righteous, who^ ye
Father Christ of Jesus shall receive with most cordial embracements unto their
everlasting comfort: Blessed are they who now cast their bread upon the
waters, looking neither for thanks nor recompense from men, for then they
shall be richly rewarded by God.


The sick Man. What reason think ye can be of that order? that before the
Godly go to Glory, the wicked all in a r^ue shall be hurled away to
everlasting punishment, being thrust down into the dominions of darkness, most
fearful spectacles of amazement? O how these so mi^ie men shall then be
pensive and perplexed.


The Pastor. This would seem to be the maine reason, viz. For thereby to
kindle up so much the more the love of the Godly toward their God: The bitter
bickering and fearful squeeles of the Reprobate hurling down to hell, being
heard and seen by the Godly, shall make the joys of heaven to relish the
sweeter unto them.

Note
If while a people were in a Church, the Church should fall down and smother
the one half, not doing any harm unto ye other, these who should escape,
should by beholding the crushed and bloody bones of others, much more be
ravished with ye joy of such a deliverance than if ye house had not fallen at
all

Note
When Dathan and Abiram with their companies sanke down to Hell Numb 16. 32
in the sight of all Israel, what joye think ye had these whom the earth did
bear above? Many who never in their life gave God thanks for that the sward
of the earth has borne them above, if they should see such a sight as of
Dathan and of Abiram, they would regard the benefit the more, and would give
God more thanks for that one mercy, than for all by-gane favors showed unto
them since they began to walk upon the ground: We thank God little that
the earth bears us above because we see it not swallow up sinners with a
gaping gulf: Note
while men see the misery of others it wakens into them the sense of Gods
mercy toward them. Note
O how glad shall the Godly be then, that they have served God, when they
shall see the Devil and his Darnell the wicked seed, cast into a fiery Lake!
when these blessed souls shall see the hels open, and the black devils flashing
fire into the faces of the wicked, and hurling away these damned spirits with
fearful cries and shrikes down to the dungeons of distress, and to most vile
Vaults of darkness entrinched among gnawing worms stinking Scorpions and
hissing Serpents, then they who were wont to weep for ye sins of the wicked in
this life, shall have no compassion on them; but shall laugh to see them lashed,
rejoicing in ye justice of their God powered out upon* these, that in a self
liking of their own estate, despised the* sweetenes of his mercy: O happy
Zepha. 2. 2
they who gather themselves before the decree come forth.

Note
Behold, and consider what a change is this: These who mourned of before for
their sins shall then solace themselves in their sorrows: The shriks and
squoakes of these damned souls falling down to hell which shall be to the wicked
a song of judgment, shall be to the Godly in yt day quite otherwise, even a
song of mercy full of mirth and of Music: O how sweet then shall mercy be
to the Godly when they shall see what Gods fearful vengeance shall work on
the wicked, whom their life by an accursed Alchymie, turned the grace of their
God into wantonness! O how rejoiced shall their hearts be, when that great
JEHOVAH shall begin to sway with his Almighty Arm, that mace of iron for to
dash these fore-lorne limbs with pain both of sense and of loss.

Then shall the Thief wish that both his hands had been maimed and mutilate:
Then shall the unclean person whose eyes are filled with adultery and
filthiness, wish that he had been borne blind: Then shall the Drunkard wish
that he had been borne without a mouth: Then shall the Blasphemer a man of
bloody oaths wish that his tongue with a Turkesse had been torn out of his
throat: Note
This also for a surplus shall be joined to their anguish, none shall be for
to wish them well, or for to condole their misery.

Note
The decree being once come forth, and the doom of damnation being once
pronounced with these words of command, Depart from Matthew. 25. 41
me, etc. All the ungodly in scarlet abominations, who in their excessive
pride rousted on high as in Eagles nests* shall in that day fall down with
Devils into that Dungeon and ward house of Hell, where there is no light but for
to let these which are tormented see their misery, no darkness but that which
may hid from their eyes all sorts of comfort: Then all their bypast burning
pleasures shall be quenched into the fire of Hell lik^ed hot yro^ quenched
into water with an extinguishing noise: Nothing shall be then but shouting and
gnashing of teeth, sighing, sobbing, and fearful groans, Isa. 9. 5.
Fuel of fire, and garments rolled in blood: All wicked Souls shall that
day be drencht into an Occan of desperate displeasure, and shall be carried
away with an invnding spaite of spiteful wrath.

O what joye shall be kindled into the hearts of the Godly, when on the one
hand they shall behold the miseries of the Theiues, Drunkards, Adulterers,
Fornicators, and Blasphemers, who were wont wantonlie to stretch out their
throats into high blastes of blasphemy, and when on the other part they shall
consider how God in mercy has fastened them as nails into a sure place, Isa.
22. 23
which cannot be shaken! O what gladness of heart shall the Saints have,
after that they have seen the wicked tumbled down into Hell, to see what
company they shall be into among Angels of light and love with Christ
himself, in whose face is fullness of joye, at whose right hand are Psalm 16. ^1
pleasures for ouermore.

Note
These pleasures unspeakable, for the greatness of themselves, shall be
commended unto the Godly by two by-respects: First, by the consideration of
that infinite woe and hellish virulencie, without any mixture of mercy,
whereinto they shall see the wicked to be plunged, whereof they shall be free:
Secondly, by the rememberance of the misery whereinto they lived, while they
did dwell on earth, during the days of their vanity, their estate changed to
the better, shall become the sweeter: Are they not these who are called Lillies
among the thorns? Cant. 2. 2.
does Scripture call them, These Revel. 7* 14
that are come out of the great tribulations? Their bypast tribulations shall
wonderfully commend their present felicity.

This we see to be of great force by daily experience* The considerations
first of other men's woes, and of the calamities wherewith at other times we
have been perplexed, are like Hunger which like good sauce gives relish and
taste to course things which at other times we think to be no dainties: To
the hungry Soul every Prou. ^7. 7
bitter thing is sweet: How sweet the^ shall the sweetness of Gods face be
to the Godly after all their terrors are past, and after they have seen the
wicked these fearful and mis-chappen brats tumbled down the steep precipes of
eternal destruction?

What pleasures I pray you shall these be, when pleasures for evermore shall
be joined with the rememberance of all these tribulations wherein we were
enwrapped while our feet stackefast in the mire? All these considerations
joined together with unspeakable pleasures shall make the Revel. 5. ^
Harpes of God sound Revel. 19 1.
Halleluiah, Halleluiah for ever and ever: Such meditations ouerflow my Soul,
dyuing in such depths.

Now Sir ye have heard of the last things which shall be done in this world,
here is the conclusion of the last judgment, The wicked as S. Matthew says,
shall go away to Matthew. 25. 46
everlasting punishment, but the Righteous to Life eternal.


The sick Man. Note
O but mine heart is sore moved within me, while I think of that deep Gulf
whereinto all wretched Souls shall be plunged: O ye who in the days of your
vanity drink up the very Cream and flower of the earth, al your pleasures
now, the^ must be gone: Oh that ever and anon we culd apply this unto our
hearts.

My soul is look one liking down from an high and steepie place: The
meditations of these woes of the wicked, makal my senses to be troubled, and al
my spirits to be confusedly shuffled together: my heart within me is so tossed
to and fro, that it is come like a squissed egg, whose yolke is mingled with
its white: All my thoughts are confounded as one that is into an hurly burly.

Good Lord, let thy visions be unto A prayer
my Soul visions of peace. The blessed God preserve us from all these woes:
Lord, make us all to cleave to thee with full purpose of Soul.

Now to come to the purpose: In your discourse ye have powerfullie let me see
the wicked swallowed up in a fearful gulf: Let me hear now what becomes
of the godly.


The Pastor. After that Christ has given them his Blessing, saying unto them,
Come Matthew. 25 34
ye blessed of my Father, etc. They all being crowned and clothed in royal
apparel shall all in good order go triumphantly in Charets up to the Heaven
of heavens with such shoutes of triumph and of Joy, of Love, and of Laud, as
was never heard since the world was founded.

Note
Then shall that prophecy be fulfilled, God is gone up with a shout, Psalm.
47. 5
the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet: verse. 6.
Sing praises to God, sing praises: That shall be the Lambs marriage day, a day
that shall never be darkened with a night, a Feast that shall never be
followed with a Fast.

Note
The day of the bringing of a Queen to the King of the Land is a day of great
joye: What pleasure can be had of Mirth or Music, shall not be away that
day.

But alas, what can the earth afford, simile aut secundum, that is like unto
that joy, which shall fill and ouerflow all the hearts of the godly, when
Christ shall bring up to the Heavens his Church, Cant. 4. 1
which is his Wife, his fair Love, having Doves eyes within her Locks, being
clothed and crowned with the glory of himself? what tongue ca^ express? nay,
what heart can conceive what joy and glory shall be there where the Lambs Wife
shall be dected with her Husband Christ, who shall enliue Her with marchlesse
joye and glorious immortality?

This is that great wonder which S. John in his Revelations, saw in Heaven
Rouel. 12. 1
viz. A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon
her head a crown of twelve Stars: Behold, and consider the Lambs Bride all
environed with Light, clothed with Christ her Sun, and crowned with glistring
stars of glory, heavenly jewels, divine Dyamonds: Behold her making a
foote-stoole of the Moon, the second great Light of Heaven: See how she
treads under her feet that most inconstant creature, for to declare that
constancy of her love toward her Lord, which shall last for ever, without any
change: O the beauty of that Bride whose cheeks shall be comely with rows
of Cant. 1. 10
Jewels, whose neck shall be dected with the chains of Christ's merits.

Note
The Angels themselves, beholding this Bride so royally attyred, shall wonder
at her beauty: When these Noble Spirits shall see and consider that great
familiarity that shall be between Christ and his Spouse, they shall Cant. 8. 5.
wonder, and shall say one to another, Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her wel-beloued*

After that the Church the Lambs Wife, who on earth was betrothed by Revel. 19.
7
grace, shall in the Heavens be married by glory, and conuoyed unto his ever
green bed, all Eternity shall be in ye Heavens lik a marriage day, decored and
trimed with all sorts of Flowers, and of Fruits, of feastings, and of Music,
and of all contentment that can be conceived, heard, seen, sauoured, or
touched by a creature: There our wants shall be turned into wishes: That which
there shall be least, shall be many thousand degrees above all that any
mortal heart here can desire.

Note
All our senses shall be possessed and filled with pleasures, our mind shall
be enlightened: Our will shall be contented: All our affections shall be
satisfied: Note
The Angel in the Revelation gave a command unto John, to write in a Book
concerning the Lambs feast prepared for his Marriage in the day of the
gladness, Cant. 3. 11
of his heart, but not being able, neither he to indite nor S. John to write,
all the dainties of that Feast he desired him to write that all were blessed
which were called unto it: Write, said he, Blessed are they which Revel. 19. 9
are called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb: Lest John should have doubted
whether it was so indeed or not, the Angel subjoyneth, these are the true
sayings of God. Note
Let us conceive this much of these pleasures, that they cannot be conceived:
All that we can conceive shall be less by many degrees than the least thing
we shall receive: Note
Then all our desires shall be enlarged and made wider: Open thy mouth very
wide, Psalm. 81. 10
and I shall fill it unto thee: God himself being All in all, all our desires
1 Cor. 15. 28
shall be fully satisfied and though they shall be always satisfied, they
shall never be cloyed: All words here are full of wants, for these be
things which pass all humane sight and search.


The sick man. The consideration of such things enliueth my Soul, and loses
mine heart wonderfully from the love of all worldly things, and draws my
heart with a fervent desire of a sight of that day: It is no wonder yt the
whole creation Romans 8, 22
groaneth and trauelleth in pain together until now: If we had hearts to
believe, we should find into our hearts an earnest expectation and a waiting
for the manifestation of the Sons of God: Alas, that our devotion should be
so rotten and unsound: Note
If we could get but a glimpse of our God here behind, it should stir up
all our desires to see his Face.


The Pastor. That is most certain: Note
By this desire shall a man know whether he be a spiritual man or a carnal:
He that is but carnal never desires to go out of this world: It is good for
us Luke 9. 33
to be here will he say, as ^eter said on Tabor: But he that has received
the Spirit will find better motions in his heart: We our selves, says S.
Paul, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wite, the redemption of our
body.


The sick Man. Alas, we all are here naturally of a temporising temper, we
linger and delay to return to our God.

O Lord of eternity, be favorable to A prayer
us that we may fear thee, let thy grace work such groans in our hearts, that
thereby we may know that we have certainly received the first fruits of the
Rom, 8. 27
Spirit: So long as we are here make the current of our affections to run
the way of thy Commandments.

There is a difficulty now come in my mind, whereof I gladly desire to be
cleared: It is concerning Christ himself, of him it is said, That he shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God his Father, after he has subdued all his
enemies.


The Pastor. I remember well where these words are written: The Apostle
speaking of the Resurrection of the 1 Cor. 15. 24
last judgment, says, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up
the Kingdom to God his Father, when he shall have put down all rule,
authority, and power: For he must verse. 25.
reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet, etc. And when all
verse. 28
things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be All in all.


The sick Man. These be the words indeed of my difficulty: I pray you to
make me understand them: What is that to say, That he shall deliver up the
Kingdom to his Father, and that after he has subdued all things, he himself
must become subject to him, that put all things under him?

It would seem that Christ our Lord shall lose by this means: For first it is
said, That he must deliver up the Kingdom, and rule no more: Seco^dlie, that
he must become subject to God the Father: I desire you Sir to loose this
knottie difficulty: Note
These who plowe with Gods* Hyfer may easily find out the darkest Riddles.
Judge. 14. 18.



The Pastor. I shall loose these knots easily: By that change the Lord shall
be no loser: Note
As for that it is said, That he shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father,
after that he has put down all rule, authority, and power: It is not to be
understood absolutely yt Christ there after shall reign no more, but yt he
shall reign no more after such a fashion as he did of before, viz. By fighting
against his enemies, who then shall be no more, neither by comforting or
protecting his friends from dangers, who then shall be free from all danger.

It is certain, that the Father reigns now by the Son, and that the Son
shall reign eternally with the Father, but that shall be in another manner
after the last judgment, then he does now: Note
Now he reigns like a Prince, fighting his Fathers Battles: Then shall he
reign for ever, triumphing over all his enemies.

This is the interpretation of some learned writers: But in my judgment it
declares not plainly what it is to give up the Kingdom to the Father.

I lik Beza his exposition best* Note
His words are these, Dicitur Christus regnum Deo patri traditurus vltimo demum
illo die quo profligatis omnibus ad unum hostibus, omnes quos a patre
gubernandos accepit, illi veluti in manus tradet aeterna gloria coronandos.

That is, Christ is said to deliver up the Kingdom to his Father at the last
day, when having subdued all his enemies he shall deliver into his Fathers
hand all these whom he had received from the Father for to guide and govern,
for to be by him crowned with everlasting glory.

By the Kingdom I understand the godly who are the Children of the Kingdom:
Christ then is said, To deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, when he
delivers unto him these whom the Father had given to him: Note
All the Godly have been given by the Father unto Christ the Mediator: And
Christ again must be countable to the Father for them: Holy Father, said
he, keep Ioh. 17. 11
through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me: And again, verse. 12.
These that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the
Son of perdition. See here how the Father is said, to give, and Christ is
said to have kept these whom the Father has given him: Note
while Christ makes his count and randereth them again to his Father, he is
said to give up the Kingdom to his Father.

Note
Neither must we here think that while the Father gave this kingdom to the
Son, he wanted it himself, or that the Son when he shall give up the
Kingdom to his Father, shall reign no more: No, Ioh. 17. 10
not: All mine are thine, said Christ, and thine are mine: Note
I confess that there is no such giving among men as can express
sufficiently how the Father is said to give any thing unto the Son: And
again, there is no such giving up among men, as can clearelie declare how the
Son is said, To give up the Kingdom unto the Father: There be no Mines nor
Thines among men which can fully express the Mine and the Thine of the Father
and of the Son.


The sick Man. Indeed Sir ye speak well: We must all reverence the high
mysteries of God, not darring to abridge his infinite wisdom within the
bounds of a brain that is not of a span long: The words of Moses are words of
great wisdom, The secret things are Dan. ^19. 29
for the Lord our God, but these that are revealed are for us, and our
posterity for ever. That then which is revealed is for us, and that which is
for us in Scripture, it is our part to seek it and to search it.

O Lord, guide me by thy counsel, A prayer
keep my thoughts within compass: Suffer not my Soul to turn awrie from thy
truth: Sequester mine heart from all vanity, that I be not curious in the
knowledge of that which thou have not allotted for me, as are these whose
hearts are filled with dreams and deceitful dotages: Let my Soul never be
sowred with such leaven as to presume to search that which thou desires not to
reveal

The second difficulty I observed in these words which ye have recited out of
that Chap. to ye Corinthians, is in these words, viz. That Christ must 1 Cor.
15 25
reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet: What is that to say?


The Pastor. That is, Christ must rule this world till God the Father has
subdued unto his Son Christ, all the enemies of his glory, and of man's
Salvation, who from the hight of their sins shall be brought down into the
fiercest flamme and lowest pit of perdition.


The sick Man. It would appear by the words that Christ shall reign no m^e
after that all shall be subdued: Seeing it is said, That he must reign till
he has put all his enemies under his feet, it would seem that when that
shall once be done, Christ shall reign no more.


The Pastor. The word Till declares not that Christ shall reign no more
after that subduing, for example it is written 21Sam. 6. 23
of Michal, that she had no Children till the day of her death.

It is not therefore to be thought that after death she had any Children: The
opinion of many great Divines, is that Marie never married Joseph though she
had been betrothed unto him, and yet it is said, Matthew. 1. 25
That Joseph knew her not, till she had brought forth her first borne: So God
said unto Iaakob, I will not leave thee Genesis 28. 15
VIVTILL I have done that which I have spoken to thee of: Such forms of
speeches are very common: I will say to my friend at Even, God be with you,
till we meet again: It is not that I desire God to be with him no more so
soon as we shall meet again.

Thus as ye see when it is said, that Christ must reign Till he has put all
his enemies under his feet, it will not import that, that once being done
Christ shall reign no more. Gabriel said to his Mother, That of his Luke 1. ^33
Kingdom there shall be none end: Note
If there be any change, it shall only be in the form of his reigning and
ruling: Now he reigns and rules by a Scepter of iron, and by the Scepter of
his word preached: The one is for to convert the most stubborn hearts of the
Elect, the other Psalm. 2. 9.
for to dash the wicked in pieces lik a potters vessel: Note
All that form of doing then shall cease, for as for the wicked they shall be
committed fast to the low dungeons of Hell, for to be vexed for ever with the
infernal Burrios: Christ then and all his members shall be quite of all their
persecutions: As for the Godly they shall be made perfect: They shall need
no more the preaching of the word: The Law then shall not be needful, for all
the Godly shall be a Law unto themselves: The Gospel shall be of no use: It
is a Doctrine of Faith: Then shall be abolished: Note
When things absent are made present, Faith has no more ado.


The sick Man. That point is made clear indeed: But what is this to say,
That Christ the Son shall reign, Till the Father has put all enemies under
his feet? It would appear by these words, that Christ overcomes his enemies
by another force than his own, seeing it is said, That * Note
the Father is he who shall put all things under his feet.


The Pastor. The most learned Divines have considered that the Apostle there
speaks not of Christ as he is Filius Dei eternus simpliciter, simply the
Son of God, but as he is in the fo^me of a servant, for that cause, as is
well remarked by the best wits, none can affirm that in Christ is, Secundaria
divinitas, a Divinity of a baser rank.

* This we must all know, that Christ the Son and the Father being but one
GOD, work with one, and the self same power: As God the Father and he are
one, so what power Christ man has in subduing his enemies, it may be said to
be from the Father, Because the Trinity is such a deep mystery, as no humane
Wit can search it through, so the actions of the three Persons are such, as no
man can clearelie discern them: It is much for our shallow-wits to know the
borders of Gods ways: Note
It is good in Gods mysteries s^pere ad sobrietatem, that our wisdom be
sober and not drunk with a giddie curiosity, neither must we d^aw to the
other extremity, as to flatter our selves in a sluggish dullness, having no
care to search the Scriptures with the men of Berea for to know that which it
Act. 17. 11
has pleased God to reveal to us: Note
It is good to seek out carefully, though not curiously the knowledge of
Gods revealed will so far as can make for the comfort of our Souls.


The sick Man. Certainly the knowledge of such things is very needful for
the comfort of these that are for to leave this world: And therefore, I who
loo^ not for long sojourning here, desire to know the more earnestly what
good things the Lord has prepared for his own into that other world. The hope
of Glory is like a strong hold against the fear of Death. Note
O^ that I were that which I would be.

There is now resting only one difficulty in the words of the Apostle, which I
never as yet could well understand: It is said, That when all 1 Cor. 25. 28
things shall be subdued unto the Father* then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him, that put all things under his feet: Is not the Son even
now subject unto the Father* If not, how is it said, That he shall be then
subject unto him?


The Pastor. Christ as God, is not at all subject unto the Father, but, all
the Godly are subject both to Him and to the Father: But as man Christ, is
with us subject unto the Father: Note
According to this a Father said well,

Christus in quantum Deus est, August. lib. de Trinit. 1 cap. 10
cum illo nos subjectos habet, in quantum sacerdos, nobiscum illi subjectus
est.

That is, To Christ as God we are subject as to the Father, but as Christ is
our Priest, he is with us subject unto the Father.

Moreover it may be said, that after the last Judgment Christ shall be
subject unto the Father, because then all the Faithful which are his Mystical
body, shall be perfectly subject to the Father, Christ the Head of the
Church, since his incarnation, has in his own Person been subject unto ye
Father perfectly, and so is he yet: But in his mystical members below there
is a miserable rebellion of flesh against the Spirit: Gal. 5. 17.
Note
But when all shall be gathered together in one Body into Glory, the^ shall
Christ be perfectly subject unto God both

Quoad naturam suam tum quoad corpus mysticum.

In his humane Nature and in his mystical Body, which are the faithful: When
all the Elect with their Head Christ shall be perfectly subject unto God, then
shall Christ be fully and finally subject to the Father: This seems to be
the true meaning of the words: This is made clear by the words following,
viz. That this subjection shall be that God may be All in all.

Note
But this we must understand, that this subjection of Christ and of his
mystical Body, is not any disgrace or disparagement to our Head Christ* or
to us: The truth is, that it is a most Princely honor to be the Prince of
Heavens subject: Note
It were better to be the least subject of Heaven, than the greatest commander
of Hell: The service of our God is greatest liberty: The more perfect this
subjection be, the greater is our Glory: Note
The subjection of a creature to God, is the very Image of God in the
creature: Gods Image in Adam was chiefly in his subjection to Gods will, which
was defaced by his rebellion, which is the very Image of the Devil.


The sick Man. We are much beholden to our God, who in his great mercy has
revealed unto us all these things into his word: His word may well be called,
A Lantern unto our steps, Psalm 19. 8.
a light which enlighteneth the eyes, burning clearer tha^ any Cresset-light
warning from dangers.


The Pastor. Indeed Gods word is a word of life and of light: It is a saving
word, the power of God to Salvation: This Rom, 1. 16
power is only peculiar to the mighty operation of this word.

Note
There be in the creatures words and lines of words, for to declare unto man
that there is a God, that so man may be without excuse: Day unto day utters
speech, and Psalm. 19. 2.
night unto night shows knowledge: Their Line is gone out through all the
earth, and their words to the end of the world: But all these words and lines
are but lines of words concerning the creation: All that they can say, is but
that there is a God, a mouer, a primum ens a first Be-ere, whereby all things
have their being: But in all these lines of words there is not one word of
Christ the Redeemer: There is not a day where the Gospel shinneth not, that can
utter any speech* or show any knowledge of that which concerns man's
Salvation, wrought with the bloody sweat of God: There is not a word let be
a line in any work of Nature, concerning the great mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy* 3. 16
Christ manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory.


The sick Man. O words worthy to be written Ier. 17. 1
with the point of a Dyamond: Seeing it is so, this should make us to esteem so
much the more of the glorious Gospel which is the power of God to Romans 1. 16
salvation of all believers.


The Pastor. The Gospel indeed is like a m^st rich treasure dug into a
field, for Matthew. 13. 44
which a man that has found it will go and sell all that he has, that he
may buy that field for the treasures cause.

This Gospel is like a Sun newly created in the heavens, which shines both
day and night, both in life and death with most glistring and wholesome Beams,
whereby the unwholesome cloudie night air of iniquity is rarefied, scattered,
and dispersed* Note
As the Sun in the heavens by its heat makes all the earth in ye Spring to
grow green, and the Corns to come up at the first with small green points,
and after to shoot up to the shot bled, and after that to come to the Seed,
that at last being cut down in a white ripeness, it may be lay^e up into
Girnels: Even so the Gospel like a Sun shining from the heavens, comes
after the cold frostie season of the dead Winter of our Nature, and by its
Beams warmeth us, and wakeneth up the seed of grace sown into our hearts by
the good hand of God: After that, with its heat by little and little it
ripeneth these sown graces, at last while we are ripe, and while the graces
of God in us are come to their perfection, ye Lord sends his servant Death to
cut us down with a sickle: Luke 16. 9
After yt by Death we are cut down, the Lord treasureth us up into everlasting
Tabernacles, the Girnels of the Prince of Heaven, far from the keen rasors
of lying tongues. Now seeing the day is f^r spent, here I shall pause, leaving
that which has been said, to your nights meditations: By yt grace of God I
shall return in the morning earelie: He that made Peter safely to Matthew. 14 29
walk upon the swelling waves uphold you so, yt ye sink not at the rising of
any boisterous blaste of temptation: Note
Gods Children in this world are lik these three Children in the fiery
furnace, though such fire seem to be Dan. 3. 23.
a consuming fire, it shall not be able so much as to sindge their apparel.
verse. 27



The sick Man. But before ye go Sir, according to your good former custume,
by your deuote prayers, commit my Soul to the arms of my Savior: I ever
fear that my false heart give me the slip: As God has given you a divine
tongue, so Lord, give me a sanctified ear, the sweetest spiritual music and
harmony of Gods service: Oh, that with Peter I could John. 21. 1
gird my coat, and swim through all the swelling seas of temptations, yt I
might come unto my Lord. Offer up I pray you Sir, for me the Christian
sacrifice of prayer: Resign my Soul into his merciful hands: Oh that I could
with you homage mine heart unto God in fervent supplications! we are not able
as I see to stand a moment in the right way without Gods underpropping hand.

Alas, Sir, I find in my prayers great distractions, which wonderfully blunt
the edge of my devotion* while my mouth is speaking to God, my mind is
speaking with follies and phansies: Note
If a man speaking unto a Prince, should now turn him unto this man, and now
to that man, would not that Prince at last command, him silence enjoining him
with all speed to pack him out of his presence, as being a man who knows not
what is matchable to such a Majesty: Many a time, alas, have I at prayer
babled out with my lips many sauourles words, which have wrought nothing but
the sadding and grieuing of Gods Spirit. A prayer


O Lord, make this meditation of mine own unworthiness, be like a whet-stone
to my prayers, that by help thereof I may pray better than ever I did before:
Give me grace at all times, but specially in prayer to keep watch and ward
over my thoughts, that I never let loose the bridle unto them as most
foolishlie often I have done, rushing my Soul over head and ears into the
myres of earthly mindednes: Now good Lord, make me fresh and nimble in my
Spirit for prayer: Oh, for that Spirit of spiritual Romans 8. 27
groans, which makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of
God. I desire your help in prayer: The night is noisome, I lie Job. 7. 4.
down, I say, when shall I arise, and the night begin I am full of tossing
unto the dawning of the day.


The Pastor. I rejoice with my Soul to hear you: I know no surer token of
Gods Spirit within a man, than a ben^nes to prayer: Reprobates with Herod may
gladly hear Preachers: But they all in Scripture are branded with this blot,
They call not upon God* Desire of conference with God, is a most sure token of
friendship between Amos. 3. ^3
God and man: Can two walk together except they be agreed? Can two speak
together except they be friends? Hypocrites I know will Matthew. 6. 7
make long prayers, which are but lip labor, which our Lord calls much
babbling: But their hearts in their prayers wander from God, and go to worldly
toys, so that while they are speaking one thing with the mouth, their hearts
are upon another subject: Isa. 29. 13
Thus Scripture calls, A drawing near to God with the mouth, while the heart
is far off: * God cannot be scorned, but knows how Act. 5. 2.
much is behind, though Ananias would seem to bring all.

Note
He who can pray from his heart, by his prayer as with a piercing keye, is
able to unlock the celestial treasures of God, where out of he will draw
comfortable cordials for distressed Souls, in their gasping agonies.

Let us now bend our knees most humbly before our Maker, and worship him both
with heart and mouth, the most pleasant harmony of a Christian Soul.

The Lord set all our hearts rightly on work: For the heart of man in prayer
is most bent to play reakes in wandering from God.


A Prayer for the sick Man.
O Great and Omnipoten^ GOD, whose Eyes are ten thousand time* brighter than
the Sun at Noone Day: Our sins cannot be hid from The^ Feign would we
confess them, but alas, for this hardness of hear^ Smite, O LORD, smite these
our hearts of iron, soften them with the fire of thy Spirit, till my: sighs and
sobs they melt within our boweles: O^ LORD, who shall not fear thee, to whom
is given all power both in heaven and earth.

When we remember thy last Sessions which shall be in that great and last
judicial day, it makes all the hairs of our head to start up: We are
instructed by thy divine Word 1 Cor. 7. 31
that the fashion and figure of this world shall pass away, and that all
Thrones Dan. 7. 9.
shall be removed, that that most Royal and glorious Throne may be erected
for the coming of the Son of man.

O LORD, in that great and terrible day all things must compeare naked before
Thee: Then shall thou Heb. 4. 13
bring to light the things which were hid in darkness, and shall make
manifest the most secret counsels of men's hearts: From thy face nothing shall
be able to procure escape: Happy shall that Soul be on whom in that day thou
shall bleink with a reconcealed face.

O gracious GOD, whose goodness is bottomless, and greatness immeasurable:
Now speak home to the heart of thy servant here, who in his fainting
weakness has desired me to power out this prayer for him: All his desires are
toward thee, stamp upon his Soul the Image of thy self: Give him a pawn and
a pledge of thy favor, make him assured that in that day he shall find thee
a favorable Judge, who shall cry on him among the rest of thy Children, Come
ye unto me ye blessed of my Father, and receive Matthew. 25. 34
a Kingdom.

Let this consideration bear out in the stormy hour of the last assaults:
Set a strong Guarde and a narrow watch over his heart, lest he be unawares
surprised by Satan's crafty plots: Let the Sconce of thy mercy fence off the
partching hea^e of Satan's most fiery temptations kindled in a bone-fire:
Furnish him now with such grace whereby he may possess his Soul in patience,
looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of thy glory in the clouds.

It was long since written by thy Iam. 5. 9.
blessed Penmen, That the Judge stands before the door, and that the end of
all things draws near: Now seeing sin is come to such an hight, that thy
Justice cannot much longer forbear, but that thou must come shortly to put an
end to this most corrupt world: LORD, cleanse quite away all our corruptions
before thou come.

Grant that continually with ye wise Matthew. 25. 4.
Virgins we may have our Lamps of oil trimmed for the coming of our Lord,
the blessed Bridegroom of Ioh. 3. 29.
our Souls: Grant that in that day with gladness we may lift up our Luke
21. 28
heads, being assured of a gracious welcomming unto our Masters joy. Matthew.
25. 2^


Keep this ever fast in our memory as an aweband above our heads, for to
keep us from sin, that Christ the determined Judge of ye world shall come for
to render to every one according as he or she has done in the days of their
flesh: grant therefore that whether we sleep or we wak, the shrill Trumpet of
Gods voice may be as if it were ever sounding to our Souls, Arise for to
compeare in judgment.

O LORD, enlighten our mistie minds, that with an vndazeled eye every one of
us may try and descry clearelie our own estate in this world,

In a more special manner let it please thee to regard thy poor prisoner
here in this bed of languishing, who^ Satan has soght to sift that his Faith
might fail: Waken his Soul softly with a merciful motion of thy Spirit of
comfort: Let him not be like these who in a dull, dead, and senseless
security not thinking on Death, chop in the earth before that ever they be
awares, neither suffer Satan to quench his clearest comforts with ye dampe of
despare: By this heavy sickness which daily increases, thou is now
Summoning thy servant here to a particular and personal compearance before thy
great Tribunal: Let him find thy Royal seat to be a mercy seat: Proclaim
unto his Conscience in his inward parts, that thou will never enter into
judgment with him: Assure his Soul that he is one of thine, and that there
is no condemnation Romans 8. 1^
to these that are in Christ Jesus, who unto all his faithful is like a Ezekiel.
11. 16.
little Sanctuary.

Let the graces of thy Spirit be all night like a bundle of Myrrh into Cant.
1. 23
his bosom: Seal up in his heart this comfort, that he who shall be his
Judge, is he, even he, who is now his Aduocat, interceeding at the 1 Ioh. 2.
1.
right hand of the Father for him: Give him strength courageously to fight out
this bloody Battle, that in the end thou may set on his head that never
fadding Crown of righteousness 2 Timothy 4. 8
Let Satan be now chained up that he be not able any more to set by the
ears the corruptions of his nature with the motions of thy grace.

He confesses LORD, before thee that if presently thou should pronounce his
doom, and suddenly plunge him in the deepest Hels, that righteousness in so
doing should belong Dan. 9. 7.
to thee: This from his heart would he acknowledge being willing, that thy
Name may be glorified, to take to himself shame and confusion of face.

O LORD, whose bowels ever rumble with co^passions rain down upon thy
servants heart here a shower of grace, for it is parched and dried with greiefe
and sorrow: Pity him for he abhors himself as a stained sinner stripped of
all good things, worthy to be crushed under ye mountains and milstones of thy
vengeance, Neither dar he, neither will he plead against thee for his
innocence: Here he is ready to subscribe all thy will were it with the best
arteriall blood of his heart: His confession is, that thou art most just though
from thy presence thou should banish him to the black lack and woeful
dungeon of darkness, where is nothing but weeping and Matthew. 8. 12
gnashing of teeth.

Out of a sore sense and abundance of feeling, he powers out this most
plentiful and sincere confession before thee: Behold, him here Lord, opening
the bosom of his confession and self condemnation before thee. O thou, whom
his Soul loves, tell him where thou feedest, and where thou make thy flock
to rest at noone in the time of parching and most piercing heat of
temptations: O cool this fainting Soul with thy blessed breath coming from
the four winds: Besprinkle it with the saving and sacred Blood of Jesus.

Thou, LORD, who is the chief Pattern and examplar of all true Kindness,
Pity, and Love: Let his groans and supplications get entry into thine
ears: Send down the Ladder of Iaacob, the ministering Spirits Heb. 1, 14
for to wait upon him, who is one of thy Redeemed ones, that when his Soul
shall be severed from his body, they may carry it into the blessed bosom of
Abraham ye father of Luke 16. 22
the Faithful: Give him a sound and a Sanctified heart, say unto his Soul as
thou said of old concerning thy beloved Children, I will delight to do him
good: Take away the trespass of thy servant, and save him; for he distrusting
his own worth, is now fled to the horns of thine Altar, even to the cross
of Jesus, the Sanctuary of troubled Souls.

As Elishah was first invested with a single Spirit and thereafter with a
doubled Spirit, so now in thy tender compassions double thy graces upon him,
which were but single of before: Let thy favors falling down upon him, be
like the rain which falls first in small drops, and after powers down in
great abundance: O quicken and enliuhis Soul with a supernatural vi gour and
life of grace, that by no lowering tempest of temptation his holy Faith be
dashed out of countenance: Let not his Hope be like the Spiders web which is
easily Isa. 59. 5.
sweept away with the least blast of wind: The weaker his body grow, increase
so much the more his spiritual strength: Verify that Text in him, To him that
has shall be given: Matthew. 25. 29
Thou who give repentance to the sinner, give pardon to the repenter: In the
boisterous blasts of most fearful temptations let his silly Soul find a
shelter under the shadow of thy favor: There is no succor but under thy wings
from the plagues of God, and curses of the Law: Thy Blood only is able to
purge and purify him from the froth and filth of all his iniquities.

Seeing he has dealt vnpartialie with himself, by condemning himself, let
thy mercy for the sake of thy Son his surtiship now absolve him, draw out
the keen arrows of thy wrath which thou have made to stick in his ribs, the
poison whereof has Job. 6. 4.
drunken up his Spirit: O how fearful have thy terrors set themselves in
array against him: Begin Lord, and continue to slack thy wrath Be with him
now in thy great mercy, O LORD, and conuoye him by the graces of thy Spirit
through the snakie field and wilderness of this world wherein he has been
like a Pilgrim, or a Traveler passing from Town to Town, till he come into
his Inn, where he hops by thy mercy to be exempt from all mixture of
misery: He is now in the heat of his journey: Let some cooling drops of
thy comforts be send unto him, for to cool and quench his drougth in the
scorching heat of this spiritual skirmish: Thou who made waters to rush out
of the jaw bone, for the refreshing of Samson Judge 15. 19
after his fight with ye Philistimes, give unto this wearied soul a drink of
that water whereof if a man drink he shall never thirst any more. Ioh. 4. 14.


And now seeing in all appearance he is not for to remain many days upon
this Earth, make him to be still looking all the days of his appointed Ioh.
14. 14.
time till his changing come: grant that when it shall come, he may change for
the better, and that for the glory of thy great Name, and for the everlasting
rest* peace, and joye of his silly sorrow beaten Soul: O crush the head and
break the heart of every sin, that lurketh, within his breast, left they
choke the Soul of this thy Turtle Dove: Be no more sour unto him: If thou
should appear grisly with a stern countenance unto sinners, how soon
should they be out-faced, if thou straightly m^iniquitie, who shall stand? But
O, mercy is with thee: Let that mercy Psalm. 130. 4
that is with thee come to him, whereby all his floating thoughts may be made
to sink and soake into the Blood of the Lamb, the softner and soupler of
stiff and hardened hearts: In the darkest hour of death be thou the comfort
and darlling del^ght of his heart: O Pastor of Israel, now put an end to all
the cloudie and dark days of his distress. Tak in this silly Soul, thy
little Lamb within the compass of thine heavenly fold, till it win there,
refresh it with a baire in its journey, let no means be deficient, til in it
thou crown thy graces with thy glory.

LORD, bless thy Church universal, the dear Spouse of Jesus, as they are all
members of one Body, make them all to be of one heart, that in an heavenly
harmony, they may all think one thing: Stop the mouth of the red Dragon from
spewing out the red bloody floodes of persecution against Her, if not, give
Her the wings of Faith whereby She may flee to the wilderness for Her
escape: O cloth her Priests with Psalm. 132. 16
Salvation, that all her Saints may shout a loud for joye: Give them one mind
and one mouth: But, alas, Icabod, where now is that glory?

Preserve our gracious SOVEREIGN with his Royal Match: Send down a princely
Spirit upon him: Keep them as the Apple of thine Eye: As thou have bund their
bodies into the bond of wed lock, so bind their Souls into the bandle of
life: Make the Heavens to rejoice at her Majesty's conversion: Love Her, LORD,
as thou loved Lidea, by the opening of her Act. 16. 14
heart.

Make both Crown and Court serviceable to thee the greatest Majesty above.

Sanctify all our Nobles, make them lik the men of Berea, courageous Act. 17.
11
for the Truth, Plants of renown.

Guide us all in the way of righteousness, and weane us from the love of this
World: Prepare us for the last Battle of the Soul: Suffer never Satan with
the mood of his temptations to trouble or distemper the clear Rivers of thy
comforts, wherewith thou refreshes thy beloved Ones: Suffer never that prince
of darkness to put out with his dampes the glorious Light of thy Gospel, which
now most orientlie shines among us.

LORD, perfume all our vnwhorthie prayers with the sweet smelling righteousness
of Jesus Christ our Lord and Master, in whose most blessed Name we pray, as
he has pleased him to teach us, Our Father which art. etc.

By Gods grace Sir, I shall return the Morrow earelie: The Spirit of Jesus
print into your heart the best comforts of his Treasures: Remember Sir, that
all our goodness is of him, for naturally we are hewn out of a sinful
rock: All our guises are but guile, till we be cast into another mould by the
Spirit of regeneration.

Strive more and more to be constant and courageous till this bitter Isa. 9. 5.
Battle be ended: For every Battle of the Warrior is with confused noise,
and garments rolled in Blood.

Now the night is fallen down: Job. 4. 13.
while deep sleep falls on me^, strin^ to be acquainted with the Teacher
Psalm 16 7.
of the reins in the night season: If the pain of your sickness rob your eyes
of sleep, cause read unto you this night Dan. 7. 1. Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.

The LORD pull off your Soul all the A prayer
filthy menstruous cloutes of your corruptions, and cloth you with the most
rich and invaluable Robe of Christ's righteousness: The Lord fill your heart
with the inspirations of the Almighty: His Grace be with you.

THE SIXTH DAYS Conference. of Heavens Glory.
The Pastor. ACcording to my promise Sir, I am here come again for to see
what it shall please God to do with you at last, wait constantly on your
God: Note
His mind is to do you good in the latter end: I earnestly now desire to know
what the meditation of the last judgment has wrought into your heart this
night bygone.


The sick Man. Note
Except that a man be well occupied in the day, his heart in the night will
swarm with worthless and witless thoughts: Satan the lord of the night, is
ever busy by secret foisting in of corruptions into man's thoughts, to justle
out of his heart all holy and heavenly meditations,

All this night it seems unto me that I heard the shrill sound of the last
Trumpet sounding most fearefullie the Alarm of the Resurrection at the second
and sudden coming of our Lord: All Saints and Angels seemed to be present at
that great Iubile.

I thought in my sleep that I saw the Son of man environed with innumberable
Charets of fire coming down with unspeakable pomp, Glory and Majesty, I
thought him more glistering than the Sun, while he sbineth in his greatest
force: Mine eyes were dazeled with the brightness of his Beams: All thrones
made room unto his Throne: Mine heart was never so ravished as it has been
this last night bypast.

In the thoghts of mine heart in the night, while deep sleep falls on man,
Job. 4. 13.
there came into my memory some passages of Scripture concerning heavens
glory, whereof most gladly I desire now to hear: The Apostle S. Paul speaks
of this with great 2 Cor. 4. 16
power, We faint not, said he, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day: There be some other good words following,
but my memory fails me.


The Pastor. I shall help you Sir in that matter: The verse following is, For
our 2 Cor. 4. 17
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.


The sick Man. These be the words indeed, I find great difficulty in these
words, I pray you to make them clear: What is that to say, Though the outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.


The Pastor. The interpretation of these words is, that the corruption and
decaying of the outward man by diverse crosses and calamities, Servit renovando
homini interno, is a means for the renewing of the inward man, yt we may grow
in godliness: By the outward man is understood the body: By the inward the
Spirit and the mind: By the weakening of the body the Spirit is made strong.


The sick Man. But what say ye of these words, that our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, is said, to work for us or to cause unto us an
exceeding and eternal weight of glory? Is that the merit and worth of
affliction?


The Pastor. The Roman Church expounds it so, yt by such afflictions men
merit everlasting glory: Indeed the words in the original seem much to favor
yt exposition: The words are these, (...) Cauficit parie operatur nobis, that
is, Causes or works that glory.

Note
But it is certain, that affliction y^ is light, and for a moment both light
and short, cannot be properly a cause of an everlasting and infinite ^ight of
glory: A moment cannot be the mother of eternity: That which is so light can
never bring out an infinite weight: But God who is infinite in po^er, makes
affliction a means for to bring us vnt^ glory as good works are via reg^
causa reg^di, Bernard*
the way to the Kingdom, but not the cause of reigning, so through the way of
many tribulations we must enter into Gods Kingdom.

The Scripture is the best interpreter of it self: Abraham who was the Father
of the Faithful, was not justified either by his doings or his sufferings: If
Abraham were justified Romans 2. ^
by works, he ^th whereof to glory, but not before God.

Note
Shame shall come upon him who glories of that whereof he may not glory
before God: I darre boldly glory before God, of his mercy, and of my Lords
merits, but to glory of man's righteousness a monstrous Isa. 64. 6.
cloth, is an abomination before GOD: Note
If sufferinges and calamities could efficientlie cause and merit that infinite
weight of Glory, how did S. Paul reckon, when he Rom, 8. 18
said, I reckon that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us? This makes the matter
clear that our light afflictions of a moment cannot efficientlie and
meritoriouslie purchase unto us an exceeding and eternal weight of glory:
they are indeed good means whereby our Souls are fitted and furthered in the
way to Glory.


The sick Man. I ever hold that the surest ground that a man be little in his
own eyes* Sinful flesh cannot be too humble before God: Note
That Religion which gives greatest glory unto God, and casts man's own
worth most down, has the clearest mark of truth: Daniel points at this
while he says, O Lord, righteousness belongs Dan. 9. 7.
unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces*

I am now satisfied in the exposition of these words, wherein I did ever find
much difficulty.

Now Sir, if your memory serves you, can ye tell what is said, by the
Apostle in the Chapter following? I remember that some notable things there be
spoken of immortal Glory.


The Pastor. Indeed in the beginning of that Chapter there be notable
words, For we know, says the Apostle, that 2 Cor. ^. 1.
if the earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with sand, eternal verse. ^
in the heavens: For in this we groan earnestly desiring to be clothi^ upon
with our house, which is from heaven. verse. 3.
If so be that being* clothed, we shall not be found naked* For we that
verse. 4.
are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened, not that we would be
v^cloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life*
verse. 6.
etc. While we are at home, in the body, we are absent from the Lord* etc.
We are confident and willing rather to verse. 8.
be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.


The sick Man. These indeed be the words: I could never well understand
them, doubtless they be words full of comforts, for these that are looking for a
better Life: I pray you Sir, to give me the exposition thereof.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir they want not great difficulty, neither does that
which I say make for the doctrine of papists* who affirm that the Scriptures
are obscure, and therefore must not be read by the common people.

Note
It is by reading that men purchase understanding: The Doctors themselves
before they read are ignorant, neither was it ever heard that Scriptures was
abused so much by the common people, as by* these who are most Learned: Where
hear we that the Merchand, the Artifan or rural men begin Heresies? Note
Are not they forged in the unsanctified brains of these in who are lodged the
oppositions of science 1 Timothy: 6. 20
falsely so called: It is oftest seen that through Philosophy and vain
deceit: Col. 2. 8.
The Soul of man are spoiled and not by ignorance of the simplest sort.

There is none obscurity in Gods Word, that should debar the people young or
old from the reading of it: Note
The Letter which my God has written unto me, I may open it, and read it, and
see what my Fathers will is: The Spirit of God in S. John, leading his hand,
has set down these words, I write unto you, Fathers; 1 Ioh. 2. 13
etc. I write unto young men, etc. I write unto you little Children* etc. Who
has power to forbid any man to read the Missiue Letter which his God has
written unto him* Moreover, there is such a Light in Gods word, that will make
a blind man to see: Note
The light of the Sun will show and discover hid things in darkness unto him
who has eyes* but cannot make a blind man to s^* But the light of Gods word
Meira^ Psalm 19. 8.
Hena^m facit ut oculi videant, it makes the eyes for to see: In that Psalm
also it is said, That the Law of the Lord makes wise the simple: Psalm. 19. 7.
It is a great ignorance for Papist Doctors to close and claspe their Bibles
from the hands of the ignorant and simple ones, seeing by this word the simple
are made wise, It is written to the everlasting praise of the men of Berea*
that after Paul had preached, they searched the Scriptures, for trying of his
Doctrine: These be the words of their praise.

These were more noble than these in Act. 17, ^1
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.

Note
As for difficulties, we acknowledge that there be many and great in
Scripture, but as for that which is absolute and simpliciter absolutely and
simply necessary for our Salvation, it is clearelie set down in Scripture: if
there be any difficulty in one place that which is there obscure will be made
clear in some other part of Scripture: This much by the way concerning the
obscurity of Scripture.

Now to come to the words of S. Paul: In the first verse it is said, For we
know that if the earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house ^ made with hand, eternal in the (...).

Some after this manner expour^ these words after that this body like a Taber
n^ele is taken away from (...) Soul, the Soul shall be in a be^ estate, even
in everlasting Glory ^ to the Heavens.

The French marginall note upon this, is yt that eternal house in the he (...)
is the body after the resurrection^ Note
So long as we are here in the sinful body, the body is but like a
Tubernacle, unconstant; weak, fra^* But in the heavens, it shall be like (...)
house that is constant; firm, strong: So corpus and gloriosa ejus conditio,
the body and its glorious estate in the opinion of some is here called (...)
house, by that house then we must understand the glory that is prepared for
the Saints in he iuen, which for its constancy and commodity ^ called an
house: According to the the Apostle in the second verse says, That we groan
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven:
That house from heaven, is that Glory which is from heaven.

Others of the Learned interpret that word Superindui to be clothed upon vt
siquis ind^tus est thorac^* Piscator.
and superinduitur pallio: Pu^o autem sic. Explican^um ex versa 4 Sancti
capiunt corpore c^lesti it ^ indui, vt no^ prius exvantur corpore mortali^sed
superinduantur c^lesti S^ immortali* hoc est ^ per (...) trans^tationem
absorbiator (...) ab immortalitate.

Thus would he say, That the Saints being huing at the end of the world,
desired not to cast their mortal bodies from them* but desire them to be
changed and clothed above with immortality* Mortality is one (...) which
must be put off, that immortality may be put on*

Others think that there be mention here made of a double clothing: Alijs
placet, says Beza, primam Beza.
vestem dici Christi justitiam, alteram vero illius justitiae praemium quorum
sententiae nolim praejudicium afferre, the one they make to be the
righteousness of Christ, the other the glory purchassed by that
righteousness.

Note
S. Ambrose speaking of these words, In this we groan, etc. If so be that
being clothed, we shall not be found nacked, says, Vt haec sit sententia
destruendum quidem hoc tabernaculum S. Amb.
morte sed ita tamen ut non p^reat: Imo ut corruptibilitate deposita
restituatur nobis immortalitate induendum. That is, The Tabernacle of this
body shall be dissolved by Death* not so yt it shall perish, but that all
corruption being taken away, it may put on incorruption, even everlasting
glory. For if the body did perish, then in that case the Soul should be
naked: Now while we are in the Tabernacle of the body, being burdened with
sin and corruption, we groan, not desiring to be unclothed, that is
altogether to want our body, but that putting off the corruptions of the
body, we may be clothed with immortality of life, which shall swallow up
mortality with all cumbers and inconuenients whatsoever.

Note
The Soul of man has an ardent desire to be clothed with immortality, but
has not will to want its body, without which it thinks its self naked:
according to this the Apostle says, In this we groan earnest lie desiring to
be clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven, That is, With glory and
immortality fast and firm like an house: If so be that being clothed, we
shall not be found naked. That is, Shall not want the clothing and covering
of our bodies.


The sick Man. My brain is so sore troubled yt I cannot bend my Spirits so
high for the understanding of these things which are so far above my reach:
Happy is he who with David is not exercised Psalm. 131. 1.
in great matters which are too high for him.

Lord, inlighten my mistie mind, Aprayer
and make me to know thee and thy Son Jesus Christ, and him crucified: Lord
also help me in the knowledge of all that may increase the knowledge of him
into my Soul.

I have heard you Sir at large upon the last judgment, and all the
proceedinges thereof: Ye have also cleared some difficulties which this night
did run into my mind: Now lest vain thoughts should draw mine heart aside
unto toys, let ^t please you to turn your purpose concerning the joys of
Heaven.

Note
While I did behold but the out^id of Heaven, mine heart was ever ravished at
the sight of that Tapestrie, embroydred like most glorious Arrasse cloth: O
what Glory must be within* where the Lord himself is with all his endenized
Citizens of glory: Let me hear you a little* thereupon: There by the grace of
my God, I hope to be within a little space, O what place of perfection and
bliss my Soul longs to dwell into that azured Palace. Let me hear of its
Glory.


The Pastor. Note
The prince of Philosophers Aristot. lib. 1. de coelo.
most subtle in Natural Science, speaking of the heavens, said, That it was
much to get any little knowledge thereof: All his knowledge c^ld reach no
further but from motion to motion, till he come* to the first Mouer, who by
the force of his Almighty arm turns about these relestiall bodies: Note
But he knew no more the great Mov ^, th^n ye would know a man a (...) vp^n
the top of an Hill displaying a^ Ensign or Standart: While the Mouer were
casting his Standart, ye might perceive the motion of a Banner, and by that
motion ye might easily judge that there be a Mouer, and yet for all that be
ignorant, not knowing the man who is the ca^ of all the motion, whether he were
your foe or your friend.

Note
The Pagans saw the motions of the heavens, as we see the shaking of a tree
moved by the winds: I see the Tree shaken and the Branches rushing one upon
another, I hear also the noise, I also know that the Mouer is that which we
call the Wind: But whence this mouer comes Ioh. 3. 8.
and whether it goes, or what moves it, no earthly tongue can tell.

Note
Pagans which have not Gospel written in quick Letters by the dead knowledge
of Nature, will come from ens to ens that is, from being to being, till they
come to ens entium him that is a Being, which causes all beeings: From motions
men in nature will come to motions, till they clime up to Primus motor, the
first Mouer: Note
On him will they look as a man in an high Fever, to whom this man and that
man will say, Know ye me? know ye me? The sight of the brain is so dazeled,
that it is pain and much labor but to hear these three words, Know ye me*
Note
Brain sick Nature can by no means know God, till the Fever of nature be
cooled with Grace: After that the cool of Grace has brought a sweat wherewith
the Soul is purged from the rotten humors of iniquity, then the Soul
becomes like a man after a Fever, come to himself again: Note
According to this it is said o^ the Forlorn, that he Luke 15. 17
came to himself after that he was cooled of his foolish Fever. Till we come
to our selves by Grace, we shall never be able to know the Lord by Nature: All
that the most wise Pagans culd do by the whole help of Nature was to come
from beeing^ to him that is the cause of all being, and from motion to the
first Moue^: Note
But who that Mouer was, the feuerof Nature made their brain so giddie that
they could not discern him.

Note
When all the Clergy of Athe^ into that Famous College of Gre^, had sought
out this God, to feel (...) (...). ^. 27*
(...), and find* him, they wandered (...) and down in their imagination^
(...) Sodomites about* Lots (...), Genesis 19. 11
no^ being able to find it: All their (...) knowledge which was but (...)
(...), could no wi^e reach unto him: For this cause they set up an (...) into
their most learned Citi^ with this in^tion written into great Letters* TO THE
(...)* (...) Act. ^. 23
(...)

* Behold, where the true God was unknown, even in the City where Socrates,
Plato* and Aristotle^* the great lights of Nature had reached publicly* The
vertical point^ all their knowledge could I never reach unto the borders, nay
not unto the base of the Gospel: Note
Behold and see where Science was to be sold in greatest abundance, there was
a profession of the ignorance of the true God written upon their Altar in great
Letters, for by the greatness of the Letters, to declare the gross dullness
of their ignorance.

Note
He who knows not God, were he never so learned, what can he speak of
Heaven* (...) Note
What should Heaven it self be without the presence of God, but like a City
laid wast, or like an old Dungeon not inhabited, where Iim and Isa. 34. 14*
Zijm resort?

Note
As for us* blessed be God, we know that there is a God into the Heavens, the
sight of whose back Exodus 34. 33
parts made the face of Moses so to shine, that no eye vndazeled culd behold
him: What a Majesty must this be whose backe-partes printed such a light into
the face of a man, that no man could behold the face of a sinner stamped with a
second impression? This is he who as Scripture teaches dwells into an
inaccessable 1 Timothy 6. 16
light, of which a learned Pagan having seen some light impression, not in the
face of Moses but only into the face of Nature, said a great word,

Note
Lumen est vmbra Dei, Deus est lumen luminis. Plato. polit.


All light which we see is but a duskie shadow of God: Note
But God, is the Light of light, a living Light* the Life of light, the Sun
that shines to the world above, and the Candle of Heaven: Christ the Sun
Mal. 4. 2.
of righteousness in Heaven shall be without any shadow of the Earth* which
is the cause of ou^ night: He shall be a Sun which shall shine continually both
round about and in all the parts of the Heaven, for there Revel. 21. 25
shall be no night there: For to come thither man should be content to Matthew
5. 29.
pluck out his right eye, even his sweetest bosom delights.


The sick Man. Mine heart is wained from the love of the base lump of this
Earth.

I desire to hear something more concerning these celestial buildings, which
Scripture calls, everlasting Luke 16. 9.
Tabernacles, the resting place of all created desires: Seeing there after
Death we must sojourne eternally, let me hea^e of the Glory of these
heavenly Mansio^s prepared for Gods most precious jewels: Note
O these blessed burnished vauts all beset with divine Mal. 3. 16
Dyamonds: Let me hear a description of that Palace.


The Pastor. The matter is high, Our creeping words of Babel cannot reach to
the ancles of such lofty matters, are but Job. 8. 9.
of yesterday, and know nothing: As I know I shall in my stammering tongue and
mussling speech do what I can for to allure you to the love thereof.

As for the structure, furniture and beauty of that Palace of our God, it is
wonderful: By no skill can any mortal hand chalk them out: There is that
blessed Bridegroomes chamber garnished with an azured Curtain which is
embrodered and spangled with stars of light, as with golden studs, whose
beauty no mortal tongue is able fully to express: Note
Well may we say and sing of that City that which David sang of its figure:
Glorious things are spoken of Psalm. 87. 1.
thee, O thou City of our God, nay, let me rather say of the figured City,
such glorious things are in thee, that they cannot be spoken, O thou City of
our God.

Note
All the glories we see without are but sparkles of these infinitlie bright
blazing perfections, which are within, even things which eye never saw, ear
never heard, and which cannot enter into the heart of man: One said very well*

Note
Res verae sunt in mundo invisibili, in mundo visibili vmbrae rerum.

That is, In Heaven the invisible world is the substance of things indeed,
but in this visible world on earth is nothing but shadows of things, which
are less than accidents.

Note
The greatest glory that we see in the outside of the Heavens is but a veil
that covers the glory that is within, as the Badgers skins covered the
Arc of glory and the Exodus 26. 15
Tabernacle: Note
But because we are in this world as children in ye womb, we cannot conceive
what can be without this world, we have made a great conception, if we can
conceive that it cannot be conceived, we muse well of Heaven, if while we
muse we be amazed, counting all joye, pleasure, profit, and preferment
Philip. 3. 8
below to be both loss and doung in comparison of things that are above which
infinitlie go beyond all created comprehensions: If these who go down to the
deepes see the Psalm 107. 23
wonders of the Lord, what wonders shall they see who are in the hights of
eternity? What rest can a man look for till he be into the Heavens? Note
There the blasts of winds, and tempests of tongs and terrors of Conscience
are not: there the Church the Lords Lilly is no more among Can. 2. 2.
the thorns: There the heart of man is no more greiued nor over clouded with
lowering Melancholy, all is in peace within: All is calm and clear. Note
There is day without night, heavens without clouds, mirth without mourning
joy without sorrow, and beauty without blemish.

Note
All good things must abound there, where God shall be All in all: When we
shall be there, our God shall enlighten our mind, and shall give our will its
will without controlement: Then shall no man say, I do the evil that I would
not, Rom, 7. 19
and do not the good that I would do: nay, but we shall do all the good we
would, being in no wi^e troubled with the evil we would Revel. 14. 13.
not: Then shall we rest from all our labors, refreshed under the everlasting
shadows of Christ, that most Cant. 2. 3
pleasant Apple Tree, whose fruit is sweet to the taste: Nothing in a word
shall be inlaking that may rejoice all the senses of our body without, and all
the faculties of our Souls within: All the Godly these blessed Denizens of
Heaven shall ever in a Quire sing the praises of the Lamb* Halleluiah Revel.
19. ^
Halleluiah upon the loud Cymbals, Harpes, Organes and Timbrels of God.

Note
O Lord, one day in thy Court is better Psalm. 84. 10
than a thousand else where said the Psalmest, speaking but of ye figure of
heaven: Is it so of ye figure of heaven: what shall it be the^ to be in heaven
it self? even in these new heavens Let it be but the tenth better, according
to that one day in Heaven, shall be better by ten thousands times than ye best
day yt ever man did see on earth*

Note
There is no serenitie below* which is not over clouded with some dumpes of
heaviness, while the flesh is upon the Soul it shall be sorrowful: Pure and
sincere joys cannot dwell in the valley of tears in this muddie mortality: One
day above is more bright and better than ten thousand below: Is it so of one
day in Heaven? Merciful God, what shall it be the^ of these days without
number, even of that everlasting of days, even that eternal day of light,
life, and liberty, clear without all g^mie clouds of sickness and of sorrows*
Note
O for a sight of the light of that countenance a light of continuance which no
mistie vapor shall for ever be able to ecclips: O Day never to be darkened
with a following light! O ever fresh pleasures which no sorrow shall be able
to fret, waste, or wear out! O Eternity, Eternity, never to have an end! O
that fair heritage! unto all these that are there, The lines are fallen in
pleasant places. Psalm. 16. 6.


Note
If we had hearts to believe, the thoughts of such Glories should waine our
hearts from the milkie transitory trashes below, which worldlings dream to
be an heaven, not to be changed with any such preached pleasures: O when
shall our Souls get them, with the Spouse to these high Mountains of Myrrh
Cant. 4. 6
and hills of frankincense!

Note
The consideration of this happiness made Ignatius a Scholar of S. Paul, to
defy all the torments Hiero in Catologo^.
that cruel Burrios could invent for the tormenting of his body: Fire,
Gallows, beasts, said he, Crushing of my bones, quartering of my members,
breaking of my body: Let all the torments of Satan seize upon me together, I
care not for them, so that I may enjoye my Lord and his righteousness. O that
all the thoughts of our hearts were made subordinate and contributarie to such
spiritual and divine desires.


The sick Man. O Lord, in the multitude of thy thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my Soul. Continue your speech I pray you concerning the
beauty of the Heavens within which is the Presence Chamber of the great King.


The Pastor. Note
S. John describes it with such words as men are able to understand or
imagine: The understanding of man concerning the beauty of a Place, reaches
no further, than to Gold, Glass, Crystal, Pearls, and precious stones, which
indeed are nothing but like Coals, or dross in comparison of these heavenly
bodies.

* Before that the man of God began to declare what he had seen of Heaven,
he said that there came unto him an Angel that carried him away to a great and
high mountain, and showed him the great City the holy Jerusalem a type and
figure Psalm. 87. 3.
of Heaven: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of our God, even of
thee Jerusalem.

Because that Jerusalem was a type and figure of Heaven I shall first speak a
little thereof.

As for the earthly it was a City in Judea builded as some think by
Melchisedec: Otherwise it was called, Salem, and Iebus or Iebusi: After that,
it was called Aelia, from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor, who builded a part
thereof, and environed Mount Caluarie, Christ's Sepulcher, and Golgotha with a
wall.

This City had two parts, the upper part and the lower: The vpmost part
thereof with the Temple was builded upon mount Moriah. 2 Chr; 1


Note
Because in this City the Lord had his residence and did show himself more
familiarlie than into any other part of the world, it was called The perfection
of beauty and joye of the Lam. 2. 15
whole earth: It is written that in circuit and compass it was four miles:
In form it was four square, having twelve gates: Joseph records that
Joseph. 7 Book chap. 3.
it was David that first called the City Jerusalem: In the time of Abraham,
said he, it was called, Solyme: Some also say, that Homere called it Solyme,
which in the Hebrew tongue, says Joseph, signifies a Fortress.

Thus much concerning the earthly Jerusalem, which now is in bondage with her
Children, the most cursed City in the world, since that desperate voice of
blasphemy was heard in it, His blood be upon us and Ma^h. 27. 1^
upon our Children.


The sick Man. That is a fearful desolation.


The Pastor. Great was that desolation: It is called, The abomination of
desolation, Matthew. 24* 15
a desolation abominable, or foresignified by an abomination.


The sick man. I remember well of these words of that Gospel: This I remember
that Christ did speak them with a Nota, Who so reads let him understand:
Often while I did read these words I found my self secretelie accused of
negligence, in that I took pains to understand the saying which Christ
desired the Reader to understand, I pray you Sir let me understand the words.


The Pastor. The words are these, When ye Matthew. 24 15
therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, stand in the holy place, (who so reads let him understand)* Then
verse. 16
let them which are in Judea, fly into the mountains.

The words of Daniel are these, Dan. 9. 6.
And after threescore and two weeks, shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself: And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the verse.
27.
City, and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a floode, and
unto the end of the war desolations are determined: And he shall confirm
the Covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall
cause the oblation and the sacrifice to cease, and for the over* spre^ding of
abominations he shall make i^ desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined shall be powered upon the desolate. These be the words of the
Prophet, of which Christ said, Who so reads, let him understand.

Note
The meaning is this: By this (...) abomination of desolation, The most learned
understand that Roman army, which under Vespasian and Titus, fearefullie
wasted the land of Judea, and sacked ye City of Jerusalem: It was said, To
stand in the holy place that is, in the holy Land of Judea near unto
Jerusalem the holy City: In these words Christ foretold of the ruin of that
City, according to Daniel who of before had particularly set down the time:
Thus as ye see the Roman army was called, The abomination of desolation that
is, Abominatio desolans seu vastans, abominablie destroying. This is more
clear in S. Luke, When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, then
know Luke 21. 20
that the desolation thereof is near: When that destroying and abominablie
desolating Army compassed that holy City, then did the abomination of
desolation stand in the holy place: Note
Some of the Learned interpret this abomination standing in the holy place, to
be that profanation of the Temple, Collocata ibi Aquila, and multis patratis
quae per legem non licebant: vnde etiam m^x sequutum est Templi and vrbis and
geni^ excidium: By placing therein the Eagle the Roman Ensign, and by doing
diverse other things forbidden by the Law, whereupon the desolation of Temple,
City, and of Nation did ensue.


The sick Man. I think now yt I understand by you yt which by reading
hitherto I have not understood: What other thing could ensue, but an
abomination of desolation where the Messiah was cut off? If for the blood of
Cain vengeance was to be taken on the murderer seuen-fold, and for the blood
of Genesis 4. 15
L^mech, if his brags were true, seventy Genesis 4. 24.
and seven fold, what vengeance must be taken upon the shedders of the Blood
of God? which not only with the blood of Abel did cry Genesis 4. 10
unto God from the ground, but also from the heavens, wherein the Sun clothed
in doole and wrapped for a space in his mourning weed would not look upon
that creature whereupon his Master was slain?

But for to leave this Jerusalem which is now abominablie desolate: Let me
hear something of the spiritual Jerusalem.


The Pastor. Note
The spiritual Jerusalem is called, Jerusalem which is above* and also Gal* 4.
26.
the City of the living God, the heavenly Heb. 12. 22
Jerusalem, and also the holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from Revel.
21. 10
God.


The sick Man. Think ye that in all these passages of Scripture Jerusalem
be taken after one sense.


The Pastor. I answer that the spiritual City Jerusalem in Scripture is
taken two ways, either for the Church below, wherein God as in a City calls
the Godly to immortality and happiness: Or it is taken for the heavens where
the Godly actuallie possess that which they had here but in hope. In the
first sense the Church militant on earth is called Jerusalem Gal. 4. 26.
above, and the heavenly Jerusalem. Heb. 12. 22



The sick Man. Seeing by that Jerusalem is understood the Church here below,
wherefore is it called, Jerusalem above, and the heavenly Jerusalem? I thought
ever that such a Jerusalem did signify the heavens.


The Pastor. Note
It is called, Above and heavenly, because all the true Godly the denizens
thereof, mind the things that are above: Though their bodies Col. 3. 1.
be here, their hearts are into the Heavens. For our conversation, as S.
Paul says, is in heaven. For Philip. 3. 20
this spiritual exaltation of hearts, the Church in the New Testament is
called* The mountain of the Lords house established in the top of the
mountains exalted above the hill.

Note
One speaking of this Jerusalem which S. Paul. called Jerusalem above, Gal. 4,
26.
the mother of us all, notes quickelie these things.

In hoc quod dicitur sursum, originis altitudo. Hugo Card.

Quod Jerusalem, Pacis multitudo.
Quod matter, Foecunditatis amplitudo.
Quod nostrum omnium, Charitatis latitudo.
It is called Above from the highness of its Kindred and pedigree.

It is called Jerusalem from abundance of peace.

It is called Free from its great liberties.

It is called ^ Mother because of its fruitfulness.

It is called the Mother of us all to teach us charity and love.

Are we not all the Children of the Church our Mother? Why then as Joseph said
to his brethren, See that Genesis 45. 24
ye fall not out by the way.


The sick Man. I have often heard of Jerusalem; that most famous City of the
Land of Jury, but I could never well know wherefore it was so called Bethlehem,
Bethel, and Bethauen, are easily known by their significations, viz. House of
Bread, house of God, and house of wickedness: But as for Jerusalem I
understand not its signification.


The Pastor. Note
Learned men are of diverse opinions concerning the name thereof: Some think
that it be so called from Iebus, which was its name while the Iebusiens dwelt
there: Hierom thinks that it is so called from (...) a Greek word, which
signifies holy, according to this in Scripture it is called, The holy City:
others are of Matthew. 27 53
the opinion that Sem the son of Noah called it Salem, that is Peace, and
that Abraham called it Jehovah I^eh, The Lord will provide or see: Genesis 22 14
Thus at last Salem and Iireh put together by David; made Jerusalem, that is,
Vision of Peac: while it was called Salem, Heb. 7. 2.
Melchizedech was King thereof called by the Apostle, King of Salem.


The sick Man. Let me hear a little of the situation of that City, and of
that Land of Canaan.


The Pastor. From Britain it lies toward the South East: One calls it
Centrum and terrae vmbilicus, ye Center and navel* of the Earth: In it were
two mountains of great renown, mount Sion and mount Moria: Sion like an half
Circle as Abricho mijas.
writters record, did lie at the South side of Jerusalem: On it was builded the
strongest Fortress of the City: There before Dauid's time was the strong Hold
of the Iebusites, so strong as they thought, that blind and lame me^ Sijah,
ariditas.
were able to keep it against whomsoever: This Mountain was higher than all
the rest: Sion signifies dryness, because the Hill was dry without any mire
or dirt.

As for mount Moriah, this was the Hill whereupon that Temple was builded: Then
Solomon began t^ 2 Chr. 3. 1
build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in mount Moriah: The ground whereupon
that stately House did stand, was that threshing floor of Ornan ye Iebusite,
which David would buy from him for the full price: The occasion was this; David
having caused number the people, the Lord was exceeding wroth, so that in
revenge, he sent out his Angel who killed with the sword of Pestilence
threescore and ten thousand men: At last David lifting up his eyes, saw the
Angel between the heaven and the earth, with a drawn sword, stretched out
over Jerusalem; which having seen, he and the Elders 1 Chr. 21 16.
of Israel clothed in sacke*cloth, fell upon their faces: At that time Ornan
with his four Sons, while they were threshing Wheat, saw also the verse. 20.
Angel, and hid themselves: David verse. 26.
upon that occasion bought the floor, and offered Sacrifices with prayer, and
God answered him by fire upon the Altar of brunt offering, and so God was
pacified: After David's death Solomon builded the Temple there: It signifies
the fear or doctrine of GOD,


The sick Man. Let me hear a little of that glorious Temple.


The Pastor. It was seven years in building: 1 Kin. 6. 2
The length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty
cubits, and the hight thereof thritie cubits, all the stones were ready for
the wall before they were brought thither: So that there was neither Hammer,
verse. 7.
nor Axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the House, while it was in building.

Those that write of this Temple divide it in three parts: First toward the
West was Sanctum Sanctorum, 1 Kin. 6 16
the Holy of holies, called also the Oracle. This by a veil was divided from
all the rest: At the death of Christ this Veil was rent from the top to the
bottom: Before that no man might enter into it but the hig^ Priest, and that
but once in the year^, not without blood: There stood the Heb. 9. 4.
Arc wherein was the Pot of Mannah, and Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the
Covenant.


The sick Man. While I was a Scholar I heard that passage confronted with
another, which declares that neither the Mannah nor the Rod were in the Arc
but only the Tables.


The Pastor. Indeed it is written that the Exodus 16. 34
Mannah was laid up before the Testimony or Arc: In another place it is
plainly said, There was nothing in the Arc save the two Tables of stone: 1
Kin. 8. 9
So indeed in that passage of the Epistle to the Hebrews the Greek word
(...) signifies juxta beside the A^ke.

The second room of the Temple Heb. 9. 2.
is called by the Apostle, The first, That is the first part of the Tabern^cle:
Not first in dignity, but in regard of entry, if it be compared with the
Holi^st or Oracle* This part is called Sanctum and Sanctuarium, and See Pisc.
in the Heb. 9. 2
(...) Sancta, which word some of the Learned take to be corrupt as also (...)
for (...): In this middle room was the Candle stick and the Table of the
Shewbread, and the Altar of incense The third part of the Temple toward the
East, was the Porch called Atrium: Here stood the Brazen Altar whereupon the
burnt offerings were burnt sub dio, under the open air, as some think on this
altar was kept that fire which came down from Heaven: Here 2 Chronicles. 7 (...)
stood also the Molten sea; set upon twelve Oxen. etc.


The sick Man. I have heard concerning mount Sion and mount Moriah, and of the
holy Temple with great contentment: Now I entreat you to let me Matthew. ^. ^.
hear of the mount of Olives, while Christ was nigh unto the Mount, he sent
his Disciples into a Village for to bring him the Ass, whereon he verse. ^5
rode through Jerusalem the day the little Children cried, Hosanna, Hosanna.


The Pastor. Indeed this Mount is well renouned by Christ's often resorting
unto it: While he was sitting upon the mount of Olives, he taught his Matthew.
24. 3^
Disciples most diuinelie concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
signs preceding, as also of the end of the world, and of the signs of his
coming to Judgment: It was upon the mount of Olives that Christ told Peter
that before the Cock cre^ Man. 14. 30
twice he should deny him thrice: It was to the mount of Olives that he came
out of Jerusalem, after his last Supper, Matthew. 26. 30
for Matthew says, That after they had sung an Hymn, they went out into the
mount of Olives: It was at the descent of the mount of Olives that Christ said,
That if men should hold Luke 19. 40
their peace the stones would cry ou^ his praise.

It was in Gethsemane a valley at the root of the mount of Olives Matthew 26. 36
where Christ suffered the bloody agony: While he there in a cold night did
sweat blood, there the Disciples slept: With himself he took a part Peter,
James, and John, Mark. 14. 33 34.
to whom he said, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, tarry ye
here and watch: There the Lord fell on the ground, praying, that if it were
possible the hour might pass from him: all this befell to our Lord at the
root of the Mount of Olives: At last from the mount of Olives our Act. 1.,
Lord ascended unto Heaven.

As for the Mount it self, it is so called, because of ye Olive trees which
grew there in great abundance. S. Augustine calls it, The mountain^ of
unction, because of its great fertility: Others calls it, the mountain of
health, because of diverse Herbs good for Physic, which grow there. Ierom
writteth that upon this mount the red Cow was burnt, whose Numb. 19 2.
ashes were prepared by the Priest^ for separation and purification.

This Mount was s^uate toward the East from Jerusalem, some thing more than a
mile, between it and Jerusalem runs the Brook Kidron.


The sick Man. Mine heart is sore wounded to hear of these places which has
been so renouned by ye pen of God.

I have heard of Sion, and of Moria, and of the mount of Olives: Now let me
hear of Hermon.


The Pastor. The Hill Hermon is also made glorious by Gods word, wherein
mention is made thereof.

The heavens are thine, says the Psalm. 89. 11 verse. 12.
Psalmest, the earth also is thine: The North and the South thou have created
them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy Name: David speaking of brotherly
love and of the communion of the Saints, compares it to the oil that ran
down upon the beard of Aaron: To this he subjoyneth, As the dew of Hermon,
and as the dew that descended upon the Psalm. 133. 3
mountains of Zion: In the Song of Cant. 4. 8
Solomon mention is made of Shenir and Hermon.

This Hill has three names, the Jews call it Hermon, the Amorites Deu. ^3. 9.
call it Shenir, and the Sydonians call it Sirion: Moses by the figure Syncope,
t^king out two Letters, calls it Syon: From Aroer to Arnon, says he, Deuteronomy.
4. 48
even unto mount Syon, which is Hermon. This Mountain is thought by some to
be higher than mount Syon that is in Jerusalem: It is near the Jordan, not
far from the mountains of Gilboa where King Saul was slain.

Some will it to be called Hermon from Heren res devota, a thing consecrate to
God or to an holy use.


The sick Man. There is a passage in the Psalm concerning Hermon whereof I
know not well the sense. O my God, says Psalm. 42. 6.
the Psalmest, my Soul is cast down within me: Therefore will I remember
thee from the Land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites from the hill of Missar, or
the little hill.


The Pastor. These words want not difficulty: In our poesy they are turned
after this manner,

And thus my Soul within me, Lord, does faint to think upon
The Land of Jordan, and record, the little hill Hermon.
In the French paraphrase it is after this manner,

Car t'ay de toy souuenance
Depuis out^e le Iordain,
Et la froide demourance
De Hermon, pais ha^tain:
Et de Mizar antre mont, etc.
In the French paraphrase made by Beza, and also in the English and French
versions it is turned, the hill Missar which is some other hill less than
Hermon as the Hebrew word does import: In my judgment our paraphrase is not so
correct as the French, for Hermon was not a little Hill as our meter calls
it, but as it is esteemed by the Learned was higher than mount Sion.

By the Land of the Hermonits the Learned understand that hilly space of the
country where is mount Hermon, and by Missar they understand some other part
where there be little hills toward the border of Israel; as Iunius expounds:
By Iunius.
these three places of the Psalm, viz. The Land of Jordan, Hermon, and Missar,
are understood, says he, three diverse Borders of the Land of Israel: The
River of Jordan bordering at the East, Hermon at the North toward us, and
Missar these other little hills bordering at the South.

In the Papists version these be the words of the Psalm,

Memor ero tui de terra Iordanis, and Hermonoim a monte modico, That is, From
the little hill Hermonoim: whether that be mount Hermon or no^, Bellarmin on
the 42. Psalm.
says one of their most learned inte^preters non liquet, I cannot tell.

The most part of these that wri^ mount Hermon, think that there were two
mountains of this name: The one was beyond Jordan near unto Libanus toward
the Northeast, distant from it an hundredth Of Jerusalem.
twenty and two miles. The other was near to mount Tabor toward the North
From Jerusalem: It is from Jerusalem to it but about forty myls: of this the
Psalmist seems to speak where he says, Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in
thy Name.


The sick Man. It rejoices my Soul to hear the names of things which were
said to rejoice in God: Now speak of Tabor.


The Pastor. Tabor is mons rotundus and sublimis, Hieron.
a round and high mountain, lying toward the North from Jerusalem about
fifty miles: It is esteemed to be one of the chief Hills that are in all the
Land of Candan, both for highness and fruitfulness: Some esteem that it be
four miles and more of hight: It is decored with all sorts of Herbs and
Trees: S. Jerome speaking of it says, Ex omni part finitur aequaliter, it is
an exceeding round Hill into the parts of Galilee. Of this Mount frequent
mention is made in Scripture: In Ioshuah we Ioshu. 19. 2^
see that it bordered the lotte of the Land of the tribe of Issa^har whose
coast reached unto Tabor: It was Ioshu. 19. 22
near unto Tabor where Deborah and Judge 4. 6.
Barak overthrew the Army of King Iabin with his Captain Sisera: For Barak
being upon the Mount with his men of war by the counsel of Deborah he went
down from moun^ verse. 14.
Tabor, and ten thousand men after him: It was upon this Mount that Zebah and
Zalmunna the Kings of the Midianites slew the brethren of Gideon: Judge. 8. 18
What manner of men, said he unto them, were they whom ye slew a^ Tabor? It
was at the plain of Tabor ^ Sam. 10. 3
where Saul after he was anointed by Samuel, met the three men going to Bethel
with Kids, Loaves, and wine.

This Hill was so steep and so strong, that Jeremy from thence took his
comparison, saying, That Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon should overthrow Pharaoh
and his Army, though they were as Tabor among the Ier. 46. 1^
mountains.

It is the opinion of all, that upon this Mount Christ was transfigured Matthew.
17. 1.
when Moses and Elias came down and con^erred with him touching his sufferings.


The sick Man. From Tabor proceed to Carmel Ier. 46. 18
by the sea* I find within me great heaviness of heart, while I think upon
these places where God once did show so many tokens of his love:


The Pastor. I find also mine own bowels moved with a mourning r^otion: Oh,
that that people had been wise: O ^ their example may teach us to fear Romans
11. 21
to offend so great a Majesty: If God has not spared the natural branches,
we should not be high minded, but should fear: If we continue not in his
goodness, he will also cut us off. But to the purpose.

As for Carmel it is the name of a City in the tribe of Judah Maon, Carmel,
Ioshu. 15. 55
and Ziph were Cit^es there.

It is also the name of that most fertile mountain which had a valey most
fruitful lying hard by it: For its fertility in Scripture language, all
fertile places are called Carmel: The flourishing estate of Christ's Isa. 35. 2.
Kingdom is called, The excellency of Carmel. It is not far from P^lemais,
near unto the Sea, for which cause the Prophet Jeremy called it Ier. 46. 81
Carmel by the Sea.

It was at mount Carmel where Elias 1 King. 18. 20
by his prayer made fire to come down and consume his sacrifice with ye water
in the ditch, whereby he confounded ye Priests of Baal, and proved the Lord to
be God by fire: It was upon the top of this mountain where 1 Kin. 18. 42
Elias cast himself down upon the Earth, putting his head between his knees
when his servant spyed the Cloud like a man's hand arising out of the Sea.


The sick Man. O but mine heart bleedeth to remember of these holy places
wherein is nothing now but desolation.


The Pastor. We have to pray with Moses, That Psalm. 90. 17.
the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: All these beauties of Canaan are
past and gone: That glorious Jerusalem, is razed and sacked with all her pomp:
Inundations of woes are upon that Land which once did flow with Milk and
Honey, the land has spewed ou^ its habitants: All this should be for to teach
us to mind these better things which are above: While that Land was at its
best it could not contain the shadows of these pleasures that are above.

Melle fluit terra hoc promissa and lacte redundat.
Ast ea quo sursum est nectare and Ambrosia.
This have I thus Englished.

With honey milk that holy Land, did richly ouerflow:
But Nactar sweet and Ambrosie, above do richly grow.
While we remember of that peoples Romans 11. 21
desolations, let us be instant with God, that he would call them in: They
have stumbled not that they should fall, but that by their fall Salvation might
come to us for to prouocke them to jealousy: If they abide not in unbelief
they shall be graffed in: Let us be earnest in prayer for them: While they had
court with God, they were careful for us Gentiles: In their familiarity with
God, they Can. ^. 1.
spoke of us and for us: We have a little Sister, said they, What shall we
do with her in the day she shall be spoken for: The sincere Jews ever groned
for the fulfilling of Noa^ Genesis 9, 27.
prophecy, that God would perswad Iaphet to enter into the tents of Sem.

LORD of thy mercy bring A prayer
back Sem that he may remain with Iaphet in the Church of God, Amen.


The sick Man. I have heard sufficiently concerning the earthly Jerusalem,
and diverse parts of the holy Land, and that with grief of heart, because in
that Land where God once was well known, now the enemies of God dominire: The
cry of Christ's Blood is yet still against it, so that it has spewed out the
ancient inhabitants. Lord, make all Nations by its example learn to stand in
awe to provoke so great a Majesty.

Now let us come to that Ie^usalem which is above, the Palace of the great
King, where God is seen of his Saints face to face: In what place of
Scripture is mention made of it?


The Pastor. In the two last Chapters of the Revelation that heavenly
Jerusalem is described.


The sick Man. How can that be, seeing it is said that John saw that
heavenly Jerusalem descending out of heaven from Revel. 21. 10.
GOD.


The Pastou^. As Jerusalem Gods Church here Gal. 2. 6.
below is called Jerusalem which is above, because her heart is in heaven with
a great desire to be there: So Jerusalem the triumphing Church above may be
said, To descend out of Revel. 21. 16
heaven, because of the great desire they have to see us all well here below:
Daily they pray in Heaven for the Saints here fighting on earth under the
bloody Banne^ of Christ Jesus: Note
They pray for them all in general, which cannot be without great affection
descending from the reflexe of their love toward our God: If by some Angel they
hear the report of the conversion of sinners, there is great joy^ Luke 15. 7
in Heaven: That good will and affection they bear unto the Saints below, in
Scripture language is called a descending out of Heaven. Revel. 21. 10



The sick Man. O but ae I think that City must be glorious!


The Pastor. No glory is comparable to that which is there: That City is
called an holy City: Holiness is the Matthew. 27 53
chiefest beauty that is: This was good Moses his prayer, Let the beauty
Psalm. 90. 17
of the Lord our God be upon us, that is true holiness.

Note
This most excellent beauty of the heavens, is typified by the most bright
glauncing of precious stones: Her light, says S. John was like unto Revel. 21.
11
a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone clear as Crystal, two
creatures color green and clear, most pleasant for the sight of the eye.

By all this this City had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, whom
I may well call Coelestes Ianito^es, the blessed door keepers of Heaven.

The building of the wall was of Jasper, and the City was pure Gold verse. 1^.
like unto clear Glass: Note
The foundation stones which are laid in our buildings are but of the commonest
sort: But all the foundation stones of this City under whose Vaults we
sojourne here, are most precious, stones as Jasper, Saphir, Chaleedonie,
Emerald, verse. 19
Sardonix, Sarduis, Crysolite, Berill, verse. 20.
Topas, Iacinct, Amethyste: If such glorious stones be the foundation stones,
what glory must be above in the Palace top, where is the busking of Beauty?

As for the gates, The twelve gates verse. 21.
were twelve Pearls, every several ga^ was of one Pearl: Wonderful gates of
wonderful Jewels, for who ever on Earth saw a Pearl so great as an Apple?
Note
Behold and wonder how the greatest door of Heaven should be of one Pearl.

As for the streets of the City they were pure gold as it were transparent
verse. 21
glass: Note
This Glass one calls it,

Aliquid auro nobilius quod Aret. in Apocalip
non est inrerum natura.

That is, Some thing more precious and excellent than gold, which thing is not
in this world to be found.

O merciful God, what stupiditie is this in man, that he cannot so fervently
love this God, who has builded for his Soul and body such a pleasant Palace
where he shall sojourn for ever in most happy immortality! O merciful God, what
a deadness and dullness is this in our spirits, that we cannot but after many
reasons and arguments be content to remove from Job. 4. 19
these our sinful Tabernacles of clay for to go dwell with our God in his
golden City and Palace of silver, where Revel. 21. 21
the Lord for ever shall feast us with Cant. 8. 9
the joys of his countenance among these purer Spirits, his excellent Ones
the Angels of glory!


The sick Man. It is certainly a great blindness: Lord, put the eye salve
of Grace to our carnal and naturalleyes, yt our sight Revel. 3. 18
being cleared thereby we may get some glimpse of these Palaces and Pleasures
that are above: O Lord, hoise up mine heart, and raise it out of the muck of
this earth: make the relish of Heaven to dash out of mine heart all earthly
desires.

It is marvelous how the Soul of man should be such a stranger to heaven: Note
When I consider how the Soul that divine proportion, so nobly furnished
with powers of great e^euation, even of most high contemplation, should so
deba^e it self among mire and dirt, not having a face to behold the heavens,
it puts mine heart into a wonderful maze: What can a Soul find either in
heaven or earth, except God alone which is able to satisfy the desires of its
so wide Capacity?

Note
O the beauty of these celestial buildinges, all Gold and Azure* But rather O
the beauty of GOD himself in whose presence is the greatest glory of that
painted Palace! O the beauty of beauties of him whose merciful presence should
turn the hels of pain into heavens of Psalm. 16. 1^
pleasures for evermore! O let the beauty Psalm. 90. 17
of the Lord our God be upon us: * O what a fickle folly is this for man to
loss eternity of happiness for the minute of a miserable life, in worldly
pleasures wherein is more sensible pain; than joye that can be enjoyed!

But to follow out our purpose intended concerning heavens glory: I have Sir
already heard of the beauty of that City, now let me hear of its Bounds:
None as I think shall be there troubled for want of Elbow-roome.


The Pastor. * O the unspeakable bounds that be there: S. John says that it
was measured with a golden reed: The Revel. 21. 15
measure thereof as the word of God testifies, was Twelve thousand furlongs,
verse. 16.
which is more than fifteen hundredth mile: Numerus indefinitus pro definito.

A City greater in bounds, than who should join together in one that great
Niniuie, Paris, Rome, London, Venise, Alexandria, Constantenople, and that
great Alcaire, or Babylon a city containing in circuit four hundredth
foure*score furlongs: Nay, join all the Cities of the world together in one,
and they shall in no way be comparable unto this City of our God, as it is
^et down in the Cart of the Revelation.

Let a man behold the Cart of the world, and in it he shall easily cover with
his hand all the bounds of Europe: But behold how the Heavens in that Cart of
God occupy more than fifteen hundredth miles.

What I pray you, is all this Earth in comparison of these heavenly Mansions,
but an hand-breadth in comparison of fifteen hundredth miles? Note
What wonder seeing as the most learned Philosophers have observed, the least
fixed conspicuous star which feemeth to be but a golden nail fixed into
this seiled house contains the greatness of the earth eighteen* fold: Others
of the greater sort are esteemed to be more than an hundredth sold greater than
the whole earth.

It is most certain that if the whole body of the earth were where a star is,
it should not appear so great as that little black spot that we see into the
Moon: Nay, certainly though an hundredth Earthes as great as all this were
joined in a cluster or in one mass, they should not there appear so great as
a little more in the Sun: for seeing a star which is of such a bigness and
such a brightness, seems to be but a sparkle; as much of earth as would come
to the greatness of a star, being corpus opacum, a body dark and duskish
should not in any way be able to be an object for our sight here below.

Note
Fie on foolish Atheimse that will not look up to the Heavens for to consider
what an Arm it can be which turns about with a continual whirling Bodies
of such a quantity.


The sick man. Oh, that we could vnder*value our selves as we should, to
acknowledge our stupiditie: Note
He is not a man indeed but a beas^, that can not say and think with that
wise Agure, Prou. 30. 2
Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man.


The Pastor. Oh, that we were wise, for wisdom Prou. ^. 11
is better than Rubies: Oh, that we were wise, for the man that wandreth Prou.
^1. 16
out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the congregation of the
dead: We are such muddie worldlings that we cannot think of that
immortality of pure and refined pleasures that are above.


The sick Man. But to the purpose: Is there not a Temple in Heaven wherein the
Saints conueene for the service of their God?


The Pastor. S. John says, That he saw no Revel. 21. 22
Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it.


The sick Man. I understand not how the Lord God can be said to be the
Temple A Godly Prayer.
thereof. O Lord, set bounds and limi^s to my curiosity: Let the love of thy
self have the pre-eminence in swaying all my desires.

A Temple or Church properly signify a particular house appointed for Gods
service: for so it is that such an house should not be in heaven: But the Lord
himself * shall be to all the Saints in steed of such an house* The Temple
is a place properly for offering up of sacrifices for instruction of
ignorants, for comforting of these that are afflicted.

Note
To declare unto us that there shall be no need of such things the Scripture
teaches that there shall be no Temple, but that the Lord and the Lamb shall
be the Temple, that is, shall be in steed of sacrifice, instruction,
comfort, joye, and all other good things unto his own, so that he shall be
All in all: No created Spirit is able to conceive and wade through such
mysteries.


The sick Man. The sum of your discourse, as I perceive, is that though that
City want a Temple, God himself by his presence shall be in steed of all
things which are helpefull unto us here: But it would seem by another place
of the Revelation, that in the Heaven there is a Temple: There was given me a
reed like unto a rod, says S. John, and the Angel stood saying, Revel. 11. 1.
Rise and measure the Temple of God.


The Pastor. Note
By that Temple is to be understood the Church of God on earth, as the most
Learned esteem.

Note
They also think that this Calamus mensorius measuring Reed. is the rule of
holy Scriptures, whereby Sects, and Heresies are discerned from the truth of
Religion.

By this Temple here I say, We must understand the Church of Christ,
according to this it is said to the Faithful, Know ye not that ye 1 Cor. 3.
16
are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? The hearts
of all the faithful are a Temple which God has consecrate unto himself for
his Spirit to dwell in.


The sick Man. O my God, keep still mine heart A godly Prayer.
in an holy spiritual temper: Soften and season it with the dew of thy Grace:
Inlighten the eyes of my mistie mind, that being made quick and nimble, they
may sharply discern, and with a lively vigor apprehend their blessed object
even God himself, the Sovereign felicity of my Soul: O Lord of
immortality, make heavenly meditations only to lodge into mine heart which
may bread therein thoughts of a more noble and spiritual temper then
ordinarlie arise and are fostered in earthly minded men 'who drink up
iniquity like water and feed upon it as the horse Leech upon corruption.


The Pastor. The Lord give ear to your desires: Oh, that we could consider
how our drousie thoughts, and dull affections are so glued unto the world as
though Eternity of happiness were lodged upon earth, and the short time of
pleasures had its residence only in the Heavens: Such follies and fancies by
the subtilitie of Satan, are molded into unstable and unhallowed brains.
There is a secret influence of folly from the corruption of our Nature, whereby
except that Gods Grace stand in the gap and debar it, all the wisdom of God
shall seem to be but folly unto the Soul of man.


The sick Man. The Lord give us wisdom in all things.

But to follow our purpose, seeing we are now speaking of that heavenly
Jerusalem, I would gladly hear you declare the differences that are between
the heavenly and the earthly Jerusalem.


The Pastor. There be many notable differences worthy our observations:

1. Note
The earthly was builded into dust, and now it has the salt of Gods curse
sown upon it: The other has its foundation into the Heavens blessed for ever.
2. That which is below had not a gate for every Tribe neither were all Israel
free Denizens therein.

Note
But as for the City above, The gates thereof, said Ezekiel, shall be after
Ezekiel. 48. 31
the name of the Tribes of Israel: The name of the City from that day shall be
JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, verse. 35.
The Lord is there: S. John says, That he saw this City environed with a
wall both great and high with twelve Revel. 21. 12
gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are
names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel.

3 That which was earthly was abhorred by the Gentiles, and at last by them
destroyed, and now by Turks possessed and subdued: Note
But as for Jerusalem above, The Nations of them which are saved, shall walk
in Revel. 21. 24
the light of it, and the Kings of the earth do bring their honor and glory
into it. 4 These of the earthly Jerusalem could not see without the light of
the Sun by day, and of the Moon by night: It behooved them to have fire and
Candles in the night time as in any other City: Note
But to Jerusalem Isa. 60. 19
above, God has said, The Sun shall no more be thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee: But the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy Glory: Thy Sun shall no verse. 20.
more go down neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall
be thine everlasting Light. 5 In the earthly Jerusalem, often in place of
Justice was a seat of malice: Note
But in the new Jerusalem evil judges shall have no sitting, but the Throne
Revel. 22. 3.
of God and of the Lamb shall be in it Psalm. 129. 4
an appointed seat, for the righteous Isa. 28. 17
Lord who shall lay judgment to the line and righteousness to the plummet.



The sick Man. O but my Soul is going to a pleasant Palace: O thou my Soul
rejoice within me, that God has prepared such pleasures for thee: O how
ami^ble are thy Tabernacles, O Psalm. 84. 1.
Lord of hosts: Mine heart is in heaven: Psalm. 87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of the^, O thou City of our God.


The Pastor. It is certain that man's heart can not conceive the beauty of
these buildings within: Note
If the house of God on earth seemed so pleasant to King David that he counted
this the one thing he would seek, that he might dwell into it, what shall
we think or say concerning Gods Palace in the Heavens? One thing, said he,
have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after that I may dwell in the
Psalm. 27. 4.
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the BEAVTIE of the Lord.

Lords mercy, what dullness and deadness of heart is this, that we seek not
after the same? should not this be our one thing? even our only hearts desire
to dwell with God above, for to behold that BEAVTIE of the Lord, these ever
g^eene pleasures in his celestial arbours.

Note
There is nothing here below which can be sufficient for to express the
image, nay, not the shadow of these things that are above: In the most
glorious creatures which are below, as Gold, Glass, Crystal, Pearls, and
precious Stones, we may see some things like shadows of these glorious
things above: But there is no creature here which can carry to our
imagination the shadow let be the image of the glory that is up into that
Holy of holies: O but God is wonderful in counsel and excellent Isa. 28. 29
in working: But our Souls are so sleepie and sluggish that they cannot
consider: Note
The fancies and folies of the earth bring us quite out of conceit with
celestial pleasures: Alas, in the best of us the seeds of grace lie buried
under the thorns shamefullie ouertopped by them: The little dram of
goodness in our hearts is waighed down with weighty talents of wickedness: a
mighty stream of earth^y thoghts and worldly desires lik a Torrent carries
our Souls down the hill from all heavenly contemplations: The clawing
flatterers of our worldly affections whisper unto us that it is good for us to
be here.


The sick Man. The Lord subdue the master sin A prayer
which like a Ringleader and head of all wickedness, makes all our purest
conceptions of heaven to be come moodie and drumlie.

O Lord, let thy graces in me be A prayer
presently up in arms for to remove all such earthly mindedness from mine
heart, by the power of thy divine Armerouse up this drousie soul, that it may
seek thee afresh by a renewed act of Faith and Repentance: Make mine heart to
detaste all earthly pleasures which are but rotten at the heart: Kindle in
mine heart a love of thy Palace above, stir up all my desires with a
foretaste of the pleasures that are there; that finding the comfortable relish
thereof I may most willingly desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ in
the heavens for ever: O Lord, in stead of all means both outward and inward,
supply me abundantly with the presence of thy Spirit: Waine my Soul from
the love of the earth, that thou may win it to the love of the Heavens.

O happy they who study to piety and purity for no unclean thing shall be
able to enter into these mansions.

O Lord, let us not be like these who A prayer
after that they have seemed to disgorge their stomachs most filthilie with
the Dog, swallow up their own vomit again: O shelter me and save me from
the unsoundness and vnsettlednesse of a deceitful heart, that I lash not out
into the excess of supperfluitie of wickedness: now while we are speaking of
the heavens, make all the love of the earth henceforth to be cried down into
my Soul.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in Heaven: I am rejoiced that while we are
speaking of the heavens, the Spirit of grace furnishes you with such
heavenly prayers which would hearten any man, to run through hell to Heaven,
except that he be of the number of these who think it but a trick to go to
hell.


The sick Man. I pray you now Sir, to continue into that purpose concerning
the glory of Heaven, for it affects much my Soul: Your powerful speech
makes my mind to stay in a feeling meditation upon these beauties that are
above.

Note
If I heard not such good purpose, my mind would either feed upon dull and
fruitless melancholy, or else should gade and run riot in reuellings and in
a world of foolish and fond imaginations.

Note
The thoughts of man cannot run long without rubor interruption in Spiritual
things, except that God in mercy both support them outwardly and sinew them
inwardly by the finger of his Spirit: The hearts of men are so light in their
gading that most easily are they moved to glide over the best things, and
either swinishlie to wallow infilthinesse, or furiously to follow these whose
whole pregnancie of wit is spended upon trifles: Thus mirrilie they pass
away that time wherein they should redeem the time that is past.

I wish that mine heart by your discourse were confined to celestial
meditations: Proceed now I pray you where ye left at last.


The Pastor. My speech was that all the most glorious creatures that we can
either see above or below are less tha^ shadows, types or figures, of things
that are within the Heavens.

Note
In them as in a Glass we see weaklie the invisible things of God: As a man
not being able to face the Sun beholds him in a Basen, full of water, and
yet not without some dazeling of his sight: That weakened light will make his
eyes to water, and tears to trickle down: If the glory of one of Gods
servants be so glistering in robes of light, that no man can behold him but
into the glass of another creature, and that also with great pain. It is
certain that God must put many more creatures between himself and us, that
the glory of his beams being weakened by diverse reflexes from one creature
to another, man with his weak tender eyes may look upon his light.

Note
If a man cannot behold the Sun in the day, he may in the night behold his
beams upon the body of the Moon: If his sight yet cannot suffer that, he
may behold him in his second reflexe by beholding the Moon in a glass: If as
yet his sight dazzle, there is a third and weaker reflexe: By another glass
thou may get the reflexe of that glassen reflexe.

Note
Certainly there must be many reflexes of Gods brightness from one creature
to another, before that his invisible things can be seen by us: What glorious
beams of Gods face think ye be these which shine within that highest Heaven
called, Coelum Empyrium, the fiery Heaven? not that there is fire, but because
(as the most Learned think) it is purer than all the other heavens as much as
the fire is purer than the other Elements: O what shining brightness of God is
to be seen there where all is more glauncing and clear, than that fire which
Moses saw in the Bush.

Note
Let us come down from thence to behold the glorious Stars ye twinkling eyes
of Heaven, laughing upon the godly with their celestial smyles: O these
bright and peerless Pearls. Let us from thence come down to the two great
Governors of the day Genesis 1. 16
and of the night from thence descend to the clear pureaire so glauncing with
the light of the Sun as if it were all of Azure: Come down yet, and under
that are Aquae limpidae, the clear waters, the mother of Pearls and of
precious gold, for the weakest eye there is terra opaca that thick da^ke,
duskish, and lumpish mass of earth which a bleare eyed Leah, may behold, for
in it to see without watering eyes the invisible things of God, were it by
looking upon a Lilly, or a Rose or upon a Snaile or a Snaike.

Note
Behold the goodness of God, who has set his creatures by degrees in
distance from the place of his inaccessible light that thereby the bleared eyes
of men may get some glimpse of the shadows of his invisible things which are
of truest worth.

Note
But O, O, O, what a glory and matchless fairness is there where God the
King of Glory is seen face to face O the glory of the Godhead: The
knowledge of the least sparkle of that glory is not attainable by any carnal
capacity.

Note
Because of that brightness that was in Moses his face by the reflexe of that
Light which he had seen but in IEHOVAHS back parts, it behooved Exodus 34. 33
him to cover his face with a Veil when he came for to speak unto men: Was
the skin of the face of a sinner so enlightened with bright beams from the
Back of God, that no man could behold it, nor look toward it till it was
covered with a Veil? How many Vailes must God put between his face and ours,
lest we should be dazeled with his glory? I take all the circles of ye
heavens, the Fire and Air above us to be as many obscuring Vailes which the
Lord has cast between the Glory of his face and the eyes of sinful man: Note
And yet in the Sun he has fastened such a sparkle of his glory, that by
his heat and his brightness, he will cause man the king of creatures to be
ashamed to behold him: He will cause him fly unto the shadows, and go with
Gogle eyes of Glass, for to save his eyes of flesh from the reflexe of his
beams though blunted upon the dark and duskie element of the earth: See how
man's sight is so weak that it cannot abide an earthly blunted reflexe of that
celestial creature.

What shall I say more of the heavens which are so far above us? Note
Let us come down and learn humility at the feet of creatures Act. 22. 3.
below as at the feet of a Gamal^ even in this elementare* Region of
corruption: Note
Behold there is such a whiteness into the snow which is but frozen and
congealed black water, that it will make the dull sight of man so to dazzle,
that when he is entered into his own house, he is not able to know the faces
that are his own, yea, many by such brightness, at last have lost their sight:
Let me yet come to an obscurer body: The small printed Letters which we read
must be darkened with ye blackness of ink; and yet because the whitenes of
the Paper scatters so the sight, it must be gathered with the greenish
color of glassen Spectacles.

Note
Now I pray you, how should man behold that passing glory of his God, who
cannot behold the witness of Paper but with borrowed eyes of Glass?

Let men hear learn in his weakness to be humble, and to reverence him that
has made so many creatures, which for brightness he is not able to behold:
Note
If poor man cannot behold the apparel of Gods creatures clothed with light,
or with colors not seen without light: If such a little glaunce is able to
dazzle his sight, how should he be able to behold the King of creatures, even
the great Creator him self; whose back parts are brighter than ten
thousand Suns.

Because of this great weakness caused into man by sin, man is removed far
from the presence of this King, lest he should be destroyed by the
brightness of his beams: Note
If while the Sun shines with his beams darded directly down, ye creatures
are so parched with heat below that they are constrained to gasp, what should
become of us, if Gods glory should appear at our vertical point without the
interposition of many other creatures between him and us? If a little sparkle
of his Glory in the Sun many thousand miles from us, makes a man to faint,
sweat, and gasp, what should become of us, if God himself the consuming Heb.
12. 29
fire should approach unto us? If the Sun which seems to be but of an
hand-breadth has such light and heat, what should it be if all the heavens
were enlightened like the Sun? Though all the heavens were turned into a Sun,
they should not be of such brightness as are the backe-parts of JEHOVAH: The
Sun Exodus 33. 23
with all his light and heat may make the face of man more obscure and duskie,
but cannot inlighten it: But the back parts of God, printed such light into
the face of a man, that for brightness no man could behold it.

Note
Merciful God, what stupiditie is this in man, that he will not consider what
a Majesty this must be, whose obscurest parts are more bright than the Sun,
and who with all is not confined with natural dimensions, as with breadth or
length, but is above the Heavens infinitlie with infinite bounds and
brightness the least sparkle whereof is more bright than if the whole Heavens
were wholly tarned into a shining Sun.

Note
If men knew the pleasures that are there, they would not loss them for ye
painful pleasures, or rather unpleasant pains of this sinful life: Alas,
that we are so careless of the attainment of such a weight of glory: Alas,
that we gaze so greedily upon the painted and varnished vanishing glory of
things below which all perish with the using.

Note
If men knew what relish is into these dainties that are above prepared for the
Saints, they would not so glut themselves with the swinish ^uskes of earthly
things, but would reserve their lust, for that whereof there is no loathing:
Fie on men that for folly should loss such an inheritance that fades not
away. 1 Pet. 1. 4.


Note
In this world we have Bethel the house of God, but above is Peniel the place
of Gods face, wherein are pleasures for evermore: Below all Psalm. 16. 1^
pleasures ebb and flow with discontent and comfort: But above is an
everlasting full sea of joys which could never enter into the heart of man:
Under the Law God was hid under a veil: In the Gospel we see him in a glass:
But in heaven 2 Cor. 3. 18.
we shall see him face to face, and that indeed even as he is.


The sick Man. Mine heart by these words is possessed with a secret louelier
auishment: Continue I pray you to declare what more beaucie is within that
Paradise: Note
Let me hear of these pleasures, which the Saints there have in the presence
of their God, and what be the order and chief ornaments of that Palace, what
be the attire of these yt follow the Lamb, and what be the form of their
feasting at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob.


The Pastor. Note
Such things are transcendent to all the wits of Nature and to all created
inventions: It is good that we beware to launch too far into such a
boundless and bottomless Ocean.

Note
What is the compass of man's brain little like a Nut-shell, that it should
contain conceptions of that which is infinite? God who killed the Bethshemites
for looking into his Arc, and reproved the Galileens 1 Samuel 6. 19
gazing up to the Heavens, will not allow men to pierce and prye curiously
Act. 1. 11.
into his mysteries which surpass all created capacity: Note
Our greatest wisdom shall be to wonder at that which passes the reach of
all reason and revelation: Note
It may well content the most curious Soul to be of Gods Court though it be
not of his secret Counsel: Note
In nothing man's reason appears more reasonable, than to cease from reasoning
in that which is above his reach.

The matter is here so high that all words forsake me as it were confessing
that they are neither fit nor able to express such wonderful mysteries: Note
As the heavens could not be measured but with a Reed of gold, so cannot
these heavenly things be declared but in the golden language of heaven which
our sinful mortality can neither speak nor understand: Note
It is dangerous for man to be curious to learn what God esteems not
necessary to teach: Man must not have ears to listen where God has not a
tongue to speak, Gods silence should teach all men sobriety in searching.

In that royal Palace of pleasures above without doubt be comfortes and
contentments, yea, and such, I am persuaded, as greater the Sun and Moon the
two eyes of Heaven never saw: What say I greater? The image of such things
could never enter into the heart of man.

Note
In my judgment all the Godly at the first sight of heavens glory shall be
like men in a dream: As it is written of Gods people, When the Lord brought
again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream: All such glory,
beauty, and pleasure Psalm. 126. 1
shall be things so excellent and beyond expectation that for a space they
shall seem to the Saints incredible, for a space in my judgment the Godly
shall be like these that dream, wondering how so great a glory can possibly
be.

My mind is now dazeled with such high considerations.

O, O, O, these so unspeakable beauties that are within that Holy of holies! O
the order yt is there! O the dainties that are on these Tables: O Prou. 23. 2
the Table of that Ruler where all may take of all without, Putting a knife
(...) their throat! O the apparel of Gods servants there: O these fairest
flowers which shall deck their garlands of Majesty, O these peerless
Pearls of price! O these lovely Iemmes! O these celestial crowns spangled
with jewles more glistering than ^tarres! O ye Angels and Archangels! O ye
all of that heavenly Queire: Cherubins, Seraphins, Princes, Powers, Thrones,
Virtues and Dominions, all inflammed with most glorious divine beams of light!
O ye Noble followers of the Lamb all decked with glory and garlands of
immortality! O the amazing beauties of these celestial Mansions! O ye blessed
eternized Denizens who live there into an eternal unity of love, which no
jarres, strife, or debate shall for ever be able to untwine! O purest Spirits
purged from all drossie mood of sinful mortality! O Palace of pleasures
wherein Angels and Saints all around with celestial Harpes make all to ring
with Holy, Holy, Holy, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah! O ye purest
ple^sures of perfection which no fretting canker of time shall be able to
outweare, or to cancel the owlish eyes of my mind are not able to reach within
the bounds of so bright an Horizon: The most I can conceive is less than the
least and lightest glory that shall be there where Souls are solaced without
stresse or strife in immortality.

Note
O glory, glory, glory, without any vein of vanity: Mine heart is ravished
and is no more within me.

Note
When the Queen of Shebah came to Jerusalem to see the glory of Solomon,
after that she had considered 1 Kin. 10. 5
the meat of his Table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of
his Ministers, and their app^rell, and his Cup bearers, it is said, That there
remained no more spirit in her. All her spirits in a manner ran out of her by
the holes of her senses, for to come and sit down and wonder at the glory of
the man: Thus wondering she remained for a space, as if she had been amazed,
till her stupefied spirit returned into her again: then she began to speak,
It was a true 1 King. 1^ 6.
report that I heard in mine own Land of thine acts and of thy wisdom,
howbeit I believed not the words until verse. 7.
I came, and mine eyes had seen it: And behold the half was not told me: Thy
wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which I have heard: Happy are verse.
8.
thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand continually before thee,
and that hear thy wisdom.

Note
Consider how the glory of a man in its greatest not comparable to the glory
of a Lilly, drew the spirit so out of the Queen of Shebah, Luke 12. 27
that for a space she was not able to speak: She wondered at that which she
saw, but what she had seen she could not utter in words, bu^ only said in
general, that she had heard a true report which she could not believe until
she came, and her eyes had seen it: And now when she has seen, she
declares that the half had not been told her.

Consider well I pray you: Note
If the beholding of the glory of an earthly Prince so ravished the heart not
of a rusticke that will easily wonder at any thing, but of a Queen, yea, and
so that no more spirit remained in her, what should it be if we should get but
as through the gra^ one sight through the heavens of that great God of Solomon
sitting upon his Throne?

Note
If but for the quarter of an hour we might see the meat of his Tabl^, and
the standing of his servants* and the attendance of his Ministers, Saints and
Angels casting down their Crowns at his feet, if, I say, we could see these
things as they are this our Spirit should be carried toward him wit^ such a
strong bent affection, tha^ (...) should not tarry within us, but being
ravished should run out of this body of clay for to go abide with him that
made it among pleasures perfectly abstracted from pain.

Note
If God as he is should appear unto us were it never so little, the bonds of
our bodies should not be able for to fetter so our Souls, but at the first
sight of God they with a most flagrant desire should flutter out of sinful
clay, for to enjoye his most amiable presence, wherein are pleasures exempted
from all hazard of surprysall.

Note
That which I say gives some light to these words which God said to Moses, No
man can see my face Exodus 33. 22
and live: As for the wicked I give this interpretation, that the sight of Gods
face should kill them* as light kills darkness, or as ye day is the slaughter of
the night: But God who kills not but quickens the killed of his own
chosen, if by them he were seen in the face on earth they should dye not a
violent death, but they should die for love to be at him: At the first sight
of his Face their Souls would not remain any more in clay, but loathing their
bodies, they should make haste for to fly to Act. 7 56,
their God: So soon as Steven saw the Heavens opened, and the Son of man
standing at the right hand of God, his Soul took post to the heavens: Albeit
the Burrios thought that they chaised it out with strokes and with stones, yet
it is certain that fra once he got that sight, his Soul was more desirous to
be out of his body, for love of Heaven, than the Soul of the most wicked man
can be desirous to abide still within for fear of Hell.

Note
There is such an attractiue love in Gods countenance, that if the Soul in
flesh could once see it, the body should not be able to keep it any more
within, no not for the space of a moment: As the load stone draws unto it the
iron by a secret and unspeakable draught, so in the face of God there is such
an attractiue force, that of need force the godly Soul at the first sight of
it must fly up unto it: As the Sun by the force of his beams raised up the
vapors toward heaven, even so if God would but turn his face to any Soul,
with the least blinke thereof, he should draw up that Soul unto himself like
a vapor raised up by the force of the Sun. Note
Consider how the sight but of his back parts makes many a well resolved
Christian to cry up unto him Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved: What is
that but the faithful Soul haling like an Hawke for to fly from the mortal
heart as from the hand of a stranger, for to come home to her Lord in
eternity? O thrice happy he whose name is in the Book, and whose Soul is
in the bundle of life.

Note
O the gain that we have by the mercy of God in the fall of Adam: In
Paradise man might live or die: On earth he now lives and must die: But in
Heaven we shall so live, that we can no more die: O blessed life of eternity
never to have an end into that other world: Oh that we could spend this life
in a sacred violence in pursuit of that celestial crown of immortality: Note
Happy is he who keeps a narrow watch over all the stirringes and
imaginations of his heart in consideration of that day. Note
Happy is he who makes all his joys and pleasures and all his best beloved
things below to be by standers waiting on the service of that one thing which
only is necessary. Luke 10. 42



The sick Man. My Soul is so ravished with you^ speech that it flutters
within me ^ haleth to be away from this mortality for to go dwell into
these heavenly Mansions with the God of glory: Our best things below in
their very quintessence are defiled with the mood of home bred corruption:
All have need to be renewed in the very spirit of their mind. Let it please
you Sir yet to continue in describing the beauty of Paradise.


The Pastor. If man o^ Earth could believe the beauty of the Heavens to be in
any measure such as it is, he would be glad at his heart to forsake the
moulding cottages of clay: Seeing the out-sid of heaven is so glorious what
must be the in side? Solomon's Temple was a type of Heaven: The further a man
went in, he saw the greater beauty: In the out most* Cou^ was but an Altar of
brass, for the s^crificing of beasts: Into the inward Court* stood an Altar
of Gold for offering of incense and of sweet persum^s* But that which was in
most, viz* Sanctum Sanctorum the Holy of holies was all full of Glory: There
God himself was heard in a voice beetweene the Cherubins: There was the Ark
called, 1 Samuel 4. 22
The Glory, wherein were the Heb. 9. 4
Tables of Gods word, Aarons flourished Rod and the Manna: There was the Word
for the instruction of the Soul: There were the Almond floorishes like a
pleasant Spring for rejoicing of the eye: There also was Mannah for meat, the
type of that everlasting Soul* feast in ye Heavens Behold a compend of the
three most pleasant seasons of the year: First, there was the seed of the
word; and after that the Summer flowers of pleasure in the flowrishing Rod: And
last there was ye fruitful haruish of Manna for meat: In a word in that Holy
of holies the figure of Heaven was the Merciesea^ the special place of Gods
residence: But all the beauty of that Temple were not sufficient to express
the shadow of these that are above the stars.

Note
S. Paul after that he had been ravished up to the third heavens got a charge
from God that he should not tell what he had heard or seen there: Only
this he declared after that he was come down, that up into Paradise he had
heard unspeakable words which no tongue of 2 Cor. 12. 4
flesh could be able to pronounce: But though such words had been speakable
the Apostle declares that it was not lawful for a man to utter them.

Note
Alas, what can the earthly low creeping wor^s of our highest eloquence
express of these joys that are above the Heaven of heavens? He who with
pen and ink would set out the greatness of that glory which is to be seen
within that blessed Building, should be as who would foolishlie tak pains to
paint the Sun with a coal: In vain shall a man prease to express that which
cannot be spoken but into unspeakable words* Words come shorter than thoghts,
and thoughts come shorter infinitely than the thing it self.


The sick Man. I have heard with great joy of the unspeakable glory of God
himself, and of the beauty of his Princely Palace: I desire now to hear
some thing more at large concerning the estate of the Saints wherein they
shall be when they shall dwell with God after the resurrection.


The Pastor. It is most certain that they shall be there into a far better
estate than we can imagine: Note
For if Da^id thought one day in Gods earthly house better the a thousand else
where, what Psalm. 84. ^0
shall it be when we shall be in Heaven, the City of our GOD, whereof God
is the House and the Temple?

The Saints shall be in such glory there, as that no earthly tongue can tell:
Note
If in this world by be: holding in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.
18.
we are changed into that same Image from glory to glory, what a change
shall be made when we shall see not Gods Image, not in a glass, but himself
face to face? If the sight of his Image in the glass of his Gospel has such a
working power as to change us into the same Image here on earth, what a change
shall be made of us in the Heavens, when we shall see God even as he is? All
the 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
godly Gods warriors then shall live in peace and rest: Note
As their life on earth was a continual battle, so shall their life in Heaven
be a perpetual triumph: Then the winter of their affliction shall be past:
The storms of their misery shall blow no more: Note
On Earth joys and sorrows are combined together: In Hell is sorrow without
any joye: In Heaven shall be joye without any sorrow: There they all in
bleached coats of righteousness shall blaze brighter than the Sun: God being
in them shall burn in them as he did in the Bush: They shall burn but not
be consumed.

While S. John was ravished in the Spirit, he beheld a great multitude which
no man could number, all standing before the Lambs Throne clothed in white
robbes which had been bleached from their blemish by the blood of the Lamb:
Note
having the testimony of two Senses, he reports what he saw and heard: With
his eyes he saw them clothed with Revel. 7. 9.
white robes and Palms in their hands: The one was their innocence, the other
was their victory: With his ears he heard the songs of their triumph. They
cried, said he, with a loud voice, Salvation to our God which Revel. 7. 10
sits upon the Throne: With them were Angels and Elders round about the
Throne, all falling down upon their face, and singing, Blessing, and glory,
verse. 10.
and wisdom and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto our
God for ever and ever: Then with vnco^querable comforts shall all Christ's
crouding Turtles be loueinglie comforted: Note
Then shall all their sighs be turned into songs: Then joys unspeakable
shall fill all their senses without any surfeit: Every Sense shall receive more
than all mortal hearts can conceive: Note
But which is of all good things the sweetest relish, there shall be such
vnspottednesse of life and love among the Saints as the heart of man here
cannot conceive: Every one shall rejoice of another well as much as they shall
do of their own felicity: The envious man seeds-man of all strife and debate
shall not be there: Note
All selfeloue which is of a niggardlie nature envious of the good of others,
shall be quite away, and in the place thereof shall come such an heavenly love
that shall make all the joys of Heaven to be common: Note
As was in the primitive Church so shall be there, but in greater perfection,
a community of goods: One shall not say, This is mine or that is thine: But as
we shall be all in Christ, and Christ in us, so shall we be all one in
another filled one with another joye: All state of strife then shall be far
away.

In Jerusalem above an everlasting peace is within her walls, and perpetual
prosperity within her Palaces: All the godly glistering like stars, shall
rejoice one into another light: Note
Every one of them by twinkling and be^kning unto other with celestial smiles
shall bend all their force for to give Mal. 4. ^.
glory to the Sun of righteousness the fountain of all their light.

Note
All Souls there shall be most wonderfully beau^fied with internal,
external, and eternal happiness: There God only shall speak peace unto
his people and unto his Saints, who shall never return again to their
folies.

Note
Man's chief contentment in the heavens shall be in love, first with God, and
then of one with another* O these everlasting streams of contentmentes which
shall flow into these blessed breasts sequestered for ever from all doole and
distress.


The sick Man. Lord, make all these things to live freshlie in our memories:
My Soul is inflammed with love to hear of that love which shall be between
God and his Saints and among the Saints themselves: Your discourse Sir, with
a plausible and pleasant insinuation windeth it self into the affections of
mine heart: It has already win mine heart to him to whom it most justly
belongs: Blessed be his Name for ever.

Seeing ye were speaking of that unspeakable love that shall be between God and
us, and also among our selves, I pray you to say some thing more concerning
that matter.


The Pastor. I shall do what I can briefly: Note
As for God, every Soul shall love him better than it self, because it shall
then perfectly know that God has loved it more than ever it was able to love
it self. As for all the Saints, we shall love them equally with our selves,
as being all members of that mystical Body: Note
Then and not till then shall be the perfect practice of that second great
command the sum of the second Table Luke 10. 27
which is, to love our neighbor as our selves: Note
If the Soul of this natural Body in the toil of our pilgrimage has such a
command over our natural affections, that it makes us to love all the
members, and every member to work equally well for the good of another: O
merciful God, what greater love shall proceed from that Spirit of Love,
which shall be in the Heavens, even the Soul of that mystical body of all
the Elect?

Note
Look how much grace surpasses Nature, and Glory surpasses Grace, the
Spirit of God which shall animate this body, shall so much more straightly make
the members thereof to live in Love: Note
The holier the Soul be within a man the greater love and concord is between
his members: But if the Soul be not holy, all the members will shortly
discord: The one Hand will cut off the other: The Hand will wound the Heart, or
cut the throat; and the Mouth will bite the Fingers: But O, what love shall be
then among the members, when our Sanctification shall be made so perfect, that
nothing more can be added unto it! O what love, peace and concord shall be
there, where God who is love like a more powerful 1 Ioh. 4. 8.
and noble form shall in an unspeakable manner inform all the members of that
mystical body! We all then shall accord to one thing: All our wills shall be
according to Gods* will: And eue^ie one of our wills with another shall be
like our two eyes whereof the one cannot so soon turn, but the other must
follow after it for to behold the same object.

Note
We cannot now comprehen^ this: For man's reason here on earth is like a riuen
vessel which can not contain the discourse of immortality: Our minds are so
drossie and ^mpish that they cannot conceive everlasting matters.

We speak now of Love: O but Love now is little among men: Note
we may say of it in this last age* as Lot said Genesis 19, 20*
of Bel^h* Is it not a little one? Though it be little now, it shall be great
in these days: Then shall it defy all sickle and foolish changes.

Noet
In this world below three graces dwell into the Soul of man like three
sisters, viz. Faith, Hope* and Charity, two of them conv^ye the godly Soul
unto the doors of Heaven, viz. Faith and Hope, but Charity enters in: The
Lord opens his Door to Love: Note
Faith Heb. 11. 1
being a substance of things not seen, so soon as the Soul comes to
sight, it cease to be, because there is no such substance there: Hope being
of things to come, so soon as the future is become present, it has no more a
do: But Love enters in, and as fire posteth up to fire, so Love swiftly
flies to God, for God is Love, 1 Ioh. 4. 8.
and for to speak so, the very element of Lou^ Till Love be at him it is
like a thing out of its element the place of its ^ost* there shall our souls
feed on his Love: In such a feeding they shall be as if they were ever
hungry and as if they were ever satisfied: Note
As the heavens hunger is without any laking, so is its fullness without any
loathing: Note
On Earth as it is said,

Voluptates commendat rarior vsus.

Single use makes pleasures the more agreeable: But in Heaven the more our
Souls shall have, the more they shall desire: The more they shall desire, the
more they shall receive: So by an infinite multiplication, joys, and
pleasures, and contentments shall be heaped upon godly Souls for ever, like
fire in fuel, which, suppone the fuel be infinite, can never die out but day
lie increasseth, as it were from a sparkle to a flame.

What shall I say more? There shall be such a fullness of all good things,
that no Soul shall be able to receive a greater desire of more: All shall be
content, all shall be vnspeakablie glorious and made perfect: There shall be
no blemish into our bodies, nor sin in our Souls: Iaacob shall not halt,
Mephibosheth shall go straight, blind Isaac then shall see, and Leah shall no
more be bleared* ye deaf shall hear, and the dumb shall speak: The lame man
shall leap as an Heart, ^a. 35. 6.
and the dumb man's tongue shall sing: Then shall these words be perfectly
Ezekiel. 28. 24.
performed, There shall be no more a pricking briar unto the house of Israel or
any grieuing thorn of all that are round about them.

Note
Then shall our wearied Souls find above the highest circumference of Heaven,
the Center of our rest.

God then shall be our Sanctuary in whom we shall have joye and gladness
without fear of ending: O folly, folly, folly! Why should we for such earthly
toys loss such celestial joys? Note
He that for so little pleasure losseth that which Christ has bought with so
great pains, as said a Father,

Stultum Christum reputat mercatorem. S. Aug.


That is, He thinks Christ to be a foolish buyer, while indeed he himself
is a most foolish seller: Note
When one day with profane Esau he shall bitterly repent his bargane, then
shall he know what a pennie-worth he has of all his pleasures.


The sick Man. Alas, that men cannot consider* O my God, master and mortify
all such corruptions within mine heart, that they be not able to lay my soul
open to Satan's temptations.

But to proceed in our purpose, what think ye shall be the chief exercise
of Souls in Heaven?


The Pastor. It shall be to sing Psalms of praise, and to follow the Lamb
whether soever he goes, from East to West, or from South to North.


The sick Man. Note
Alas, that for this prick of earth men should do that which shall debar
them from that Palace of pleasure: Our bodies as ye think shall not then be
wearied in following the Lamb, were it to go never so far.


The Pastor. O not: Note
Then shall our Souls be refined from the dross of sin: Then shall we be
free of all this lumpishnesse of clay caused by sin, wherewith now we are
both cloyed and clogged: Note
Our motion then shall be swifter than the Sun in his course: As with
a^thought our hearts will compass the Heavens* so shall we go most swiftly
whether we desire: As by the motion of the Eye we look from East to West, or
as the Sun beams while he arises are suddenly darted from the one end of
Heaven to the other, so shall it be of our motion then, for we shall be
carried with the infinite power of God, which shall not be subject to the Laws
of natural motions below: As for example, here can be no motion without
resistance: Note
All motions whether from above or sio^ below or ouerthwartlie* find enemies
by the way opponing themselves to that which is moved, as Edom did to the
Israelites, saying, Thou shall Numb. 20 18.
not pass by me: The stronger the opposition be, the motions are the slower:
Man cannot wade through waters so swiftly as run through the air upon the
earth, because the party is stronger which is against him, all things go so
below, but above no bodies shall oppose themselves to the Children of God: What
ever be above, all shall go with them, they shall be like ships before the
wind, carried with a mighty gale: There is nothing here like unto that that
shall be into that celestial Fabric.

But not be curious to diue into such deepes: Note
This is certain, that the Saints shall be carried there with the force of
an unspeakable power, and that without any weariness: They shall run, says
Isa. 40 31
the Prophet, and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint: What can
these want who being companions Psalm. 16. 11
of the blessed Angels, shall abide with him in whose face is fullness of
delight: Note
There all our pleasures shall be so pure that no unclean inclination shall
be able by any juggling feat of conueiance to cogge in it self into our
hearts any more: O the foolishness of man's blind and bewitched heart, that
for a moment of toylesome time should loss that Eternity of joye.


The sick Man. Think ye that in Heaven we shall be of diverse ages,
Children, men, or old men, as we were here when we deceased?


The Pastor. It is hard to tell we must not swerue from the wisdom of Gods
word: Scripture here is silent: But seeing Heaven is the place of perfection,
it is probable as some Diuins think, that in Heaven all shall be in greatest
perfection: Seeing say, they, that infancy is imperfection and old age is
defection, none of two are convenient for bodies that are perfectly glorified:
Note
As the Sun takes the mid course of Heaven, so shall the godly, who shall
shine like Suns, abide in the midst beeweene the Poles of all extremities,
for there shall be ye perfection of Virtue, Age, Stature, Beauty, and of all
that shall concern them: Note
All shall be content, for all shall drink their filles out of the River of
the unmixed pleasures and perfections of God, which neither Man nor Devil, the
strength of Hell, or length of eternity shall ever be able to trouble or make
drumlie.


The sick Man. There is one thing which earnestly I desire to know, viz.
Whether or not we who on earth have lived together, and loved one another,
shall know each other into Heaven.


The Pastor. It is thought that so shall be, and that because of the presence
of God, in whom is such a Light that by it we shail see and know these whom
we never did see or know on earth.

Note
When Christ was transfigured Luke 9. 28
upon mount Tabor, down came Moses and Elias who^ the Apostles had never seen
of before: Though they had never seen them before that, yet by the light of
Christ's transfiguration they were so enlightened that they did perfectly know
what they were: If the sight of that figured light, gave such a knowledge unto
sinners that they knew these whom they had never seen, what shall it be when
all obscure figures and also our sins* which makes all good things obscure,
shall be removed; and God shall be All in all.

Note
But though we should all know one another: as I think indeed we shall* all
these carnal respects which are here* as of Father, Mother* Wife and
Children, shall all fall from us, lik the 2 Kin. 2* 13
mantle of Elias, before we enter into Heaven for to enjoye these Empyrian
pleasures which are so far above the fadome and reach of all changable
mortality.

Note
We think much now of such earthly respects which are indeed Coagulum
hujus vitae, the very curding and joining together of greatest natural
contentments.

But seeing all such things are but things of Child-hoode, they shall not enter
into our thoughts when we shall be perfect men into the Heavens, the
Presence Chamber of our 1 Cor. 13. 11
God: When I was a Child, said S. Paul, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a
Child, I thought as a Child: But when I became a man I put away childish
things.

So long as a man is into this world if he be compared with that which he
shall be, he is but a Child, he understands as a child, he speaks as a
Child, and he thinks as a Child: All the dearest natural respects that are
here, are but childish things: Seeing they are so, when we shall come to
Heaven where we shall be perfect men, they all shall be put away.

Note
I will let you see this in a natural figure: In this world we have that which
we call Child hoode, and that which we call the perfection of a man: Now tell
me I pray you, should it be seemly for a grave Senator sitting before his
Prnce, and confering upon the most weighty matters of the Kingdom, to begin
and speak what he did with this Child and that Child, with whom he was wont to
ride upon Reeds? Would he being a wise man at such a time begin to
discourse how with these little companions he builded under a bower little
houses into the sand, or how in their childish conuentions they made their
little feasts of Pieres* Nuts, and Apples? Would a wise man think ye in the
presence of his Prince put off the time with such purpose* No, not.

When the foolish Child is become a wise man, he speaks no more as a Child,
neither understands he as a Child, neither thinks he as a Child: Such
childish things in Heaven shall not so much as once come into his thought, for
that were to think as a Child: That which is now in part shall be done away,
at the coming of perfection, which shall be in that Coronation day.

Note
Because we are here but children, we cannot now understand the wisdom of
the words and thoughts that we shall have above: Languages then shall cease:
One shall not speak English, and another French, and another Spanish: That
Babylonish confusion of tongues shall be taken away, and we all shall speak
the Language of the Lamb: Note
God then shall speak no more unto his people with stammering lips and Isa.
28. 11.
with another tongue: Then shall be no difference of contrie-men or estates,
whether they were borne in Asia, Europe or Africa: There shall it not be
looked to whether they were Kings or Subjects, Masters or Servants, bond or
free. Col. 3. 11


In the Heavens is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision, nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free: But Christ shall be All in all: Note
What can be laking unto man, where God shall be unto him All in all, yea,
and the Soul of his Soul.

As the Soul is in the whole man, and wholly in every part, so shall the
whole divinity in ye heavens inform the whole mystical body, and be in it
wholly, and that into the least member thereof, God being All in all: Then,
and not till then, we shall Psalm. 36. 8
be satisfied abundantly with the fatness of Gods house, and drink of the
Rivers of his pleasures, yea and our Souls, shall feast themselves by all our
senses upon unmixed joys free from the mudde and distemper of all
displeasures: In a word our hearts shall be fastened to our God with such
cords of love which no thing above or below shall be able to untwine.

Here is our journeyes end, here is our resting place from our labors Revel.
14. 13
and toilesome travels: Here is absence of all evil, and presence of all that
is good: Note
Here the Lamb is the Temple, and the Light* and the Tree of Life that
brings forth fruit every month, ever new joys without perishing of the
old, ever new pleasures without any loathing of ye former, ever new light
without any darkning* ever new life without any dying ever new delights,
without any dolours, ever new Glory without any grudge, ever new mirth with
out any mudde of misery: * Bodily pleasures work a great desire aye till
they be gotten: But spiritual delights as a Father said,

Cum non habentur sunt in fastidio. Gregor.

Cum habentur sunt in desiderio.
Before they be gotten they are loathed: But are they gotten? they are loved:
Note
So long as our Souls are led hoode-winkt in this our moody and mistie
mortality, we cannot thorowlie perceive this.

O that we had hearts to consider! O that we could rightly mind Col. 3. 1.
the things that are above! Note
O that our hearts were wained from this our native soil, a place of hunger
and cold, a place of nakedness, sickness and sorrow, that we might
earnestly desire to be into that holy Land, where we shall feast on the
Tree of Life, and drink of that Crystal River with pleasures for evermore! So
Psalm: 16. 1^
long as we are in this our mortality we must be still looking till our
change come, which being once Job. 14. 14
made we shall never change any more: Note
O then the sweetness of the Crown shall for ever allay the sow^enesse of the
Cross.


The sick Man. Mine heart is wonderfully ravished with such purpose: I find
my Soul silent within me, that it may hearken and give good heed to that
which ye say: Blessed be he who creates the fruit of the lips: O Lord, Isa.
57. 19.
come and let thy Spirit take houseroume into mine heart.

Now let us come to our purpose again: So far as I can observe your mind is
that we all shall know one another in Heaven, but without regard to any
carnal consideration* whether they were our Father o^ Mother, or our Sister?


The Pastor. It is even so: Noet
For if any particular respect should be had to any it should be of a man to
his wife, or a wife to her husband, who must leave both father and mother and
cleave unto another for to become one flesh: Yet so it is that in Heaven, there
shall be no more particular respect between them, than these whom they had never
seen before: The Lord has made this plain: The Saducees who scorned the
Resurrection, having told Christ yt there had been seven brethren in Israel,
which all had married one wife one after another, and that last of all, the
woman died also: Now said they, In the Resurrection Luke 20. 33
whose wife of them shall she be?

Jesus answered, and said, The verse. 34.
children of this world marie, and are given in marriage: But they that shall
verse. 35.
be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: Neither can they die any
verse. 36.
more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of God, being
the Children of the Resurrection: Note
Certainly at that day none of these seven brethren will claim any more
acquaintance unto that woman, than unto her whom they had never seen before
that day.

Note
What created thing can allure the eyes of ye creature, where the Creator Psalm.
73. 25
is visiblie seen as he is? Whom have I in Heaven but thee? said, the
Psalmist: Note
As the Sun by his beams at his first rising darkneth all the glorious
stars, of light so yt they seem to fly away from his presence quite out of
the heavens: So shall the love of God himself like a greater Light darken and
dazzle all other desires whatsoever: No by-respects shall be able to hinder us
to have ou^ eye to the maine: We shall loath all things that we may feast on
his fac^ wherein is fullness of joye. Psalm. 16. 11



The sick Man. I desire Sir to know of you whether or not there shall be
degrees of Glory in the Heavens, or if all shall be alike in honor.


The Pastor. The most part are of that opinion* that there shall be diverse
degrees: their opinion is founded upon these 1* Cor. 15. 41
words, There is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars: For one star verse. 42.
differs from another star in glory: So also is the Resurrection of the dead,
it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: Note
Some of the Learned who esteem that there shall be diverse degrees of glory
in Heaven, think that no such thing is intended in these words, but only as
one Star differs from another in glory, so shall the body after the
Resurrection differ far in glory from the estate wherein it was in this
life: according to this it is said, It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
glory, for to declare the different estate of the godly here and hereafter.

Note
For this assertion concerning degrees of glory this seems to be most
clear, which is said by Christ to his Apostles: Behold, said Peter, we have
forsaken all and followed thee, Matthew. 19. 27
What shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of
man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory ye shall also sit upon twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.


The sick Man. Before ye proceed I pray you to clear these words, That ye
which have followed me in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit
on his Throne, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones: I understand not well
what ye word Regeneration signifies there* To follow Christ in the
regeneration* what can that be?


The Pastor. These words be diversely read* Some read them this way, Ye
who have followed me in the regeneration: Others read them, after this mane^
joining therewith the following words, In the regeneration when the Son of
man shall sit on his Throne, ye also shall sit: If the words be so joined,
Ye who have followed me in the regeneration, (...), the word Regeneration is
taken as the most Learned esteem for the preaching of the Gospel, which Christ
brought into the world, whereby a new creation or regeneration of men's hearts
and Souls has been made in the world: So to follow Christ in the
Regeneration is to embrace his Gospel whereby we are regenerate.

Note
But in the opinion of the most part (...) Regeneration here is rather to be
joined with the words following after this manner, In the regeneration they
shall sit upon Thrones, according to that In regeneration, is as if he had said,
In renovatione mundi vel post renovationem mundi in altero seculo, That is, In
the renewing or after the renewing of the World: Indeed regeneration here
seems ^hieflie to signify the Resurrection and restoring of our bodies.


The sick Man. It would appear by that saying of Christ in S. Matthew, that
the Apostles shall sit upon twelve Thrones in greater dignity than any others.


The Pastor. It would seem so to be: As for Moses, Enos, and Elias, and so
many worthy Prophets most glorious instruments of Gods grace in this world it
would seem that their glory there should be greater than that of common
persons: Many of them Dan. 12. 2
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake: And they that be wise shall
verse. 3.
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.


The sick Man. That and as much is said as well of all the Faithful as of
Prophets and Preachers: the^ shall the righteous shine forth Matthew. 13 43
as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: Behold, how all the Righteous
shall shine forth as the Sun: Likewise, Deborah in her song said* Let them
that love the Lord, be as the Judge. 5. 31
Sun when he goes forth in his might: By this it would seem that seeing
they all shall be like Suns that their glory shall be equal.

Note
Moreover, let me reason as I (when I was a Scholar) have heard reason in the
Schools, we are not saved by any worth that is in our selves, but only by
the righteousness of Christ Jesus: Now for to be saved, a man by Faith must
apply unto his soul the whole righteousness of Christ, for Christ's
righteousness divided cannot save: Seeing then I a poor Crafts-man or
labourer b^ my Faith receive the whole righteousness, I receive as much as
Moses, or Elias, Peter, James, and John, and so seeing that Righteousness is
the only meritorie cause, I having it all by imputation, must also receive
the glory in as great a measure as they: For what can they have, except that
righteousness, which can deseiue at Gods had any thing that is Eternal? Though
a man should give his body to be burnt for the cause of Christ, he does
nothing but that which he is oblished to do: By this then it would seem that
seeing by the on lie righteousness of Christ eternal happiness is merited, and
that all that have Faith, must apply unto themselves that whole righteousness
without any division, that whosoever has Faith to be saved, shall receive as
great a degree of glory as any of the Apostles: Otherwise if ye make
difference, ye would seem to attribute some part of heavens glory to the
worth of man's doings or suff^rings.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir the m^tter is full of difficulty, many things would
seem to make for that opinion: Particularly the Parable of the Talents, for
to him that had gained but two Talents with his two, as well as to him who had
gained five with his five, shall be said, Intra in gaudium Domini, Enter Matthew.
25. 23
into thy Masters joye: To all was said alike, Enter into joye: Not thou enter
into the greatest joye with thy ten Talents, and thou into a lower Chamber
with thy four Talents.

Note
Indeed the arguments are both strong, for, and against both the opinions;
yea, so strong that they made a very learned man after reasoning to and fro,
to say,

Vtramque sententiam esse probabilem, Martyr.
and habere argumenta ex Scripturis: Neutram tamen ex Scripturis certo
confirmari posse.

That is, Both the opinions are probable and have arguments out of Scriptures,
but by no argument out of Scriptures can it be certainly prouen that there
shall be degrees of glory in a greater measure in some than in others. And
therefore, that learned man seeing the matter so urged with most forcible
arguments, leaves it undiscussed, as being a thing the knowledge whereof is
not absolutely necessare for Salvation: Note
There be many deepes in Scriptures where the grossest Elephants must swim:
Things absolutely necessary for Salvation, are into the plain shallow foords
of the Gospel, where the little Lambs of Christ may wade over for to enter into
Canaan: So long as we are here, we know but in part: Multa sunt reservanda
futurae scholae: Note
There be many things here whereof we must leave off the searching out, till
from these little Classicke Schools below we pass Master into Gods
celestial University above: Note
It is great wisdom for man to learn here, Sapere adsobrietatem, To be
sober in his search.


The sick Man. I thank GOD for this well employed time: Oh, that all my words
had been from my youth concerning such spiritual purposes: Alas, for evil
spent years: Oh, that young men would learn in time to spend well their golden
hours: Note
Happy is he who wears out the short time of this sinful life at the
sincere service of his God: My Soul now with the pinched forlorn is returning
home to the good fare of my Fathers house. Have ye yet any more to say
concerning the things that are above?


The Pastor. If ye would have a short description of all these things, take it
up in these few words, Eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2. 9
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God has prepared for them that love him.

Note
No man can so imagine of such joye, pleasure, and contentment to be there,
but the thing it self shall be many stages above all humane imaginations: It
shall be our wisdom to imagine that they cannot be imagined.

Note
When I think of that everlasting and exceeding weight of glory which ^ Cor.
4. ^7
passes all understanding, my meditation is dazeled, and my tongue is tacked,
the one not being able to conceive, nor the other to describe these things,
which eye never saw, ear never heard, and which could never enter into the
heart of man.

Note
This is the godly man's non vltra, his outmost bounds: There is no created
capacity on earth which can conceive an everlasting and exceeding weight of
glory.

The greatness of this glory puts me to silence: Note
Sight, and Sense, Feeling and Fruition shall one day teach us that which now
eye can not see, nor care hear, nor heart conceive: So soon as we shall see
God as he is, we shall know him, and his 1 Ich. 3. 2.
glory, as we are known: Then shall we see with our eyes, that which now we
believe with Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1
and a demonstration or evidence of things not seen: So long as we are here in
this muddie mortality, we live in a valey of tears, where we are forced to
hang down our heads, and hang Psalm. 137. 2
up our Harpes, as being captives in Babel: Above are the comfortes of Syon,
where joys afresh are infinitlie redoubled.

Now Sir, according to your desire I have spoken at large of this worlds
vanity, and also of the last judgment, and of Heavens glory, and of Hells
horror: think ye that this discourse has made any motion in your heart, for
to make you strive with a stronger strain, to draw nearer unto your God?


The sick Man. I thank God from mine heart that mine heart is in another
temper and tune, than when ye came first unto me: God by his Spirit in your
words, as by a soft and sweet breath has refreshed my Soul: By Faith my
spiritual eye I see now Christ the Sun of righteousness arising upon Mal.
4. 2.
mine heart with the brightness of his beams.

Mine heart now burns within me, and pants with an vnuterable longing for
a sight of the face of my God: Note
Now, Lord, draw the Curtain that some glimpse of joye may yet more clearlie
appear for the recreating of my wearied Soul: O dear Redeemer, no tongue can
tell how much poor sinners are beholden unto Thee, who with a strong Arm have
brought them out of a dry pit wherein was not a drop Zach. 9. 11
of comfort.

O that deep and dark dungeon of sin that I have been into! O these
blessed beams which my Soul fealeth coming from his countenance! O the Light
of that Face which puts more joye into Psalm. ^. 7.
mine heart, than all the world can have when their Wheat, Wine, and Oil do
most abound.

Note
O infinite weight of glory! O pleasures ever to be spoken of though
unspeakable! O joys ever to be thought of, though none heart be able to
conceive them! O pleasures most pleasant to the eye, though eyes below cannot
see them! O, O everlasting mirth of Music! O ye celestial Tunes, most
worthy to be heard, though ears of flesh cannot hear you! O Tree of Life
Revel. 22. 2.
most sweet to the taste, though sinful tongues may not taste of thee! O
Crystal River proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lamb, when shall my
soul drink of thee with a full Cup* Note
Mine heart like an Heart pants and brayeth after these water brooks:

Oh, when shall I come and appear before Psalm. 42. 2.
God* O my God, keep mine heart A prayer
under some spiritual serise of these blessed delights, till perfectly I
enjoye thee into the arms of my Soul, with the contentment of all
contentmentes, then which there can be no greater.


The Pastor. It is ye Lord who with the Eye-Salue Revel. 3. 18
of his grace has enlightened your mind: He has taken out the mots of
temptations which of before did make the eyes of your Soul so to water till
they become drumlie: Now Sir ye know full well what it is of God and his
goodness in the Heavens, where faithful Souls shall be fed with the bread of
Angels and feasted with the daintiest delicates that are above.

Noet
The wicked in this world are like blind men which eat many moats and flees:
They eat them because they cannot sec to discern them: Note
All the knowledge of the wicked is but ^ carkase and carrion of knowledge: To
know God and his Son Christ and him crucified, is the very marrow and kernel
of true happiness: Note
A Soul whose eyes ye Lord has enlightened with grace, can no more rest off
its God, than an element out of its own place: It may well be detained and
withheld from its place by some stronger power, but no power can make it to
rest, till it be there where God has appointed it to rest.

Your Soul now Sir, is drawing near unto its Rest: The nearer (...) be unto
it, let your motion toward it be the swifter: Note
In this, Grace is like Nature, swiftest at the end of the motion which tends
unto rest.

Up still with your heart, and rejoice in your God* Note
Happy are ye who now are flitting from this world wherein the silly Soul
as a Ball in a Tenice is tossed from wall to wall, and scourged with the Racket
of diverse temptations, which by course one after another are ready to catch
it at every rebound.

Note
Let your Soul now altogether rejoice in your Savior: That is the only joye
which shall never be taken from us: All other joys are but li^ flying moats in
the air, toil and toys, toylesome toys, For even in Prou. 14. 13.
laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness.


The sick Man. Blessed be my Lord for ever: I find now the beginning of
these joys, which pass all understanding* My Spirit has received ye earnest
of immortality: Note
I find now my Soul in the kindly temper of a spiritual constitution, which
as I am fully persuaded shall never be troubled with any moodie mixture of
distempered mortality, if once this Battle were ended: O the blessed beams
of that righteous Sun which Mal. 4. 2.
shine so brightlie upon my Soul* They shall never be intercepted by any
earthly interposition of sinful shadows: Note
Hence forth nothing shall be able for ever to ^et God and my Soul at odds:
O now nothing shall be able to affright my Soul any more with dreadful
distempers! to God alone belongs the glory.

Well may I say, If the Lord had not Psalm. 94. 17
helped me, it had not failed but my Soul should have been put to silence.

Note
I esteem all the joys which I feel to be a Cluster of Canaan which my faith
lik a trusty Spy has brought unto me, that thereby I may know the goodness
of that Land: But because I cannot tell what assaults my Soul may yet suffer,
for I find my former joys a little ouerclouded: I pray you Sir to conceive a
prayer to God for me, that the assurance of his pardons may more and more be
sealed up into mine heart that death be not unto me as a king of fear, but
rather as a passage and an entry to life eternal: Make earnest requeast for
me, that I die not as the wicked, whose hope does perish with their breath,
having their Souls goared with sin the sting of 1 Cor. 15. 56
Death.

O Lord, bring me an Out. law A prayer
by Nature, within the bounds of thy Sheep-folde: Fill now my Soul with
spiritual and heavenly inspirations: I have alas, the most part of my life,
been like roustie iron, unfit for any work: It has fared with me as with
the Eye which seeing other things, sees not it self* nor the face wherein it
is fixed: In knowing other things I have remained ignorant of my self, a great
stranger at home into mine own bosom, from my youth, my Soul sick of ^
spiritual dropsy did swell in a conceit of its own excellency: Now* Lord,
wound this pride of life within mine heart, wound it in the head* and craze it
in the brain: Separate all iniquity from me that nothing wherewith thy
Spirit may be grieved, may harbor in mine heart: Upon this earth there has
been none hoe with my desires, which lik ye sore craving Horse-Leach culd say
nothing but Give, give: Now, Lord, make my Soul to loath that which I have too
much loved, prepare my Soul, empty it of all that is evil before it come
before thy Face, wherein is fullness of joy for all Saints Psalm. 16. 1^
and Angels which are above.

Now, Lord, after yt thou have cleansed me by the fiery trial by beating and
battering mine hard heart, let the workman-ship of thine holy hands be to
refine me more and more till I become perfectly a new creature: O power this
heart into the calmes of thy compassions, that therein as in a mould it may
receive thy lively Image: Weed out of mine heart all carnal and earthly
desires.


The Pastor. I bless the Lord, for such working of his Spirit: According to
your desire we shall bend our knees to God in prayer: While we are praying,
lift up your heart unto God and pray with your Spirit: Set now all your
affections in bensell before the Lord: Let us all humble our selves here
before our Maker.


A Prayer for the sick Man.
O LORD, prepare our hearts to prayer: Let us not be rash with our mouth, nor
hasty with our heart to utter any thing before Thee.

O glorious GOD, and all merciful Father, which art the true Physicion both of
Soul and body; we must humbly bend our knees before Thee entreating thee to
be with thy servant here whom thou have now laid into this bed of
languishing: Let not his sins whereof he has been guilty from his youth
up, prouok thy wrath any more against him: Knit them all in a bundle, and cast
them all behind thy merciful back, bury them al into the bottomless sea of
thy compassions, that they neither be able to accuse him any more in this
world, nor yet to condemn him in the world to come. Isa. 1. 18.


Though his sins, LORD, were like Scarlet and Crimsin, there is virtue into
the Blood of thy Lamb to make them white like woole, and whiter than the Snow
For thy Sons sake remove all his transgressions as Psalm. 103. ^ 12
far*fro^ him as the East is from the west.

Hell, LORD, and Destruction are before thee, how much more the hearts of the
Sons of men? Thine All seeing Eye, pryes most clearelie into the in-most
closet of man's heart: Look with the Eye of thy compassions within the Doors of
this wearied heart of thy Servant: Look in and proclaim mercy and pardon
unto his silly Soul.

Let him know that neither Death* nor Life shall be able to separate him from thy
Love: O LORD, assist him and stand fast by him in this hour* Desert him not in
his greatest and last agony: Let thy Spirit possess him so fully that there
be none entry or room for Satan's temptations: when the Temper is bufiest* let
thy Spirit be strongest: Arm him with all Pieces against the last conflict
of this bloody battle: Honor him with the Laurels of victory: Let thy
strength be made perfect in his greatest weak nesse: Do the turn by thine
own force, and take all the glory to thy self.

By the virtue of thy Christ crucify into him the old Man and his works:
Make him to die into him, that he may live to Thee, who to Philip. 1. 21
all the Faithful is advantage both in life and death: He is now, LORD,
walking between thy Mercy and thy Justice through many-temptations: Govern
thou his steps with such wisdom, that the fear of Justice may keep him
from presumption, and the hope of mercy may prevent despair: Increase his
patience with his pain* Sanctify his Sickness, make it as Bellows to thy
graces, that thereby they may be kindled and blown up to a greater flame.

Enamour him with the love of thy goodness: Power in the oil of thy mercy
into his bruissed heart, which has been filled with mournful groans.

And seeing now thou art calling him to repetitions, to see what he has
profited in thy School, cast into his rememberance all the good things that
hitherto he has heard or meditate for to comfort this hour* Be strong in
him now in this time of trial: Apply unto his wounds the Balm of Gilead: He
is weak* and therefore, O LORD, forbea^e him in thy mercy.

O pity this wounded man as did that Samaritane: Power Oil into Luke 10. 33
his wounds, bind them up, and take him to thine Inn: For thy mercies sake
remember him: Forthy Sons sake pity him: For thy promise sake forget him
not: Free his Soul f^ the maze of all worldly cares: Inspite into him the
life of grace with a most fresh vigout and fervent heat of zeal to thy
Glory: He, LORD* in his most piercing pains knows not what to do, but his
eyes are on Thee: In thine hands is both Life and Death: Thou bring to the
Grave, and bring back again.

In thy great mercy, O LORD, Psalm. 41. 3
make all his bed in his sickness, make his bed to be a School unto him,
wherein he may not only learn the hudgnesse of his own misery, but also
the greatness of thy mercy: Let neither Death fright him, nor the Grave grieve
him: Let him know that Death is but a sleep for the friends of Christ, and
the Grave Ioh. 11. 11
a bed for the resting of their wearied bones: Let not the weight of Isa. 57.
2.
mortality bear down his Spirit from minding the things which are above
Col. 3. 1.
Make him content to quite gladly all earthly pleasures and contentments for
to go and dwell with Thee his GOD in immortality.

Let neither the sweetness of the Fig, nor the grapes of the Vine, nor the
fatness of the O live hinder his desire to reign in heaven: Against the fear
of death comfort him with hope of the glorious Resurrection: Assure his Soul
though his body go to be eaten of the worms, that he in that body again
shall see his Redeemer and none other for him: Furnish him with spiritual
courage unto the end: Give him boldness to march without fear through the
valey of Psalm, 23. 4.
death for to come to Thee, yea* to run were it through Hell for to come to Thee
in Heaven.

Tell unto his Soul that his pains dismay him not, seeing his travel is to
bring forth eternal life* Let thy Justice seat trouble him no more, seeing
Christ has paid his debts: Let him not be afraid to come before the Face of
his Judge, seeing the Judge himself is his Brother, who has both cut and
cancelled that hand-writting of the Law, which no flesh was able to perform.

Pity him, LORD, pity him, for lo he is now in thine hands looking
pitifully up to Thee for thy mercy: Some of thy setters are yet upon him,
none can loose him but the hands which have bund him: Pity good LORD, and
pardon, set unto this Soul the seal of thy pardons by the Spirit of adoption:
Heal and sweetly close up the wounds of his Spirit by the virtue of thy most
blessed Blood.

This is our confidence, that thou who have stricken him is able to heal him,
and will also do it, if it be for thy glory and his well, if not, Lord, in
judgment remember mercy.

If it be his best that after some days sickness he depart out of this
mortal life, let these pains which he suffers now be like Ionathans 1 Samuel
20. 20
arrows which were not shot for to ^urt but to give warning.

Give him grace that like an obedient Child he may as w^ll kiss thine hand
while it beats as while it blesses.

If thy decree be come forth that he must remove from this World, assure him
of a better place* where pleasures are in greater number the the stars: Teach
him by thy Spirit that by death he shall change a mortal habitation, a
dungeon of darknes^ ^ cage of corruptions for everlasting T^bernacles, most
heavenly sacred M^sions where constant peace and vnmi^ joys remain: Weane
his heart from the love of all things that are under the Sun: Let the beauty
and glory of the Heavens whereof he has heard at length this day, draw the
desires of his heart to abide into that P^lace of pleasures, where there is
Light without Darkness; Mirth without Sadness, Health without Sickness*
Wealth without want, and Beauty without blemish: For the sake, of thy dea^e
Self, seal up into his Soul the assurance of thy love, that in all bol^nesse
through the bleeding bowels of Christ's compassions he may come to the Throne
of thy grace, and from thence he may enter into glory*

O LORD, the comfort, the joye, and the glory of Israel. Be favorable to thy
distressed Saints dispersed upon the Earth: Thy Church here below is like a
ship on the sea: Though it floate aloft, it is fore tossed to and f^o with
wind and with wave: thou therein* seems whiles to sleep: Now, LORD, at last
awake, in these boisterous blastes: Master, Master, save us, for we perish:
Awake, O LORD, and rebuke the winds: Alas, O LORD, thou seems now to lowre in
thy wrath, by driving all our petitions from Thee with a dark and cloudie
countenance, so that these that trust in Thee are clean dashed out of
countenance while they hear the scorninges of the adversaries who now waste
and havoc thy Vine.

Arise, O LORD, as a man of war: Awake, as one out of sleep, and like a Psalm.
78. 65
mighty man that shouteth by reason of Wine: Smite thou all the enemies in the
hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual reproach: Take the Cudgel into
thine hand and stricke a way these Dogs which follow Thee but for crustes:
Let us never be cold or careless in the distress of others, but for to
assure us that we are all members of one Body, give us this pledge of
mourning with these that mourn: Make us all to be grieved for the affliction
of Joseph.

Bless our gracious SOVEREIGN Amos. 6. 6
with the Spirit of Wisdom and of Grace, Rescue Him from all dangers both
bodily and ghostly: Though He be a Prince among men, yet He is thy Subject:
Thou who by Grace have made Him to reign over thy people on earth, at the end
of his appointed time when the days of His Reign shall be happily finished,
exalt Him highly in the heanens among thy Saints and Angels: So long as He
is here, let Him know that it stands Him fast in hand to be an Hornager
unto Thee: Direct him so in all His carriage that His whole life may be to all
His Subjects an holy patronage of good example: Let Him never retract nor
repeal that vow which He made at His Coronation for to maintain the purity
of thy Gospel, and for to be a loving Father unto thy people: Cloth his
enemies with Psalm. 132. 18
shame, but upon Himself make His Crown to flourish.

Bless His Royal Match: Make Her to strive and stretch all the powers of Her
Soul by prayer in searching the sincere knowledge of thy truth* LORD, in Her
careful search make Her to say at last with the Spouse, I have found him whom
my Soul loves, Psalm. 1. 6
I will not let him go: Thou, LORD, love Truth in the inward parts, and
therefore, so sanctify Her Heart, that She may day lie thrive in the power of
Godliness: Though all outward means should fail Her, be Thou to Her in
stead of all means, abundantly supplying Her with the power and presence of
thy Spirit: Level, LORD* Her Heart directly to the love of Christ and of him
crucified, that by a true and lively Faith in him She may shine among the
Saints in Heaven like one who in a great measure has been received in Grace
on earth: Let thy Preastes be Psalm. 132. 9
clothed with righteousness.

Bless all our Nobles, make them truly noble, not like Ephraim, whose
righteousness was like the morning Hos. 6* 1.
dew: Let them never for feed or favor slinke or shrink back from the
purity of thy Gospel established in this Land: Give unto us all courage for
the Truth, that we may be bold to resist even unto the blood* not being
like these who at the first in an hot and hasty zeal promise fair with
Peter, but anon at the first womanly temptation start aside like deceitful
bows: Suffer no sin to go current with us without check: Let us never
follow the sway of times, with sewed Cushions under our Elbowes.

LORD, abide with us this night: As thou have drawn the night Curtain of
darkness upon the face of the earth, so be thou a pillar of the cloud
between us and our enemies: Hide our souls from Satan's temptations, as by
the cloudie pillar thou hid the Israelites from the Egyptians: Make us this
night to sleep softly and soundly in thine Arms, that our bodies being
refreshed with sleep, may be the better enabled to morrow for to set forth
thy Glory in the work of our Vocation.

LORD, let these our weak prayers come up before Thee like Pillars of smoke
perfumed with the Can. 3. 6.
lively sauoure of thy Son, To whom with Thee and the Spirit of Grace, be
endless Glory and Dominion for ever.

Now Sir, we have recommended you God, to who is stretching out the Arms of
his mercy, ready for to receive your Soul, into the bosom of his Love: Make
you now ready for him, for in all appearance ye are not far from the doors
of death: Be Psalm. 107. 18
vigilant in prayer, lest Satan yet put in his leaven into the Spirits dough,
and so by sowring it, make it distasteful to the Lord: By a little drop of
filth the pure web of the Spirit will become a menstruous cloth.

The sick Man. The lost Sheep is found: I give you most hearty thanks for
that fervent prayer: I pray God that it be heard in the Heaven, as Solomon
prayed for these yt prayed in the Temple which he had builded, saying, Then
Kin. 8. 34
hear thou in Heaven: Lord, grant that these comforts and contentments be
not deceiuable feelinges and flashings of joye: O Lord, let not the Spirit of
Grace in this new birth recoyle, as once Zarah in Thamars womb. Seeing God
has furnished me with a new spiritual strength. I wish that I culd employ it
well for ye short space that I have to live among mortal wightes in this
region of corruption. A prayer


O Lord, stir all the streams of mine affections toward thy self: Wound,
ward, weaken, and wasle all my delightful and darling sins, that my whole
joye may rest on Thee: command and confine all my thoghts to thy self, that by
Faith my Soul may seize and lay hold on the merits of Christ the celestial
Pearls of price: Disburthen my soul of every weight that hangs so fast on;
lest that thereby it should be swayed away from Thee.

I find mine heart stirred with a fervent desire to power out it self in
prayer before God: I pray you all that sit by, to join your affections with
mine into this work.


The sick man's Prayer for himself.
O LORD, the Father of mercies, and GOD of all Consolation, be present in thy
great mercy with me thy unworthy servant, into this time of trouble, suffer
me earth and ashes to speak with thy mercy: In the multitude of thy
compassions, blot out my transgressions: wash me throghlie from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sins, where by the seed of thy grace within mine
heart has been choked and starued.

Let the depth of thy mercy swallow up the deepes of my misery: Bridle my
sins and spur forward thy graces within me: Set all mine affections on
foot, that they may follow after Thee: Put a fairer flame into my smoking
slaxe, and more strength into this bruisedreede, that the bones which Psalm. 51.
8
thou have broken may re^oyce.

O Lord, with thine eye salve cleanse Revel. 3. 18
and open the eyes of my poor Soul, that I beholding these things that are
above, may gladly desire to be dissolved for to be there with my Lord, and
Savior: Lord, let thy Spirit carry still a strong hand over me: Furnish me
with such measure of thy graces whereby I may patiently wait upon thy will:
Except that by a special favor thou uphold me, I shall never be able to
secure my feet in so slipperie ground: While I have been hearing most
glorious speeches of the Heavens, the shadows of earthly things have
ecclipsed my mind like a Moorie: O make such shadows to fly away, that the
horizon of my spiritual sight being cleared, I may in some measure see thy
back parts, whereby my Soul may be enlightened like the face of Moses:
Though often I have been deaf at thy preachinges, be not thou dumb at my
prayers: O Father of mercies, listen unto the groans of my drooping spirit
assailed with diverse temptations: Hear the sighs and crouding of thine own
Turtle Dove.

O LORD, lead me into the Land of uprightness, and make thy grace to seat it
self into mine heart* Store my memory with these good lessons which I have
heard preached in mine health: Let me never ouer-pryze any good thing that is
within my self: Though James and John bragged that they were able to Matthew.
21. 22
drink of thy cup, scarce could they abide to see Thee drink it: O Lord,
make me ever to undervalue thy greatest worth, that through the valey of
humilitte I may come to these ever lasting exaltations.

Come LORD, for lo thy servant comes: I am willing, Lord, help my
unwillingness: If it be thy will to loose me out of this sinful prison, when
I shall leave this earth to earth, appoint thine Angels to carry my Soul unto
Abraham's bosom, where I may sing with thy Saints Halleluiah for ever: Come,
Lord, now and seek thy lost groate* Fetch home upon thy Shoulders this
wandering Sheep, and make all the Heavens to rejoice: Despise not that which
in the creation thou did ennoble with thy liknesse: Give me a warrant and
a token to be admitted within the Gates of thine everlasting Tabernacles: Till
I come there make my Soul to burn still in holy feelings.

Lord, hear me for the dear sake of thy Son to whom with Thee and the
Spirit of grace (as it is most due) we render all praise, glory, and dominion
for ever, AMEN.

The Pastor. Blessed be God, Sir, who makes his Spirit to work so
powerfullie within you: We are all greatly refreshed with your comforts: It
has been a great joye to us all to hear that most sweet and fervent prayer,
full of the groans of the Spirit of Jesus:

Note
In you have we seen the truth of that Text, The Spirit helps Rom, 8. 26
our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: But
the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered: I am assured that that same Spirit has made intercession for you
with groaninges in that prayer which now ye have uttered.

And again, while I consider in what weakness and faintness I found you at
the first I wonder at such a vigor of Spirit which I petceiue now to be into
you: Note
Truly the word of God is most true* God gives power to the faint, and to
them Isa. 40. 2.
that have no might he increases strength: Even the Youths shall faint and
be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the
Lord, renew their strength: They shall mount up with wings as Eagles.

Note
Many in their afflictions either desparatelie rage, or weaklie wa^le: But God
in great mercy has at last filled you with true Christian courage and comfort
in your greatest smart: He has listened to all your desires, being moved
with that sacred Love, which always burns in his bosom: Note
His Grace like the Notherne Pole, has given you aim and direction whether to
bend your course.

Now the darkness of the night begins to ouer-cloud the earth: By Gods
grace I shall return in the Morning so soon as the birds shall begin to
chirpe at the spring of day.

Note
Because while the spirit of man is idle, it wears and wastes it self away
with barren and lumpish melancholy: While ye shall awake, cause read
Scripture unto you, and particularly these places, Psalm 27. Psalm 84.
Psalm 87. 1. Corinthians 15. 2. Corinthians 12. Revelation 21. Revelation 22.
His Grace be you.


THE SEVENTH DAYS Conference.
The sick Man's last words to his Pastor, Friends, Wife, and Children.

The Pastor. THE Lord bless you Sir: According to my promise yester-night I
am come again early: All this night mine heart has earned to know of your
estate: How have ye passed this night?


The sick Man. O the mercy of my God toward me, that has moved you to take
such pains for me an unworthy worm: By your most holy Sermons ye have
furnished and supplied my mind with store of holy and heavenly meditations:
Ye have been both a Paul for to plant me in the true Faith, and an Apollos
for to water me: Christ the Master builder by the Finger of his Spirit has
laid the foundation of his Temple within mine heart: He has made choice of
you, a skilefull Workman to advance the work, till in mercy at last he
shall roof his graces in me with celestial Glory: By the word of God ye
have comforted me, that is only the word of comfort: Note
Of all other words were they never so eloquent, I will say with a Father, In a
thousand talents of worldly words a man shall hardly find an hundredth pence
of spiritual and heavenly wisdom: This life is like the Haw thorn, more
pricking than pleasant: Ye have ravished my heart with desire of immortality
above: I bless God Sir that ever I saw you


The Pastor. All these good things are to be ascribed to the working of GODS
Spirit: All the juice and sap whereby the branches spring and live, ensues
and rises from the root of the tree: We who are Pastors are but ye Lords
Spouts and Cocks of his Conduits, whereby his graces are conuoyed unto the
hearts of our hearers: If the Spirit of God make not a man's Salvation sure, he
will incessantly reele from one doubt to another, from one temptation to
another, like a drunken man from wall to wall.

It is good therefore that ye summon your heart and your glory to give
praise unto your God: Let not a thought of your heart absent it self from this
point of service: God must not be served by halfes: As for me: I am but the
Lords weak Instrument for your well: Give God the glory.


The sick Man. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that Psalm. 103. 1
is within me, bless his holy Name.

I desire now to come with David to my last words.


A speech of the sick Man. to his Pastor.
First of all, I address my speech to you my worthy Pastor: Gods mercy in
you toward me has been great, for ye have soundly unfolded all the
intricate difficulties wherewith my Soul has been fearefullie entangled: Ye
are one of these that may well say, We have the mind 1 Cor. 2. 16
of Christ: God by his Grace have made you that one of a thousand: you Job. 33.
23 Iona. 1. 1.
have I found to be like Jonah the son of Amittai, that is the son of
truth: Happy is that Preacher who is led in all truth.

O the Majesty of that message: O the wisdom of these that gain Souls unto
Christ: Wisdom has said, That he that wins souls Prou. 11. 30
is wise: O but my Soul loves you: Note
My love toward you assures me of Gods love toward me, for by this we know
that we are translated 1 Ioh. 3. 14
from death to life, because we love the Brethren.

I love you Sir in the dearest blood I have, for ye have been the good
instrument of God for my conversion: ye in all my troubles, while mine heart
was touched to the quick and my Conscience ransackt to the bottom, have been
to me a Barnab as a son of consolations, where with as with splents, ye have
bound mine heart: God in great mercy has given unto you the tongue of the
Isa. 50. 4.
Learned, with lips touched with a coal from his Altar for the relieuing
Isa. 6. 6.
of my wounded Conscience with words of comfort.

O but that is true, a whole some tongue Prou. 15. 4
is a tree of life: By the sword of the Word ye have cut the twisted bonds of
my greatest temptations wherein my Soul lay fast fettered. Mine heart has
been greatly rejoiced to hear you resolving al my doubts and difficulties: O
how beautiful Isa. 52. 7.
are the feet of these that bring go^ tidings! Now I find that of Solomon
Eccles. 12. ^
to be true, The word of the wi^ are as goads and as nails fastened by the
Masters of assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd: Christ that great
Shepherd of the flock (...) with your words, as with goades ^ nails so
fastened me to himself that Death it self shall not be able to sever us: Note
Ye have wonderfull^ Cant. 7. 8
restored my sick Soul with flagon^ of the most sweet juice of the cluster
of wine: Ye have bound up my bro^ ken joints with the spiritual splen^ of
divine comforts.

Note
O in what woeful plight, O in what seas of gall was I plunged when ye came
first unto me! there was nothing sound into my Soule^ All was full of botches,
boiles and pu^trifying Isa. 1. 6.
sores: But ye like a cunning Surgeon in curing tumors have brought the matter
to an ^ead* and at last with great skill ye have launced the boiles of my
corruptions, whereof now* God in mercy has made me free. I tremble to
remember these fearful temptations wherewith ye found me at the first beset
and besieged: Note
These were indeed such temptations as Bernard called.

Terribilia de fide, horribilia de Bernard.
divinitate.

Note
Satan has assaulted me both in a black shape and into an Angel of light:
By your sweet comforts my Soul has been revived like that dead man that
lived by touching 2 Kin. 13. 21*
the bones of Elisha: Ye have fed my Soul with the doctrine of your breasts
big as Towers: Ye have Cant. 8. 10
strengthened and sinewed my weak Soul with comfortable words wouen and
wrought out of a feeling heart by the strength of holy meditations.

And now happy are ye who have been the instrument of my conversion: I hope
to be one day one of these that shall stand at your back, Isa. 8. 18.
when ye shall say to your Master Christ, Behold, here I am, and the children
that God has given me.

Account me Sir one of these Talents that ye have gained with the Talent of
your gift: Your words have stricken home unto mine heart with powerful and
particular applications of comforts, whereby my disaffected Soul has been
wooed and wone unto the love of my Savior Jesus: account me therefore a seal
of your Ministry: Ye know better than I what God has promised to these that
with a ready mind shall 1. Pet, 5. 2
convert a sinner from his evil ways, such (as God himself has promised)
shall be like the stars in the Firmament for ever: From your Dan. 12. 3
lips is come the sweetest balm that ever dropped from the pen of God upon the
leaves of the Book of life. Blessed be my God, who by his good Spirit into
your mouth has breathed most sweet comfortes into my Soul: Note
Woe to all Doctors of despair: Blessed be your lips wherein Mal. 2. 7.
God has placed the preservation of knowledge: Your tongue to me has been
like a silver watch bell to rouse and waken up the gifts of God within my
Soul: God by his words in your mouth declaring unto man Job. 33. 23*
his righteousness, has blown up his Isa. 42. 3.
Graces which were weak into mine heart like a smoking flax, or a sparkle of
fire under green wood: Blessed be my God, who by your divine instructions
has made me to be acquainted with himself: Your comforts has been
cordials and lenitifes to the ranking and festered sores of my Soul: To God
be glory, who has made you most cunning of that great Art of saving
sinners.

O my dear Pastor, by the refreshing Balm of your consolations ye have
infinitely indeered my soul, you to g^s Job. 33. 23
one of a thousand: Note
I am assured that God has made you faithful with Jeremy, for to take forth
the preciou^ Ier. 15. 19
from the vile.

Now my God, with whom I A prayer
think to be shortly, be with you in your Ministry, and make you his
faithful servant unto death, that ye may be a worthy wooer for Christ, for
to bring home many straggling sinners unto him the blessed Bridegroom of our
Souls.

Farewell now my faithful Pastor: My Soul now is glad to flitte from this
house of clay: Note
As for my body it must go to the grave where for a space it shall be
confined but not confounded, for I look assuredly for the day of the
Resurrection.

O Lord, seal up in my Conscience A prayer
the discharge of all my sins, that I may gladly lay down this Tabernacle.

The Pastor. Mine heart rejoices with an exceeding great joy to reap such
fruits of my labors: But this know, that what good ye have by me, it is not
from me, but from him that sent me: * It is God that gives life and Soul
Romans 1. 16
unto the Word that is powerful to Salvation.

Paul may plant and Apollos may 1 Cor 3. 7
water, but it is God who gives the increase: Note
The best of all Preachers, are but like John the Baptist, the voice Luke 3. 4.
of a Crier, who could not make all the crooked straight, nor the rough plain.

If any good be conuoyed unto your Soul by me, I am but the Instrument or
Channel wherethorow the Spirit of Jesus has made his Graces to flow unto you:
To Him alone belongs the Glory and the Thanks: Note
It is not humane eloquence which conuerceth Souls: One word quickened and
enliued with his Spirit, is more fruitful than all the glorious eare-pleasing
pomp of man's words, which like Agrippa and Bernice are full of fantasy: All
Act. 25. 2^
the good that man can do either by word or work is like the honey in the
comb gathered out of many flowers: But the evil is lik the Spidders web
drawn out of our own bowels.

The griefs of your heart Sir have been very great, but now ye are mercifully
comforted: Note
Many in this world plod on from sin to sin marching merrily and feareleslie
toward ye plagues of Hell: But O, how much are ye beholden unto your GOD, who
in all your wearisome mazes has supported and sinewed your Soul by his saving
Grace.

Because Sir there be here diverse of your Friends and other acquaintance unto
whom it may be ye would desire to speak, I give place to them that now they may
learn something of you: Note
The last words of a godly man are very forcible unto the living: And
therefore Sir, while ye have breath, spend your short time upon this, that by
your good counsel ye may do good to these that are for to live after you:
That once done* commit your Soul to God as a faithful Creator: 1 Pet. 4. 19
He himself has said, I will not leave thee, neither will I forsake thee.


A speech of the sick Man. to his Friends.
And now ye my trusty Friends whose age God has crowned with ripeness of
judgment, I turn my self to you: But first of all, let me speak unto you my
spiritual and special Friend, who in my deepest plunge while I was fast
sticking into the myrie clay, did uphold me with your comforts: Note
Your counsel to send for my Pastor has prouen a special salve for my
sore: God by that man of whom ye spoke has now healed my Soul of all its
harms. O blessed be that unspeakable mercy of my God: Note
Though Satan had bereaved me of my purity he could not bereave my God of
his pity: Note
The Lord of light has brought my Soul out of that long and loathsome Psalm.
23. 4.
night which is in the valley of the shadow of death, in comparison whereof the
most palpable darkness of Egypt might have been esteemed to be day: O that
pleasant Sunneshine wherewith my Soul is now enlightened: O my God, breath
more A prayer
and more into my Soul the life of grace.

The spiritual Friend. Glory be to God for his wonderful A prayer
mercies toward you: The Lord, now set your Soul on wing that swiftly like
an Eagle it may fly up to its God: Note
Many a sore assault have ye suffered since I spoke with you at the first*
Satan and his temptations with the world and the corruption of Nature had
gathered themselves against you like Gebal, Amon and Amaleck against Israel: Of
them Psalm. 118. 12
may ye well say now, They compassed me about like Bees, they are quenched
as the fire of thorns* To Satan may ye now say, Thou have thrust sore at me
that I might fall, but the Lord has helped me.

When I met with you first ye were compassed with a chain of calamities,
one linked into another: Note
To me ye appeared to be hanging over Hell by the slender twined thread of a
lifelesse hope: Ye were plunged deeper down than Iona^ was, when he went
down to the bottom of the mountains, where the weeds were wrapped about his
head* Now let your Soul say with Jonah, Iona, 2. 9.
I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, I will pay that
that I have vowed: Salvation is of the Lord.


The sick Man. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all Psalm. 103. 1
that is within me bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
forget not all his benefits: Farewell my trusty Friend.

Now as for you mine other friends I turn my self to you: Note
He that is converted with Peter should labor Luke 22. 32
the conversion of others: He whose weakness the Lord has helped should
strengthen his brethren.

It is now time to take our last good night* Here in your presence, I say,
Farewell O world, wherein I have lived which I have too much loved: Learneye in
time to set your affections upon God: None of you can tell if God shall give
you such laiser to repent as he has granted vntome: Note
If ye forsake not in time the sweet pleasures of your sins, fear lest at
last that that be found true which Abner said to Ioah* Know thou not that it
2 Samuel 2. 26
will be bitterness in the latter end.

Note
There is no sin so sweet to man in his life but before his death it shall
be dissweetned and turned into gall and wormewoode within the belly of the
Conscience.

I speak by experience as one who has known the terrors of the Lord: Note
O my dear friends look over your shulder back to your bygone life, and
consider how grieved ye shall be for the sins of your pleasures when ye
shall be warded into your death beds, ready to compeare before the great
Judge of the world: As ye see me this day, so shall others see you ere it be
long: I have often been glad among you: Ye see now by me what it is of all
worldly ^oye: Note
With a little blast of sickness such comfort like chafe are chassed away:
Your time is fast coming: Your Glass is running my sickness cries unto you,
Learn of the estate of this your old Eccles. 11. 3
Friend, to make your selves ready for another world: To me to day to you to
morrow: Where the tree falls, there shall it lie: Whether the Glutton and the
Beggar are gone, thither must we all; that is, either to (...) hams bosom or
to the Devils (...) Luke 16. 22
Note
The death of one is like a (...) charging all others to be ready (...)
flitte and remove.

Happy, yea, thrice happy is that man who in these (...) and desperate days
is not dulde with security: Blessed is he who is for^ warned, strive to be
forewarned.

Blessed is that man who is eue^ upon his watch, having his loine^ girded and
his Candle in his hand Luk 12. 35
waiting for ye coming of his Lord. A dew my loving Friends: Note
Seek in time the friendship of your God* Strive to be worthy ye style of
Abraham yt was called, The friend of God. ^am. 2. 23.


O my dear Friends let me now tell you what the Lord has done to my Soul:
Note
He has at last been sensibly gracious to my poor Soul, which Satan has
long hunted up and down like a Patridge on the (...): The Devil like a dogged
Doeg has sought to suck out the heart blood of this trembling Turtle: Blessed
be the Lord for ever who has disappointed him.


The Pastor. I fear Sir that long speech trouble you: Your affection carries
you above your strength: Contract your speech in as few words as ye can: What
counsel will ye give to your Spouse here? It is good that she hear your
directions; for I see yt Gods Spirit is mighty in you.


The sick Man. If any natural man were here for to hear me, he might
willingly think that I were Verbosus, a man of many words: Note
But alas, that I have spoken so few of this sort: From Morning until Evening
my tongue in health like the pen of a ready writter was swift to speak of
too many things, whereof now I repent from the bottom of mine heart: If
Nature be so windy in vain prattling, should grace want wo^ds in that which
may be profitable to the hearers?

I care not what carnal men think for my many words: Note
I am shortly for to compeare before him, before who^ man's improbatio^ or
approbation is of little weight or worth: My strength so long as I can speak,
shall be spended into that which may do good to these whom I shall leave
behind: Note
I shall do what I can both feelinglie and faithfully to warn others to fly
from the wrath to Luke 3. 7.
come.

Be not offended I pray you Sir, if I be free with you: The last motions of
Gods Spirit in this mortal life would be very charitablie thought of: I pray
you Sir to pardon mine hasty and cankered Nature, if I have spok^n any thing
amiss, whereat ye may take exception,


The Pastor. The Lord bless you Sir: Praised be his Name who has touched
your lips with a live coal taken with a Isa. 6. 6.
tongues from off his Altar: The Lord is with you; speak so long or so little as
ye please: Glad am I to hear the motions of that Spirit of Grace which is
lodged into your heart.

Here is your Spouse, Sir: Let her hear your last directions.


The sick man's speech to his Spouse.
As for thee my Spouse, now shortly thou art for to be a Widow: I counsel
thee that first of all thou marry thy self to Christ, let him be thy
spiritual Spouse.

* As for other marriage the word 1 Cor. 7. 8.
concerning widows is plain: It is good for them that they abide so: But if
they cannot contain, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to
burn: Note
No marriage, as thou see, is directly appointed for Widows, but for these
that cannot contain: Otherwise the Apostles words are true: It is good for
them that they abide so: Note
If so be that thou marry, plant not a Thorn where a Vine should grow:
Dishonor not the first bed, and prefer not purse or portion to the worth of
the person: If GOD call thee to marriage, see that thou call GOD to thy
marriage, if Christ be at thy marriage, that is, if thou marry in Christ, thy
water shall be turned into wine, which was Christ's first miracle: Note
The water Ioh. 2. 11
of weariness of trouble and of sorrow which thou have drunk with me, shall
be turned into wine of joye, gladness, peace, and prosperity. But if thou
marry not in Christ, but make thy choice by thy sight, and not by sighs to
God in prayer, then shall thy wine be turned into water: God shall manifest a
new miracle upon thee to the worse, that is, All the prosperity, peace and
contentment thou had with me, shall be changed in misery, pinch, and
poverty, and many a woe is me: Then had thou never such cause to put on thy
doole weeds at when thou shall put it off.

Take good heed to thy self: Now is the last age of the world, this life is
full of dangers: Satan has laid more snaires on earth, than there be stars
in heaven.

Remember well this watchword, Mat. 13. 33
Watch and pray, having ever thine eye upon thy God: Keep thy self from all
apperance of evil: A flee Eccles. 10. ^
great of wickedness will cause all thy perfume to stink: Note
Sin is like a River which at the source is but small: A scandell is like a
scab that begins with itching, but ends into blisters, boiles and
putrefying sores Tak good heed to thy carriage and to thy, company, evil
company vain co^municatio^, and rotten words, will work upon the conceptions of
the mind, lik Jacobs pilled rods set in the gutters and Genesis 30. 38
watering troughes before the flocks: The flocks which conceived before the
rods brought forth Cattle ringstroaked, verse. 38.
spekled and spotted: In evil company at the hearing of vain, idle or rotten
words, what can the heart of man or woman conceive but that which after it is
brought forth shall appear both spekled and spotted? An evil thought is a
sin which besides its own particular sting, is able to trouble sore the
Conscience by awaking the old sins of our unregeneration.

Let my counsel be acceptable unto thee: Note
Haunt never the man whose name is pitched with a black report: It is hard to
touch pitch, and not to be defiled: It is not good for men were they never so
good to be haunters of women: Christ's Disciples wondered that he spoke unto a
woman Ioh. 4. 27
apart, a great argument that Christ was never with that Sex but in company:
It is no better for women to haunt the company of men: Fire and flax are
easily kindled, the least sparkle of fire will kindle Tinder: Note
Good outward means are helpful to inward motions the mothers of our actions.

Some I know will say, that they fear none evil, and that they are clean of
all such pollutions: If it be so, it is a benefit of God: But yet learn the
lesson.

Caute and casie. None stand so well but they have to take heed lest they
fall: Note
Were 1 Cor. 20. 12
thou never so holy thou have need to say the Lords prayer, whereof Lead us
not into temptation, is a petition: Enter never into that, whereinto thou
desires not to be led: None at the first dash be brought to the height of
corruption: S. Peter 1 Pet: 3. 2.
wills yt women's chaste conversation be coupled with fear: Fear always if
thou be wise: He or she that would avoid a sin, must shune the occasion:
Note
The least shows or appearences of evil are these little Foxes Cant. 2. 15
that spoil the vines: How little leaven will sour the whole lump? What is
the best of all sinful flesh, but like Gunpowder? a sparkle of temptation may
kindle in a moment that which in our whole life time we shall not be able to
quen^h with many tears, no more tha^ Esau could recover the blessing which
after it was sold, he sought with many tears: That which we may be tempted
to, we may fall into. Let all flesh suspect its own frailty: Scorners may
speak as they please, but daily doolefull experience will subscribe the
truth of my words.

Note
In this last age, alas, many godly Sidera volentia.
persons in appearance lik shooting stars fall down in diverse places with
their blazing profession from Heaven unto Earth, a most sure token of a tempest
to come: Note
Too many, alas, shame goodness by seeming good, like Frogs infro^kes Vice
in the habit of Virtue. While inwardly the heart is rotten, now or then
corruption must burst out into scab and scandel: Many with their fair
profession are like Rowers in a Boat, who look one way but go the clean
contrary. For this cause I entreat thee to study the substance of godliness,
and not to be like these whose chiefest care is spended upon shows: S. Paul
speaking of the life Coloss. 3. 3.
of the Godly, says, That it is hid with Christ in God: Note
It is so hid there that none shall be able to find it for to steal it
away, or to take it by force, but not so hid but that it must also appear in
all the effects of godliness.

Note
When God commanded Ezekiel to p^each unto the dry bones, that they might
live, he ordained Ezekiel. 37. 9
for him this Text, Thus says the Lord God, come from the four winds O
breath, and breath upon these slain that they may live For to apply this,
where there is a life after slaughter, I speak of a spiritual life, a life
hid in God, the^e must appear four effects from the four winds: From the
East, the Orient of that life, there must be an arising from sin: From the
West, there must be a dying to sin, even a setting and going down of
wickedness: From the South, must come the heat of zeal moisted with showers
of tears of true repentance: At last from the North, must come a chill cold
of trembling fear to offend God, whereby we make an end or work out the
work of our Salvation with fear and trembling: These be the four parts of
godliness wherein all Christian Souls must be carefully exercised: In this
is the substance of true godliness* It is better to be stark naught, than to
double our sins by seeming good: It is easy to juggle the outward eye of
flesh, but that inward Eye which sees our thoughts a far off, nothing shall
escape: There is not a Crown of life for carnal livers.

Hearken unto me mine heart: Be busy in prayer, join fasting thereunto,
lest that the high feeding of the flesh make the body to kick against the
Soul, which is too far in love with the body: Note
Of a pampered body may the Soul often say, in some measure as Christ said of
Judas, He who has eaten bread at my Ioh. 13. 18
table has lift his heel against me: Note
All fleshly pleasures are both vain and vile: They are like blisters which
begin with itching, but end in swelling sores: Beware of such succred poison.

Note
My counsel is that often thou read the holy Scriptures, and particularly
the thirty one Chapter of the Proverbs where thrift and godliness are joined
together: Be careful and painful in thy manag^: Think surely that Idleness
is the mother of all mischief: Seek Gods grace both earnestly and earelie: A
little with Gods blessing is a rich heritage: An handful of meal and a 1 Kin.
17* 12
little oylein a cruse was sufficient for the Prophet and the Widow of Sarept^
till the famine was past: That blessed handful was better, than the best
provided Barn or Girnell in the Land: Note
The grace of God is an heritage of greatest and surest rent: Unsanctified
prosperity is but a seeming Sunshine which vnauoidablie must perish: Blessed
is the woman who with Marie in some measure Luke 1. 28.
is received in grace.

Tak good heed to thine heart watch well over thy thoughts, though thoughts be
called light, the sin of thought is heavy: from the inward thoughts spring
and sprout all outward mischiefs.

As for thine outward carriage* meddle not in other men's matters: Note
Curious searchers of the life of others are often careless correcters of
their own: Many neglecting the hudge beam in their own ye, must needs be
tampering with the little mots yt are in others* A slacked tongue and a slack
hand keep other company: An idle woman must be a pratler, when the hand
cannot practice, the tongue must prattle: To such it is scorn to preach, that
for every idle word we must all be answerable.

My dear Spouse I must tell thee all that I think concerning thy well, for I
desire thy Soul to be knitte with mine into the bundle of life: Take good
heed to thy self, these who in this world have a name to li^e, have great
need to rule well their life: The nearer a body be to a lighted Candle the
greater is the shadow thereof, so the nearer the body of sin be to one that
is enlightened, the greater is the Scandale thereof: Note
Put the breadth of thy finger hard near to the Candle, and it shall make a
shadow greater, then all your body: but the farther it be removed the less it
will appear: Remember I pray thee how near thou art to the Candle of a bright
and glorious profession, a little Mot of evil will be called a mountain in
thee, because thou was my wife, and because we have lived with good report:
Note
The wicked are most feign to take the Godly but tripping in a lesser fault,
of their infirmities they make bucklers for the defense of their maliciousness.

V^e my counsel for fear of scandale, and for to flee all appearance of
evil, Hatte the very garment Iud. v. ^3.
spotted with the flesh: Watch well over thy self both alone and in company:
Strive never to seem to be that, which thou art not indeed: Note
Many have much more than they show; but more show much more than they have:
The Religion of the greatest part for all their pretenses, is but a smoke, a
shadow, a blast, or a sound: Note
Substance without appearance is better than appearance without substance: Note
The Soul which has but a form of godliness is most deformed in Gods sight:
Ordinarlie she who is most farded is most filthy: Note
Vices are most vile when they are shrouded and ouer-cast with a countenance of
Virtue, a vizard of piety makes one a monster in Gods eyes: Note
There is no such villainy as that which is varnished over with colors of
godliness. Sinners may cloak sin and cover it for a space, but they cannot
stand long, for wickedness shall be broken as a tree.

Let therefore thy Faith within, appear in thy life without: Note
All the Faithful should be like the roll of that Book which Ezekiel saw in
a vision which was written within Eze. 2. 16.
and without: If there be no Letters of life written without, there is no
living Faith within, but a dead carrion of Faith for Faith without works ^am. 2.
20.
is dead. For this cause flee the foggie lithernesse of the flesh, and strive
for the fruits of Faith: Note
Above all be earnest in prayer the preserver of honesty: Hear Gods word with
reverence as good news from a far Prou. 25. 25.
Country: Let this word be a straight rule to direct thee in all the carriage
of thy life: let no worldly business withdraw thee from it, while it is
preached: Note
These who eat their bread with greatest sweat eat not the sweetest bread:
It is not early rising, nor late going to bed that enricheth: Note
Though for a time Marthas toyling and troubling her self Luke 10. 41
about many things, seem to bring much profit, it shall be seen at last
that it is the grace of God that enricheth.

Note
This is most certain, the ^urest fastening in this world is but loofenes
without God, in whom alone is the certainty of that which shall never perish.

Note
In all thine affairs, in all companies remember that in the secret closets
of thine heart thou have frequent ejaculations unto thy God, that he may guide
and guard thee while thou shall encounter with temptations, hardly shall she
be caught that fears the snare: Satan with his baits and lures is ever
waiting for to catch his prey: Note
He has three great gunnes, three great impoysonners whereby he wastes the
graces and good names of many, viz. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life: It shall be thy best to arm thy self against
these three, by holding continually a wakening and jealous eye over thy whole
conversation: Note
If the evil thought be stiffled so soon as it begins to stir into the
heart, it shall never be able to produce an evil action into the hand* For
this cause wise Solomon gave a precept which I may call a spiritual Cordial*
which is, that above all watch and ward men Prou. 4. 23
and women should keep their hearts:

Note
Many with Hypocrites may seem to have their hands in heaven Luke 18. 12
by giving alms with the Pharisee, while indeed their proud lofty and
faithless hearts are in Hell, God looks not so much to the outward action
as to the inward affection* Note
The Lord cannot away with the painted superficial flourishes of holiness of
these that are false hearted and meerelie formal: The Israelite indeed, in
whose heart is no guile, is the Ioh. 1. 47.
Lords delight: Study therefore I entreat thee to the purity and power of
godliness: Be careful to write all these heart precepts upon the palms of
thine hands, lest that unawares thou be woefullie caught and ensnared in some
scandalous sin whereby thou shall shame thy profession: All mortal feet are
feeble and stand in a sliperie ground. O what danger is in giving way to our
first sinful motions, while sin is least feared it is most to be feared:
Satan is most dangerous while he is transformed 2 Cor. 11 14
into an Angel of light: Poison confected with Sucre is most piercing and
deadly: Smiling Ioabs are most cunning in smiting, fair alluring and tickling
temptations oftest prevail: Note
Many are like the Lark, which while it plays with the feather and stoupeth
to the glass is suddenly enwrapted in the Fowlers net.

There is nothing more dangerous than security: While Peter thought himself
stronger than all men, Satan was hatching three abominations in his heart,
which at last brake out, first in lies and last in perjurie: stand in awe and
sin not: One sin draws on another lik links in a chain. We have sinned,
we will go up, that Deuteronomy. 1. 4^
is we have sinned, we will sin: Keep ever GOD in thy sight, and be humble.

Be careful in all thy carriage to live in good example: Allow not thy self
in that which is evil, flee the folies of this age which is wonderfully given
to new guises of decking the body, most women's hearts are sowred with this
leaven. Note
Let spiritual joys be thy jewels, and the good works of thine hands, let
them be the gold rings of thy fingers the matter of thy pleasures: There is
nothing more pleasant than to do well: Note
For this cause good works are in that Song of songs called, a gathering Cant.
6. 1.
of Lillies and flourishing of the Vines: She who is too curious of ye outward
decking of the Back, cannot be careful of the inward trimming of the heart:
Note
Fard and foolish vain fashions of apparel are but* Bawds of allurement to
uncleanness: Note
Away with these dyed Dames whose beauty is in their Box, such dawbinges are
soon washed off from these painted Iezabels, such melting faces are not meet
for marterdoome, for the cause of Jesus, under such false faces is no lodging
for true and honest hearts.

In all things strive thou to be sobe^: Note
Beware to out* run thy rank or to out wear the fashions by attyring thy
self too gorgeously: Soft Matthew. 11. 8
appparell is but for Kings houses: What are such Cuts and Cordons, Silks and
Satins, and other such superfluous vanities, wherewith many above their rank
and place are so disguised, but infallible tokens of an unsanctified heart? Note
With such follies often are joined libertine eyes and wandering in wanton*
glaunces. Let my counsel please thee, Idol not thy body with these who harbor
in their bosom the snake of pride: Note
Let thy chief care be to deck the hidden man of the heart: A meek and
humble soul is a great ornament in Gods eyes: This is Scripture, The ornament
1 Pet, 4. 18
of a meek and quiet spirit is of great price in the sight of God: She whose
heart is truly godly, will be most careful to put on that which most will
please the Lords eye: Consider well what I say: Follow not ye fickle fancies of
vain women, whose minds are like the Moon in a continual change, but rather
be a Schooler of these whose wisdom is constantly contrary to all new
fangled follies: Note
Too curious busking is the mother of lusting looks, the Iuy-Bush hung out for
to inueigle unsanctified hearts unto folly.

Note
What are these finest silks the fairest feathers of our pride? What are they,
but worms work and moathes meat? Strive for the power of mortifying grace:
while the flesh is lusty and at a full sea, the Spirit is at under* even at a
low ebb: The pampering pride of life is the bane and poison of spiritual
graces, beware of it: It is an high treason against the most High, it is a
sin which first lifts up, and after brings down with a shameful fall
that which it has once lifted up.

Note
The heart of man is lik the shellfish, which pride as an Eagle takes up into
the air, but while it is come to a great hight, it anon lets it fall upon
the rocks of shame and disgrace; where after that it has dashed it in pieces
it greedily deuoureth it: Note
He who in Heaven could not dwell with Pride will never on Earth harbor in
that heart wherein it lodges: Outward counterfeit humility may for a time
jug* gle the eyes of the beholders, such a varnished pride is a double
abomination: O how detastable unto God are these who being vainlie puffed up in
their fleshly mind, have no Col. 2. 18.
lodging for humility, but into their mouths: And yet who can have patience
to give ^are, shall at last hear a Sibboleth some swelling word, which by the
accent, shall give notice* that they are not such as they say.

Note
Certainly Humility is one of the fairest flowers in the whole garland of
spiritual virtues: Whereas Pride a spiritual tympanie blows up the heart,
and makes the Arteries to swell with unclean spirits, Humility tempereth the
blood, and quieteth the Spirit with such a calmness, as that wherein the Lord
appears to Elijah. 1 Kin. 19 12


Some if they be not Whoores or Thieves, they think that they cannot fail,
and yet in one sin are all sins, for who fail in one, fail in all: Note
That which God said by his Prophet is notable, If a man beget a son that is
a Thief or a Murderer, Ezekiel. 18. 10
or that does any one of these things: Observe the words, Any one, Though he
do all these things, Shall be live? verse. 13
he shall not live: He has done all these abominations: See how he who has
done but any one is here also said to have done all these abominations: See
how all sins by a little bore creep in with a deceitful pace: If one
poisonfull herb be in the Pot death is there.

What shall I say more of Humilie, the rarest virtue in women? This I will say,
The lowliest heart is ever in highest in Gods account, it ever has the best
share of his favors: Note
As streams of waters run to the low valleys, so do the graces of God
flow to the humble Souls: Shame and confusion of face is the ordinatie end of
all the puffes of pride and of all unlawful daliance: This sentence never
lighted false, Pride must get a fall: This is Scripture, Psalm. ^38. 6
Though the Lord be high* yet has he respect unto the lowly: But the proud
he knows a far off.

Be constant in all thy ways: strive to keep peace with thy neighbors: Note
For this end set a porter at thine ear, for to hold out fal^e reports: an
open ear and a loose tongue are two deadly foes to all sacred friendship:
Where such are, triffles are taken for truethe after that a matter it
thoroughly sifted, most men's r^ports are found to be but babbling.

Note
Let the true fear of God harbor in thine heart continually: The fervent
zeal of many is agueish lik fevers which come and go by fits and starts: Ahab
could crouch when 1 Kin. 21. 27.
he heard that the Dogs should lick his blood. Till Pharaohs sorcerers were
Exodus 8. 19
fearefullie plagued, none of them could pronounce, This is the finger of God*
Be not like the wicked who never fear God but when he is in a tempest:
Fools are so stiff and steely that for God they will not stir an inch, till
his judgment cause them to stagger.

Strive to live by precept and not by example: Many think themselves to be
well, beause they are not so evil as many others: Note
In this they are like the Drapers who give luster to a Karsey by laying it to
a Rugge: The deeper damnation of some in the poole and puddle of perdition,
shall be a very small comfort for these that are in the shallow foordes of
the floodes of fire, kindled with the brimestone beams of everlasting
burnings: Note
The fore-skinne of an uncircumcised heart is so thick and brawnie that no
precepts can pierce through it, till the Spirit himself make a way.

Oh then, seeing we are all a brood of corrupt loins, it stands thee in
hand to be earnest with that Spirit of grace, that he would teach thee to
keep watch and ward over all thy ways.

Note
If any creature offend thee, bite not at the stone, but lift up thine eyes to
God: None evil is in the City Amos. 3* 6
but that which he has done.

At divine Service be not chill nor cold: Be fervent in thy prayers, while
thou speak to God with thy mouth, suffer not thine heart to wander upon
toys, it is more difficile to pray than to preach, wicked men may preach, but
they cannot pray, God has branded them with this blot they call not upon God:
Note
The Lord put into thine heart the juice A prayer
and sap of his Grace.

My Spirit is so wearied that I am not able to express my mind.


The Pastor. The Psalmest said well, The Lord will Psalm. 138. 8
perfect that which concerns me: He who has begun in you his graces, shall
perfect that which concerns you, yea, and shall make his grace to 2 Cor. 12. 9
be made perfect in your weakness.


The sick Man. O my Lord, lead me in the land A prayer
of uprightness: O God, with Thee Psalm. 143. 10
is the Fountain of life: In thy Light Psalm. 36. 9.
we shall see light: Revive mine heart, O Lord, with some new supplye of
strength from above: Let the words Psalm. 19. 14
of my mouth and the meditations of mine heart be acceptable in thy sight, O
Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.

Above all things my loving Spouse, beware of evil company, the corruption
of good manners; and fuel of folly: Note
It is good to use company as Moses did his Rod, so long as it remained a Rod
he remained with it, but so soon as it became a serpent incontinent he fled
from before Exodus 4. 3.
it: Be not like these most vile persons, who for to varnish their appearances
of evil with alleging innocence, say, That they care not what men say of
them, and that they cannot hinder men to speak: Away with such words, such
vain partlings cannot secure the Conscience, neither content the scandalized
beholders of evil appearances: If thou do not evil, do not evil lik: Be
not altogether careless what others say of thee, but in all security of life
strive for a good name, which is better than Eccles. 7. 3
precious ointment: There is no such folly as folly practiced with profession
of wisdom: Hypocrites may warily watch over their words and outward actions,
but none but Nathanaels, have hearts without guile. Ioh. 1. 47.


Consider well I pray thee, that we are now come to the dregs of days, and
extremities of time, and also to the extremities of sin, for avoiding of the
sands, we rush upon the rocks: We live in the last and most corrupt age,
wherein the very confluence of all the corruptions of former ages have made
their Randie-vowes: So, (as all may see) it is utterly impossible, except the
Lord work wonders that any keep themselves so passinglie pure from all spice
of contagion, but some one infection or other shall stick unto them, unto Gods
dishonor, and their own disgrace: O how many rubs are in the way to life
eternal! My best beloved let such instructions sink deeply down into thine
heart, that thou be not like Hypocrites, who are more thoughtfull for
plausible conueiances and outward plastering appearances, than for any
substance of godliness: Be truly godly, and not profane, like these who
say what the Prophets will, must into ye house of Rimmon, one thing or other
must they do, wherein God must be merciful unto them.

Note
As for thee be a Church wife and also an House-wife: It is not seemly for
women to be gading here and there she is most happy * Note
who in this sinful time is least known of the world, so that she truly
strive to know God and her self: Wise Solomon who in his wisdom excels
all, as also in number of wives spoke by experience, yt wandering Women were
not chaste, by this special mark he brandeth the whore, That her Prou. 7. 11
feet abide not in her house, but now she is without, and now in the
streets: verse. 12.
By Solomon's record, she that gadeth abroad cannot be well thought of: With
Wisdom she has cracked her credit: If Dinah had tarried at home while she
went abroad, she had not been deflored, which was the cause of great
bloodshed, which made her brethren Simeon and (...) Genesis 49. 7
afterward to be divided in Iaakob, and dispersed in Israel: The occasion of
all that evil was from the vanity of the Damsel, her folly is registered in
Gods Chronicles for all Ages to come, that women chiefly may read it, and be
wise by her example: The words are these, And Dinah Genesis 34. 1
the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Iaakob, went out to see the
daughters of the Land.

Remember well I pray thee these few p^ecepts: Be careful and sincere at the
service of thy God: Serve him not by halfes: Note
He who is only holy, must be served wholly: Take good heed to thy self,
beware of clawing flatterers, who for gain will varnish thy vices, for to make
them seem virtues. Labor for a good name, perrell it not for trifflles: If
for light matters it be mainelie hazarded it shall be easily cut off, where
ever thou be, be content with thy lot: See that in any wise thou never
harbor in thine heart a discontented mind: Beware of an evil tongue, which is
an vnruelie evil, within the compass of the mouth wherein it is, is a Iam. 3.
6.
world of wickedness.

Be careful both for the inward and the outward of thy conversation, for many
eyes will look and spy what shall be thy life after me: Be therefore ever
upon thy guard, sin never in hope of secrecy, for none can sin without a
witness: Sequester thy self from all occasions of evil, if thou would have
grace to be dearly and deeply rooted in thine heart: Where ever thou art,
think God thereto be present: Tak him at all times to be an eye-witnes of thy
thoughts: Note
Though ali be barred out, ye Lord is within: Fear God and live in peace with
thy neighbors: Note
Let the good thoughts of thine heart put the over in the hands of practice,
first know and the^ do, which is complete Christianity: Grow in grace, groan
for sins past, escape relapses, haunt the godly, fly these that are of a
prostitute Conscience: Sin is like a Ring-worme of a contagious and spreading
nature, from less to more over Shoes over Boots like Hezekiels waters from
the Ankles to the Knees, and so higher and higher from scabbe to scandale:
Shune all appearance of evil, so shall thy conversation savor like ointment,
and most sweet perfume. Now the Lord be with thee: Kiss me, and so farewell.


The Pastor. Here Sir are your little Children waiting for your blessing, it
is good that ye say something to them for their instruction: The last words
of a Friend or of a Father are often of greatest weight, and bear most into
the rememberance of these to whom they are spoken.

I fear that ye faint in your weakness, and therefore be as summar and short
as ye can.


The sick Man. I thank God, though the strength of my body decays, my
Spirit is become stronger like Samson, after Judge, 16. 22
that his hair began to grow: My force and courage within is renewed Psalm.
103. 5
like the youth of the Eagle by casting of its bill: Blessed be he who gives
Isa. 40. 29.
power to the faint, and increases strength to them that have no might.

O Lord, mould mine heart after the A prayer
heavenly model of thy Law: Empty mine head, and disburden mine heart of all
earthly cares, that my thoughts may be wholly and entirely spent upon thy
self without any turning awry from holy and heavenly meditations.


The Pastor. Seeing God is with you in such a spiritual power, spend your
short time the best ye may for his glory and for the well of these whom ye
desire to be best in this world after you.

Note
That new strength which appears in you at the sight of your Children
remembereth me of old Iaakob lying on his death-bedde, when it was told him
that Joseph whom he loved was come to see him* it is said, That Israel
strengthen himself, and Genesis 48. 2
satte upon the bed.


The sick Man. I find the like mercy, though not in such a measure.

O my God, fit and furnish my Soul A prayer
with the sanctifying grace of thy spirit: Rouse up my Spirit, whet up my mind
to feeke the things which are above: Lord, put a living Soul within this
dying body.


A speech to his Children
And now ye my Children gather your selves together and hearken unto your
loving Father, that ye may remember well his last words.

Come near me I pray you, and receive your old Fathers blessing: Let me lay
both mine hands upon your heads that I may make my last prayer for you. A
prayer


The Angel which redeemed me Genesis 48. 16.
from all evil bless the Lads, and let them grow in multitude as fishes,
God make you as Ephraim and as Manasses. Behold* now my dear Children, I go
the way of all the earth* keep the charge 1 Kin. 2. 2.
of the Lord your God* to walk in his ways, that ye may prosper in all that
ye do, and whther soever ye turn your selves: By instant prayers to God
hemme in the folies of your youth: Note
In this wicked evil world strive to be like fishes which keep their fresh
taste while they live in saltest waters.

Be careful to consecrate the first years, even the flower and pryme of your
life unto the Lord, which shall be a means for sanctifying the rest of your
age: Note
The first borne* and the first fruits under the Law of ceremonies were the
Lords: The substance thereof in the Gospel, is that we give the Lord the best
of our years and the flower and strength of our age: Note
Most men in the prime of youth are both hot and headie: Happy is he who in
a sober mood and cold blood passes the time of his sojourning here
chiefly, while he is in the strength of youth: By careful culture and
manurance the fierceness of Bears and Lions will be mitigated and tamed: It
is a great slight of Satan to make young men sport in their sins, under hope
they may repent when they are old: But alas, who is so young that can say,
that he shall live until morrow? Note
Is it not seen that there be as many little as great skuls in Golgotha? As
soon, say we, comes the Lamb skin to the market as the old Sheep: Note
But though they who are young were assured to become old, they could not be
assured of repentance which is ye gift of God, which he gives to whom and
when it shall please his Majesty: That which is the gift of Gods good
pleasure, is not a thing which a man may have when he pleases: Youth is Ioh.
5. 4.
lik the time of ye stirring of the poole, a gracious time, if it be well
employed: Christ I know may cure a Soul that has been sick of the palsy
of sin eight and thirty years, but that must be counted a most rare
miracle: Note
Late repentance is seldom sound: But alas, though a man were assured that in
his old days he should repent truly of all the folies of his youth, how
bitter a thing is that which Gods word calls Repentance? Note
A Pagan having gotten some little glimpse thereof, while he conferred ye
pleasures of sin with ye pains of repentance, refused to bargain for his
pleasures, saying plainly, Non eme^im tanti poenitere, that he would not buy
repentance so dear: Most men in the heat of their sins lay about them to
find some pretense for the lessening thereof, lest they seem vgelie.

Oh, that youth would be wise, our youth is either a great friend or a great
foe unto our old age: If we get a fill of Gods mercy in the morning Psalm. 90.
14
of our age, we shall be glad and rejoice all our days: Note
The rememberance of a well spent youth, is in old age lik the casting of the
Eagles Psalm. 103. 5
bill whereby its age is renewed: Note
O the silver colored gray head of that old man, who from his youth in the
maine of his life, has walked in the ways of righteousness! Grace from the
Cradle is of great expectation: Note
Happy is that youth which is old in grace: If ye get grace to your youth,
ye shall get glory after age: God it is who gives both grace and glory.
which two I may call the Note
everlasting twins conceived into the breast and bowels of that Mercy that
is above.

Take heed my Children: In your first days strive to be like the Ancient of
days: Note
A good Conscience well kept in youth is a perpetual feast for old age: That
man's youth is a great friend to his old age who can say with Obadiah, I fear
the Lord 1 Kin. 18. 12
from my youth: A well spent youth is a blessed seed time for Heaven: A well
spent youth is spiritual physic unto old age, which of it self on Earth,
is a sickness drawing unto Death.

As the well spent youth is a friend unto old age, so if it be evil spent, it
is a most fearful foe; a foe full of woes: Note
woe to him whose old bones are sores with the sins of his youth: the Psalm. 25.
7.
Lord has taken the pen in his hand wherewith after he yt has narrowly
searched his ways, he shall write bitter things against him, and shall make
him possess the iniquities of his Job. 13. 26
youth: * Beware therefore to set your corruption to work, for to give the
Prime of your life unto pleasures: Be wise in time, lest Satan shely foist in
and closely convey corruptions into your young and tender hearts by tickling
and tempting you to folly: Note
It is more easy while it is time to spend well the time, than after to
redeem the misspent time: Why would ye trouble your old age with young
folies? If ye saw the seed of folly in your youth, ye shall undoubtedly
reapesheaues of sorrows in your old age: It is a sore trouble to sow in
laughter and reap in tears: Note
In the best man that lives, there is sufficient matter of mourning for his
cloudie and rainie years: The old man has enough to suffer under sickness,
though he had no cumber of his sins: Note
O how pleasant is the bitter harvest of a foolish youth! O folly, has not
old age pains sufficiently in the body, though it be not surcharged with
the troubles of the Spirit: What wisdom is this to surcharge the weakest age
with the heauiest burden? Note
Think chiefly upon this, seeing the goodness of God follows the whole
life of man from his mothers belly to his burial, it is reason that his whole
life as well youth as old age, be framed for to express his thankfulness.

My first and chiefest direction to you is, that ye give to God the first
fruits of your age: Note
Suffer not sin in your tender years to get hold and haunt in your hearts:
A godly Youth has a special promise (...) God, these that seek me earelie
(...) (...). 7. 17
find me: This parable was forged in Hell, young Saints old Devils, that is,
A good Lad will be an evil man: And this is turned over again by the
profane world, viz. An evil Lad will be a good man: Nay, but an evil Lad is
in the way to prove an old wag-string: A young scoffing Ismael will become an
old swaggering reueller. Children in Scripture are called Plants: If in the
Month of Psalm. 128. 3
May a (...) be without leafes or buddes, we conceive little good hope of any
fruits to be had in the harvest time thereafter: will a tree bring forth
fruits before it flourish? When flourish time is past without any blossom,
shall we look for any fruit for that year?

Learn of the trees to know your seasons: Note
Solomon sent the sluggard to Doctor Pismires school for to Prou. 6. 6.
learn wisdom, to provide for the evil day: Strive with the trees in your
youth to get a spring of grace, which may app^are in the sprout and blossom of
dispositions unto virtues.

Mu^ium est ass^escere a teneris.

Note
To begin well or evil is to be in the midst of the journey: Most powerful
are the first impressions lik the love of women which ordinarlie is greatest
toward her first Match the guide of her youth, who tulit primos Prou. 2. 17
amores, has gorten the prime of her love: It is hard to fall from her first
love: Note
See what a liking these who are in Kings Courts will have to remember of the
Cottage or rural village whereinto they were borne and brought up: The secret
draught is so powerful that hardly can any express the cause: This made a
Pagan to say,

Nescio qua natale solu^ dulcedine cu^ctos Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse
sui.

By this ye may see how by a certain secret instinct we ever love the places
where we have been borne and brought up: Note
Observe the lesson of this, if ye pass your youth in sin and in the
pleasures thereof, hardly shall ye ever forget that company, do what ye can, ye
shall ever have a certain secret love, which your Soul darre not avouch,
toward that which ye once loved while ye were young.

Note
If your sins be your Companions in your vouth, they will be your
Counselors in old age: Rehoboams fall was in this, yt he took counsel of the
young men that were grown up with him: If sin be 1 Kin, 12. 10
brought up with you in your youth, there is danger that ye take its counsel
in your old age: The time of youth is most dangerous, for in it the affections
are boiling, in it reign and rage unhallowed heat, and passionate distempers,
which except they be repressed with the strength of grace, break out into the
thunders and tempestuous storms of uncleanness, of riot and of drunkenesse,
and such like, which make most fearful breaches and deep gashes into the
Conscience.

Beware therefore at the first to sin, lest at last ye sin by custom: Isa.
48. 4.
The hardening custom of sin is in Scripture called, An iron sinew in the
neck, and a brazen brow: Note
If custom of sin make you impotent in well doing, it shall at last make you
impudent in evil doing: Note
He who manteth or stammereth in his speech while he is young, will in all
appearance speak so until his dying day: Note
Fools dream that man is like March, if he come in with an Adders head, they
think that he shall go out with a Peacoks tail, as if an evil beginning
were the way to an happy end.

Be wise in time my dear hearts, from your youth consecrat your selves
Nazarites unto the Lord, that is, Be pure and holy, touch no unclean thing,
give not prouocatio^ to the flesh, but rather abstain from all 1 Pet, 2. 11
fleshly lusts which war against the Soul: What shame for Gods sons to be
sins slaves.

If ye would live long, live well: Note
The wicked, says Solomon, shall not prolong Eccles. 8. 13
his days which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God: Note
For this cause it shall be your best to take the first handsell of time for
well doing: Resist the Devil in the beginning of sin: Note
Fight against iniquity as against a foraine enemy at ye borders of your
heart, even at the first landing, before it get fitting in fast and stable
ground: While it is fleeting, fight it off the shore: Note
Sin is like a Cockatrice it must be killed into the shell before it come
out with piercing venomous looks: Note
Satan in this last and most corrupt age has with many blots branded earelie
holiness: As for you my counsel is, that with great care ye strive to
begin well early in the morning of your age, and that thereafter ye
constantly go on till like a Sun ye come to the Noone of grace in glory.

Note
In three times of our age we should strive to three degrees of holiness: In
Childhood we must be good, in Youth head we must grow better, in old Age
we must be best: Note
He who is not best at last in mine opinion, was never good at all.

In all Ages tak heed to all your ways be never wedded unto any sin, though it
seem like Zoar but a little one: There is no sin so base that it will go alon
without a Page at its back: while ye hear of others faults, practice Plato
his Precept, Numquid ego tale? Have I done any such lik thing my self?

Strive in all your affairs to be upright before God and man: Be ever of these
that stand on the Lords side for the good cause: Let no consideration of
profit or preferment make you to stiffle the voice of your own Conscience:
Shute not your ears at its cry like the Adder at the voice of Psalm. 58. 4.
the charmer. Be not loath to know your selves, try and examine well your
inward parts. Do never with great confidence that which ye can not do with a
good Conscience.

If ye sin, delight not in sin, such pleasures are too dear, and bought
at too high a rate.

In your whole like reverence your Pastor though subject to many infirmities,
for we fail all in many things: Elias refused not his meat 1 Kin. 17. 6
because a Raven an unclean foul brought it unto him: Best men often are
signs and wonders even in Israel. Isa. 8. 18.


Oh, that I had words of motion, that might stir you up to all Christian
duties: Beware I exhort you to follow any evil example given by me: Note
Strive by grace to be better than the Rock wherout of ye have been hewn:
Many a time have I started aside and stumbled in the way: It is a rare mercy
of God that has brought me through this world with honesty: It is only Gods
guarde even his saving grace which has kept my life from scab and scandale,
for in truth, I speak it to my shame, that God may have the glory: I have
been like a foolish Flee that flutters about the Candle: It is by the mere
mercy of my God that the wings of my profession have not been scorched with
the flammes of some one temptation or other, which should have been to me the
cause of some filthy downe-fall: Note
A scandalous sin is like a dampe which quenches the bright Candle of a
glorious profession.

Let these that are forwarned strive to be forearmed: Happy is he who in time
beats down his own corruptions, and tameth his wild heart like an horse whom
the Ridder breaks, that he may travel him the parts and the pace as he best
desires: It it only Gods mercy which has stopped the torrent of my
corruptions: Learn therefore of me to pass the 1 Pet: 1. 17.
time of your sojourning here in fear: The evil which man least fears, he
is nearest to fall into.

Take heed my dear Children, and give ear unto my counsel: * Where ever ye
be, think shame to commit that which ye would think shame to confess: In
all things strive to have a clear Conscience toward Act* 24 17
God and man: Respect more goodness than greatness and its sway: Be always
courtesse: Note
Cut not a man in the current of his speech, be not self conceited, but be
little in your own eyes: Strive rather to be good, than to seem to be so:
Obey your betters, hearken to the wise, reverence the gray hairs found in the
way of righteousness: Note
Suffer rebuke patiently, for it is better than secret love; faithful are the
wounds of a friend: Haunt ever the Prou. 27. 6
company of the godly: In all affairs be like the Be, such out of all things
the best, and leave the worst, seek out the honey, leaving the venom to the
Waspe: Let every day be to you as your last day: Note
Before you go to bed at night make your score even with your Judge: Be daily
careful to fit your count* so shall ye have the less to account for at your
final reakoning: In all things be upright and do well, for as Iehosaphat
said, The Lord will be with the good: If ye 2 ^hro. 29 11
would dye, the death of the righteous, Numb. 23. 10
strive first to live the life of the righteous: Note
If ye would come to the end, ye must not leap over the means: While ye are
young, kill your sins in their youth, even in their first motions, while they
touch but the spirit Ephesians ^. ^4
of the mind, before they be hatched out from under the affections: Isa. 59.
5.
Break betimes the Cockatrices egg, lest at last it break out into a Viper:
Beware to conceive mischief, lest ye bring forth iniquity: Note
By the corruption of our corruptions, is the generation of our regeneration.
Pamper not ye Carrion: Note
Beasts fed on ye bare commons are not so near the slaughter as these yt go
into fatter pastures: B^ware of all uncleanness: Make a covenant with your eyes
not to behold wine and women: keep carefully your vessels clean in
sanctification and honor: Note
If ye slip in any sin, beware to sleep in it, for that is death, Vita
in vigilia est: Note
Godly men in old age regretting their former haunts, are lessons from God to
teach Youth not to plot the pleasures wherewith God is displeased: Many sins
of Youth be called tricks, but it is a terrible trick to go to Hell: Note
People foolishlie cloak Fornication with a trick of youth, but the Spirit of
GOD gives it a scarlet cloak dyed in red with the blood of 1 Cor. 10. 10
three and twenty thousand.

Be ye wise in time, let the rememberance of the shrill sound of the last
trumpet ever hold your heart in a stir so soon as ye see the least
appearance of evil: Note
Think no sin little, seeing it is against so great a Majesty: For eating of a
tree Ada^ was banished out of Paradise: For touching the Arc shaken with the
Oxen, Vzzah lost his life* For looking 2 Samuel 5. 7
into it fifty thousand three score 1 Samuel 6. 19
and ten men were slain at Bethshemeth: For gathering sticks upon the
Sabbath, God declared that the man Numb. 15 39
should be stoned unto death without the Camp: Such things are written for
our learning: As for you, stand in awe to sin in a thought: To clippe the
Kings Coin were it never so little, is an high ^reason: Be affraide at the
first gloumes of your GOD: Crouch so soon as he begins to shake his rod at
you: In all companies be constantly godly; like the Sun in his light: Too
many like the Moon, now glister with reflexes of light, and anon are
darkened: Now and then they appear with diverse faces, now with Saul, they are
Prophets among the Prophets, and anon as reuoking all former godliness, they
run ry^ot with gluttons and reuellers: O my beloved, think never shame to be
godly among scorners: Care not that by your conscio^able carriage the wicked
be gauld and grieved, in their mad mood they will call all godliness but
outwardnesse and formalitie.

Tak good he^d to all your ways, set a guarde about your thoughts, and a watch
before your mouth: Note
Seeing the tongue is man's glory, let it not be abused with rotien Psalm. 57.
8.
words: Let not your ears be open for to receive the scowring of other * Note
men's filthy mouths.

Be calm and quiet in all your ways: Be not rash or hasty, look before
ye leap, be not selfe-willed, 2 Pet, 2. 10
proud contemners of your betters: Aspire not above your pitch: Note
Care not so much for man's d^spight as for Gods displeasure: Let God be the
caruer of all your car^s. Abhor to be idle like these who sitting in the
Chire of sloth: pass their time at handie dandie: Loyter not while ye should
labor: Note
The first word that Pharaoh said to Iaakob and his sons was, What is your
tread or Genesis 44. 33
occupation? Be painful and faithful in your calling, live not litherlie as
these that are given to sleep the sluggardes lingering sickness: He is of a
base spirit who sluggishlie gaping and stretching himself, lies lusking on
the down: Up, up from the feathers earelie in the morning strive with the
Cock in watchfulness, and rise with the chirping of the birds: Join
watching against evil, with wishing and prayers for that which is good: Note
It is good that the body be moistened with the morning dew, earelie rising
brings health to the body and increases the number of man's days: Note
I remember of a verse which while I was young served for a wakener for to
rouse me from my morning sleep.

Sanctificat sanat, dit at quoque surgere mane.

That is it makes holy, whole and rich to rise earelie in the morning, for
this cause early buckle your selves to your business: Be wise and watchful:
In all your enterprisses have an eye upon your God, do all as into his sight,
be not too cast down in adversity, nor too puffed up in prosperity: Note
If man's applause make you to ouerweene your selves at any time, chasten your
loftiness with the memory of many infirmit es which are nested within you,
in all things fear the worst, and hope the best: Note
That which seems to man vnliklie, is not with God impossible.

Let your life in a godly sober, and civil carriage shine before men that they
seeing it, may glorify your heavenly Father: Strive not to be called
Doctors and Rabbis though ye be men of letters, but above all strive to be
teachers of others by good example and not by word only, lest ye be like the
Fyle which smootheth all other things, but it self remains rough: Note
Beware of all sinful pleasures which like fair Ladies come with alluring
propines to woo and catch the unstable soul: Note
In the very throng of all your adoes draw your selves to a set diet of
private devotion.

Mine heart begins to faint, of force I must make a pause: After that I am
refreshed with a little rest, I shall declare to you all that is in my mind
and memory.

O my Soul, seek and sigh for grace: Be careful for a nearer acquaintance
with the Lord of Heaven: Shortly thou shall embrace him whom the Fathers by
faith saluted but a far off. Heb. 11. 13


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in Heaven the A prayer
groans of thine humble supplicant, make him fully and freely to taste and
partake of the pleasures of thy graces til he come to glory: Roll his wearied
Soul within these compassions, which in thy mercy are rouled together: O
dear Jesus, besprinkle thou his heart with thy precious Soule-sauing blood
which is ever lovely to the merciful eye of the Father.

Take breath a little Sir, that ye may continue in such precepts: such
heavenly sentences were never bred nor brewed upon the earth: The Lord Ezekiel.
3. 1.
himself has put the Roll of these things into your mouth which ye have
eaten, and which make your breath to have the savor of life unto 2 Cor. 2. 16
life: Certainly in some measure the Lord Jesus has breathed upon you, as
he did upon his Apostles, when he said unto them, Receive the Ioh. 20. 22
holy Ghost.


The sick Man. Lord imprint thine Image into my Soul afresh.

My Spirit is revived, a new power is entered into me: Blessed Isa. 40. 29
be he who gives power to the faint, and who increases strength to them that
have no might.

Give ear now again unto my speech. O ye my dear Children: Incline your
ears unto the words of my mouth: Note
See that ye live in love; a rent is the forerunner of a ruin: If ye would
live and die in honesty, practice all Christian duties: Fear God, love the
Church, honor your King, be faithful to your Country, reverence your
Mother: 1 P^t. 3. 8
Be pitiful, be courteous, live in love together: Note
Your strength is in unity, like a sheafe of arrows: A Eccles. 4. 1
threefold cord is not easily broken: Note
Our Lord after that he had ended his last Supper prayed five several times,
That his Disciples might be one: Ioh. 17. 11 21. 22. 23. 26.
The smallest grain of discord will at last grow to such head and hear, that
it will part these who are most entire in love: Let the falling out of Paul and
Barnabas that blessed pair of most worthy worke-men, teach all good men to
live in love: Note
Men of a waspish nature cannot work Honey with the Bees: Bitter poison is
only to be found in their Combs.

So far as is possible have peace Psalm. 34. 14
with all men: Seek Peace, and follow after it: Note
Be not braggers nor brawlers like Ismael the wild man whose hand was against
every man, and every man's hand against him: Return never evil for evil,
less evil for good, but rather good for evil: Be not like Lions, which while
they are young are gentle till their tallons grow long: Have peace with all so
far as is possible, and the God of peace shall abide with you. Note
Be not busy bodies in other men's matters for fear of after-claps if any
thing be amiss: Note
One says very well, In little ado much rest, in much adoeno rest.

Learn of Peter's fall to flee all evil company, lest in the end ye come
home with a weeping cross: It were better to suffer cold without, than within
to be warmed with such as S. Peter met with in the high Priests hall, such
warmenesse is but a cold comfort: If ye fall in love with any sin strive
not only to leave it, but also to loath it.

The Lord give you wisdom in all things: Be neither given to much company
neither to sancie singularity: Enterprise nothing rashly without conferring
first with God and with some godly friend: Note
Before ye intend a work, cast first the costs lik the wise Builder in the
Gospel, hold ever your mind upon God and honest things: Note
In most secret places think on Gods eye which sees our thoughts a far
off: Be fervent in prayer: Grieve not the Spirit of Grace: Neglect not his
graces within you: What ever they be, let them be carefully employed: See that
ye be faithful in traffiqueing with your Lords Talents. for to return them
with profit: Away with these who love to lurk in a lazy luskishnesse.

This age is defiled with filthy Belghes of blasphemy: To swear and roar is
counted good fellowship: Bridle ye your tongues, beware of the language of
Hell: Note
By little and little in oaths the tongue is inured till it strike at Christ's
wounds with bloody blows: Note
Cursed shall they be who dye their tongue red in that blood, which is the
ranso^e of the world.

Consider this I pray you, stand in awe and sin not: Note
Be not like the worlds fools who being loose without any bridle of fear,
care not what be their end, so that their way be pleasant: Believe not all
reports: Note
Try before ye trust: B^e not like the blind whelps which suck every thing
that is put into their mouth, thinking it to be the teates of their mother:
While ye live in the world be not worldlings: The most worthy are not most
wealthy: Eutrapeles heaped riches upon these whom he hated, for to burden them
with cares. Use the things of this world rather with hand than heart: Consider
all things with a nature and impartial survey of all circumstances: Let
neither Love nor Lucre make you to sway from the square and rule of
righteousness: Note
All things below are but tottering and transitory trashes set upon a whirling
wheel: There is none earthly thing of such worth for which a man should make a
breach in his Conscience: If ye study to be rich, ye will fall into many
temptations, it is hard to win much soon and well: Note
A short care is fittest for a short life: Note
Most men's hearts so are curbed with carnal that spiritual meditations take
up their hearts but at reuersion by fit and starts.

Be in good example one toanother: Note
Ye who are elders be like the great wheels of the Clock whereof if one be
set a going, it will move its fellow, and that y^ other which is next unto it:
Note
Let all your strife be in this, who in the Christian course shall out stripe
his fellow Ioh. 20. 4.
in well doing, as John and Peter ran a race who should be first at the Lords
grave.

Note
In all affairs see that your hearts be ever down right for the good cause:
If ye would walk circumspectly in all your ways, have ever an eye upon your
count: None of you can tell how soon ye must compeare in judgment.

While ye are tempted unto sin, ask first your heart but these two questions,
1. What answer shall I make for tbis to my God at that great day? 2. Would I
be content that another did the like unto me?

Be wise like Serpents and innocent like Doves: Let your life be harmeles;
for in that day Righteousness shall bear and wear the Crown.

If God spare your days, and bless you with years, beware to celebrate new
years with old sins: * An old Father said of himself that when in his
tender age he had once lost the tenor of an holy life gray hairs were got
about his head before that he could recover it again: Gray hairs in the way
of righteousness are called, a Crown of glory: But seeing while Prou. 16. 31
ye are young ye have no particular promise of long life, dream not of many
days: It is hard to sit fast upon a sandy foundation: Delay not your
repentance in a loitering lasines: But as a man that has a set time for his
task daleyes not, but carefully listeneth to the Clock and counts his
hours, so do ye: Be ever upon your watch until the time of your Job. 14. 14
changing come: In the prime of your days be thinking on your end: Be instant
with God, like Moses that he would so teach you to number your days Psalm. 90. 12
that ye may apply your hearts to wisdom and to well doing: Note
Waste not the short Candle of your life at idle play, which God has allotted
to light you unto bed: There is no such foe to repentance, as to think that we
have time enough to repent, or that we may repent when we please: Note
He that will not while he may, shall not when he would. Be not profane
like Esau: Live not in a customarie gross sin: Loose not the reins to your
corrupt affections: If ye fall with the Saints, strive also with the Saints
to be recovered out of your falls: Note
Many speak of David's fall who never remember David's rising: The repentance
of the Godly is set down not to teach sinners to sin, that after they may
repent, but rather to drive them from sin, by letting them see how a short
sweet is followed with a long sour: Note
What a fool is he, who seeing his Neighbor break his leg in breaking of
an Orchard for an Apple, would leap the same loupe, being assured of as much,
and all because he sees that now his neighbor is soundly healed, and
feels no more pain?

If ye wander from God, hasten your return: A man out of the way must come
back again: The soone^ he returns the less is his labor: If ye fall in
sin and rise again, beware to be relaps: Note
An Horse coming by the same place where he caught a fall, will starte a
back: Neither for Spur nor Wand will ye get him into the same hole again:
David no doubt after once would not count the Tribes again, neither would
Peter after that awefull look of Christ, deny his Master again; neither
would Job seck any more to dispute with his God again: They all know by
experience how bitter a thing such sins were, and therefore abhorred all such
things at the very rememberance thereof.

Note
Remember well I pray you that old age will inquire what youth has been
doing: This now know, that all youthlie pranking pleasures are followed with
pages of pains, which cry unto others, that they listen not to the
allurementes and deceitful charms of their filthy flesh: While Dalilah
lulleth in her lap, she is armed with Sissers for to cut the hair of our
strength.

It is good that both old and young have their loins ever girded and their
Candles in their hands, waiting for yt coming of their Lord: Learn of the
foolish Virgins, how dangerous a thing it is to sleep without oil in your
Lamps: Let never sin reign in your mortal bodies: Subdue the flesh to the
Spirit: Note
If ye live in Gods fear, look to die in Gods favor: Note
Happy is the man that keeps a Calender of his days, whereby he may be
roused up to think every day his last: Note
It is certain that our life like a ship upon the Sea is carried with a
strange gale: There is none abiding here; our Sun is fast posting to the
West, as he arose so shortly must he fall.

And therefore though ye dwell one earth mind the things that are above: Let
your Souls here in earth, Col. 3. 1. Luke 16. 19
and on earth soar up toward ye everlasting Tabernacles. Note
Too many Souls be Trewands from God, only minding the things that are
below: Beware that thornie cares choke in your Souls the seed of grace: To be
worldly minded is death: Aspire not above your pitch: Note
Thrust not yourselues in offices: An office is well called, A Calling, because
man should wait till he be called unto it: It is better to be haled by
force of others to great offices, than to rushrashlie upon them undesired: It
were to be wished that rather men want Offices, than that Offices want men
answereable to their discharge.

Affect not to be singular in glorious shows of profession without substance,
like Pedlers who hang out more than they have within: There be none so peevish
as prattling professors without the power of practice: Note
The new creature in actions is the truest outward witness of the truth of
the inward affections: Affection bewrays the evil affections.

Malo esse probus quam haberi.

It is better to be good, than so to seem.

Among all humane duties be careful to keep love with your Neighbors: So
far as is possible win the good word and will of all men: Be not
contentious nor stirrers up of discordes: God has blessed Matthew. 5. 9
the peace makers, The Apostles Precept is plain, Let brotherly love Heb. 13.
11
remain.

Forget not the poor: Hide not yourselues from your own flesh: The rich and
the poor will meet together, Prou. 22. 2
says Solomon: That is, One good turn may be requited by another: If they
cannot recompense you, they will pray for you: Note
Though that which ye give unto them at the first seem to be lost, like seed
sown into a running water which carries it away, the Lord, who brought back
the Jordan shall bring back your lost Josh. 3. 16.
seed with a plentiful increase: Cast then your bread upon the waters, for
Eccles. 11. ^
ye shall find it after many days: Christ's counsel is, that rich men make
Luke 16. 9
unto themselves friends of the Mammo^ of vnrighteausnesse: If ye receive the
poor in their need into your earthly mansions, they by their prayers shall
receive you in your greater need into everlasting Tabernacles: Note
When Dives has dyned let Lazarus have the crumbs: Note
Cursed Adam was covered but with fig leaves, and Christ cursed the fig tree
for having leaves without fruits: While ye give alms let all be done without
a desire to be seen or praised of men: Let not your left hand know what the
right hand gives, and God shall reward that humble secrecy with open honor:
What ever be done, see that it be done in Faith, without which most glorious
works are but glistering sins, and Pharisees alms, beggars of praise,
things done to be seen.

Be meek and gentle toward all: Note
The Spirit of God cannot light upon a Soul but in the shape of a Dove: Every
way of a man is right Prou. 21. ^
in his own eyes: But the Lord pondereth the hearts.

My Spirit faints, my breath shorteneth, mine heart sickeneth, I find Death
now besieging my Noble parts: I cannot tell how soon God shall fetch away my
Soul: It is most certain that I draw near to Psalm. 107. 18
the doors of death.

I have yet something in my mind for to tell you, O my dear Children; but for
weakness I cannot, till I be refreshed with a little rest: Within a little
space I look to be locked in my grave. O Lord, say unto my Soul, I am thy
Salvation: Refresh mine heart, rejoice my Soul with a sight of thy reconcealed
A prayer
face, before that I go hence, and be seen no more.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in Heaven.

O how much fruit grows off one stalk: GODS grace in you has brought
forth a large harvest of comforts to all that have heard you.

The Lord renew your strength, and A prayer
put his Spirit within you: The Lord sanctify your Spirit, which is the Candle
Prou. 20. 17
of the Lord, searching all the bowels of the belly.

The God of all grace has cleansed and purified your words through the stramer
of his great mercy: * So soon as ye have gathered strength let us hear the
rest of your counsel to your Children: In it is wisdom for to be learned of
old age, recover your force a little, that ye may conclude that which ye have
begun: Note
It is good in good things to go through stitch.


The sick Man. O Lord, perfect thy strength in my great weakness.

My dear Children hearken unto me: It is not possible but in this evil world
ye shall be troubled with great and grievous afflictions: In my great griefs
I was ever wont to comfort my self with that wise speech of Solomon, When a
man's Prou. 16. 7
ways shall please the Lord, he shall make even his enemies to be at peace
with him: If any man offend you, or is offended against you, persuade
yourselues that some of your ways please not the Lord, and therefore if ye
would please good men, or have good men for to please you, walk in the ways
which will please the Lord: All men's hearts are in his Prou* 21. 17
hands like rivers of water: He can make a foe of a friend, and a friend of
a foe: Note
If ye neglect this counsel, ye shall at last be forced to stand at staves
end with the whole world: He who is at variance with his God, will never agree
with himself, and so shall be in discord with all, for as the Pagan said well,

Conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.

He who is not good to himself, can be good to none: Though commonly men
say of some, He is, or was evil to none, but to himself: A wise man in this
land has made a good replye to that speech, viz. It were alms to hang him
that is not good to himself.

Now ye are young, yet breath is in the body, Work while it is light: Note
Be careful to keep a Callender as it were of your days which may call upon
you hourelie, be diligent for the time is short: By years, days, and hours,
our life is continually cut and sklised away.

What shall I say more? The Lord give you wisdom in all things: Godliness
is true wisdom: Best spirited men are not ever most spiritual: As for you*
strive truly to be religious Nathanaels Israelites indeed. Ioh. 1. 47.
Every night before ye go to bed, set before your eyes the mercies of yt
day: Muster them orderly and take a view of them carefully, that upon your
knees from your hearts ye may give God his praise* While ye are gone from the
public prayer of the Family unto your private bed Chamber, remember Gods
mercies afresh: While ye remember them, let this be your last collation
drink before ye go to bed; Psalm. 116. 13.
take with David the cup of Salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord: Note
As trades men have a day Book for daily receites, it were expedient that all
the godly have a register wherein may be written the noble acts of the Lord,
for to help ou^ weak memory, lest we suffer his mercies to slip out of
our mind: Note
If ye either forgette your sins or Gods mercy, remember that ye have a
Conscience which is a daily obseruer, a night watch, and a secret spy into
your Souls.

In all your adoes strive to be righteous before God, and upright before men:
See in a short verse what shall be the end both of the godly and wicked

The memory of the just is blessed: Prou. 10. 7
But the name of the wicked shall rotie.

O my dear Children, lay up carefully these words into your hearts which I
your old Father have spoken with much pain: Note
Think upon this, one day Death will inquire what Life has been doing.

As for my worldly affairs, as Rents or Goods, if they be great lippen not
to them: If they be little, little with Gods grace is enough: If ye be
godly, God shall be your Father and your feeder: If ye abound be not
prodigal: Make not a god of your Belly: Beware to tipple or quaffe, or with
the glutton to feed delicatelie: Care not for panch pleasures: Luke 16. 19
John lived on locusts: Note
It is Matthew. 3. 4
better to live on Cake and water with a godly Elias than to feast royally
with a foolish Nabal: Though feasts be pleasant they are dangerous: When the
days of feasting were ended Job sent and sanctified his children, Job. 1. 5.
and rose up earelie in the morning for to offer burnt offerings for them al:
for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned and cursed God in their heart:
Single feasting is fittest for the Soul and most wholesome for the body: God
sends sluggardes to the Pismire as to a Master of work for to direct them
from loitering to labor.

Note
Let gluttons whose dearest delights, are in panch-pleasures from morning
until even learn of the Swallows who sit not down to dine but feed while
they flee: As they feed on flees, so they flee while they feed: What should
man do with his Belly, but feed it as in a flight: Let the wings of
sobriety carry you from glutting plenty before ye be ouer-taken with that
which shall make you to be ashamed to morrow: While yebegin to drink, beware
of after-clapes: Men by a little distemper at the first contract easily an habit
of sine: Note
S. Augustine speaking how his Mother MONICA, learned to tipple, ^aith,

Primoribus labijs sorbebat exiguum: August. Confess. lib. 9 c. 8
Itaque ad illud modicum quotidi^na modica addendo in eam consuetudinem lapsa
erat vt prope jam plenos mero calices inhianter hauriret.

That is, At the first she began but to kiss the cup, and to sippe a little
of the wine while she filled the Cup to her Parents, but anon she came to
this, that she made no bones to suck dry full Cups of wine: See how from
sipping at last she came to carousing.

Oh, but that is a dear drink, which costeth a man a Spot in his name and a
blot in his conscience: Experience tells that pleasures is more dangerous
than pain, and feasting tha^ fasting: Remember Jobs children, see in what a
fear that godly Father was concerning their ^easting: Certainly his fear
was not a foolish fear without any ground: It is set down in Scripture for to
teach men fear in feasting: Note
Too many at such times turn themselves into barrels and beasts swinishlie
ouerturning all reason and judgment that is within them: As for you, be ye
sobber if ye would be holy: God will not tarry into yt heart which has a
god in the belly: Note
He who would lodge the Arc must chasse Dagon to the door like a dog:

Note
Many who neglect the belly* have pride printed in great capital Letters
upon their back: Be ye not sumptuous in apparel: Note
Let God give you the coat according to the cold: Follow not new fashions:
Beware of evil example: Woe to the world for scandales.

As ye should not be prodigal, be not also misers, pinch-pennies: Defraude
not your selves of your granted good: Be thankful to God for all his gifts:
Away with these who after they have received that which they sought, have done
with God, till they need him again.

In all the course of your life strive to hold the Balance equal, virtues in
the midst: Note
Extremities are like Border Thieves not subject to the Laws. Be neither too
nice, nor too pert, too scurrile nor too silent: Note
In worldly wealth try before ye treasure: If ye be rich, glory not in
your riches; if ye be poor, pray God to keep you from the extremity of
poverty, lest that ye put forth your hand to steal: Note
If God send poverty be not discouraged: Though it be sore, it is no sin:
Lazarus with his rags was welcomer to God than Dives with his purple: He who
begged from that rich man on earth, saw the rich man a beggar into Hell: He is
rich enough who has the favor of his God: Note
In good life is long life.

Nequities vitae non sinit esse senem.

The wickedness of life abbridgeth the life.

Be more desirous to live well, than to live long: Too too many live to spend
their grace-right with their Birth*right: Such like wanton Widows are dead
while they live*

If ye fall in sin, up, up, make haste to return unto your God: Repentance
delayed in youth is a strengthening of sin against the old and weaker age:
The least sin entertained makes a way for more: Note
The least drop of the juice of evil is lik leaven that sowreth ye whole lump*

If in this world ye prosper, be not taken up with self foolish conceit:
Take not outward prosperity to be the ell and measure of Gods love: Note
Whether ye wither or ye flourish in worldly things, think upon this, that
your misery or happiness can be in nothing but in that which is eternal: Note
Go where ye please, the justice of God one day shall try the foote-steppes
which ye have trodden.

The chief Legacy which I leave to you all is the Charter of Gods promise,
which I have received by the hand of Faith: In it is an Heritage of lines
fallen in pleasant places, VIZ. That not only he should be my God, but that
he should be a God to Exodus 20. 6.
my Children unto thousand generations keep fast this promise into the Charter
Chists of your hearts: In confidence of this promise depend upon your God in
well and in ^oe, in wealth and in want: Though he should slay you, yet say
with Job that ye will trust in him.

Now for to draw to an end, for my breath fails, and mine heart faints,
I desire you above all things to be earnest in prayer with God: Note
By prayer morning and evening dress your Souls like the Lamps of Gods
Tabernacle: Fill them of the pure oyle-oliue of his grace, that always they
may shine. Note
Eliphaz charged Job chiefly with this, as being the chief cause of all his
woe, that he restrained prayer before Job. 15. 4.
God: With this the Psalmest has branded the wicked, They call not Psalm. 14.
4. Psalm. 5 3. 4.
upon God, and again, They call not upon God: Note
It is observed by the most cunning Physicians that pain in speaking and
loathing of meat, be two symptoms of a diseased and distempered body: A Soul
while it prays, it speaks; while it hears it eats. If there be pain in
the one and loathing in the other, that Soul cannot be well: Thrice a day
David was wont to pray, at morning, Psalm. 55. 16
evening* and at noone: Note
This zeal also wakened him while others were sleeping: At midnight he arole
for Psalm. 119.
to pray unto his God: Happy is that man, who shall so spend the short time of
his life in this valey of mortality.

Let this in all things be an awband above your heads, that the eye of the
Almighty God is ever upon you, and that he is acquainted with all your ways:
Where ever ye be think your selves ever to be in that most awefull presence:
make Conscience of all your thoughts, for the Prou. 24. 9
very thought of foolishness is evil.

Beware of the lusts of youth: Strive with God in prayer, that he would so
engage you in his grace and love, that your corruption prove not strongest
while your wits are weakest: Entreat earnestly the Lord that he would
make perfect his strength in your weakness. 2 Cor. 12. 9


When ye find any good beginnings of Grace within your selves, wait
steadfastly upon the due accomplishment thereof in Glory: Whom the Lord loves
he loves to the end, his calling and gifts are without repentance.

If this ye do carefully, ye shall be like twigges which having a vigorous
life, sprout and flourish till they come to trees.

And now at last for to conclude and sum up the whole briefly: If ye would
have God to dwell into you, be ye an holy Sanctuary for his Spirit: If ye
would have God to rest in you as he did into his holy Temple there must be
in you as was in his Temple an Holy of holies: Note
As were within God's Ark so must ye have within your hearts, the Tables of
Gods Law the sum of the Old Testament, and with them the pot of Manna,
even Christ the bread of life the substance of the New Ioh. 6. 35.
Testament. Love this word; honor this word, bleed for this word, yea, and die
for it. Many in this world be like these Pultrons and base spirited men of
Thessalonica, who had no Act. 17. 11
courage for the t^ueth: As for you, strive to be like these of Berea, who
were better borne and of a more manly breeding in that they were courageous
for the Truth. Strive to ye keeping of Gods Commandments for like friends they
are so linked together that if one be offended, all the rest will interest
themselves in its quarrel, fail in one, and fail in all Pray fervently,
that ye may practice all these my precepts This doing ye shall never find your
selves fatherles: The great God shall be your Father: To this Father now I give
you, irtreating him to be a Father unto you in all times to ensue. A prayer


The Father of mercies, the Son of his love, and the Spirit of c^mfortes, so
guide you in all your carriage that ye may carry an incorrupt Conscience to the
1 P^t, 5. 10
Grave. The God of all grace make you perfect* stablish, strengthen, settle you,
and lead you in the Land of vprightnes: Psalm. 144. 10
The Lord bless you all with his best blessings: My blessing I leave you:
Kiss me, and so fare well.

Now the day is fatre spent, and my strength begins to fail me, seeing all
things as the Apostle says, are sanctified by the word of God and 1 Timothy 4. 5
prayer, let us conclude this days conference with our humble supplications
unto our God. My dear Pastor offer ye up this Evening Sacrifice: The Lord
perfume it with the spiritual incense of Christ's merits, that thereby our
Souls being perfumed, the Lord may find a smell as the smell of a field
which the Genesis 27. 27
Lord has blessed. Pray earnestly for me, yt the Lord give me both strength
and courage for the fighting out of this Battle, that in the end I may be
crowned with the Laurels of an everlasting victory.


The Pastor. My Soul rejoices to have heard so many good words from your
mouth: Solomon said very well and wisely, A word spoken in due season Prou.
15. 23
how good is it?

According to your desire we shall conceive a Prayer to GOD for you. The Lord
power upon all our Souls Zach. 12. 10
that promised Spirit of grace and of supplications.


A Prayer for the sick Man. Sore weakened with sickness.
MOst gracious GOD, most Psalm. 19. 24.
dear and loving Father, Let the word of our mouth, and the meditations of our
hearts be acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, our strength and our Redeemer. By
thy Spirit banish all straggling thoughts, and keep our minds steddie and
attentive in this chiefest work of devotion.

Behold, LORD, and consider here thy poor Servant fainting in great
weakness of body, But though flesh and friends, health, and wealth, and all
should fail him, thou, LORD, will never fail him: He is thy Servant, he is
thy Servant, the son of thy hand-maide: Thou have most powerfullie hitherto
supported and vpholde^ him by thy merciful hand: Now leave him not while he is
drawing near unto his long home. Eccles. 12. 5


It is easy to perceive that his age is departing from him, like a shepherds
Isa. 38. 12.
tent, and that thou art ready to cut off his life like a weauer: His
desire, LORD, is to be with Thee, Thou have heard the sighings of this
prisoner, and thou have understood the groans of thine own Spirit: As thou
have begun the good work in him so perfect it in due time: As thou do
with the year crown it with thy goodness: withdraw not thy Psalm. 65. 11*
Grace from him till it be made perfect in weakness.

Thou, LORD, have manifested thy love to him wonderfully, by putting into his
mind and mouth such divine precepts and counsel^ to his Friends, Wife, and
Children, that all that have heard them have been forced to wonder at the
glory of thy grace.

Now dear Jesus let thy force be with him in his fainting, but the nearer he
draws unto his end, let thy Spirit the Comforter enable him the more, till
victoriously he has put an end unto this Battle: As the strength of his
body shall begin to decrease, let the comfortes of thy Spirit increase in
his Soul: Seal up in his heart that peace which thou have purchased by the
blood of the Prince of peace: Assure him of the rest of these joys which are
to be revealed, whereof he has already received the earnest: O, say unto
his Soul, that thou shall be his Salvation.

In the silence of the night while deep sleep falls on man, make thou his
Job. 4 13.
reins to instruct him: Suggest unto his heart the sweetest words of thy
comforts which may be unto him like apples of gold in pictures of silver:
Prou. 25. 11
Waine his heart daily more and more from the love of things below: Make thou
his Soul to soar up with Eagles wings toward the heavenly Isa. 40. 31
Mansions. Prepare now his Soul to the last conflict: Put upon him all the
Armor of God: Strengthen Ephesians. 6. 11
his Faith, that he may hold fast by Thee, yea, so resoluedlie, that though
thou should slay him, yet he may trust in thee.

When the force of sickness shall tak away the use of his tongue, make his
heart to groan unto Thee in the secret language of thy Spirit, that in thine
hands he commen^ (...) his Soul and that he desires thee to come quickly for
his relief.

Let not the increasing throes and pangues of death discourage him: In greatest
anguish uphold his enfeebled heart with the hope of Glory: Look on him, Lord,
with the eye of thy mercy, incline thine ear to ye sighs of his heart, make
haste to come for his Soul is longing for his appointed Job. 14. 14
time, till his change come: As thou art the Lord of life, so unto thee belong
the issues of death: Let strength proceed from thee like virtue from Christ's
garment, whereby he may be encouraged against the fearful assaults of
death, which shortly in all appearance shall besiege his noble parts, for to
bring him unto dust from whence he came? Make thy Spirit to enter into his
heart for to uphold him against this fear and smart of his last and most
heavy hour.

Let him know that if the earthly 2 Cor 5. 1
house of his Tabernacle be dissolved that he has a building of God, an house
not made with hand eternal in the heaven: Make his Soul more and more
earnestly to groan for to be clothed upon with his house, which is 2 Cor.
5. 6
from Heaven: Seeing while he is here at home in the body, he is absent
from the Lord, make thou him confident and willing rather to be absent from
the body, that he may be present with Thee in the Heavens.

Let the hope of the Resurrection uphold him against all the terrors of the
Gra^e: Persuade his Soul that at the sound of that shrill celestial Trumpet,
his body shall arise, and with these same eyes shall behold his Redeemer, and
none other for him.

Innumerable evils, Lord, have compassed him about: Now the time approaches
that thou will deliver him from all his fears: Make haste, Lord, Come Lord
Jesus, come.

Rebuke Satan we entreat thee, that in the darksome night he interrupt not
the comforts of thy Spirit: Suffer never that sly and crafty one, to bereave
him of the pledges of thy love: Make him to hold fast that which he has,
that none be able to take his Crown: O merciful God, take notice of all his
wants and necessities; and be thou to him SHADAI GOD all sufficient for to
supply them: Let him not want that Grace without the which he cannot serve
thee: Through thy self make him to push down all the enemies of his
Salvation: Through thy Name make him to tread them under foot that rise up
against him, for he has not forgotten the Name of thee his God, neither has
he stretched out his hands to a strange God.

While his eye-stringes shall be broken, and when the throes of death shall
make his heart to tumble within him, then be thou the strength of his heart,
the health of his countenance, and his God. In his greatest griefs anoint his
Soul with some drops of that oil of gladness wherewith thou once anointed
our Lord and Savior above his fellows: Let ^sal. 45, 7
thy Graces like that precious ointment that ran down upon the beard of Psalm.
133. 2
Aaron flow down from thee abundantly upon all the powers of his Soul: Let
spiritual virtues drop down upon him as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew
that descended upon Psalm. 133. 3.
the mountains of Zion. O thou the perfection of beauty shine upon his Soul:
Indue him with a melting and relenting heart.

Be merciful to thy distressed Church, comfort Her in all Her tears and
troubles: Pity Her deformities: Adorn Her with Purity and Unity: Though
She be 1 Cant. 1. 6.
outwardly 1. duskie because the Sun has withered Her, yet She is the Kings
Daughter whose 2. whole glory 2 Psalm. 45. 13
is within: 3 Awake, O North 3 Cant. 4. 6
Wind, and come thou South blow upon Her Garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out: Declare unto Her enemies that if they 4 touch Her, they shall touch
4 Zach. 2. ^
the Apple of thine Eye. Let them all know that it is 5 hard to kick against 5
Act. 9. 5
pricks, and that if they perlecute thee, Thou will throw them to the ground.

Be merciful to our gracious SOVEREIGN the Kings Majesty, as by thy Grace
thou have made him a King, so by thy Grace make Him a good King: Power down a
princely Spirit upon his Soul, that He may have courage for the Truth: Make
Him answerable to his most honorable Style, Defender of the Faith.

Vouchsafe thy mercy upon his Princely Spouse: Let the beauty of the Lord
Her God be upon Her, Make Her like the Kings Daughter Psalm. 45. 13
which is all glorious within: Make Her a Mother in Israel, a Nurse Mother to
thy Church, an happy Mother of blessed Children.

Be merciful to all the Nobility of our Land, fix fast their hearts upon
the things that are above,

Bless our Pastors, make them painful and Faithful at thy Service, that
they may gain with the Talents which thou have committed to their keeping:
Make them to strive more then for states to be in thy favor: Let their
chiefest care be to win and woo many Souls to the love of Jesus, the
blessed Bridegroom of Ioh. 3. 29.
the Church.

Good LORD, be merciful to us that are here humbled before thee: Increase
our Faith, and better our feeling and apprehension of thy love Look graciously
upon this our evening sacrifice which we do here render unto thy Majestic
perfumed with the merits of thy Son in that prayer which he by his most
sacred wisdom has taught us saying, Our Father which art, etc.

The sick Man. Before the market time of my life A prayer
be ended, O my dear God, let me have a rich pennie-worth of thy mercy: Thou
who bids us buy without money, give us grace to tak the advantage of the
Market, before the Sun of our life be set. O that in this our day we could
know the things belonging to our peace, that in an holy zeal the corruptions
of our affections wherewith our hearts here be in^hralled and sold under
sin, may be justled out and tread under foot.


THE EIGHTH DAYS Conference.
A Conference with a carnal Friend concerning his Burial: Concerning Funeral
Sermons: Diverse prayers: Death approaching: A Soliloque^ between the Soul
and the body in a trance, their last adewes: The last gaspes: Michael and
Satan disput for the Soul.

The sick Man. THE troublous toils of this world are the bane of Man's life,
they surfeit his mind with car^s: My Spirit is much wearied, Oh, that I had
wings lik a Dove, then would I fly Psalm. 55 7
away and rest: Note
O with how many roots are we fastened unto this earth: The World, Wife,
Life, and Children, but most of all our own corruptions are burdens which hang
so fast on, yt none hand but that of the Almighty is able to shake them off:
So long as we have health and wealth we stalk in our vanities, like
Nebuchadnezar in his palace of confusion: We never perceive that we dwell in
Babble till one judgment or other bring us to confusion: We will not suffer to
be reproved while the time is fittest for repentance: We are offended at the
word except that it glyde by our faults: We will not with Peter be with-stood
to the face: Gal. 2, 11.


Note
The Preacher must whisper his reproves behind our backs, or he must speak
unto us as unto Princes into Parables: We hear like stones, and 2 Samuel 12. 1
go like snailes: Fie upon us; Oh, that we were wise.


A carnal Friend. What are ye now doing Sir? In all appearance ye are
shortly for to leave this world, ye have said all your adewes and have turned
your back upon all worldly things as Hezekiah did when he turned his face
Psa. 38. 2.
to the wall.

I desire Sir* to know of you but one thing, Where would ye be buried? Were
it not expedient that your Corpse lie into ye Church, where are buried these
which are in greatest account in this world?


The sick Man. What have I to do with this world* 2 Cor. 7. 31
or with the fashions of this world* which pass away? Note
Wherefore should I make the glorious House of my God a flesh pot of corruption?
Fie upon our folly: Should it be convenient that my stinking bones cast up any
noisome vapors, for to trouble the living at the service of the everliving?

What advantage shall it be to my Soul to come and fetch this body out of a
Church more than out of a Church yeard? What prerogative shall it be to my
body in that day, that it has been buried into Gods House? Gods House in
Scripture is called, An House of prayer; but in Matthew. 21. 13
no place is it called, A place of burial: Let no man make me an evil example
after my death: Note
What is this; How long shall foolish man go round in his course and compass
of vanity, like a blind horse in a Mill?


The carnal Friend. But would ye not at least have a Tomb Sir, and your name
written upon it with this, Here lies such a man?


The sick Man. Note
Vain man is glutted with vanity even unto the gorge pype: Why trouble ye me
with vanity in death, who is now mourning for ye vanity of my life? mine
account is cast up for another world: My name is written into the Book of
life, what care I for Revel. 3. 5
Letters into stones? away with such Banners of pride: Such things are but cold
comforts to a wearied Conscience: Such things are but vanities of none abode:
Where are now the Mausels and most glorious Tombs of Emperors: It was well
said by a Pagan,

Sunt etiam sua fata Sepulchris.

That is for to give a gloss to these words, Tombs wherein the dead are
buried, will be buried themselves: Nothing is here permanent, Triumphs have
their Tombs, and Crowns have their compass. O my God, faste^ A prayer
and fix the eyes of my Soul upon that which is eternal.

O the folies of men's hearts, who vainelie and needleslie waste upon their dead
vanities that which might build houses for the poor: But let proud men lie
under their stately Towers, such lifted up stones must at last fall down as
he fell who now lies under them.

I like well of Beza his answer on his death bed to one that spak to him Beza
his reply on his death bed.
of a Tomb, Sub cespi^e viridi, said he That is* Lay me under the green
Turfe: A notable word of humility: Genesis 35. 8
Good Deborah was buried under an Oak tree: Many may lie under painted stones
whose Souls are pined into Hell: God will never inquire of a man's Soul where
was thy body buried? But how have thou lived into that body* shall he say:

Lay me then under the green Turfe: Note
How many Martyrs have been burnt into ashes which have been cast up into
the wind, and scattered upon the waters?

Coelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam.

He is covered with the Heavens who wants a grave.

Facilis jactura Sepulchri est.

The loss of burial is no great loss.

O that my Soul* were truly humble: Note
I have alas in the days of my vanity been too much pined with ye pride of
life, sca^dalously appearing without: but, O, O, O, Si trabes in oculo strues
in cord, a little beam of pride in the eye tells that there is a stake of it
in the heart: And yet in this Turfe of humility which I cry for, I spy a
lurking pride: Pride is a secret thing so small spun that hardly can it be
discerned: A man will be proud that he is not proud, or rather because he
will not seem to be proud: This is privy pride: The humblest heart is not
ever covered with coursest apparel, yet certainly it is good both in life and
in death to show good example: Lesser sins at the first make way, and paue a
causey for greater: folies framed by some are followed by others: Woe to the
world for scandales.

The chief thing at burials whereof men would take heed, is that the dead
bury not the dead* Woe to these buriers when these who are dead in sin bury
them who are dead for sin: As for you Friend, be wise in your words, The
lips of the fool, Eccles. 10. 12
said the wise man, will swallow up himself* In many men the affections keep
captive the understanding.


The carnal Friend. I pray God to make me wise. In all this which I have
spoken there is no great matter of folly: Seeing the pomp of burial
displeases you, ye may be willing that a funeral Sermon be* made for your
praise and commendation, no man of any worth now wants this honor.


The sick Man. So many men so many minds: Away with the flattering
panegyricks of such funeral praise: Let Christ be preached and not sinful
man: Away with that preaching whereof man is the Text: Note
Solomon speaking of the good wife, says wisely, Let Prou. 31. 31
her own works praise her in the gates: So let the by past life of a man
praise him in his death: All men are liars, but Dummie cannot lie.

Note
If I have lived well, my life shall grace and praise me sufficiently: If
not, wherefore should I make the Trumpeter of truth to become a libeller of
lies?

Vivorum sunt haec solatia non mortuorum.

Such comforts are only for the living but not for the dead: O the vanity of
stinking pride which blasteth the souls of men with most filthy stains.

Note
Tell me I pray you who made Christ's funeral Sermon when he was laid into
the Grave? He whose life could never preach, is not worthy to be preached
upon after his death: If while we live our life preach, it will preach also
after our death: Note
The best funeral Sermon a man can have is when his life makes all his godly
neighbors to say, This man while he lived (...) a Nathanael an Israelite
indeed, without any fraud or guile: He was a man who truly and sincerlie
lived in the fear of his God.

But men must be preached, will ye say, for such is now the fashion: Well, if
men will be preached with Seraphicall tongues, let him who preaches their
virtues also preach their vices, as the Prophets did of old, not sparing
Kings: David's treachery 2 Samuel 11. 4
and his adultery, his murder and his numbering of the people are as 2 Samuel
24. 1
well set down as his desire of the building of the Temple: So Solomon's 1 Kin.
11 4
idolatry and foolishness is 2 Chr. 32. 25 2 Chr. 20, 37
as well put in write as his wisdom: So Hezekiahs pride, and Iohoshaphats
loving of these that ha^ed the Lord, and Iosiahs rashness in 2 Chr, 35, 22
battle against Pharaoh Neco, are plainly declared and faithfully penned,
that all the world may know that they were but poor sinners: It is written of
Gods beloved people, that for their sins God delivered his strength into
captivity: By Psalm. 78. 6
this appears evidently that the best Kings and best people are in Gods
word as well painted in their vices as in their virtues.

He who would rightly draw a man's portrature must paint his blamishes as well
as his beauty: In such a case his wrats and his wrinkles must be wroght with
the pinsell, that his image may be like unto himself: Note
If men be only portreyed in their virtues, the half of their face shall not
be seen: What is the most part of man's life here but a sinning against God,
and a provocation of the eyes of his glory? Note
The best men that live here in the greatest perfection of Gods image are like
a quarter Moon, enlightened but in a fourt part: How many have but a sharp
edge like the Moon first seen after the change?

If funeral Sermons were made after this fashion, that men's vices were as well
reproved, as their virtues commended, the Preacher should be desired to keep
silence. If ye would preach my virtues, ye must also preach my vices, and then
when should that Sermon have an end? Fie on the pride of life, which all good
men chiefly at their death should both condemn and contemn.

Of old in Scripture we read of the pride of life: But now in this last age
Satan has hatched a new pride called, The pride of death, eue^ of death which
brings all men low: Note
Pride printed into stones cries to the living, Here lies a proud Fellow:
He that will be proud in death, when shall he be humble? * Away with that
which is both hateful unto God and hurtefull unto man.

For all that is said, I would not absolutely blame Funeral Sermons; for the
death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight: Note
That which is precious in the eyes of God, may be declared glorious in the
ears of men. But yet with leave I must say yt with reason in a great part of
our Churches they have been abrogate and casseered because of abuse: Note
Seeing the Brazen Serpent which was made at ye first by Gods own appointment
was broken in pieces for the abuse thereof and disdainefullie called,
Nehushtan, a lump of Brass, much more things which God never commanded in his
word for to be, being filthilie abused, may be rejected* Note
For is it not now come to pass and that to the great disgrace of many
Preachers, to the hearkening and hardening of lewd livers that men whose life
was full of scab and scandales, their names being rotten fore their bodies, are
so decked and busked up with flowers of Rethorick, so wrapped up into
hyperbolicke commendations as it were into a seare-cloath, for thereby to keep
close within smothered the stinking smell of their most filthy memory.

Let all abuse be taken away: As for me I would not that men should be too
contentious and eager in things neither bidden nor forbidden by God: Note
Paul and Barnabas for an indifferent thing came at last to such an heat, that
they departed one Act. 15. 39
from another: But I cannot read that ever they met again.

Note
If none but these whom God set out as lights of life were praised after death
for to be a spur unto the living, for to follow their footesteppes, it
should not be a miss briefly to say somewhat to ye praise of the defunct:
Note
Why should not the glory of Gods graces in his Saints pass along and glaunce
clearly in the eyes of these that are alive? But let ever the body of the
Sermon run upon Christ's life and death wherefrae issues all the grace and
virtue of man's life, within one periode of a preaching the praise of any man
may find sufficient bounds*

Now I thank you loving Friend for your kindness and good will: But also let
me entreat you not to be so worldly minded: It may be that shortly as I am
now, so shall ye be: Man's life at the longest may be measured with a spanne:
Behold, said the Psalmest, thou have made my Psalm. 39, 5,
days of an hand-breadth: Mine age is as nothing before thee: Our life is but
a vapor and a wind which once passes Iam. 4, 14, Psalm, 78, 39
away returns not again: It should therefore be your best in time to
prepare your selves for a better life and not with many to rely securely upon
a possibility of pardon: If ye be wise, venture not upon such broken staves
which fail in greatest need.


The carnal Friend. Think not the worse of me Sir, if I desire you to be
honored with the best in Burial, be not too precise, I hope that we all
shall come to heaven at last, we are all sinners: I hope before I die, to
repent me of all my sins.


The sick Man. Note
S. Augustins words are of great power.

Metuendum est ne te occidat S. Augu.
spes: and cum multum speres de misericordia incidas in judicium.

It is to be feared that while men hope for nothing so much as mercy, even then
they fall into damnation.

I pray God that such hopes deceive you not: Note
Many foolishlie make a pack horse of Christ's merits and Gods mercies, not
caring what burdens they lay on: Note
A broken heart is only an heart qualified for the pardons of heaven: If
Christ Jesus his words be of any credit among men, this we must hold that
none shall come to heaven but by the narrow way. Matthew. 7. 13


Note
Satan with his temptations has bored out the eyes of many as the Philistines
did to Samson: But Judge. 16, 21
alas, who has the courage of Samson to seek to be led to the chief
pillars that he may pull them down for to be revenged upon his foes?

Alas, this is the fashion of this world, men like the sluggard live in Prou.
24. 33
delays in steep and in sloth; Yet a little while, and yet a little while: No
man will build an Arc until the Genesis 19. 16.
floode come: Lot himself did linger to save himself from a brime stone fire:
Note
Men have no leisure to be saved; so hard is it for the most part to pluke
their feet out of the clouches of this world: Note
If we could overcome the love of this world which is the great Goliath of our
enemies then should we easily overcome the pride of the Philislins and the
fear of Israel: But carnal men know not what it is to mortify old Adam with
his corrupt lusts: Note
Fools feed on folies, and tickle their fond fancies with imagined
contentments, not knowing the strick and narrow course of sanctification: Such
men's speech is often both unseemly and unseasonable.

Note
Blessed be my God who has given me the staff in the hand, and the stone in
the scrippe wherewith I have stricken all my strongest corruptions in the
temples: Satan is tread under foot, my flesh is subdued, mine heart is in
Heaven, I care for the world no more, neither desire I to speak any longer
of clay, or of any thing below: My mind is above far from the dirt and
dross of all earthly thoughts.

O my heavenly Father wrap my A prayer
Soul, wrappe it up in the righteousness of thy Son: Let that be the white
long robe of my Soul while my body wrapped in its winding sheet shall lie
rotting into the grave: O my God, fill my fainting heart with a joyful
confluence of the precious sufferings of Jesus, of the promises of life and of
the joys of heaven: make mine end with that of the upright man to be peace:
Be not cast down Plas. 37. 37
my Soul, neither be thou disquieted within me: Hope in God, for I shall
^sal. 43. 5.
yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.

Oh, but mine heart is sick: Oh, where is my dear and loving Pastor? His
conference is most comfortable unto my Soul.


The Pastor. I am here Sir, waiting till I see the end of your Battle: I
have heard all your words with great contentment: I have plainly perceived
that Gods Angels these noble Spirits attend both to guide and to guarde you:
God by the arm of his power has brought you out of the thicket of thorns and
pricking thistles of money temptations: He who has made all things in number,
weight, and measure has not surcharge your Soul above that which he has made
you able to bear.

God in great grace has made you first to know your self in your offenses and
misery, and after that to know him in his Majesty and mercy: The Lord God in
great kindness has furnished you with firm Faith, constant Hope, and sincere
Love: He has led you through many trauerses and perplexities: Now have ye
passed the most dreadful and darkest hour of all your temptations.

Now the dawning of a new day approaches, now labor might and maine to be
prepared for you: God Mal. 4. 2.
within a short space Christ the Sun of Righteousness that day spring from
Luke 1. 78.
on high shall arise upon your Soul never for to go down: Continue in your
prayers to God, that he would possess your Soul with true hearted holiness,
without which no Soul shall see Gods face: What now Sir are ye doing?


The sick Man. My silly Soul is here waiting till Death come and open the
prison door, yt she may flee to her God and to her Contrie from whence she
came: Fogs and mists arise before mine eyes.

O my God, from the Throne of thy A prayer
Grace r^ine down upon my wearied Soul the refreshing showrs of thy most
iender mercies: Vouchsafe upon me some crummes of thy comforts.

Oh, that I had the wings of a do^e for to flee to the wounds of Jesus Psalm.
55. 6
as to the holes of the Rock: Note
My poor Soul in this body is like a Bird in a Cage looking through the
wyres, Feign would it be free of this sinful captivity.

O but my Soul pants fast after my Savior: Note
What now shall stay me from my God, from my Christ, from my Father, and my
brother, and my Comforter, and my dearest Darling of delight? I long to be in
Heaven the place of my rest: My desire is to go to Goshen the Land of light,
of Life, and of Liberty: Mine heart is fast linked unto Christ in love: O
Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him.

O man what is God that thou art so forgetful of him? A prayer


O my GOD, prepare me to meet thee with a bruised Spirit: Melt my sins into
sighs, and my troubles into tears: Let thy good Psalm. 143. 10
Spirit lead me into the Land of up* rightnesse: Lord, let never this clay
return to clay till my Spirit be ready to go to him that gave it: O quicken
and sharpen my care of heaven dulled and blunted with earthly thoughts: Make
sound wisdom and discretion to be life unto my Prou. 3. 23
Soul and grace to my neck: Make my Soul trim with that costly wedding
Garment bought with thy Blood: O Jesus, the blessed Bridegroom, who have by
thy Gospel of Grace betrothed my Soul unto thee, in righteousness in
judgment, Hos. 2. 19.
in loving kindness, and in mercies, come now and perfect the marriage in
glory before the Saints and Angels that are Psalm. 16. 11
above, where pleasures are for evermore.


The Pastor. Amen, Amen: The Spirit of God Sir is with you, and within you:
Continue in such holy and heavenly thoughts: Contemn still the transitory
triffles of this world, that gladly ye may desire to go dwell with your God.

Naturally all men are so stiffenecked, and so steel hearted that they cannot
submit their will to the good pleasure of their God: O that men would be wise
in time, and could consider how they must be accountable for every hour of
time they have employed in their life! Note
Our Souls, alas, are so sensual, that they will not knit into acquaintance
with Right and Reason, but like factious and ligged lieges rebel stifelie
against their Lord: Hardly will man's heart rander unto that petition which is
often in his mouth, viz. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: Note
The pride of man's heart perketh it self above the Laws of humble obedience.

Blessed be God, whose mercy has made you a resolved man: such words as I
have heard of you were never teached in the School of Nature: Nature cannot
speak the language of Canaan: We have nothing to rander unto God for his
working mercies but the mites of praise.

O but ye are much beholden unto GOD, who has endued your Soul with his love,
and subdued the raging power of temptations whe^with your Soul at ye first was
carried lik chafe or dust before a gale and mighty wind: O but your heart at
the first was fearefullie hacked and mangled with most terrible temptations!

O but the Spirit of Jesus has wrought wonderfully within you: Now by him
are ye made free from all the terrors of temptations which like venomous
hornets did fly in your face.


The sick Man. I find now all that to be true: Glade is my Soul that ever
it knew that Lord: Full welcome is his Spirit to me: Christ is now my Love and
mine hearts delight: He has rid my Soul of all mine heauie-hearted
thoughts: By his blessed Spirit he has persuaded me, that my Soul has a
true and real enterest in these blessed tidings of peace and Salvation, which
he by his Blood has bought and brought from the Heavens.

O the mercy of my God! O the Ocean of his compassions, which has swallowed
up the most hudge mountains of mine iniquities! O what a redemption is this?
to be delivered from so great a death? 2 Cor. 1. 10
wherein the damned must die so long as God shall live! Note
O death of torments without any end! O life of continuance without any ease*
O the immortality of that death, wherein sinners shall ever be dying, but
never dead, wherein the least touch of pain cannot be counteruailed with the
millions of pleasures! O the tumbling and tossing that shall be there where
the wrath of God shall infinitely burn!

Now Christ the Lord of life has made me free of all these fear^s: I hope
shortly to be with him: I rejoice in hope of the glory of God: To him will I
say as he said to Zacheus, Today I must bide with thee: I long Luke 19. 5.
to be out of this state of strife: My body is weak and mine ^eart faints
within me.

O Lord, recreate and refresh my A prayer
Soul with the blessed Blood of the Lamb orientle streaming through the
channel of his wounds: Give me a constant assurance that all my sins are
blotted out of thy Register: Where no wood is, there the fire Prou 26. 20
goes out: Where sin is taken away, there wrath cease to be: O Lord,
conduct the Ruther of my Soul, till it has sailed through all the seas of
sorrows and become to the Port of pleasures Psalm. 16. 11
for evermore?


The Pastor. Take courage and continue so: Lift up your head, with the eye of
Faith behold the other Shore, even the Land beyond the river, The Psalm. 143, 10
Land of vprightnes, Canaan which is above: Bend up all your heart strings with
hauenlie desires: Fix fast your eyes upon that Crown of immortality: Let now
all your thoughts claspe fast about the mercies of your God: He now imbraceth
you, his hand is a sure hold fast, which never lets slip, yt which it once
has seized on: In all appearance your Battle is near an end: Wait
steadfastly upon the Lord: Christ shortly with a soft hand shall loose the knot
of your life, that your Soul may go free to the place of its rest, your Soul
already by the merciful Arm of Jesus has been delivered from the painful
rack of repentance, and now is set upon the rock of your Salvation: The
gracious God has been your Father, Feeder, and Defender: Your desirs which of
before, were grappled to the ground, now only aspire to things which are above:
Note
Afflictions to the Soul is like the gade to the The Hebrews called the Gad^
Judge. 3. 3 Malmad quod boves doceat arare.
Ox a teacher of obedience.

Find ye now the tempest of your Conscience so allayed as ye would wish? Is
all calm and at quiet within? I hope that the blessed drops of the Lambs
Blood have quenched that wild fire wherewith once your troubled Conscience was
enflammed: Ye as I esteem are no more troubled for your sins, as though God
neither would nor were able to forgive: I pray God that ye may boldly say
with a godly Father.

What shall I return unto my gracious God, that I darre now S. Aug.
look my sins in the face, and not be afraid?


The sick Man. My sins, I bless God, fright me no more: O the rich bowels
of Jesus wherein is a Mine of mercy.

I remember now of a sweet saying of a godly man on his deathbed.

Note
When mine iniquities, said he, are greater than thy mercies, O God, then
will I fear and despair.

The comfortes of my God now refresh my Soul lik the River of Siloah Isa. 8. 6.
that watered the City of God: I bless God for all my try all and troubles
which he has made to work together to my well: Note
Grace in the heart is often like fire in flint insensible until it be beaten.

It is good for us that we be afflicted: The bluenesse of the wound Prou. 20.
30
purges away evil: My Salvation now is surely sealed by the hand of ye
Spirit: By his seal it is made sure and authentical: O how my Soul has with
a bright eye discovered the favors of his face: Note
O if God forsake a man, he will shortly with Judas * Note
pass from the horror to the halter: O the mercies of God toward me.


The Pastor. O how much are ye beholden unto God, who by his Spirit has so
directed your heart and mouth, with words perfumed with the savor 2 Cor. 2* 16
of life unto life, ye have refreshed all our Souls as with a sweet breath:
Note
If the Spirit of Grace guided not our tongues in our temptations, our mouths
to our everlasting shame, should breath out stiff and stinking blastes of
blasphemy against ye Lord our Creator: Praised be the Name of the most High,
who has borne and broken that unspeakable burden of wrath where with ye were
surcharged at our first meeting.


The sick Man. Amen, Amen: Blessed be the Name of Jesus: At that Name the
knees of my Soul bow in a most humble manner to the ground, for to kiss it
with my mouth a thousand times upon Conscience of my bygone misery, and of his
present mercy: All mine affections are set on foot and are so cheered and
ravished with the love of my God, as no tongue can express.

O happy, and thrice happy change: Note
Once I feared damnation, now Christ is my Salvation: Once I sat in darkness*
he is now my Light* Once I was in Death, he is now my Life: Once I was in
bondage, he is now my Liberty: Once I was in want, he is now my Wealth: Once
I was in sickness, he is now mine Health: Once I was in shame, he is now
my Glory: What shall I say mo^e? He is mine only Dear, and and dearest
hearts desire: He is my strongest Tower: I have none other Arc to save me
from the flood. Mine heart is prepared, mine heart is prepared: Note
Oh that I were where without let I shall sing Halleluiah for ever, where all
earthly objects shall seem but filthy abjects in comparison of him.

Now Sir I entreat you to conceive another Prayer, that thereby as by the
Charet of Elijah my Soul 2 Kin* 2. 11
may be carried up into Heaven: Commend my Soul into the hands of Christ the
Redeemer: Ye the Lords Priest stand still with the Arc till my Soul has
passed the Jordan for to enter into Canaan. A prayer


O Lord Jesus, pity this poor Soul that pants at thy feet, draw it out
of this clogge of clay: B^e with me unto the end: Grave thine own shape deep
within mine heart, that it may be in judgment as a piece of evidence, that
the Heavens are mine heritage: O look upon me, who am here, waiting upon Tit,
2. 13
that blessed hope: Comfort and refresh me with the sweetest breath of thy
blessed Spirit: Set my silly. Soul upon Pisga the sight hill of Canaan:
Guarde me with the invinsible troops of thine Angels: O thou whose Name and
Nature is mercy, take my wearied Soul and lull it sweetly in the softest
arms of thy most tender compassions.

Join your prayers unto mine: The effectual feruant prayer of a righteous
Iam. 5. 16.
man avails much.


The Pastor. According to your desire Sir we shall worsle with God in prayer
that your end may be peace. Psalm. 37. 37


The Lord gather all our scattered A prayer
thoughts, that being as twisted together into one threede, they may be like
Eccles. 4. 12
the threefold cord which is not easily broken, powerful to draw down Gods
Graces from above.

Let us pray.


A Prayer for the sick man.
O Lord, settle earnest prayer in our Souls upon true sense of our need: Let
not our prayers be tumultuous: Tune thou our words by thy Spirit, while our
lips walk, make our hearts to move: Preserve us from vain babyling, lest our
prayers Psalm. 109, 7
be turned into sin.

O God, the God of all Spirits who have the keys of Heaven and of Hell: Thou
steeketh and no man opens: Thou opens and no man steeketh: Open now thy
merciful doors unto this poor Soul which pants after thee as the chassed
Heart Psalm. 41. 1
pants after the water brooks: Let none of his sins stand between thy
face and him for to eclipse his Soul the light of thy countenance: Seal up
in his heart by thy Spirit* ye free and full forgiveness of all his
transgressions. Thou who by the virtue of thy death made ye veil of the Temple
Matthew. 27. 51.
to rent for to make an open way to the Holy of holies, make also the partition
wall of all his iniquities to cleave from the top to the bottom, that his
Soul removed from his body, may get entry to the Highest and holiest of the
Heavens where thine honor dwells: Make thy Graces in him to grow like Elias
his cloud which at the first no bigger than an hand, at last by and by did over
spread the whole sky. Sanctify his Soul and soften his heart, with the
divine dew of thy Grace: Say unto his Soul, I am thy Salvation: Behold, Lord,
his Soul is seeking thee, let nothing in his search carry him on the by.

Keep fast in his remembrance the blessed bloody passion of his Redeemer
Jesus: When Death shall come, let him die with thy Christ in his Arms.

Strengthen and increase his desire to be dissolved, assuring him that it
shall be much better for him: Furnish him with strength, whereby he may row
against the strictest streams of all temptations, till he arrive into the
haven of the Heavens* the sole and safe harberie of Salvation.

And seeing no unclean thing can enter into Heaven, Lord, wash this thy
servant, and wash him thoroughly, that by the virtue of thy Blood, his sins
though they were red like scarlet and crimson, may be Isa. 1. 18.
made white like wool, and whiter than the snow. Pull off his Soul the
menstrous cloth of his own righteousness, and cloth him with the righteousness,
of him whose stately style is, THE Ier. 23. 6.
LORD OUR RIGHT TEOVSNES.

Thou who have already added strength unto his Faith while it was scant like a
smoking flax, let not the Isa. 42. 3.
sparkle which once thou have kindled for ever be quenched: Amid the sight of
his sins, make him to lay hold upon the merit and full satisfaction of his
Savior: Let him with all the Faithful receive of that fullness, Ioh. 1. 16.
and grace for grace.

And seeing now, Lord, he is coming unto thee through the snakie field of
many temptations, let Eccles. 6. 15
his feet be shod with the preparation of thy Gospel: Thou, Lord, wilt never
suffer any that trust in thee to be confounded: He followed thee constantly
in his life, now let thy Spirit tryst him at ye hour of death: He
disclaimeth all hope of help by any other than by thy self alone: Though he
knows not perfectly what to say, yet his eyes are on thee: Thou who is Alpha
and Omega have begun this good work in him, crown it with the perfection of
thy goodness: Let him more and more feel that he is everlastingly acquit
by the Blood of the Lamb from the terrors of Gods Tribunal: Refresh his Soul
more and more with celestial spiritual joys proceeding from the Spirit of
Grace: Let him feel himself assuredly knit and united to thee: O thou
preserver of men* that in and by thee he may be presented blameless before
thy Majesty's Iustice-seate.

Furnish his mind with light, and his memory with strength, that he may
understand and remember that Christ's death is an absolute and all sufficient
Sacrifice for removing the guilt of all repenting sinners: Show him a sign of
thy love: Multiply in his heart the pledges of thy kindness: Make him faithful
unto death, that he may receive the Crown of life.

Thou have already subdued in him alloue and liking of this world: Now grant
that the hope of that glory, which is to be revealed, may be so strong in
his Soul, that it may shield and fence him from the force and fury of the
last assaults: The nearer he draws unto death, enlarge the channel of thy
graces like a River which is broadest toward the end of its course: Make his
heart in the ^orest pangs of death to be still lifted up toward thee.

And seeing Death and the Devil man's two last enemies are ever busy the one
for to fright, the other for to tempt: Prepare him, Lord, and furnish him so
with thy Graces, that he may prove victorious in this last assault.

O gracious GOD, assist him by thy force against the most violent blustering
winds of the last and most fearful temptations: If Satan look in at the
doors of his heart, seeking for an entry, let him never get so much as one
chamber-roome set a part for his sojourning: Make thy grace unto him like a
Sun, like a Bridegroom coming out of his Psalm. 19. 5,
Chamber to disperse the darkness of his mistie mind.

Unto his last gasp direct him so by thy good Spirit, that his Soul may
cleave so fast unto thee yt neither sin, nor sickness, life, nor death* may
be able to separate him from thee: Though thou should slay him yet will he trust
in thee: Fail him not now in time of need: uphold his heart in this heavy
hour: Let his Soul lurk under the wings of thy mercy, till the tempest of
wrath be calmed and past over: Be thou to him a shelter against the heavy
showers of the last agony.

O gracious Lord, in wrath remember Hab. 8. 2.
mercy: In the multitude of thy compassions blot out his transgressions, and
that for the dearest drops of that sacred Blood that gushed upon the cursed
cross: Rinse and cleanse his heart from all uncleanness: Give him courage in
his greatest fears: Let not Death be unto him as a king of fear, nor he as
one of the wicked, whose hope does perish with their breath: O Lord, let thy
Name be unto him like a strong tower for to hid him into the time of trouble:
Let this be the clear candle of his comfort never to be quenched, that
Christ by his death has for him and all the Faithful, overcome Death and
disarmed it of its sting: Declare by the inward motion of thy Spirit to his
Soul, that the nature of death by the death of Christ is changed into a sleep
unto all the friends of Christ, who by the infinite power of his divine Nature,
has swallowed it up in victory, and has so digested it, that now the
bitterness thereof is past.

As the Arc was to Noah, and Zoar unto Lot, so be thou a refuge to this
faithful Soul fighting thy battles, not only against flesh and Ephesians* 6. 12
blood, but against principalities and powers, against the governors of
darkness of this world, and against spiritual wickedness in high places: Let
thy strength be made perfect in his weakness: As thou have up holden him
hitherto by the strength of thy Spirit, so continue with him until the end:
The battle is the Lords, fight Lord, for thine own cause, eue^ for this Soul
one of thy redeemed Ones: obtain thou the victory, and take the glory to thy
self. O God, both of grace and glory seal surely up in his bosom the pardon
of all his iniquities: Perfect the comfortes which thou have begun, say unto
his Soul; That heaven is not so high, nor hell so low, nor the world so wide,
as are thy mercies toward him: All thy creatures have their own dimensions,
but thy mercy, Lord, like thy self is without measure: Out of these infinite
compassions make this silly Soul partaker of the dearest mercies that ever
rould together, the relenting bowels of thy tenderest love.

Hear us, Lord, in all these our suits, and that for the sake of thy best
beloved and only begotten Son the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose Name, and at
whole command we power out our hearts to thee in that prayer which by his own
sacred and most blessed mouth he has taught us, Our Father, etc.

The sick Man. Lord, hear thou in Heaven: Blessed for ever be thy Name, for
such spiritual comfortes, for so many mercies, I can rander nothing but the
little mites of praise and thanksgiving.

Mine heart is filled with songs of Gods mercy: If his Spirit of grace had not
vpholden me in my first fears while (as I thought) I was wrapped into an
infinite wrath, I had certainly been swallowed up with overmuch sorrow: But
now blessed eternally be the Lord who has made the earth to swallow up all
the floodes of temptations and tribulations, which that red Dragon the Devil a
bloody murderer has cast out of his mouth after me for to carry my Soul
down head-longs to perdition: Now find I Gods word to be true, that he is
overcome Revel. 12. 11
by the Blood of the Lamb: Except that the Lord had been on my side, O in
what a dumb dumpe had my poor Soul been driven into ere now.


The Pastor. He who followed Genesis 3. 8
Adam through the thick bushes, and Ino^. 2, 1
Jonas in the bottom of the sea, He who Genesis 32. 29
blessed the crooked man, and made the 1 Samuel 1. 18
barren fertile, and the Luke 1. 62
dumb to speak, the Luke 7. 22
deaf to hear, and the Ioh. 9. 7.
blind to see, has made his grace perfect in your weakness: He best feels
the pulse of our hearts and the force of our life.

Loath would he be to break the Isa. 42. 3^
bruised reed, or to quench the smoking flax: Note
All men by nature are but like an unclean Dunghill of dross, their hearts
at the first are but a den of Dragons: But so soon as the Spirit of grace has
begun to draw the draughts and lineamentes of Gods image within the soul of
a man, nothing shall be able to deface or mangle that lively image: To all
sorts of temptations Gods wisdom shall find an out-gate: Note
Neither the trains of Satan, nor the treason of our bosom sins, nor the
terrors of hell, nor the trashes of the world shall ever be able to preueale
against psalm. 16. 3.
Adirim Gods excellent Ones: According as Zacharias filled with the holy Ghost
prophesied, It is granted unto us that we being delivered Luke 1. 14.
out of the hands of our enemies, may serve him without fear.


The sick Man. I bless God for such inestimable comforts: Satan has
shrewdly assaulted me, but could not prevail: My corruptions have been
subdued and awed by the Majesty of the Spirit of Jesus: My Soul rejoices in
GOD: In the merits of Christ as in a glass I see him a meek and a merciful
Father: I am not now afraid to come to a trial at his Tribunal, I am no more
dismayed for the unquenchable flammes of the fiery lake.

I think certainly that there was never a man so much beholden to my God as
I am: Truly may I sing with the Psalmest, I waited patiently Psalm. 40. 1
or the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: He verse. 2.
brought me out of an horrible pit, out of the myrrie clay, and set my feet
upon a Rock, and established my goings: He has put a new song into my mouth,
verse. 3.
even praise unto our God: many shall see it and fear, and shall trust in the
Lord.

O that I had breath for the setting forth of his praise! Happy is he who
while he may utter words, praises God continually: Blessed is that man who
may call his tongue his Glory: Note
O my Soul, I charge thee by the Roes and by the Hindes of the field, that
thou cease not to praise his Might* his Mercy, and his Majesty: O my Soul,
take heed and listen unto his voice: O Jesus, the great Deputy of mercy sent
by the Father, forsake me not in this heavy hour.

Now I sore sicken, so that all naturall*force fails me: My words now so
wea^ie me, that I think ere it be long this body shall be lodged in the
place of silence: But let me entreat you Sir; so long as ye shall perceive
life to be in me, let it please you to continue in some good purpose
concerning the world to come: By some holy discourse rouse up my drousie
Spirit, hold mine heart upon an edge: Let me not die like a senseless Nabal,
of whom it is written, that his heart died within him, so that 1 Samuel 25 37.
he became like a stone: Many blindlie and boldly rush into hell.

I beseech you Sir: to wait well upon me till ye see the end: I think that
ere it be long my Soul shall be at the farthest tryst.

O Lord, warm my frozen Soul A prayer
with the sense of the kindled compassions of the bowels of thy love* Inlighten
my mistie mind and clear it with thy countenance: Be thou the comforter of
my Conscience, until the day break and the shadows fly Cant. 4 6.
away.

Take now Sir my Soul into the arms of your prayers, lift it up and lay it
into that blessed bosom of my Lords mercies: Bend yet again your knees
before God in prayer, that he for his mercies sake would receive me into my
Masters joye: O but my Soul fluttereth fast within me for to be at my God:
Let it please you to be fervent in prayer for me, that I may foil under my
feet the Devil, Death, and all the powers of hell: The Devil in death will
not fail to give me a furious assault at the chiefest fortress of my
Salvation, for to batter it down to the ground: Entreat the Lord that his
mercy may be a strong rempart and a blessed Bul-wark against all the Engines
of hell which are ready bent to waste and hauock all Gods graces within me.

O Lord, camp thine Angels about A prayer
me: Place thy Pauilions of war between me and mine enemies: Refresh me
more and more with thy comforts: Give me the earnest of these joys which
pass all understanding: Possess me with the Spirit of gladness, for that
thou in mercy have forgiven me my sins: Continue so unto the end, that in
the heavens for ever this may be the burden of my song, For his mercy Psalm.
136. 1 2. 3. etc.
indureth for ever.

Let it please you Sir on whom God has vouchsafed the Spirit of Prayer in a
good and great measure, to assist me with your comforts and prayers, lest by
temptations I should begin to slack off my care and watchfulness.


The Pastor. Hold fast your eye upon Christ your Redeemer: Follow him through
the valey of death, for he has Psalm. 23, 4
not only pointed out our path, but as Heb. 2. 10,
Captain of our Salvation, has trodden every step before us: Ye may well
stick a little in the narrow throat of Death, but that one step Genesis 26. 22
being past ye enter into Rehoboth a place of room, far from the reekie
smoke, vain shadows, and dreams of earthly vanity, and perishing
pleasures: Note
Be glad Sir, to flit from this barren moorish ground and muddie mortality
for to go to a paradise, Psalm. 16. 11
a Palace, a place of pleasures for evermore. According to your desire we
shall return to God by prayer.


A Prayer for the sick man drawing near to the doors of death.
O Father of mercies and God of all comforts in whom all goodness and graces
are treasured, let it please thee favorably to regard the soul of this thy
servant here, whose heart pants after thee, as the wearied Heart pants after
the water brooks: Refresh his Soul with the Psalm. 42. 1.
divine dew of thy grace till it be entered in at the gates of Glory: Power
into his heart the sweet streams of thy love: Settle his soul in a right
and upright course, so long as it remains in this mistie and muddie
mortality, send out thy light and guide it by thy Grace, till it has passed
the straites of Death for to enter into the Land of vprightnes. O Father of
mercies, persuade him by thy Spirit, that the coming of Death shall be to him
a time of discharge, a time of freedom from sickness of body, anguish of
Spirit, trouble of Conscience, and from all possibility of sinning any more:
Let him know that while he is going to the Grave, he is going to a bed of
ease, where most quietly he Isa. 57. 2.
shall rest from all his toylesome labors.

Turn all fear of Death into a cheerful expectation, and longing for the
hour of dissolution: Make quiet his Conscience, that he may die with comfort.
O thou Savior of mankind, whose boweles are filled with merciful compassions,
spread the wing of thy righteous garment over this Soul of thy servant: Thou
have shaken him with thy terrors in diverse assaults: Thou have brought him low
for to make him a fit passenger for the little door which leads unto
Glory.

Leave him not now, Lord, in his greatest need: Make thine Angels camped about
him, powerfully to assist him against all the last assaults of yt evil one:
Thou who have heard all his groans, registrat thou his sighs, and put all his
tears into thy bottels, suffer not thy kindled zeal to cool in him: In an
holy despair of his own worth, make him wholly to rely upon thy mere
mercies in Christ, the only salve for sick Souls, and remeed for broken
bones. Psalm. 51. 8


While he is weakest, work with thy Spirit feelinglie and powerfullie into his
heart: Subdue every evil motion that may arise therein for the troubling of
his soul: Draw up his desire above the pitch of all natural knowledge: Banish
all earthly things clean out of his mind, and make all his thoughts to
attend upon thee: In thy divine might rebuke Satan, that he interrupt not thy
comforts: Let him not be able by his secret craft and vyles to steal from him
the pledges of thy love.

O Son of GOD, O Sun of Mal. 4. 2
Righteousness, send a quickening heat with a shining light into his silly
Soul: Make thy blessed Beams to strik on his heart for to warm it with thy
love: Set all his desires a floate from the mood of sinful mortality: Thou at
diverse times have affrighted him fearefullie with dreadful visitatations of
Conscience: His Soul has been sore racked with ye pitiful perplexities of a
vexed mind: Now death is approaching: Sight and senses and all are failing,
but thou Lord will never fail him: While the natural eyes of his body
begin to grow dim, then clear thou the spiritual eyes of his soul, that
he may with Stephen see the heavens opened, Act. 7. 56.
and the Son of man ready to receive him: And always, Lord, as the time of
death shall approach, so let his Soul draw nearer unto thee, that while
sickness shall take away the use of his tongue, his heart may cry to thee,
Come Lord Jesus come, in thine hands I resign my Spirit.

Now Father of mercies, seeing thy Girnels are prepared for him, by the power
of thy grace fan this Corn clean from its chafe that it may be treasured
up therein: Put his life in a readiness, that he may give thee a cheerful
account of all wherein he has employed thy Talents: Let him hear these words
of joye, Faithful servant come and enter in thy Masters joye.

Long has his Soul been wooing the heavens with weak fluttering desires:
Now open the window of thine Arc and let in this wearied Dove crouding for
thy Rest Many depthes be between us and heaven: One deepth calls upon
another deepth, for flesh and blood there is no possibility of passing
through: But, Lord, that which is impossible with men is possible with thee:
Let therefore the virtue of thy death be to him like a Bridge for to set him
safe over all the gulfes of misery: In his journey to thy Kingdom remove all
rubbes out of the way.

O Lord, listen to our cry: Put these our unworthy prayers into thy golden
Censer: Perfume them with the incense of thy righteousness, and offer them up
to thy Father upon the Altar of thy divinity: And thou Fatherof mercies, for
the merits of thy Son his all saving death which he has suffered for all
repe^ting sinners: Receiuein mercy this Soul which Satan has sought to sift:
Receive the dear price of the Blood of thy Son: Let thy Justice say, I am
satisfied: Let thy mercy so smile upon him, that it may be the health of his
countenance and the comfort of his Conscience: While he shall finish his
course, finish thou his Faith with perfection whereby he may die, having a
settled assurance of that blessed Inheritance and massy Crown of
immortality, which Christ has conquised by his bloody merits: To whom with
Thee and the Spirit of Grace, be all Glory, honor, dominion and everlasting
power for now and ever, Amen.

The sick Man. Lord hear thou in Heaven. O blessed God, and Father of
eternity, A prayer
seeing my time now is short, give me grace to manage it well: Shute not
thine ears to my sighs, while my tongue in the jaws of death shall cleave fast
to the roof of my mouth: O follow me with thy favors, eue^ through the valey
of the shadow of death: O Lord, because thou art faithful, and cannot lie, I
look shortly to receive in hand that which I have in hope: O come now and put
an end to the days of my vanity.


The Pastor. Blessed and magnified be the Lord of eternity for such
wonderful mercies toward you: Note
He most powerfullie and most wonderfully has brought you back from the
corrupt course of Nature, as a Boat rowed against the stream by the force of
Arms and of Oars: Behold, now ye approach unto your Heaven Be of good heart
Sir, ye are near unto your rest, the place of Psalm. 16. 11
pleasures for evermore.

Now seeing the end draws near, ye have to remember well if ye have any
grudge against any; that before ye decease, they may be fetched and friended
with you.


The sick Man. I wish all men to be well: I hope that no man wishes otherwise
to me: Note
My desire was never either to revile or to revenge: I am ready to satisfy
where I have failed, and to forgive where I have received the greatest wrong:
Man's wrongs against me are but light in comparison of my wickedness against
God: Note
He is not worthy that God should forgive him his sins who will not forgive
his neighbor an injury: My good God has forgiven me all: As he has
forgiven me, so I forgive all men, and desire the lik to be done by others
unto me: Note
My Soul abhors these words of ranckour, I may forgive him, but I will not
forgete him: The softning Spirit of God cannot dwell where there is such stony
steely hardness of heart.

O Fountain of Grace, power the powers of thy Spirit within my breast, A prayer
that, my Soul, may be refreshed with thy blessed balmie comfortes of saving
grace: Draw up my spirit toward the Tabernacles of immortality: O when Psalm
42. 2,
shall I come and appear before God! Put to the Spure to this dull jadde of my
foggie flesh, that I may make more haste in my journey.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in heaven.

Seeing God has blessed you with Wealth, I doubt not but that ye will do some
thing for the well of Colleges and Hospitales: Note
Colleges are the Seminaries or seede-plotes of virtues, out of which come
these who become Rulers of the Church and Commonwealth: Hospitals are shelters
for the poor the friends of Christ: Christ's counsel to the rich is that they
make friends of the Mammon of Luke 16. 9,
unrighteousness: Such words were not spoken by our Lord without great and
weighty reasons.


The sick Man. All these things were done in my Testament, while I put mine
house to an order: I have not forgot that point of duty: He is not worthy to
be called a faithful man who leaves not behind him some fruits of his Faith:
Note
That Faith which cannot justify a man by good works before men, will never
justify his soul before God: Remember me, O Lord, Nehem. 13 14
concerning this, and wipe not away my good deeds which I have done for thy
glory.

Let men dream of Salvation as they please, S. James his precept is, that men
show their Faith by their Iam. 2. 18.
works: Note
Though Pharisees do all that they do for to be seen, men must not in men's
sight forbear to do well: Because Hypocrites come to preaching and prayers
publicly, true Israelites for that must not sit at home: The Godly must
not be so base in heart as to abstain from all public good, because the
wicked worship but outwardly: Shows without substance in some, should not
be able to banish the shows of substance from others.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir ye speak wisely: As the tree is first seen in the
budde and then in the flourish, and after in the fruit, so must the life of
man Matthew. 21. 9
be: Because the barren fig tree had nothing but leaves, the fruitful tree
must not grow bare, the leaves of the tree have their own use among the
fruits: So have godly shows good uses when they are joined with true
substance: Note
The Faith of a Christian should not think shame to show her fair face,
because Hypocrisies face seems to be fair while it is fairded: No not: God
will have true faith to come out, that the world may see her into works: Show
me thy Faith by thy works: Christ Iam. 2, 18
who desires that the niggard or ambitious Matthew. 6. 4
left hand know not or see not the liberality of the charitable right hand,
commands that we let ou^ light so shine before men, that they may Matthew. 5.
16
see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven.

The graces of Gods Spirit in a man are like a light candle: No man light a
Candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a Candle-sticke, and it gives Luke
11. 33
light to all that are in the house: Note
The good life of the godly man should be like a City set on an hill
Matthew. 5. 14
which cannot be hid: Note
The labourer sows not his seed on the ground that it may still remain
hid under the cloddes; neither does God sow his graces in our hearts that
there they may lu^k and still abide secret: Note
I like not these who fear to seem godly left they should be thought to be
Hypocrites: Even in that are they Hypocrites, that for fear they seem to
affect godliness, will not do good that may be seen which would move the
true Israelits to glorify our Father in heaven, yea, and also allure these to
come to God who as yet are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel.

I confess that few be troubled with such a fear: It is a sin whereof very
few in this Land are guilty, yet seeing it is a sin, it would be carefully
avoided: Note
Because Papists wholly rely on their works, Protestants with great scandale
will only brag of their Faith: Thus both the one and the other against the
truth of doctrine separate that which God has joined together.


The sick Man. O Lord, GOD of gods, O Father of everlasting compassions, whose
blessed A prayer
bowels did bleed upon the cross for to save sinners, pity here a frail
and feeble creature yet tugging and wrestling in the Barras of this sinful
flesh: Furnish me with strength, whereby I may surmount and vanquish all
difficulties which are between my Soul and the place of its everlasting rest:
I am weak, forbear me, Lord, in thy great mercy: Join thy Grace with my
grief^: O that I were with my Christ, the Mark whereat I aim, the Port
whereto I sail, the rest of my desires: Let thy good Spirit, O Lord, assist
me: Let thy favor and grace be my vade-mecum till I come to thy Glory: O
who shall give to my soul the wings of a Dove, that it may Psalm. 55. 6
flee out of the Douket of this body up to its God: O dear Savior, set Cant.
8 6. Cant. 1. 4,
me as a seal upon thine heart: Draw me and we shall run after thee:
Hold mine heart aloft, that it may only mind the things above.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in heaven, and grant the suit of thy servant: I
fear Sir that ye be wearied with speaking: As I perceive ye force your
self in your words above the reach of your strength: Seeing ye travel thus
in pain of your speech, spend the little space of life that rests in holy
meditations concerning the bloody wounds of Christ your Savior.


The sick Man. Christ now is only my comfort: I love him with the best
bowels of mine heart: In the bowels of his mercy I read by the eye of Faith
most fair lines of his love, all written in great Capital letters of an
heavenly impression: Note
Christ is to me in stead of all, for already in my need he has stood me
in more stead than all.

O in what a pitiful plight my silly and forlorn Soul was once into!
Bl^ssed be he for evermore who in so great kindness has shined upon me with
ye blessed, bright, and unspotted beams of his mercy.

O but my Soul pants after him! Oh, how this heart of mine is evil to
break! What a piece of clammie teugh clay is this that settereth so my Soul,
that by no means can it be loosed from it, that it may soar up to its God,
from grief to glory: O that I were with him with whom I shall not want the
thing that I can wish: Now, Lord, the time is come; pull off me the dull wiede
of sinful mortality and cloth my soul in white with the Robe of Christ's
righteousness, that it may follow the Lamb: O but I am wearied: My Soul
longs to see the Face of my God.


The Pastor. Wait upon the Lords will, when it is time he will open the
prison door and let your Soul fly up to your Glory: Think on Heaven still:
Note
Mount up your mind to your Maker, who shall shortly roof with Glory the
graces which he has reared up into your heart: Let the hope of these things
hearten you in the mudde and mire of this sinful mortality.


The sick man. O Lord, pity this Soul, which A prayer
I have defiled and defaced with scarlet transgressions and crimsin iniquities.
Thou have begun the good work in me: It is now near to perfection: Put to
now the last hand, and perfect the work: Rub out perfectly with the Blood of
thy Lamb the least stains which stick in my Soul, that while thou shall
look upon me, thou may know me to be thy redeemed one by the stamp of thine
own Image.

O Lord, fix mine heart so into A prayer
thine own heart, that nothing be able to pull it out, without pulling out
thine own: It has been like a crooked twigge, O writh it so now the right
way, that it may be according to thine own heart.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in Heaven, and grant the suit of thy Servant:
Let nothing be able to tickle, tempt, or trouble his Soul.

Be of good heart Sir, the Battle is near an end: Fight out the good fight,
finish your course, and keep the Faith, hence-foorth is laid up for you a
Crown of righteousness which 2 Timothy 4 8
the LORD shall give you at that day. Make now full proof of your courage,
which shall shortly be covered with a Crown. Hold out still in your holy
exercise till your change come.


The sick Man. I weary of this cottage of claye: I am at a point with all
that is under the Sun: I care not for this worlds favor, no more for its
frown: But O but my Soul longs to be with my Lord, that I may see his face
with fullness of joye. Psalm, 16. 11


O thou with whom nothing is impossible, A prayer
make the scales of mortality to fall from mine eyes, that I may fee thee
before even as thou art: My Soul longs to be out of this myry lak of
misery, for to dwell with thee into the Palace of immortality: O when shall
I get rid of these sinful bonds! O Savior of mankind give ear unto my
suit: Deliuere me from this seeming life, that I may die to live the life of
ple^sures for evermore: O draw, draw out this Soul entombed into this body:
Before thou separate them s^ale surely thy pardons within my Conscience, and
do perfectly away all my transgressions: Guarde me and assist me and
harness my Soul against Satan his last on-sette.

Let my Soul graspe with an holy greediness in the hand of Faith, such
spiritual comforts as thou, O Lord, make to come from the boundless and
bottomless fountain of thy mercy toward all these who^ thouloueth: Let my
soul feel more and more sensibly these mercies which fairelie and oriently
stream through the bloody wounds of my blessed Savior Jesus the (...): wash
and bath my drooping Soul in the well of life: Give unto it a drink of the
rivers of thy pleasures.

O Lord of love, shed thy love into mine heart through the bleeding bowels of
my blessed Savior: O blessed Redeemer of lost mankind, O Pelicane of pity,
whose heart did ever melt with m^rcifull compassions, pity my Soul in this
painful plight: Mine heart strings are racked, my bowels are rent, the house
of the Soul is falling down, now open the door of thine everlasting
Tabernacles, that my Soul may go from Grace to Glory: Make the power of thy
love like a load stone for to draw mine heart after thee from the mudde of this
mortality.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in heaven, and A prayer
fulfill the suit of thy Servant, bury all his sins and his sorrows in the
bottomless sea of thy mercy: Entombe in the Tomb of Jesus where they may
lie for ever without any hope of a resurrection.


The sick Man. I wait for the Lord, my Soul doe^h ^ sal. 130. 5
wait and in his word do I hope: My soul verse. 6
waits for the Lord, more tha^ they that watch for the morning: I say, More
tha^ they that watch for the morning: My Soul is wearied of this earthly
Tabernacle: Psalm. 42. 2.
O when shall I come and appear before God? O that I were at my wished home: O
now move the poole of thy mercy, and move my Soul to run into it.


The Pastor. It is likly that within an hou^e God shall grant you your desire:
Could not Matthew. 26. 40
you watch with me but an hour? said Christ to his Disciples: Ye have now
but an hours absence from your God: Ye have but an hours voyage from the
body to the sight of Gods face the place of your rest: Fix fast your eyes
upon the Crown of immortality, till your Soul be past from toilesome Time to
Eternity: Yet a little while and God shall retire you from the tyring travels
of this life: Watch but an hour, and your end shall be peace. Psa. 37. 37



The sick Man. The Lord send a good hour wherein I may lay down the load
of this mortality: Alas, many an hour have I evil and idly spent in pam
pering this foggie flesh with the light and loose pleasures of this life.

O Spirit of Grace, draw near A prayer
unto my Soul: Make thy residence into this broken heart: Correct, cure, and
cover all the corruptions of my Nature. Begin and end and crown the work
with thy goodness: At last close in me thy graces with thy glory: O make mine
eyes to see, and mine arms to carry and mine heart to be filled with thy
Salvation: Conuoye unto my Soul the warmest blood that ever heated the heart
of Jesus: Let that ever recking blood wherein is a Savor of life unto life:
Comfort and vp-holde my Soul in this last heavy hour.

Now Sir, seeing the end draws near, help me to spend well this hour,
which in all appearance shall be my last: I wish that all my thoghts and
affections be now so bended toward my God that they neither sway nor swerue
from him by any idle wandering of mind.

O Thou that art high and excellent A prayer
Isa. 57. 15.
who dwell in the high and holy place: Though thou be high, thy promise is
to dwell also with him yt is of a contrite and humble spirit: According to thy
promise revive the Spirit of the humble, and give life to him that is of a
contrite heart: O Lord, according to thy wonted grace make me in my last
agony, to possess my Soul in peace and patience: Disapoint Satan in all his
crafty fetches: O cover this silly Turtle under the mantle of thy mercy: All
other couerings are but light and slight like Spiders webbes which cannot
endure the breath and blast of thy mouth.


The Pastor. Lord, hearken thou in heaven, and give ear unto the suit of thy
Se^ua^t.

I perceive indeed that now your words weary you: Lest ye faint I shall tak
the speech upon me: If it be your will I shall let you hear a most divine
discourse taken from a godly preacher on his deathbed, ye words surely are
weighty and of great power: If ye please I shall let you hear them, while I
speak them, meditate ye, and in your mind make them your own words.


The sick Man. I entreat your Sir, for to let me hear them: I shall follow
you in mine heart as I can: I find that my tongue almost now fails me.

O God, while I hear, let the Spirit of grace take harbor into mine heart: A
prayer
Set all mine affections on bensell, that I may carefully give ear unto thy
comfortes the cordials of thy Gospel: O clear the sight of my mind, dazeled
with the mist of my corrupt affections.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sins of thy servant.

After this manner Sir, the man of Quis hic fuit non liquet.
God spoke upon his death-bedde.

I owe to God a death, as his Son died for me: Ever since I was borne I have
been sailing to this Haven, and gathering patience to comfort this hour;
therefore shall I be one of these Guestes now, that would not come to the
banquet when they were invited? Note
What hurt is in going to Paradise? I shall lose nothing but the sense of
evil: And anon I shall have greater joys than I feel pains: For mine Head
is in Heaven already, to assure me that my Soul and body shall follow after.

O Death, where is thy sting? Why should I fear that which I would not escape,
because my chiefest happiness is behind, and I cannot have it unless I go unto
it? Note
I would go through Hell to Heaven: And therefore if I march but through death,
I suffer less than I would suffer for God: Note
My pains do not dismay me, because I travail to bring forth eternal
life: My sins do not fright me, because I have Christ my Redeemer: The Judge
does not astonish me, because the Iudg^s Son is mine Aduocat: The Devil
does not amaze me, because the Angels pitch about me: The Grave does not
grieve me, because it was my Lords bed: Oh, that Gods mercy to me might
move others to love him: Note
For the less I can express it, the more it is.

The Prophets and the Apostles are my forerunners: Every man is gone before
me, or else he will follow after me: If it please God to receive me into
Heaven before them which have served him better, I owe more thankfulness unto
him.

And because I have deferred my repentance till this hour whereby my Salvation
is cut off, if I should die suddenly: Lo how my God in his merciful
providence, to prevent my destruction, calls me by a lingering sickness,
which stays till I be ready, and prepares me to mine end like a
preacher, and makes me by wholesome pains, weary of this beloved world,
lest I should depart un willing like them whose death is their damnation.

Note
So he loves me while he beats me, that his stripes are plasters to save
me, therefore who shall love him, if I despise him?

This is my whole office now to strengthen my body with mine heart, and to
be contented as God has appointed, until I can glorify him, or until he
glorify me: If I live, I live to sacrifice, and if I die, I die a sacrifice,
for his mercy is above mine iniquity.

Therefore if I should fear death it were a sign that I had not Faith, nor
hope as I professed, but that I doubted of Gods truth in his promise whither
he will forgive his penitent sinner or not. Note
He is my Father, let him do what seems good in his sight: Come Lord Jesus,
for thy servant comes, I am willing help mine unwillingness.


Here is the end of that godly man's speech.
As at that Brydell in Cana, the best Ioh. 2, 10.
wine came last, so shall it be heer^: After the words of a godly man I shall
let you hear the words of God spoken by a man inspired by his Spirit, even the
last words of David the man whose praise is this, that he was a man according
to Gods own heart.

The last words of David.
David the son of Iesse said, and the 2 Samuel 23. 1
man who was raised up on high, the a^ointed of the God of Iaacob, and the
sweet Psalmist of Israel said.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, verse. 2.
and his words was in my tongue.

The God of Israel said the Rock verse. 3.
of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God.

And he shall be as the light of the verse. 4.
morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender
grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.

Although mine house be not so verse. 5.
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things and sure: For this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow.

But the sons of Belial shall be all verse. 6.
of them as thorns thrust away because they cannot be taken with hands.

But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron, and the staff of
a spear, and they shall be vt^er lie burnt with fire in the same place

Alittle before his death at the inauguration of his Son Solomon he spoke
many notable words; among others these be of great weight.

O Lord, we are here but strangers 1 Chro. 29 15
before thee and so^ourners, as were all our fathers: Our days on the earth
are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.

O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and verse. 18.
of Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts
of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee.

That hundredth and two Psalm is excellent: It is entitled a prayer of the
afflicted when he is overwhelmed and powers out his complant before the Lord.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let Psalm. 102, 1
my cry come unto thee hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in
trouble, incline thine ear unto me: In the day when I call, answer me
spe^dilie.

For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burnt like an hearth,
etc.

Seeing, as we see, that nothing is stable in this world but as it is in that
Sermon of the Preacher, vanity of Eccles. 1. 2.
vanities, and all is vanity, we have to entreat the Lord earnestly as
Moses did a little before his death; That he would so teach us to number Psalm.
90. 12
our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, and to well doing: All
things below wither and decay, our best beauties are w^ithed and wrinkled by
time: But the beauty of the Lord is of everlasting continuance: Psa. 90. 17
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.

O the beauty of the things above: O the beauty of the Firmament: O these
azured Curtains spangled with stars of light: What jewels of joy are within,
no mortal tongue can tell.

Look up now Sir with the eye of your Faith and visit these heavenly Ioh.
14. 2.
Mansions and blessed buildinges for immortaltiie: Ye are shortly for to
change for the better.

So long as our silly Souls are here, they are but poor Souls reading and
meditating the mercies of God within a cottage of clay, having nothing to see
with but the weak light of the small Candle of grace; a light dimmed and
darkened with the reekie smok of our sinful corruptions: But so soon as we
shall be dissolved by Death, we shall come to the everlasting Beams of a
Sun which by nothing is able to be ecclipsed, alight which knows no
darkness, even that Light which brings light out of darkness. Ioh. 1. 5.


Now Sir, up with your heart sail out your course: Be like the Pylot who while
he has hand on the Helm, has his eye fixed on the heaven: Take now the
Cup of Salvation the ^sal. 116. 13
great Mazer of his mercy, and call upon the Name of the Lord: He is worthy
to be praised for his unspeakable favor toward you: Note
He in great mercy has toward you turned all the sharp corrasiues of the Law
into most sweet cordials of the Gospel: He has now made you free of all these
terrors whereinto ye found your self once liable.

Oh, Lord, how did once the sharp edge of thy Law laid to his mourning heart,
cut him through the very gall! But blessed be thou, who in thy great mercy
have cut the Cartropes of his sins where with he was once kept fast under
the most heavy bondage of Hell.

What say ye now Sir: How is it of all? Have ye heard all these words, and
laid them up into your mind?

The sick Man. I have heard them all, and that with great comfort; now mine
heart is in heaven: Christ by the virtue of his invaluable Bloodshed has
taken away the gall of my guiltines: Note
Now my body is wholly dead to its pain and my Soul is wholly alive to its
glory. Note
I see a Crown of immortality which my Soul would not stick to fetch through
the brimstone beams of hell: My Soul sees the face of its Redeemer: Christ
with a soft hand is now loosing all the bonds of my misery: Note.
His most sacred Blood has melted my marble heart.

Now come Lord Jesus come: Long have I looked for thy Salvation: Now let thy
servant depart in Luke 2. 29
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy. Salvation.

O my dear Soul I summond thee with all thy powers and faculties to be
thankful unto thy good and gracious Lord: O what tribulations am I come
through! O with what balmie comfortes has the Lord asswadged the dolours of my
Soul, O my Soul I charge thee by the Roes and by the Hynds that thou haste
thee unto thy God in thy strongest affections: Keep now tryst with the Spirit
of thy God, who is now here waiting till thou be ready.


The Pastor. My Soul and all that is within me praise the Lord, for the
powerful working of his Spirit within you, whereby he has made such a
change as is wonderful.

Note
This particula^ remembereth me of a certain Martyr who being condemned to
be burnt, could feel no working of the Spirit within his heart till he came
near to the stake: But being once come ^ox. Act and monu^. Fol. 1555^. (...)
impression.
there, with a cry he clapped his hands, and crying out amain, said, O
Austen, he is come, he is come: The Martyr was called Master Goner.


The sick Man. By the grace of God I hope shortly to say as much: My Soul is
ready bent waiting for his coming: O come Lord Jesus come: Let this mine
Revel. 17. 7
hungry Soul win in now at the ports of thy Palace for to get a share of ye
marriage supper of the Lamb, in hope already I feast upon the joys of
eternity: Note
In my Soul is now the Charter of my Salvation sealed with that most pure and
purifying Blood of the immaculate and spotless Lamb that came to take away
the monstrous and menstrous sin^es of the world: Note
In the virtue of his Blood is my strongest comfort and highest resolution: By
it alone all my black and bloody Isa. 1. 18.
sins are cleansed from their crimsin color.


The Pastor. Indeed Sir, it is only that Lambs Blood that can purge away
sin and iniquity: Note
Though man should wash himself with nitre, and I^r. 2. 22.
take him much soap, yet for all that shall his iniquity be marked before
God, except that he be bathed into this blood of sprinkling.

Seeing now your Charter is well sealed, hold fast these writtings, that
nothing above or below, no not principalities and powers be able to Ephesians. 6.
12
wrest them out of your hands.

Happy is your heart now wherein is that white jewel of the Revelation Revel.
2 17
even the white stone wherein is a new name which no man can know except the
receiver: Note
O the boundless bleeding bowels of Gods compassions! O that infinite
storehouse of Christ's merits and mercies, which no sin were they never so
heinous, can be able to stint or restrain before the repenting sinner get a
part of that purchase: Neither Death, nor Life, things present nor to come
shall be able to with hold a mourning sinner from a share in our Lords dearest
compassions.

Christ now Sir is ready to receive ^ou: Make your self ready for him: Lift
up your hea^, for your Redemption draws near: The end of your time and
toil is fast coming: The Angels of God are here waiting upon your Soul,
which is now looking Cant. 6. 10
out to Christ as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and
terrible as an Army with Banners: Whereupon is your mind now fixed?


The sick Man. All mine affections are bended toward God: Note
O what shall be able to hold or hinder me from hastening to my Lord, the
repairer of life, the destroyer of death, ye conqueror of Heaven, and the
vanquisher of Hell? Note
O my Savior come nearer yet unto me, let my Soul creep in by A prayer
thy wounds, even to the very bowels of thy mercy: Warm it like a Chicken
under the wings of thy love*


The Pastor. In Christ alone is Salvation: Out of his side did issue the water
that has quenched the unquenchable fire of Gods wrath, with the Blood that
takes away the sins of the world.

Note
His holy Heart was racked, his Arms of compassion were stretched out upon
the Cross for to declare to all repenting sinners the infinite wideness of
his mercies: Note
His sacred Head hang down bowed for to give ear unto the gronings of his
prisoners: Note
His blessed Bowels rumbling with compassions rolled together, made him to
proclaim that Oyas of mercy, Matthew. 11. 28
Come unto me all ye that are wearied and ladened with sin and I will ease
you.

Much has he suffered for our cause: Note
Like a painful labourer he powered out sweat not only of water but of
blood, at the working the great work of man's Salvation: At last by laying
down that Life of love, he achieued the victory over Satan, flesh, the
world, and all the enemies of man's Salvation: Them all he has crushed and
trodde under foot: Stand fast by Jesus: In Faith and Hope thrust your heart
upon him: What now, Sir, think ye upon?


The sick Man. Christ has bund up all my wounds; he has perfectly closed
them with the blessed Balm of his comfortes: Now at the end of mine appointed
time I am waiting earnestly till my changing come: I hope ere it be long to
be translated from grace to glory. Job. 14. 14



The Pastor. O Lord, set this Soul as a seal upon thine Heart, and as a
seal upon A prayer
thine Arm: Out of thy great Cant. 8. 6,
love make this Soul beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem terrible as
army with banners: Thou, Lord, who crownest the year with thy goodness Psalm.
56. 11
tak in thine hand the crown of immortality and in this Soul crown thy
graces with thy glory. Now Sir, ye are near the borders of Canaan, three or
four steps more would set you in that Land of life and love.


The sick Man. Mine heart like an Heart braying after waters, pants after
God: O Psalm. 42. 2.
when shall I come and appear before him? Now mine heart shiuers within me, I
am so sick that I fear to faint.


The Pastor. O Lord, now be merciful and show favor A prayer
toward this thy servant: Distill thy graces into his heart with a blessed
influence from the Spirit of thy love, pull in all his spirits to Thee, and
thrust out all distractions: O Lord, of Life and Love breath into his soul the
life of immortality.

Take heed now unto him ye who are near about him, for death now approaches
with its last assaults in all appearance: Look well to him for he seems to
be fallen into a sown.


THE SICK MAN IN A SOVVNE, A SOLILOQVEE, Or a privy conference between the
Soul and the body of the sick Man lying in a sown.
The Body. MY Soul desires thou now to leave me that have borne thee about
me so many years?

If thou go from me I must no longer remain among the inhabitants Isa. 38. 1^
of the world, but incontinent after thy departure I a vassell of death must
be hid under the dust among crawling worms, far from the eyes of the
living: These who were once glad to kiss my mouth shall abhor to see my
face: Is not the Grave a Babel a place of confusion? Do not Iim and Zim resort
there? Do not the Satyrs and the Fairies dance Isa. 13. 21.
there?

Mine hair startes all up for fear, while I think upon these solitudes and
mansions of silence, I faint at the very thought thereof: Oh, my dear Soul
will thou abide with me no longer? If thou depart, my Beauty, my Color, my
Conference, my Company and all is gone: Oh, shall all my senses now be closed
up? shall I speak no more, hear no more, see no more than if I were a stone?
Must I now go remain into the mire of mortality, the place of silence? Must
I abide the long nights among the Graves, places fearful to the living, where
men make no resort?

O wretched weakling that I am, by Death, as I see, I shall be grapled to the
ground where I shall be forced to make my bed in the da^ke.


The Soul. My Body be not thou disquieted, I am but for a little space going
before thee for to take seasin of Heaven for thee and for me.

Though I be absent for a space, I shall never forget thee: In Gods appointed
time I shall come again and fetch thee out of the muddie moulde of mortality.

At the first blast of ye last Trumpet I 1 Cor. 15. 52
shall come down, and shall enter into thee and quicken thee again: At that
time God shall cleanse thee from all thy corruptions, and shall make thee like an
Angel of God.

My silly Body we have taken much pains together for to get a rest which we
have looked long for, but culd not find: now go to thy rest till come again
for to bring thee to eternal repose: If thou were commanded to go to labor
and to pains, thou should have some cause indeed to whine and to shrink, as
one hampered in a snare: But the Lord is now desiring thee like a wearied man
to go to thy rest for to sleep soundly into a bed wherein thou shall no
more be disquieted with dreams or with visions: When thou shall once awake,
thou shall be still with Jesus: If in mercy he has made me to prevent thee
in the possession of eternity, let not his favor toward me work in thee
any heart rising against that Majesty, who as the Potter does with his clay,
may do with all his creatures what he pleases.


The Body. But, O my Soul, the Grave is fearful: It is a retired solitude
and a place of silence, a place of filthy stink: I abhor to think of it,
how that in that dungeon of darkness, and den of corruption I must lie down
naked implunged in myrie slime among worms, a lump of most vile and lifelesse
clay. Alas, my Soul.


The Soul. My Body be not discouraged: Note
The Grave is a place where the body must lie till with the Eagle Psalm. 103. 5
there it cast its Bill, a means for to renew its youth: Note
So soon as once there it has cast the old slugh of Nature, incontinent
thereafter it shall become a new creature: Except, said Christ, that the corn
of Ioh. 12. 24
wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone.

Have patience but a little: New corn will come at the day of the
resurrection: The days of man's mortality are the Lords seed time: The bodies
of the Saints are his seed, the Church yard is his field: Suffer now the
Lord to sow his own ground.

Be not disquieted nor cast down with grief: It shall be thy gain to go
down to the grave: There shall 1 Cor. 15. 42
thou be sown in corruption, but thou shall be raised in incorruption: Thou
shall be sown in dishonor, but thou verse. 43.
shall be raised in glory: Thou shall be sown in weakness, but thou shall
be raised in power: Thou shall be sown a natural body, but thou shall
verse. 44
be raised a spiritual body: See what by Gods mercy shall be the great
gain of the Grave.

After that the Graves of the godly shall be ripe, the Lord by an infinite
power shall make all their bodies to be taken up, for like fine wheat to be
laid up within his heavenly Girnals: When thou shall arise, it shall be to
an immortal happy life.

Have patience for a little space, and be not crabbed: Yet a little while and
I shall not see thee, and again a little while after the resurrection and I
shall see thee, when thou shall be transchanged into the blessed estate of
glorious immortality: Then shall I dwell in thee without any spot or wrinkle:
Let the hope of this, temper thy present grief. Let not the Grave afray thee
my dear Body, for it is the last bed which every man must sleep in: Lie
down into it gladly: Be content with the silk worm an argument of the
resurrection to be enwrapped for a space in thy Winding sheet, till the chill
cold winter-tide of this mortality be pas^: At the glorious spring of
eternity; at the return of the Sun of righteousness Mal. 4. 2.
so soon as the heat of the beating beams of Gods love shall pierce in unto
thy Grave, in a moment in the twinkling of an eye thou shall be quickened and
raised up, yea, renewed and refined from the sinful dust of corruption, and
after that carried above the brightest azured skies unto the place of
immortality among psalm. 16. 11
pleasures for evermore.


The Body. I cannot but lament and wail to be deprived of thy company: My
dearest Soul full dear art thou to me: If two strangers had been but some
few days in their journey together, they will have a certain regret for to
leave one another: What wonder is it then, that we two who have been of such
old acquaintance, mourn at this last and long adieu.


The Soul. As thy love is great toward me, so is mine also great toward thee
my Body: But seeing it is the will of him who married us together that now
we be put asunder, we must submit our selves unto his good pleasure.

This separation shall be but or a little space, and that for the well of us
both: Note
The husband will sail the seas and go far from home, in hope to return
with advantage: The same hope encourages his wife to live lik a vvidow for a
space: At last the husbands return with expected profit, is welcomed with
greater joys tha^ was his former presence.

It shall be so with us my dear Body: At my return in the day of the
Resurrection there shall enter such a joy into thee, as eye never saw, ear
never heard, yea, and which never could enter into the heart of man. As the
long dark night makes the morning seem sweet to the wearied watch, who has
long looked for it, so shall our little absence be a certain commendation of
that presence, which after the great day shall be for ever.

Cease in time I pray thee to stick at such earthly conceits: I may no longer
tarry with thee, the Crown of immortality is already in sight.


The Body. But alas, how is this that thou should go to glory before me?
and leave me in the dust of death, a peace of moulding clay? Have I done any
wrong but by thy counsel and direction? What have I beeene but the instrument
of thy sin? All the action is from thee: Of all that is done amiss thou have
been the inuenter the contriuer and arch-plotter: God is no accepter of
persons or of parties: What then is my guilt, that I should be behind thee left
into the Grave a fearful den of death and pite of corruption?

What a misery is this for me that I should lie under the power and bonds of
Death, a Carrion under a Turfe warded in deaths most loathsome den and
abhorred jayle? There must I lie chill with cold stinking and rotting with my
mouth full of earth and my belly full of worms, closed in a Coffine.

O what matter of melancholy is this, that within a few days where are my two
beautiful twinkling eyes, shall be nothing but fearful eye-holes in a rotten
skull, which shall be nothing but a nect of clockes and abominable creeping
things: Within a few years this head which now lies softly upon this
Pillow shall be rolled and trinnelled up and down by the feet of the
posterity: Here a bone and there a bone, and not a bone together, all shall
lie scattered here and there: the dogs shall play with some and Children
shall play with others; some shall lie drying before the Sun, and others
shall be bruised into pieces, and grund into powder: O what a change is in this
our mortality! Behold presently what a starueling I am, being nothing but
skin and bone: Behold, and anon all shall be turned into stink.


The Soul. All such thoughts are all but worldly, heavy, dull, and formal:
Suffer the Lord to sow his own seed: Thou art afraid for the Turfe of the
Grave: Care not for the Turfe, for under it shall thou be as a pickle of Corn
under a clod: The Spring time of the Resurrection is not far froe, when thou
shall rise up more beautifullie in honor, power, and glory, than ever thou
was before.

Shall any thing be impossible unto Luk 18. 27
God? He who in his death revived many Saints, whose bodies Death had fast
under the key of its power, shall with a blast of his voice make open G^aues to
let out all these who were prisoners of death, from Adam until that day.

Let this comfort cheer up thine heart my Body: The Grave shall not be able
to keep thee long Note
As Jonah was vomited out of the Belly of Hell, so shall thou be delivered
Iona. 2. 2.
from that Monsters mawe.


The Body. But in the mean time what reason is it yt I a carrionlie carkase
should be bund ^oth hand and foot and committed close prisoner to the grave a
cold and chillie house, while thou art set at liberty? Behold, how already I
am both withered and wanzed


The Soul. The Grave to ye Godly is no prison, but a resting bed from their
labors, where God re^resheth with sleep the wearied bones of his beloved: The
Prophet says, That they rest in their beds, and that they Isa. 57. 2.
enter in peace: Note
While the moulds are cast on them in the Grave it is but the drawing of their
Bed curtain: The buried bodies of the Saints are in their grave lik Babs
lapped in swaddling * Note
clothes in their Cradles: As a tired man will not be offended if he be sent
to his bed for to sleep, neither should the wearied body be grieved to go
to the Grave the place of rest and quietness.

Be not peevish nor perverse my Body; envy not mine happy estat: Though the
Grave should be to thee a prison, why should thou complain because I am set
at liberty? If it has pleased God in mercy to be good to me, why art thou
offended? May not the Lord say unto thee, Is thine eye evil because I am
Matthew. 20. 15
good?

What happier should thine estat be, though God should command me to be
buried besides thee? May not God do with his own as he pleases? He might
have taken thee to Heaven, and have shute me a prisoner in the Grave: In his
justice he might have cast us both into Hell.

Think it then a mercy that he is so good unto me, who shall never count my
glory full till we be both crowned with immortality in the heavens: Note
Be not offended at the Lords good will toward me, but rather thank him that
he has made death to be temporal in his mercy, which was eternal in his
threatening: Note
Of a corrasiue he has made a cordial.

Have patience O distressed Body: Suffer a little, that God may be true, Genesis
3. 19.
Dust thou art and to dust shall thou return: Dust being once delivered from
the power of the Grave, shall reign with God in glory: Note
The Body is like gold which cannot be rid of its dross, till it be molten
and dissolved.

Again as this death is not total neither shall ^t be perpetual for at yt
first sound of the last trumpet all the beried bodies of yt faithful shall lik
the Eagle cast the bill of their mortality.

Now mine old companion and yoke fellow art thou not content to go to bed
and there to sleep till the morning of theresurrection come? That day shall
make an amends for all that we have suffered in this valey of tears: Then shall
all thy confusion be turned into comforts.

Let us now be content that the Lord loose the pines and slack the cords of
this our Tabernacle of clay.


The Body. Now glad am I my dear Soul that ever I had such a Soul as thee:
now my dear Turtle go with my blessing to the service of our God: Go from
the Cross to the Crown, from a prison to a Palace, from the mourning-weede to
the wedding garment: Go dwell with the Lord and the Lamb, wait well upon
him: Go now from the black and dismal days of drooping distress and
dirtie distractions, to joye, to peace, to pleasure, to light, to life, to
liberty: Go hear that happy harmony of heavenly Musicians in heavenly
Mansions where mercies bless without judgments blasts: Go hear the voice of
all the Menistrels of that celestial Quire.

Be thou above the Stars, while I am under a Turfe: All my comfort is in
this that we shall meet again in Bliss: Note
Now blessed Soul prepare thy Lamp, power out thine oil, the heavenly wooer
the Bridegroom Psalm. 16. 11
is come for to take thee to his Chambers of Charity wherein are pleasures for
evermore.

In hope of the Resurrection I go gladly to my Grave, whereout of I am
assured to arise for to meet my Redeemer in the clouds: This Candle of my
comfort shall never be put out.

Now before we shed, let us shed some tears: Note
The last rain of our afflictions, wherewith we may Cant. 2. 11
bath the bruises of our Lord which he in love did suffer for our glory.

Now I go to rest in the dust a prisoner of hope: Go thou to thy God, attend
well his service, and court his Countenance for ever in his most pleasant
Yuorie Palaces: I am now refreshed with a cooling taste to immortality to
come: Farewell my dear Soul and truest Turtle, mount up now to the Heavens:
Thou have already past all toil and turmoyle: The way that rests unto the
Kingdom is both smooth and even, without any rub of opposition thou shall
enter into immortality: O the showers of grace and mercy which rain down
upon us both: Farewell till that desired day of the Resurrection come.


The Pastor. His eyes stir a little, they are full of tears the tribute of
Repentance: He begins to shake, he now seems to be wakened out of his
trance: I will inquire what his mind is set upon. What meditations are these
Sir that ye are upon? Ye seem to have been in some good motion.


The sick Man. My Soul Sir and my body after a blessed agreement have been
taking their adewes one from another: They have been blessing each other,
because they have served God together, they look to be one day both glorified
together.

A sea of comfortes has rained down upon my Soul from the Heavens in most
sweet and pleasant showers.


The Pastor. Surely that is a worthy exercise: Such good motions are plants
of God and impressions of his finger: Happy are the Soul and the body that
can serve God together with one shoulder: At that last day they shall have a
joyefull meeting, they two shall be clasped together in love with such
contentmentes as tongues of Angels are not able to express. But O when the
wicked soul shall return from hell to take up its body for to carry it to
everlasting torments, then shall they curse each other with many a woe for
their Fornications, Adulteries, Lies, Deceits, Riot and Drunkenesse: Then would
the body if it could have intelligence of the souls coming wish that a rock
or a mountain would fall upon it for to hide it from the Soul, that being
void of life, it might be free of feeling.

But the decree is come forth, of necessity they must be joined together: O
but they then shall look one to another like Lions: Their feed shall receive
none agreement, no not: They shall never agree in any thing but in this, to
(...) together that their comfortless dolours may be doubled: Note
This is a dear pennie-warth, so little pleasure for so much pain: In that
day all the wicked shall bitterly repent such barganes.

Now happy is your Soul Sir, and your body both, that are so well resolved
to depart: Ye are certainly blessed that ever ye were borne: Note
Behold, now ye rest in hope of the resurrection, which shall be in that
great day of Gods general assembly, when all that ever took breath shall
compeare before Christ the Judge of the World, for to receive that which they
did in the flesh, be it good be it evil.

Now Sir, seeing ye are an enrolled Citizen of Heaven, and an adopted hair of
God, up still with your heart toward that heavenly Heritage, with sighs and
groans beat on still at the doors of Gods mercy: God gives unto prayer
victory against himself.

Now the time draws near Sir, your hour is come to a quarter, fight out
the good fight, fix the eyes of your Faith upon the bloody wounds of Jesus:
Lay hold on him, listen to his voice, ere it be long ye shall hear these
words of joye, Come Matthew. 25. 21
faithful servant and enter into thy^ Masters joye.

O Lord, the giver of grace and A prayer
of glory; out of the blessed bowels of thy mercy bath and wash this Soul
with that arteriall blood which sprang through the pierced filme of the heart of
his Redeemer: At the beginning of this Battle, Lord thou did see how his
poor Soul was scorched with the flames of hellish temptations, which did
burn the very marrow out of his bones: this is thy ordinary dealing with
thine own: Hell on earth is for the heirs of Heaven: But heaven on earth is
the portion of the heirs of hell: Now, Lord, from his hell bring him to thine
Heavens: Make his Soul more clearelie to look up toward the blessed bloody
wounds of his Savior, wherein he may perceive the props of his protection:
Make his Soul now to be fully possessed with an entire love to the fairness
of thy face, wherein are pleasures Psalm. 16 11
for evermore.


The sick Man. Lord Jesus make clay again with A prayer
thy Spittle for to anointe my dimmed Luke 2. 30.
eyes, that clearelie with Simeon my Soul may see thy Salvation: We in our
life receive but ye first impositio^ of hands like the man that saw men Mar.
8. 24.
walking like trees: Now, Lord, at death give me the second imposition, that I
may see thee even as thou art.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in Heauen^ A prayer
Maintain the life of his love toward thee: Now water the seed which thou
have sown: Weed out the tares which Satan has sown: Pity and pardon:
Lay all his sins upon the Son of thy love Now let his feet be shod for the
journey which he is making to a better place: Inspire his Soul with the
spirit of grace, till his life be expired: Save him by thy blood which saved
the^ that spilt it.


The sick Man. I find Death besieging my heart with se^sible blows: O bring
out my Soul out of this brick of bondage of the body: Mine heart stringes
are so racked within me that they are like to break: The hope that is
deferred Prou. 13. 12
is the fainting of the Soul: Lord, help me in this heavy hour.


The Pastor. Lord, hear thou in heaven, and satisfy his hearts desire.


The sick Man. Pray, pray, that the Lord uphold me in the throng of these
throes wherewith mine heart is gripped, lest I be wholly swallowed up of
despair.


The Pastor. O Savior of mankind, who out A prayer
of thy mere mercy and love came under the charge of his accounts: Make now
answer for him as his Aduocat before that high Tribunal, before which his
poor Soul is now arraigned to co^peare: Turn all thy wrath in mercy, and
thy Iustice-seat in a Throne of grace: Call home all his wandering thoughts,
settle and them upon thy self: Maintain the life of his love: Make death to
him a Messenger of mercy, and his pains a mean to bring him to thy
pleasures: O Captain of his Salvation under whose bloody banner he has in
his life made war against the enemies of thy glory, at death overcome thou
all the enemies of his Salvation: With thy Trumpets and Lamps terrify all
these merciles Midianites: Make them like a wheel and as the stubble before
the wind: Grant the victory unto thy weak Servant here, that in the
Heavens thou may crown his Soul with glorious garlands of immortality, Lord
hear us for the sake of thy Son unto whom with thee and the Spirit of Grace
be all glory and honor, Amen.

Now Sir, up with your heart to the Father of mercies: Fight out courageously
the fight of Faith: Christ now is holding out the Crown, your Salvation is
sealed, ye need not fear, ye have your warrant under the Broad Seal of the
King of Heaven.


The sick man. O My dear Pastor, he is come he is come whom my Soul
loves: Cant. 7. 10
I am my Beloueds and his desire is toward me: The lost sheep is found: The
unthrifty Son is come home again: All the snares of destruction are broken:
My Soul is escaped like a Bird: I am now at a point, infinitlie desirous
rather to go to my God than to sojourneanie more on earth: Mine heart is more
in God, than in my self I have a begun possession of Heaven by the first
fruits: I look for perfection in fullness of joye and Psalm. 16. 11
pleasures fore evermore.

O blessed Jesus set me as a Seal upon A prayer
thine heart: O dear Savior, Cant. 8. 6.
the Root and the Rock of my Salvation, lo I come: stretch out thine Psalm.
40 7.
Arms and take my Soul into thy bosom, yet a little while and I shall be no
more a stranger with thee Psa. 39. 12
and a sojourner.


The Pastor. O blessed be our God for evermore who has made you to triumph
so over all your enemies after such vnuterable groans of grief where your
mind was sore perplexed at the first: Hold fast now that which ye have: Your
heart is now richly stored with the true treasures of godliness: Ye are but
sipping of these joys whereof in Heaven ye shall drink in a full cup.


The sick Man. Christ the Lord is mine: He is mine: Philip. ^. 21
He is to me hoth in life and death advantage: My comforts are in my Bosom:
The Angelicali Guardes are here about me: I dye in the Faith of Jesus: Come
even Lord Jesus A prayer
come quickly and loose this Soul a prisoner in clay groaning to be at
liberty: O my Soul return unto thy rest, psalm. 116. 7
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: Now may I say, This poor man
Psalm. 34. 6.
cried and the Lord has heard him and delivered him out of all his troubles.


The Pastor. The Lord is with you, who ere it be long shall fulfill all your
hearts desires, yea, he shall do above all that ye can think or wish: Now
Sir, ye have him whom your soul loves: His Spirit is in the very bosom of
your heart: Hold fast the grip ye have: Dye in his Arms, sleep in the
blessed bosom of your God: Full liberty is at the door ready to enter in:
Yet a little and ye shall have a joyful meeting with Christ and all his
Angels in the Kingdom of your Father: Till ye come out of this body stick
fast by Faith to Christ your Redeemer: Claim boldly that which he has
dearly purchased by his Blood.

O dear Jesus, his Staff and his Strength, wrape now his Soul into A prayer
the white winding-sheete of thy righteousness: While he has life live thou
in him, yt while he breaths he may live to thee, and after death may live with
thee for ever: Let neither life nor death be able to separate him from thy
love: The nearer death approaches for to separate his Soul from his body,
d^aw thou the nearer unto his Soul, till thy Spirit the Spirit of Life fully
and finally in all perfection live into him the Soul of his Soul.

Fix your eye now upon the heart of Christ, deadly wounded for your
transgressions: Behold that Speare-hole in his heart, which he suffered for to
sa^e you: Consider his bleeding wounds all dropping the balm of mercy, which
has proceeded from the bowels of his compassions: He it is who has died for
your sins, and is risen again for your righteousness.


The sick Man. I know that my Redeemer lives, his Job. 19. 25
blood of an invaluable price is the only ransom of my Soul: He only is
the joye of mine heart, and the health of my countenance.


The Pastor. Hold fast that confidence: Let your Soul repare unto the
everlasting Arms of his love: Shroud and shelter your self under the wings
of the Almighty: Ye are now near the end of the Race: The Lord guarde you
with his Grace, that no temptation of Satan be able trippe your heel before
that ye be entered in his rest: Now the lowering showring seede-time of tears
is past, and the Harvest of joye is hard at hand: Now Sir, Christ is at the
door: Behold, he stands at the door and knockes, he is now for to suppe
with you on earth, that ye may suppe with him for ever in the Heavens: Behold,
he is with you.


The sick Man. I have found him whom my Soul loves, I will surely hold him,
and will not Cant. 3. 4.
let him go: My Soul has already taste of the fruit of Canaan by the report
of the spy of my faith: Christ now is mine.


The Pastor. Seeing ye have him, wrap your soul into the bowels of his
everlasting compassions: wait on, perfection is the last gift: Lift up
continually the eyes of your spirit to the worthy wounds of Jesus: In them
behold * Note
and read in great Capital characters the unspeakable love of the Father.


The sick Man. O Lord* I have waited for thy Salvation: Remember me now
while Genesis 49. 18
as thou art into thy Kingdom: Father into thine hands I commend my Luke 23.
4^
Spirit, my Soul I give to thee who have given it to me.


The Pastor. Now Sir, your wished hour is come: Christ is laying his Arm^s
about you for to receive your Soul in his bosom: Solace your self in your
Savior, who has made it free of al weights, that swiftly without any let it
may flee up to its God: O the love of Jesus toward you: He has not only
been an Inte^cessour to pray for you, but an Advocatalso to plead for you: By
the virtue of his Blood your cause is win: And therefore homage ye now your
heart sealed with ye sense of his love: Yield and surrender your Soul into
the Arms of his mercy, that he may perfect his graces in you with glory in
immortality.


The sick Man. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and Act. 7. 59.
glad it with thy glory.


The Pastor. He again is fallen into a trance: His battle is now near an
end: Let us wait a little and see what he does.

He now begins a little for to stir: There is yet some life into him as I
perceive.

Now Sir, be glad: Christ is knocking at the door for to call forth your
Soul from bondage to liberty, from your banishment to an heavenly home, from
a prison of pain to a palace of pleasures for evermore.

That we may have assurance that ye die in the Faith of Jesus, show us some
sign: Lift up your hand in token yt ye are assured to go to God

Behold how he has lifted up his hand.

Cortenet quod lingua tacet.

His hand tells what is in his heart: O but this poor Soul since the
beginning of this bloody Battle has been miserably mangled, howed and
hacked upon by most bitter and bloody temptations what carnal, what
spiritual: Now blessed be God, from all his troubles he is come to his good
things: We are all oblished to give praise unto God, who has set out this man
before us as an excellent example and mirror of his mercy.

It is the custom of God, as we see, to put his dearest Ones to the hardest
proof, as wise Builders put the greatest timber and the heart of the Oak to
the greatest stresse.

Note
Many think that Heaven stands hard by their Bedside, and that a light,
Lord have mercy, will make the door of Heaven to go wide open to ye wall, no
not: Through man^e Act. 14 22
tribulations we must enter into that Kingdom: Note
As April showers go before the May flowers, so must our tears trickle
before our Triumphs: We must smert before we smile, and groan before we
glory: All Christian Souls like Christ himself, must enter by the port of
pains unto the palace of pleasures Psalm. 16. 11
for evermore: No co-reigning without a co-suffering.

O let us consider what pains this godly man has suffered in this fiery
trial since this Battle 1 P^t, 4. 12
began: O with what difficulties has he swimmed through so many temptations:
If the righteous scarcely verse. 18.
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Note
O sour Apple of Adams pride, many teeth have thou set on edge.

The Sparrow by wandering and the Swal. low by flying may escape, but where sin
Prou. 26. 2
has been once, there must also be sorrow before that the sinner can come to
joye: It is not so easy as many men think to win in at the doors of
heaven, as though one Gods-mercy were enough for to do the turn: Note
Before that a man be able to win in at the strait gate for to enter into
his everlasting rest, he must be buffeted with diverse temptations, and broken
with sorrows till his heart become contrit that is, grund and bruished small
as if it were corn in a Querne: Note
There is none entry into rest for man before that in great grief he has
plucked out his Matthew. 5. 19
right eye, even his dearest darling and best bosom pleasure: Note
He that would lodge with God in eternity must here lay hold on his
Kingdom with an holy violence: What wonder that he auen be hard to win,
seeing with all the infernal powers of darkness, legions of our own
corruptions combined, oppose might and maine the grouth of Gods graces in our
Souls.

Many foolishlie in the idle rowings of their brains content with a blush of
zeal, think that Heaven may be win with wishes, and therefore in their
life skippe wantonlie over the threatenings of the Law, in hope that easily at
death they may catch at the promise of the Gospel: But who had seen this holy
man of GOD upon the painful rack of repentance, would count all the
perishing pleasures of sin too dear bought pleasures: Note
Sin at the beginning is like poison in perfume, pleasant at the first, but
not long after it works deadly, except yt it be repelled with some stronger
Antidote: The way to heaven as we see is not like the way to great ma^ket
Towns easily discerned by the multitude of footesteppes.

Our good Friend is now in the very panges of death: A patient and Lamb*
like death is this: His life is on his lip: This wearied Traueler is now
near the end of his journey: Seeing that the end of a work crowns it, let
us conceive a Prayer whereby we may lay his Soul into the bosom of his God,
who shall refresh him with everlasting comforts: O Lord, by the vigor of thy
Spirit give wings to our groueling prayers.


A Prayer for the sick Man approaching unto Death.
O GOD of mercle and of man's Salvation, who thinks nothing too dear for a
repe^ting soul, were it to give it a draught of the heart Blood of thy Son*
we here upon the knees of our hearts humbled again before the foote-stoole
of the the Throne of thy Grace, put up to thee our most humble suit for this
thy servant who is now coming to thee: His words now fail him, but thou,
Lord, wilt never fail him: In stead of words let the crouding sobbes the
Turtle find room into thine ears: Heave up his heart to thy mercy seat
with the requests of thy Spirit, in sighs which cannot be expressed.

O charitable Alms giver open the hand of this Beggar and thrust the money of
thy mercy into it: Seal fast up in his heart the remission of all his sins
in the blood of Jesus: Bury all his transgressions in Christ's Burial:
Establish thy free Spirit within him: Take from him all dullness and deadness
of spirit, all secure and hardened thoughts, all that may hinder him from
coming unto thee: Continue his comfortes begun: Be thou the end and the
ender of his work: Lord, disapoint Satan who by his charms and cunning
trains has gone about both by force and fraud to catch this Soul of thy
servant.

Now Death is approaching: To thee belongs the issues of death: Thou killest
and thou make alive: thou bring down to the grave, and again thou
raisest up: Now as evidently appears, thou art for to remove Isa. 38. 11.
this thy servant from the Land of the l^uing, and thy will must be done: We
could have wished the continuance of his Christian fellowship with the
lengthening and enlarging of his days: But most humbly we submit all our
affections unto thy good pleasure and will.

O Father of mercies in whose boundless bowels are most pitiful compassions
without any passion, show thy self merciful, loving, and kind toward this
Soul, which in the days of its flesh has been with thee but a stranger and
Psalm. 39. 12
^ sojourner: His Soul now is saying to thee with John his two Disciples* Ioh.
1. 38.
Rabbi, Master where remains thou? Answer it as thou answered them
lovingly, Come and see, and after verse. 39.
that tak it home to thine own house as John took home thy Mother. Ioh. 19. 27


O dear Father of our Savior by Nature, O our dearest Father by adoption; be
favorable to this thy servant, even for that blood wherewith thou art passing
lie pleased: Forget and forgive all his sins whatsoever: Lay now thy loving
Arms about him: Claspe him hard to thy bosom, and keep him fast till he be
surely and softly placed into the heavens.

Now, Lord, thou have begun to loofe this Soul out of its prison: Let earth
go to earth, and his Spirit return to thee that gave it: Place it into one of
these heavenly Mansions which thy Son is gone to prepare for these that are
thine: Strengthen him now at the last and highest point of his trial.

O Great JEHOVAH, who never hucketh to give mercy to heart broken sinners, let
him find more and more yt thy bowels ouerflowing with mercy, are ready to
receive him: In the bottomless sea of thy mercy make his sins all to be
choked, and his Soul deliciouslie to be bathed with everlasting comforts.

And because Satan in his last assaults is most furious, be thou most
powerful in him by the virtue of thy Spirit: Blunt so the edge of all his
temptations that they be not able any more to wound his Spirit: Let thy secret
love be unto his Soul lik a Secret or jack in this bloody battle, whereby
he may be shielded from the bloody blows of a most cruel adversary: Put on
him, Lord, the complete armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 13
that he may be able to with-stand in this evil hour, and having done all,
to stand: Before this Battle end make him with stomach and courage to run
all his enemies through with the two edged sword of thy Spirit.

Have now, Lord, a special care of him: Hemme in all his thoughts within the
compass of thy will: Possess him so with the fulness of thy presence, that in
him there be found no room for any ill motions: Furnish him with the supply
of all these graces which thou know to be wanting into him: Let thy Spirit
make residence in his heart, as in an house of God.

Now, Lord, while it is time to save, save the Soul of thy Servant which is
now ready to remove: Open unto it that euer-flowing fountain promised to the
penitent of the house of David for to tak away sin and uncleanness: O
Fountain of Grace, wash him and wash him thoroughly with the blessed Blood of
thy satisfaction: After that thou have made him perfectly clean, hold out thy
succouring and helpful arms unto this Soul and take it into thy bosom: Let
it there taste of the honey of thy Compassions.

In this time of gloummines and darkness of death, inlighten his Soul with
the light of thy countenance: Turn thy face now unto it: Hitherto it could see
nothing but the Backparts of Thee that Great JEHOVAH, which brings joye but
in part: From such parts now bring him unto the fullness: Turn thy self unto
this Soul that it may fully see thy face wherein is fullness of joye. Psalm.
16. 11


And seeing no man can see thy face and live, let this thy Servant now see thy
face and die, that after death he may live with thee for ever in the Heavens:
Let neither the love of life nor the fear of death turn his eyes from the
prize of the high Philip. 13. 14
calling of God: Make him now with a long step from the earth to the heavens
to step in into immortality.

Now, Lord, engraue deeply this Soul into the palms of thine hands Set it
as a seal on thine heart: Wrap it within the Mantle of thy mercy, war^e it
within the bowels of thy love, lap it in thy bosom with that unspeakable
joye which Christ has purchased with unspeakable pain, even through the
bloody merits of his most bitter passions: His words now are failed: Square
thou all his thoughts by the rule of thy Spirit of grace.

Lord, make these our weak prayers, to mount up lik Pillars of smoke parfumed
with the merciful merits of thine only Son: To him with thee his Father,
and with the Spirit of Grace, be all Glory, Praise, Power, and Dominion for
ever.

AMEN.
The spiritual Friend. O dear Friend whom I have seen a sorrow beaten
sinner; Rejoice now in your Savior, whose mercies have been the Bane of all
your sinful miseries: Cleave still fast unto your Savior: Let not him go
whom your soul loves, till ye come to Peniel where ye shall see him face to
face.

The Lord refresh your wearied A prayer.
soul with the soft and sweet breath of his Spirit: The Lord kned into your
heart these spiritual meditations which are of the purest strain: O Father of
mercies give unto this soul a most sure Infef^ment of heaven by the hand of
thy Spirit: Make some drops of thy Myrrh to enter in by some little creuice of
his heart: Put in thine hand by the keye hole of the door that his bowels may
be moved for thee: Let such a strength now repare from thee unto him, that the
world may see that thy strength is made perfect in weakness.

It shall be expedient that now ye his Pastor in a short prayer recommend
him to God again: Behold him now at the last gaspes, his eye stringes are
broken: The water of death trickleth down over his cheeks: His life is now
drawn to an hair.

O Lord, while bodily sight and senses fail, make spiritual sight and sense
succeed in a greater perfection: Make a spaite of thy grace with a mighty
stream to carry him to glory. A prayer


O dear Friend up with your heart to your God: Now all your sins shall die
with your sickness: The Rock of your Salvation Jesus has shiuered them in
pieces: There is (...) Romans 81.
condemnation to these that are in Christ, who out of the pangs of love
suffered yt pains of hell for man's Redemption* His Angels Sir are here
waiting upon your Soul for to carry it to pleasures for evermore: Yet a
little ^sal. 16. 11
while and lo ye shall be at the vpshotte of all your woe: Ye are now
utterly out of the reach of all the powers * Note
of hell, even upon the borders of everlasting pleasures, unmixed pleasures,
which shall turn all your tears into triumphs.


The Pastor. Now Sir, Gird up the loins of your 1 Pet. (...). 13
mind, make haste to your God, who shortly shall put into your hand the palm
of victory: Satan is chained up now for doing you any more harm: The night
of your trouble is Luke 1. 78.
past: Christ that blessed Day spring has brought a morning mercy unto your
Soul: His graces in you has shined more and more and so shall do until the
perfect day even until your Soul carried on Eagles wings reach the hight of
Heaven, where without tears or tediousness are pleasures for evermore. Psalm.
16. 11


Though your tongue now fail you Sir, let your heart be busy with God in
prayer, he will hearten and encourage you in all the business: Your task is
at an end: Heave up your heart to Christ crucified with us, and that with
sighs and sobbes the groanings of his own Spirit.

Though your body now be cold, the Spirit of Jesus shall by a free and vital
operation maintain the heat and vigor of your Soul. A prayer


The Spirit of comfort conueye unto your soul the warmest blood that ever
heated the heart of Jesus.

Let us pray.


The last prayer for the sick Man in the very jaws of death.
O LORD, whose mercies are above all thy works, it was never thy custom to
send away a broken heart without comfort: Now hear the secret g^oanes and
sighs of thy servant, whose soul is ready in this gasping agony to come out
of its Tabernacle for to co^peare before thee: Thou who have given him thy Son
for a ransom, give him thy Spirit for a pledge: Furnish him with force for to
fight and finish this Battle in victory: As thou have been at ye beginning of
his being even the beginner of his being, so now be thou the end at which
he aims, even the end of all his woes.

And seeing he is now in the narrow throat of death, help him by thy power,
till he has past this passage* Put now into him a fresh li^e that in a strong
vigor he may run with the feet of the Hind till he come to thee in
ete^nitie: Make him now supple and nimble while he is near the end of his
race: His silly soul has been sore weather-driuen with many temptations,
now let his battle take an end: Receive his soul in thy Rest. and lull it in
the bosom of thy pleasures.

Be a shield and a shelter unto him for to hid and cover him from the last
blows and painful thrusts of his enemy the Devil: Disapoint that evil
one, while he looks for the greatest victory: Let him receive the foulest
foil.

Loose now sweetly these two which thou have joined together, that after his
eyes with old Simeon have seen thy Salvation, he may depart in peace.

Seeing the Battle is now come to the la^f stroke, make thy Spirit, O Lord,
in him to fight it out, that having overcome, thou may put the palm of
victory into his hand after that the days of dangers are past: O draw this
soul now unto thee with the strongest cords of thy love: Proclaim unto his
Conscience a full and a final remission of his sins, whether Original or
actual, whether of Commission or of Omission: Subscribe his pa^don with the
arteriall blood of thy blessed Son.

O Father of mercies, the Spouse of all faithful Souls, receive this Spirit
into thy wed locke-bedde: It was betrothed unto thee by thy fair promises in
the Gospel, now according to thy promise accomplish and fulfill that blessed
Band in the presence of thine Angels: Long, Lord, has he thought on it, and
earnestly longed for it: Seal thou it now with the sense of thy love: Fulfull
it, Lord, and this day be thou the Bridegroom of his Soul: Here he has
seen but the Copy of thy countenance, let him now come where he may see thee
even as thou art: As thou gave him his measure of grace in the world, so now
give him his portion of glory besides thy self: Let nothing sway his thoughts
from thee in this last ag^nie: Season so his heart with thy love that there be
no room in his heart for any thing by thy self.

Now loose the pinnes of the Tabernacle, while his soul shall be out of the
body let it enter into ye Palace of pleasures: Say unto it as Laban said Genesis
24. 31
to Abraham's servant, Come in thou blessed of the Lord: Thou who have clasped
his name within the Book of life: Bind now his soul into the bundle of life:
Draw it out of this myrie mortality, and place it among the Angels and
spirits of just men, who are always in thy presence Psalm. 16, 11
courting thy countenance, wherein i^ fullness of joye.

Unto the end and in the end, keep his heart unblameable in holiness* that
Satan that roaring Lion be never able to catch him within the reach of his
paw: Preserve the true relish and sound joys of thy Spirit of grace within
him, till from grace thou bring him unto glory, where thou shall crown thy
gifts and graces with thy goodness.

O now open the everlasting doors and let in this Soul decked with ye laurels
of victory: Let all the Heavens welcome this converted sinner with songs and
shoutes of joye.

O Spirit of Comfort, thou have guided him through many seas of sorrows, sit
still at the Helm till thou have brought him to his Haven. O now crown thy
graces with thy glory: Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

To the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be everlasting praise and dominion for
ever,

AMEN.
Michael and the Devils dispute for the 'Soule of the sick Man alittle before
its departure out of the Body.
Satan.* I Have many things to lay to this man's charge: I am the Lords
Proctor and Acturney appointed to plead for his justice: I have already sifted
his life: Of force this Soul must be damned: None Assise can cleanse it: It
is now taken red hand in the path and passage of sin.


The Angel Michael. I will not use against thee a railing accusation, neither
darre I for my Iud. v. 9.
Master the God of mercy and of meekness: It has pleased his royal
Majesty to license thee to accuse the souls of men: Thine accusations are
ever most bitter and most bloody: I am here standing on my Masters side for
to defend this Soul which he has bought with his blood.

But what can thou say against this man whose Soul is committed to me for to
be carried unto Paradise: I know thee of old to be the accuser Revel. 12. 10
of the brethren: I remember well how once I contended and grappled with Iud.
v. 9.
thee for the body of Moses which was buried sore against thy will: It is
likely that of it thou thought to make an idol.

Loose now thy leach and let all thy hell hounds come forward: Come, come with
thy most foul mouthed objections: what ca^ thou now allege against the soul
of this man before that it come out of this body: Thou art here a Lion
against a Lamb: Declare now what thou can in this Assise: Thou can say no more
than he has already said against himself: But come on, f^aime thine
indictment against him: Discharge thy fie^ie darts with the outmost of thy
force.


Satan. Know thou not that there is a large harvest for Hell, many called
but few chosen.

He is my Vassal, I require but Justice: Let him receive but according to his
deseruinges: Here is a Bill of indictment able to conuinee him: In his
wickedness he turned to his course as the horse rusheth into the Ier. 8. 6.
battle: Both fiercely and feareleslie marching under my colors in the
pursuit of his pleasures he ran ryote in the way of wickedness.


The Angel Michael. Is not God a God of mercy, able to forgive? But what has
he done?


Satan. Behold, the pieces of Evidence which I produce against him: Let all
the actions of his life be brought to a true touch, and it shall appear what
a monster he has been.

In his youth he scorned at the Thunder of Gods word, counting it but Paper
shot: His soul was never grieved to grieve the Spirit of grace: seldom came
he to the Church, he was of the kindred of Noah's Raven delighting to fly
about the Arc, not willing to enter into it: Gods honey word of unspeakable
sweetness was vinegar to his teeth: The pure commandment of the Lord which
enlightened the eyes was lik smok unto his Psalm. 19. 8.
eyes the cause of blearednesse.

In all points he was disloyal unto his God: He misregarded his Parents: He
burned with lust like Hos. 7. 4.
an Oven heated by the baker: He so loved his lust that it was his law: His
hands were full of pickerie, his eyes were full of adultery, and his heart was
full of guile and his tongue full of lies, ever gaggling like a Goose. He was a
cunning clawbacke and a paunchpike thank: His custom was to defile the air
with most filthy belghs of blasphemy: He sported at all reproves: O the
noble juggling. Psalm. 35. 26


There, there, this gear goes trim.

By hook and by crook he sought for gain: How he wanne it he cared not if
men perceived not his fraud: With Judas he was wholly given to the bag and
baggage of his covetousness.

Shall this man come where God is* who never walked in his way? In all his
ways he did ever go awry lik a Child that scribleth without a rule: All his
good intentions were but like false conceptions which are buried before their
birth: let me now tread him under foot, that I may lay him dead straight like
a worm: O the infamous man whose name does go with a brand upon it like
Cains mark: He followed Christ for loaves: But O when the corn was spent the
Rate left the Barn.

His whole life was but a mire of mischief: All men can tell that he was but
an untrusty Pilferer, a fool hardy fellon rushing in rebellion against God
and man: If so be that he was exalted, he cared not that God was dishonored:
In the pride of life he walked like Nebuchadnezar strouting in his Palace with
bragging words Dan. 4. 30
boasting of his Babel: Gods patience has long suffered. In his sufferings he
has comforted himself in this, When I see a convenient time then will I
execute judgment: Now is the time of execution come: Either now or never, for
his sin is now ripe and ready for the sickle.

I am wearied with accusing, what shall I say? His heart was ever swelled with
pride: By costly apparel he gave evil example: With his pleasures he was
tied like a dog in a leach: He could neither suffer a Superior nor comport
with a Companion: The blue envy in his heart made him hate to see others
thrive besides him: The praise of other men's virtues, was as who had dispraised
himself in his face: He was ever malcontent at Gods graces into others: He
was like a Swine under an Oak feeding, and foiling Gods benefits lik Acorns:
But who ever saw his face lifted up with thanks to the shaker of the tree? He
was full of peppered sausinesse, sporting himself with checkes and taunts: As
he had a babbling tongue to speak evil, so had he a bibulous ear thirsty
after false reports.

O what filthy dung hills and heaps of sins were hoodred in his heart: If
he did not any evil, it was not for lack of will, like the frozen serpent
he hissed when he could not hurt, but so soon as he began, he lustilie
lashed on. All his meditations were mould in malice.

As for his Religion he used his liberty as a cloak of maliciousness: 1
F^t, 2. 16
While he come to the Church it was but for the fa^shion, for to show the
frindges of his hypocrisy: He thought a long Sermon a surfeit, as Judas
thought the oil spent that was powered upon Christ, so thought he all the time
alloted to Gods service: He was ever cold in well doing as one of ye frozen
generation: A proud man was he in his own conceit while he found himself
enlightened with some ca^fused glimmerings of light glauncing upon his heart
through the deceiving glass of a temporary faith: His neck was an iron sinew
and his brow brass: In a word Isa. 48. 4.
all his affections were out of order as bones beside the joint.

It were more easy to count the sand than his sins of omission and of
commission with excess of riot.

I seek but Justice, now his life is near an end, let Gods vengeance take
him at the rebound.


The Angel Michael. That is a bloody Lybell, if all be true that is said by
the father of lies: Though his sins were thus bloody Ioh. 8* 44.
as thou accuses, there is a redeeming Blood in Jesus for his ransom, his
wounds are the holes of the Rock of refuge: All that accusation is but founded
upon surmise.

But though he were guilty as thou affirms, is there any sin so great
that God cannot forgive? There is no sin so red but Christ's Blood can make it
white: Gods word is true, sin dyed in Scarlet-red lik crimsin, may by God be
made white Isa. 1. 18.
lik the wool and snow: Thou cries for Justice, Christ's Blood cries for
mercy; which of you two shall best be heard?


Satan. But can Gods mercy be against his justice? shall mercy against
justice plead for the witness of a Raven? shall a most vile sinner escape
damnation? shall not Justice be his bane? Let me now give him a knock with
the bar of judgment: While he had strength to walk he left the narrow
path, for to go croude with the wicked in the broad way: Now let him suffer
for all his riotes, let the doors of heaven be bared in his teeth, Gods mercies
must not be against his justice: Let me now give him a yercke with my whippe.


The Angel Michael Avoid, there is no breach in justice while his sins are
pardoned, for Christ his Lord has suffered for him, he has satisfied for all
his debts at the b^rre of justice, and that to the utmost farthing: When all
was paid, Christ cried with a loud voice that heaven and earth might hear
Consummatum est, that is, A^l is paid, Ioh. 19. 30
the whole work of man's Redemption is finish^d This was h^ard by the devils
themselves, and not one durst stand up to say the contrary.

Thou c^yeth for Justice, (...) is Justice, here is Justice: Christ his
Cautioner has paid all his d^bts: Note
It is against Justice to require one debt to be twice paid: By Justice then
he must be saved, because Christ in great mercy toward him has made full
satisfaction to the Justice of God: Note
His Lords passion is his pardon, for the drops of his Blood his Father has
given him in exchange life everlasting for all repenting sinners, what needs
him to fear who has Christ for his Cautioner.


Satan. Christ would never be Cautioner for such a Reprobate goat as he: In
wickedness he has out-stripped all others, he put on Christ like an Hat which
goes off to every one that we meet: The wine pynt and Tobacca Pype with
sneesing powder provoking sneuell were his hearts delight. His life has been
a stumbling block unto many: His best virtues were but splendida peccata
glistering sins: His most precious pearls are but of pewter.

Away with this Child of Belial, out upon him with all his fair words, all
his Religion was but scroofe and scumme: Would Christ ever be Cautioner for
such a Banquerupt as he, who all his days has been a boisterous reueller,
the chief of a knot of knaves.


The Angel Michael. He who is not in debt needs Matthew. 9. 13
not a Cautioner: I came, said Christ, to call sinners to repentance: Though
his sins were many as thou objectes, no misery in man can ouer-reach the
mercy of his God: Christ in all will be answerable for him.


Satan. What has Christ to do with this stubburne and steele-necked Bebell
who was in his whole conversation both hot and hardy? The voice of his
Conscience within was outcryed, and all honesty out-faced by his corruptions:
After y^ evil turn was done he had his excuse ready at his fingers ends.
Think ye that Christ will be Cationer for all men, or that all men shall be
saved?


The Angel Michael. Not for all, neither shall all men be saved: But this man
is one of Gods because of his Faith.


Satan. How could he have Faith? Faith is by the Word. The Word had none abode
in him a pettie-fogger a trouble town: What could such a smatterer as he
learn at the hearing of the Word? He has been but a Bungler delighting into
gewgowes: He was a leaking vessel, letting things run out as fast as they
came in, his Faith was ever fained.


The Angel Michael. Though his Faith was weak, yet was it never fained, God
quenches Isa 42. 3.
not the smoking fl^xe: Note
He looks not so much to the strength as to the truth thereof: Thou art
fertile in foolish words which are the sum of the Devils dictionarie.


Satan. I hear thee brag much of his Faith, but who did ever see it? I H^b.
11. 1,
know not what the evidence of things not seen signifi^th: I could never
understand that Theology: I understand S. James better, show me thy Iam. 2,
13.
Faith, says he: If he had Faith let it be seen: To say that he had
Faith, is but a vain blast: What has his life been but a web of vices? What
has he been but a fruitless shrubbe in the Lords garden, where he but
marred the ground? What has he been but a ^luttish sluggard a Gore-bellie, a
Bellie-god, petting himself with paunch-pleasures, his mouth like a Bung-hole
was for nothing but for the filling of his belly among his drunken Gosips:
Hypocrisy has so enwouen it self into his heart, that all his thoughts are
become as black as hell: His heart was ever void of all Charity: If he was
well he cared not for others in their calamities: This was his ordinary
speech concerning the afflicted: What have I to do whether they sink or they
swim? Every vessel must stand on its own bottom: Let every man shift for
himself: the well and wealth of others was to him an eyesore: curse now this
barren ground which has been a soil only fit for weeds.


The Angel Michael. These be but accusations or rather cauillations without
any ground. The Godly saw that he was among them a fruitful tree, whose
branches were bowed down that men might pull the fruits with their hand.


Satan. What fruits Could such a thorn as he bear grapes? Could such a
Thistle as he bear figs? Where are these fruits of his Faith? What was he
ever but a monstrous person all mouth, tongue, and voice, without heart or
hand to think or do good: he seemed to be wise while indeed all his actions
were contrived but by quirkes of vvite: He could give God his lips in stead of
his heart: He had many fair sweet words like the sounding of golden Bells,
but where are his Pomgranates fruits worthy amendment of life? All might
see that he was like that cursed ground where Thistles grow in Job. 31. 40
stead of Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley: Let him now crack of his
Cockle and boast of his Barley.


The Angel Michael. These be but calumnies and ^orged slander and
detractions: He was indeed like a tree planted by the psalm. 1. 3.
rivers of water that brings forth the fruit in his season.


Satan. What was he but a knottie, barren, rotten scrubbe, marring the
ground? Show me his Faith if thou can? make search of his works: Try them and
tell me what they are in thy best s^raphicall discourse.


The Angel Michael. This and this and this he did: And if God had spared his
days he was well minded to do more: God ever prefers the willingness of
man's mind to the worthiness of his wo^ke: For if there be first a willing 2
Cor. 8, 12
mind, it is acceptable according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.


Satan. All that was but hypocrisy for to be seen and praised of men: His
chiefest care in that was fool shlie to gain an opinion of more than ordinary
piety, as if he had been a Rabbi in Israel: But O inwa^dlie in his Soul he
jested at hell not caring for Heaven: Gods boaste seemed to him but Bugges
things made to fear Children. His heart was a very Vice of vices turning
from evil to worse.


The Angel Michael. God alone knows the heart: Mala men's malus animus: Thou
judge others to be like unto thy self: Note
Because when thou art Lucifer an Angel of light a white devil in appearance,
then art thou most set on blackest darkness, thou think others to be
likewise disposed for to juggle.


Satan. But can he deny his sins? Are they not all written into mine
accusation Book? His debts are so hudge that he cannot be able to pay: A way
to prison with this Banquerupt, never plead more for him, for his sins are
so manifest that they cannot be covered: Did not his open scandals strike the
Drum of rebellion against the heavens? Who can deny his sins? Let me now
sheath this dagger in his bowels: The pleasures of his sins are past, now
let him find the sting of guilt.


The Angel Michael. It is truth that he has sinned, but also thou cannot
deny but that he has confessed his sins: By the blessed blood of Jesus
they are cancelled and blotted out of the Book of Gods rememberance. O
despightfull Spirit thou art first (...) crafty tempter and after a cruel
tormenter: Thou are ever picking quarrels with Gods redeemed ones. What ever
he has done amiss, he has sore repented it.


Satan. He but seemed to repent: His heart which men thought to be a seat
of sincerity was but a sink of sin: If it were uncased and laid open this
should clearelie appear: At preaching, the word without and the dumb choppes
of his Conscience within could not move him to do well: At his prayers, before
men he could chirppe like a gras-hopper: But where are the tears of his
Repentance?


The Angel Michael. His prayers were not chirping, but crouding even the
crouding of the Dove: As for his tears the holy water of grace, and most
pleasant dew of Repentance, the Lord has put them into his Bottalls: Many a
tear since this Battle began has trickled down his cheeks for the grieuing
of his God His eyes like two water sluices running continually.


Satan. What is that? Hypocrites which are but peevish hyrlings and miserable
wretches with their deceitful rubbinges can wring water from their eyes: By
such crafty conueyances they cu^ningly bleare the eyes of me^ who can see
nothing but outward appearance: There be many counterfeit tears in the world.


The Angel Michael. The tears of Jacob while he wept Ios. 12. 4.
made supplications were not the worse because profane Esau could shed Heb.
12. 17
tears. The tears of the Godly are like precious pearls, in Gods eyes.


Satan. I know his treachery better than ye, he was cunning in the art of
seeming: I ever knew him a doubling and dissembling C^mpanion; a Dragon with
Lambs horns: Well could he strain the utmost veane of his wits for to
bleare the eyes of men: The way of godliness in his heart was as the way of a
man with a Prou. 30. 19
maid most close from all access:

Many a time could this craf^ie Bible-carier wring out a tear in the Church
for to catch the applause and vain breath of man's praise: But in secret he
could prophanelie laugh in his sleeue and scorn at sincerity: Among such as
himself his mouth was blotted with blasphemies, among the Godly again he
could pratle much of piety: His chief study was to dawbe the outward man
withfaire shows like a Rogue in a stage with the apparel of a Prince: While
he did hear the word and his Bible before him, it was but of course and
custom and not of Conscience: He like Nimrod was a mighty hunter not of
beasts but of vain praise and applause: When he gave alms, he caused blow
the Trumpet that others might know when he did any good in appearance: He in
his bragges was like the Hen which cackleth at every egg she lay^th: To his
lusts he was a voluntary vassell: Among his neighbors he was like a
Cormorant: He was like an empty box with a fair title written upon it, an
^smaelite in the coat of an Israelite: All his religion was but an outward
aperie of profession, a sign hanging without, having nothing within: When he
hang down his head lik Isa. 58. 5.
a Bulrush, it was but for a day, so soon as the morrow came and he to his
old byas again: His best thoughts were like a false conception which is
buried in the birth; like a stalled Ox he set up himself a fatting after his
fasting: For the great treasures of Gods graces he never returned the tribute
of glory; such was his unthankfulness: Now let me dri^e him to my den, that
I may flash fire into the face of this most wretched forlorn sinner, who in
his heart has hatched all sorts of mischief.


The Angel Michael. Well have thou been called ye accuser of the brethren: away
with thy slanderous lybell, not worthy that I should shape it an answer: what
this poor man has done amise dear has he bought it, with many a sore sigh
and groan to his God, has he both loathed and lamented his faults: God has
heard him and has sealed up his pardon with the blood of his Son: The sweet
and soft breath of Jesus has refreshed him with comforts, and now his Spirit
which was once sore troubled and distempered is made free from all his fears,
God in his favor has seasoned his heart with a saving grace: Thine hid malice
hitherto confined within the bounds of thy bosom, is now broken out into
great distemper of words.


Satan. Behold, behold, the great velumes of the count books of his
conscience: Look upon these scarlet and crimsin letters of his transgressions:
Shall this short and abrupt devotion of his in his sickness, be counted
Repentance? Will not the most wicked vvaile under Gods hand while it is
weighty upon them? Note
There is no Crown of life for carnal livers: How easy is it to hang down
the head Isa. 58. 5.
like a bulrush for a day? While he had time to do well he was both cold
and coward in well doing: All his good works were but in external form,
shows without substance: Cunningly could he trick and trim Psalm. 51. 6.
the outward man: But he neither loved the truth in ye inward parts: As he
was double minded so had he a heart Iam. 4. 8.
and a heart, which he did apparel with fair Mantles of godly appearance.

While under fair colors of Religion he did hear the world in hand that he
stood for God, and was zealous for the good cause, he in his privy practice
was my close factor, serving me for his profits and his pleasures: Glad was
he to gogge the worlds eyes with the distinctions: Of v^urie he made a biting
and a toothlesse: lies, he diui-ded in Officio^s and pernicious: His greatest
faults he could well cloak with mincing and excusing.

O the deep dungeon of hypocrisy that is within that breast: O how cunningly
has all his wickedness been concealed hitherto? None has been upon his
privy counsel but I and his own corruptions: O that heart of his a pit and a
puddle, a den and a dungeon both dark and deep! Who can see it? who can
sound it? But why spend I time in ye unsavory raking of this dunghill. Good
Lord, it is a strange thing how thou whose clearest eye has seen him most
perfectly in the inmost closet of his heart, should send down an Angel to
plead for him: O how cunningly could he with his fists beat the breast with
the Publican, being no less in his heart presumptuous than the Pharisee! Here
lies in this bed a painted Tomb fair without: But O what rottenness is
within his heart? none eye could abide to see it, if it were perced with a
gimlet. Shall this man come where God is, who never walked in Gods ways? Like
a blind horse he stammered and rushed in every mire: His heart was nothing
but a kneding ^rough of wickedness, yea, a gulf and groope of uncleanness:
Let now the heavens cry shame on him.


The Angel Michael. Thou art shameless in thine accusations and dogged in thy
malice: Thou with thy bellows, of temptations first blows at the coal of
si^ne, and after that thou cries for judgment which should chiefly be
directed against thy self, the father of all mischief.

But in this last point of thine accusation thou have plainly bewray^d thy
murdering malice in taking upon thee to judge of the sincerity of the inward
parts: Thou presumes far above the reach of thy knowledge: God alone is the
searcher of men's hearts: Note
It is he alone who has an eye witness within us.


Satan. Though God only knows the heart, yet by the fruits the tree is
known: Matthew. 7. 16
It is easy to guess of his heart by the copy of his countenance, he had a
swift and a souple tongue: But his hand was heavy to practice: What has he
been all his lifetime but a bag of imbred malice, a most filthy excrement
into the Church? Behold how he is altogether berayed with ordure: Let me now
with the besome of justice sweep him outat Shel^coth the dirt port of Gods
house: What shame shall it be to the heavens to receive such a dunge hill and
lump of filthin^sse whose disbanded corruptions have defiled the air? It shall
be justice that now he be washed in the Kettle of Hell.


The Angel Michael. What God has cleansed that call thou Act. 10. 15
not common: Christ by his blessed Blood has made him clean: The Lord of
glory who opens and no man steeketh, has opened the everlasting doors for
to let in his soul: I am here waiting on for to carry it to glory: It is in
vain that now thou sets thy temptations on foot and on fire: By thy crafty
cosening thou shall not be able to rob or to filch from him the least grain
of grace.


Satan. What? shall this bastard professor and runnagate escape the doom
that is due to his villainy? While he had time he lived in pleasures, and
feasted while others fasted: His seven years of plenty are past, now let him
smart with the Glutton into hell: Let him there be refused of a drop by him
to whom here he refused a crumme: Can God look upon his iniquities and not
kindle a consuming fire in his wrath against such a varnished hypocrite,
whose whole religion was in a mouth filled with great swelling words of
vanity? In such deceitful cunning coloring, he among all did carry away
the Bell.


The Angel Michael. God will never look upon his iniquities, for he has cast
them all behind his back: God beholds none Numb. 23. 21
iniquity in Jacob; neither does he see perverseness in Israel: Note
The Lord judges not his Children by the remnant of their old corruptions,
but by the beginnings of his renewing grace: Note
The merciful God is more pleased with a dram of grace, then provoked with a
pound of iniquity: Sins are not sins before God, except that they be done
with pleasure: That which I say is from that truth: He that is borne 1 Ioh.
3. 9.
of God sins not.

Avoid Satan: Thou art ever covered with rage as with a raiment: When thou
see anger kindled thou art ever ready to add tinder to that fire: Thou art
cunning and crafty to clok thy bloody massacres with pretenses of seeking
justice.


Satan. What say I but truth; His whole delight was in sin: While he was
in health and strength, he did wear my Liuerie: Who did ever see him bear
Christ's cognizance? All his godliness was but cloak and color without
life and vigou^: Though he sin not now there where h^e lies, he has not
left sin, but sin has left him: If his tongue could speak. he could not for
his heart deny it: Scribitur in facie: Behold his fierce and kill-bucke
countenance: While he had youth and vigor he obeyed no law but his lawless
appetits: Was he challenged? Then he fathered his sins upon me.


The Angel Michael. Thou in thy fond humor have ever biting corrasiues, for
bleeding Consciences: In his members I confess there was a lawless law
indeed, but in his mind was Gods Law warring against the law of his members:
From his heart he hated that law of his members: But his whole delight was in
the Law of the Spirit: Note
After that he had sinned he (...) cast the first stone at him self.


Satan. All these be but fair cloakes and couers for to hide his
transgressions: But they will not prevail: The heavens know that he was but ye
carrion of a Christian, aglozing hypocri^, having the carkase of knowledge
without the life of love and the power of practice, ever fickle lik a
Chameleon: He is now in his good mood, but if he should yet live a space, all
should soon see yt in his heart is nothing sound settled and sincere: what need
I more? this Soul must be mine, he has sinned, and therefore he must be
cursed, and so he must be mine: Behold his Band and Obligation: By the Law
of God he is mine: Now must he run into ruin: Let me give him a girke
with my rod.


The Angel Michael. Avoid that bloody Band has been cancelled by the blood of
God, that Obligation long since has been ^uen with the nails of the Cross
of Jesus: That which the Law had (...), has been loosed by the Gospel: What
his works could not do, Gods grace has perfected: By favor the merciful
Lord has chosen him out of the lost mass of mankind: Seeing his ransom has
cost God his blood, all accusations must be sealed with silence: In despite of
the utmost rage of all infernal force this Soul shall be saved: Though all
the powers of hell prodigiouslie mad should rage, rampe, and roar, they
shall not be able to vn^ye the knot of Faith and Love where with he is united
unto his Savior.


Satan. I fear fore now that he slip the collar and go from me: At least
seeing in his whole life I have been his Master, let him be divided, let me
have any part and let God take his choice in the partner-ship.


The Angel Michael. Avoid Satan with thy witty wickedness, whereby
woluishlle thou would worrie this red^emed Lamb. Thy shaire is not with God:
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter: The whole man is Christ's who
has bought him with a price.

Away with thy gun-pudered humor: Attempt no more to touch him: Thou shall
never grippe him any more within thy cruel clouthes, nor inwrap him in thy
snaires: Wo^ to that Soul that serves thee: Note
It is like a Bird on a bush which is smitten in her song of the Archer for
whom she had tuned her song: In the utmost of all cruelty thou have
discharged the utmost of thy gall upon this wearied heart: I will enter no more
in parley with thee.

Now come our thou fillie Soul unto him that breathed thee in that body: Come
to thy rightful owner: Come into mine arms that I may carry thee up the
Ladder of Iaacob unto bless: Christ thine Advocat has pleaded for thee, and
has win the cause: Come now Soul out of that body, fly like an Eagle up to
the blessed Carcass of thy Lord, where is constant peace, unmixed joye, and
blessed immortality: Now thou art Christ's and Christ is thine: Hearke^ and
hear the cry of thy Spouse, Rise Cant. 2. 10
up my Love, my fair One, and come away: Rejoice wearied Soul, lift up thine
head, Salvation is come: The Heavens are opened go enter into thy rest.

The Battle of the Soul is now ended: Now dear Soul come out to eternity,
come out to thy Bridegroom who now calls thee: Be clothed with royal
apparel: Put on the massy and bright crown of immortality with ye glorious
Garland of celestial Laurels spangled with Iemmes of joye: Come out wearied
Traveler from doole, dolor and distress, for to enter into Psalm, 16. 11
pleasures for evermore.


FINIS.
A COMFORTABLE Speech for the Widow of the defunct.
M. WE daily may see the truth of that in Job, Man Job. 14. 1.
that is borne of a woman is of few days and full of trouble: He comes
forth like a flower and is cut down: He flees also as a shadow and
continues not: Of this is a necessity, For it is appointed Heb. 9. 27.
unto all men once to die: The decree is come forth against all flesh, All
flesh is as grass, etc. The grass Isa. 40. 6.
withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it:
verse. 7.
Surely the people is grass: All must go to ye vast gulf of the Grave: Be
cause all have sinned, all are mortal without exception of persons: prince
people, great and small, all must go to Golgotha: To great men God has said,
Ye are gods, but ye shall die like psalm. 82. 7.
men.

What man is he, said the Psalmist, psalm. 89. 48
that lives and shall not see death? Were a man Monarch of the Job. 14. 5.
whole world, Job says, That his days are determined, the number of his
m^neths are with God: He has appointed his bounds that he cannot pass: As
the enemies of Christ could not lay hands on him till his hour Ioh. 7. 30.
was come, neither Death the (...) 1 Cor. 15. 26,
enemy touch the Saints till the hour of their change come. Job. 14, 14


As for you M. whom now the Lord has made a Widow, ye have to take patience,
and hold your Leuit, 10, 3
peace with Aaron: David said to God, I was dumb and opened not my Psalm. 39. 9.
mouth; because thou did it: A Widow in the holy tongue is called Almanah
from a word that signifies dumb, a word warning her to lay her hand on her
mouth for to seal it with a reverend silence, because God has done it: Let
his decease provoke and enkindle your desire to go to him, for he will no
more come to you.

God, M. has not left you comfortless, for now happy is your Husband who
has drunk of deaths cup so peaceably even a sleeping drink wherewith he
has gone to sleep with these righteous, who are said by the Prophet to rest
in their beds: The friends of Christ die Isa. 57. 2.
not, but softly with Lazarus that friend of Christ, they sleep in their Ioh,
11, 11
Graves, where they lie still and are Job, 3, 13,
quiet. Travel M. with your own heart that it be silent.

O but ye have to bless God, who has dealt so mercifully with your dearest
heart whom he has so powerfullie up holden in so bloody and bitter a
Battle against the enemies of his Salvation wherein by the strength of God in
his weakness: After bitter bickeringes he has obtained so glorious a
victory which has made all the heavens torejoyce.

Now assuredly M. ye may say, My dear Husband the desire of mine eyes is now
a Prince in heaven crowned with the ever green Laurels of immortality: He
has changed a frail life, a wind in a worm for eternity of Glory.
Faithful Job patiently blessed God, by whose permission Satan in a
whirlwind crushed all his Children together under the ruins of an house,
how much more comfortablie may ye say, The Lord gave, and the Lord has Job.
1. ^1.
taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Note
How many good and godly persons have their Husbands taken by Pirates, pyned
in Galleyes, rotting in prisons, slain by poyso^, stobbed in duells, murdered
by Traitors, killed in war, drowned in Rivers, sunk down in Seas with
their whole substance, and diversely taken away in most doolefull manner? But
be hold, which may blunt the edge of your dolours, your husband peaceably
deceased in his bed having his eyes closed with the finger of a Friend: Though
all the sorts of death of Gods beloved Ones be precious in his sight, yet it
is most comfortable for the living when these whom they love best are removed
in this outward peaceable manner, both spirituallie and temporallie comforted:
This Job calls to die in Job. 29. 1^.
our nest. If God had done otherwise to you in the rigor of his Justice, who
durst control him?

This also ye must remember for the settling of any dru^blie mood of
impatiencie that may be in your heart, that he was but lent unto you for a
space, and so contracted ye at the first to tarry but a space together: for
if ye will take leisure to read your Contract of m^rriage, ye shall find
that therein is made mention of the death of you both: Let me yet come nearer,
after he had taken you by the hand before the (...) on your marriage day, your
hands a little after few words spoken did go asunder again, even for to
tell you that none immortal knot can be had of any things here below: happy
she whose heart is pliable and obsequious to the will of her God.

I confess that ye cannot but mourn, being deprived of such (...) pleasure
the fairest jewel of all your worldly joy, the staff of your estate on who^
your greatest comfortes did depend: what wonder? for many days have ye been
glad together, so that it is no possible were ye never so sanctified, but your
heart must be deeply wounded: Why not? Gods will was never against any
moderate mourning for the dead: * Grace makes no^ men and women Stoics and
stocks that cannot be moved for anything: Nay, God permits us to mourn but
not to carke and care 1 The^, 4. 13
as these which have none hope, who ^ugging out their hair and down their
cheeks power out their roaringes as waters, being swallowed up of
discouragement, having none hoe in their grief, they some out mire and dirt.

It is permitted to mourn when Gods hand is gone out against us: It is
natural: True grace is not against it, but against its corruption in excess:
In the Olde-Testament Abraham mourned for Sarah: For the Gen, 23, (...)
death of Deborah Rebeccas Nurse was sore weeping, for which cause y^ Oak-tree
under which she was buried was called, Allon Bachuth, the Oak Genesis 35, (...)
of weeping: Jacob wept exceedingly for Joseph, whom he thought by some wild
beast to have been rent in Genesis 37. 33
pieces: After that Jacob had gathered up his feet and yielded up the ghost,
Joseph fell upon his face and wept (...) Genesis 50. 1
him and kissed him: Naomi after she had lost both Husband and Children, would
no more be called Naomi, that is pleasant: Call me Ruth. 1. 20
not Naomi, said she, that is pleasant, but call me Marah that is bitter, For
the Almighty has dealt very bitter (...) with me: I went out full, and the
Lord verse. 21,
has brought me home again empty: Why then call ye me Naomie, seeing the
Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me* These
all were interested, and therefore they mourned, being pinched with the smart.

Behold, M. how in the Olde-Testament God by taking away by death has
afflicted his dearest Ones and for to use Naomis words has testified against
them: consider also how they have mourned. In the New Testament Christ himself
groaning in Ioh. 11. 35
himself wept at Lazarus his Grave* The words are these, And Jesus wept: The
sight of Christ's death was by Simeon foretold to his Mother Luke (...). 25.
Marie: This Simeon called a sword which should pierce her through the Soul.

Note
Thus as ye see a Christian heart is not a Marble heart but a mel^ing heart
furnishing tears the tribute of our love appointed for the funeral obsequies
of our best beloved, whose appointed months of life are expired: Note
Indeed where grace is, it stays at the course, stops the ^ent and the
stream of Natures blind and bold corruptions, bringing our most violent
affections into an holy compass of an humble submission unto Gods will: But
it never dissalloweth a tempered Turtle crouding for the absence of our dearest
comforts: Such clear crystal tears the Lord will put up in his Bottels: But
as for these drumlie and barmie tears of fierce and unruly passions coming
from the muddie fountain of an unhallowed heart, the Lord will not respect
them no more than (...) regarded the sacrifice of Cain: Note
Suc^ G^n. 4.
tears are like the waters of jealousi^ to the whoorish woman which mad^ Numb.
5. 21
her thigh to rotte and her belly to swell: None but humble and godly
grieuances shall be noted in Gods Register for to be assuaged and allayed with
comforts.

By all that which we have said M. ye see that ye have license to mourn
like these that have hope: Ye have indeed now to mourn, but first for your
sins which might have been some occasion of his remove from you: What is the
best of our hearts, but a filthy sinke-hole and stinking dunghill: That done,
first ye may mourn thereafter for (...) loss: If the first ye do
sincerely* God in his appointed time shall be the repairer of your loss with
doubled contentmentes as he did to Jacob who mourning sore for Benj^mine, in a
clap recovered both I^seph and Benjamin: But how can that be? will ye say:
For him whom I have lossed can I never in this world recover: Note
Know ye not what Elkanah said to his Wife Hannah weeping for want of
Children, Why 1 Samuel, 1, (...)
weepest thou? said he, and why eatest thou not? and why is thine heart
grieved? am not I better to thee than ten Sons? She is not worthy to be
comforted who thinks not God to be better to her than ten thousand Husbands:
Has not the Lord who sits at the Stern, ruling all things above and
below, proclaimed himself to the world to be that Psalm. 68. 4.
great IAH, The Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows? David
was confident in this (...) my father Psalm 27. 10
and my mother for sake me, said ^e, then the Lord will take me up. As for
your children lay fast hold upon ye promises of your God, who has oblished
himself in a Precept of his Law, to show mercy unto the posterity of the
godly and that unto thousands: There is Gods Obligation, whose word is faster
than all the writs of men subscribed with a thousand Noters: Such is his love
to the posterity of the godly that though the Mother should forget the fruit
of her womb, yet can he not forget them whom he has printed upon the palms
of hi^ Isa. 49. 16.
hands: He who has made the Egyptian to favor his people, and Exodus 12. 36
caused the fi^rie flint to yield water Numb. 20 11
for the thi^stie, and moved the deuourer to afford food: Though he ^udg. 14.
14
suffer the Lions to lack and suffer hunger: Psa^. 34 10
They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. All worldly comforts
may deceive us, as a Broo^ as the rising of the Rivers they pass away: But God
whose bowels are ever earning over us is ever fast and sure: With him is no
shadow of change: This comforted the Psalmest in the failinges of his flesh
and heart: God, said he, is the strength of mine heart and my portion for Psa.
63. 26
ever: This may well content us except that we be heartlesse cowards.

I know and am fully persuaded that ye would gladly have still enjoyed your
Jewel for some number of years, even unto the last date of man's days, even
unto his threescore and tenth year, or to four score the utmost fear of
sinful life set for these in who^ is the reason of strength: Psalm, 90. 10
This I know would have been your desire: But be ye thankful to God, for
the blessed time ye have enjoyed him already: How many be Widows before
that their first year be ended? Note
And yet though so should have been done with you or with all these that live
godly: A good marriage were it but for a day, it is in Gods Count Book
reckoned to be of long continuance: Many days make not the long life, but
well spent days: A Child of God though an Infant of days, dies an Isa. 65.
20.
hundredth years old, but the sinner an hundredth years old shall be
accursed; he is but as of yesterday. As for your Husband M there is no need
now of lamentations for him, for he is well: He is now among these ransomed
Isa. 35. 10.
of the Lord, obtaining joye and gladness, where sorrow and sighing have none
abode. God in great mercy has taken him away, that he should not see the
evil to come. This Isa. 57. 1.
was a favor granted to good Josiah, that he should be removed in peace before
the break of weather: Behold, said the Lord, I will gather thee unto 2 King.
22 20
thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, and thine
eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.

Note
In these last Dreggie days of the world the dead could speak to the living,
they might well say to them as Christ said to the weeping women of Jerusalem,
Weep not for Luke 23. 28
us, but weep for your selves, for behold the days are coming, etc. In all
appearance behold in this Age the days are coming fast on wherein that of
Jeremiah shall be said to the living, ^er. 22. 10
Weep ye not for him that is dead, neither bemone him, but we^pe for him that
goes away, for he shall return no more, nor see his native Country.

There be such fearful calamities now brewing for this Land that by all
liklie-hood, when ye shall drink the cup of wrath, our griefs shall so go
beyond all such sorrow, lik that of Ezekiel, yt neither shall the Husband
mourn for his Wife, nor shall the Wife wail for the Husband at their burial:
Behold, a Pattern. Ezekiel. 24. ^6


Son of man, said the Lord, Behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine
eyes with a stroke: Consider well the sodainnesse, the increaser of grief,
yet neither shall thou mourn nor weep, nor tears run down: Forbear to
cry, make no mourning for Ezekiel. 24. 17
the dead: Bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon
thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men: All this
was to declare that such calamities shul^ ouer-take that people, that all such
mourninges for the death of Husbands, W^ues, Children, etc. should be swallowed
up by a greater grief.

This is plain by the words following, Ye shall not mourn nor verse. 23,
weep, but ye shall pyne away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward
another.

Let us speak in Conscience: May not the Lord most justly as he did threaten
there, take from us our strength, the joy of our glory, the desire verse. 25
of our eyes and that whereupon we set our minds, even the Gospel the Arc of
his covenant? O let us die before yt ever that Glory depart from this Israel.
1 Samuel 4. 22


This consideration may sufficiently teach you and us all moderat mourning in
so merciful a visitation: It shall therefore be your best in your deepest
doole to Behave and Psalm. 131. 2
quiet your selflik a child that is wained of his mother: The choicest argument
of comfort which the Apostle could find concerning the dead, is founded upon
the Resurrection, the day of the general meeting of all Saints: I would not,
said he, have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13
that ye sorrow not even as these which have none hope: For if we believe
that verse. 14.
Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him. verse. 15.


For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive
and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep.

For the Lord himself shall d^scend verse. 16
from heaven with a shout with the voice of the Arch* Angel and with the Trump
of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.

Then we which are alive, and remain verse. 17
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in
the Air: And so shall we be ever with the Lord. verse. 18.


Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

Consider well and weigh these words which that great Penman of God has set
down with a precept that with them we should comfort one another while we
are in doole for the dead.

Finally this M. ye must know that all earthly sorrows were they never so
sharp, will at last grow blunt, and will be meekened and skinned over by
time: Now that which Time can do to a Pagane, let Grace do it to a Christian.

I entreat the Lord of all Grace and A prayer
kindness to cast down his compassionate eye upon your afflicted and grieved
case that your mourning being tempered with mercy ye may in your greatest
grief rejoice in your God,

Amen.
A compendious Epitaphe fit for a godly Man deceased.
To long Eternity from toylesome Time,
His Soul is past, his Body sleeps in Slime.
A COMFORT for the fatherless.
MY dear hearts be not dismayed in this grievous affliction: But take it in
patience, seeing it is from Romans 8. 28
the Lord, who makes all things to work to the best of th^se that love him.

As Father Job said while he was made Childlesse, so must ye say while ye
are made fatherless, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken Job. 1. 21.
away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Note
If ye can bless him for the removing of his blessings, he shall double his
blessings upon you, and shall make them to meet you at every turn.

The fatherless Children of the faithful whether their Fathers have been
poor or rich, have a rich Legacy left unto them? ^or to them belong that
promise of showing mercy unto thousands: Such as be blessed of him, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 37. ^2
mist, shall inherit the earth: In another place he says, The generation
Psalm. 112, 2
of the righteous shall be blessed.

We know nothing on Earth more tender than a mother toward the fruit of her
womb: This made Isa. 49. 15.
the Lord to say, Ca^ a mother forget her sucking Child, that she should not
have compassion of the fruit of her nombe? But what answered the Lord to that
verse. 16.
question? Yea, said he, they ^ay forget, yet will I not forget thee: Behold I
have graven thee upon the palms of mine hands: This was David's greatest
comfort that though his Father and his Mother should for sake him, yet the Lord
would take him up: If ye would hear of sensible Experience, My flesh, said
he, and mine heart Psalm 73. 26
fails: But God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever.

Thus as ye see Father, and Mother, Sister, and Brother, flesh and Friends,
Heart, Health, and Wealth, and all will fail us, but our God is only and
ever fast; he is the strength of our heart and our portion for ever.

Seeing it is so, let your hearts rely upon your God alone: What ever your
distresses be (as Abraham said to his Son) The Lord will provide: Note
Will ye hear Experience? I have been young, said David, Psalm 37. 25,
and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed
begging their bread: Note
Though the children of the godly be but Children of poor fathers, yet here
is their comfort, their godly fathers before they die treasure up for them
many prayers in Heaven, and leave unto them the rich Legacy of Gods favor.

Ye know certainly that your Father was one that feared the LORD from his
heart, whereof, to all our comforts, he has given a good proof: And
therefore ye may boldly by the hand of faith lay hold on the promises of
God which belong to all the faithful and to their Children unto many
generations.

Ye may know by the written word Luke ^12. 25
how God feeds the Ravens and clotheth the Lillies: Though they neither
toil nor spinne, and though they neither sow nor reap, and though they
neither have storehouse nor Barn, yet are they sufficiently provided: Note
How much more are ye better than Fowls or flowers?

Christ's precept is of profitable practice, verse. 31.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be cast unto you: Pray the Lord not coldlie and carelessly, but
most earnestly, that he would cleanse and scour your hearts from all these
worldly cares, of what Luke 12. 22
ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, and what ye shall put on: Learn
in time to cast your burden upon the Lord, who desires you so to do, and that
with a promise, that he Psalm. 55. 22
shall sustain you: Note
A little with Gods blessing is enough: It is like that Widows handful of
meal and little oil which failed not: The vessels 1 King. 17 12
of Gods grace are like that other Widows pot of oil, which yielded 2 King.
4. 2
out oil continually so long as there were vessels to receive.

If ye be earnest with God in prayer, he will not repel your prayers with a
deaf ear: The Lord himself has taken upon him to be your Judge and
defender: If any go about for to molest you by a violent and boisterous
course, he will certainly be their bane, like dung he shall swee^e them
away from the face of the Earth.

Seeing then ye have such fair promises of GOD, made both to your faithful
Father and to you also in the day of your Baptism, beware by a lewd life to
forfeite such Bands and Obligations: Beware to follow the evil examples of
this World, in following the drove, which either by secret hypocrisy or
public profaning, bids Battles to all the Precepts of Gods Law: Sharp
is that sauce which comes after the sweet^st worldly pleasures: Let them be
as pleasant as ye please, there is an Hook in the Bate: The most part of this
world is but a rabble of Reprobates, an host of damned sinners rushing upon
their own destruction: Their cleanest Garments are spotted with the flesh:
They are Iud. v, 23,
more clammie than pitch: None can touch them and not be defiled.

Be ever earnest to do well: Though ye come fair short of that you should
and also would do, yet be not discouraged: Gods strength at last shall be
made perfect in your weakness: It cannot be avoided but many will trouble
you by fraud and by cusenage, and by other diverse afflictions: Note
Though such things be tedious to the flesh and go against the stream of
your affections, yet in the latter end all shall work both to your well and
contentment.

Let not sorrow ouerwhelme your hearts: Mourn not as these that 1 The^, 4. 13
have none hope of the Resurrection: Let the meditations of Gods mercy and
promised favor rouse up your Souls from that lumpishnesse and melancholious
drowsinesse which may creep in into your hearts in this troublous time: Note
Strive to bound and fence your hearts about deligentlie with the thoughts of
Gods Fatherly favor, who shall never leave you fatherless: Note
Though your father be dead, yet God is alive.

Now Sir, ye who a^t the elder be ye the more thankful to God, who has
given you the first place: Show good example unto the younger: Oppress them
not, but rather be a father unto them: By your good counsel strive to make
them pliable and frameable to Gods will revealed in his word.

As for you who are younger ones, be not discouraged, for often grace makes
the younger to be the elder, and sin makes the elder the younger: So Jacob
found the bl^ssing, Genesis 27, 33
though Esau was the first borne: Note
It is Virtue that makes the Heir.

Let your hearts therefore rely upon the Lord: Let him be the caruer of all
your cares: If ye depend on him ye shall not want: Note
He who created the world without matter and preserves it without means, is
God all sufficient who can easily find out means for the maintenance of al
these that by faith can lay claim to his promise: If wealth be expedient for
you, the Lord will give you a large allowance, till he make your Cup to over
flow: Note
But if otherwise he has appointed Psalm. ^3 5.
to exercise you with poverty, know yt he who has the hearts of all men in
his hands can easily for your comfort stir up some who by their liberality
toward you shall provide themselves bags which wax not old. Luke 12. 33


If ye can bend your whole endeavor to the service of your God he shall
satisfy you with the provisions of his mercy: Note
But if otherwise ye become lewd and profane haunting evil company the
very canker and cut-throate of all godliness, ye shall never prosper; no not
though by a painful drudgerie ye should draw out the very lifeblood of your
hearts: It is not early rising no^ late going to bed, but Gods blessing that
enricheth.

Now the Lord of grace bless you Aprayer
mine hearts: The Lord teach you to set and seal these comforts with prayers
and patience upon your hearts: And seeing the days are now evil even the
dregs of days: I entreat the most High to grant you grace hour lie to
ren^w and strengthen your watch, that your hearts and spirits may be preserved
unblameable, and that until the day of his most glorious appearance.

AMEN.
A divine and heavenly discourse fit to be read to these that are conueened in
the house of mourning, that thereby the living may be remembered of their
mortality.
Dearly Beloved, this our godly Friend one of Gods excellent Ones is now
deceased, and that peac^ablie like a Lamb into the arms o^ his God, who has
ever lasting lie fast bund his Soul in the bundle of life* The death of such
is often a fearful pre^age of much anger and evil to come.

His Soul is now glorious in the Heavens like a Star new created in the
Sky: It is now living the life of God above, where it is filled with the
infusion of that (...) which we have here on earth (...) by imputation: He
has now al^ God and all that is in God in ^speakable perfection being in that
place where God is all in all.

At last after sore fighting and bitter bickering, as diverse godly persons
have seen, through the bent brows of an angry Judge he has seen the
yearning and relenting bowels of a loving Father: Now after his Battle ended,
he has (...) the Spirit: Note
Clepsydr^ (...) his hour glass is now run out, and his Soul is come to
its wished home where it is free from the fetters of flesh: Now from the
^hanging turns of time, he is at last come to Eternity: Note
Through many seas of ^orrows both bitter and brimie has he sailed before that
he could ariue at that blessed Port.

Our hearts cannot be but sorrowful to be deprived of such comfortable
company as was ^is: But here i^ our comfort and the matter of our joye, he is
well and shall be so for ever: Note
By the mercy of his God he is now passed over the knoppes of the mountains
of misery and through the muddie myres of sinful mortality, through fearful
trials and troubles, even from the dyets of grace to the dainties of glory,
from the Cant. 7. 11.
Villages of this world unto Luke 16. 9
everlasting (...), far above the rolling wheel of all changeable pleasures
and smarting pains.

Poor man's life on earth is like a restless whirle-gigge whirled about: The
moving heavens are the place of our rest; and the resting earth is the place of
our restless motions: Note
The way of this life as we may see is not adorned with Violets and Roses: No
not: It is full of rubs and thorns and pricking whinnes of piercing grief: O
with what pains has his silly Soul sought up the sweet streams of Gods
mercy (...) to the Fountain it self which is (...) to the Heavens!

God in great mercy has now (...) last after many dolours and bitter
bickerings put his Spirit into the ac^ tuall and full possession of his (...)
all joys: Through fire and water (...) Psalm, 66. 12
Lord has brought him out into a (...) place: Now he is free from ye body of
bondage which did hang so fast (...) His Soul is set out of ye reach of (...)
troubles and sublunary toys: Now blessed be our God, he is no (...) liable
to our sinful mortality into this earth a gulf of corruption, God at last
has recompensed his light affliction with an everlasting weight of glory: O
but he has had a painful time in his sickness! with many deep sigh and
heavy groan has he been heard in his fears: His face could never be
dried for tears continually trickling over his cheeks: Note
Happy is he now for all the clouds of his sins have been dissolved by ye
rain of mourn^full tears where with all Souls must be baptized before that
they can be members of the Church Triumphant: Now blessed be God, all his
tears and his travels are turned into triumphs: If men shed not ^eares on
earth, God cannot wypt them away in heaven: All, as we, must fight the good
fight before ^hey can catch the Crown.

Note
Let us all learn in him, and in ^his House of mourning to see and con^der the
end of us all, that while we are living we may lay it to our hearts and make
it a matter of our nights meditations: Note
Happy and thrice happy is he that can practice that saying of Job, All the
days Job. 14. 14
of mine appointed time, will I wait, till changing come.

It is good that we ever be watchful upon our guarde well prepared for our
last departure and final accounts: Note
No man can ^ll how soon he shall be arraigned in the great Judge his
Consistory: The day of this life wherein only we can work, declineth a
pace: The fearful night cloud has taken post* So soon as it shall come, man
shall be discharged to work any more.

It is good often to consider (le^ we should dote and dream of Immortality
here) that the short thread of this life will be soon drawn out to an end*
that by such thoughts we may learn in time not to be taken up with abortiue
earthly pleasures which perish in the budde.

What is this earth but a muddie mire? What is poor man's life on this earth,
but a map of misery? Note
The best of it is white and black checker work mixed with pains and
pleasures, lashes and laughters: Even in laughter Prou. 14, 13
the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness: This godly
man's death should be warning for us: Note
Death knocking at our neighbors door should remember us of our mortality:
There is no case of humane calamity, but it is insident to all: In this our
old friend we may see and read that we have none abiding here: He is now
gone to his long home by the way of Eccles. 12. 5
all flesh: Note
Above the rolling circumference of heaven he has found the center of his
rest: Natures necessity subjecteth all flesh to mortality: He is gone before
us from the land Isa. 9. 20.
of the shadow of death through the valey of the shadow of death unto
everlasting felicity, and we all soon o^ since must all tread the same way:
Let us prouok our watchfulnes with this, that we shall go to him, but he
shall no more come to us: Let us work while the day lasts: Note
Before we be benighted by death, let us wot where we shall get a lodging* So
long as we have breath and being let us like Moses be instant with God in
prayer, that he would so psalm. 90. 12
teach us to number our few and evil days that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom and to well doing.

We have all great need to go to this School for the learning of that
lesson, because death in this narrow passage of mortality steals upon us all
with insinsible degrees* The course of our days is like the Gen, 1, 16
course of the Sun the ruler of the Day, whom our owlish eyes cannot perceive
to move, though he rejoice Psalm. 19 5.
as a strong man to run a race: we know him to be more swift than wind, yet
while we behold him in his course, we cannot perceive his motion: It is even
so of our life: Our days run fast away, but we perceive not how: Note
It is not long that we stand, but when we begin to fall, we are like the
Ice which thaweth sooner than it froze: Our life like smoke or chafe is
carried away as with a gale wind, and yet we cannot consider: Oh, that this
meditation like the Rowell of a Spur could prick us forward in our voyage
from grace to glory.

Note
Nature has taught the ^sillie Birds, the Cranne, Storke, and Swallows Isa.
8. 7.
our winter strangers, to know their seasons: As if they had numbered the days
of their absence, they come precisely at their appointed Spring: The Salmons
also in their season return to the place where they were spawned: They like
skilled Airthmeticiens number well the days of their absence, and for no rubs
in the way will they be moved to crack their tryst.

All this have they learned in the School of Nature: Note*
But men who should have grace with Nature, forget to desire to return to
their God who at the first spawned or as Scripture Gen, 2, 7.
speaks breathed within them their living Souls: Men are often worse than ye
beasts, who would feign know their duty, but cannot: Many me^ can, but will
not, lik these whom 2 Pet. 3. 5.
S. Peter calls Willingly ignorant*

The God of grace give us wisdom, that before our day be spent and our Sun
set, we may weigh well and consider how we may so live to die, that we may
die to live* Ezekiel. 9. 2.
Note
Happy is the man whom God his white man, has in this life marked with the
mourning mark: The way to Heaven is not so easy as many dream: Oh, how many
lets be within us and without us! Note
Oh how many weightes hang ^o fast on, whereby the unstable Soul of man is
tossed and swayed hither and thither.

Seeing this holy man of God such a strong Oak has been so sore shaken,
what may we poor little shrubs expect? O but we have great need to coffer up
some comfortes against the evil day: All worldly helps depart from us, when
we depart out of this life, but Gods favor fails never: When all things
have forsaken us, then only he will stand by us, and at last will draw us
out of this myrie lake of misery.

Happy and thrice happy is the man that is holy here, whom the Spirit of
God may point out with an Ecce, Behold a true Israelite: Ioh. 1. 47.
Such a man after death shall obtain a name, which shall give him after death
a second life: O thrice blessed is he whom God in mercy remoueth in time,
that his eyes should not see the evil to come. Isa. 57. 1.


The world now is come to its dregs: From little to little our zeal is come to
its last gasp: Now, if ever, the Church is a Lilly among the thorns: Cant.
2. 2,
Our sins are become like Oaks: but our virtues are pinched small lik grains
of mustard seed: Note
We look in drumblie waters, and therefore we cannot see our sinful blots and
blamishes.

Lord, teach us to grow better that so long as we sojourne in these mansions A
prayer
of dying wightes, we may strive without guile to glid through this world, that
at last following this our old dear friend we may come to him and to all the
Saints into to that celestial Palace, a place of Psalm. 16. 11
plenty, peace and pleasures for evermore.

Another discourse of the same sort.
O How hard a thing is it for the living to remember that we are but weeds of
a day fading and flying vanities.

Note.
We are all here like poor Travelers who have far to go and little to
spend: In our most constant estate below we are like Ionahs Iona* 4. 6.
gourd that sprang up into a night, and withered into another, even a ^oish
vanity.

This life, said a Father, is miserarable: August. Consol. lib. 6. cap. 11.
Our death is uncertain: If it surprise us unawares, whither shall we go?
and where shall we learn that which we have neglected here? Men for the most
part wallowing in their sins, while they look most for life, are by their
expectation surprised of Death: But, Oh then, whether shall they go? Alas,
that we cannot consider while we have time and breath: Note
Man naturally is so dull and dumpish that he cannot imagine that he is
possessed with a melting mortality: Note
The best of us in spiritual matters are pure blind: We cannot see far off,
no, that which is near, even this mortality among us, yea, within us: Note
That which has breath can hardly think of burial: Note
A morning mementomori is not able to waken us, so fast are we lulled asleep
in carnal security, even while the dead Bell sounds we forget o^
niortalitie: Note
The House of mourning is become an house of drinking, of snuffing and of
sneuelling with Tobacca: Though we be warned, we are not wiser.

In Solomon's days, the living in such places laid such things to their heart:
But, alas, even while in the Eccles. 7. 2.
thoughts of the gastlie visage of death we are carrying others to ye grave our
hearts are not molten and liquified for sin the cause of our mortality: Note
While we put our hand to the Beire we may get some light sudden flashes of
devotion, but anon we forget that within a short time as we do to others, so
shall be done to us: Even while we walk with the dead to the Grave, we
dream of immortality; forgetting our borrowed days: Note
If there be any heat of zeal in our hearts how soon is it cooled: Man's
heart is like water which as the Learned observe, becomes more cold after the
heating Arist. meteor. 1* 12.
than it was before: Such heat because it is not natural and kindly, but
forced by fire, it cannot continue, but must be foorth-with extinguished: Note
Man is like an Horse that naturally ^rots, though by industry he be broken
and made to ^mble for a space, yet ever and anon he preaseth to go out of
his amble for to enter into his trot: While we are at the Beire and the dead
corp^ in sight, an ambling sorrow for a space may make the bowels of our belly
to wamble: But have we once turned our back upon the Grave, and we anon to
the old trot of our former folies.

While we should learn to die, we plant our selves in the face and glory of
the world: Note
We are so troubled with Marthas many things that we forget Mary's best part:
Note
Many come to their deathbed before that they had ever earnestly thought of
their life: They die even then when they thought to begin to amend their life:
Thus as ye see they die deceived in their delays: they die before they know
wherefore they lived* Their Sun sets while they are entering on the
journey. The evening of their life is the morning of their task: By by and base
respects their mind^ are carried on the by: Note
Foolish fancie^ creep in by stealth and slilie insinuate and wind in
themselves into their hearts wherein being once fast cogged, they keep the
mind musing on vanity till the Sun of their life be set.

While their time is thus spent, they can do nothing but lament the loss of
that which they cannot recover.

Vitae summa brevis, spem
Nos vetat in choare longam.
Note
A short life is not for long and large projects.

Note
Poor man is sent unto this world for a great business to be done in a short
time: He must first of all glorify his God, and in that doing he must work
out the great work of his Salvation: All the time alloted to this business is
but threescore and ten years or four score at the most: But, alas, most men
sleep both the morning and noone of their life: And yet which is worse, even
while they see their Sun going down, and posting to the west, they have no
care to redeem the time: At the coming of death, their assigned business is
scarchlie well begun: Note
Most men are so miserably muffled that they cannot see the sand of their
hour glass in a continual course: Oh that we were wise to be forearmed for
death whereof we are forewarned: As the Cananitish woman picked comfort out of
the reproachful name of Dog, so out of all things should we without dainty
niceness be storing up comforts for to uphold us in our last and most heavy
hour: But Oh, where is the man who in time is careful to redeem his evil
and idly spent hours? O foolish man, fie upon thee, shall the sickle folly of
an hour cost thee the lose of that glorious immortality? Will thou not think
in time that grimme Death shall come at last like an armed man for to bereave
thee of thy Soul, thou neither can tell how, when, nor where: Note
Happy is that man whose journey, time, business and breath, are finished
together: Happy shall that t^yst be when these four shall finish in
immortality.

It is good that in time we set all the powers of our Soul upon Christ, that
out of his Sacred person we may suck the influence of his goodness, whereby
we may be saved from the trains and treasons of the Devil: Note
He is ever ready to strik fire with his frezell and his flint, if we will
find him tinder: Oh, that our hearts continually could mind things that are
Col. 3. 1.
above: All things below are unconstant, as water they sl^d away, but Gods
favor is more fixed than Mount Syon.

What an heart-scald should this be unto us, that we have so long neglected
this best part, not remembering our latter end? Let us now therefore consider
in time that we are all into this world but Tenants at will: Prince, people,
great and small, all must leave this Cottage of clay, at the first warning:
Pale Death at its first approach will anon change the copy of their
countenance.

Stat sua cuique dies.

Every man's day is set: None can transgress his appointed hour: God
absolutely at Death must be obeyed: None by force or favor may sit his
summonds: We by the death of others are all lawfully forewarned to flit and
remove: All things above us, beneath us, about us, cry unto us, that we must
shortly leave this world for to go sleep in slime: No contentment of man
below can out-last the date of four score year^s: O Lord, open our eyes, that
we may see how the sickle figure of this world passes away.

Note
Happy and thrice happy is he who after the bitter and bloody Battle of
this life is with old Simeon Luk, 2. 29.
departed in peace: As the life of the godly is gracious, so is their death
precious: This we learn in Scripture: Precious to the Lord is the death Psalm.
116. 15
of his Saints: Note
But as for all the wicked who while they lived did justle out of their hearts
all fear of God, they shall be so wrapped in his wrath that their hearts shall
be slitted with sorrow: Note
While the godly with Elias shall be princely carried into Gods royal Coach
unto heaven, the wicked Ahab shall be sent into a bloody Charet unto hell,
deprived of all these comforts which they on earth did most eagerly desire:
All their princely pleasures shall be followed with pinching pains: Note
Such will boast boldly before death come, but at the slight and light touch
of a Fever or Flux they quickelie pluck in their snailes horns like Ahab
lowering in sacke-cloth: When sickness begins to lay siege to their noble
parts, they weakly wail and womanly lament: Then know they but too late that
man's life is but a wind in a worm.

* O happy is that man in whose heart Christ has graven deep the shape of
himself in this world: when Death shall come then shall he know what blessed
treasures of contentment, God has stored up for his beloved: When the Souls
of the faithful which on earth have been endued with a matchless concurrence
of divine graces, shall come out of their bodies, Christ the Father of mercies
shall cast the arms of his co^passions about their necks: At their first
entry into Heaven, he shall give them the comfortable kisses of peace.

Lord, soften our stony hearts, and A prayer
enlighten our mistie minds, that all our joye may be in enjoying thee in whom
is fullness without dislike: O satisfy us yearly with thy mercy the Psa 90.
14
fairest flower of the Garland of thy Majesty.

While we remember the death of others, make us carefully to study unto
newness of life, that in this life we dying unto sin, may after death live
unto Thee, and with Thee unto the utmost bound of the Genesis 49. 26,
everlasting Hills,

AMEN.
FINIS.
A. H.
emblem

THE LAST BATTLE OF THE SOVLE IN DEATH,

2. Volume.

Carefully digested for the comfort of the Sick: By Mr. ZACHARY BOYD,
Preacher of Gods Word at Glasgow.

Bernard in Sermon. Novissima sunt quatuor, MORS, IVDICIVM, GEHENNA, GLORIA: Quid
horribilius morte? Quid terribilius judicio? Quid intolerabilius gehenna? Et
quid incundius gloria? Idem. Senibus mors est in ianuis, Iuvenibus vero in
insidijs. Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs of ANDRO HEART. 1629.

TEMPVS
emblem

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS ELIZABETH Queen of Bohemia, etc.
MADAME,
IN corporal troubles let us seek for spiritual Comfortes: Days of sorrow
are days of drowsiness: For the remeede of such sorrows here follows a
Discourse of heavens Happiness, with diverse other Christian comforts which I
must humbly and heartily dedicate to your Majesty.

If MADAME I were more able to present your Majesty with some matter^ of
greater worth, my will should not be deficient to mine Ability.

Thus presuming out of your Royal bounty that this little Offer from One of
SCOTLAND your Majesty's native Soil shall be graciously accepted, I most
humbly present it to your Majesty for to be received and shrouded under your
Royal safe-gard and loving protection.

After many fervent and unfeigned prayers made to God for the esta blishment of
the Crown upon your Majesty's Royal Heads, and also for spiritual Graces to
be abundantly powered upon you, and upon the rest of these Royal

Plants, which by the great mercy of God have branched from You both, I
humbly take my leave.

Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Orator and Servant: M. ZACHARY
BOYD Preacher of GODS word at Glasgow.
From Glasgow the 12. day of Februrie 1629.
THE QVEENES Lamentations for the death of her Son.


O But GOD is most terrible, when he is angry, He has called as in a solemn
day my terrors round about: surely against me is he turned, he turns his
hand against me all the day, My flesh and my skin has he made old, he
has broken my bones: He has builded against me, and compassed me with gall
and travel: He has set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old: He
has hedged me about that I cannot get out: He has made my chain heavy:
He has turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: He has made me
desolate: He has bent his Bow and set me as a mark for his arrows: He has
caused the Arrows of his Quiver to enter into my reins: He has filled me
with bitterness: He has made me drunk with worme-wood: The very Sea
monsters are careful for their young ones: They draw out the breast to give
them suck.

How should I be like the unnatural Job. 39. 14
Ostrich which leaves her eggs in the earth, and forgets that the foot
may orush them, or that the wild beast may break them? She is hardened verse.
16*
against her young ones, as though they verse. ^17.
were not hers: God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted
to her understanding.

Alas, alas, the joye of our heart is ceased: our dance is turned into
mourning: The crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned,
for this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim.

Wherefore, Lord, do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?
Thou have utterly rejected us: Thou art very wroth against us: O that mine
eyes were a lively Spring of tears which day and night might trickle down
for the lamenting of my loss.

O ye Daughters of Britain my native Soil: Conueene your selves together:
Come all and join your sorrows with mine: Come contribute tears in
abundance, that we may deplore our damage: Come, come and help me to mourn
for my first Borne: It is Gods will, it is Gods commandment that ye mourn
with these that mourn: With whom will ye mourn, if ye refuse to mourn with
me?

O noble Ladies of Britain, think upon my sorrows: My grief is great, mine
heart is broken, mine eyes do fail with tears: Come ye all and condole with
me: Cast off your Rayments of joye: And thou BOHEMIA with the PALATINAT make to
your selves new Robes of doole: Fill all the Lands with mourning like that
mourning in Zachary, Zach. 12. 11
The mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, for the death of good
Josiah. Mine heart is sore gripped with grief: Iam lik the Pelican in the
wilderness: Mine eyes Psalm. 102. 6
do fail with tears; my bowels are troubled, my Liver is powered upon the
earth: I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder: He has also taken me
by the neck and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark: His
Archers compass me round about: He cleaves my reins asunder, and does not
spare: He powers out my gall upon the ground: He breaks me with breach
upon breach: He runs upon me lik a Giant: My face is foul with weeping,
and on mine eyelids is the shadow of death: My Friends scorn me, but mine
eye powers out tears unto God: When a few years are come, then I shall go
the way whence I shall not return.

The Lord has made me as a byword of the people: Mine eyes are dim by reason
of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow: Know now ye all that God has
compassed me with his net: He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and
he has set darkness in my paths: He has stripped me of my Glory, and
taken the Crown from mine head: He has destroyed me on every side, and I
am gone, and mine hope has he removed like a tree.

His troops come together and raise up their way against me, and encampe
round about my Tabernacle: He has put my brethrene far from me: My Kins-folke
have failed and my familiare friends have forgotten me: Have pity upon me,
O ye my Friends for the hand of God has troubled me. Apostrophe ad filium
mortuum


O my Son, my dearest Son is gone: He is lost, where shall I find him? O
FREDERICK my Son where art thou? Shall I see thee no more? Shall I never kiss
thy mouth again? Once did thou lie in my belly near unto mine heart* but now
alas, thou lies sleeping in slime: Now thy bed is made among the crawling
worms: Thy Princely Body now lies in the place of silence: O where is thy
Color now? Where is thy Countenance? Long shall it before I see thy smilling
Face and twinkling Eyes: My dear Heart FREDERICK, Long may I cry before that
thou make answer: How have I lost Thee? How past thou from me? When said thou
thy last adewes? What were thy last adews? what were the last words thou spoke
unto me? Where saw I thee last? Oh, if I had known when I last saw thee, that
I would never again see thee alive: Then would I have kissed thee, then would
I have more constantly considered thy countenance: I would have said in my
self, Is this the Face that I shall never see again? Is this the Mouth that
shall never speak again? Are these the Ears that shall never hear again?
Are these the Eyes that shall never see again? That Mouth, that Nose, these
cherrie Cheeks and lilly Lips, these Ears and Eyes would I have kissed
ten thousand times kissed and over again.

Alas that I should have so journed so near unto the Waters: Alas that ever I
knew that merciless Element.

O cursed Waters! O Waters of Apostrophe ad mare and flumina.
Marah full bitter are ye to me: O Element which of all others shall be most
detestable to my Soul! I shall never wash mine hands with thee but I shall
remember what thou have done to my best beloved Son the Darling of my Soul, I
shall for ever be a friend to the Fire which is thy greatest foe.

Note
Away Rivers, away Seas, Let me see you no more: If ye were sensible Creatures,
my dear Brother CHARELES Prince of the European Seas should scourge you with
his Royal Ships; with his thundering Cannons he should pierce you to the
bottom.

Note
O Seas of sorrows, O fearful Floods, O tumbling Tempests, O wilful Waves,
O swelling surges, O wicked waters, O dooleful deeps, O peartest Pools, O
botchfull butcher Boats, was there no mercy among you for such an hopfull
PRINCE? O that I could refrain from tears and that because they be salt
water like unto your selves: Away with you Seas of sorrow, for ye have robbed
me of my dearest Darling of account, henceforth ye shall never be able to
repair my losses: O my Son FREDERICK, my Son, my Son FREDERICK, would God
I had dyed for Thee, O FREDERICK my Son, my Son.

A. H.
TEMPVS
emblem

(...) mine or the water took away the life of my Children, than that a bloody
Herod should cut all their throats most cruelly embrewing himself in their
blood: While David was in a great strait doubting of what plague to make
choice, at last he resolved saying, Let us fall into the hand of 2 Samuel 24. 14
the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the hand of
man.

O but will your Majesty say, To die and to be suffocate in the waters yt is a
matter of great sorrow: If he had died in a Battle honorably; that had
affoorded me some comfort: Then would I have heard of his valiantness: The
Colonels and the Captains and others of Martial Spirits had been the
Trumpeters of his praise, so should he have died with great honor.

Let it please your Majesty to wiegh the matter well in the Balance of the
Sanctuary.

Indeed MADAME, to die in a Battle is by men accounted honorable: To die
fighting with a bloody Sword in the hand, is by men called, The Bed of
honor: Note
But in my judgment it is better for the Soul to die in water, than in war:
For in the one man is often in a rage, thirsting like an Horse-leach after the
blood of his Brother: At that time there is nothing sound or settled within
him: All his thoughts are in an hurly burly: If instantly he die the Sun
of his life goes down upon his wrath: His whole desire is bended for to
destroy his Brother: But in the water his chiefest desire is for to save
himself: To die in war is to die by the hand of man, but Water is like the
Pest which that great Warrior called, The hand of God.

O but alas, will your Majesty object such as die so* get not space once to
cry Gods mercy.

God forbid MADAME that our Salvation should depend upon the last words of our
life, or upon a prayer at the last gasp: Our Salvation Romans 8. 1.
is better fastened than so: There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus. Your Majesty knows that the day of Judgment shall come in an
instant upon both the Godly and the wicked: Then shall they all be changed in
the twinkling of an eye: Not one of all the men and women then living upon
earth shall get so much time wherein they might Luke 1^. 13.
but say these few words, God be merciful to me a sinner, and yet for all that
shall we think that that sudde^ change shall bring any prejudice to the
Salvation of Gods Elect and chosen ones? Romans 11. 29
God forbid: Whom God loves he loves to the end: His gifts and graces are
without repentance.

I know that your Majesty would have earnestly desired that he had be found
alive, and that a Preacher by a prayer had commended his Soul into the hands
of his Savior. For answer, I am assured that that young Prince was so well
trained up by your Majesty in the School of piety, that morning and evening
he was accustomed to be earnest at his private devotion: It is the opinion of
learned Divines, That who carefully in ye morning has cast his Soul into ye
Arms of his God, shall thereafter all the day find the virtue of that prayer
prevailing with God, though at the moment of death he be not able with his
tongue to speak unto GOD: The prayers that were conceived before cry up to God
at the last gasp for mercy, peace, grace and reconciliation, through the
blessed blood of Jesus, which cries for better things than the blood of Abel.
Genesis 4, 10,


Now seeing that without any doubting your Majesty is assured of his
Salvation, consider these joys of heaven which his Princely Soul now
enjoys: These joys have I described as I can in this second Volume of the
Last battle* which I have dedicated to your Majesty: There ye shall
clearelie see that he has changes for the better: Note
While he was alive he was but a Prince on Earth, and now the Lord has made
him a crowned King.

Thus entreating the most High to send unto your Majesty the COMFORTER
himself, who can most cunningly cure the wounded heart, I humlie take my
leave.

Your MAJESTY'S most humble and most obedient Servant M. Z. B.
From Glasgow the 12. of February 1629.
TO THE QVEENE Of BOHEMIA.
OUR poor life here is not of single Joys,
But mixed with Gall, and worme-woode of annoyes:
The dint of Winds, and waves, and stors mie streams,
We must endure before we reach to Heavens:
Pains here wants pause, all is but loss and labor:
A thousand cares Within our hearts do harbor.
The life of man on Earth is but a blaste,
I^ comes with Tears and ends with a gasp:
All that is here is with a speedy flight,
On jangling wheels soon hurled out of sight.
All that is here is out of Tune and taste,
All whirles about, but Rest will come at last.
Wait still until that Day spring from on High,
Come down with thousands brighter than the Sky.
Then mistie Clouds of sorrows shall depart,
When that Aurora shall rejoice our Heart.
ANOTHER.
Here bubbling Waters Seas of sorrows dash,
Here Waves, here Winds which make the Clouds to clash:
Here Fevers, Fyres, here fickle vanities,
Combined are to bring Calamities
To mortal man (not sparing young or old)
Whose life is like unto a tale that's told,
Now happy he who free from all distress,
Rests in the Heavens, far from this wilderness.
A Prayer for the afflicted.
MY troubled Soul Lord counsel and comfort,
My Sternelesse-Boate conduct thou to her Port
From cloudie cares my muffled Spirit redress,
And of mine heart the grief and groans repress:
My Spirit to Thee its Maker high aspires,
Who art the Zenith of my best desires.
Your MAJESTY'S most humble and obedient Servant and Orator M. Zachary Boyd*
Preacher of GODS Word at Glasgow.

Faults escaped in printing.


Faults Corrected 69 feast fast 142 tired tried 172 wakened weakened 176 waken
weaken 177 spoke space 191 lperous leprous 198 Bairnes Barnes 213 Skes Skies
259 again against 2^8 desperati desperate 293 frine far in 307 Tophel Tophet
308 Companiourie Companionrie 332 slubber slumber 332 slumbert slubbert 345 men
me 345 hair heite. 355 for with 370 that after after that 376 missacrours
mass^crours 387 directs directed 405 carcing carking 4^9 Burriors Burrios 4^4
mortal immortal 487 his of of his 516 men man 544 reignam regna^i 563
co^sation conversation 597 hand head 602 commond common 603 sterts streets 609
spread shread 620 found sound 633 wr^ke work 649 decritorio decretorio 659
vanished varnished 664 vnwisored vnvizored 669 sacaked the godly sacked at
Christ's right 672 Christ's right hand hand 689 living live 695 whom who in The
2. Volume
Faults Corrected 760 absurbiator absorbeatur 804 hoc haec 807 ac at 851
haruish harvest 960 harbor harbor 98^ pleasant unpleasant 1003 nature mature
1053 hearking heartenin^ 1132 about me about with me

TEMPVS
emblem


