THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH, Plainly laid forth, and soundly proved by
testimonies both of holy Scripture, and also of old and new ecclesiastical
writers.

Declaring first from what things God would have us straightly to rest upon the
Lords day, and then by what means we ought publicly and privately to sanctify
the same:

Together with the sundry abuses of our time in both these kinds, and how they
ought to be reformed.

Divided into two Books, by Nicolas Bownde, Doctor of Divinity.

Hieron. Prolog. Galeat. In the Church of God every one does offer that which
he is able: some gold, silver, and precious stones: others blew silk, and
purple, and skarlet, and fine linen: it is well for our part, if we offer skins
and goats hair.

AT LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, for John Porter, and Thomas Man. 1595.

HONI SOYT QVY MAL Y PENSE


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, ROBERT Deuoreux, Earl of Essex and
Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, etc. Master of the Q.
Majesty's horse, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, the increase of all true honor and
favor with God and men.
RIght Honorable, if there were so many good reasons to move your Honor
graciously to accept these my labors, as I have just causes to induce me to
prefer them to your Honor; then I should have good hope, that as they have
most willingly come from me, so they should have good countenance at your
Honors hands. For besides your late Honorable favor extended unto me requires
this and al other duties of me, whereby I might show my self thankful to your
Honor for the same; even so the desire also that I have, that this truth of
GOD might come forth with the best credit, has moved me in the conscience of
mine own tenuitie to become humble suitor in the behalf thereof for your
honorable gracious protection. Wherein if I have intruded my self further then
I ought, and pressed nearer to your Honor, then it becomes me, craving your
Honorable pardon for this my boldness, I beseech your Honor to accept either my
fervent desire to tender all duties unto you, or my great care to purchase best
favor for this work, or both, which have compelled me hereunto. And herein I
am so much the more importunate with your Honor, not for my self, but for
this part of Gods holy truth, that it might be countenanced as one of your
Honors favorites, because as we be fallen into these evil days, wherein too
many are ready unadvisedly to set themselves against whatsoever they dislike,
and therefore the best causes are driven to seek patronage where it may do
them most good. So the Lord having enlarged your honorable name, above a great
many, which as a precious ointment flowing from your self, comfortablie
refreshes and perfumeth a great number, this part of Gods truth also might
enioie the common benefit of it with other, to be ouershadowed thereby, and by
that means have entertainment there, where otherwise happily it should be
finally regarded. And so it becoming for your Honors sake a welcome guest unto
them, it might deliver unto them in the name of God as sent by your Honor, that
message of his that it centaineth, to the honor of his name, to whom all honor
is due, from who^ all honor comes, whom truly to honor is the greatest
honor. Thus ceasing any further to interrupt your Honor from your weighty
affairs, my prayer unto God is long to preserve your Honor, zealous of the
glory of God, faithful to her Majesty, profitable to the whole realm, and
comfortable to your own soul; most humbly with all dutifulness taking my
leave.

Your Honors most humble at commandment always in the Lord: Nicholas Bownd.
Norton in Suff. June 1595.
To the Godly and Christian Readers, and namely to the reverend, wise, and
godly learned Fathers and brethren, Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel,
grace and peace he multiplied.
RIght reverend and well-beloved in the Lord, when as about nine years since I
was solicited to publish my Sermons upon the ten Commandments, by certain
of my godly brethren auditors then of the same, I had many reasons that
prevailed to dissuade me from that enterprise, and especially because I thought
it superfluous in such great variety of learned writers, of that matter
especially; wherein I have been since more ^onfirmed by all those who of later
times have travailed in that ^^nde. And moreover, besides mine own
insufficiency for so great (...) matter. J was of opinion, that he that
bends himself unto ^riting, had need to have some relaxation from
preaching, vn^esse he be of great gifts, and meruailously fitted for both,
and therefore being necessarily tied unto the one, I durst not vnder^ake the
other; yet their importunity prevailed thus far with ^^ne, as to make trial
what I could do in this commandment which I had then in hand: whereunto also
I was the rather indu^^ed, because it contained that argument, which as it is
of all other most excellent, so it was least of all dealt in by any, largely,
^^nd of purpose. Having then within a few months, at my best ^^asure finished
this treatise, as diverse of my fellow Ministers ^^n whose hands it has bin)
are sufficient witnesses, and by them further encouraged to communicate it unto
all men: I yielded thereunto, slowly indeed because I knew a reverend, godly,
M. Robert Greencha^.
and learned father, who for the most part of his life time, greatly travailing
in this matter by his own reading, meditation, and conference, with sundry
learned men, had long before finished a great volume, and waited but his
opportunity to furnish it to the press, though I never read one leaf of that
book, whom I did for just cause so highly reverence, that I was unwilling to
prejudice any of his godly proceedings, especially in this thing, wherein I
knew he had travailed above most of his time: and thereupon suspending my
purpose for a time, when I had imparted unto him what I had done, he gave me
this advise, to take his book, and to compare it with mine own, and to make
one of them both; which I refusing, as being unmeet for such a purpose, and
not knowing how I should well sort out to the Reader such variety of matter,
as was like to arise out of them both, nor cunningly to fit the one to the
other, as it were to put a new piece of cloth to an old garment, determined
wholly to suppress mine own, expecting the coming forth of his in time:
whereunto also I solicited him by writing, and that also was my just defense to
those that still called upon me, for the coming forth of mine own. In which
expectation I continued, until most untimely, I understood to my great grief,
and to the unspeakable loss of the Church of God, that he was fallen a sleep
in the Lord: And then I revived my former purpose and reuised mine own
labors, in which having at the first contented my self, with the bare proofs
out of the scriptures, which I then thought sufficient, especially for that
auditorie, to whom they were first meant, did now compare the several
positions therein contained, with the doctrine of former times, and other
Churches, as I found the same set down in the writings of the fathers Greek
and Latin, new and old, so many as I had, or could conveniently get, and as I
had time to read them: whom I finding to agree with me in the same points, or
rather my self with them, was thereby the rather confirmed therein, and thought
that by their testimony and consent, as it were by the pillar of truth, I might
sustain and defend the same against al those that should oppugn, or gainsay
it. Thus having so many learned men on my side, managing the same cause with
me, or rather my self fighting under their colors, have at the last brought
forth this treatise unto the view of the world, and have adventured it unto
(...) the censures and speeches of all men: wherein as I have sought the ^^ory
of GOD in the publishing of his truth, so I pray the same lord, to maintain,
defend, and bless the same, so far forth as it (...) his truth. And here
(derely beloved in the Lord) as I have ^^imply, and as it were with a naked
breast declared unto you, the ^auses of my beginning and proceeding in this
work, and that I ^aue not rashly, and on the sudden fallen into these
opinions, and ^hrust forth my self into the world, so I most humbly crave of
^ou this favor, that all prejudice and sinister affection being ^ayd aside,
al things might be weighed in an even balance, before they be refused, as not
having their just weight, even there where they might carry some show of
untruth, according to the Canoni^all rule of the Apostle, much more that al
frivolous wranglings, contentions, gain saying, ambitious desire to overcome,
and perverse drawing of things to a wrong sense, being forborne, where I seem
to err (as I acknowledge my self subject unto it) I might charitably and
Christianly be admonished by your godly wisdoms, that so I might also either
by better proofs second the truth, or else upon more mature deliberation
retract mine error, ^f there be any: For I do most willingly submit my self
unto the Church of God, by it in all things to be censured and reformed,
according to his word. Which I do so much the more earnestly entreat at your
hands, because besides the conscience of my great insufficiency to deal in so
weighty a matter before so many hundreths, as the Lord in our time has raised
up fit for every purpose, I am not ignorant that this argument of the Sabbath
is full of controversy, above many other points of divinity, wherein many
learned, and godly men dissent one from another: which as I was persuaded of at
the first so now of late, since I attempted the ^ublishing of this book I have
found it to be true by a most ^nwilling experience, even among those who for
their great va^ietie of all learning deserve singularly to be admired. And
^^ough it were to be wished, that we should be like minded, being ^^one accord,
and of one judgment yet seeing we are men, and have but our measure of
knowledge, and that in every thing, and so may easily dissent; in that
whereunto we are come let us proceed by one rule, and if any be otherwise
minded, GOD shall reveal the same unto him. Thus commending my self unto your
prayers, and these my labors unto your favorable good liking, I bid you most
heartily farewell in the Lord, who keep us always his and one another in
Christ. Norton in Suffolk, June 27. 1595. next after the year of Gods heavy
and unknown judgments, by sundry tempests continued and renewed, of
boysterons winds, great rain, and outrage of waters, fearful thunders and
lightnings, pintching dearth, and untimely fruits, to the destruction and loss
of men, cattle and goods.

Your dutiful brother and fellow servant in the Gospel of Christ: NICHOLAS
BOVVNDE.

The first book, showing the Institution and necessary Continuance of the
Sabbath, and from what several things we are commanded to rest upon that day.
Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.

9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work.

10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manseruant, nor
thy maid, nor thy beast, nor the stranger that is within thy gates:

11. For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, and the sea, and
all that in them is and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it.


AS in the first Commandment, the substance of Gods worship is set down, and
in the second the manner of it, in the third the end: so here the time when,
and how long this should be openly and publikly thus practiced. In giving of
which Commandment, the Lord uses such manner of words and matter, as might
most stir us up to the careful keeping of it: for in the practice of it,
consists the practice of all the other, and in the neglect of it is the
neglect of all religion. Our natural corruption and rebellion therefore
against this Commandment especially appears, in that the Lord stirs us up
to it so many ways, yea in the first pronouncing of it.

How this Commandment differs from all the rest.
For first, whereas in the other Commandments he contenteth himself with bare
commanding this, or forbidding that, yet to this he puts an especial mark,
saying, Remember, that is, think of it before hand: for indeed the want of
remembering it in due time, is many times one cause, that it is no better
observed when it comes: And in Deuter. Deuteronomy. 5.12.
Moses repeating the Law, forgets not this word but uses another of like
importance, saying, Observe or look unto the Sabbath to sanctify it: and
further adds. As the Lord thy God commands thee, referring them to the
first giving of it, yea even in this marking.

Keep holy the Sabbath day, but the evil is expressly forbidden, In it thou
shall do no manner of work.

Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal,
etc. yet in the first table (in which we are as blind as beetles) every
Commandment has some reason annexed unto it: As in the first, The first
Commandment has one reason joined to it.
I the Lord am thy God, which brought thee out of etc. Where because of that
merciful Covenant that he has made with us, to bless us in all things
eternally (which as he first made it in Christ, so he confirmed it in our
miraculous Redemption wrought by him, whereof the deliverance out of Egypt was
a type and figure) therefore he requires, that we should serve him with all
that we have, and none but him, and so that we should take him only to be our
God. And the third Commandment one.
In the third Commandment there is one reason used, namely, that the Lord will
most assuredly and severely punish all them that do dishonor his name, and
therefore we are charged not at any time to empaire his credit, but rather most
highly to advance it, as the very end wherefore we were first created.

Yet the second Commandment is more fortified, The second Commandment has
two.
and has as it were a double bar, I mean two reasons, as against the which
the vanity of our reason, and crookednes of our heart has yet more appeared
in so cunningly devising and willingly embracing so many kinds of false
religion, neither conceiving nor liking that true manner of Gods service, which
he has prescribed in his holy word. And therefore as he requires, that
neither in an Image, nor in any thing else devised by us, we should serve him,
but according to his own wisdom and will made known unto us in his written
word: so he first will plentifully reward in mercy, even to the thousand
generation them that shall in love thus serve him according to his
Commandment: and secondarily, (howsoever passing over many other sins) yet
as a loving and jealous husband, will prosecute to the full the punishment of
that spiritual adultery, whereby the hatred unto God appears in that the
heart is stolen away from him by a false worship.

But yet in this fourth Commandment the Lord goes beyond all that has been
spoken, The 4. Commandment has three.
and binds us up with a threefold cord that can hardly be broken. For he
sets down three reasons, not only to commend unto us the excellency, and
to show the necessity of keeping of it, but also to give us to understand, how
rebellious and corrupt our nature is here especially. As it is indeed: for many
are not persuaded, that there should be any day at all kept: others do not
agree upon the day, which it should be: some prefer other days before it, or
make them equal with it: they that are otherwise minded, yet are not
established in the precise resting and straight ceasing from so many things as
God requires: much less do men agree upon the public and private manner of
sanctifying and keeping it holy. he has given us six days to be occupied in
for our selves: and therefore it is good reason that we should rest upon the
seventh, to attend upon his business, as it were. rested upon the seventh day,
when he had created the whole world in six, that we thereby might the rather
be allured unto that order, which he was purposed to establish, namely, that
we should rest upon the 7. day from our own works, as God did from his, and
so be like unto our Creator. the blessing of sanctification: and therefore it
is not lawful for us to use it to any other end, but to this holy and
sanctified end, for which God in the beginning created it.

The fourth difference of this commandment from all the rest.
Last of all, whereas all the other Commandments are given forth in such manner
of words, as bind only our selves, Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord
thy God in vain, Thou shall not steal, etc. though I grant that more is
employed, and they not only bind us thus to look to our selves, but to so many
also as be committed to our ^^arge (the Lord having given us authority
ouerthem, ^^at we might see them practice all the laws of both Ta^^les so much
as lies in us) yet I say, much is not ex^ressed in the delivery of them: but
in this Commandment in express words God speaks to us, and charge us with
the care not only of our selves, but others ^lso, saying, Thou, and thy son,
and thy daughter, thy manserua^t, thy maidserua^t, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. Thus we see how many ways this Co^ma^deme^t
is charged upon us by the Lord, how straightly he requires it at our hands,
and how in the very giving of it, al things are joined unto it by God himself,
that might commend ^^t unto us with greatest credit and care of obedience.

It remains that we should see, That the Sabbath ought to be continued.
what are the special things contained in it: but first of all, it is needful
to prove unto you, that the Sabbath ought still to be continued with us,
because without this persuasion, all doctrine or exhortation tending to the
true manner of sanctifying it, falls to the ground and is unfruitful. First
of all therefore, it appears in the story of Genesis, that it was from the
beginning, Genesis 2.3.
and that the seventh day was sanctified at the first, so soon as it was made:
in so much that Adam and his posterity, if they had continued in their first
righteous estate, should have kept that day holy above the rest, seeing the
Lord sanctified it for their sakes: and though it be so indeed that they
should have been occupied in some honest calling and work upon the six days
(according as it is said to Adam, that the Lord put the man into the garden of
Eden, Genesis 2.16.
that he might dress it and ^eepe it) yet notwithstanding, upon the seventh
day they should have ceased from all wordly labor, and given ^hemselues to the
meditation of Gods glorious works, and have been occupied in some more
immediate parts of his service, according to the former Commandment. And that
we might understand indeed, that the law of sanctifying the Sabbath is so
ancient, the Prophet Moses in Genesis does of purpose use the same words, which
the Lord God himself does in pronouncing it, (as it is set down in Exodus)
namely, that he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, and that in it God
rested from all his work which he made: to teach us assuredly, that this
Commandment of the Sabbath, P. Martyr in Genesis 2.
was no more then first given when it was pronounced from heaven by the Lord,
then any other the Moral precepts, nay that it has so much antiquity, as the
seventh day has being: for so soon as the day was, so soon was it
sanctified, that we might know, Rulling. in Romans 4.5.
that as it came in with the first man, so it must not go out but with the
last man, and as it was in the beginning of the world, so it must continue to
the ending of the same, and as the first seventh day was sanctified, so must
the last be: and as God bestowed this blessing upon it in the most perfect
estate of man, so must it be reserved with it, till he be restored to his
perfection again.

The Church of God did keep the Sabbath from the beginning, before it was
pronounced upon Mount Sinai.
And we shall be so much the rather persuaded of this, if we consider how the
Church of God upon the consideration of the first institution of the Sabbath,
did retain by tradition the true knowledge and practice of this Commandment,
as well as any other part of the word, from Adam unto the coming of the
Israelites into the wilderness, passing over the red sea from out of Egypt,
before the giving of the law, as appears in Exodus: when Moses exhorting them
upon this new occasion of gathering and preparing Manna, to the sanctifying of
the Sabbath still, notwithstanding that, as they had done before, and therefore
to rest now from both, saying, Bake that to day which you will bake, Exodus
16.23.
and sees that which you will sees, and all that remains lay it up to be
kept till the morning for you: first speaks of the Sabbath immediately
following, as of a known thing unto them, in the former part of the verse, to
morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: upon which bare notice
of the Sabbath next ensuing, he could not have so forcibly required the
^^sting from work, if it had not been a thing that they ^ere long acquainted
with.

Besides, in this same place, he persuades them unto ^t with the same reason
that the Lord uses in promulgating of it, and almost in the same words,
saving that, that which is there generally spoken, is here applied to the
particular occasion: Six days shall you gather it, verse 26.
but in the seventh day is the Sabbath: to show us also that they knew the
equity of this commandment from the beginning. Moreover, when some did break
this commandment so reasonable and so well known in seeking for Manna, Moses
reproving them at the word of the Lord, says in the words following, verse 29.
Behold how the Lord has given you the Sabbath, (speaking of the time past)
therefore he gives the sixth day, bread for two days: tarry therefore every
man in his place. Last of all Moses testifies of the people in the 30. verse,
Tremelius. Iunius.
that afterward they rested every Sabbath, (as some do read it) and as yet
the law was not given.

And therefore under correction, I think it not true, that is avouched by a
learned man, when he says, Conuinci non potest, Muscul. loc. com. praecept. 4.
etc. It cannot be proved that the Sabbath or rest of the seventh day was kept
before the giving of the law, either from Adam before the flood unto Noah, or
after the flood unto Moses, or of Abraham and his posterity. For as a learned
and ancient father and Bishop says, Iam hic ab initio, etc. Here now even from
the beginning God has insinuated this doctrine unto us, teaceing us In circulo
hebdomadis die^ vnu^: Chrysostom. in Genesis 2. Homil. 18.
that in the ^o^passe of a week, one whole day is to be put apart for a
^pirituall rest unto God. Unto all which may be added ^^at, for proof that
this commandment is natural, moral, and perpetual: that I say may be
added, which was practiced among the Gentiles, and all the heathen, concerning
the keeping holy of certain days, though altogether ignorant of the law of
Moses: The Gentiles by the light of nature kept some days holy.
for though it was so, that they knew not the institution of the seventh day,
much less did they keep it, yet some days by a common consent they severed
from their worldly affairs, and dedicated them to the service of their Gods:
nay though they did altogether so hate the only true holy day, that neither
would they observe it themselves, and also mocked the Jews for observing it;
Iere. Lament. 3.7.
yet of themselves they erected other days, which they appointed to a holy and
religious use: which evidently declares, that the law of the Sabbath was so
deeply graven in the heart of man at the first by God himself, that howsoever
the print of it was by the fall of Adam, and by sin growing in the posterity,
was (I say) greatly mangled and defaced, so that it could not be read: yet it
was not so wholly raced out, but that some deformed scratches, and (is it were)
scarres of it did appear. And therefore though they could not attain to the
knowledge of the day, much less the true manner of sanctifying it without the
word: yet that there should be a day differing from other in use, sequestered
from the common affairs of the world, and consecrated to the worship of God,
this was that which did show it self to them whether they would or no.

Herein therefore I agree with the Schooleman, who says, Thom. Aquin. 2.a.
2.ae. quaest. 122. art 4.
That the commandment of sanctifiyng the Sabbath is partly moral: moral in
as much as a man does appoint a certain time of his life to attend upon
heavenly things: for there is a natural inclination in man to depute a
certain time for every necessary thing, as for the receiving of his meat, for
sleep, and for other such things: and therefore he does according to the
direction of natural reason, appoint a certain time for his spiritual
refreshing, whereby his soul is refreshed in God. And as in the second
commandment, though they knew not the true service of God, (as being without
his word) yet that he should some ways outwardly beworshipped, they were
fully assured, as ap^eareth by their superstition and Idolatry. So the very
^ay that God had blessed to this end they understood not, neither could do
without the law, yet that there ^ought to be some day they held undoubtedly,
as appears by their practice, when they had sanctified so many days to
themselves.

And that this Sabbath day, The Gospel has not taken away the observation of
the Sabbath.
which has that commendation of antiquity and consent which we have heard,
ought to stand still in his proper force; and that it appertains to us
Christians now, most evidently appea^eth by that authority and credit which
it receives from the Gospel and new Testament also, in which it is so highly
commended unto us, (that I might not in this place speak of the manifold other
testimonies that it has in the old:) And by name we may see, how our Savior
Christ and all his Apostles establishes it by their ^ractise, for they upon
the Sabbath ordinarily enter into ^he Synagogues of the Jews, and preach unto
the people, doing such things upon those days, as appertain ^o sanctifying of
them, according to the commandment.

Christ Jesus being made under the law (as the Apostle says) came to fulfill
the whole law for us, Galath. 4.4.
and therefore he indeed submitted himself unto the observation of the least
ceremony thereof al his life long, till at his death he cried out, It is
finished, Ioh. 19.30. Math. 27.51.
when the veil of the Temple rent in twain from the top to the bottom: to
show that all types and figures were abrogated and taken away, and therefore
that his observation of the Sabbath makes no more for the certainty of it,
then his observing of Circumcision, keeping the Passover, and offering up of
^^crifices, do make for their continuance now under the Gospel. received the
holy Ghost, John 16.13.
even the spirit of truth, that should lead them into all truth, do by
their practice and writings show that the Sabbath stood upon a surer ground
then the whole ceremonial law, and therefore could not with it be taken
away. Acts 13.14.
Paul and Barnabas, (as it is in the Acts) coming into Antiochia, went into
the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day, and sat down, and after the reading of
the Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying,
Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to the people, say
on: then Paul stood up, and beckened with the hand, and said, Men of Israel,
etc. going on forward with that notable sermon that is set down there, and
when he had ended, verse 42.
(as it is in the same chapter) The Gentiles besought them, that they would
preach those words unto them the next Sabbath day: which also they did. And the
next Sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God.
verse 44.
Moreover, the same Apostle at Thessalonica, Acts 17 2.
went into the Synagogue of the Jews, and three Sabbath days disputed with
them by the scriptures.

And thus he did not once or twice, but continually and ordinarily, showing
the ordinary continuance of the Sabbath, and the sanctifying of it, as the
Evangelist precisely notes, saying: Paul as his manner was, went in unto them.
Now, though we are to presume that Paul neither taught, nor practiced any thing
contrary to the rest of the Apostles, but that they agreed in one uniform
order of doctrine and government of the Church, (as who had received of one
and the self same spirit) and therefore this might be sufficient to show
their consent herein: Yet notwithstanding we may read how in the last book
of the Bible, and by the last Apostle (I mean who lived longest) the same
thing is confirmed: where he is so far from teaching, that the Sabbath for
the space of 97. years after Christ was taken away, (about what time it is
thought that he wrote that book) that ^^e plainly avouches the continuance
of it in the Church, ^y this new and honorable name, Revel. 1.10.
The Lords day, where ^^ne of purpose noting the time that he received those
Revelations in, calls it by that name that was best known to the Church at
that time, otherwise he should not so fitly have expressed his mind to those,
to who^ he wrote, which day thus called, all writers do agree upon it new and
old, yea the Papists themselves to be this very Sabbath which we observe.
Thus it is sufficiently proved, that the Sabbath was none of those Ceremonies,
which were justly abrogated at the coming of Christ, as being appointed of God
for no further time, but that it continued in the practice of the Church when
all other ceased, yea was kept faithfully in the Church by all them who had with
one consent shut out all the rest. And that it is so commanded in the first
book of holy scriptures, Genesis.
where is showed what was from the beginning, that it wants not his due
praise in the last book of the same, Revelation.
where is a prophecy of things to be fulfilled unto the end: and therefore
we must hearken unto the truth of this doctrine so much the rather, least
that fearful judgment do fall upon us, which the Lord Jesus himself
threatened to bring upon them, that shall diminish any thing contained in this
book, and therefore which shall in whole or in part take away this day which
is so honored there, when he says, Revel. 22.19.
If any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this prophecy, God
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city,
and from those things which are written in this book.

But that I might not seem tedious unto you, we shall further hear in one
word, that the Sabbath still binds us, and that it ought to stand in his
greatest force, That two ends of ordayning the Sabbath, shows the continuance
of it.
that ever it had, and that we have as great need of it as ever any people had
in the world, and that our posterity shall have so likewise, and therefore
cannot be without it, if we consider the principal ends of the first
instituting and ordaining of it by God unto Adam in Paradise: A day of rest is
necessary.
Commanding him to rest upon that day, and to keep holy the day of rest. And
first of all to rest, because he was not of an infinite nature, though perfect,
and therefore could not be occupied wholly about many (I do not say)
contrary, but sundry and diverse things at once, as about the business of this
world and the worship of God: wherefore being bound by his calling to dress
and keep the garden, Genesis 2.15.
verse 3.
and yet charged to keep holy the seventh day, meditating upon the wisdom
and mercy of God appearing as in all the creatures, so especially in himself,
and thus beholding the invisible things of God in them, Romans 1.20.
giving thanks to God for them, praying for the continuance of them, teaching
them to his posterity, etc. it was needful that the seventh day should be
unto him (as it was indeed) a Sabbath day, that is, a day of rest, resting from
all his other necessary business, that so he might with his whole heart and
mind attend upon these, as the worship of God required, which he could not do,
so long as in any part he should be occupied about the other.

Now, if the perfectest man that ever was could not do this, and therefore
stood in need of this liberality of God, in giving him a day of rest, how
shall not we be too foolish in thinking, that we (we I say) that have not only
lost all the excellent graces, that Adam was furnished with, but also in stead
of them, great corruption has overwhelmed us, so that our minds are dull in
concerning the goodness of God in his word and works, and our hearts void of
the true sense and feeling of it, yet we should be able to have all our
worldly business still in our hands, and in our heads, not resting from them
any day, and therewithal to have the same understanding and wit of ours, so
conceiving and desiring by prayer the mercy of God, in the Word, in the
Sacraments, and in all other things of God requires, Luke 10.27.
with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all
our thought. Or rather must we not needs confess as the truth is, that being
more bound to the service of God, then Adam was ^n respect of our sin, yet
are less able to perform it ^hen he in any tolerable measure, when we have
done all that we can, and therefore have more need of a day of rest then he,
that nothing might hinder us. Muscul. loc. com. praecept. 4.
For if the bird (that she might fly) must flutter with her wings, and deliver
her self from all things that might stay her, shall we think, that it makes
no matter, if we come not to Gods service with minds and affections, freed
from all lets, in which we must in our spirits be lifted up higher, then it is
possible for any bird by flying to attain unto? And does not woeful experience
tell us, that when we have freed our hands from worldly matters never so much,
yet we cannot so soon free our minds from them? and being once free, they
will yet renew themselves within us, without any present occasion, by reason of
our corruption, even in the Church, and will iustle out (as it were) the
meditation of Gods service many times, whereof Gods children do complain: how
unruly then wrould they be, if there were not a day to rest from the occasions
of them, and how should we ever be occupied in the word and in prayer, and
the other parts of Gods worship, with any good acceptance to God, and
comfortable practice to our selves, if we should never a day rest in body from
the labors of this world, that in mind and heart we might be free from the
cogitations, studies, delights, and desires of the same? So that we are not
only not to think the Sabbath to be needless (as many Atheists, profane and
ignorant men do) but also we are to be persuaded, that we our selves should
always have been ignorant, profane and Atheists, not serving God at all, but
continually drowned in ^he things of this world, by reason of the works in the
six days, or at the least, dissembling, counterfeit and hypocritical, serving
God rather in ceremony and in show, the^ in that manner of sincerity and
truth, which he requires, if God had not in respect of our weakness at first
appointed a day to rest in, from all things that might any way stay and hinder
us in it, and now in regard of the same weakness, but much more because of the
sin which is within us, had not commanded the same to be continued for our
further good.

Gualt. in Act. 13. Homil. 88.
And so I may say with Master Gualter, Because we are distracted with diverse
business, Necesse fuit, it was necessary that some time should be appointed
free fromal cares and business, in which we should employ our selves wholly in
soul and body, about those things which do make for the service of God,
Muscul. in praecept. 4.
because in it (as it is truly said) Animum requirit non dimidiatum sed
integrum, God requires not half but the whole soul and mind. And (that I
might remember my former promise of being short in so large a matter) we may
briefly consider the necessity of continuing the Sabbath unto all ages, It is
necessary that a day should be sanctified.
if we remember that the Lord would have Adam to sanctify and keep holy one
several day in the week by it self, that by those holy means of Gods
service, whereof his soul did stand in need, (as his body did of corporal
food) he might keep himself in that perfect estate which he was placed in,
which he had also power to do. For though he was so glorious and excellent as
he was, and shined in all virtues of soul and body far above the Sun,
which he might have possessed for ever: yet so it was by Gods wonderful
dispensation, that there were notable means ordained for both, without which
they could not be: and therefore as in respect of his body, there was
abundance of pleasant fruit in the garden to eat of, Genesis 2.9.
so in regard of his soul there was the word of God, even the Commandments
(the perfect knowledge whereof he had) the sacrament of his life already
received of God, Genesis 1.26. and Coloss. 3.10. compared together Genesis 2.9.
and to be continued by him, the tree that was in the midst of the garden,
he was commanded to pray and give thanks, and there was the wonderful and
excellent frame of the world to stir him up to these things. So that as his
bodily life ^ould not be preserved, (God ordayning it so) without ^^e use of
his creatures, and therefore he willed him to ^^dresse the garden and keep
it, in the six days, Genesis 2.15.
that it might yield those things unto him: So the life of God which was in
him, could not continue without those ho^y and spiritual means appointed for
that purpose, and therefore he was commanded to keep holy the seventh day:
verse.3
that in the more plentiful use of all the means upon that day, he might both
make a supply of that which could not be done on the other days, and also
thereby be continued in all strength to do all other duties the days
following.

Now, if Adam because he might fall, did stand in need of this day, to
preserve him from falling, how much more we being so horribly fallen already,
(as we be) do stand in need of it again, again, to bring our selves back
into that estate, from whence we are fallen, and as it were to recover our
first footing: if it was needful for Adam (I say) being now most perfect to
have a day allotted out unto him, by true sanctifying of which he might still
abide in his perfection: can we be so froward to imagine, that now it is not
most needful for us, being so imperfect, that thereby we might be brought
unto our first perfection again? Yes surely, unless we be too much lovers of
our selves, and ouerweaned with the pride of our nature, must we believe, that
if the perfect image of God in Adam, not lightly shadowed, but drawn out with
most lively and orient colors by the finger of God himself, could not
continue in his first beauty, except by the pure means of Gods worship (as ^t
were by the first colors) it were now and then refre^hed, or at the least wise
kept in the same freshnes: then ^hen this goodly Image is so fowly defaced with
sin, that not so much as the first draught thereof does appear, nay all the
colors of it are by Satan sullied with iniquity, or rather clean put out,
have we much more need to sanctify many days by the word, Sacraments, and
prayer, etc. that so the Image of the first man might be renewed in us, Coloss.
3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
in knowledge, in righteousness, and in true holiness, after the Image of him
that created him: even as the Lord God himself does make this the use of the
Sabbath, saying, Keep ye my Sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you
in your generations, Exodus 31.13.
that ye may know that I am the Lord which do sanctify you: calling it a
sign, that is an instruction, or that which teaches, because by the observing
of it they should be taught, that it was the Lord that created them, and would
sanctify them: and therefore he says, that he would have them observe and
keep the Sabbaths, that thereby they might know, that the Lord which made them,
would also sanctify them by those means and so by a new birth shape them into
that Image whereinto he had created them at the first. Unto which agrees that
which the Prophet Isayah speaks in the 56. chapter, where he promises unto
the barren in stead of sons and daughters, that this shall bring them a
better and more lasting name then they, if they will in true knowledge of his
will and holiness of life serve him, as he requires of them in his covenant,
and (that they might do so) will diligently keep the Sabbaths, Esaias 56.4.
saying, Thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, and choose
the thing that pleases me, and take hold of my covenant, even unto them will
I give within my house, and within my walls a place and a name, better then of
the sons and of the daughters, and I will give them an everlasting name, that
shall not be put out. In which words we see he requires this of them, if they
would enjoy the promise, that they should serve him in knowledge and in holiness
according to his covenant: and therefore that they would keep the Sabbaths:
whereby the Lord himself would give unto them that which he also promises in
his covenant, eue^ that knowledge and holiness which he requires, and
according (...) which they were first created, whereby they might ^nioy all
other promised blessings.

Thus then we ought to be so far from the brutish mind of a great many, who
minding nothing but their back and their belly, know no use of the Sabbath,
saving that they see it is thus commanded by authority, and ^hus publicly
observed: as that we should acknow^edge it to be the singular mercy of God
toward us in Christ Jesus, that he has given us his Sabbaths, given them to
us (I say) who when we were plunged in the bottomless pit of all misery, and
there pressed down with the weight of our own sins, had no means to be
raised out of it again (as from the dead) saving his holy word, and blessed
Sacraments, (in which he offers unto us assuredly Christ Jesus to be our
Savior and redeemer) has together with them given us his Sabbaths, that upon
them we being so fully and altogether occupied in ^hese means as we should be,
(and as we can not be in ^he other days, because of our callings) might
through the blessing of God be made partakers of him, who was made of God the
father for us wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30.
holiness and redemption, and so be saved by him.

And indeed, what would become of us, If there were no Sabbath, Gods worship
would be altogether neglected.
if we had not the Sabbaths? For that I might not speak of the wicked, who
upon the six days seldom or never pray, never read the word, never give
themselves to any good meditation or conference of the Scriptures, (as the
things not appertaining to those days) but are wholly possessed and carried
away with the profits and pleasures of this world, as it were with a stream,
yet through Gods merciful ordinance are driven to hear upon the ^abbath, and
do that which otherwise they would not, whereby happily some good is wrought
in them, or else are left more without excuse before Gods judgment seat, to
their just condemnation: That I might not speak of these: we may pitifully
behold the children of God themselves, many times neglecting the public and
private exercises of religion, even of the word and prayer in the week days,
being partly distracted in their callings for want of heavenly wisdom, to
divide out their times, and partly hindered by that untowardness and unaptness,
that is in their nature to all goodness, and partly by a careless forgetfulness,
(the world thrusting it out of their minds, and the devil stealing it away)
whereby they do not so grow in the graces of God as they might: therefore they
are to too unthankful, if they do not acknowledge with thanks this
unspeakable benefit of the Sabbath, in which God has commanded them for their
good to supply their former wants, to make up the breaches (as it were) of the
other days, and to build up the decays of them, and to do that wholly, which
before they did but in part, and to do that an whole day, which before they
did but by pieces, and to do nothing but that which before they joined with
other things; that so they might come to that happiness which GOD would have
them, and to the which otherwise they could not come. For lamentable experience
in themselves does teach them, that though they observe the Sabbath never so
diligently, according to Gods good commandment: yet by reason of sins (which
is so bred in the bones, that it will not out in the flesh) they find
themselves failing in many duties to God and men, very unto ward many times to
those that they do, and so corrupting them; falling into many sins, prone
unto a great many more, and so hardly with great striving to keep an eeuen
course of life, that in their consciences they do assuredly subscribe unto
this truth, that if there were no Sabbath at all, they were most miserable, and
should become like unto the rest of the world. And so let us conclude this
matter, confessing and acknowledging upon the premises with all the Church of
God, (to the stoping of the mouths of them that gainsay it, the (...)
condemnation of them that enquire not after the ^eth of it, and the praise of
our God) not only that the ^^bbath ought to be continued, but that we take it
as a ^^incipall mercy, that the Lord has reserved it unto (...).

Now it remains that I should descend into the particulars of this
Commandment, which also I would presently do, were it not that certain
objections which men make against this truth (which doubtless also may arise in
your minds) did lie in the way, It is dangerous to reason against a known
truth.
which are first to (...) removed: wherein generally we are to be advised and
careful how at any time we dispute against any truth plainly proved, and
when the doctrine is substantially confirmed, how we stand reasoning against
it, which as I have often taught, so I take it to be a safe way, least when we
will not receive the truth in love, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
that we might be saved, God give us over to effectual illusions, that we
might believe lies: then shall we think every show of reason, that either our
own corrupt understanding shall teach us, or any wicked man shall buzze in our
ears (the devil working in both by Gods just judgment) to be of more force
for the overthrowing of that which is taught, then all that has been spoken, or
can be to uphold it.

But if in this case any reason be offered unto us, let us first of all suspect
it, and draw our hearts to a misliking of it, so shall we be fitter to reason
against it, as the Apostle teaches us in many places, and namely in the 6. to
the Romans, Shall we continue still in sin, Romans 6.1.
that grace may abound? God forbid. As if he should say, fie upon that, God
keep us from it. Secondly, let us know that though we cannot answer the
doubt, that yet we must not give over our persuasion in the truth. For if it
be a principle in Philosophy, that a fool may object more sometimes, then a
wise man can answer, much more is it true in Divinity, that we having sin
in us out or measure, and the spirit of God but in measure, the one can teach
us to object or conceive more against the truth, then by the other we shall
be able to answer and say for it. Last of all, let us say with the Apostle,
2. Cor. 13.8.
I can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: and therefore that
wit and reason we have, let us rather spend it in learning the proofs to
maintain the truth, (which is the safest way to continue in it) then to
entangle and (as it were) to snarle our selves in those doubts against the
truth, which as they be many, so are they endless and dangerous.

But concerning the objections against this special truth, my purpose is not
to meet with every one of the^, (for I know them not, neither can any man)
for as the truth is one and certain, so errors are infinite and without
number, in so much that look how many men there be in the world, so many
objections there be made against one principle in religion, and so many more,
as that every man may have a world of doubts within himself: yet some I will
briefly remember and those especially, which I have observed to be most rise
in the mouths of that people, with which I have had most dealing in this
matter.

The Sabbath belongs only to the Jews.
First of all, they ignorantly say, (as all objections do arise from the
ignorance of the truth) that the Sabbath is a Jewish thing, belonging only to
that people, and so not appertaining unto us. Against which all that that we
have already spoken and heard, does most evidently and openly, and (as it
were) with a loud voice speak: For it has been substantially proved, Church,
in his own proper force, that it might appear, that it was of a nature far
differing from them, having neither beginning nor ending together with them.

And this is that which a learned man master Wolphius says, (when having
before spoken of other festival days of the Jews now abrogated) he adds:
Wolph. Chronol. lib. 2 cap. 1.
Sabbathum autem dierum ordinarium and perpetuum, etc. But the ordinary and
perpetual Sabbath of days, that is the seventh day, (by this name he
opposing it to the Sabbath of weeks and years) is not to be reckoned among
the figures and ceremonies of the Jews, both because it was ordained in
Paradise before the fall of man for the worship of God, and also it is
commanded in the Decalogue, which contains in it nothing ceremonial, nothing
typical, nothing to be abrogated: for in that I hold the position of the
Schooleman to be true: The precepts of the Decalogue are (indispensibilia) not
to be dispensed withal. Thom. 1ae. 2ae. quaest. 100.
And therefore the urging of this commandment upon the Church of God at this
day so straightly, is not to bring them into the intolerable bondage of the
Jews, from which they are delivered by Christ: nor to lay upon them that yoke
which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear: Acts 15.10.
but to challenge them with that ancient obedience, which God always required
at their hands, and from which they were never free. Nay to shake off our
obedience to that, whereunto the Church has always yielded under this
pretense in so weighty a matter, is to abuse our liberty, to turn it into
licentiousnes, and to set open a window unto all kind of profaneness.

The Sabbath is a continual resting from sin.
not so much of any one day, nor the resting from any special worldly labor,
as of the whole life of a Christian, and the continual resting from sin,
which is the spiritual and true Sabbath: and so not any one day, but every day
is commended unto us, that in them we should rest from our own works which
is sin, and so keep a continual Sabbath, sanctifying every day, and putting
it apart to the doing of Gods holy service, and that alone: which if we do,
then do we truly keep the Sabbath, though we be occupied in the affairs of
our calling. For this is that (say they) which the Prophet Esaias commends unto
us, when he says, that upon the holy Sabbath, we must not do our own will,
nor do our own ways, nor seek our own will, (for thus many words there
he uses) but consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord: Esaias 58.13.
Lo, (say they) he requires this, on the Sabbath that we should rest from
doing our own will, and this alone, which ought to be perpetual, not
restrained to any certain day, and therefore the Sabbath that he speaks of,
is of this nature, and of none other. And of this judgment there are too many
in the world, not only those who under this color do abolish this day, as
the Familists, and other profane men: but also those who retaining the day,
make this the principal thing in it, to rest from sin, (which I take to be
general to the whole law, and common to all days) and therefore they do
restrain these words, (No work, Thy work, Any servile work) unto sin, and
make it almost proper unto that, at leastwise principally to include it: and
therefore under that pretense take more liberty to themselves upon this day,
then they should, so that they rest from sin. And of this mind are not only
the Schoolmen, but also so many new and old writers, that I need not to name
any: from whom (with all humility, reserving their due praise to themselves)
let me a while with your favors differ in judgment, without all suspicion of
singularity, till you hear what I can say to the contrary. Unto this
therefore we do first of all answer, Moses does oftentimes speak of a set
day, and the seventh day is oftentimes. repeated, and he stands upon a day,
and therefore if Esaias be otherwise taken, he is against Moses, one Prophet
against another, which cannot be: and thus by the authority of Moses in those
days his mouth might soon have been stopped.

Secondarily, To r^st from sin is the fruit of the true keeping holy of the
Sabbath.
we say that the true meaning of the Prophet in that place, is to teach the
right manner of sanctifying the Sabbath indeed, and therefore he corrects
that abuse which was among them, by name, that they straightly observing the
outward rests, had not that care of the fruitful use of Gods worship, which
they should have had, but either altogether neglected it, or did it but in
Ceremony. Therefore he tells them, that all their resting was to no purpose,
if they did not so spend that time in the holy service of God, as that thereby
they might be made afterward more fit to rest from sin, and to do Gods will:
and so does give them to understand, that the^ they had sanctified the Sabbath
indeed, when as thereby they were more furthered in the spiritual rest: not
altogether taking away the Sabbath day, but showing what, fruit should come
thereof, without the which the other was but an outward, and bare and
unprofitable Ceremony. Whereunto agrees Master Calvin: Call. in Exodus 20.8.
Legitimus Sabbati vsus, The right use of the Sabbath must be referred to our
sanctification and the denial of our selves. He does not say, that this is all
in all, but that we must make this good use of the day, to profit thereby in
mortification, and that must the fruit of the worship of God therein.

And that this is the proper meaning and natural sense of the place further
appears, by that which goes before in the same chapter: Esaias 58.5.6.
Is it such a fast that I have cho^^^n, that a man should afflict his soul for
a day, As also it is of keeping the day of fast.
and to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to lie down in sack cloth and
ashes: will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is
not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to
take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that wander into thy house? When thou see the naked, that
thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh? In all which
words, it cannot be the meaning of the Prophet to take away the outward
abstinence from the creatures of God in the day of fasting, (which was
commanded in the law and the Prophets, and warranted by our Savior Christ
afterward in the Gospel, according to the nature of it) but to show that though
they did fast never so much, so that their bodies were brought low thereby,
and made weak like a bulrush, yet that their hearts were haughty and proud
still, hard and cruel to their brethren, and were not thereby humbled in their
souls before God and men, and did not show their humiliation according as
they did outwardly profess it by the ceremony of fasting, did not show it (I
say) by the deeds of love unto men, that all their fasting was not regarded of
the Lord, neither was it acceptable unto him. So that in both the places he
speaks incomparison (as in many other places of the scriptures) giving us to
understand assuredly, that neither the ceremony of fasting was allowed of God
(though commanded by him) unless that afterward by the fruits of true
humility, they did show that they had used it in truth: neither the precise
observing of the Rest upon the Sabbath was pleasing in his eyes (though
necessarily required by him) unless by the power that they got thereby against
sin, to rest from it, they did declare, that by the religious use of Gods
holy service, they had sanctified it aright: so that he does not forbid the
one to establish the other, but shows that it is in vain and to no purpose,
when it is secured from that end, for which it was ordained, and brings not
forth that fruit which it would do, if it were rightly used, As we may see
the spirit of God speaking thus: And it must be the fruit of all true religion.
Iam. 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled even before God the father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world: Where his purpose is not to exclude all the parts of Gods service,
as though no religion consisted in the hearing of Gods word, receiving the
Sacraments and praying, and as though if a man did ^eade an outward civil
life, so that he could not be openly charged with any sin among men, but were
pitiful to the poor, then it made no matter of what religion he were, for
this was all in all: but he speaks against the hypocrisy of such, as making
a great show of religion, and carrying the name of professors, there appeared
no fruits of true religion in their lives and conuersations, assuring them
that all their religion was in vain, and more in show then in truth, unless
these fruits did follow upon it, as appeared by the verse immediately going
before: If any of you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. And so tells us, that
a man may be said to be of a good religion indeed, when he serves God in the
word, Sacraments and prayer, so that thereby he is made more fit to do all
duties unto men, especially to show mercy to the fatherless and widows in
their adversity. So that a man can no more under that forenamed pretense out
of Esaias, take away the observing of one particular day distinct, and put apart
from the rest to Gods use in his service, and yet to imagine that the law of
the Sabbath should not be broken, then be may from this other place of James
conclude, that to hear the preaching of the word, to receive the Sacraments,
and to pray unto God, are none of the things which God requires, neither does
pure region consist in them: but as we would rightly judge ^im to mistake the
scripture, that should upon this or any such place (as certain schismatikes or
rather heretics have done) sever and cut themselves off from the public
meetings of the Church, and that manner of Gods service which is now received
among us.

So that we say, that he is led with some private sense of his own, and does
not wisely consider the circumstance of the text, nor indifferently compare it
with the body of the rest of the Scriptures, which shall upon that other place
of Esaias disanull the keeping of any one certain day, and so to race out (as
it were) that Commandment out of the Canon of the Scripture. But that I might
not stand too long in one thing, I will hasten to that which follows.

Christ has taken away the Sabbath in the Gospel. Mark. 2.27.
that Christ takes it away in the Gospel of Mark, and other places, where he
says, that the Sabbath is made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: therefore
it must serve man, and not man be bound unto it, it is at the will and
disposition of man, and is to be ordered by him, and he not to be brought into
the servitude and bondage of it, it is in his power to keep it, or not to
keep it, and how and after what manner to keep it, seeing it was made for him.
Calvin says (upon the miracle of healing him that was sick of the palsy)
Videndum etc. We must remember what kind of defense Christ does use, Calvin in
Ioh. 5.17.
he does not say, that the law of keeping the Sabbath was temporary, and now
to be abrogated, but rather does deny, that he has broken this law. Then the
same Master Calvin sets down his judgment plainly of this matter: Calvin. in
hunc locum.
Falluntur meo iudicio, etc. They are deceived in my opinion, who think that
here the Sabbath is altogether abrogated, seeing that our Savior Christ does
but simply teach what is the right use of it: for although he had said before,
that he was the Lord of the Sabbath, yet the time of abrogating things was not
yet come, because the veil of the Temple was not rent in sunder. And therefore
we must further remember that our Savior Christ, being the only Prophet of
the Church, and perfectly knowing the will of his father, John 1.18. and 1.2.
as being in his bosom, and a teacher sent of God into the world at that
ignorant time, when the truth was so darkened by the false glosses and corrupt
interpretations of the teachers, yea almost put out, does in this and other
like places entreating of the Sabbath, interpret the true meaning of the law,
bringing it into light, and redeeming it (as it were) from the thick mists of
ignorance, into which the Rabbis and Doctors of the Church had thrown it. And
as in that notable sermon which he makes, Matthew. 5.6. and 7. chapters, he does
not dispute against the law, but against their false meaning and corrupt sense,
unto which they had wrested it: so here he shows, that it was never the
meaning of this Commandment, that the rest upon the Sabbath day should be so
severely required, that for want of things necessary, man should take hurt
^hereby, seeing that the Sabbath and day of rest was ordained by God for the
profit and commodity of man, and not for his hinderance, and so justifies
the doing of ^is Disciples in gathering corn, preparing and eating it, because
that otherwise they should have fainted in their journey: for so it was, that
they so followed their Lord and master, travailing from town to town to
preach, that they had no leisure to eat their meat, therefore going through
the corn fields, they gathered here and there to satisfy their weak and
weary bodies. Now whereas the Pharisees that were present were offended at it,
because ^t stood not with their tradition of resting from all bodily ^abour,
our Savior Christ upon that occasion teaches the ^rue manner and end of
resting upon the Sabbath (which was ^om the beginning) and brings not in any
new liberty, which was not granted before, saying, The Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath: where we must understand, that by Sabbath he
means the Rest, even as the word does import, and so it is true indeed that
God ordained a time of rest for man's sake, that he being helped thereby, and
his nature refreshed, might be made more fit to do the works of God, and his
own works in his calling. So that the Pharisees did pervert the right end of
resting, when they turned it to the hurt of man, for want of doing such things,
as the nature of man did presently stand in need of, as now the Disciples being
ready to faint, if they had not gathered for themselves, they should have been
more unfit to serve God in their callings. And this self same thing Master
Gualter very learnedly observes: Gualt in Mar. 2. Homil. 22.
Sabbathi otium Deus hominis causa instituit: God has ordained rest or ceasing
from work upon the Sabbath for man.

We must use rest, and all Gods creatures to fu^ther us in his service.
So (to draw these things into a narrow room) I grant unto them, that rest was
made and ordained for man, as meat and drink, apparel and sleep, and all
other things here below, and man was made to glorify God: and therefore he is
so to eat and drink, sleep and rest, as he thereby may be furthered in the
service of God, and a man can no more from hence gather, that a man may use the
day of rest at his pleasure, and that it is in his own power to dispose of it,
as it likes him best, then he may persuade himself to eat, what and when and
where, and how it pleases himself, but as the Apostle says, All the
Creatures of God are sanctified our use by the word and by prayer: 1. Tim. 4.5.
and thefore if we will have the right use of them, we must so use them as the
word requires, and pray unto GOD for his blessing in the sober usage of them:
so must we say of the Rest which God has commanded us to sanctify and keep
holy, the sanctification of which was the highest and most principal end of
it, according to the Commandment, Remember the sabbath day (that is) the day
of Rest to k^epe it holy, and therefore though the Rest was made for man, and
man has the disposition of it, yet man being made for the glory (...) God, he
must so use his Rest, as by the sanctifying of it, ^e may bring glory to God
indeed. And therefore the ^ame Master Gualter, a little after says, Gualt ibid.
These things are ^ot so to be understood, as though it were lawful for us in
^hese things, to appoint or do at our pleasure what liked us ^est: but Christ
does here teach the right use of all outward things, least that we should
through superstition abuse those things unto the hurt of our selves or other
men, which God ^ath appointed for our safeguard and good. Therefore let us mark
how our savior Christ does say, Man was not made for the sabbath or rest, but
he does not say, man was not made for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, or
keeping ^oly the day of Rest: For as it is true, that all the Creatures were
made for man's use, and therefore they were made before him, that he being made
might use them: so man was made that he might keep the whole law of God, and
every part of it, and therefore it was not given out ^ill man was made: so man
is above the Creatures, but ^he law is above him, and he is made to worship
God, to ^allow his name, and to sanctify his sabbath. And so I may say with
Peter Martyr. Here consider the order of things: P. Martyr. in Genesis 2.
some things are created for man, therefore man was made after them: but man
was made for the service of God, therefor straight way after the Creation, was
brought in the ^lessing and sanctification of the sabbath.

And thus we may conclude the truth of this doctrine that we have in hand,
notwithstanding any thing, that ^ath been spoken against it, namely, that as
there has ^een a sabbath day from the beginning, so there is great ^^ason that
it should continue to the ending, and though had never so many adversaries that
have bent their ^^ree against it, yet they are not able to overthrow it, as
^^ing that which is strengthened by Gods Commande^^nt, and (as it were)
fortified by his own hand: yet I am not ignorant, that it has many and
mighty enemies, and those that have a great deal more to say against it then
I have uttered: nay, I do not think, that there is any one point of our
Religion, that is so in controversy among the learned of all sorts, as this
of the sabbath, wherein many friends do disagree: but my purpose is not to
deal so far, which thing I leave to them that have travailed a great deal
more then my self in this matter, and I do pray that this my labor might
be a spur to the godly learned, to take more pains in so worthy an
argument, and to publish abroad that which I know some have in their hands
concerning this doctrine, (though I have not read the same) and then I would
think I had reaped a sufficient fruit of my labor: and in the mean season I
will remember my purpose, to contain my self within the compass of my first
preachings.

Now as we have hitherto seen, that there ought to be a Sabbath day, so it
remains that we should hear upon what day this Sabbath should be kept, and
which is that very day, that is sanctified for that purpose. For I know it is
not agreed upon among them that do truly hold, that there ought to be a
Sabbath, which is that very day, upon which the Sabbath should always be.
Herein the Lord has been merciful unto his Church, and succored the
infirmity of man in this behalf, and decided the endless contention that
might have been about this matter, The Sabbath ought to be upon the seventh
day and upon none other. Genesis 3.2. Exodus 30.10. Deuteronomy. 5.14.
in that he has told us that it is the seventh day, which he has sanctified
for that purpose. For it is in express words said in Genesis, that God blessed
the seventh day and sanctified it: and in Exodus, The seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God: and afterward the same words be repeated by
Moses in Deuteronomie. Therefore it must needs be upon that day and upon none
other, for the Lord himself sanctified that day, and appointed it for that
purpose, August. epistol. ad ^anisar. 119 cap. 10.
and none but it. And therefore it is truly said of that great clerk Saint
Augustine, De solo Sabbatho dictum est, etc. This is said only of the Sabbath,
GOD sanctified the seventh day. In so much that a man being in conscience
persuaded that he should keep holy unto the Lord some one day or other, should
ignorantly choose out some other day, neglecting the seventh, to sanctify it by
resting from his labors, and wholly applying himself to Gods service, he
could not look for that blessing from GOD, which no doubt the Church of God
does find at his hands upon that day by virtue of his especial promise, for he
blessed that day and sanctified it. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 2.
And as Peter Martyr alleges it out of Rabbi Agnon, This blessing does light
upon those who observe and sanctify the same Sabbath that God has appointed:
and we do not read that he bestowed that blessing upon any other day, which
we know he did upon the seventh: So that the substance of this law is natural,
as Master Iunius say^h, Iunij pralect. in Genesis 2.3.
and to be observed of all men alike, namely, that every seventh day should
be holy unto God And so it is true not only that of every seven days, as
Peter Martyr says, one must be reserved unto God: Pet. Mart. in Genesis 2.
and a little after, it is perpetual that one day in the week should be
reserved for the service of God, but that this must be upon the seventh: In
setting down of which I do not so far forget my self, but that I remember
that some, whom with all humility I do reverence in the Lord, and give
thanks unto him for their labors, that (I say) they are otherwise minded, and
do not think that the Church is necessarily tied to the number of seven in
observing the day: Yet I do not see (be it far from me that I should
obstinately contend with any) where ^he Lord has given any authority to his
Church ordi^arily and perpetually to sanctify any day, except that which he
has sanctified himself. For I hold this with ^ther learned men as a
principle in divinity, that it belon^^th only to God to sanctify the day, as
it belongs to him to sanctify any other thing to his own worship. Muscul.
loc. com. praecept. 4.
Deus est qui sanctificat, says Musculus, It is God that does sanctify, that
is, who of common or profane things makes holy, it is duty religiously to
observe according to his word the things that are sanctified of him: nostrae
potestatis non est sanctificare, it is not in our power to make holy at our
pleasure the things that God has not sanctified, if any man shall attempt it,
he not only therein is superstitions and not religious, but also does therein
challenge that to himself by a rashness, that cannot be excused, which belongs
only unto God. And as we know not how to worship him, but that we are sure by
his word, that he has sanctified such and such things to that end: namely,
has appointed the preaching of his word, the administration of the Sacraments,
and calling upon his name for that purpose, and therefore in using of these, we
promise our selves to be blessed of him, for he has himself established them
by his own mouth, and therefore his blessing must needs accompany them: So at
what time we should neglect all other things, and wholly apply our selves unto
these we are wholly ignorant, but that we know he has sanctified the seventh
day, and blessed it for this cause, and it was as needful for the Lord (in
respect of our selves) to tell us which was the day, as to tell us that there
ought to be a day, and so much the more, by how much our nature is more corrupt
in one then in the other. For all they which either by the light of reason or
knowledge of Gods word have attained to this truth, that there ought to be a
day severed from the rest to this end, yet have not gone so far with one
consent to set down this very seventh day: For that I might not speak of the
Gentiles, who kept so many holydaies as we know they did, yet could not away
with the Sabbath of the Jews which was upon the seventh, the very practice of
the Papists does declare how blind we are in this matter, who unto the
seventh day (which the Lord has sanctified) have adjoined so many other days,
as the second, third, or fourth day of the week, and all of them indifferently
as they fall out, and made them equal with the seventh in sanctifying of them,
nay many times preferring them above it, in that they have appointed a more
solemn kind of service upon some of the^, then upon the seventh, and judging it
a greater sin to travel or work upon some of them, then upon the seventh,
wherein (yea, if their religion were good) they could not ordinarily look for
such a blessing of God, as upon the other. Besides there be other, who justly
condemning the Papists for this intrusion of days, yet are persuaded not only
that the day which we now keep, may be changed by the Church without any
offense, but that the number of seven may be altered, contrary to that which
has continued from the beginning. Therefore, we must needs acknowledge it to
be the singular wisdom and mercy of God toward his Church thus by
sanctifiyng the seventh day to end the strife: For as we see in Gods service,
when men go away from his word, there is no end of devising that which he
allows not, and they fall upon every thing, saving upon that they should: so
in appointing the day if we be not ruled by the word, we shall find by
experience that every day will seem more convenient to us then that, at
leastwise we shall seem to have as good reason to keep any other as the
seventh.

Now seeing it appertains only unto God to bless us, It belongs only to
God to sanctify any creature.
it cannot belong to any but him to appoint the means whereby he will convey
this blessing unto us, and he has not only sanctified the means, but has
especially blessed the seventh day for those purposes, and dealing with it, we
deal with that which has an especial blessing upon it for our sakes. For
this cause we use in the sacraments the water, the bread, and the wine rather
then any other thing in the world: and we look assuredly to receive that
blessing from these creatures which we cannot from any other, because GOD has
sanctified them for this purpose, and has put that rich blessing upon them for
our good, which no other creature has under the sun: In so much that if any
one would minister or receive the Sacraments in any other elements then these,
he should not find that blessing of the forgiveness of sins, and newnes of
life, which the Lord does by these means convey unto his Church. For as no
man in the world can of himself make this promise unto men, that they shall
be washed and cleansed from their sins by the blood of Christ, and that by
his body and blood they shall be nourished in soul and in body unto
everlasting life: so none in the world can appoint out the means whereby God
will convey these inestimable treasures unto us, put us into the possession of
them and make us assured of them, which when himself has done we cheerfully
look for that good from them, because he is faithful and true, that has
said, he has thus blessed them for us. In regard of which, as the Jews did
faithfully keep that seueth day to the end, which they knew by the word, which
only God blessed and sanctified for their use, so it was unlawful for them to
change it for any other, because they had not that warrant that they should be
specially blessed unto them, as they had for this, which being that very day,
upon which the Lord himself rested from all his work which he made, he did
therefore bless this seventh day and sanctified it, Gen 2.2.
because that in it he had rested from all his work that God had created and
made, to that end, that they observing that day rather then any other, might
therein be made like to their creator, and might show by their practice, that
they worshipped him, whom they knew, even him, that as he had made an especial
covenant with them to save them, so he was able to do it, for it was even he,
who when he had made the whole world in six days, rested upon the seventh,
and therefore sanctified it, and none but that, that this work of his might be
had in an everlasting remembrance. And when all the Gentiles round about said,
that they worshipped every one of them the true God, (and yet they did not thus
know him by his word, and by his works, and therefore made him but am Idol)
they by their practice in observing that seventh day did show, that they did
know him aright, and so made him known unto others: the glory of which work
had been obscured and darkened, if they had changed the number of that day,
which the Lord in wisdom left to his Church to be obserucd in the policy
and discipline of it, when he might have appointed some other, that so the
benefit of our creation might always with praise be remembered in the Church,
according as it is said in the words of the commandment. In six days, the
Lord made the heaven and the earth, Exodus 20.11.
the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, therefore the
Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it, which in the verse going before
he calls the seventh day. Thus we learn that God did not only bless it,
but bless it for this cause, and so we see, that the Sabbath must needs be
still upon the seventh day as it always has been.

But now concerning this very special seventh day, Why we keep another seventh
day, and not that which was from the beginning.
that now we keep in the time of the Gospel, that is well known, that it is
not the same, it was from the beginning which God himself did sanctify, and
whereof he speaks in this Commandment, for it was the day going before
ours, which in latin retains his ancient name, and is called the Sabbath,
which we also grant, Dies Sabbathi.
but so that we confess, it must always remain, never to be changed any
more, and that all men must keep holy this seventh day, and none other, which
was unto them not the seventh, but the first day of the week, as it is so
called many times in the new Testament, and so it still stands in force, that
we are bound unto the seventh day, though not unto that very seventh.
Concerning the time and persons by whom, and when the day was changed, it
appears in the new Testament, that it was done in the time of the Apostles,
and by the Apostles themselves, and that together with the day, the name was
changed, and was in the beginning called the first day of the week, afterward
the Lords day.

It was changed in the Apostles time. Acts 20.7.
Now that it was changed in the Apostles time it appears, by that which we
read in the Acts. The first day of the week, the disciples being come
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued the preaching unto midnight. In which Scripture we see,
that now at this time, the Churches in some places used to have their public
assemblies upon this day, and that all the parts of Gods worship proper to the
Sabbath were exercised upon this day, as the preaching of the word, receiving
the sacraments, and common prayer, and that the Apostles consented to the
practice of this, for Paul preached at this general meeting: And it appears
by the circumstance of the story, that this was then ordinary, (though not in
all places at the first) for this meeting was not upon this special presence
of Paul, for he had tarried there, now seven days in all, but they met to
receive the sacrament, (as it may be gathered, that it was an usual thing in
the Church to receive it every sabbath) and upon this occasion Paul preached,
and because he was to depart on the next day, and so they knew not, when they
should hear him again, therefore he continued preaching so long as he did.
Unto which may be adjoined that which he writes to the Corinthians: 1. Cor.
16.2.
Every first day of the week, let every one of you put aside by himself, and
lay up as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come, where
he wills them to do that upon this day, which is most agreeable to the
sabbath: Namely to gather for the poor, which is the fittest day for that
purpose, and therefore no doubt chosen out by the Apostle, both for that reason
he alleges, that the week being ended, and a man seeing how God has blessed
him in it, he might accordingly extend his liberality, and chiefly because it
ought to be then, when wen hear the word, that by it they might be most of all
stirred up unto it, and are made partakers of the Sacraments, and prayers of
the Church, and so thereby receive most mercies at Gods hand, that out of their
abundance, they might supply the necessity of others.

Seeing then in the wisdom of the spirit it seemed good unto the Apostle,
that there should be a common gathering among the Corinthians, as well as
among others for the persecuted Saints, we must needs presume of him, that he
did choose out the fittest time, to further so weighty a matter, and we have
heard that that is the most convenient time when the Church being met together,
they are ocupied in so many parts of Gods service, which might move their
hearts to greatest pity and liberality: and seeing he appoints this
collection to be made the first day of the week, we may be most assured, that
this day was allotted out unto all the forenamed things among them also, though
they be not here specefied in express words: especially, when we have the
like already in the place of the Acts above mentioned. And unto this practice
of theirs the Apostle consents, and as it were gives his voice, for he
wills them to do it upon the day. All which do show at least wise thus
much, that this alteration and change was made in the time of the Apostles, and
while they lived, the Sabbath day of the Jews by little and little wearing
away with the rest of the Jewish worship. Neither could so great a matter be
done all at once, anl generally be practiced in every Church together, seeing
the Magistrates were not then Christians, and so they could not have the help
of civil authority for the establishing of this constitution by law
compelling all men thereunto: but as the Gospel did enlarge it self and
further spread abroad, and men did willingly give their names unto it, so they
did consent unto this exchange, as unto other decrees of the Church.

M. Fox. in Apoc. 1.10.
Unto this agree all the learned. Master Fox that worthy historiographer and
divine, as he alleges it out of Saint Augustine, says, Hereby we do
understand that the first institution of the Lords day, Vel ab ipsis
Apostolorum temporibus, etc. Is derived even from the very Apostles time unto
us. Sozom. eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Therefore, whereas Sozomene in his ecclesiastical history reports, that
the first Christian Emperor Constantine the great, did by law establish the
Lords day, which was of the Gentiles called Sunday, as he says, Master
Bullinger says, it is to be understood, that he Bulling. in Apoc. concio. 4.
reverenced the Catholic custom of the Church, which was from the Apostles
time; rather then that he did even the^ first ordain it. Bucer in Mat. 12.11.
For as Master Bucer says, The Lords day was appointed by the common consent
of the Christians, for the public assemblies of the Church, ipso statim
tempore Apostolorum, even at the first in the Apostles time. Now seeing the
alteration was made in the Apostles time, And by the Aposles themselves. Ioh.
16.13.
and they did yield unto it by their practice, by whom can we imagine that this
should be done, but by the^, who had received the spirit, that should lead
them into all truth? then by them (I say) who for their excellent gifts were
able to see further into things then all the Church besides, who for their
great and Apostolical authority would prevail more then any other, who were
appointed by Christ, to be the chief builders and planters of the Churches,
both in doctrine and discipline? And therefore S. Augustine says plainly,
August. de temp. sermon. 251
Dominicum diem Apostoli and Apostolici viri, etc. The Apostles and men of
Apostolical authority did ordain this day in the Church. M. Fox in Apoc.
1.10.
And M. Fox concluding out of his words, says, From hence it is manifest,
that the observation of this Lords sabbath, Aucoritate niti Apostolicae
institutionis, does lean upon the authority of the Apostles institution. If
indeed they had resisted it, (as they did many other things, that crept into
the Church in their time) we would have suspected it, or rather utterly refused
it, but seeing they have commended it unto us by their practices, as appears
in that Scripture which we know to be Canonical and Authentical, we do
acknowledge, that the Lord furnishing them with his holy spirit, as he used
them according to his good pleasure like worthy instruments, to convey unto us
the holy scriptures, which we receive from their hands, without all gain
saying, so we believe that they had his extraordinary direction in abrogating
the former day, and placing this in the room of it. For as the learned Doctor
Fulke says: D. Fulke upon Rhem. Test. Apoc. 1.10. Acts 1.2.
Now for the prescription of this day before any other of the seven, the
Apostles had without doubt either the express commandment of Christ, before
his ascension, when he gave them precepts concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the ordering and government of Church, or else the certain direction of his
spirit, that it was his will and pleasure that it should be so, and that also
according to the Scriptures. And as we do not dispute of the authority and
credit of their writings, which we know not to have proceeded from the
spirit of man, so we do not call into question the lawfulnes of this change,
which we see in their writings allowed, and by themselves commended unto us in
the same. So that I may conclude with him that says, Wolph Chronol. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
Fecerunt hoc Apostoli, The Apostles did make this change, as appears by
their writings, whose examples we do well to follow, as of whom it is said,
Iunij praelect in Genesis 2.3.
he that hears you hears me. And so concludes Iunius, Quamobrem cum dies
Dominicus, etc. Wherefore, seeing the Lords day is both by the fact of Christ,
(s. his resurrection and often appearing to his Disciples upon that day) by the
example and institution of the Apostles, and by the continual practice of the
ancient Church, and by the testimony of the scripture, observed and
substituted into the place of the Jewish Sabbath, Inepte faciunt, They do very
foolishly, who say that the observation of the Lords day is of tradition, and
not from the scripture, that by this means they might establish the traditions
of men. And that it might be fully known to the whole church in time, that the
day was changed indeed, they gave it a new name, calling it the Lords day, that
the very name it self might proclayme, with a loud voice, as it were with the
sound of a Trumpet, thus much unto the whole world, yea among them, which had
not yet submitted themselves to the observation of this day. For thus Saint
John calls it in the Revelation, Revel. 1.10.
I was ravished in the spirit on the Lords day, by which as it is agreed upon
of all sides, that he means this very day which we observe, so when he
gives it this name, writing unto the Church, to whom he would commend this
prophecy: he shows, that then it began at least to be so called, and was in
his time, known by that name to some, he living longer then the rest of the
Apostles. And so as the bounds of the Gospel were enlarged, and it was by
little and little in more places entertained (neither could so great a thing in
all places be done at once) so with it also was the observation of this new
day, together with the change of the name thereof in the same places
intertayned also. And therefore Ignatius Bishop of Antioche, living in the time
or this Apostle, Ignat. ad Magnes.
says of it, Omnis qui Christum amat, Let every one that loves Christ keep
holy the Lords day, renowned by his resurrection, which is the Queen of all
days, in which death is overcome, and life is sprung up in Christ. And so
after him in other places, it was thus called and kept. Eusebius. lib 4. cap. 22.
For as Eusebius makes mention in his Ecclesiastical history, Dionisius
Bishop of Corinth, who lived about the year of Christ, 106. speaks thus,
Hodie, to day we have celebrated the Lords holy day. And Justinius Martyr,
Justin. apol. 2.
not long after him does not only name the Lords day, but shows how it was
observed then, even as it is of us, when he says, That they met in one place
to hear the writings of the Prophets, etc. Tertul. lib. de Idololat.
And Tertullian after him among the solemn days of the Christians then
observed, does first of all name the Lords day. Thus we may see that this
change was made and approved of the Church from the beginning, and so has
continued unto our time.

But least it should seem strange unto us, Then also was changed the Ministers
and the ministry of the law.
that any such change should be made in the day, we must call into our
remembrance, how many things were changed at that time: Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. we give up our selves a living
sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable unto God. Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Why then might
not the day be changed? nay, 1. Cor. 10.
was it not the great wisdom of God, to change the day with all these, to
show that there was a through change indeed in the whole government of the
Church of the Jews, when the day it self (upon which all the other things
were practiced) was changed together with them? And whereas all other things
were so changed, that they were clean taken away, as the Priesthood, the
sacrifices, and sacraments, this day was so changed, that it yet remains:
which shows, that though all the other were ceremonial, and therefore had an
end, this only was moral, and therefore abides still. So says Master
Gualter, Gualt. in Mal. 3. Homil. 23.
The Primitive Church thought it did abolish the Jewish Sabbath, Olim illud
sacru^ non aboleuit, yet it took not away the holy day of rest, but did
translate the observation of it, unto the day following: therefore there is the
same use of it now, which was of the Sabbath in times past, among the true
worshippers of God.

Why the Apostles changed the sabbath of the Jews into this day that we now
keep, rather then any other.
When thus it seemed good to the Apostles upon these weighty considerations
(being herein governed by the holy Ghost) to change this day, they were
directed by the same spirit advisedly to choose this day (which we now keep,
and must keep to the end of the world) rather then any other, upon special
grounds and most singular reasons laid open to the Church, who seeing into
them, and being persuaded by the^, gave their free consent unto it. For seeing
that our God and savior Jesus Christ, taking upon him the wonderful work of
our Redemption, did finish and make an end of it, upon that day, when he did
most victoriously rise from the dead, and so declare that he had conquered all:
and that he dying in the state of a condemned sinner for us, taking upon him
all the punishment, that was due to us, even to the ransaking and confounding
of all the parts of his soul and body: Luke 22.41.44.
with drops of water and blood trickling down from him, when he kneeled upon
the cold ground, and to the pouring forth of that lamentable cry with great
anguish, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And being thus carried to
the grave, Math. 27.46.
and put under the ground, as a man forlorn and cast away, death holding him
fast, and chayning him up (as it were) for the space of three days and three
nights: he did notwithstanding all this at the time appointed, Act. 2.24.
even upon this very day loose the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible, that he should be holden of it, and rising up with wonderful
great glory, d^d show that all things were ended, and that he had redeemed
mankind, and all the Creatures into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God, Romans 8.21.
according as it is set down in the Gospel. When the first day of the week
began to dawne, Math. 28 1.
Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary came to see the sepulcher, and behold,
there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven,
and came, and rolled back the stone from the door of the sepulcher, and sat
upon it, and said to the women, fear ye not, for I know that you seek Jesus
that was crucified, he is not here, for he is risen as he said. Now that it
might appear, that all the Ceremonies of the Jews were at this time ended in
him, that was the fulfilling of them, and that all those shadows were taken
away by his death, who was the substance and body of them, Because Christ did
rise from the dead on that day.
they did make choice of that day, specially upon which he rising again from
all things which he suffered, did declare, that he had overcome and ended them
indeed.

And besides, that it might be an effectual teaching to the Church, that all the liberty and freedom from sin, from hell and death, and from the
eternal wrath of God, is purchased unto them by the accursed death and
shameful sufferings of Christ Jesus upon the Cross, and by none other, and
that all glory, happiness and life comes unto them from his righteousness and
glorious resurrection, they did prefer this day above any other, as most
worthy, in the which he having before suffered all these intolerable things
for them, and being pressed down with them, even unto death, did afterward
(recovering himself as it were, and gathering new strength) like unto the most
victorious lion of the tribe of Judah, did I say, Revel. 5.5. Romans 1.4.
mightily raise up himself in glory for their sakes, by the invincible power
of his Godhead. Chrysostom among the sundry names, which he reckons up,
that this day had in the Primitive Church, says, it was therefore called the
Lords day, Chrysostom. sermon. 5. de resur.
Quia solemnis erat memoriae resurrectionis Christi: because was solemnly
appointed for the memory of the resurrection of Christ. August epist. ad
Ianuar. 119 cap. 13 and ad Casul 86.
Whereunto agrees S. Augustine: The Lords day was declared unto the Church, by
the resurrection of the Lord upon that day. And in another place: The Apostles
did appoint the Lords day in stead of the Jewish Sabbath, Idem de temp. sermon.
251.
Quia in eo redemptor noster a mortuis resurrexit: because upon that day our
redeemer did rise from the dead, which also therefore is called the Lords day.
So that not so much the Apostles, as Christ himself brought in this change,
and was the author of this day. And this is that which one says: Wolph.
chronol lib. 2. cap. 1.
Nouum Christus Sabbathum substituit: Christ did appoint the new Sabbath, when
our last enemy death being overcome, he made an end of the labors of our
redemption, which in his humanity were to be borne, and the next day with the
new man restored, he brought out of the grave a new time, the time of our
redemption, and of the new Covenant, and did prepare an everlasting Sabbath
(into the which himself then entered) for us also at the time appointed, by
virtue of his resurrection to be entered into: therefore as in the time of the
Creation, that day which was first of the Creation finished, was made holi^ for
the worship of God: so now in the time of the redemption, that day which is
first after the finishing of it, is to be accounted holy of us. August. de
te^p. sermon. 251.
It appears in the Scripture (says S. Augustine) that this day is of great
account: for it is the first day of the world, in it were formed the Elements,
in it were created the Angels, in it Christ rose from the dead, in it the holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles, and God first rained Manna in the
wilderness: so that by these and such like marks the Lords day is made
famous. And in another place he says further: Idem de temp. sermon. 154.
This is the day in which the children of Israel passed through the red sea
dry foot, in which the Lord Jesus was baptized in Jordan, in which he turned
water into wine in Cana of Galile, in which he fed 5000. men with five loaves
in the desert, in which he came into his Disciples, when the doors were shut,
in which we hope, that he shall come to judgment. Many other things are spoken
of this day, as, that upon it Christ was borne, upon this day the old Covenant
and Testament was changed into the new: especially of some of the Rabbis,
Wolph. chronol. lib. 2. cap. 1.
(as Wolphinus observes) Upon this day Aaron and his sons were consecrated
to their office, and the Princes did begin to offer to the Tabernacle. So that
as the Psalmist says of Jerusalem, Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou
city of God: so we may say, many excellent things are spoken of this day. All
which, whether they be true or no we cannot tell, and yet if they were, they are
all nothing to this, The resurrection of Christ, which alone has made it
famous, and has given it that honor which all the other besides are not able
to do. So that in this respect, it may be truly said of this day, as it is
in the Psalm, Psalm. 118.15.
This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice in it:
For this Psalm principally pertains unto the Messiah, of whom David was a
type and figure (as Master Beza notes): Beza paraphr. in hunc Psalm.
So that here the day of the Lords resurrection is commended unto us, wherein
he being delivered from death, is made the head of the corner, as David being
delivered from his enemies, was made the head of the people.

So that I say, as for the memory of the first Creation, that seventh day was
sanctified by the Lord, in which he rested from his work, and thereby declared
that al things were most perfect, when he wrought no more: upon which
consideration the whole world was bound to keep that day, until the coming
of Christ: even so he at his coming taking upon him the creating (as it were)
of a new world, I mean the renewing of it, and redeeming of it from sin, and
from that bondage, Romans 8.21.
corruption and vanity, (as the Apostle speaks) wherein all the creatures
were by reason of sin, and faithfully performing all things to the full, not
leaving of any jot or title thereof from the beginning of his life, to the last
moment of his death, yea, and in his death and burial and Resurrection most of
all, after which time he suffered no more, but entered into his rest, and upon
that day he began, and so continues it for ever, that the most famous and
worthi^ memory of his second creation might not be inferior to the first,
but that the beauty and glory of it might shine more excellently in the
Church, Therefore this day was appointed, and none but this could be ordained.
then that of the other, as indeed it was greater: therefore this day was
ordained by special advice, and none but this day could be chosen to be the
Sabbath and day of Rest, which Christ Jesus the Creator of the new world,
rested from his work of the new creation, (for thus indeed the Prophets do
speak of the time of the Messiah, that then all things should be made new:
Esaias. 65.17.
I will create new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind) because the price of their renewing was then
fully paid. And again for this cause, when the said Prophets do speak but
of the time unto Christ's coming, they express it in these words, for ever, as
they are willed to keep the holy feast of the Pass^ouer unto the Lord
throughout their generations by an ordinance for ever: Exodus 12.12.
and so likewise the other sacrament of Circumcision is called by the Lord an
everlasting covenant, Genesis 17.14.
because then the first world had an end, (that I might so speak) and the new
world began, in which respect the time of the Gospel is called the world to
come, Heb. 2.5. And therefore as the Church by keeping the first seventh day
did testify, that they worshipped and depended upon that God, which rested
himself upon that day from the work of creation, and therefore sanctified it:
so we by keeping this seventh day, do witness not only to all the Church,
but to all Turks, Infidels, Panims and Atheists in the world, that we serve
and look assuredly to be saved by that Lord Jesus Christ, and by none other,
who by his resurrection upon this day, did rest from the work of our
Redemption, which he had fully ended and brought to perfection. Neither did the
Church iud^e amiss, P. Martyr in Genesis 2.
(says P. Martyr) if in observing the Lords day, it preferred the memory of
our present restoring, that is, the resurrection of Christ, before the
finishing of the workmanship of the world. And again: For this cause, (says a
learned writer) even because of Christ's resurrection, when the day was changed,
the change was made, Wolph Chronol. lib. 2. cap. 1.
A feria septima in primam: From the seventh day of the week into the first,
and the beginning of the Sabbath is not now from the evening, but from the
morning, at what time the Lord did rise again. And lastly: The cause of this
change (says Iunius) is the resurrection of Christ, Iunij praelect. in Genesis
2.3.
and the benefit of the restoring of the Church by Christ: the remembrance of
which benefit did succeed into the place of the memory of the creation, Non
humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius obseruatione and instituto, not by the
tradition of man, but by the observation and appointment of Christ, who both on
the day of his resurrection, and on every eight day after, unto his ascension
into heaven, did appear unto his Disciples, and come into their assembly.

Like unto the which, This day must never be changed, but continue unto the
end of the world.
because nothing can ever fall out in the world, comparable unto it, in glory
and power, therefore this day must continue in his first honor of
sanctification unto the end of all things, and no day be set up like to it, or
it changed into any other day, least the wonderful glory of that thing be
darkened, and the infinite power of it weakened, I mean the glorious and
mighty work of our Redemption, which by the sanctification of this Sabbath is
commended unto us, and we by keeping that holy still, do commend it to our
posterity. And this is it which is alleged as a reason of the observation of
this day in the Apostles constitutions: Constit. Apostol. lib. 7. c. 37.
It is called the Lords day, because it declares unto us Christ crucified and
raised up again, and it is worthily commanded to be kept as the Lords day,
that we might give thanks unto thee, O Lord Christ, for all these benefits:
for (say they) there is that grace bestowed upon us by thee, Quae sua
magnitudine omnia beneficia obscurat, which by the greatness, and as it were
brightness of it, does obscure and darken all other. So that though the day was
once changed upon these considerations, nay they being such as they be, it
could not but be changed: yet for so much as the like cause ca^ never be
offered unto men, to move them to enter into this consultation, therefore the
day must not only not be changed any more, but it must not so much as enter
into men's thoughts to go about to change it. And therefore I do so much the
more marvel at him, who says, That the keeping holy of the Lords day is not
commanded by the authority of the Gospel, Bre^tius in Leuit. 23, 2.
but rather received into use by the public consent of the Church. And a
little after: The observation of the Lords day is profitable, and not to be
rejected, but yet it is not to be accounted for a commandment of the Gospel,
but rather for a civil ordination. And, That the Church might have appointed
but one day among ten or foreteene, Idem in Leuit. 25.8.
for the public rest and Gods service. And, That herein consists part of our
Christian liberty, that it is lawful, (if so be it be done by public
authority) to keep holy weekelie not only not the Lords day, but as they
call them, Monday, Tuesday, or any other day.

Wherein, that we might be the rather established, we must remember, that not
only, that name of the day was changed together with it, but it was changed
into that very name it has now, upon these special reasons, that we have
already heard. The name of the Sabbath was changed into the name of the Lords
day, which also must be retained.
For it is called the Lords day, even of the Lord Jesus, and it has the
honorable name of him, who upon that day did arise in greatest honor, in so
much that we ought not only to keep the day, but to keep it in his right
name, especially, seeing part of the honor of it is in the name. For as we do
breed reverence of the Sacrament in men's hearts, by speaking of it after his
own proper name, the Lords Supper, the cup of the Lord, the Lords table: 1.
Cor. 11.20.27. and 10.21.
so it makes the day more highly to be esteemed (as it ought) when we call it
by his right name religiously, the Lords day, and do not miscall it by a wrong
name, as the heathen have done profanely, the Sunday: who having ascribed the
government of the seven days in the week unto the seven Planets, and having
accordingly given them their names, as appears more evidently in the Latin,
Dies solis, Lunae, Martis, etc
then in our English names: yet so it is that any of the days might be called
Sunday, as well as that which is, without any offense. But it is not so in the
name of the Lords day: for as by it can be meant no other day, but that which
we keep for our Sabbath, so the name cannot be imparted to any other day
without sacrilege. Therefore as the Jews did carefully retain the name of
the Sabath, according to the first institution, so ought we to acquaint our
selves with the name of the Lords day. Thus did the Christians use to call it
in former times, as it is well observed by that ancient writer Beda, Mos
Christianus appellat, Beda in Luke 24.1.
It is the manner of the Christians to call it the Lords day, because of the
resurrection of our Lord: where he says, that not only now and then they did
so speak, but that it was an usual manner among them. And we had need to do
it so much the more, because it behooves us to use al good means, to advance
the credit of this day in men's consciences, in these profane and irreligious
times, especially wherein as the contempt of all religion appears in many
places, so especially it bewrays it self in this, that the Lords day is
every where so unhallowed. Now, if the wisdom of the world has taught the
heathen to be so circumspect in their generations, as by the false names of
days to keep the memory and honor of their false gods, should not the
wisdom of Gods spirit teach us to be as careful in our generations to take
into our mouths that holy name of the Lords day, which as it is commended unto
us in the word, not devised by man, as the other, so it does greatly advance
the dignity of the day, as that which is derived from the name of the most high?

And if a mortal man does take himself to be disgraced, Therein consists
part of the honor of this day.
not only when he is called by a wrong name, but also when he has not his
right name and just titles given unto him: so no doubt, the honor of the day
appears not to be so great as it is, when it wants that most excellent
name, by the which it is commended unto us in the scriptures. I grant indeed it
will seem strange unto us at the first to change the name, (as all new things
for a while be strange) but we know that every thing must have a beginning,
and that which is at the first begun in a few particulars, is afterward in
time received of multitude, and so by custom grows into a law, that hardly
can be changed. Therefore as there was a time in which the names of the
heathen were unknown, and yet by the obstinatee endeavors of some, when they
were begun, they were received and so continued: even so, if any man would
begin himself thus to ve the name of the Lords day, though he were alone at
the first, I doubt not, but in a few generations the true and holy name should
be received among us.

But to return to that which we spoke of before, we have plainly seen, that
the day and the name ought thus to be changed, whereby the Sabbath is made now
so much the more excellent and renowned under the Gospel, then it was in the
time of the law, because that whereas the one carried upon it indeed the badge of
the creation of the world, which made it famous, upon this is engraven the
lively Image of the redemption of the world, which makes it so much the more
famous, by how much the benefit of the one exceeds the benefit of the
other: not only that, but it freshly represents the memory of the first
creation also, and so by a double mark is more highly commended, that being
the very day in which the creation of the first and old world was begun, and
the day wherein the redemption, and the second and the new world was ended.
Even as not only Iustine Martyr does join both these together, when he
shows that in his time the Church did publicly meet upon this day, Justin.
Mart. Apolog. 2.
does because it was the first day wherein God began to make the world, and
also because upon that day Jesus Christ our Savior did rise from the dead: but
also Saint Augustine speaking many excellent things in the commendation of this
day, August de te^p. sermon. 251.
joins these together, It is apparent that this day is famous in the
scriptures, seeing it was the first day of the world, and the day of Christ's
resurrection. And so the memory of the one does not put out the glory of the
other, but being added unto it, as a further honor, does increase the dignity
of it so much the more: even as Jacob was more renowned of God when he was also
called Israel. Genesis 32.28.
Thus we do conclude this matter in one word, that this very day which the
Church observes in all places, is that which must endure to the end of the
world, as having his authority not from man but from God himself, and is that
very day, which is now commended unto us in the commandment.

And now all these things being thus premised (which of necessity must first
have been spoken of:) the order and time, and my purpose requires, that I
should according to your expectation proceed in the words of the commandment
it self, as it was first pronounced by the Lord from heaven, and after written
by Moses in the 20. chap. of Exodus, ver. 8. Division of the text into the
commandment and the reasons of it.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, etc. to the end of the 11. verse.
In all which words, we have two principal things to consider of, the first is,
the commandment it self in the 8. verse: the other is, the reasons which are
used to persuade men, unto the obedience of it, in the other three verses.
Concerning the commandment it self as it consists of two words, (as it
were) so in the true understanding of them two consists the whole meaning of
the commandment. The first is the Sabbath day, or day of rest, which we are
willed to remember: the second is, the sanctification of the Sabba^h, or
keeping holy the day of rest, which we are willed to be careful of The Sabbath
day. As by it is noted out one special day, namely, the seventh, as it is
afterward declared, (The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God:) yet
because it has the name of the nature of it, for it is so called, because of
the rest that is proper unto it, it does show unto us, The first thing in the
commandment is to rest upon the seventh day.
what is the first thing required in this commandment, namely, that upon the
seventh day we should rest: for the Sabbath day in the first tongue wherein it
was pronounced and written, signifies as much as the day of rest: yet so as
that in the beginning, it was the proper name of the seventh day, because there
were no other days of rest appointed by God, but only that. But afterward,
when the Lord gave unto the Jews the ceremonial law, he appointed also unto
them certain other days in the year, as appears in the books of Moses,
and is well known unto men, in which he commanded them to rest, and to keep
them holy: therefore they having the nature of the first and only Sabbath, are
called in the scriptures Sabbath days: as the yearly day of purifiyng and
clensing the people, as it is set down in Leuiticus, Leuit. 13.31.
is called a Sabbath, because that in it they were commanded to do as upon the
Sabbath, according as it is written: The tenth day of the seventh month you
shall humble your souls, and do no work at all, this shall be a Sabbath of
Rest unto you. And so the first and last day of every other feast, had the same
name, because it was of the same nature, whereunto the Apostle has respect:
Colos. 2.16.
Let no man therefore condenme you in meat and drink, or in respect of an
holyday, or of the new Moon, of the Sabbaths: speaking of many in the plural
number, where he proves that Christ has set us free from all the ceremonies
of the Jews, and that they are in no wise to be a dioyned unto the Gospel, in
so much that we are not bound to that distinction of meats and days, that
they were: no not of the Sabbath days, neither to keep that one which we do,
in that manner, and to that end, that they did in every point, neither to keep
the other Sabbath days at all which they had. Thus generally, the name of
Sabbath was given unto every day of rest, but principal, and in it own
nature, it noted out that Sabbath day, which was the seventh, and more
improperly by a tropicall speech, that was made common to all the other. But
yet so, as that always the name did declare the nature of it, and does show
unto as that the Lords requires of us, that upon that day we should rest
indeed. For though it be not always true among men (who may be deceived)
that the things which they name have those properties in them, which their
names do import, as when David named his son Absalom, he was nothing less
then his fathers peace, yet when the lord gives names unto things, who fully
knows, what is the nature of every thing, and makes it to be that which he
calls it, it is always true, that the name is not frustrate and idle, making
a show of more then the thing can afford: and therefore as when he named the
child that should be borne of the Virgin Mary, Jesus, he made him a Savior
indeed according to his name: so when he called the seventh day, a Sabbath
day, he willed and commanded that men shoul rest upon it, and that men can no
more take away rest from it, then they may alter and change the name of it.

And that there ought to be a most notable and singular rest upon this day, A
very exact and precise rest must then be kept.
and that it should be nothing else but a day of rest: and though men may rest
upon the other six days for their benefit and good, yet that the rest upon
this must be a most careful, exact and precise rest, after an other manner,
then men for the most part do perform, it appears very plainly in the
scripture, where besides the manifold Commandments of keeping the Sabbath,
which is a day of rest, this very thing is so particularly, and so often, and
in such express words urged and repeated, that men should then rest. As Exodus
16. Exodus 16.23.
when he would persuade the people to rest upon the seventh day from gathering
and preparing Manna, he tells them, To morrow is the rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord: where he is not contented to say to morrow is the
Sabbath, (which was as much to them, and was so known as the day of rest to
us) but he doubleth the word and says, It is the rest of the holy Sabbath: as
though he had said, It is a day of rest, even of the holy rest indeed noting
out ths necessity of the rest, and how straightly the Lord requires it of
them, and that the rest might not be omitted at all. Exodus 31.15.
Unto which agrees that which is in the 31. chapter, where he does not only
say, that he that works about the Tabernacle upon the seventh day should dye
the death, but also adds, (as it were giving a reason of it) the seventh day
is the the Sabbath of the holy rest unto the Lord. Where he both calls it
the Sabbath day, and (as it were expounding it) the day of rest: and though in
the first tongue both the words be of one nature, and signify one thing, yet
it has seemed good to the Interpretors thus to translate them, that retaining
the proper name of the day in one, the other might show the nature of it: and
both of them joined together, might declare how necessarily the rest is to be
adjoined unto the day, and what a principal regard the Lord has unto that in
this Commandment, which is of men least of all considered. And as Moses in the
Mount had received this from God in so plain words, that notwithstanding all
that was to be done, the Sabbath must be a day of rest: So in Exodus 35.2. he
coming to declare all that should be done, begins with this, namely, with
resting upon the Sabbath, and in so many words gives it in charge unto the
people, in how many he had received it from the Lord, in the chapter mentioned
before: Six days thou shall work, but the seventh day shall be unto you the
holy Sabbath of rest unto to the Lord, whosoever does any work therein,
shall dye: where besides the civil punishment of death upon those that did not
rest, (which he forgets not, as he had received it) he doubleth the word
rest unto the people, as the Lord did to him before, Leuit. 16.31.
calling it the sabbath of Rest. So in Leuit. 16. though he speaks not of
this very seventh day, but of the day of pacifying (as we have seen before)
yet because it had the nature and name of the Sabbath, he does not only say, In
it do no work at all, but also calls it a sabbath of Rest: Leuit. 23.18.
as also in the 23. chapter of the same book, where he speaks of it again,
and with more words stands in requiring the Rest at their hands, as you shall
do no work the same day, verse. 30. and every person that shall do any work
that same day, the same person also will I destroy from among his people, ver.
31. you shall do no work therefore: and in the end concludes, 32. this
shall be unto you a sabbath of rest.

Out of which places we must needs confess, that the Lords meaning is not,
to fray us with a vain show of words, but that he as earnestly commands the
thing, as the words be many that he uses for our dulnes sake. For if the
wisdom of a man be discerned, in that his words be proportional unto his
matter, and that thereby we know the matter is weighty, when his words are
many: then much more must we be persuaded, that the holy scripture was written
by such a heavenly wisdom, that it contains not a confused heap of vain
and unprofitable words, and that it is full of idle repetitions, (which were
blasphemy to think) but that the Lord has in wisdom tempered his speech
for our good, and framed it to our capacity: and therefore foreseeing the
pronenes of our nature to break out in this Commandment, has set up so many
bars (as it were) against us, and does thus beat that into our ears, which
we are so unwilling to hear, and more loath to follow. And here, (that I might
not seem tedious unto you) let us in one word consider of that, which is in
this same chapter spoken of the seventh day it self, and therefore no exception
can be made against it in the 3. chap 23 3.
verse of the same chapter, where the Lord speaking of the yearly feasts which
they should keep, begins with that which was the chiefest, even the Sabbath,
and commanding them first of all to rest upon it (which is indeed the first
thing required upon that day) uses thus many words, Six days shall work be
done, but in the seventh day shall be the sabbath of rest, you shall do no
work therein, it is the sabbath of the Lord, in dwellings: where he is not
contented twice to have repeated the word sabbath, (which signifies rest) and
further to add, that no work should be done therein, but repeateth the
words as we have seen heretofore, calling it the sabbath of rest, that is,
the rest, even the most notable rest, giving them to understand, that upon that
day they must rest, yea they must rest indeed.

But I will shut up this point with that which is in the 25. Leuit. 25.4.
chapter of the same book of Leuiticus, where the Lord speaking of that rest
that should be given unto the land every seventh year, (which was a childish
instruction to them of the nature of the Sabbath, according to the dispensation
of those times, that they might know how necessary it was for them to rest
upon the seventh day) does very straightly require, that the land should rest
upon the seventh year: and therefore does so speak of the rest of the land,
as of the rest of the Sabbath, because that was a figure of it. The seventh
year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, it shall be the Lords sabbath,
thou shall neither sow thy field, nor cut thy vineyard: where (as we see) he
does not only call that year twice a Sabbath, that is, a rest, and forbids
them under two kinds (that were the chief) all manner of work, but calls
it the sabbath of rest unto the land. Showing how necessary a thing it was,
that the land should rest, that the shadow might be like the body: and that
this rudiment might teach them that for the which it was ordained, he tells
them, that unto the land a singular rest is to be performed upon the seventh
year, because the like special rest is to be observed upon the seventh day.
Thus we have hitherto seen concerning this matter, not only that the Lord
requires in this Commandment, that we should rest upon the seventh day, but
how necessarily he requires it of us, and what great care we ought to have of
it, and that it is a greater sin to work upon that day, then it is taken to
be, and that it is not an indifferent thing to work or to rest, but that even
to rest from labor, though it be a mere worldly thing in it own nature, yet
is a singular part of our obedience to God upon that day, when it is so many
times required, so often urged, and as it is, near pressed upon us with words
doubled and tripled, yea and that by God himself, who is not flowing with
words in a barren cause, but shows unto us the waightines of his
Commandment, by the force of his words, and the severity of his laws by his
most significant and patheticall speeches.

The reason why the Lord would have men to rest upon this day, is manifold: The
chiefest cause of resting is, that we might wholly attend upon Gods worship
the first and principal is that which was from the beginning, that men might
be the more fit to sanctify it in the holy service of God, which because they
could not do with all the powers of their soul and body, as the worship of
God requires, so long as they are about their worldly business (because they
must needs take up their wits and their wills, the understanding and the
heart either in whole or in part, so long as they be conversant in them)
therefore that we might so do as he requires, he would have us rest from
that, which might hinder us from it: and because the affairs of this world,
and his worship are two distinct things, he would have us rest from the one,
that we might be occupied in the other. Thus speaks S. Augustine, August. de
te^p. sermon. 251.
Sciendum est fratres charissimi: We must understand dearly beloved brethren,
that it was therefore commanded not only of our holy fathers (as he says
there) but of God, that we should rest especially on the Lords day, that
ceasing from all worldly business, we might be more prompt and ready for the
worship of God, when we should have no let to hinder us from it. For as we
have seen already, our nature is not only ^o now, but was so in Adam, that
he could not do both these at once, and therefore as he was willed by God to
sanctify the seventh day, so he willed him therefore to rest from dressing the
garden, in that he called it a Sabbath day, that is, a day of rest, and this
reason, as it did straightly bind Adam to rest upon it, so does it all his
posterity much more.

Afterward, there were other causes adjoined unto this, which made this
necessity of resting a great deal stronger: A less princip^ll cause is the
retayning of our bodily strength.
and by name, for because that through sin the body of man is weakened, all
the natural humors of it being corrupted, and having lost the first vigor and
strength of it, and therefore is now subject to pain, to wearisomnes, to
sickness, and to death, and so stands in need of ease, and craves rest (as
that without the which it cannot long continue) therefore in respect of this,
men had need to rest so much the more, that by the rest of the seventh day,
they being refeshed, might be more enabled even in the strength of their
bodies, to do the works of their calling cheerfully. Adam and his posterity,
if they had continued in their first estate should have labored upon the six
days, but their labor should have bin no labor unto them, I mean, they
should not have labored with wearisomnes and with pain: for these are the
punishments of sin, and the forerunners of death, threatening a dissollution
of the body in time, but then there should have been no death, yet they were
bound to this rest for the forenamed cause: but now, when as besides that,
labor is through Gods just punishment become so laboursome unto us, and work
is so full of pain, and travail makes weary, according as it is said. In
the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread: Genesis 3.19.
then we see there is greater cause we should rest on this day, and we are (as
it were) with a double chain bound unto it. Therefore in the 5 of Deuteronomy. where
Moses repeateth the law, showing h^^ great cause there is, why they should rest
upon the Sabbath, he alleges this in the end of the 14. verse, that thy
manseruant and thy maid may rest as well as thou: speaking of them, who as they
are most subject to labor, so therefore do most of all stand in need of this
benefit of rest. Afterward, when this law was given to the Jews by the hand
of Moses, as in the observation of it they had many Ceremonies proper to
themselves, so in the end and cause of this rest, there was something joined
unto it, which bound them unto it most straightly, and yet appertaining to no
other people but them: and though all the people in the world were equally
bound to rest upon the Sabbath day, and there was great reason to bind every
one of them unto it, yet the Jews had more reasons then any other, and in their
rest was some special consideration, which could not enforce or compel any
other but themselves.

And of this nature is that whereof Moses speaks in the next verse of this
very chapter: Deuteronomy. 5.15.
Remember that thou wast a servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord
thy God brought thee out thence by a mighty hand and stretched out arm,
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to observe the sabbath day. The Jews
were bound to it more specially, for a memorial of their deliverance out of
Egypt, and a seal of their deliverance by Christ.
In which place he makes the day of rest to be a memorial to the Jews, of
their resting from their heavy burdens and intolerable labors in the land of
Egypt, when the Lord rid them, out of the cruel hands of Pharaoh: and so
because that benefit was a pledge unto them of their eternal delivery and
redemption by Christ from sin, and the miserable thraldom of it, even the
Lord did assure them of it by this miraculous deliverance, according to the
manner of teaching in those times, wherein the truth of this doctrine was not
so plainly revealed: therefore this rest also upon the sabbath was unto them a
type and figure of that eternal rest from sin, which they should have by the
Messiah, and the one was most lively shadowed out unto them in the other: for
these causes also were they bound to rest upon the sabbath, which bound none
but them, because they only were partakers of the redemption from Egypt,
wherein they only were in bondage; and so to rest upon it, that in resting
they might both thankefully remember the happy and often desired rest, from
the endless work in Egypt that oppressed them (which none other could do but
they) and also with faith to meditate upon the hoped and eternal rest from the
deadly works of sin in themselves by Christ, and to behold the performance
of the one in the other, even the body in the shaddowe, which none other are
bound unto but they.

So that the Jews having these reasons to move the^ to this rest, besides the
above mentioned, were more severely tied unto it, the^ any other people; but
yet so, that it was required at the hands of all men, long before these causes
were annexed unto it: and therefore though these be removed and taken away, yea
and the people to whom they only appertained: yet notwithstanding the Sabbath
and day of Rest is not gone with them, but is still in his first virtue and
ancient strength, which upon good grounds it had in the beginning: which I do
therefore speak, least that men might ignorantly imagine, that because the
Sabbath and rest was a figure and shadow of another thing to that people, that
now the body being come, Which being taken away, yet we are still straightly
bound to rest upon the sabbath.
and therefore the shadow removed, the sabbath should be no more, and the rest
should have an end: seeing that the sabbath of rest was for many hundredth
year, before the Jews were, much more before it was made a figure unto them.

The which thing that it might not seem strange unto us, we may consider the
like almost in every moral precept, which though every one of them was from
the beginning, yet as they were given to the people of the Jews, had certain
things added unto them, as accessory helps to keep them in the better
obedience of them, which now being taken away again, the first commandments
themselves have lost nothing of their former authority, but do bind as much
as ever they did. Thus all kings and princes are still bound to provide, that
the true religion of God be publicly professed in all places of their
dominions, far and near, though they be delivered from this rudimentall
instruction of writing the Law of God upon the borders of their coasts, Josh.
8.32.
which the Jews were precisely tied unto, that they might be helped in the
other. Thus all householders must have a care still of instructing their
family in the fear of the Lord, that it may be said of them as of Abraham:
Genesis 18.19.
He commanded his sons and household after him to keep the way of the
Lord, and to do righteousness and judgment, and that they may say with
Joshua, Josh. 24.15.
I and my household will serve the Lord, though they be delivered by Christ
from the Jewish ceremony of writing the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
upon the poastes of their doors, and upon their gates. Thus every Christian is
still charged to meditate upon the law of God day and night, Psalm 1.2. Colos.
3.16.
and to have Gods word dwelling in him plenteously in all wisdom, though that
be taken away, which was unto the Jews a childish instruction of this
commandment, which they were bound unto to further them in the obedience of
the other, namely, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
of having it written upon their bracelets, and upon their frontlets.

The like mighty be said of many other things: though the ceremony of singing
in such musical times, and playing upon instruments in the Temple to serve God
by them, as were used in the Law, appointed by the Prophets David and Nathan,
be taken away under the Gospel as merely Jewish, which did signify unto them
the glory and acceptance before God of the spiritual worship commanded, yet
the truth of this which was before, remains still, Colos. 3.1^.
that we should teach our selves in Psalms and Himnes, and spiritual songs,
singing with a grace in our hearts to the Lord. Though the fruitful and
pleasant Land of Canaan be taken away, which was specially meant unto the Jews
in the promise joined to the fifth Commandment, yet the promise of long life
here in the earth, is not taken away from obedient children, but is as large
and as sure as ever it was, and now the whole world is blessed unto us in stead
of it. By all which we see, that it has been an usual thing, unto the
Commandments (that were before the Jews) to adioyne certain things to
further them in the better keeping of them, which only agreed unto them: which
when they were taken away with that people, to whom only they were meant, that
yet the first Commandments did not only not dye with the^, but being revived
(as it were) do continue to this day, as those which have lost nothing of
their virtue, nor suffered any eclipse by taking away of the other.

And it is no good reason to say, this commandment had such a ceremony joined
unto it, therefore the whole Commandment is ceremonial; or the ceremony of
this Commandment is ended, therefore the Commandment is taken away: for then
all the forenamed things, which are so commended to us in the new Testament,
should be disanulled, (which no man will say) because all the Jewish ceremonies
belonging to them are quite vanished, and as it were melted away like snow
before the sun. All which is most true in the sabbath of the holy rest,
wherein we have seen that the rest was commanded at the first, and we say it
is still required, notwithstanding we grant, that in respect of the Jews (in
time) was adjoined unto it the remembrance of both their deliverances: The one
from Egypt by Moses, which was past, the other from sin by Christ, that was to
come: in respect of which as it was a monument of a thing already performed, so
it was a figure of another thing promised and hoped for: and therefore though
the ceremony of the rest be ended, and the figure of it be taken away with
that which was the substance of it, and the shadow of it be ouershadowed (as
it were) with the body (which was Christ) yet there is no reason, why the rest
it self should be taken away, which was commanded long before any such type
or figure or shadow was adjoined unto it. Insomuch that we still keep the rest
of the sabbath, but not to that end that the Jews kept it, not as a badge of
our deliverance from Egypt, (in the which we never were) nor as a token of our
freedom from that bondage (wherewith we never were oppressed:) neither as a
figure of our redemption to be wrought by Christ, which in his word most
clearly we see is already performed, nor that in it we might as in a shadow
obscurely and darkely behold our eternal resting, and ceasing from sin,
which he has already purchased unto us in his death, and has in his Gospel
most lively poynted out before our eyes: but we do observe the rest, and
confess, that it most nearly concerns us, because of the first institution,
that we resting from our ordinary business, might bestow the day in the
holy service of God, in the which we cannot in any acceptable manner be
occupied at all, unless we rest from the other, according to the
Commandment. Bulling. in Romans 14.5.
Even as M. Bullinger also does very excellently set it down: The sabbath is
ordained of God not for rest in it self, for he no where allows idleness,
therefore the rest of the sabbath is commanded for another end, namely, for the
diligent study of religion, for it is therefore commanded to rest from handy
labors, vt hoc totum tempus impendamus, that we might bestow this whole time
in the exercise of Religion. And this we do see, that as to rest upon that
day is the first thing required, so for what cause it was appointed: which as
it did bind men from the beginning, so we can never look to be exempted from
it.

And that we might yet be the more thoroughly persuaded of this one point, From
what things particularly we are commanded to rest.
and more clearly see into the truth of it, let us unto all this that has
been spoken, add that for a further proof, which we find in the scripture:
that the Lord does not only thus often require that men should rest, that
they should do no work, doubling the word Rest in many places, and going over
it again and again, that if it were possible we might conceive it and yield
unto it, though not at the first, yet at the last: but also more largely and
fully descends into particulars, forbidding them by name to work in such and
such things, and at such times as might carry with them the greatest
probability of being exempted, and might make the greatest show of giving
privilege to work: that all excuse might be taken from them, who in the
pride of their wits cannot conceive, nor in the stubbornnes of their hearts
will yield unto this commandment of so precise a rest: neither will have
their hands and their feet so shortly tied up, but will needs break out
upon that day most ungodly, to the doing of that which seems good in their
own eyes.

1 From gathering and preparing Manna. Exodus 16.23.
This is that which is spoken Exodus 16. concerning the gathering and preparing
of Manna, which was their daily food, that upon the seventh day, they should
rest from both: To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath of the Lord, bake
that to day which you will bake, and sees that which you will sees, and all
that remains lay it up to be kept till the morning for you, And afterward
verse 26. Six days shall ye gather it, but in the seventh day is the Sabbath,
in it shall be none: Here you see that he would not have them work about the
provision of their food, when it might be done the day before, and that now
when they were fed from hand to mouth (as it were) because they were not made
to feed themselves, but to live to Gods glory, he would have them so to eat,
and so to provide for their eating, that the rest upon the Sabbath might not be
interrupted: and therefore not to gather or provide upon that day, which would
have taken up a great part of it, and so they could not have sanctified it as
they ought.

Whereunto we may adioyne that which is spoken concerning the making of the
Tabernacle, 2 From doing any thing about building the Tabe^nacle. Exodus 31.13.
first by the Lord himself unto Moses in many words. Speak then also unto the
children of Israel, and say, notwithstanding keep you my Sabbath. verse. 14
Whosoever works therein, the same person shall be even cut off from among his
people. verse. 15. Six days shall men work, but in the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the holy rest unto the Lord: whosoever does any work in the Sabbath
day shall dye the death. verse. 16. Wherefore the children of Israel shall
keep the Sabbath, that they may rest throughout their generations for an
everlasting covenant. Where the Lord does teach the^ that the rest of the
Sabbath was of such importance, that he would have the making of the
Tabernacle to give place unto it, and though it was the place wherein the Lord
should be worshipped, and therefore much might have been said for the defense
of those that should have wrought upon the Sabbath about it, yet because it was
not already sanctified to that end, and so was not holy, and therefore the
working about it in it own nature merely civil and worldly, therefore he
would not have it hinder them from that, which was above all worldly things,
even his own service: which that they might perform in such wise as they
should, he wills them to rest from all other work, yea, from working about
the Tabernacle.

And afterward, when Moses comes to speak unto the people of the same
matter, he forgets not this charge, but places it in the beginning of his
speech unto them, as a thing most weighty, as appears in the same book.
Exodus 35.1.
These are the words which the Lord has commanded, that you should do them.
2. Six days thou shall work, but the seventh day shall be unto you the holy
Sabbath of Rest unto the Lord, whosoever does any work therein shall die: 3.
You shall kindle no fire throughout all your habitations upon the Sabbath day:
and so goes on to the declaration of that which appertained to the Tabernacle,
as follows in that chapter. As though he should have said, notwithstanding
all this which you are to do about the rearing of the Tabernacle, you must
observe the rest upon the Sabbath, as you had wont to do: the six days are
appointed for it, but upon the seventh do nothing, no not so much as make a
fire, to heat any tools, or to prepare and dress any thing that belongs
unto it. And though I am not ignorant, that some do otherwise expound this
last verse (whom I do esteem in the Lord as I ought) yet considering the
place, that it occupies, and that it goes immediately before his speech
concerning the Tabernacle, I am persuaded that this is the true and native
sense of it. Must we not needs then think that to rest upon the sabbath, is a
thing that the Lord highly regards, when he would have it kept, yea to the
delaying (as it were) of the building of the Tabernacle? And what excuses shall
men have before God for their needless working, and superfluous travails,
when so excellent a work as this might not be excused?

And here we may not let that pass, which is so worthy remembrance, concerning
this matter, spoken by the Lord himself, as it is by Moses set down, Six
days shall thou work, Exodus 34.21.
and in the seventh day thou shall rest, both in earing time and harvest thou
shall rest. Where, besides that in so few words, 3 In the time of sowing and
harvest.
he does twice use this word rest, it is to be marked, that to rest upon the
seventh day is so necessary, that he of purpose chooses out the fittest times
for men to work in, and those that might seem most to be excepted, as seed
time and harvest, and forbids them by name to work upon the Sabbath, yea,
in these times of the year, and that in the most necessary times and business
that belong to man's life, they must rest, because God has commanded it,
preferring his worship and the obedience to his commandments, before all their
own private gain and commodity whatsoever. And Master Calvin upon this place
says, Whereas the Lord does expressly bid us rest in the time of earing and
harvest, Calvin. in Exodus 34.21.
it is not as though he did give us liberty for all the year besides, but
hereby does more restrain us, because no necessity ought to interrupt this
holy observation: otherwise it might seem to have some honest pretense, if
because of continual rain or other unseasonable weather, the time of sowing
were not so commodious, that husbandmen might be exempted from this laws,
least by their resting a dearth should follow: And so also might they think
for gathering in the Corn, least it should rotte upon the ground: Atqui Deus
nullam dispensationem admittit: But GOD admits no dispensation, but that the
seventh day should be kept, Etiam cum periculo communis iacturae, Even with
the danger of some common loss.

So that, whatsoever our corrupt reason and the devil might minister unto us,
for the dissuading of us from this obedience, yet if our care be unfeignedly to
please GOD indeed, and that we would have the testimony of a good
conscience, in the things that we do before God, not serving him in
hypocrisy after our own hearts lusts, deceiving our selves: whatsoever we
imagine to the contrary, we had need to have at least as evident and plain
places of the scripture for the iustifiyng of our manifold business and great
working upon the Sabbath, (which is too common every where) as this one is
evident and pregnant against them: unless we will have it appear, that we
make no conscience of our doings at al, or rather that we do wittingly and
willingly transgress the known truth, and destroy the law of God, Psalm.
119. part. 17.
as the Prophet speaks. For no doubt upon this ground, and the persuasion of
this law, that worthy and thrice noble Nehemiah, dealt so zealously (as it is
written of him in the 13. chapter of that book) when he saw men work upon
the Sabbath in the time of harvest, according to that wicked custom that had
grown up in the time of the captivity, and did so mightily set himself
against that manifest breach of the Commandment, (though it was not so taken
before) that through Gods good hand upon him he prevailed in the end: Nehem.
13.15.
In those days saw I in Judah them that troad winepresses upon the Sabbath,
and that brought in sheaues, and which laded asses also with wine, grapes and
figs, and all burdens, and brought them into Jerusalem upon the Sabbath day.
17. Then reproved I the Rulers of Judah, and said unto them: what evil thing
is this that you do and break the Sabbath day? did not your fathers thus, and
our God brought all this plague upon us, and upon this city, yet you increase
the wrath upon Israel in breaking the Sabbath? In which words, as it is
evident, that he speaks against working upon the Sabbath in the harvest time:
for he names such things as are proper unto harvest, as the bringing in of
sheaues, figs and grapes, (which were their fruit) and the treading of
winepresses: so he charge them that thus to do was an evil thing, worthy
of reproof, nay of punishment, (as he afterward threatens it) he says, that
they break the Sabbath in so doing, and did increase the wrath of God against
Israel, even as it was the cause, that he had taken such punishment upon their
fathers already. Where it seems, he had respect unto the prophecy of
Jeremy, who had long before threatened destruction unto Jerusalem, Ierem. 17.27.
for the polluting of the Sabbath, and namely in this, of open carrying and
recarrying of things into Jerusalem: When he says, But if ye will not hear me
to sanctify the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, nor to go through
the gates of Jerusalem, in the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, and it shall not be
quenched. And Master Calvin writing upon this place says, Calvin. in hunc
^^^um.
Hoc emphatie additur: There is a great emphasis in this, that he speaks of
the gates of Jerusalem: for it was not lawful to do any of those things in
the fields and solitary places, it was therefore a great contempt to come so
openly into the city.

But to return to the scripture alleged before. What can be spoken more
plainly then this, for the overthrow of all such vain excuses, as men do
forge in their own brain, and for the establishing of this doctrine, that to
rest upon the Sabbath is so necessary, that the imagined necessity of
harvest, will not excuse our working before God: neither will it go for
payment before him. Which we may assure our selves, that those men did well
understand out of the scriptures, who in their Council so decreed:
Instituimus, We ordain, that upon the Lords day, Cabilonens. council. cap. 18.
nullus penitus praesumat, no man at all presume, to do any work of
husbandry that is to say, not to plow, to reap corn, or what soever
pertains to the husbanding of their ground. For as Irenaeus says: Non
vetabat lex, Iren. contra haeres. lib. 4. cap. 20.
The law did not forbid those that were hungry to take meat, and to eat of
such things as were at hand: metere aute^ and colligere in horreu^ vetabat, but
it did forbid to reap and to carry it into the barn.

And here (that I might make an end of this place) (before I go any further)
this may most certainly be gathered from it, that if the rest of the Sabbath
will not bear this working, no not in harvest, without the breach of it, then
much less will it suffer the ordinary keeping of Faires and Markets upon that
day, 4 No faires to be kept upon the Lords day.
the buying and selling of wares, the carrying and recarrying of them: for we
see how all these abuses being among them, this godly governor Nehemiah in the
wisdom of the spirit espieth them, and in the zeal of the same can in no
wise wink at them: for thus it is written of him in the same place, as we
have already heard in part, verse. 15. In these days saw I in Judah those that
trod Winepresses on the Sabbath, and I protested to them in the day that they
sold victuals. 16. There dwelt men of Tyrus also therein, which brought fish
and all wares, and sold on the Sabbath unto the children of Judah, even in
Jerusalem. 19 And when the gates began to be dark before the Sabbath, I
commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not be opened till
after the Sabbath, and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there
should be no burden brought in on the Sabbath day. 20. So the chapmen and
Merchants of all merchandise remained once or twice all night without
Jerusalem. 21. And I protested among them and said unto them, why tarry ye all
night about the wall? If you do it once again, I will lay hands upon you.
From that time they came no more upon the Sabbath. Out of which description of
their ungodly practice in the story, it is as clear as the noone day, that
there was a common market or fair upon the Sabbath, it is set out so plainly,
and in so many words: for there was selling of all wares, and there were both
Merchants and chapmen, not only within Jerusalem, but which came from other
places, to buy and sell, but he reproves the one and the other, and conuicteth
them all of the manifest breach of the Sabbath, in not observing the rest of
it, yea, even those that sold victuals, and those that did but carry things to
and fro. And so this scripture teaches us, that the holy rest of the Sabbath
is so inuiolably to be observed, that no persons at any time may break it, no
not under the pretense of buying and selling then, when most may be gained
either ways, no nor under the color, that they do but carry things to be
bought or sold, no nor under the show of doing that which might seem most
tolerable, as buying and selling of victuals.

All which things are so palpable and gross a breach of that Commandment,
which requires a resting from such things, that they are not only condemned
in the judgment of them, that have seen most clearly by the light of the
word, but also of such as being stone blind, and therefore could not discern
them with the eye, yet were able with their hands (as it were) to feel them.
For in the very depth of Popery, it was by the authority of the Parliament
ordained, Ann. 27. Hen. 6 cap. 5.
That all manner of Faires and Markets should upon the Sundaies clearly cease,
and that there should not be any showing of goods and marchandises upon the
same, under pain of forfaiture of all the goods aforesaid so showed, to the
Lord of the Franchise: and therefore by authority aforesaid power was granted
unto all such as had no days to keep their Faires but these, that they might
keep the same three days before or after (they signifying the same by
proclamation unto the Country aforehand). And they which of old time had by
special Commission sufficient days before, or after, should in the manner as
is aforesaid, keep their Faires and Markets, the said Sundaies except. Where
also it is worthy to be considered, by what reasons the King, the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the whole Commons of this Realm of England, were
then induced unto this resolution, as they be set down at large in this
statute: Namely, they did consider (that I might use their own words) the
abominable injuries and offenses done to almighty God, by the occasions of
Faires and Markets upon these days, accustomably and miserably holden and used
in the Realm of England: In which days for great earthly covetousness, the
people were more willingly vexed, and in bodily labor troubled, then in other
workedaies, as in fastening, making their boothes and stalles, lifting and
setting their merchandise outward and homeward, as though they had nothing in
memory the horrible defiling of their soul, in buying and selling, and so
specially withdrawing themselves and their servants from divine service. These
are the words of the Statute, in which, though I am not ignorant, that they
made other days in the week (Saints days as they be called) equal in this
thing with the Lords day, nay preferred them before it, according to the
ignorance of those times: yet it is sufficient for my purpose, that the
Sundaies (so called) were not excluded, but rather with the other included in a
branch of this Statute.

Yea, this law was in force here in this land long before this time, even
before the Conquest, when as in the days of Canutus, Canutus lege 14. and 15.
amongst other laws made by a council of his sages at Winchester (which as
some write are yet extant) it was enacted, Item, that Sunday be kept holy:
Faires, Courts, Huntings, and worldly work on that day to be forborne. But to
shut up this matter in a word, we do understand, that the Lord has not only
by his general Commandments often repeated, showed unto us, that a rest upon
this day must needs be observed of us, but also has in particulars met with
all these exceptions of times and business, which might least of all seem to be
included within the compass of it, that we might not measure the length and
breadth of this rest, by the crooked rule of our own imagination, (as the
greatest part do) but by the undeceivable line of his holy word, which is
only able to give us the full measure of it.

But yet if you further demand from what things we should rest, seeing it is
agreed upon among us, that we must rest indeed, 5 We must rest from
whatsoever does hinder us from Gods service.
surely the answer partly appears by that which has been already spoken,
and does more fully arise from the words of the text. For first of all, seeing
the principal end of resting is, that the day and time might be sanctified in
the holy worship of God, as the Word, the Sacraments and prayer, it must of
necessity follow, that whatsoever thing does hinder us from spe^ding the time
profitably in these things, we must rest from them. And therefore we see that
always this reason is brought, why we should rest from other things, even
that we might give over our selves to Gods service. As when Augustine says:
August. de te^p. sermon. 251.
We are commanded to rest upon the Lords day from earthly business, that we
might be more fit for Gods service. And also in a Council held under Charles
the Great, in which many worldly things are expressly by name forbidden, as
husbandry, keeping of Courts, dealing in merchandise, Arelat. Synod. 4 cap. 16.
etc. This is the conclusion, His solummodo peractis, those things only being
done, quae noscuntur, which are known to appertain to the service of God.

So that I may say generally, as M. Calvin says: Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. Ser. 34
We ought to cease from those works, which hinder the works of God, let us
from calling upon his name, or stay us from exercising our selves in his holy
word. Secondarily, it may appear by that opposition which is made between the
works of the six days and the Rest of the seventh day, that whatsoever are
the works of their calling, wherein they are occupied in the six days, from
them they must rest upon the seventh, according as it is said: As from the
works of our callings.
Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, but the seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, that is,
any of that work which thou use to do upon the six days: which is also
proved by the example and pattern of Gods Rest, who in six days made the
Heaven and the earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day: from which time he has not rested from doing every thing, for he
preserves and governs the things that he has made, but he rests from
such works as he did upon those six days, namely, of making new kinds of
creatures, or framing any more worlds: which example of his must be our
imitation, for he rested for our sakes, to teach us, that though we have our
several callings, wherein we must be diligently occupied in the six days,
yet we must rest upon the seventh, and rest from those things which we usually
do upon the six days, by virtue of our calling, for so he rested himself.

Therefore, whereas one man is occupied in this thing, and another in that, and
every man has or ought to have some special business to attend upon in the
six days, and being in an honest calling he should labor in it diligently,
that he might not eat the bread of idleness: he ought upon the seventh day, to
put himself apart from all those affairs, and (as though they did not
appertain unto him) to have no dealing with them. And this is that which
Tertullia^ says, speaking of the seventh day: Tertul. aduers. Marcion. lib. 3.
In it thou shall not do any work. Quod? vtique tuum: What work says he?
thine own work: Consequens n. est, vt ea opera sabbatho auferret, quae sex
diebus supra indixerat, for it must needs follow that he should forbid those
works upon the sabbath day, which he had before appointed for the six days,
and therefore he further adds: Tua, id est humana and quotidiana, I say,
thine own works are forbidden, that is, worldly and daily business. So that
here we need not to descend further into particulars, or to use many words
for the opening of this matter, it does so plainly offer it self unto us,
that it may be both seen and felt of us, and here needs no great capacity
for the conceiving of this point. For if we live not altogether in idleness,
unprofitably spending away the time and our selves, and be as it were an heavy
and unprofitable burden upon the earth (whereof there be two many in the
world, and it is one of the greatest sins of our time) if (I say) we can but
tell what is our daily business, and wherein we are or should be occupied,
even these are the things that be meant in this commandment, that we should
rest from. So that here we had need rather of a good conscience, that might
move us in the fear of God, and in a careful obedience to his commandments,
to enter into this rest, which we have seen so many ways commended unto us:
and that every one must examine his own proper works, and so he shall easily
discern, what be the very special things, from which he must rest, as though
they did not belong unto him at all. Thus shall the labourer perceive, that
upon this day he must rest from his days labor, whether it be digging or
thrashing, or hedging, or any thing else: and the artificer from his daily
craft and trade of making such things as be incident to his calling; and the
husbandmen from sowing and tilling and manuring the earth, and gathering the
fruits of it, and such like: yea, even in the time of harvest, as we have
seen, Exodus 34.

To this end besides that that has been alleged heretofore for this purpose;
I may put you in mind of one of those worthy Laws, which Charles the Emperor
delivered unto his visiters, whom he sent with his authority to reform the
Church. Item, we decree, Centur. 8. Eccles. luster. c. 6.
that as God has commanded no servile work be taken in hand, on the Lords
day, as also the Prince my father of blessed memory gave charge, by his
Synodall edict, to wit, no kind of husbandry, neither cutting of vines, nor
tilling the ground, neither reaping, nor mowing, nor hedging, neither rooting
or felling of trees, nor digging in rocks nor building, nor gardening, nor
hunting: The women likewise to forbear al Manual work, as weauing, sowing,
embroydring, kemming of woll, dressing of flax, shearing of sheep, and washing
of clothes, etc. The Merchant and chapman must rest from buying and selling of
wares, and making of bargains upon this day, yea even from buying of victuals,
fish or flesh, meat, bread, or drink: for the six days are given them to
make their provision in, as it has been already declared unto us, out of
Nehemiah 13. And whereas this abuse was common among the Jews, in the time of
their captivity, by reason of the great ignorance, and because they were
mingled with the heathen: after their return under Nehemiah, when things began
to be reformed, they bound themselves by covenant, to redress this fault also:
for this was one article in the covenant. Nehem. 10.31.
That if the people of the land brought ware on the sabbath, or any victuals to
sell that they would not take it of them on the sabbath, and on the holy days.
Wolph. lib. 3. in Nehem. 10.
And M. Wolphius very excellently upon this place: Ijs vtuntur verbis, They
use such words as do somewhat declare, that this custom had been among them
that if other foreign people, who had no conscience of the sabbath, had
brought any corn or wares upon the sabbaths, they preferring their own
commodity and lusts before the observation of the sabbath, they did not stick
to buy all that of them, whatsoever it was? By what means both the religious
observation of the sabbath, and the number of them that offered sacrifices and
heard the word of God, was greatly decayed, because they were occupied about
other things. And whereas they speak of the people of the land, thereby
meaning other nations, they secretly prevent their objection: who might reply,
that the strangers in no case were to be tied unto the Laws of the Jews, and
that this delay was to their hinderance, if they might not be rid of their
wares before the day following: and that many of them did offend of ignorance,
and that if they should be thus hindered, it would come to pass in time, that
they would bring nothing, and by that means, the City should want victuals,
and things necessary: all which did carry with it a very probable show of
reason: Nehemias aliam rationem init, Nehemias, he takes another course, and
shows that the ancient laws of our forefathers, yea of God and for religion,
ought to be so esteemed of us, that we should not suffer them to be broken for
any strangers sake. And the same Wolphius does further add, That this people
does promise, that in the reviving of this law, they would do after this
manner, vt si peregrini mercatores, that if the Merchants that were strangers
should bring any merchandise thither, without their priuitie, or against their
will, that notwithstanding it should be unlawful for any of the Citizens of
Jerusalem to buy of them: whereby they did hope in time it would come to
pass, that the Merchants (will they nill they) should give over bringing to
sell, when they should perceive, there were no buyers at all. And truly, as if
there were no receivers, there would be no theeties, so if there were no
buyers on the Lords day, the sellers would soon shut up their shopwindowes.
Let all that have offended this way repent and amend by the example of this
people.

And we may further understand, how these things by many excellent laws in
sundry places have been condemned, and namely those that were made under
Charles, about the year 1313. when as one says, Ne in Dominicis diebus
publica mercata exerceantur: We forbid that public merchandise should be used
on the Lords day. And an other: Item interdicitur, Arelate. Synod. 4. cap. 16.
Turonens. Synod. 3. cap. 40. Rhemens. Synod. cap. 35.
ne mercata vsquam fia^t die Dominica: Also it is forbidden that trading of
merchants should be used any where upon the Lords day. And again, Ne diebus
Dominicis secundum Domini praeceptum quilibet mercata exerceat: It is forbidden
according to the Lords commandment, that any man should use buying and selling
upon the Lords day. Where we see, it is not only forbidden to all men and in
all places, but they say also, it is according to the commandment of the Lord.
Now, though we be not come thus far, yet it were much better the^ it is,
Queens Iniunct. art. 34.
if in all places that were practiced, which they are bound unto, namely, That
no Inholder or Alehouse keeper should use to sell meat or drink in the time
of Common prayer, preaching or reading of the Scriptures. The Carrier must
cease to carry and recarrie things bought and sold from place to place, as
appears in the same chapter, where he charge them, that in doing of these
things they did break the Sabbath, or not observe the Rest. The Prophet
Jeremy complains of this in his time, and speaks against it as a breach of
the sabbath. Take heed to your souls, and bear no burden on the Sabbath day,
nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem, Iere. 17.21.22.
neither carry forth burdens out of your houses on the Sabbath day, neither do
ye any work, but sanctify the Sabbath, as I commanded your fathers: where
he wills them to leave carrying, that they might sanctify the sabbath,
thereby insinuating, that they cannot stand together, but the one must needs be
taken away, that the other might be established. And Master Calvin upon this
place says, Calvin. in hunc locum.
It appears, that they were grown to great boldness, when they did so openly
break the Sabbath: thereby declaring his judgment, that open carriages do
bewray an open contempt of the Sabbath. The Schoolmaster must rest from
teaching, and the Scholar from studying the liberal arts and humane
sciences, as those which are his peculiar labor in the six days, (and as it
were) his daily work. The Lawyer and the Client whether plaintiff or
defenda^t, must upon this day give over their suites and their pleading, and
not only rest from going to Westminster hall, but also from studying the case,
reading of evidences and such like, as themselves best of all do know, and
their Clerks also from writing of the same: For the same constitutions, that
bind them from public pleading, whereof there are many (as themselves may
know) the reason upon which they are grounded, and which in them is alleged
being drawn from the word of God, and containing in it the equity of this
Commandment, does restrain these also, because they must needs hinder the^
from the service of God, either altogether or in a great part, in which wholly
with all possible fruit, we should be occupied upon this day. The laws of the
Christian Emperors, Leg. final. C. de ferijs.
Leo, and Anton, do very particularly meet with them in this case. Dominicum
itaque diem, Therefore we decree, that the Lords day should be honored and
reverently esteemed, and therefore let it be free from all executions, let no
man then be troubled with any summons, let no man be compelled to bring forth
his surety, let the Apparitor or ser^ea^t hold his peace, let there be no
advocates, let not the dreadful voice of the Crier be heard. The Physician
must leave off the reading of Galene and Hippocrates, and rest from the
studying of the Anatomy, the diseases, the simples and compounds. For of all
such as upon this day leave the excellency of Gods word, and the study
thereof, and attend upon humane arts, which in comparison of this are as low as
may be; there has been just complaint made long ago: Descendunt hodie
nonnulli, Upon this day many come down from the height of Gods word, Beda in
lib. 2. cap. 8. in Sam.
unto the which they should ascend, Et legendo Dialecticos, Rhetores, Poetas
gentilium ad exercendum ingenium terrestre, quasi ad fabros Philistim pro
exacuendis siluestris sieve ruralis culturae ferramentis, inermes, hoc est,
spirituali scientia priuati, conueniunt: And by reading of Logicians,
Rhetoricians, and Poets of the Gentiles, for the exercising of their earthly
wit, they as it were come to the Smithes of the Philistims, to sharpen their
country tools for husbandry, being spoiled of their weapons, that is, being
void of spiritual understanding. Where he shows, that as it was a very base
thing for the Jews to go from the high country of Judea to the Philistims,
for the sharpning of their tools: so it is too unseemly a thing for
christians upon the lords day to leave the excellent study of the scriptures,
for any humane science whatsoever, which is lower the^ this, without al degree
of comparison: and that therein indeed they show themselves void of heavenly
wisdom. The Iusticer and Judge must rest from sitting upon the bench and
place of Justice, iudicially examining and determining of causes, between
party and party, about matters for the preservation of the peace, and
otherwise: and also from examining of causes more particularly at home,
reserving the malefactors rather to some other day in the week: neither ought
they to sit upon Commissions, or be occupied in such like, as do justly belong
to their offices. Says Master Calvin: Calvin. in Exodus 20.8.
Though it were lawful to defend a man from wrong, and to help him that was
wronged, if any man should violently set upon his neighbor on the Lords day,
because present necessity would not suffer it to be delayed, Audire duos
litigantes Iudicibus fas non fuit: Yet it was not lawful for the Judges to
hear the controversies of men pleading before them. And generally in one word,
(that I might not stand upon the particulars which are infinite) every man in
his several room, place, or calling, high or low, bond or free, old or young,
ruler or ruled, one and other, Yet in themselves they are good, necessary and
lawful, but not upon this day.
even from him that sits upon the throne to the maid servant that is at the
Mill, and the captive that is in prison, must rest from their ordinary works,
which are upon other days not only lawful and commendable, but also
necessary, yet upon this day are so wholly to be left, that they can in no wise
agree with it, no more then light agrees with darkness, and resting with
working.

So that when we do forbid men all worldly travel and labor upon the Lords
day, as the things from which God their creator would have them rest,
according to the plain words of his Commandment, we do not find fault with
such works, we do not condemn the things, we judge them not to be wicked and
ungodly, but we confess with all humility as becomes us, that they be
lawful, commodious and necessary, and we will ascribe as much unto them, as
themselves can justly challenge, but we say at this time, and upon this day,
they are unnecessary, unfruitful and unlawful, because the Lord has
forbidden them, that other things might be done.

The circumstances of time place, etc. change the nature of our actions.
Neither must it seem strange unto us, that the time should thus change and
alter the nature and quality of things, making that unlawful which was lawful
before: for so we see it is in all other circumstances of places, persons and
ends: according to the diversity of which, one and the same thing, is not
only diverse from, but also clean contrary to it self. Many things are
commendable in the Magistrate, and do deserve great praise, as the cutting off
of the malefactor, Romans 13.4.
that so sin might be taken away, seeing he bears not the sword in
vain, which if a private man should but attempt, it were a thing intolerable,
and most severely to be punished, as our Savior Christ says, Mat. 26.52.
All that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. So in other things we
know, that to give alms, is a sacrifice, Prou. 19.
that the Lord is well pleased with, in so much that he accounts all that
we give to the poor, as lent to himself, and he promises to repay it us in
the greatest time of our need; but to give it before men, that we might be
seen of them does so defile and stain this most excellent virtue, and as it
were change the nature of it, Matthew. 6.1.
as that it has no promise of reward from God at all, nay it is plainly
forbidden of him. For men to sleep in their houses upon their beds, or
otherwise to take their natural rest is allowable, and that without the which
they cannot continue, but to sleep in the Church, Act. 20.9.
and in the time of divine service, and ministry of the word, sacraments and
prayer, is not only forbidden, but has been most severely punished. Even so
that work, which is not only permitted, but also commanded upon the six
days, and which might not be left undone, yet is altogether forbidden on the
seventh day as unlawful, and that with the denouncing of most fearful
punishments upon them that will not obey, as we have seen heretofore in the
gathering of Manna, building the Tabernacle, buying of victuales and selling.
Therefore as no reasonable man will say, this or that is lawful in it own
nature, therefore every man may do it, and every where, and at all times: so
it is no good reason to say, God has commanded us to do these things,
therefore why should we rest from them upon this day, unless we can show,
that upon that day also he has commanded them: but let us rather say, as the
truth is, The Lord has commanded us to do these things upon the six days,
therefore, we must rest from them upon the seventh. And in so doing our
purpose is not to persuade men to idleness, and to do nothing, neither is it the
meaning of the commandment, but to rest from those works of our own that
are forbidden, that we might wholly and without all let be occupied, about
those works of God which he has prescribed, as shall hereafter more
evidently appear unto us.

But that we might yet more deeply consider of this, and be more fully
persuaded, that the Lord would have this general rest, from every thing, so
carefully observed, and that no kind of work should be done by any: besides
the first and general commandment of resting, that we have seen, All degrees
of me^, both high and low, are commanded to rest upon the Lords day.
he more particularly forbids all estates and degrees of men, as well the
principal as the accessorie, and helps all manner of work, and not only
them but all other creatures, which are most fit for it, and whose labor man
might be most ready to abuse, for the breaking and interrupting of this rest:
as it appears in the words following as they are set down in the 10. verse
of this 20. chapter of Exodus. In it thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy manseruant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy
stranger, which is within thy gates. And is repeated again, Deuteronomy. 5.14. in as
many or more words. Thou shall not do any work therein, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, nor thy manseruant, nor thy maid, nor thine ox, nor thine
ass, neither any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates,
that thy manseruant, and thy maid servant may rest as well as thou. In which
places we do see, that there is none of any calling or estate whatsoever, nor
of any kind, or sex, or age, that may be exempted from this rest, but that
particularly, and by name all governors, both in the family and common
wealth, and all under government, are charged with it, whether it be father or
child, son or daughter, master or servant, man or maid, magistrate or
people, freedenison or borne without the liberties, even to the stranger, and
so many as be within their gates, that is within the compass of their
jurisdiction and government, yea and the very beasts themselves, whereof some
are named, as the Ox and the Ass, which are the chief, and were most usually
occupied among the Jews, and therefore no work is to be done any where,
seeing there is none to do it, for every one is by name expressly forbidden
without the exception of any person.

Therefore concerning these particulars more fully, we may perceive, As the
Magist^ate and governor.
that the magistrate and governor in authority (how hye soever) cannot take
any privilege unto himself, whereby he might be occupied about worldly
business, when other men should rest from them. For the Lord begins with them
first, saying: Thou, even thou that art a father, a master, a governor, and
have any within thy government, and under thy hand (as it were within thy
gates). And all that be in subjection.
And as the governor may not pretend his authority for excuse, as though he
might escape by that, no more may the inferior his subjection, as though that
should hide him, seeing the Lord who is governor of both, speaks unto both,
and names both, whether he be son or daughter, manseruant or maydseruant,
bond or free, borne at home, or a stranger, as it is in the words of the text.
And there is great reason of this, if we consider the subjects themselves, and
especially the servants, As servants especially.
whose condition were intolerable, and not to be borne, if when they have for
many days been wearied with continual labor, they should not have some good
time to rest in, and the Lord in his wisdom has appointed one whole day in
seven, and therefore no less can be given.

And seeing that the rest was made for man (that is, Mark. 2.27.
appointed for the benefit and commodity of man) there can be no show of
reason that they should want it, who do stand in most need of the benefit of
it, but because it is most commodious unto servants, it ought especially to be
affoorded unto them. And therefore Exodus 23. Exodus 23.12.
where this law is repeated, he brings this reason: That the son, and the
maid, and the stranger should rest, namely, Arias Mont. Vattabl. Tremel. Deuteronomy.
5.14.
that he might be refreshed thereby, and as it were take his breath, as the
word does import, and is so translated by the most skillful in that tongue. And
in Deuteronomy. when Moses would persuade the governors, willingly to bestow upon
their servants this benefit of rest, he wills them to remember the heavy
bondage of Egypt, in the which they had no rest, that by their own experience
they might confess, that it was equal and just before God and men, that the
wearied servants should have rest. Master Calvin upon this place says: Let thy
servant rest, and why? For thou wast sometime in bondage: Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5.
Ser. 35
the time has been thou could have wished that one had given thee some
rest, and release from thy labors, thou ought then to use such gentleness
toward them which are under thy hand: If thou were in bondage, would thou
not that one should give thee some release? Would thou always be oppressed
with labor and travail? Surely by thy good will thou would not, it
behooves then that thou bear also with others.

And how full of discomfort and continual misery should their lives be, if
this comfortable refreshing, common unto all the creatures, even to the ox and
the ass, should be denied unto them? Moreover, if the masters do but look
to their own private gain, they may be induced to show this mercy unto
their servants, that thereby they might be more enabled unto all new duties of
their calling the week following; having thereby renewed their strength, which
otherwise would have decayed: which when it is not in that convenient measure
extended toward them, that the Lord requires, some of them fall into sickness,
others into great weakness, and manifold aches, and lamenes in their limbs, or
have their bodies consumed, and their blood dried up, before the natural term
of their life be expired: wherein besides the cruelty offered unto their
persons, they do wrong unto themselves, that they cannot enjoy their labors
so long and with so great profit, as otherwise no doubt they might do. And
this is that which Master Calvin in the same place observes: Calvin ibid.
When you shall have this consideration (namely, of dealing thus mercifully
with your servants) then shall you know, that this day shall further serve you
for some earthly profit and commodity, albeit in the mean time, this is not
that you ought to seek after. To speak in a word, our Lord in this place
declares unto us that, which in like manner has been pronounced by Jesus
Christ: Matthew. 6.33.
that when we shall seek the kingdom of God, all other things shall be cast
upon us.

But last of all, if we look into that which is the chiefest, the honor and
service of God in sanctifying the Sabbath, which he as straightly requires at
the hands of the servants as of the masters: Ephe. 6.9. Coloss. 3.11.
seeing there is no respect of persons before him, neither Grecian, nor Jew,
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free: For he
that is called in the Lord being a servant, 1. Cor. 7.22.
is the Lords freeman. Likewise also he that is called being free, is Christ's
servant. Therefore that they might serve their high Lord, and heavenly master,
who is above all, and Lord over al, upon the seventh day, as they have served
their earthly masters upon the six, we must needs confess that they also
ought to rest from those works of their calling, which otherwise would hinder
them in it, or altogether keep them from it, unless besides the hinderance of
their salvation, we would set our selves against the glory of God, to our
endless confusion, whilst we hinder them from doing that service, that he
requires of them, seeing because of our business they can in no wise perform
it unto him.

The like is to be said in some part of the beasts, The cattle must rest upon
this day.
as the ox, and the ass, or any other cattle, as we have already heard it,
Deuteronomy. 5.14. that they also might have the benefit of rest, which they cannot
want, that so they might more commodiously be preserved for the use of man, for
the which purpose they were made in the beginning, and which is the very end of
this rest: And therefore it is said of them also: In the seventh day thou shall
rest, Exodus 23.12.
that thine ox and thine ass may rest and be refreshed. But chiefly and above
all this was commanded unto them, that thereby (as by a sure bond) themselves
might be kept under obedience of this rest, whom it did most of al concern,
when they did see that the beasts themselves might not break beyond the
liberty of it, of whom notwithstanding the Lord had a less principal regard,
but as they might be serviceable unto men in this behalf. Even as Master
Calvin does very plainly lay it forth, entreating of this matter: Calvin. upon
Deuteronomy. ^. ser. 35.
This was to the end the Jews, seeing the stables closed up, should be put in
mind to say: God sets here before our eyes this sign, eue^ in the bruit
beasts, and this is to the end that we on our part should be the better kept
and holden in his service. Thus it behooved the Jews deeply to weigh even in
the bruit beasts this visible sign, which was given to the end this might
restrain them so much the more, and that they should be admonished by this
mean to observe the Sabbath day with all reverence.

Jonah. 3.7.
And thus as in the days of Jonah, when the King of Niniue proclaimed a fast,
he said: Let neither man nor beast, bullock nor sheep taste any thing,
neither feed, or drink water, but let man and beast put on sackcloth, that by
the sight of it, they might be taught the greatness of their sins, and be the
rather moved thereby to a more earnest repentance for the same. Exodus 19.12.
And as in the giving of the law, when the Lord would strike into the hearts of
all the people, a reverence of his majesty, that they might the more
obediently receive his word, and content themselves with that manner and
measure of revealing himself unto them, that he was then purposed in his
wisdom to use toward them, and knew to be most expedient for them: and
therefore would not have them come near the mountain to gaze, and too
curiously to search after that, which was not lawful for them to know: and
therefore commanded Moses to set up marks unto the people round about the
Mount, charging them also not to break out beyond them, under the pain of a
most execrable death: and therefore would have the very beast that should touch
the mountain be stoned, or stricken through with darts, to move the people
unto a deeper consideration of it, for whose sake only every thing there was
then done. Even so here, that all men might most carefully observe that rest
unto the Lord, which is so acceptable unto him, he commanded the bruit beasts
and unreasonable creatures to rest, not that he had any care of them in giving
his law (to whom it does not appertain) but having a singular regard of his
people, and therefore taking away from among them all things that might be any
occasion to withdraw them from the obedience of this rest, even the working of
the cattle, and giving unto them all the good means, that might make for
their better proceeding herein, even the resting of the ox and the ass.

For which cause also he commanded that the strangers, And the strangers that
be of another religion.
borne out of the stock of Israel, nor of the lineage of the Jews, yet now
adjoined unto that people, and being under their government, should, howsoever
in other things they knew not the true God of Israel, neither did serve him
according to his word, yet in this should at leastwise be subject to the
outward discipline and order of the Church, and have their rest common with
them, that thus the Church, whom the Lord especially regarded, whither soever
it did look, and cast her eyes, might have nothing as a snare to entangle her
by beholding the strangers and cattle to work, when themselves did rest. And
for the same cause, he bound the strangers, as well as his own people, to the
outward observation of other laws and statutes, so far forth, as did make
for the uniformity of the Church, and edification of it in godliness by their
example.

Whereunto agrees that, Calvin. upon Deuteronomy. 5. sermon. 35.
and is almost the same in words, which Master Calvin writes in his sermons of
this matter. For we know (says he) that if things contrary to the service of
God be permitted, although one shall happily say, these which offend are not
of our society and company, we shall notwithstanding by their evil examples,
be induced to follow them: if the strangers had been permitted to labor among
the Jews, what might have happened thereby? The Jews would have had dealings
with them, and so have defiled themselves, they would have made small
difference between this day and others. For when examples are set before our
eyes, we are easily led away to that which is evil. And in the same place a
little after he thus concludes, So then to the end, all such occasion of
transgressing against this rest, might be removed, and that this day might be
observed with greater reverence, as God willed that the beasts and cattle
should rest, so commands he that the strangers do the like, although they
were of another faith and religion. And as the Passover, though it were a
Sacrament only belonging unto the Jews, and the difference of meats, and of
clean and unclean things was proper unto them, yet the Lord would have the
strangers that dwelt among them be subject to the same laws, for the good of
his people, and so that otherwise he would not have them to have any dealing
with them, (for he threatens to cut them off from his people) which appears,
as in other places of the Scripture, so Exodus 12.19. and Leuit. 17.12.15. All
which do evidently declare, that the Lord would have this holy Sabbath of
rest, without all interruption and gainsaying, to be duly observed on all
sides, when unto the particular commanding of all estates, by name to rest, he
has adjoined the beasts and the strangers, upon whom be lays the like charge.

The ground also had her Sabbath and rest
And to make an end of this matter, that the excellency and dignity of this
rest, nay the necessity of it may be known far and near to be so great as
it is indeed, the Lord did command the ground to keep her sabbath and rest,
and so upon it, did engraue the lively image of this true rest, that by this
babish instruction (meet for the time) they might learn of what moment and
weight the Sabbath was, when as thus al creatures should stoup and do homage
unto it, yea the very insensible ground should not be free from the subjection
of it: as it is at large in many words set down by Moses, Leuit. 25.3.
Six years thou shall sow thy field, and six years thou shall cut thy
vineyard, and gather the fruit thereof. 4. But the seventh year shall be a
Sabbath of rest unto the land, it shall be the LORDS Sabbath, thou shall
neither sow thy field, nor cut thy vineyard, that which grows of it own
accord of thy harvest, thou shall not reap, neither gather the grapes that
thou have left unlabored, for it shall be a year of rest unto the land. All
which things thus at large unfolded and laid forth before our eyes, may
determine and make an end of this matter, if unto them I do add this one
thing: that whereas men might have gone about to withdraw their obedience from
this rest, defrauding the law (as it were under a vain pretense of resting
themselves) whiles in the mean season they did abuse the labor of their
servants, their cattle and the strangers, to the doing of many of their own
works upon the Sabbath, contrary to the true intent of the law giver; he is
not contented to have in most plain words forbidden them to work themselves,
but (because whatsoever they do by others, they are said to do it themselves,
and it is accounted unto them as their own work) he forbids them also to
do their worldly business upon the Sabbath, by their servants, by their cattle,
and by the stranger, and contrariwise commands them to rest, (as it were) in
the persons of every one of these.

So that the ample and full meaning of this commandment concerning the rest is,
that we work not at all, We must not compel others to work for us, and so
to do our business by them.
neither directly nor indirectly in our own persons, or by others openly, or
covertly, or under hand as it were, not only abstayning from work our selves,
but not setting laborers to work for us, not thinking it to be sufficient if
we travel not our selves, when in the mean season, we cause others to run,
and ride, and go for us: which is to be marked of us so much the rather,
because that in any which make some show of religion, and would seem to be
devout in this, do notwithstanding through a gross ignorance, and palpable
hypocrisy deceive themselves and others, in doing many things by their
servants and others, sending them to fayres, causing them to work in harvest,
and appointing them to other business, which themselves are ashamed of, and
therefore will not so much as once be seen in them. Therefore we must not
compel others to work for us, as for example, (that we might see it in one
kind, and thereby judge of the rest, I will take that which is too common every
where) we must not enforce Tailors and shoomakers, to work for us upon the
Sabbath, by too straightly exacting, that we have our apparel upon that day,
though they truly tell us, and we should in love believe them, that they cannot
compass it against such a time, or cause them to travel for us upon that day,
in bringing home of our stuff, whereas other days are appointed for such
purposes. And that we might yet better understand it in another kind, the
master when he is driven of necessity to leave some of his servants at home,
when the rest go to the Church, may not under this color inioyne him so many
things to do in his absence, that he cannot in any tolerable manner sanctify
the Sabbath, and observe the rest though he would, but leaving only such
things as of necessity must be done, it is in his choice to rest if he will.

they might attend upon the works of the Lord. Many do thus abuse their
servants.
Neither must masters deal so cruelly with their servants, as to ouerlay them
with their own business the whole week, and to hold them to it so straitely,
that they will give them no time to do any thing for themselves (though there
be never so great need) but only the Sabbath day, and so hinder them from
keeping their rest: and indeed for the most part this is only the servants
day, what time soever he can gain upon it, from his masters business, that is
his own, and none but that, and therefore many of them are driven to do many
things upon that day for themselves unwillingly, which otherwise they would
not do at all, as traveling to their friends, mending their apparel and such
like.

So that in this respect we have just cause to complain, as they did in the
council at Paris, Dies Dominicus, vtcunque a quibusdam dominis venerando
custodiri videtur, Council. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50.
a conseruis, seruitio eorum pressis, perraro debito honor coli videtur.
Howsoever it may appear that the Lords day is some thing reverently kept of
some masters, yet of their servants, (whom they abuse and oppress in their
service) we see it very seldom times to be kept as it ought. But the masters
are guilty of their sin.
But this commandment does teach us, that masters and governors must be so
far from causing their servants to work upon this day for themselves and
others, that they must not leave it indifferently to their servants to choose,
whether they will work or no, but they are charged to ouersee them, and look
unto them so, that they may be sure that they do rest indeed, and to keep
them from work, yea though they would fall unto it of their own accord. For
though the commandment of resting belongs generally to all, and therefore
the servants, and children are named, yet the speech is directed unto the
father and the master, that they might look to the execution of it, when as it
is said: In it thou shall do no work, thou and thy son, and thy daughter,
thy manseruant, and thy maidseruant. And as they have authority over their
servants and children to command them, and to punish them if they disobey, so
he charge them to exercise their dominion over them in this, in compelling
them to obey the commandment of God, who has set them over them in his room
to that end, which if they neglect to do, the sin of the children, and of
the servants shall kindle the fire of Gods wrath against them, the flame of
which shall break out to the destruction of the fathers, and masters also,
because they have their part in the sin, by not keeping them in obedience unto
God, whom he placed under them for the same purpose.

Thus we may understand that this commandment of resting, is so large and
stretches it self out so far, that it reaches unto men of all sorts, ages,
degrees, sexes and callings, in so much that none can be advanced so high, that
he should be without the reach of it, nay the higher he is in calling, and
the more he has under his government, the more straightly is he bound unto
it, not only to observe that in his own person, The commandment of
superiors does not excuse the in^eriours in working for them upon the Lords
day.
but in all them that be committed unto him: and concerning all inferiors,
either servants, children, laborers, artificers, or any other, that do not
work for themselves, but for others, that their inferioritie and subjection
will not excuse them in doing any work; for they also are especially some of
them particularly named in the commandment, and the other are included in it,
and they must remember that which has been spoken before, that they are not
only the servants of men, but also and especially the servants of God, who
has created, redeemed, and does preserve them, and has as great care of them
as of others, and will be served of them as well as of any other, and will
therefore reward all equally alike, for there is no respect of persons before
him: And therefore as they fear to displease men, who have authority to
punish them, so let them especially fear to displease the Lord, who has power
to throw body and soul into hell.

Therefore let men away with these pretenses, which will not serve to say: I am
under authority, and therefore must obey: alas I would feign do otherwise, if I
could, and I am thus commanded: what would you have me to do? I grant it is a
grievous thing to be thus punished, and that which must cause us to mourn
before God for our sin: but yet when men command us to work at the same time,
that the Lord would have us to rest, we must with all humility and reverence
answer them, as the Apostles do in the like case, Whether it be right in the
sight of God, Act. 4.19.
to obey you rather then God, judge ye. And we must be willing rather with
patience to suffer their displeasure, to bear their rebukes and chidings, yea
to undergo all their chastisements and corrections, then to be drawn one
foot from this obedience to God, which he requires at our hands, and will not
leave unrewarded with manifold blessings both in this world, and in the world
to come.

Moreover, as the household governor is charged to see, that all his family
do rest upon the Sabbath, as much as lies in him: so the rulers in the
Commonwealth are bound so much the more, to see the same performed of
themselves, and all the people, by how much the Lord has given them more means
in their hands to perform it, both because their authority is greater to
command, and their power mightier to punish them that do disobey. Magistrates
are bound to restrain the people by law from working upon this day.
And indeed this is that which is meant in the words of the Commandment: That
is within thy gates. For even as the walls and the gates of the city are the
surthest part of it, and whatsoever is within the gates, is under the
government of him that rules the city: so by a figurative speech he means
the utmost coasts, and the furthest border of the jurisdiction of any, even
unto the very gates of it, as it were: and when he says, within thy gates, he
speaks by name to him that is ruler within the gates, that he should
diligently look unto all them that be under his government, that they do
observe the rest of the Sabbath, as well as himself, yea even unto the
stranger, and him that is not of the same country and religion, yet now as he
enjoys the benefit of his government, so he should yield to this outward
practice of the Church at least, that he do rest together with them, that so
it might no ways be broken, neither publicly, nor privately, in the household,
nor in the Commonwealth, by the freedenison, nor by the stranger.

The Prophet Jeremy spying this abuse of the Sabbath in his time, speaks
first unto the Princes of Judah, saying: Iere. 17.20.
Hear the word of the Lord ye Kings of Judah. And Master Calvin upon this
place notes, that he was commanded to begin with the King himself, because he
(as having authority) should repress so great licentiousnes. Therefore it
behooves al Princes and Magistrates, that be in highest authority, to provide
that laws be enacted for the preservation of this rest, with civil
punishments to be inflicted upon them that shall break it, according to the
quality of their offense, and that both themselves, and other the inferior
officers, should every one of them within their circuit, look diligently unto
the faithful observation of such wholesome laws, by all the subjects throughout
the whole realm: by which means, as a great many sins might be prevented,
that they should never be committed, so the Commonwealth might be preserved
from many grievous punishments and common plagues, which either have already
come upon it, or do most justly ha^g over the head of it, for the neglect of
the same. By which means it might come to pass, that there should be no
Faires kept upon that day, no travailing thitherward, no such common carrying
of wares from town to town, as is; no such haunting of Tauernes, Alehouses
and Innes, no buying and selling of victuals any where: no such making of
Marriage dinners, and other needles feasts: riding and going up and down, no
such working in the time of hayfield, and harvest, in the fields, and at other
times in the shops of Tailors, Shoomakers, and others. If unto those good laws
that we have already in this behalf, others that be wanting, might be
adjoined unto them (which we pray for, and hope shall be in time) and for the
good execution of every one of them, diligent inquiry might be made at the
general assizes, and quarter Sessions, in every shire throughout the whole
land, as for the keeping of other laws, so of these, and the malefactors and
offenders this way might be severely punished, that others might fear to
offend by their example, the mouths of the wicked might be stopped, offenses
unto the godly removed, and sin taken away from among us. And this is that
which they in the Council of Paris labored to effect, when they said, Council.
Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50.
That they would humbly sue unto the Emperors highness, that the authority
and power, which was in them ordained of God, for the honor and reverence of
so great a day, might strike fear into all men, that they might not fall into
such breaches of the day, as are there named, even the very same almost, which
I have here set down, because (as they do allege there) whiles men do
commit such things, they both stain the honor of Christianity, and do open
the mouths of blasphemers, to speak evil of the name of Christ.

Unto the which that you might be the rather encouraged, and take it upon you
happily in the fear of God, I do most humbly upon My knees.
meekenes beseech you (upon whose shoulders the whole burden of the common
wealth does lie) that you would enter into the deep consideration of so
weighty a matter, according to the sage and advised wisdom that is within
you: and that amongst your manifold and earnest consulatations, this might not
be the last, as it is not the least. The great zeal of Nehemiah in this
behalf is a^ worthy example to follow.
And therefore that you would set before your eyes as a great many of other
things, which the scripture does afford, that might persuade you unto it, so
especially that worthy example and practice of the famous and renowned
Nehemiah prince of the Jews, Nehe. 13.15.
after their return from the captivity, as it is set down in the last
chapter of that book, where he thus speaks of himself. In those days saw I
them in Judah, that trod wine presses on the sabbath, and that brought in
sheaues, and which laded asses also with wine, grapes and figs, and all
burdens, and brought them into Jerusalem upon the sabbath day; and I protested
to them in the day that they sold victuales. 16. There dwelt men of Tyrus also
therein, which brought fish and all wares, and sold on the sabbath unto the
children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. 17. Then reproved I the rulers of Judah,
and said unto them. What evil is this that ye do, and break the sabbath
day? 18. Did not your fathers thus, and our God brought all this plague upon
us, and upon this city? Yet ye increase the wrath upon Israel, in breaking
the sabbath. 19. And when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the
sabbath, I commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not be
opened till after the sabbath, and some of my servants set I at the gates, that
there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day. 20. So the chapmen and
merchants of al merchandise remained once or twice al night without Jerusalem.
21. And I protested among them, and said unto them, why tarry ye all night
about the wall? if ye do it once again, I will lay hands upon you. From that
time came they no more upon the sabbath. In which words is fully described
unto us a most lively picture, both of that religious boldness, and zealous
courage that should be in a magistrate, bending al his force to the suppressing
of such abuses as do most dishonor the name of God, as the breaking of the
sabbath, and also of the good blessing, and prosperous success of God upon the
worthy labors, and Christian interprises of all such. For though this abuse
of profaning the sabbath ( by breaking the rest of it, so many ways as we
see) was so universal, and that through the iniquity of the time prevailed so
long, that it had gotten a strong head, and could not be bridled at the first,
(for though the gates were shut, yet they tarried without at the walls all
night, hoping to come in in the morning with the foremost, according to their
former custom, (so obstinate and perverse were they in their wickedness) yet
when he was as constant in Gods cause, which he knew he had taken in hand, as
they were froward in their sin, God gave him to deal so wisely (being not
discouraged) first, by proclayming the law of resting, which he knew before
was in the word, then by threatening imprisonment upon them that would not keep
it, commanding the inferior magistrates to look to the execution of it, and
rebuking them for their negligence, and sloth in it, in former times; fearing
them by the consideration of Gods judgment, even their present captivity,
which came upon their forefathers, from the which they were not all returned,
and into the which or some other they might fall again, because of this one
sin) that he prevailed with them, even as it is set down, to his great
commendation, and to the singular encouraging of all Christian Magistrates in
their offices, What good success God gave him in it.
to the unspeakable comfort of the church, and the immortal praise of God,
that from that time they came no more upon the sabbath. A worthy reward for
so noble an enterprise, an honorable triumph for so rare a conquest.

And if we do see so happy an end of the travail of one man, in so corrupt
a time, dealing against a sin so deeply rooted, so publickely defended by
the practice of the common people, so generally winked at by the inferior
magistrates, and that in Judah and in Jerusalem: what hope might we have of
the blessed endeavors of so many Nehemias, in a time more religious, among so
many worthy governors in the Church and commonwealth, if our sins did not
hinder it, and if they would deal in the faith and zeal and constancy of
Nehemiah, and we would help them with our prayers. That so first of all it
might be established by a general meeting of all estates, civil and
ecclesiastical, as it was in his days, by the Priests, Leuits and chief of
the people, that none should do any thing contrary to the observation of the
sabbath, Nehe. 10.8.9.14.
no not under the pretense of dealing with strangers, and then that those laws
might be diligently executed with great severity upon all transgressors, yea,
though they were strangers, as they were in his time, rebuking, and sharply
punishing all inferior officers, by whose negligence the fault should be
committed, as he did with great gravity and moderation.

So then, to draw this whole treatise into a narrow room, and to shut it up
in a word, the sum of all is, that the Lord has commanded so precise a rest
unto all sorts of men, that it may not by any fraud, deceit or circumuention
whatsoever be broken, but that he will most severely require it at their hands
under the pain of his everlasting displeasure. And this is the first duty
here required, that both we our selves, and all under us do upon the seventh
day rest from all such works, as by virtue of our callings appertain unto us,
upon the other six; and this is the thing that we should be persuaded of.

Objection. If men should thus rest from all work, how should they live?
But now if any ungodly man through the coueteousnes that is in him, cannot
yield unto this, because he sauoureth not the things that be of God, but is
worldly minded, and therefore is ready to object and say, if we do not
labor, how shall we eat? you see the world is hard, and things are at a great
price, and we have a charge of wife and children that must be cared for, and
when we have wrought sore the whole six days, it will scarsely find us
bread, therefore what reason is it to bind us from working upon the seventh?
And why may not a poor man then earne a penny, as well as at any other time?
What? I think you would have us to starve. It is true in deed (as M. Calvin
says: Calvin. upon Deuteronomy. 5. sermon. 35.
) That all of us naturally are of that mind, that if we endeavor to mount on
hye to the heavenly life, and bestow our studies herein, we think we shall
dye for hunger, and this shall be to turn us from our profits and
commodities. For (as he further says) the devil comes always to persuade
us, under this shadow and wilines, that if we employ our selves to the service
of God, we must needs dye of famine, and that we live to be pitied of others
for our misery. Of a truth we cannot serve God, except we cast from us these
worldly cares, which press us down overmuch: then I do further add, that
surely here we have need of faith to believe, That godliness has the promises
of this life, as well as the life to come, 1. Tim. 4.8.
and that if we will first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all
needful things shall be given unto us. Matthew. 6.33.
And therefore if we rest upon the seventh day, because the Lord has commanded
it, he will so bless and multiply the things that we have, that we shall
receive from him our daily bread upon that day, as well as upon any other. For
if the servant that has travailed all the days of the week in his masters
service, may look for his ordinary food and wages upon the Lords day
though he rest thereon: then may we much more look for this just and merciful
dealing from God. And that we might believe it the rather, let us remember the
promise which the Lord makes to the Israelites in the like case, when he
commanded them to let their ground rest from plowing and tilling the seventh
year, as it is plentifully recorded by Moses: Six years thou shall sow thy
field; and six years thou shall cut thy vineyard, Leuit. 25.3.
and gather the fruit thereof. 4. But the seventh year shall be a sabbath of
rest unto the land, it shall be the Lords sabbath: thou shall neither sow thy
field, or cut thy vineyard. 18. Wherefore ye shall obey mine ordinances, and
keep my laws and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land in safety. 19. And
the land shall give her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein
in safety. 20. And if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year? for
we shall not sow, neither gather in our increase. 21. I will send my blessings
upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.
22. And ye shall sow the eight year, and eat of the old fruit until the
ninth year, until the fruits thereof come, ye shall eat the old. Where
we see how the Lord does abundantly promise to supply the want, that might
have seemed to come upon them by resting the seventh year, with a treble
blessing upon the revenues of the sixth, which thing also he did most
plentifully perform so long as they obeyed, even so no doubt the Lord will
increase the wages of a poor man earned by his faithful labor in his calling
upon the six days, that it shall suffice him for the seventh also, so that
for want he shall not need to work upon it.

Calvin in Leuit. 25.20.
And here I must say as Master Calvin does: Nunquam Dei praeceptis morigeri
erunt homines: Men will never be obedient unto the commandments of God, till
their distrustfulnes be corrected, and men are always witty enough to
pretend many things, why they should not obey: but here was a special promise,
that no lack should come to the Jews by resting upon the Sabbath: whereof he
had given them a sure pledge long ago in the desert, when on the day before
the Sabbath, a double portion of Manna was given to all that gathered. And we
have not seen men that have been painful indeed driven to that necessity,
that for the supply of their want, they have been compelled to labor upon the
seventh day: But contrariwise, we may many times observe, how they that are so
wordly upon the seventh day, do not so greatly prosper, but though they gain
one way, they lose another. But be it that it were not so, and that they
always gained, be it never so much, yea the whole world, if it were possible,
and in the mean season lose their own soul, through their disobedience, what
will they give for the redemption of it? This ought to serve us (as Master
Calvin sets it down in his sermons very largely, and very pithily, whose
words therefore though they be many, I will recite) as a principle, Calvin upon
Deuteronomy. 5. Ser. 35
to stir up us to follow that which God has comanded us. For the chiefest
thing which stays us from ordering our life to the obedience of God, is this,
that being too much wedded to our selves, we think this shall be against our
profit: and we will always provide, howsoever the case stands, for our
commodities in those things, which appertain unto the world. Behold how men
cannot follow God, but rather forsake him, and draw clean backward from his
law, for that they think if they serve God they shall never thrive. Now this
is so wicked an unthankfulness, that it serves to aggrauate an hundredth times
more our rebellion: what must we do then? Let us note well, that we shall not
be able to serve God with a frank and free courage, except we be resolved,
that he provides for our whole life, and that he will not forget us, as it is
spoken in the person of Joshua: Josh. 1.9. Heb. 13.5.
For the Apostle to the Hebrews applies this doctrine to all the faithful,
yea to draw them from overmuch care, and carking, he says: Thy God will not
fail thee; he will not forget thee. So that if once we can be persuaded, that
God watches over us, and that he will liberally provide for our necessities,
it is certain, we shall not be so busied in our earthly affections, and we
shall not be so easily turned from serving of God, we shall not be hindered to
meditate and think on the heavenly life, we shall so pass through this world,
as to use the creatures thereof, as if we used them not, because we know
always, that we ought to make our race further.

a Sabbaths days journey: Act. 1.12.
concerning which first of all, it is not agreed upon how far that was,
Master Calvin upon it says, it was but two miles, and of that judgment are
most of the Latin interpreters. Doctor Tremelius in his notes upon this place,
says, it is but one mile, Test. Syria.
and that he proves both by the Syrian paraphrast, and out of the Jews
Talmud, and other Rabbis. So that by this rule, men's iournyes must be
shortened a great deal less then they be, except they have better proof.
Besides, Master Calvin says in the above named place, that there was no such
thing prescribed in the law: Hierom. in resp. ad Algas. quast. 10.
And S. Hierome says plainly, it was but a tradition of theirs, and especially
of two Rabbis, Atriba, and Simon Heli.

Therefore let us not shut our eyes against so plain a truth, and to day when
we hear the voice of God, let us not harden our hearts, but subscribe unto the
verity of it, by our practice: and let us be willing to rest from al earthly
affairs upon the seventh day, and not to entangle our selves with any thing,
according to that which we have seen thus plentifully proved unto us. All
bodily labor is not forbidden upon this day.
All which must so be taken, not as though my meaning were, that there should
be nothing at al done, and that it were utterly unlawful to do any thing at
all: For certain bodily labors were always permitted upon the Sabbath, yea
even then, when the rest was most exactly required of the Lord, and precisely
observed by men: as appears by that which is written in the Gospel by S.
Matthew, in many words: Matthew. 12.1.
At that time Jesus went on a Sabbath day through the corn, and his Disciples
were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat. 2 And
when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him: Behold thy Disciples do that
which is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath day. 3. But he said unto them:
Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungered, and they that were
with him? 4. How he entered into the house of God, and eat the Show bread,
which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that werewith him, but
only for the Priests. 5. Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the
Sabbath days the Priests in the temple break the Sabbath and are blameles? 6.
But I say unto you, that here is one greater then the temple: wherefore if ye
know what this is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have
condemned the innocents. Saint Mark recording the same story, adds this:
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Mark. 2.27.
28. Wherefore the son of man is even Lord of the Sabbath. But S. Matthew
proceeds further in the forenamed chapter, to declare the doctrine concerning
such works, as may be done upon the day of rest, by the practices and speeches
of our Savior Christ. For he adds: Matthew. 12.9.
And Jesus departed thence and came into their Synagogue. 10. And behold there
was a man which had his hand dried up, and they asked him saying: Is it lawful
to heal upon the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him? 11. And he said unto
them: what man shall there be among you that shall have a sheep, and if it
fall on a Sabbath day into a pit, will not he take it and lift it out? 12. How
much more then is a man better then a sheep? therefore it is lawful to do
well on a Sabbath day. 13. Then said he to the man, stretch forth thy hand, and
he stretched it forth, and it was made whole as the other.

This portion of holy scripture does show unto us, that certain works may be
done upon the Sabbath (and in part what they are): therefore as from this and
such like places, we do rightly take liberty unto our selves, to work in
certain cases upon the Sabbath, so we must be wary that we take no other
liberty, then that which the word affoordeth, if we be desirous in good
conscience to approve our selves before God, and to justify our doings in the
sight of men: so that we may not under this pretense presume that every thing
is lawful, because something is permitted, abusing Gods liberality, and our
own liberty, turning it into carnal licentiousnes, and worldly prophanenes.
But (seeing we have heard in how many places, and how straightly the Lord
requires that all men should rest) we might be assured that the thing which
we do, is of the nature of those which are permitted unto us, and that we
have good ground for it, not rashly aduenturing upon things, and doing them at
all adventure (as it were) and because we our selves in our own corrupt
reason, have so conceived of them.

Therefore we shall learn out of this scripture, what things may lawfully be
done of us, without the breach of the commandment of rest. First of all such
bodily labors are permitted, As that which directly pertains to the service
of God.
as do immediately and directly concern the worship of God, and without the
which he cannot be served of us according to his word: For this cause it was
permitted unto the Priests, nay they were commanded to sley beasts, and to
prepare them for sacrifices, and offer them up according to the law, about the
which they took so much the more pains upon that day, then upon any other of
the week, by how much the sacrifices were increased: for besides the daily
sacrifices, Numb. 8.9.
morning and evening, there was a special sacrifice for the Sabbath, and all
this being commanded in the law, our Savior Christ says, They in doing of
it were blameless, therefore whereas he says that the priests in the Temple
break the Sabbath, he does not mean that they did so indeed: (For he
affirms that they are blameles) but speaking according to the meaning of the
Pharisees, who would condemn the fact of his Disciples in gathering the ears
of corn to satisfy their hunger, says, if every bodily labor be a breach
of the Sabbath, then the Priests in the Temple brake it, but they are
blameless in so doing, As going to Church though it be far off, to preach or
hear Gods word.
therefore they brake it not. Thus we do grant, that men may travail to the
places of Gods worship, where the public assemblies and meetings of the Church
be, because otherwise they cannot join with them in the communion of the
word, sacraments, and prayer, and though they be far distant in situation of
dwelling from the common place of meeting, yet it is permitted unto them to
travail by land, or by water, on horseback, or on foot thereunto, nay they
are commanded to do it, and they may not under the color of a long journey
tarry at home idly taking their ease. For even as the slaying of beasts, is
merely in it own nature a worldly and bodily labor, yet the Temple which was
sanctified did change the nature of it, and made it holy: so to travail and to
ride, or go to and fro upon the Sabbath is altogether painful, and laborsome
to the body, but to take this pains, to preach or to hear the word, makes it
an holy work, and is warranted by the scripture: as in this very place, we
see how our Savior Christ and his disciples travail from town to town to
preach the Gospel, and take such pains, that they are hungry and faint in
the way.

In like manner that all things might be done in order and comelines in the
Church (as it is meet) and therefore that the whole congregation might meet
together at one time, there must be some notice given of it to the people by
the sound of some thing: And loring bells to call me^ to the Church.
For the which purpose, as the trumpets and horns of the Priests and Levites
were ordained under the law: so we have the ringing of belles amongst us.
Therefore I do not see how the common iangling of belles that is used in too
many places, and the disordered ringing at other times of the Sabbath, and for
other ends, should be a work of the Sabbath, and how it can then be
justified, yet the ringing of one bell according to the custom of the place at
one time, and the same or some other at another time, to call the people
together, that they might come with one consent (as it were one man) (which
meeting would otherwise be scattered and confused) that so all might be
present at the service of God from the beginning to the ending, and as it is
rightly called common prayer, so it might be common to all indeed, and not
private to a few, this end makes the labor acceptable unto God, and though
it be a work, yet it hinders not the observing of the rest, commanded upon
that day. And to prepare necessary and convenient food for every one.


Moreover, God has given to men liberty upon this day, to prepare that food
which is meet and convenient for every one, that their bodies being thereby
comfortably refreshed through Gods blessing, they might be the rather thereby
sitted unto the cheerful proceeding in his service, which otherwise through
their weakness, might faint, and give over in the mids of it, for such is our
nature, that we stand in need of a continual repayring by the creatures, and
that every day: therefore though (as we have seen) the buying and selling of
victuals, and carrying of them to and fro was forbidden, seeing that the other
six days are given unto men for these purposes, yet the preparing of them,
and making them serviceable for the use of man, according to the necessity of
every one, is that which cannot be done at other times, and yet men cannot
want it, if they fruitfully hold out in sanctifiyng the Sabbath unto the end,
and therefore this makes it lawful unto all men, when they do it in that
manner, and measure that may most of all further them in Gods worship, which is
the chiefest thing upon that day to be considered, and unto the which all other
things ought to be referred. Thus our Lord Jesus does maintain the fact of his
Disciples in gathering the corn in the fields against the cauils of the
Pharisees, for they were weary, and hungry, and had no meat, neither place
nor time to provide any in, therefore they took that which was offered unto
them in the way, gather it and dress it, (as it were) for themselves. And thus
does the Schooleman truly say of this place. Thom. 2.^. 2.ae. quaest. 123.
art. 4.
Excusat discipulos suos. Christ excuses his disciples, who gathered the ears
of corn upon the Sabbath, Propter necessitatem quam patiebantur, because of
the present necessity that they were in.

And whatsoever the time present does necessarily require, though it belong not
to Gods service.
Last of all, and generally concerning this matter, what things soever the time
present does necessarily require to be done for our own furtherance, the
commodity of our brethren, or the benefit or preservation of any of the
creatures, which cannot be deferred unto another day without loss or
hinderance, neither could any ways be preuided for before: (For ^he occasion
was but new offered) though they do no ways belong to any part of Gods
service immediately: Nay I will say more, and but the truth: though they do
keep us from it, or call us away when we be at it, yet they are permitted
unto us, and we may lawfully do them, though they be never so painful and
full of labor without any offense against the law of the Sabbath, wherein
notwithstanding bodily rest is so straightly required, as we have learned. And
therefore it is truly said, Opus corporale, Thom. Aquin. ibidem.
A corporal labor pertaining to the preservation of a man's own boyd, life or
health, when it is necessary, breaks not the Sabbath. Where he brings in the
example of Helias in this case, flying for the space of many Sabbaths together
from the persecution of Iezabell: Such is the great liberality and mercy of
God toward us, that all men might be left without excuse before his judgment
seat, that will not observe this rest of the Sabbath, which when he requires
of them never so exactly for their good, gives unto them notwithstanding so
great liberty of working to encourage them thereunto; if not, at least to the
stopping of their mouths in their just condemnation. And this is that which is
spoken in this chapter, Math. 12.11
That if the sheep be now in the ditch, it must be presently helped out,
least it miscarrie.

Therefore that we might see the truth of this general rule in some few
particulars, for better edifying and instruction in godliness, though there may
not be mustering and surueying of soldiers, Example hereof.
trayning up of men in the feats of war ordinarily upon the Sabbath, cannot
abide no delay. Tho. Aquin. ibid. quaest. 40. art. 4.
And herein also the same Doctor of school divinity (as they call it) says
truly, It is lawful to make war for the preservation of the common wealth,
and defense of the faithful: Si tamen necessitas hoc postulat: If necessity
do require it; where he gives this reason: for this were to tempt God, if any
should in such an imminent necessity abstain from war: Sed necessitate
cessante: But when this necessity does cease, it is not lawful to war. I
will not say as he says, In diebus festis, Upon the holy days, but in diebus
Dominicis, upon the Lords days: Beda in marc. 2.23. 1. Match. 2.40.41.
For as Beda says, Necessitas excusat, Necessity does excuse the fact: where
he alleges the example of the Machabees, who did well upon that day in
defending themselves by arms against their enemies, and they made a decree at
that same time, (as it is set down in that history) saying, and 9.44.
Whosoever shall come to make battle with us upon the Sabbath day, we will
fight against him, that we dye not all, as our brethren were murdered in
secret places.

Tho. Aquin. secunda. 2. quaest. 123. art. 4.
Opus servile ad salutem alterius, non violat Sabbathum, A bodily labor that
is taken in hand for the health of another, does not break the Sabbath, and
inde est, and hereunto it is lawful to give physic unto all men upon the
Sabbath day.

if any breaking into shops or houses by thieves, or such like, we ought so to
meet with these present occasions which by no wisdom could have been
prevented at another time (for they were but now seen, nay they did but even
now offer and show themselves) as may most seem for the benefit of men in
preserving the creatures, which as they were made in the beginning, so are
still to be preserved for his use, neither can they decay without his great
loss and hinderance, in so much that upon these occasions men may not only be
absent from the Church, but also if they were now in the mids of Gods service,
might safely depart from it, yea sometimes unto the leaving of no one person in
the Church. And to this purpose is the similitude of a learned man: Beda in
Mar. 2.
Talis haec causa, etc. Herein the cause that mooues men is such, as in the day
of a public fast: wherein, Si quis aeger leiuniu^ corrumperet, nulla ratione
reus tenetur. If any man through sickness be driven to eat, and so break the
fast, in no wise he is to be condemned.

Last of all, not only men, Many things of necessity must be done to the
cattle upon this day.
but the brute beasts must have all such duties performed unto them, which of
necessity they cannot want without their peril, as the cattle must be
foddered in the winter time, and the beasts must be milked at all times of the
year, and the ox must be loosed from the stall, and driven to the water. Luk
13.15.
And this is that which our Savior Christ me lives, when he says in this
chapter of Matthew. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. In the which place he
does not refuse sacrifices (for they were commanded by God) but he speaks in
comparison, as though he had said: The Lord had rather have mercy showed to
men, then sacrifice offered to himself: so that comparing these duties,
mercy with sacrifice, he prefers the one before the other, and says, he
had rather have this, then that, when both of them cannot be had together, but
if the one but performed, the other must be neglected, then would he have us
leave the sacrifice, and show mercy in helping others.

Genesis 2.24.
So that as it is said, in another case: A man shall leave his father and mother
and cleave to his wife: Not meaning the he should altogether forsake them, but
showing that the bond of marriage is greater then the bond of nature, between
parents and children; and therefore the duties more necessarily required, he
compares the one with the other, and says, that if present duty be required
of me to my parents, and yet at the same time my wife stands in need of my
help, so that I cannot do both together, but must needs leave one undone. I
must make choice of the wife, as the principal, and forsake the father in
comparison of her. Even so the spirit of God here by sacrifice (at by one
kind) meaning generally the whole worship of God, he would have us so to offer
it unto him, as that in the mean season we neglect no occasion of showing
mercy unto any of his creatures, which he offers unto us, but rather first
of all to show mercy, and then to offer sacrifice. As he says in another
place: First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Matthew. 5.22.
For seeing that the whole service of God is ordained for this cause among many
others, that we might be made more fit to help our brethren, and to show all
duties of mercy unto them, all other must give place unto this, when
necessity so requires. According to that which Master Gualter says: Gualt.
in Marc. 2. Homil. 22.
Omnia externa: All outward things must give place unto love, least we lay a
snare upon them: quos necessitas ineuitabilis alio vocat: whom inevitable
necessity does call another way: or at whose hands the present necessity,
that cannot be avoided, does require another thing. And that this is the true
meaning of the law of resting, appears more clearly by that which Christ
Jesus speaks of it in the Gospel after S. Mark: Mark. 2.27.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. That is, the day of
rest was appointed for the benefit of man, not only of him, but of all other
creatures: and therefore it must be so observed, as may be most beneficial
unto them, and the rest in it must give place to them, and not they to it: so
that it were against the meaning of the lawgiver to abuse the rest unto the
hurt of them, and that men should under the pretense of resting, withdraw all
their labor from them, who by present necessity did call for it, and require
it at our hands.

For seeing that the end of it is, that the creatures might be preserved in
their best estate (which without some rest, could never long continue) if now
by laboring I preserve that, which otherwise, if I rested from helping it,
would perish, I have by labor attained unto the very end of rest, which
without labor I could not: and thus in laboring I have not broken the
commandment of rest, but kept it in one of the principal ends for which it
was instituted: namely, the profit and commodity of all the creatures here
below. In which respect our Lord Christ maintains the doing of his
Disciples in gathering the corn, and eating it, for that thereby their frail
and weary bodies being refreshed, and getting new strength (which otherwise
would have fainted, as wanting their ordinary food) were made stronger, and
more able to follow their master. Now, seeing that the Lord in commanding to
rest, had regard to his creatures, that could not want it, namely, that the
breasts might be made more serviceable unto men, and men more fit to do duties
unto their brethren, and unto God in their calling, because his Disciples were
fitted unto this by that labor, which necessity put upon them, and if they
had not so labored, they should have been more unfit: therefore in this work
the commandment of resting was not broken, nay it was especially observed.

Thus as we have seen the commandment of resting is so straight indeed, as it
seemed best unto his wisdom, who made all things for himself, yet in giving
it, he has had regard unto our good: and therefore has made it so large, that
within the compass of it, there is liberty given us to do all such things,
as do not directly hinder the sanctification of the Sabbath: or if they be
against it in their own nature, yet necessity that could not be foreseen,
nor deferred, craving them at our hands, they are judged to be far unlike
unto themselves, and have as it were a new quality put upon them: And here is
the old proverb of the heathen true: Necessitas non habet ferias: Necessity
as it is without laws, so without holy days. And though it be so that we
are given to take too much liberty to our selves, and therefore had need to
be restrained unto the full, and it were more profitable for us to hear from
what things we should rest, then wherein we may labor, yet there is a truth
in all things, which must be known: and though some are ready to abuse it,
yet therefore it must not be kept from them, who have care rightly to use it.
For though they that be ignorant, will be ignorant still, yet wisdom shall
be justified of her children. Which is to be considered of us the rather, least
any through a gross superstition, should fall into the extremity of the
Jews: of whom it is written, and namely of certain heretics called Essaei,
Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 5.
that they are over precise in this rest, so that they dress all their meat
the day before: upon that day they kindle no fire, they remove no vessel:
Aluum non purgant: they do not ease themselves. And in this respect, Mac.
2.3.4.
Mattathias, and the rest of the Jews condemned justly the fact of their
brethren, who for lack of defense suffered themselves, their wives and
children, to the number of 1000. souls to be slain of their enemies upon the
Sabbath day. P. Ram. comment. de rellig lib. 2 cap. 6.
Concerning which fact of theirs, also a learned man says: Superstitio fuit ex
ignorantia: It was a superstition bred in them, for want of the true knowledge
of the law of God.

Hereunto also may be referred, that which the most famous Historiographer and
Divine Master Fox, reports in his worthy book of the Acts and Monuments of
the Church: says he, Master Fox.
Some English histories make mention of a Jew, who about the year of our Lord
1257. fell into a privy at T^kesbury upon a Sabbath day, who for the great
reverence he had to his holy Sabbath, would not suffer himself to be plucked
out: and so Lord Richard Earl of Gloucester, hearing of it, would not suffer
him to be drawn out upon the Sunday, for reverence of the holy day: and thus
the wretched superstitious Jew remaining there till monday, was found dead in
the dung. Therefore let us acknowledge the bountifulnes of God there where it
might seem unto us that we are most of all restrained, and let us not break
his hands and cast his cords from us: but use his freedom well that he has
set us in, and seeing we have liberty to do things of necessity, let us not
venture upon them too boldly, but first of all be sure that they be necessary,
and therefore lawful.

And let us not imagine a necessity and dream of it, when there is none: nor
be of the number of those, whom Solomon of in the Proverbs, Prou. 20.25.
Who devour the holy things, and then inquire after the vows: that is, first
do the thing, and then inquire whether it be lawful, or no: but let us see in
the wisdom of Gods spirit, What works are necessary and therefore lawful
upon this day, and what are not.
whether it may not conveniently be deferred until some other time, and
therefore not necessary, and so no work of the Sabbath, and therefore
abstain from it. For the wise men of this world make many things necessary,
which indeed are not, by doing many things then, when the ought not to be
done, to prevent a necessity, which they have imagined, may fall out in time.
But if they will say it is now necessary, they must be sure that it cannot
be deferred: For what makes a thing necessary in this time, but that no
other time will serve conveniently for it? To this agrees that which a learned
writer says: Si quis roger: If any man demand, Wolph. lib. 3. in Nehe. 9.14.
what is lawful or not lawful to be done upon the Sabbath, (says he)
Tenendum est respo^sum Sceuolae: he must answer as Sceuola did, who being asked
what was lawful to be done upon the holy days, it is reported that he made
answer: Even that which would have hurt, if it had not been done. Which is
true, Exodus 54.21.
if it be rightly understood. Therefore they which in the time of harvest and
hayfield, work upon the Sabbath contrary to the express words of God; as we
have seen heretofore, for fear of the change of weather, and least that
happily some thing might be lost, unless they can say certainly, that to
morrow there will be such weather, and therefore it will be lost: how can they
tell that only this present time is necessary for it, and that no other time
in the world can serve for it, and therefore it must needs then be done? For
how if it fall out otherwise on the morrow? Shall not both other men condemn
them of folly, and themselves also be judges against themselves, that the
things might have been deferred, and therefore that there was no such
necessity, as they presumed upon?

How if the sky had fallen? As no man that has any religion, and care of his
duty to God, will voluntarily absent himself from church for fear of that,
which might come to pass, he knows not when; as that if thieves come, he may
call for help, or if he spy his neighbors house on fire, he may give
warning of it, or will wander up and down in his pastures, fearing least a
sheep should be fallen into a ditch, that he might help it out, so ought we
not in any other time of an imagined necessity, and without just cause
suspected, do that upon the sabbath, which otherwise we will confess, ought
to have been done, neither would we have taken it in hand at all: but taking
the occasion of that, which present necessity does offer unto us in deed, we
must commit the success of those things unto the Lord, which we could by no
wisdom foresee, and though he has given us liberty to judge of the time
present, yet he has reserved this preeminence to himself, alone to be judge
of the time to come, and he would have us for the dispensation of that to
depend upon his providence in obedience to his commandment, who has promised
to give us fit times for the accomplishment of all things here below, so far
forth as he knows it to be most expedient for us.

Moreover, Take heed that we bring not a necessity upon our selves, which God
lays not on us.
when we do understand that such things are necessary which we go about,
(and they be so in truth, for they cannot be deferred) herein lies not the
whole matter, for it may be that they might well have been done before, and so
are not simply necessary, but in respect, namely of our carelesnes and
slothfulnes, who did not foresee and provide for it accordingly, as we might
have done, and thus every thing that might be done upon the six days shall be
made necessary for the seventh. But this necessity because we do wilfully
bring it upon our selves, and the Lord is not the author of it, who must be
the judge of it, it will not carry out the credit of our doings, neither will
it be a sufficient plea for us, before the Lord; who to meet with all such
vain pretenses, at the first, wills us to remember the sabbath before hand,
and to remember it to this end, that nothing might let us from keeping it
holy, and therefore so to dispose of our business aforehand, that nothing do
hinder us from resting upon it. For certainly if men do still remember, how
many days to the sabbath, and that when it comes, it must needs be a day of
rest, if they had any care to keep it, they would not entangle themselves with
more business then the time would permit, that they might not work upon the
sabbath, under the color of necessity, because something is not done, which
they have wilfully taken upon them, more then they ought to do.

And hereunto it seems they had respect in the council, Council. Matiscon. 1.
cap. 1.
where it was thus decreed. Nemo sibi talem necessitatem imponat: Let no man
impose upon him such a necessity, that may compel him to yoke his oxen, where
they speak of a necessity that a man through his own defaulte brings upon
himself. 1 An example thereof.
As for example, (that I may speak unto the capacity of the rudest) if any
artificer should promise so much work to be made ready against such a day,
which now he sees cannot be done, unless he and his servants do work upon
the Sabbath, should thereupon ignorantly deceive himself, and say, surely this
must needs be done, and I cannot put it off beyond such a time, without great
loss, and therefore takes courage to himself, and works some part of that
day, this will not excuse him: for the Lord that wills him to rest upon that
day, commands him also to remember the day long before, that when it comes,
he might rest upon it. But men do wilfully flatter themselves in their sins,
and are glad when they can smooth out their matters, and put this glass upon
the^, that they could not be deferred, though it be not so indeed. And
therefore when the Lords day is the furthest time, to the which they may safely
defer their business (but yet might do them before) will carelessly let pass
all the days of the week unregarded, and then suddenly, because there is no
more time remaining, put them in practice upon that day (going themselves to
this town to speak with such a party, and sending out their servants to
other places about other things) and yet will not be persuaded (forsooth) but
that all is well, and that they have very great reason for their doings: for
this is that which they will stand to justify, and they can prove it before
all men, that the thing was merueilous necessary, for it could not be
deferred: but in the mean season, they will conceal that from you which marres
al again, which their own conscience tells a great many, and a wise man may
easily epsy it in the rest, that they have carelessly pretermitted the
opportunity of doing it at another time, when it might have bin as well, or
more conveniently done.

And that I might not be tedious in so plain a matter, (though my purpose be
to speak most profitably, and therefore tarry in it the longer) I will show
you the like in a case, that I have had experience of my self, 2 Another
example.
when I did once dealt with one for laboring upon the Sabbath, and namely, for
washing hemp out of the water, in which it had been laid a rotting: the party
answered me, that it could tarry no longer, but must needs then be drawn out,
otherwise all should be lost: which whether it be so or no, I leave it to be
judged of others (for I confess I have no great skill that way my self) yet
by further speech, finding that they know how many days it must lie in the
water, I said unto him, that they might have prevented it, if they would have
remembered the Sabbath, and therefore to have counted their days, and put the
hemp into the water, that they might have drawn it out again one or two
days before, or after the Sabbath. So then the truth is, that many times such
things must be done of necessity, and they are come to that pass, that we
cannot avoid it: but then we must do it with an heavy heart, and sorrowful
mind, lamenting our former negligence, that did not foresee it, and bewayling
our carelesnes, that we did not provide for it, praying to God to forgive us
our sin, which though it be not wilful and of presumption, yet proceeds of
ignorance and want of care, at least to remember, neither can it be excused.

Therefore when a man is to appear at Westminster Hall, in the Term, 3
Another example.
or has another such like business, and the day of his appearance be upon the
Monday or Tuesday, he must not therefore presume to travail upon the Lords
day, which is a day of rest, because he can say, it is necessary that I should
be there against such a time: for the Lord in giving this commandment, has in
wisdom prefixed this word, remember before it, and Moses in repeating the Law,
Deuteronomy. 5. Dot not forget it, but faithfully keeps it, saying, observe or mark
it, that from hence we might learn so to dispose of all iourneyes and
travails, that somewhere we might observe, and keep a sabbath or day of rest.
If we say we had forgotten it, and the time stole upon us before we were aware,
we must understand, that all this is nothing, but vain fig leaves, which will
not cover our nakedness, from the eyes of him that sees al things, before whom
ignorance will not excuse, when he has in his word taught us what to do, much
less will careless forgetfulness prevail, when he has commanded us to
remember it.

Let us therefore in good earnest, cast away all the cloakes of sin, and let us
not willingly be seduced, for that only the Lord judges to be necessary at
this time, which by no heedful remembrance or marking, 4 Another example.
we could have done before, howsoever in the vanity of our own brains, we
may judge to the contrary. So that if any man when he has had the whole week
before him, to make his provision, will neglect the opportunity, and pass the
time over, and then go upon the Lords day to the butchers, or such like places
to buie victuals, hoping to get a better penniworth, or because he would not
let his business before, or for that he makes no difference of days, and all
this while grossly imagines, that he commits no sin, excusing his fact
with this, that meat must needs be had, and it cannot be deferred, daubing
it up, as it were with the untempered mortar of necessity, he must be
admonished, that howsoever he may set a fair face on his before men, and may
bleare their eyes, that cannot well see, yet in Gods judgment i^ is less then
nothing (who must be judge of all) but will melt away as snow before the
sun, seeing that he has to cut off the head and tail of those idle
pretenses, spoken aloude, and proclaimed long ago, that the sabbath is to be
observed and remembered for these causes: which we must do so much the rather,
because he promises unto us, that in six days, we shall be able to do all
our work, for so is it in the words of the commandment. Six days shall
thou labor and do all thy work, Every man in the six days may do all his
work.
in which words because he uses it as a reason to persuade us to rest upon the
seventh day, there must needs be secretly included, as there is, a promise of
the blessing of God upon our labors in the six days, that in them we shall be
able to do al our work, even al our work, I say, which properly belongs unto
us, and which the Lord would have us to do, and therefore calls it our
work. As Master Calvin notes upon these words: Calu. in Exodus 20.8.
Vniuersum opus. All thy work: hereby (says he) is signified, that though the
sabbath be taken away, there will be time enough for all our business: otherwise
this reason we see were insufficient to persuade men to rest upon the seventh
day, if in the six we might truly object, they cannot do all their work.
But the Lord, who knows what he would have us to do, and therefore what is
our work better then we our selves, and what is our strength to do it, and
what time we have allotted out for it, he says in the six days, we may do
all our work: and this he speaks to the busiest body in the world, and to
the most covetous, who knows no end of working, whereby any gain is gotten,
and therefore when we take upon us so many things, that we are overwhelmed with
them, and cannot bring them to an end, with the end of the six days; then
have we intermedled with that which belongs not unto us, and have entered as it
were upon other men's business, and it is not the Lord, but the devil that has
set us on work, and he will one day pay us our hyre.

Master Calvin does lay forth this whole matter very plentifully in most
significant words, Calvin. upon Deuteronomy. 5. sermon. 35.
and follows it with great power, in his sermons upon Deuteronomie: When it is
said, Thou shall labor six days, our Lords would hereby signify unto us,
that we ought not to complain of yielding unto him, one certain day, when
he leaves unto us six for one: as if he did say, shall the cost and charge
be great unto you, to choose one day which may be wholly given to my service,
that you do no other thing in it, but read and exercise your selves in my
law, or hear my doctrine which shall be preached unto you; a day to come to
the Temple, to the end you may there be confirmed by the sacrifices, which are
there made; a day to call upon my name, to declare and protest, that you are of
the number and company of my people: ought this to be grievous and
troublesome unto you, seeing you have six days free to traffic and to do
your business in? when I use such gentleness toward you, that I demand but one
day of seven, is not this an over great unthankfulness on your part, if you
complain of this time, as being evil employed: If you be such covetous and
niggardly wretches, as not to spare me one seventh part of the time? I have
given you your whole life, wheresoever the sun shines upon you, you ought to
acknowledge my goodness, and how that I am a liberal father toward you, for
this sun which J make to shine, is to give you a mean to go and walk by,
to the end, that every one may do his business: and yet for all this why is it,
that I shall not have one day among seven, in which every one should withdraw
himself from his travail and labor? that you be not wrapped in the care of
the world, and so have no care to think upon me? Now then we see that this
sentence of travailing the six days is not placed as a commandment, but is
rather a permission which God gives, and that to reproach the unthankfulness of
men, if they observe not the Sabbath day, and sanctify it in such sort as we
have spoken. So then when men shall have well considered of this thing, they
shall be convinced that God bears with them as a father, which should show
himself pitiful to his children, and therefore let us take diligent heed
that we be not ungrateful, but be provoked and allured to serve our God so
much the more, seeing he commands us not those things which might seem over
bitter and painful unto us, but has a due regard to our power and ability,
therefore when he bears with us after this manner, and leaves unto us our
profits and commodities, so much more dissolute, wicked, and inexcusable are
we, if we be not inflamed to yield our selves wholly unto him. Thus far
Master Calvin.

See then what an impudency and rebellion this is, that men are grown unto:
the Lord says, In six days they may do all their work, and therefore
wills them to rest upon the seventh: and they most wickedly cry out as loud,
with more then a whorish face by their speeches and practices, that in six
days they cannot do all their work, and therefore they take up also all our
part of the seventh: what a cruelty then is this that they charge the Lord
withal, that he should bind them under the pain of eternal condemnation to
rest upon the seventh day, and yet should not give them sufficient time upon
the other days to end their work in? which once but to imagine were horrible
impiety. But let us justify the Lord in his mercy, and confess as the truth
is, that we ought so much the more carefully to remember the Sabbath, to rest
upon it, because in the six days we may do all our work, if we will pray
unto God for wisdom in our calling, and so we shall be delivered from that
necessity of working many times, which otherwise we do voluntarily pull upon
our selves. Thus we may conclude this point, that seeing the Lord of his great
liberality, even upon that day wherein he requires our rest most precisely,
has not cast us into that bondage, that we should do nothing at all, but has
left us that freedom that in needful things we may labor, it stands us in
hand so much the more carefully to look to our selves, that we be sure the
things we go about could not have bin done before, not deferred any longer: and
therefore were necessary to be done at that time, which when we be thoroughly
persuaded of by Gods word, then may we in faith and a good conscience take
them in hand, knowing that the Lord exempteth us as it were at that present,
from the general law of resting, and by some special occasion calls us to
work, and therefore we do it, as unto him.

Works of necessity upon the Lords day must not be done for gain but of mercy
and pity.
In which consideration, we ought not to take any thing for our worldly labors
upon the Sabbath, and we should not make a gain of our travail upon that day
if necessity drive us unto it, for we do it not as a work of our calling,
from the which we must cease, nor as that by the which we get our living,
with which we must not meddle) but only because some of the creatures do
stand in need of our help, for whose preservation the day of rest is
appointed, and therefore in pity and compassion unto them, we yield them our
labor and do it as a deed of mercy, and unto the Lord. And therefore though
that constitution of Gregory the 9. Cent. 13. cap. 6.
be not in all points sound, when he says, Let men and cattle rest upon the
Lords day, unless urgent necessity compel them, vel nisi gratis fiat, or
unless it be done freely for the poor, or for the Church: because the free
doing of a thing will not excuse it, when there is no necessity, or when it is
not a work proper unto this day: yet it seems that herein he aimed at the
truth, when he requires that that which is done should not be for gain, but of
love to the poor and to the Church of God, and therefore freely.

And this is that indeed which commonly men do pretend when they are charged
with their needless trauailings, that it was a good deed to help such a one in
misery, and it did lie upon his undoing, and he could not but do it for very
pity, and a great deal more they can say for themselves. Therefore let it
appear by their doings that nothing moved them but pity, and that of very
conscience to relieve the necessity of others, thy were moved unto it, by not
only not receiving, but not looking for any reward of men, no more then you
do of the alms which you give, and for visiting the sick, and imprisoned,
that so it may be counted as an holy work indeed, when you do it, not
respecting your own profit in it, but only the good of others. Therefore let
the Physician, or chirurgian, and such as attend upon the sick, or are any
ways employed about him, take nothing for their pains upon the Sabbath; but
let them do it freely, that it may be a gift and not accounted as a work of
their calling, but a deed of love, and the apothecarie though he receive money
for his stuff, yet let his labor be free. The like must be understood of all
other works of necessity: And therefore if the lawyer, counselor, or sergeant
will needs travail then about his clients cause, let him do it only for Gods
sake, and not be occupied about it, as a worldly thing, and a matter of gain,
for that is proper to the six days, in the which God would have them in the
sweat of their face to eat their bread.

for the Lord, as this day is appointed out wholly for his service: and that
no private commodity of your own moved you unto it, for the Lord has given
you the six days to make provision for yourselfe, for otherwise we shall make
no difference betwixt the six days and the seventh, the works of the one and
of the other, if we shall in all of them alike be conversant in the same
things, with the same mind, and for the same end and purpose. Therefore that
I might end this matter, we do see, that excepting these cases of necessity,
in which the Lord would have us thus cheerfully to be occupied, as about the
works of mercy, and his service only, from whence no gain is to be looked
for, 1. Tim. 6.6.
(though godliness indeed be great gain, and he that has pity upon the poor,
lends unto the Lord, and look what he lays out, Prou. 19.17.
it shall be repayed him: we are bound most straightly in this commandment to
rest, and that the Lord looks for a rare and singular kind of rest, even
such a one as we have heard out of his word, and that he will not dispense
with us in any wise, but as it has been showed; and therefore that we ought
to have a principal respect and regard unto it, as to the thing that does most
nearly concern us. And in this one point though I am not ignorant, that I
have a great cloud of adversaries against me, who are otherwise minded, and
cannot be thus persuaded, (as indeed many things in this commandment are
greatly controuersied, yea among the learned, as in any one that I know) yet I
desire them in the fear of God, that as they will observe the rule of the
Apostle, James 1.19.
who would have us swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath: they
would indifferently, and (as it were) in an eeuen balance weigh such things,
at have been already alleged for the proof of it, before they begin to give
out their censures against it.

Objection. If we be thus straightly bound to rest, we are still in as great
bondage, as the Jews were under the law.
Therefore whereas some men might hereupon gather that if the case be thus
betwixt the Lord and us, in the matter of the Sabbath, and that the
commandment of resting does stand in such force and strength, and binds us
so strongly as it does, then our estate is no better then the Jews, the same
yoke of bondage lies still upon our necks, that was upon them, and the
freedom purchased by Christ is of none account, the liberty proper to a
Christian man nothing worth, the Gospel has no preferment above the law.
Answer. We are not bound to rest for those ends and purposes, for which they
did.
For answer unto the which we must consider, that first of all we are
delivered from that manner of keeping the Sabbath, which the Jews were tied
unto: at that it might put the^ in remembrance of that great rest, which the
Lord bestowed upon them, from the continual and intolerable work in Egypt, by
the hand of Moses, and that thereby their hope might be nourished of the
Messiah to come, by whom they should have a perpetual Sabbath and rest from
sin, in the kingdom of heaven, begun hereupon earth; unto the which ends
they were bound to have a principal respect, and so to keep the Sabbath, as
they might most profit in these, even in thankfulness for the benefit received,
and in hope of that that was promised, neither of which because they can
appertain unto us, (for we have not been in Egypt, and therefore cannot
remember our delivery from thence, and Christ Jesus is already come, and has
entered into his rest, and therefore we need not to hope for it) that though
we be bound to the same rest with the Jews, yet our condition is more easy
and tolerable, in that we be freed from these appertenances, and these other
burdens are not laid upon us.

The which we shall be so much the rather persuaded of, if we look into that
liberty, 2 We have also more liberty then they in the manner of sanctifying
the day.
which is brought unto us by Christ, concerning the sanctifying also of the day
of rest, which consists in such a multitude of purificatio^s, washings and
clensings, and in such a great number of sacrifices and oblations, al which
were doubled upon the Sabbath: and therefore the observation of the Sabbath was
more laborious, and painful unto them, and sooner might they offend in it: in
stead of which we have fewer things to do, and they be more simple, plain and
easy, as the hearing of the word, receiving of the Sacraments and prayer. And
generally as our estate is better then of the Jews, in regard of the whole
worship of God, which is now more evident, shorter, not so compound, more
significant, and with less difficulty; so upon the Sabbath, because the whole
worship is to be performed, in consideration of that also, great are our
privileges above theirs, as in all other things, so in the observation of the
Sabbath. Hebr. 1.1.
Moreover, whereas God in old times spoke sundry times, and in diverse manners
unto them, and therefore their knowledge of the law was not so great as ours in
these last days, wherein he has spoken unto us, once by his son: neither
were their graces and gifts so many and excellent ordinarily, Act. 2.20.
as they be now, when God has powered out his spirit upon all flesh: and
therefore they being like unto children, 3 And we are set free from all the
childish rudime^ts annexed unto this day.
and we unto men grown, they stood in need of many more helps to further them
in the observation of this commandment, then we do, and which though they
were bound unto, yet we are freed from: As they were commanded to let their
ground rest every seventh year, and that is called her Sabbath, with many
other such like things.

Therefore as we have great freedom in all other commandments above them, so
in this. For must we not needs confess, that though we are still bound as
the Jews were, Psalm. 1.2.
to meditate upon the law of God, day and night, yet for so much as we are not
commanded to carry it about in the skirts of our garments, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
and upon other bracelets, as they were, and though we be not exempted from
teaching our children, no more then they, yet because we are not charged with
the writing of it upon our gates, verse. 9.
and the posts of our doors, as they were; must we not acknowledge (I say)
that even in those things, that we are bound unto, in common with the Jews,
we have more liberty. then ever they had? So is it in the Sabbath, though we
be bound to keep the rest, yet because we are freed from many rudiments of it,
which (as childish instructions to further them in it) they were bound unto, as
we have seen in the former part of this treatise, we must thankfully
profess, that the Lord has dealt more liberally with us, then with them.
Therefore even as the child which is set to read, must name every letter
apart and distinctly by it self, and spell every syllable, that so he might
be helped forward to reading, which when he has attained unto, though still
he be bound to read, yet he is freed spelling and naming every letter, as he
had wont to do, and that were a great bondage and wearisomnes to bind him
unto it still, nay it were altogether ridiculous, and childish in him indeed:
So now, though we be charged to rest upon the Sabbath, yet when we are not
ouercharged with those Jewish ceremonies, which they (being children) had given
them as furtherances unto the^, let us not complain, before we have cause,
Galat. 4.3.
neither murmr against God, because we cannot be so licentious, as we would,
seeing we be at such liberty, as we be, and as it pleases the Lord to bestow
upon us, and let us be so much the more careful to rest, by how much we have
but this one thing to attend upon, and are made free from many other, which
might hinder us.

Unto all which if I shall add this, in the last place, I will make an end of
this matter, that besides these great privileges, which we have spoken of,
Christ Jesus in the Gospel, has offered unto us somewhat more, even in this
commandment that we have now in hand: 4 And from the observation of many other
Sabbaths which they had.
That though we be restrained upon this day from work both hand and foot, as
the Jews were, yet have we liberty to work upon many other. For they were
bound unto a great many of other days, which had the nature of the Sabbath,
and therefore are so called many times, and upon the which they might not
work: which as it appears in many other places of the scripture, so
especially in Leuit. the 23. where they are reckoned up in order, beginning
with the Sabbath, unto which is adjoined the Passover, the feast of the first
fruits, of trumpets, and of tabernacles: and every one of these had more days
then one proper unto them, as appears in that chapter most largely, besides
the first day of every new Moon: from all which we are now freed, as
appears by the Apostle. Coloss. 2.16.
Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day: or of the new moon, or of
the Sabbath days. For he speaks of many, even of all those, which unto the
Jews were commanded upon the same condition, that the Sabbath day was, and
were of like nature to it: and therefore he finds fault with the Galathians
for observing them, Galat. 4.10. verse. 9.
saying, Ye observe days, and months, and times, which he calls weak and
beggarly rudiments, because now there was no use of them, but all of them being
taken away, only the Sabbath is reserved for us. Therefore who is so blind
that will not see? and so obstinate that will not confess? that though we be
bound to the keeping of the Sabbath, as the Jews were, yet neither the
liberty of the Gospel is taken from us, nor the bondage of the law cast upon
us. Nay, who is so unthankful for this great liberty in these days, above
that which the first people of God had, that under the pretense of it, he will
break out to the doing of whatsoever likes himself upon the day of rest, and
set open a door of all licentiousnes unto others: Matthew. 18.6.7.
but woe be unto the world, because of offenses, it is necessary that offenses
should come, but woe be unto them, by whom they do come, it were better for
them that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they were drowned in
the bottom of the sea.

Therefore let us be otherwise minded, and take it, to be our bounden duty
most carefully to rest from the ordinary works of our calling upon the
Sabbath, whatsoever may be spoken or imagined to the contrary. And the rather
that we might do it, Gods punishments upon the breakers of the Sabbath.
let us consider of the judgments of God that have come upon men for breaking
the Sabbath: By which sensible kind of persuasion (even experience the
mistress of fools) they in the Council at Paris labored to persuade unto a
more religious keeping of the day, Council. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50.
when after they had justly complained, that (as many other things) so also the
observation of the Sabbath was greatly decayed, through the abuse of Christian
liberty, in that men too much followed the delights of the world, and their
own worldly pleasures, both wicked and dangerous; they further add: Multi
nanque nostrum visu, multi etiam quorundam relatu didicimus, etc. For many of
us have been eyewitnesses, many have intelligence of it by the relation of
others, that some men upon this day, being about their husbandry, have been
stricken with thunder, some have been maimed, and made lame, some have had their
bodies, even bones and all burnt in a moment with visible fire, and have
consumed to ashes, and many other judgments of God have been, and are daily:
whereby it is declared, that God is offended with the dishonor of so great a
day.

And the Centuriators of Magdeburge, Cent. 12. cap. 6.
entreating of the manners of Christians, made report out of another history,
that a certain husbandman (in Parochia Gemilacensi) grinding corn upon the
Lords day, the meal began to burn, Anno Dom. 1126. Which though it might
seem to be a thing mere casual, yet they set it down as a judgment of God
upon him, for breaking the Sabbath. As also that which they speak in the same
place of one of the Kings of Denmark, Ecclesiast. hist. Centur. 12. ibid.
who when as he contrary to the admonition of the Priests (who desired him to
defer it) would needs upon the day of Pentecost make war with his enemy,
dyed in the battle. But that may be better known unto us all, which is
written in the 2. book of Macchabees, of Nicanor the Jews enemy, who would
needs set upon them on the Sabbath, from which when other the Jews that were
compelled to be with him, could by no means dissuade him, he was slain in
the battle, and himself most miserably, but deservedly handled, even the
parts of his body shamefully dismembered, as in that history you may read
more at large. And I am sure our time has not wanted examples in this kind,
whosoever has observed them, when sometimes in the Faires upon this day, by
sudden floods the wares have swumme in the streets: sometime the scaffolds at
plays have fallen down, to the hurting and endangering of many, sometime one
thing, some time another has fallen out: of which we must say as Christ says
of the Galileans, they were not the greatest sins in England, Luke 13.2.3.
but unless we repent and amend, we must all likewise perish. He punishes
some, to show the rest, what they must look for, if they continue; he
punishes not all, here in this world, to teach us there is a day of judgment,
reserved for the rest. And therefore it was well alleged in a provincial
council, to persuade unto the better observation of the Sabbath: Matisconens.
council. 2. cap. 1.
Haec omnia: By doing of these things, we shall both pacify the wrath of God
toward us, and also turn away, and remove his heavy plagues, as sicknesses,
and scarsitie.

And here I may remember unto you (if it be not altogether out of place) the
history of him, Numb. 15.32.
who in the time of the law, gathering sticks, was stoned to death for it, by
the judgment of Moses from the mouth of God, of which M. Calvin says, That
this is the sum of the history, Call. in hunc locum.
that by the death of this one man was ratified the religious observation of
the sabbath day, that afterward it might have more reverence; by which severe
punishment, it is apparent, that he did not so much offend of ignorance, as of
a gross contempt of the law, whereby it came to pass that he made none
account to subvert and corrupt all holy orders. As it appears also by the
circumstance of the text, going immediately before, where is set down the
difference of punishments upon malefactors, who sin of ignorance and of
contempt, or (as it is said there) with an high hand; which latter should be
punished with death, and then follows immediately this history as an example
or proof of it: whereby it appears, that though not every breach of this
commandment is to be punished with death, yet the open and contemptuous
breaking of it, does deserve it, as all other sins of the like nature in
other the Commandments of the first and second table: as an Atheist, he that
offers unto other Gods, that blasphemeth the name of the living God, that
curses father and mother, that commits murder, etc. which judgments, when
the magistrates do fail to execute, then the Lord does it himself upon some
few, to show what should be done to all the rest, and what they may look
for, if they do not repent.

But to proceed in this matter according to my purpose, Upon the Lords day we
ought to rest from al honest recreations and lawful delights.
it is most certain that we are not only commanded to rest from these that we
have spoken of, but from al other things which might hinder us from the
sanctifying of the sabbath, as well as these, of which sort are all honest
recreations, and lawful pleasures, which are permitted unto us upon the other
days, to further us in the works of our callings which we do stand in need
of, even as of meat and drink, and sleep: for if those worldly duties (which
we are commanded to walk in, and be of necessity required, and without the
which the common wealth cannot stand at all) are then forbidden when we should
attend upon the Lords work, because we cannot be wholly occupied in both: much
more those things which serve but for pleasure, without the which mankind may
continue, though not so well continue, must be given over, because we cannot
have the present delight in the use of them, and yet at the same time be
occupied in the hearing of the word, and such other parts of Gods holy worship
and service, as he requires of us, upon the Sabbath day: Nay because men
cannot be both at Church serving God with the rest of their people, and in
their houses sporting themselves with their companions together; nor in the
great congregation praising God with their brethren, and in the open fields
playing with their fellows at one time: (And God upon the sabbath requires
these of them) therefore the other must give place to it, and we must not
think it sufficient, that we do no work upon the sabbath, and in the mean
season be occupied about all manner of delights, but we must cease as well
from the one as from the other. And we must do it so much the more, by how
much the works of our recreation are less needful, then the works of our
vocation, and yet do more hinder us from the sanctifying of the sabbath then
they. For experience (which is the mistress of very fools) may teach us (and
our nature is such that it must needs be so) how much we are moved with
delectable things every one in his kind, some this way, another that: how
marueilouslie they do affect us, how all our senses are taken up with them, and
all the parts of soul and body, wholly possessed with them, that for the
present time none of them can be occupied about the Lords work immediately, at
least wise as they should be. Therefore upon this day all sorts of men must
give over utterly all shooting, hunting, hawking, tennise, fensing, bowling,
or such like, and they must have no more dealing with them, then the artificer
with his trade, or husband man with his plowe: and as men must not come to
Church with their bows and arrows in their hands, so neither with their
hawks upon their fists, which they had need to do so much the less,
because a living creature which is stirring, which must so beheld in the eye of
the bearer, and in the open view of others, is more able to hinder the mind
from being attentive, then a senseless creature, or a piece of a stick, which
a man may cast behind him, or throw where he list.

to the edifying and building up of one another in godliness, 1. Cor. 14.26.
and not to the pulling down and destroying of them therein? And if they
themselves would be ashamed to hold them upon their fiftes when they should
receive the sacrament, upon what ground do they hold them in the ministry
of the word? Unless they will lightlier regard the word, then the sacrament,
or put asunder those things which God has joined. So then we see they are
greatly deceived, who when upon this day they have abstained from all kind
of work, do think they have marueilouslie kept the commandment, though in
the mean season they have been occupied in all kind of pleasure and delights,
and (because they know no mean between working and playing) think it
sufficient, that they restrain themselves of the one, and then give themselves
all liberty to the other.

Now if these and such like honest and lawful recreations do hinder men in
obeying the commandment of rest, in so much that they can in no wise stand
together, what shall we say of so many unlawful games as are used every where?
Much more from all unlawful pastimes. Ephe. 5.16.
(which only and truly are called pastimes, as they be) because there is
nothing in them, but a mere idle and fruitelesse mispending of the time, and
passing of it away, which they should redeem. If such as be tolerable at
other times, upon this day are inexcusable, because they hinder us from
sanctifying the day; what profitable show of reason can be brought for the
maintenance of those, which being at all other times worthy to be condemned,
yet upon this day are most commonly practiced, and are made as it were proper
and peculiar unto it, as though the time did make them lawful: and gave some
privilege and credit unto them?

Here therefore we may justly complain unto God, and men of the manifold
abuses, and sundry breaches of this holy rest, by all the disorder and
confusion that accompanies Lords of misrule, wherein whole days and nights
are spent even upon the sabbaths, and at that time especially when they would
seem to be most devout, keeping the remembrance of the greatest benefit that
ever was, or can be bestowed upon mankind, even the birth and incarnation of
Christ Jesus, and therefore they will not work at all (for sooth) that they
might give themselves more wholly to the consideration of it, as they should,
but that their doing do manifestly speak against them, that they do
celebrate the feast of the drunken god Bacchus, rather then any thing else.

So that here we may justly complain, with that ancient father and godly
divine, Bullinger in Apoc. concio. 4.
as he did in his days, That whereas David when he was under Saules
persecution, chiefly bewaileth, that he had not free access unto the Lords
tabernacle, our men count it one of the chiefest happiness, never to come into
the company of the Sain^es: Et die dominico abuti ad lusus, and to abuse the
Lords day unto gaming, Musculin Matthew. 12.11.
unto drinking, unto dancing, and unto profane things. And with another
learned man. Vanitati student die dominico: Many give themselves wholly to
vanity upon the Lords day, and spend away the time in their delights, in
feasting, in drunkenness, in whoring. Whereupon it comes to pass, there at no
time seen more vanity, filthiness, and riote, then upon that day which should
be accounted holy unto the Lord. August. in enarrationem tituli. Psalm. 91.
So that here that saying of S. Augustine is true, Quanto melius est arare quam
saltare? How much better is it for men upon this day, to go to plow, then to
dancing.

Yet if we had this one complaint only to make, it may be we could hold our
peace; but because we may justly say with the Lord in the Prophet, behold a
thousand abominations more, Ezekiel. 8.13.15.
we must needs renew our complaint of the ordinary Enterludes and
Stage Plays, (wherein some spend their whole life, and when they die, their
conscience vncomfortablie tells them, that they have not wrought but played
all their days:) and also of the common Bearebaytings, Bulbaytings,
Cockefightings, and such like, wherein there is nothing else, but an unnatural
pleasinhg of our eyes, and feeding our affections with the cruelty of one
creature against another to no purpose: of the May-games, and setting up of
May-poles, and of so many other, as the very wisdom of men has judged
unlawful, and therefore not to be suffered in a Christian common wealth: much
more has the word of God condemned them, as the unfruitful works of darkness,
and more meet for the night either of Atheism among the Heathen, from whence
they sprung, or Idolatry among the Papists, in which they grew up, then for
to day and clear light of the Gospel, in which we do live: and therefore as
it is a sin to be occupied about them at any time, so a double sin at this
time: and if we ought to rest from them altogether; then most of all upon the
Sabbath and day of rest; and if they be works not agreeable to the days of
our own works, then much less with the day of the Lords work.

And here we had need to pray that the ancient laws of Christian Princes and
Emperors might be revived, and where they be, that withal leueritie they might
be put in execution, whereby a number of abuses, might be constrained to
shrink in their horns, which now without all controulment too shamelesly
lift up their heads here in England. Canutus in his laws among other things
which he forbad upon the Lords day, Canutus lege. 15.
(as we have seen before) says, Let huntings and all worldly work be
forborne. And in the impe^iall laws the same things with great severity are
forbidden: for when it is first said, Dominicum d^em semper honorabilem ita
decernimus: We decree that the Lords day should always be so honorable and
reverenced, etc. Then it follows: Leg. final. C. de ferij^.
Nihil eodem die sibi vendicet scena theatralis. Upon that day let there be no
state plays, or other games, nor the lamentable spectacles of fighting with
wild beasts. Etiamsi in nostram natale^ celebranda solemnitas inciderit,
differatur: Though it so fall out that the solemnity of our birth day should
then be kept, let it be deferred. Si quis vnquam spectaculis interesse, etc.
Let all his goods be confiscated, and lose them, Whosoever shall be present at
any spectacles or games, (they say die festo) I would it were with us, but die
Dominico, upon the Lords day.

August. de temp. sermon. 251
Saint Augustine amongst many other things which he dissuadeth his hearers from
upon the Lords day in his sermons, says, Neque in venatione se occupet, and
diabolico mancipetur officio: Neither let any man upon this day be occupied in
hunting, and herein become the devils servant, to do his business by ranging
the fields and the woods, shouting, hollowing and crying out. Most of all
ought such things to be kept out of the Church, neither should men be suffered
so to play the fools there, nor to come in thither from their games with such
unseemly behavior as in some places they do, in this respect we had need of
the door keepers that were under the law, to keep out such profane dogs
and filthy swine: for as one man says, (complaining of sundry abuses of the
Lords day) Et quod omnium turpissimum est: And that which is most shameful of
all, Muscul. in Math. 12.11.
men run with such vanity and imprudencie unto the assemblies of the Church,
when others meet to exercise the discipline of faith, of modesty, and of the
framing of their whole life, I say they come thither with no less want of
modesty, Quam si ad vanissimas saltationes, and impudica spectacula, Then if
the people were called together, unto most vain dancing and shameless
spectacles: Nihil est disciminis inter habitum saltantium, and ecclesias
ingredientium: There is no difference between the attire and behavior of
dauncers, and of them that come into the Church. Notwithstanding, I am not of
that mind (neither would I be mistaken) to think that men should never take
their delight, It is not unlawful to use recreations, we only restrain men
from the^ upon this day.
and that all recreation were sinful, I am not so stoicall to bind men only
unto things of necessity, seeing the Lord of his great mercy, has given so
many for pleasure: be it far from me that I lay any heavier burden upon any
man, then the Lord himself has laid: For I know that to all things there is
an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under the sun. But as in the
former treatise, we did not condemn the works of men's callings, because we
judged them unlawful upon the day of rest, nay we held them commendable and
necessary, and therefore would have men faithfully to travail in them upon
the six days, that so they might rest from them upon the seventh, when they
have done all their work before: So in determining (that we must give over
then our ordinary recreations) we do not conclude, that they should altogether
be left, but advise men rather to take them at some other time; and we do
exhort them that be in government, to give some time to their children and
servants, for their honest recreation, upon other days, that they be not
driven to take it upon this, seeing they can no more want it altogether, then
their ordinary food. And as we have seen they are bound to give them some time
to work for themselves, unless they will by their over much straightnes
compel them to it upon the day of rest, so must they spare also some few
hours for their refreshing now and then, seeing they can no more want the one
then the other.

But that we might thoroughly perceive the largenes of this rest, and know the
full measure of it for our good, we must stretch out our line yet further, for
it extends it self beyond all this that has been spoken: for in this
commandment the Lord does not only bind men to rest from such works and
pleasures as we have seen, We must rest also from speaking and hearing of
worldly matters.
but also from speaking and talking of them, seeing his purpose is, not only
to restrain the hand and the foot, but the lips and tongue also, because
they hinder our selves and others from keeping holy the day, as well as any
thing else. For unless we will restrain and shorten this commandment more
then all the other, why should not idle words be forbidden here, as well as in
all the rest? And seeing in the first, both Atheism and profane speeches are
forbidden, and it is a sin against the second commandment, to name false gods,
us well as to worship them; Psalm. 16.4.
and in the third, the name of God is dishonored by our ungodly conversation,
and by our vain and false oaths, why should not the law of the Sabbath be as
large in forbidding long communication, and large discourses about worldly
business and pleasures, as well as the things themselves? especially when we
see the same equity and proportion, in the laws of the second table also: In
which not only murder is forbidden, but all railing words, Math. 5.22.
proud, and scornful speeches; and that law which forbids adultery,
Ephesians. 4.29. and ^.3.
says, that no filthy communication must proceed out of your mouths:
therefore seeing the other commandments are given to frame the whole body of
man, and every part of it unto obedience, why should it not be presumed of the
commandment of the Sabbath also, that it orders our words as well as our
works? especially seeing the one is more disordered then the other, and they
which can rule their hands, and their feet, cannot so well govern their
tongues: of which truth (seem it never so new and strange unto us) though no
truth indeed be new, we shall so much the rather be persuaded, if we consider
that much talk about worldly matters does as well hinder the sanctification of
the day, as much work, and so much the more, because we may work with our
selves alone, yet cannot talk but with others, and so do hinder both our
selves and them: For our minds cannot be wholly set upon the worship of God
as they should, and at the same time be speaking of, and listening unto the
affairs of this life, even of our commodities, profits and pleasures. Besides
that the Lord would have our mouths and ears otherwise occupied upon this
day, as well as our hands and feet, as shall more fully appear hereafter. So
that upon this day men must cease from making of bargains, and broaking of
matters, from talking about their merchandise and trades, from questioning and
debating of things about their cattle, corn and white meat: and generally
from all worldly matters incident to our calling, and then we must speak with
new tongues (as it were) and put new words into our mouths, as well as new
works into our hands: that it may appear unto all men, which behold us, that
it is a day of rest indeed, when we thus rest in whole, not in part, and that
it is a new day differing from the other six, when we are so altogether made
new, and as it were differ from that, which we were before, both in word and
deed.

And therefore we must be far from the practice of a great many, who make
this the only day of reckoning with their servants, and of accounts with their
laborers, and chapmen, and bestow it for the most part in hearing what has
been done the week before, and prescribing what should be done the week
following. Much less should we draw near the practice of such, who as they
know no end of their pleasures, so they can never make an end of talking and
hearing of them, so ouerfilled are they with them, that out of the abundance
of their hearts, their mouths must needs speak: and as they have many
fruitles discourses abuot their hawking and hunting at home in their houses,
before and after it, besides that which they have abroad in their fields, when
they are in the game, so that there is more time and words misspent afterward
about it, then was well spent before in it: even so they make all days alike,
and look how far their hawks are from their fists, and their dogs from
their heels upon that day, so far are the unprofitable and endless tales
concerning the same from their mouths and cares: and a little less, because
when necessity drives them to leave the one (because they are at their meat,
and such like) yet they cannot give over the other, but pursue it to the
uttermost, even to the disturbance of others, and filling their heads so full
of vanity, as their own are, besides their own sin in abusing of the time,
and the dishonor of Gods name in breaking of the Sabbath.

And now if unto all this which has been spoken, you will give me leave to
add but one thing more, you shall see how absolute, and perfect this law is,
even like unto the lawgiuer himself, who (as he is a spirit) so will be
worshipped in spirit and truth, in all the several parts of his worship,
which he requires in every one of his commandments. For this is that which
was delivered unto us in the first entrance into the Commandments, namely,
that the whole law of God was given unto whole man, and as the Lord God
created him both in soul and body, redeemed him by Christ Jesus, sanctifies
and preserves here, and is purposed elsewhere to glorify him in both for
ever: so he has set him down that form of obedience, whereby in both he might
be reformed to that image, according to the which he was first created, in
righteousness, and true holiness: and therefore in this commandment does show
us, And from having our minds occupied about the same.
what in body and soul we should keep us from, even that we must rest from
having our minds occupied about all those things, which are not lawful to be
done upon that day: and that we must not only lay our worldly business out of
our hands, but put them out of our heads, so that we may not spend our time in
studying about the works of our calling, nor beat our heads about the^,
laying platformes (as it were) for the week following, and so have our heads
fully fraught with the^: but we must have our understanding and affections
clean empty and void of them, that there may be room for such heavenly
meditations to dwell in us, as the Lord would have us to be filled with them.

Calvin in Genesis 2.3.
Master Calvin expounding these words, The Lord blessed the seventh day, says,
this blessing is nothing else, but a solemn consecration, Qua sibi Deus studia
and occupationes asserit die septimo, whereby the Lord does challenge to
himself upon the seventh day all our studies and labors: and therefore we
must not be such gross hypocrites, as to imagine that if we have washed our
hands clean from the works of our calling, so that none of them do cleave to
our fingers, that this were an acceptable obedience unto God, when in the mean
season, our minds are as worldly as ever they were, and our thoughts be as
fresh upon them, and our affections are raised up to as great delight in them,
as though we were in the midst of them. But as the whole law is spiritual;
so this commandment has a spiritual truth in it, and contenteth not it
self with an outward obedience, but requires the inward truth of the heart,
that as we make a show of resting from earthly things, so we should do it
indeed, without the which the other is but a fruitless and idle ceremony.
For seeing this is the very end of putting our selves apart from all worldly
business, that our minds might not be entangled with them, which because they
must needs be, so long as we are dealing about them, (such is our nature that
we cannot do things, and have no feeling of them, as though we were a sleep
or in a trance) therefore do we dispatch our hands of them, that our minds
might not be disturbed by them. Seeing then this is the principal end that
we aim at, to unburden our minds of these earthly cares, that we might be
more quick and free in Gods worship, we must especially labor for it, and
not stay in these other, which though they be great in themselves, yet are they
but helps and furtherances unto this: in so much that if on the Sabbath we
leave all our work at home, and come never so far from it, to the Church,
yet if our minds be working (as it were) because they are occupied about it,
and we would be working (if we might, and if we might not be known, and if
we might not be punished or blamed) and our minds have carried us this way,
that we would gladly have stolen a working cunningly (as we say) if we
might not have been spied, all that we do is but mere hypocrisy: so far
are we from the true obedience of this commandment.

And this we have seen sufficiently proved heretofore, that we therefore rest
from all worldly things: Vt paratiores and promptiores ad cultum diuinum (as
says S. Augustine in that excellent sermon of his) That we might be more
ready and fit for Gods service, Agust. de te^p. sermon. 251.
when there is nothing to encomber us: and we leave at that time, terrenam
sollicitudinem, the care of earthly things, that we might the more easily
attend upon the word of God: which we cannot, if still our minds have these
burdens upon them, and be not released from worldly thoughts, which press
them down from being lifted up unto that heavenly life.

Master Calvin in his Sermons upon Deuteronomy. gives this reason why Christians
should not go to law upon the Sabbath, Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. Ser. 39.
Because upon that day every man ought to withdraw himself to Godward, to
mind his works, that we may all of us be provoked to serve and honor him. And
afterward adds: Common meetings are made that me^ might hear the common
doctrine of salvation, and it is good reason, that on the Sabbath day all other
cares and thoughts should be laid aside. And in another Sermon he says: For we
must rest, Idem sermon. 34.
and how rest? forsooth we must abide still and quiet, our thought must not
stir to wander and devise this and that. Gualt. in Act 13. Homil. 88.
For as Master Gualter says; God does therefore call the Sabbath his day, that
we might know when that day is: Ab omnibus alijs curis, and studijs
abstinendum est: that we ought to abstain from all other cares and duties.

According unto which exquisite rule, if we do measure out the obedience of
all men, we shall easily see how short they are of that perfect righteousness,
which is here required, and that many shall be even then found breakers of
this commandment, when they did most of all presume of the keeping of it, and
were puffed up with a special pride for it. For let us grant it unto them,
(which it may be is true) that they have borne themselves in an even and
civil course, not breaking out into any open contempt, or wilful and gross
breach of this Commandment; yet if they will call themselves before Gods
judgment seat, they shall find that many of these times, they had a good
desire to work, and would feign have been at it, if they might have been
covered, and (as we say) their fingers did tickle at it, which as it has been
true at other times, so most of all, when as we imagined that we might have
gained something, if we would have wrought, and our ceasing from it was
something unprofitable unto us, as in the time of any common Fayres, or in the
days of harvest: of whom the Prophet Amos justly complains, speaking in
their person: Amos. 8.5.
When will this new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath,
that we may set forth wheat?

But if we judge this doctrine too severe, and we cannot yield unto it, let us
compare this Commandment with the other, which be of the like nature with it,
and it may be, they will persuade us, and lead us into the truth of it. In
the second Commandment, we know that not only the making and worshipping of
Images is forbidden, but also to set up an Idol in our heart, and to wish that
we had it, and to be desirous to return unto Popery, liking of those times
better then of this time of the Gospel, and to be gaping after the Mass; so
that we are ready to embrace it, if it were thrust upon us again, and we
could be very well contented with it, so that we want but the opportunity to
furnish a Mass: So in this, not only the bodily labor is forbidden, which
the laws of men may provide for, but also the cogitations and desires of the
mind toward them, which none is able to meet with, but the Lord, that this
law might be like unto himself. And seeing that (as our Savior Christ
expounds the law) he that is angry with his brother vnadauisedly, is guilty
of the law of murder: Matthew. 5.22. verse. 28.
And whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
already with her in his heart: why should we not say, that he that looks
on his business with a mind desirous to be occupied about them, has broken the
commandment of resting already in his heart? unless he will make the one
unlike the other, and to be as it were of another brood. For is not this that
dignity and preferment, which we give to all the whole law of God, above all
the laws of men? that as they do behold but the words and works of men,
therefore their laws can forbid and punish sin, but when it thus breaks
out, and bewrays it self: but the Lord as he is the searcher of the hearts
and reins, so his law reaches thither, and finds out sin in the very
beginning of it, when it first lifts up the head, and tarrieth not to give
sentence against it, till it bring forth the unsavory and unfruitful fruits of
it, but proceeds in judgment against it, when it is but in the blossom and
bud, nay in the very first rooting of it? which if it be true in all other
commandments, why should we imagine that the bounds of this are so straight,
that it will not reach so far?

Objection. If the commandment be thus strait, who is able to abide it?
And whereas men are afraid to say what they think; and to confess this truth
which they are convicted of, because they do not see, how then they shall be
able to keep this law: we know that this is the thing in controversy between
us and the Papists, whether the law of God may be perfectly kept or no: and
therefore though they abhor all popery, yet if they stand upon this point,
they shall fall into a popish opinion, and agree with them, who when they have
set it down, Council Trident. sext. sess. Canon. 18.
as a law of the Medes and Persians that may not be changed, that the law of
God may be fulfilled of us, then they must needs give such an interpretation
of this law, as might carry with it some show of possibility, that it may be
fully kept indeed: we may perceive that the heathen Philosophers by the light
of nature have seen further into the truth of it, then we have done, by the
bright beams of the word, who said, that a good man must have not only his
hands and eyes continent and free from sin, but also his mind. And we must
endeavor our selves so much the more carefully to dispossess our minds of all
earthly matters, because it is so hard a thing to attain unto: For we cannot
so easily cast all worldly imaginations out of our heads, as we can cast the
things themselves out of our hands, neither can we so far remove our
affections from them, as we can separate our bodies from them, which
notwithstanding unless we do, all the other is but popish and ceremonial,
and whereby we cannot attain unto the sanctification of the Sabbath, in any
tolerable measure.

But let us consider (says Master Calvin) whether they which call themselves
Christians, Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. sermon 34.
acquit themselves in this point, as were requisite; a great part of men
think they have the sunday, that the better to atte^d on their worldly
affairs, and they reserve to themselves this day, as if they had no other to
deliberate for the whole week to come: now though the bell should to a
sermon, they think they have no other thing to do, but to think on their
business, and to make the account of this, and of that. Therefore whatsoever
has been spoken before, of resting from the usual works of our calling, the
same is true of the ordinary speaking, and common thinking of them, all which
(because they be of the same nature) must needs come under one and the same
law, and therefore look what liberty the Lord has given us, We may speak and
think of things that be necessary.
for the works of our calling in the time of necessity, (as it has declared
unto us before) the same have we for our recreations our speeches, our thoughts
and desires, that so far we may be occupied about them all manner of way, in
soul and in body, as they shall not hinder us, but rather be means to
further us in the true manner of sanctifying the day.

And we have here so much the more liberty, because we cannot do our
necessary business, but we must speak and think of them, not only in the
doing of them, but also before and after them. But because I have already made
a several treatise before of the works, which necessity makes lawful, I
will not here enter into it again, left I should be confused and tedious, but
refer you unto that place for guiding of your speeches and studies, as well
as your labors and works, only desiring you to remember that which is there
set down also, that we judge those things only necessary for the time present,
which could not have been thought upon, spoken of, and done before: neither
might be put off to be studied for, conferred about, or put in practice till
afterward.

A conclusion of all that went before with an application of it to our selves.
And so we conclude the former part of this commandment, in which we have been
something the longer, because it was needful, seeing it is so large, and as it
were the ground of all the rest, wherein we have seen what kind of rest the
Lord requires, even such a one, not as we might grossly dream of, because of
our blindes, but as is plainly and truly published in his word, in the which
he has declared what is the height, and the breadth, the depth and the length,
and the full measure of it. And this the Lord requires of all, and every one
of us continually, from the beginning to the end of our lives, without any
interruption, under the pain of everlasting condemnation, as it is alleged by
the Apostle to the Galathians out of the law: Galat. 3.10.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the law to do them: in which curse is contained all the
punishments of soul and body which can be devised in the greatest measure,
as it is most largely opened in many places of the scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.20.
and namely in Deuteronomy. 29. where he threatens to bring upon the^ every curse
written in that book, and every plague that is not written in the book of the
law. and 28.61.


According to which rule, if we will examine our whole life past, we shall
see how great is our deserved misery, because of the infinite breaches of
this commandment: For first of all, we are by nature altogether ignorant of
the truth of it, and when it is taught us, we have no conceiving of it, and
less liking unto it, but all our reason and affections are clean contrary
unto it, so that we have many ways broken it in thought, word and deed, not
only in the days of our ignorance, but since our knowledge, and therefore
there must needs be a great handwriting of accusation against us, and we may
here truly say: Psalm. 19.12.
O Lord who does understand the errors of this life? for setting all other
sins apart, the Lord has many ways to plead against us, in this one thing,
so that we must needs confess, that if he wink at all other our sins, and
yet mark narrowly what we have done amiss in this, we shall not be able to
abide it, or to answer one word for a thousand, so great cause have we to be
humbled before God, and to repent us not only for our sins generally, but
particularly for breaking the Sabbath, that so we might see, how greatly we
do stand in need of Christ Jesus, without whom we should have perished so many
thousand times, and how unspeakable the love of God is toward us in him, in
delivering from so endless misery, so many times deserved by the testimony
of our own conscience, more by the judgment of him, who is greater then our
conscience, 1. John 3.20.
and knows all things: And thus we truly understanding and rightly applying
the law, it shall be indeed (as it is most properly called) our schoolmaster
unto Christ, Gal. 3.24.
that we might be made righteous by faith, and lead us by the hand unto our
Savior, when it lets us set (as in a glass) how in our selves, we are more
then lost, and that none can save us, but only he, who is truly called,
Matthew. 1.21.
Jesus, because he saves his people from their sins. Of whose salvation
then may we be assured, that we are truly partakers, when (besides the
persuasion of the forgiveness of our sins) we have power from him to dye unto
sin, and live unto righteousness, as well in this commandment, as in any
other, seeing that he has not only borne the punishment of sin, but also
took it away, and as he became a sacrifice for sin, 1. John 3.8. Ephesians 4.8.
Coloss. 2.15.
so he came to destroy the works of the devil, and having ascended up on high
has led captivity captive, and spoiled the prince of darkness, who is thrown
out, and has given rich gifts unto men, not only unto his church generally,
but particularly to every member of the same, so that now if any man be in
Chrst Jesus, he is a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17.
and he himself now lives no more, but Christ Jesus lives in him. Galat.
2.20.
But if we be the old men we had wont to be, and be no more careful to
observe the rest of the sabbath, then we have been in times past, then are we
not as yet partakers of the benefit of Christ, and so are under the curse of
the law, which one day will sease upon us to our endless confusion.

2. Pet. 1.10.
Therefore let us labor to make sure our election, and calling by Gods works,
and let us strive to be persuaded that the Lord has passed over the faults of
our youth, whereby we have infinitely broken the holy rest of the Sabbath in
thought, word, and deed, in the blindenes of popery, and light of the
Gospel, openly and secretly, at home and abroad, alone by our selves and
with others, and that the Lord has received the sacrifice of his son, as a
full recompense for them, by that same second grace, which we have received
from the strength of his sacrifice, that we do give our selves wholly to
serve him, in all holy obedience unto this commandment, more carefully in all
time to come, and that by his grace we are enabled thereunto, and to desire
continually to grow in it, all which we know can come from none other, then
from him, who has obtained it of his father for us. And thus the law shall
keep us also with Christ, that we fall not away from him, when it teaches us
daily to grow in humility for our sins past, and makes us to be careful
of duties to come, Phil. 2.12.
laboring to finish out our salvation in fear and in trembling.

The second book, declaring the several parts of Gods worship, whereby we
ought publicly, and privately to sanctify and keep holy the Lords Day, with
other and by our selves.
Deuteronomy. 5.12. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee.

13. Six days thou shall labor and do all thy work.

14. But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: thou shall not do
any work therein, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manseruant,
nor thy maid, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, neither any of thy cattle, nor
the stranger that is within thy gates: that thy manseruant, and thy maid may
rest as well as thou.

15. For remember that thou wast a servant in the land^ of Egypt, and that the
Lord thy God brought thee out thence by a mighty hand, and a stretched out
arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to observe the Sabbath day.


THe second and last part of this Commandment is, The second part of the
Commandment is to sanctify the day of Rest.
that we carefully spend the day of Rest upon the holy service of God alone:
which though it be last in order, yet is the chief and principal thing in the
Commandment, and that whereunto the ceasing from labor is to be referred, and
without which the other is imperfect, and as it were a shadow without the
body. Which that it is so indeed do, appears by the very words of the
Lord, and the order of them pronounced from heaven as we have already seen
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, which also Moses preciselie
commands in repeating the Law to the Israelites, before his death. Deuteronomy. 5.12.
Observe the Sabbath day to sanctify it, ^s the Lord thy God has commanded
thee, which day we are then rightly said to sanctify or keep holy, when we
bestow it upon the service of God, which is most holy, and so (by making it
proper unto that which is holy) both we and the day are hallowed thereby. John
10.36. Zanc. de tribus Eloh. pan 2. lib. 3. cap. 9.
That great learned man Master Zanchius the divinity reader at Heidelberge,
entreating upon that place of John (whom the father has sanctified) says,
that to be sanctified signifies to be consecrated unto God, and to be put
apart from other things unto an holy use; and so is God said to have sanctified
unto himself the Sabbath day, that is, to have selected it from the other
days, and to have consecrated it to himself. And this signification is very
common in the scripture: whereupon the people also of God are said to be
sanctified unto God, and in this sense Christ takes where, when he says that
he was sanctified of the father, for he alone of all the three persons, and of
all other creatures was ordained unto the office of the mediator, and to be the
head of the Church; even before he took upon him our flesh.

Chrysostom. in Genesis 2. Homil. 10.
Whereunto agrees that of Chrysostom. Quid est? What is the meaning of this?
He has sanctified it: he has distinguished it from other days, and we see to
what end. For as M. Bullinger says: God has sanctified the Sabbath, not that
one day in it own nature, Bulling. in Romans 14.5.
is better then another, or because he delights in our Idleness, but he has
therefore sundered the Sabbath from other days, which he has appointed for
work, It is then sanctified when we bestow it upon Gods worship.
that we resting from our works upon this one day, might more freely hear
the law of God, and worship him. For by this means in deed all the things
that ever have been used in the sacred worship of God, have been hallowed, in
so much, that of what kind or nature soever, they were before, yet now the
holy God, whom only they served, and his holy worship, unto which they are
made proper, has sanctified them, and made them so wholly to differ from all
other, as though they were not of the same nature and kind, and so from that
they were before, as though they were not the same any more.

Thus we do read that the tabernacle and the temple were holy with all the
ministers of both, Which also sanctifies all other creatures used therein.
Exodus 29.44. Leuit. 27.30.
and whatsoever thing else served in them even unto the very garments of the
priests; as it is in the 29. verse of the same chapter, and the tithes of the
land given unto the maintenance of Gods worship; and them that served in it. So
then as all other things are called most holy unto the Lord in the same
chapter, because they are separated from that common use, verse. 28.
wherein other of the same nature are employed and may not be used, but to the
Lords use: So the Sabbath day, or day of rest, is then sanctified of us, when
we do not use it in the affairs of this life, from the which it must be
separate, and from which upon it we must rest, (and therefore it is called a
day of rest, as we have seen* but use it in the Lords service, and make that
day proper unto it, and to nothing principally but that: So likewise in the 40.
chapter of Exodus (where mention is made of the rearing up of the Tabernacle,
and how every thing was sanctified by Moses, and made holy) that which the
Lord speaks of Aaron is true of all other things that served in the
Tabernacle: Thou shall put upon Aaron the holy garments, Exodus 40.13.
and shall anoint him, and sanctify him that he may minister unto me in the
Priests office: where in the latter words he expounds what is meant by making
him holy, even to appoint him to that holy office, that he might serve the
Lord in his holy service. For as the Lord himself did then sanctify the day,
when he appointed it to this holy end, so when he commands us to sanctify
it, he requires that we should use it only to that holy end, for which it
was ordained, and so by the right use of it, to maintain (as it were) that
holiness, which at the first was put upon it. Even as Moses did then sanctify
all the forenamed things, when he dedicated them to Gods worship, and the
Priests (by using them in that manner alone) did keep them holy still: which
they should have unhallowed, whenever they had abused them to any other end,
or not used them to this holy end.

As the water, bread and wine in the Sacraments.
Thus we may easily understand, what is the true hallowing of the day, even to
spend it in all the parts of Gods worship, which makes every thing appointed
unto it holy, even the very time that is spent about it. Therefore as the
common water being once brought into the Church, and appointed for Baptism, is
no more common, but holy water, being separated from the common use of water
(which is to wash, etc.) and now appointed to assure us of the forgiveness of
our sins by Christ, and of our new birth in him, at the commandment of God
(which is holy): And as the common bread and wine set upon the table of the
Lord, appointed for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is holy) and so
put apart from the common use of these creatures (which is to feed our bodies)
and applied to that use which is not common but holy (namely, that we thereby
might be assured, as by most certain pledges that our souls and bodies shall
be nourished up by faith in Jesus Christ unto everlasting life) are no more
common bread, but holy, during this most holy use: and the Lord Jesus Christ
at the first, by appoynting them to these ends did sanctify them, the
Ministers and the people by thus using of them, do hallow them, or keep them
holy: So what time soever is bestowed of any, upon the service of God, he
keeps that holy, and the Lord commanding us to keep holy the day of rest,
does require that we should spend it in the holy service of his majesty,
unto which he himself appointed it at the first, and so sanctified it. And
this that we might do the better, he commands us to rest from all other
things in the world, that so the day might not be taken up with any thing else,
save this, which makes it holy.

And thus we do not only see that it is further required in this
Commandment, that Gods holy worship should be practiced upon this day, To
worship God upon this day, is the most principal thing in the Commandment.
but also that this is the most especial thing contained in it, and unto which
all other things are to be referred: and therefore the Lord himself in
pronouncing the law, uses as many words to commend unto us the sanctifying of
the day, as he did to establish resting from worldly affairs: as namely, when
first of all he says: Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: and
afterward calls it the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, that is, a day of
resting from all other things, that it might be bestowed in serving the Lord
thy God, for it is called the Sabbath of the Lord, not so much because it was
appointed by the Lord, as for the Lords use: and therefore ought rather thus to
be translated, Tremel. Ari. Mont. Vatabl.
The Sabbath unto the Lord, or day of rest for the Lord. And amongst other
great learned men, which thus read it, so also writes Tertullian: Septima die
Sabbatiza Domino Deo tuo: Tertull aduersus Marcion. lib. 3.
Keep the seventh day an holy Sabbath unto the Lord thy God.

And to this end, as the Lord himself does oftentimes call them his Sabbaths,
so the ancient and learned father well observes it: Hierom. in Ezec. 45.
Obseruandum (says he) it is to be marked that he does not say absolutely, and
you shall sanctify the Sabbath: but with a note of difference, Sabbatha mea,
my Sabbaths. And so writes Wolphius: Wolph. Chronol. lib. 2. cap. 4.
De Sabbathis plerunque, God does often so speak of the Sabbaths, that he
calls them his, not for difference sake, because the people of God then had
none other: but that he might show that the Sabbath was appointed for the
honor of his name, and dedicated unto his service. And as he gives us
liberty to work our own work upon the six days, so he commands us
straightly to cease from them upon the seventh: that we might work for the
Lord, seeing it is appointed to be a day of resting from all other affairs
for the Lords business sake. And last of all he adds, that whereas the Lord
did create the world in six days, he himself entered into a new work,
distinct from the former upon the seventh, and therefore bestowed an especial
blessing upon that day, which all the rest have not, even the blessing of
sanctification, that it might be kept holy to himself. For as Master Calvin
says, Benedixit and sanctificauit, Calvin. in Genesis 2.3.
secundum verbum est exegeticum prioris: Of these two words, (the Lord blessed
and sanctified) the latter does expound the former.

Pet. Mart. in Genesis 2.
Whereunto agreeeth Peter Martyr, To bless is to give and bestow something:
this did he chiefly give unto it, that therein we should rest, and apply our
selves to the service of God: which so many words abundantly testify, that
the waightiest thing in this commandment, is that the day of rest should be
bestowed upon Gods service, in so much that if we had attained unto the perfect
observing of the rest, yet we are not come to the end and goal (as it were) of
this commandment, no not unto the midde way of it: which is so much the more
diligently to be taken heed unto, because many through a gross and palpable
ignorance and want of religion, as they cannot be persuaded of that precise
rest, which we have seen here commanded, so more profanely dream, that
though not all, yet the greatest part of obedience unto this commandment
consists in abstaining from al worldly business, and therefore they that have
some care of this, yet never or very seldom think of the other, and making
some conscience of working that day, think it to be a venial, or no sin at
all to neglecte the service of God, (which is most especially required) or at
least wise not to be thoroughly occupied about it, Call in Exodus 20.12.
as the Lord on that day does require. For as Master Calvin says, God was not
delighted with the idleness of his people, but when he bad them rest upon the
seventh day, there was relation to an other end: For as the same man says in
another place, This were a very bare and naked thing, Idem upon Deuteronomy. 5. ser.
34.
that our hands only and our feet should rest, and that nothing else should
be done. What must we do then? we ought to apply this rest unto a more high
and excellent thing. And a little after he shows it more particularly, saying,
When our shop windows are shut in on the sunday, when we travail not after
the common order and fashion of men, this is to the end we should have more
liberty and leisure to attend on that which God commands, that is to wit, to
be taught by his word, to assemble our selves together to make confession of
our faith, to call on his name, to exercise our selves in the use of his
sacraments. Therefore the servant of God Moses, to meet with this gross
corruption in the 5. of Deuteronomie, does not only use the forenamed word of
sanctifying the day, but further adds in the same place: As the Lord thy God
has commanded thee, Deuteronomy. 5.12.
making the greatest part of the commandment to consist in hallowing of the
day. For when God sanctified the day, Iunij praelect. in Genesis 2.3.
he commanded man to sanctify it, that is, to bestow it in holy exercises.

So then look how many reasons there were before for the establishing of the
day of rest, so many more are there for the keeping it holy, seeing this is the
principal end of resting, that it might be hallowed, which because it cannot
be in that manner that it should, unless we do rest, (for we cannot wholly
bestow it upon Gods service, if we bestow it upon our business in whole, or in
part) therefore that this principal might have his due room, al other things
must give place unto it. And though there were many other causes of ordaining
the day of rest, (as we have already seen) yet none so chief and principal
as this: For Adam being in paradise, whiles he had not yet sinned, though he
was therefore exempted from many causes of resting, which his posterity did
stand in need of, yet for this cause was bound unto it, as much as any, that
resting from the works of the garden, he might sanctify it according to the
commandment, which otherwise he could not do. And therefore in the words of
the commandment we are willed to remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy,
Therefore we ought to remember the Sabbath to this end especially.
not so much remembering that we rest upon it, as that we sanctify the time of
our rest, and therefore remember to rest before hand, that nothing might hinder
us from the worship of God upon the day of rest, but therefore rest, and
therefore remember to rest, that the service of God might be taken in hand.
And as it is a sin not to be careful of the Sabbath, that we might rest upon
it, so it is a greater sin not to observe it, that it might be a Sabbath unto
the Lord by sanctifying of it: and if for want of heedfulnes any thing do
compel us to work upon the day of rest, it is our sin in not marking the
Sabbath day: so if by our negligence we cannot sanctify the day of rest unto
the Lord, it is a greater sin of not remembering to keep it holy, which is
the first and greatest thing in this commandment.

Master Musculus says, Polluitur Sabbathum, cum cuius gratia instituitur,
Muscul. in Math. 12.11.
a plerisque plane non curatur: The Sabbath is broken of many, when they
consider not to what end it was ordained. How many in the world can and do
remember well enough the Sabbath day to rest upon it? but how few do remember
to employ that time about the Lords business, and so to keep it holy? One
makes account of the Sabbath day for this end, another reckons of it for
that, and every one remembers it for some purpose, but the Lord would have us
to remember it, that we might altogether bestow it upon his worship, yet none
almost looks unto that. Therefore it was the wisdom of God to meet with this
blockishnes of our, (who remember every thing saving that, that we should, and
those good things which we do remember, we think of them to far other ends
then we ought to do) and to tell us plainly, that this is the chiefest end
of marking the Sabbath, that we might keep it holy: which if we do not, as we
cannot so well mark it, as we should, so we do mark it to a wrong end, and
do (as it were) take our marks amiss of it. Master Calvin upon these words
says, Hinc colligimus: We gather from hence, that God speaks not of a small
matter, Calvin in Exodus 20.8.
when he commends the sanctification of the Sabbath not in a word, but does
exhort them unto the diligent marking of it, and so does pronounce that their
want of care to mark, is a breach of the commandment. And Master Musculus
upon the same words says, Nota^dum quod, It is to be noted that he does not
simply say: Sanctify the Sabbath day, but remember to do it. This kind of
commanding is not light, but weighty, hereby is signified, Muscul. in eundem
locum.
that a matter of great importance is commanded, and that which by no means
is to be neglected, but with great care to be kept. For so do parents and
masters use to commend the doing of those things unto their servants and
children, which above all other things they would have least of all neglected.
So then if it be necessary to rest upon this day, (as it has been strongly
proved unto us) then is it much more necessary to sanctify the day, as we
have seen in part, and it shall more fully appear unto us hereafter. Which
we had need so much the more carefully to take heed unto, because the common
practice of men is so clean contrary unto it, and the sin as it is more
common, so it is greater and more dangerous.

And now we may more plainly understand the great necessity of that precise
rest, which has been so often spoken of, and is so hardly received, even for
because that otherwise we cannot so keep it holy unto the Lord, as we ought to
do: For this is the law of things consecrated unto the Lord, that they may not
otherwise be employed, the^ to his use, and they must not be partly his, and
partly ours, but altogether his, if they be holy to him: therefore seeing the
day must be hallowed, it must not be used in other affairs, saving in the
lords business, and it must not be partly ours by doing our own work, and
partly the Lords by doing his, but his alone; as it is called a Sabbath unto
the Lord, and therefore we are willed to do no manner of work in it.

And that the truth of this doctrine might appear unto us so clearly as the
noone day, The sanctification of this day is very precisely urged in the
Scriptures.
even that the Sabbath ought most undoubtedly to be sanctified of all sorts,
let us unto all this, which has been already spoken, add the consideration
of so many scriptures, wherein the spirit of God speaking of the Sabbath, does
in most significant words, commend (according to our capacity) this truth
again and again to us. And first of all in the sixteen chapter of Exodus.
Exodus 16.23. verse. 25.
To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: and afterward: To
day is the sabbath unto the Lord; in both which places he calls it a Sabbath
unto the Lord, and in the former place, an holy rest, not only showing that
they should rest upon it, but especially to what end, namely that they might
keep the day holy unto the Lord by serving of him: and therefore he stands
upon it, calling it an holy rest, and further adding a Sabbath unto the Lord:
as purposing to let them see into the most especial end of their resting, even
the sanctification of the day in the holy service of God. Moreover in the
thirty one chapter of the same book: Exodus 31.14.15
Ye shall keep the Sabbath, for it is holy unto you. Six days shall men
work, but in the seventh day is the Sabbath of the holy rest unto the Lord:
where he calls it both holy, and holy unto the Lord: showing what manner of
rest it must be, not an idleness, or sleepie taking of our rest and ease, but a
careful spending of that time in Gods service, in which we must rest from all
other things, especially for that purpose. Likewise in the 35. chapter of the
same book: Six days shall thou work, Exodus 35.2.
but the seventh day shall be unto you the holy day of rest unto the Lord:
where Moses declaring that message unto the people, which he had received
before from the Lord for them, tells it to them fully and in the same number
of words almost, straightly requiring at their hands the keeping holy of the
Sabbath day, as a thing of great importance, as appears by his speech so
earnest, and doubled, calling it an holy Sabbath, and then a day of rest unto
the Lord.

But what should I here stand upon all the places of Gods word, in the old and
new testament, (which are infinite) giving most certain testimony and
authentical credit to this doctrine; the time would not serve, and the
treatise would grow into a greater volume, then I am willing it should: these
may suffice to show unto us, that the keeping holy of the Sabbath day, must be
the principal matter in this commandment, and (as it were) stand in the
first rank, when it is in so many places, and in such ample words commended,
and recommended unto us. For if it be the wisdom of a servant, there to be
very attentive, where his master uses many words, and to be assured, that that
is a matter of great weight; then much more ought we to judge the hallowing of
the Sabbath day to be a thing, then the which nothing ought more to be
regarded of us, when unto the words of Remembering and Marking (that are set in
the beginning of the commandment) this thing also is in so many words spoken
unto us, and as it were beaten into our ears. That I might not speak any
thing of such other places, wherein the serving of God, in the place appointed
by himself, is adjoined unto such exhortations as are made for the keeping of
the Sabbath, thereby declaring by what means especially the Sabbath is kept
holy: Leuit. 19.30.
as ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my sanctuary: where the Prophet
Moses exhorting the Israelites to the diligent keeping of the Sabbath day,
speaks unto them of that worship of God, which was practiced in the
sanctuary, as the only way to keep it. Unto which agrees that which is set
down in the 23. chapter of the same book. Six days shall work be done,
Leuit. 23.3.
but in the seventh day shall be the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation. Ye
shall do no work therein, it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.
For in this place he does not only call it a sabbath unto the Lord (so many
times before) but also says, Holy assemblies were commanded to be kept upon
these days.
that upon it must be an holy assembly, which assembly then should be holy,
because they must meet for an holy purpose, not to deal about any worldly
affairs, (which notwithstanding they did at other times) but to be occupied
altogether in the holy service of God, and in an holy place.

And this was a thing not peculiarly belonging to some one day, but generally
commanded, and practiced upon every Sabbath day: namely to have holy meetings,
that the day might be kept holy. And indeed, it was so inseparably adjoined
unto the Sabbath, that it was not only ordinary upon the seventh day, which
is only properly called the Sabbath, but upon all other festival days of the
Jews, commanded by God unto them to observe, (which had also the nature of the
first, and true Sabbath) as appears most plentifully in this one forenamed
chapter of Leuiticus in many verses, where their several feasts are reckoned
up: of which as he afterward speaks in particulars, Leuit. 23.4.
so thus of them all in general. These are the feasts of the Lord, and holy
conuocations which ye shall proclayme in their seasons, calling them feasts
unto the Lord, that is, days of rejoicing before him, and thanksgiving to him
for his benefits, and praying to God for the continuance of them: wherein that
they might be furthered, they had the exercises of the word, and offering up
of sacrifices, even as they did rest from their other business, that they might
wholly attend upon these, and so the conuocations or assemblies of the people
were holy: which if it were true of those days that were but appurtenances
unto the weekly Sabbath, then must it needs much more be verified of it,
whereunto all the other were referred. And if the other days could not be
feasts unto the Lord, as they are called, unless they were holy assemblies,
then much less can this be a Sabbath unto the Lord, which is the very name of
it, unless their meetings be in the Lord, and for his worships sake.

For this cause the Prophet Esaias calls it the Lords holy day, and a day
consecrated as glorious unto the Lord, saying: If thou turn away thy foot
from the Sabbath, Esaias. 58.13.
from doing thy will on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight to
consecrate it, as glorious unto the Lord, and shall honor him, etc. whereby he
does declare that the especial thing in the Sabbath day, is the honor and
service of God, upon which we must so altogether attend, that it may appear
that we have dedicated the day unto him indeed, and made this the chief
glory of it, that it is holy unto him. Therefore it was commanded in the
law, that the sacrifices, and so consequently al other parts of Gods worship,
(which were never severed from them) should be doubled upon the Sabbath day,
And then the daily service of God was doubled.
that so they might altogether be occupied about them, and do nothing else, the
whole time being taken up with them: as is in express words set down by
Moses, Numb. 28. Number. 28.9.10
where having spoken before of the daily morning and evening sacrifice, he
adds: But on the Sabbath day, ye shall offer two lambs of a year old
without spot, and two tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering, mingled
with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt offering of every
Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and drink offering thereof. And
Chrysostom speaking of this thing, says, Chrysostom de Lazar. conc. 1.
The Sabbath was not given for idleness sake, but rather that we being drawn
away from the cares of temporal things, might bestow all our leisure upon
spiritual things: Nam sacerdos eo die duplicat hostiam: For (says he) the
priest upon that day does double his sacrifice.

And if we look into the 17. chapter of the Prophet Jeremy, where he
promises from God, a blessing to the Jews, if they would keep the Sabbath,
and threatens a most grievous destruction to them, if they did break it, we
shall find that in many verses, speaking of the true manner of keeping that
Commandment, how he not only requires a resting from bodily labor, but also
the bestowing of it upon Gods service, when always he joins these two
together: Iere. 17.22 25.27
If ye do no work, but sanctify the Sabbath, as I commanded your fathers.
Whereunto agrees the practice of the whole Church, from time to time, as
appears by the very reading of the story of the new Testament, in which from
the one end of it, unto the other, nothing is more clear, then the ordinary
reading, preaching, and hearing of the law publicly, with all the rest of Gods
service practiced upon the Sabbath with one consent: which as it is confirmed
by infinite testimonies, so the time would not serve to stand upon them, I will
content my self with that one, which is set down in the Acts of the Apostles:
For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, Act. 15.21.
seeing he is read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.

And when the day was changed, all the exercises of religion were changed
together with it, and did still accompany it: In the time of the Gospel these
meetings are, and ought to be upon the Lords day.
So that the holy meetings of the Church were upon the first day of the week.
I call them holy (as before) because they were taken in hand, and continued
only for the holy service of God, as it is apparent in the 20. chapter of the
same book, besides many other places, where the Evangelist S. Luke writes
thus: The first day of the week the Disciples being come together to break
bread. Paul preaches unto them, Act. 20.7.
etc. Whereunto no doubt the Apostle S. John had respect in his Revelation,
when he calls this new day, Revel. 1.10.
by this new name, the Lords day, deriuing it from the Lord Jesus, who was made
Lord and heir of all things, who as he did rise again upon this day, so he
did institute a new service, and a new ministry, and a new day in the honor
of the new work, which he had now finished. So that it is true, which Master
Bucer says: Communi Christianorum consensu dies Dominicus co^uentibus
ecclesijs publicis dicatus fuit ipso statim te^pore Apostoloru^: Bucer in Mat.
12.11.
The Lords day was appointed for the common assemblies of the Church, even in
the Apostles time. And therefore (as it has been declared before) this was not
first brought in by the Christian Emperors, but allowed and approved by them,
or rather by public authority established, whereas the Christians did without
law, by the authority of Gods word, observe it before. So that it may truly
be called the Lords day, as it is indeed, not only because the Lord Jesus did
arise from the dead upon that day, and so declared that he had made an end of
the work of our redemption, but also and especially because by serving of him
upon that day, in that manner that he has appointed, not only the memory of
it is kept, but we are made partakers of the benefit of it also.

Therefore, unless we will change the name, which we ought most precisely
to keep, as a chief honor of it, we must retain the service of it, without
the which, the name is idle and fruitless. For as S. Augustine says: Tantum
diuinis cultibus seruiamus dantes scilicet huic diei reuerentiam: We rest
(says he) from other things, August. de te^p. sermon. 251.
that we might only serve God, therein giving honor and reverence unto this
day. Showing that the honor of the day consists in serving God upon it. For as
the Apostle Paul writing of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, does use these words, the Lords Supper, and the cup
of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.20.27.
and the Lords table, not only because this was instituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ, but also because he is there most truly present, and does there wholly
offer himself unto us, to be made partakers of him, and because we ministering
and receiving of it, do yield him that service, which he requires of us,
according to his Commandment; Luc. 22.19.
Do this in the remembrance of me: Even so it is called the Lords day, both in
the old and new Testament, because of the service in it done unto the Lord: as
the Church also therefore is called the Lords house, 1. Tim. 3 15. Matthew. 21.13.
because it is the house of prayer unto him.

All which places severally by themselves, and jointly together, do bear
witness unto the thing we have in hand, namely, that here is commended unto
us, not only the careful abstayning from all worldly business, but especially
and above all the holy spending of the time in the divine service of God, which
is so much greater then the other, by how much the principal in every thing,
is greater then those that are but helps and furtherances unto it. And here I
may put you in mind of that which Augustine says to this purpose: August. de
te^p. sermon. 251.
Let us take heed that our rest be not idle and vain, but being severed from
al other business: Solo diuino cultui vacemus: let us attend only upon the
worship of God.

Therefore let us in the fear of God be persuaded, that it is our bounden
duty upon this day to join our selves to the holy assemblies of Gods people
in the Church, Therefore upon this day we ought to come to Church, and to be
occupied in all the parts of Gods worship.
(which is his house) there to serve him, and to come thither, as it were to
his school, there to hear his voice, to learn his most holy will, to do
it, that so also we might make provision for our souls, that we might be the
fitter to serve him the whole week following. And this is that, which an
eloquent and divine Philosopher writes: When the Sabbath is so greatly
commended in the old testament: P. Ram. comment. de rellig. lib. 2 cap. 6.
Schola Domini praecipue commendatur, Academia non Platonis, vel Aristot. The
school of God especially is commended unto us, not the school of Plato, or
Aristotle, but of almighty God, the knowledge (I say) of his law, and the
understanding of the heavenly covenant between God and man is commended unto
us. And this was the practice of the Primitive Church, as it appears by the
constitutio^s of the Apostles (if they be these) wherein it is thus decreed:
Constit. Apost. cap. 63.
Verum in die Dominico diligentius conuenite: Come together more diligently
upon the Lords day, to give thanks unto God, who has made all things by Jesus
Christ, and has sent him unto us, and has suffered him to dye, and raised him
from the dead: For what excuse (say they) can he bring unto God, who upon this
day does not come to hear the wholesome word of the resurrection of Christ?

But if we further demand what are the pars of Gods service, that we should be
occupied in; surely to speak of the true manner of worshipping God, does not
properly belong to this place, it was sufficiently opened unto v^in the second
commandment, but generally whatsoever is the true worship of GOD, in that
we are bound to serve him publicly and privately, as at all other convenient
times, so wholly and altogether upon this day, and to do nothing but that,
that so it might be an holy day indeed, consecrated unto the Lord, and the
Lords day alone, as we have seen it to be called in the scriptures.
Therefore whereas the Lord is served in the ministry of his word, sacraments,
prayer, and al other parts of his holy discipline and government, which he
has appointed for his Church, these are the very things in which the day is
to be consumed, and without the which we cannot sanctify it in the least
tolerable measure. In so much that as we have seen the sanctifying of this day
so highly commended unto us in the word, so we shall see the practice of all
these set down in particulars, in sundry places of the same word, as the
only means whereby it is sanctified of us.

Therefore we have seen already, Numb. 28, 9.
that many sacrifices were then to be offered, which were never truly
performed without the word, which gave life unto them, and without prayer, that
they might be accepted, and confession of their sins, that thereby they
might be assured of the forgiveness of them: So that in commanding the one by
name, he includes the other, which were never severed from it, especially
seeing that in so many places of the scripture they be joined together. And
this is that which the Prophet Ezechiel speaks of, Ezekiel. 46.1.2.3.
showing both the Prince and the people, what they should do upon the Sabbath,
namely, that the gates of the Temple being set open, they should repair
thither, and there the Priests should offer their burnt offeringes, and they
should worship the Lord.

But it is more plainly set down in the new Testament, that it was the
ordinary custom of the ministers, and people to meet together, and join in
the word, sacrament and prayer. For in the 20. chapter of the Acts, it is
reported by Saint Luke, Act. 20.7.
that the Church of God at Troas, upon the first day of the week, (which is
the Lords day) came together to break bread, (that is, to receive the
sacrament, There ought to be the preaching of the word upon this day in all
places.
he noting for brevity sake, under one kind the whole action) and he takes
that rather then any other, to show us that this was one of the usual parts
of Gods service in the primitive church, to receive the sacrament every Lords
day, as well as to serve him in any thing else: and Paul being there, then
preached, where he alleging no other cause of both these, then that it was
the first day of the week, (which was then appointed to be sanctified) does
teach us, that these are the means to sanctify it by, and that they are
proper unto the day.

Now though prayer be not here named, yet we are to presume that neither the
word nor sacraments were ministered withouth it, seeing the fruit of both
depends upon the blessing of God, which is obtained by prayer, and seeing
that in other places they are joined together. And that the ministry of the
word is so unseparably joined to the Sabbath, and has always been, further
appears by that which is most plainly and in many words set down in the 13.
Acts 13.14.
chapter of the same story: where it is thus written, When Paul and Barnabas
departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a city of Pisidia, and went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down. 15. And after the lecture of
the law and Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying: Ye
men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.
16. Then Paul stood up, and beckened with the hand, and said, Men of Israel,
etc. as follows in that chapter, to the 42. verse, where again it is
written, that when they were come out of the Synagogue of the Jews, the
Gentiles besought that they would preach these words to them the next Sabbath
day. 44. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole city, to hear the
world of GOD: which words do sufficiently show, that it has always been
diligently observed of the Church to sanctify the Sabbath day in the public
reading and preaching of the word, as in the most singular part of Gods
service: For Paul came and found the Church already met together upon the
Sabbath, and reading the law and the Prophets, and then was desired to preach:
and afterward being desired to preach again, they came and heard him upon the
Sabbath. And in the 15. chapter we have heard already, That Moses has of old
time, Acts 15.21.
in every city them that preach him, seeing he is read every Sabbath day in
the Synagogues. Besides that which is written of Paul in the 17. Chap 17.1.2.3
chapter, that he coming to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews,
as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days disputed with
them by the scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered,
and risen again from the dead, and this is Jesus Christ, whom (said he) I
preach unto you.

But it were an endless labor (though profitable) in order to reckon up all
the several places, which show that these are the holy works of the Sabbath,
which the Lord requiteth all men to be occupied in, if they will sanctify the
day according to his commandment, and as the practice of the Church gives us
example. And upon these considerations, it seems it was enacted in a council
held in Germany, under Charles the great, for the maintaining of the public
preaching every Lords day, Council. Mogu^t. cap. 25.
that Si forte Episcopus, If the Bishop be not at home, or be sick, or upon
any other urgent cause be not able himself* Nunquam tamen desit diebus
Dominicis, qui verbum Dei praedicet, Yet let it be so provided that there
never want one to preach the word of God unto the people on the Lords days.

Phil. Melanct. in praecept. 3.
Master Melancthon reckoning up many parts of sanctifying the Sabbath, says,
Pie fungi ministerio, where he makes this not only one, but the principal
thing, for a man well to discharge his ministry: in which answer he includes
the preaching of the word, because a little before he says, that the Prophets
when they lament the desolation of the Sabbath, they complain, Abolitum esse
ministerium docendi, That the ministry of teaching was abolished, and that
the priests lips did not keep knowledge: But (as themselves say) they were
dumme dogs, and delighted in sleeping.

Bucer in Mat. 12.11.
And Master Bucer in this argument, writing of the practice of that Church
wherein himself lived, says, Dominicis diebus in singulis Parochijs, ad
minimum duae, si non tres habentur conciones, Upon the Lords days in every
parish, there are two sermons at the least, if not three. Which also as it may
be truly said of a great number of Churches in England, for the space of these
many years, under the most happy reign of her majesty, to the great glory of
God, her singular renown, and the salvation of many souls: so in that
respect, we are to bow our knees unto God day and night for the preservation of
her royal majesty, that it may be so by her means for ever: as also that in
those places, where it is yet wanting, it might be brought in, in Gods most
blessed time, if our unthankfulness do not hinder us, even as that zealous and
good King Iehosaphat, could not do all things in his time, that he would for
the reformation of the Church, because the people then had not prepared their
hearts to serve the GOD of their fathers. 2. Chron. 20.33.


Therefore to be short, let us look unto that which is in the chapter
immediately following: Chap. 18.4.
That Paul abiding at Corinth, disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, and
exhorted the Jews, and the Grecians. Here the holy Ghost witnesses of him,
that he did openly teach the scriptures every Sabbath day, and in the
forenamed place, that it was his manner so to do: then it must needs be the
custom of the Church to come to the public ministry of the word upon those
days, Al men ought to resort to those places where the word is preached.
and it must be a common manner with them: which is spoken to this end, that we
might not be of that brutish mind that some are of, that know no other thing to
do upon the Sabbath but to rest, and take their ease, and therefore lie many
times at home sleeping most profanely, and so their ox and their ass in
ceasing from their work, keep as good a Sabbath as they: neither to be so
ignorant as others are, who content themselves with their own private readings
at home, or with the bare reading of the word in the Church neglecting the
preaching of it, not laboring to procure it to themselves, nor repairing to
those places in the mean season where it is, though it be the chiefest part of
Gods service, and therefore the most especial means whereby the Sabbath is
sanctified, and without the which all other things in the service of God, are
less accepted of God, and more unprofitable to our own selves.

Therefore how many places of scripture have we seen before, commanding us so
straightly, to sanctify the Sabbath, so many are there binding all men of what
estate and condition soever, to listen after the preaching of the word, and to
be at it every Sabbath, if they have any care to discharge themselves of that
obedience unto God, which he so straightly requires at their hands. As we may
see in the scriptures, how they that feared God, living in the corrupt times of
the Church, and so not having their ordinary teachers, have upon the Sabbath
day frequented those places, though far off, where by the doctrine of the
word, they might sanctify the day in some good acceptable manner.

In which consideration, the Shunamite (as it is recorded in the second book
of the Kings) when his wife told him that she was going to the Prophet, 2
King. 4.23.
but concealed the cause from him (which was for the restoring of her son to
life, which she had obtained by his means before) he demands of her, why
she should go that day, seeing that it was neither new moon, nor the Sabbath
day: as though he had said, if it had been any of these days, which the Lord
had commanded to be kept holy, then no marvel if she hastened thitherward so
fast: For so it ought to be, and so it appears she used to do, that by
hearing of his doctrine, she might keep holy the day, and so thereby be
furthered in all other holy duties.

In this respect I would to God we might say of our time, Justin. Martyr
Apol^g 2.
as Iustine Martyr does of his: Die, qui solis dicitur, omnes qui in oppidis
vel agris morantur in vnum locum conueniunt: Upon the day that is called
Sunday, all that dwell in the towns or villages do meet in one place: and
for the space of an hour the canonical scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles
are read. It is a Canon in the prouincial Council of Malisgon, That if any man
have a Church near them, they should go together, and there upon the Lords
day to be occupied in prayer, etc. Where their meaning was not to dispense
with them that were further off, but to inioyne all to go to their next
Churches. And in another Council, this is the maine reason why they should
give over all worldly affairs: Quo facilius ad ecclesiam venientes: Council.
Alater. 3. cap. 27.
That they might the more easily come to the Church and pray, etc.

And unto this does that learned father and Bishop Augustine exhort his
auditors, in a sermon which I have often alleged, which is worthy of all men
for this purpose to be read over: August. de te^p. sermon. 251.
Let no man separate himself from divine service: Neque otiosus quis domi
remaneat: neither let any man tarry idling at home, Idle.
when other are gone to the Church. Which also as it is very Christianly
provided for under her most excellent Majesty, both by statute, and also by
her Injunctions, Q. Iniunct. articl. 46.
that all should resort unto their parishes upon all Sundaies, and there to
continue the whole time of godly service, under the pain of penalty: So it
had been happy for this land, if in all places it had been executed, but with
half that care, that it was first meant. But I may complain of it, with
Master Calvin, Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. Ser. 34
rather the^ amend it, That whereas, if we were so fervent in the love of God,
as we should, all would morning and evening, assemble themselves together, to
the end they might be edified more and more in the service of God: we see that
with much ado, men will assemble themselves on the Sunday, and that many are
to be holden to this order, by force and violence: and a little after, it
suffices not, that every one withdraw himself to his own house, either to
read the holy scriptures, or to pray unto God, but it behooves that we come
into the company of the faithful, and there declare the concord and agreement
we have with the whole body of the Church, and celebrate in such wise this
order, as the Lord has commanded.

So then as we have seen heretofore, that it is lawful upon these occasions,
to travail upon the day of rest, now we learn that it is necessary, not only
tolerated, but enjoined unto us, because it is the day that must be sanctified,
and therefore all labors commanded, whereby we may hallowe it in the best
manner. Therefore let us in all conscience and care to serve God, cast away
such vain pretenses (as that the weather is too hot, or too cold, the ways
are too foul, the journey too long, and a thousand more) which might hinder us
at any time from the preaching of the word, and common prayer, in which
consists the head and the foot of keeping holy the Sabbath day. For these
are so necessary, and have been so continually practiced of the Church, and by
succession as it were from hand to hand delivered to the posterity, that we
should too much degenerate from them, if we should debar our selves from
these holy things.

The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, where he had before taught every
Sabbath day, and so by his example and doctrine, showed them the right manner
of keeping holy the day, when afterward some great abuses were crept into the
Church, he writes unto them, and corrects the faults that were in their
solemn assemblies upon the Lords day, as appears most plainly in the
process of the whole chapter, but more especially, when he so many times
repeateth their general coming together: Corin. 11.17.18.20.
seeing then he finds fault with the corruptions in prayer, prophesying or
preaching, and the Sacrament, it is most evident, and must needs be granted,
that these were the holy exercises upon that day usually in their common
meetings, whereby the day was made holy unto the Lord, and most glorious to
them. If the^ it be so (as it cannot be denied, unless we will deny the clear
light of the Sun at midday) that the chiefest point of hallowing the Sabbath
day, consists in coming to Gods house, where he offers unto us the
special parts of his service to be occupied in, and no where so much as there;
Where the word is not prea^hed, or men come not to it: this day cannot be
hallowed as it ought.
then it must needs be subscribed unto, that in Popery, and al false
religion, there is nothing else but a mere profaning of the day, by abominable
idolatry and superstition: and so many days as we were under that intolerable
bondage, we were set free from Gods service, and so long lived we in a
continual breach of this Commandment. And not only so, but wheresoever the
preaching of the word is not, or where men have it, and come not to it, there
can they not sanctify the day in that manner that they should, because they
want the principal part of Gods service, and that which should direct them in
all others, and make them most profitable unto them.

Which if it be so, (as we cannot with the least show of reason deny it) then
what cause have we to be sorry for our selves and others? Which have so many
times broken this law by wilful absenting our selves from the Church without
any just cause, or by not seeking to the Prophets to teach us, when we had not
them at home, and which do so continually see our brethren in many places,
for want of teaching, willingly to break this law, and which must needs
foresee, ours and their posterity to fall into the same sin, nay to continue
and dye in it, unless by establishing a preaching ministry every where (which
all are commanded publicly to pray) the disease be now cured, and so to be
prevented in time to come. In our English Letanie.


And if this be the estate of the poor people, The ministers that cannot, or
will not preach, are special causes of unhallowing this day.
that have not the preaching of the word among the^, that by breaking the
Sabbath continually they must needs provoke the most patient Lords wrath at
the last, and endanger their own souls health: what can be said or thought
sufficiently, and answerably unto the sin of them, who being called the
ministers of God, as they that should be the chief in his service, and go
before others in it, by preaching unto them, are able and willing to do nothing
less in the world, then that? For partly they are ignorant, and cannot do
it, partly they are given to ease, and will not do it, and partly they have
so many charges to look unto, that they know not where to begin to do it. And
so do not only unhallow every Sabbath day that the live, and do bestow no
day in the week so ill as that, (which they should bestow best of all)
because they neglect that, which God requires most of all at their hands: but
also are the only chief causes every where of unhallowing the Sabbath, and
do compel the people to break it, whether they will or no: which sin is
yet so much the greater in them, because it is not accounted of, and so there
is no care to amend it. But let them be assured, that all the charges given
concerning the sanctifying of the Sabbath in the scripture must be double
charged upon them, for themselves, and their people; and look how earnestly
this is by the Lord commanded, so severely will it one day be required at
their hands, when they shall have no body to speak for them, nay they shall
plead against themselves, and better were it for them a thousand times, to
beg in the mean season, then to eat up, and to live upon (as it were) their
own sins, and the sins of their people, and to carry about with them their
own bayne, not by slipping into, of human frailty, but stubbornely falling
into, and more wilfully lying in so manifest a breach of so great a
commandment, and that in the highest point of it.

Psalm. 95.7.8. 2. These. 2.10.11
Therefore to day if we will hear Gods voice, let us not harden our hearts
against it, but, let us receive the truth in love, least he give us up to
strong illusions, effectually to be deceived, and to believe a lie, and let us
confess as the truth is, that the Lord would have every Sabbath to be
sanctified, by the Minister and the people, and that in the Church he ought to
preach the word, and they to hear it every Sabbath day: And though we be not
so grossly blinded to imagine that it is not necessary one whit upon that
day, we must not also be deceived to think, that now and then is sufficient,
once a month, or twice a quarter, and so sometime both Minister and people
should be exempted from it, as though they could sanctify the day after some
other manner.

And though I have justly stood upon the preaching of the word especially,
because it is the greatest part of Gods service, and yet that which is most
neglected: my meaning is not to exclude the other, as though they appertained
not unto us: for it wholly and every part of it does concern us, and is to
be practiced upon this day. Therefore we must also come to the reading of
the word, We must be present also at the reading of the word, common prayer,
and administration of the Sacraments from the beginning to the end.
and common prayer, and receive the Sacrament so often as it is administered, yea
though we received it the Lords day immediately before, and be present at the
Baptism of others. For we have in the forenamed places, seen all these
practiced together, and seeing they be parts of Gods public worship, we must
leave no holy work of his undone, whereby the day might be sanctified unto
him. So we must be present at the whole action, and continue at the divine
service, from the beginning to the ending (as it is provided by the law of the
realm, which is grounded upon Gods word,) neither foreslowing to come at the
beginning, nor hastening to depart at the ending, which is so much the more
diligently to be taken heed of on every side, because herein many do offend
carelesselie, and yet the danger of it is very great. Some under the pretense
of coming to the Sermon, tarry at home a great part of the service, and so
neither are they at the confession of sins with Gods people, nor are made
partakers of the prayers of the Church for the forgiveness of their sins,
neither do ever hear much of the scripture read: other under the color of
being at all these depart away before the blessing is pronounced upon them,
and so many times lose the fruit of all (as Judas did,) or else tarry not the
ministering of the Sacrament, as though it were a thing impertinent unto them.

Therefore it is in express words set down by the Prophet Ezekiel cap. 46.
Where he speaks of Gods worship upon the Sabbath day, that the prince shall
be in the temple in the midst of the people, he shall go in, Ezekiel. 46.10.
when they go in, and when they go forth, they shall go forth together:
where we see he requires that all should be present from the beginning to the
ending, even the very chiefest in every congregation, as well as the meanest,
and no privilege is to be given to any one more then to another, for coming
unto, abiding at, and departing from the service of GOD, which concerns them
all like in the whole, and in every part of it: then the which nothing can be
spoken more truly, nor more plainly, which the Prophet David, as he knew very
well, so labored to persuade the people of it, Psalm. 84.10.
when in the Psalm. 84. He accounts the door keepers of Gods house blessed,
who were first and last in the temple, and so partakers of the whole worship.
Wherefore whenever we do voluntarily bereave our selves of any part of the
public Ministry, we cannot sanctify the day so in every portion of Gods
work, as he would have us to do.

Hereunto it seems they had respect in that council, Council. Malisgon. 2.
cap. 1.
wherein they say, Si quis, whosoever he be, let him go to the Church upon the
Lords day. And they bring their reason: For it is just, that we all celebrate
this day, vnanimiter, with one consent, or all together, in which we are made
that, which we were not before, for we were the servants of sin; but by it,
we are made the children of righteousness. August. de temp. sermon. 251
S. Augustine complains in his time of this abuse in one kind. Adhuc quoque,
quod valde dolendum est, conqueri vobiscum volo: I will further complain unto
you of one thing, for which there is great cause to be grieved, that there are
some, especially the great mighty men of this world, who when they come to the
church, have no devotion to praise God, but compel the Minister to curtall the
service, and to say it accordiog to their pleasure, and will not permit him to
follow the order of the Church, for their bellies sake, and coueteousnes, as
though but one little part of the day were appointed for Gods service, and
all the rest of the day together with the night, were ordained for their
pleasures.

See how truly he sets out, as it were in their colors, the manner of a
great many in our time. So that how many times soever, we have made
unnecessary delays, and have been afraid as it were, least we should come
too soon, (though in all worldly matters we suspect that we should come too
late, and we are loath to lose the least part of that, which might make for
our profit) we have hindered our selves from doing some part of Gods
service, which the rest of our brethren have been occupied in, and so have not
done unto him all that same service, which he required of us upon that day,
which must be dedicated unto him alone.

And least that we might imagine that the Lord does not so strictly require
this service at our hands, (besides that we must remember, that it has been
proved unto us out of the word, and declared how the practice of the Church in
all times has yielded unto it) if we do further consider the reasons, why
the Lord would be thus openly, and together of all his servants worshipped, we
shall easily perceive, that they stand still in force, and bind us as much as
ever any before: so that we cannot justly say, it is true in deed, it was thus
once, God would have us to serve him publicly in the Church.
but now it is not so necessary, we have more liberty then others, and so
discharge our selves of our obedience to God, at least wise of some part of it.
For first of all the Lord would have such solemn assemblies of his people in
one place, worshipping him together in those principal parts of his service,
which otherwise cannot be done, and has not left it to every man's discretion,
alone in some corner to serve him, when it pleases himself, (though he
require that of every one also, M^tth. 6.6.
even that entering into his chamber, he should shut the door, and there pray
unto him in secret, which will reward him openly,) but would have all resort
to the common meetings, and there jointly to agree in his service, praising
him in the assemblies, Psalm. 107.31.32.
and declaring his name unto our brethren in the midst of the congregation,
that thereby his Church might be known and discerned in this world from the
synagogues of the idolaters, and conuenticles of the Schismatickes, that so it
being, as a city set upon an hill which cannot be hid, Matthew 15.14.
and the mountain of the house of the Lord, being prepared in the top of the
mountains, and exalted above the hills, Esaias 2.2.
all nations might slow unto it, and they descrying it a far off might
repair unto it, as the Eagles do resort thither, where the dead carcas is:
Luke 17.37.
And so not only the godly might encourage one another, saying; Come, and let
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, Esaias 2.3.
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we
will walk in his paths: For the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem: but also that all the wicked which should by apostasy
forsake it, and revolt from it, or through contempt not join themselves unto
it, (as too many have, and do still in our time) might justly be condemned,
and left without all excuse, where it should be so visible, and as it were
palpable unto them.

Gualt. in Marc. 3. Homil. 23.
And therefore, as Master Gualter says, They that use the Sabbath day rightly,
Sacros coetus adeunt, go to the public assemblies to hear the word of God
and pray: and the same man in another place; Idem in Act. 17 Homil. 108.
It is evident that it was the ancient custom of the people of God, to
frequent the holy meetings, for which cause we do read, that holy days and
holy places in time past were ordained of God. Whereupon he infers in the
same place, that their perverseness is to be detested, who do profanely scoff
at the public meetings of Christians, wherein they manifestly bewray that they
are not touched with any desire of wholesome doctrine, or true religion. For
there the Lord does offer unto his Church those most notable and singular
means of their salvation, A commendation of the preaching of the word which
there is to be had. Romans 1.16.
which as they cannot want, so they can find no where but there, for there is
the preaching of the word, which is Gods own arm, and power to save all them
that believe, in so much that without the ministry and preaching of those,
Romans 1.16.
that have the public authority and callings of the Church, most ordinarily
men are not saved, Rom 10.14.
as the Apostle says: How can they believe without a Preacher? And how can
they preach unless they be sent? 1. Pet. 1.23.
For indeed this is the incorruptible seed whereby we are borne again,
without which we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: and Chap. 2.2.
and this is that sincere milk, whereby as newborn babes we are nourished,
and grow unto eternal life, A^^s 8.31.
even that word, that is preached; in so much that we cannot understand what
is read, (understand I mean to salvation) except we have a guide to preach
unto us, who may give the sense, Nehem. 8.8.
and cause us to understand the reading. For our Lord Jesus Christ, when he
ascended up an hye, and led captivity captive, Ephe. 4.8. unto 17.
gave rich and plentiful gifts unto men, pastors, and teachers, for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
building up of the body of Christ, til we al meet together in the unity of
faith and knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man, and unto the full
measure of the age of Christ, that we from hence forth might be no more
children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
deceit of men, and with craftines, whereby they lay in wait to deceive, but
might follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up unto him, which is the
head, that is Christ, by whom all the body being coupled, and knit together by
every joint, for the furniture thereof, (according to the effectual power,
which is in the measure of every part) receives increase of the body, unto the
building up of it self in love.

Seeing then there are so many excellent and glorious things spoken of the
preaching of the word, by the spirit of wisdom and truth it self, the like
whereof cannot be verified of any thing else under heaven, namely, that it
should be the principal, and most ordinary means to begin, to continue, to
increase, and make perfect in us faith, and all other graces of God, which
accompany salvation: and this can no where be had, but at the hands of the
ministers, Whose lips must preserve knowledge, Malac 2.7.
and the people must seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of
the Lord of hosts. Therefore it is as needful for us now still to come to the
place of common preaching, as it has been for any people heretofore, and to
serve the Lord with this part of his worship, which he has appointed for our
most especial good: besides that in so doing, we shall draw on our brethren
by our example, and (as it were give light unto them to see) where the
mountain of the house of the Lord does stand, and shall rise up in judgment
against them, who willingly stops their eyes against so clear a light, that
they might not be saved.

But that we might yet the rather be encouraged unto this, There also are the
sacraments administered, and there have we the benefit of common pr^yer.
and see the necessity of that to be so great as it is, we must further
consider that there also are the sacraments administered, which are most sure
pledges, and seals as it were, of all that good which is offered unto us in
the word, and whereby the delivery of them is confirmed unto us. 1. Cor. 11.20.
And these were so usually celebrated in the primitive Church upon the Lords
day, (as also appears in the scripture) that it had his name of them: For
Chrysostom writes, Chrysostom de res^^. sermon. 5.
that it had three names, The Lords day, because of Christ's resurrection, and
dies panis, dies lucis, The day of bread, because of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and of light, because of Baptism. There we are helped not only with
the prayers of so many of our brethren, and sisters, by whose means that which
was wanting in us, is supplied by them, and that which with many striuings we
have not obtained alone, by their help we shall more easily attain unto: but
also and especially our prayers are offered up by the minister of God, who is
appointed to that end, and in respect of which, his ministry is a thousand
times more acceptable unto GOD, then Aaron with his rich attire was beautiful
in the eyes of men.

Therefore I may say, as that grave and learned man says, Ph. Melancth. in
praecept. 3.
Master Melancthon: His atque alijs rationibus: By these and such like reasons
every man should stir up himself to love the society of the Church, in
which there is so much good, that if there be any commodity in other
societies, it is but a shadow of that, and they are beholding to that for it.
Which if they do not, then let them hear what the Apostles say: Constit.
Apost. cap. 63.
Quam excusationem afferre potest: What excuse can he pretend before God, who
comes not diligently upon the Lords day to praise God, and hear his word? I
doubt not but they please themselves in many their excuses, and think that
thereby they be able to satisfy men, but I say as before: how can they excuse
it before God? All which shall move us to be willing to come to the Church
upon those days: For as a godly man says, It must needs be a very great
contempt of God, Bucer in Psalm. 92.
not to bestow one day in the whole week in the knowing and serving of our
creator, of whom we have received our selves, and all things else that we enjoy.

Master Musculus writing of these words of the Gospel, that our Savior
Christ, Luke 4.16.
when he came to Nazaret (as his custom was) went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, says: Considerandum hic: We must here consider, what use was of
the Sabbath amongst the Jews, which Christ himself did diligently keep, as
we see here, when it is written, that according to his custom, he went into
the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day. If Christ did thus keep the Sabbath day,
and went into the Synagogue, that it is written, that this was his custom,
when he had no need of the lecture of Moses: what excuse shall they have in
these days, who either by too much disdain, or contempt upon the Lords days,
do neglect the Church, in which the doctrine of life is delivered? Who does
not see here (says he) that Christ by his presence does confirm a good
custom? And Melancthon speaking of the sundry breaches of this Commandment,
reckons up this: Seldom, M^lancth. in praecept. 3.
or never to come to the public ministry of the Church, where it is rightly
taught, and by their example to draw away others from that ministry, which is
not defiled with impiety, All which we stand in great need of.
as the Donatists and Brownists of our time have done.

Now least we might grossly imagine, that we stand in no need of all these
things, we must soberly, and in godly trembling and holy fear, remember that
he in his wisdom has appointed them, and therefore to refuse them, were to
make our selves wiser then he, and he that has established the ends of al
things, has also ordained all the means to bring every thing thereunto: and
therefore as he has chosen us to salvation in Christ, so he has in great
wisdom and mercy provided these rare and wonderful means, which he has
made to be effectual and mighty by his blessing, to bring that most happily
to pass: and therefore we in voluntarily neglecting the means, do bereave
our selves of our salvation, and shall justly perish, whatsoever we may fondly
dream, or others vainly persuade us to the contrary.

For if the nature of man was such in the beginning, (as we have already
seen that in Adam) that in his most perfect and blessed estate, he stood in
need of all those holy exercises, wherein he was commanded to sanctify the
Sabbath, for the better preservation of himself in his first perfection and
happiness: how must not we needs be persuaded, that we (being fallen so clean
away from it as we be) do stand in need to sanctify the Sabbath again and
again in all the means of Gods worship, and especially then in the most
principal, that thereby happily we might be recovered into our former estate?
Nay, what a blockish presumption were it for a man to think that Adam was
bound to sanctify the Sabbath, according to the Commandment, that being holy
and righteous still, he might have been preserved in the favor of God for
ever, and that we our selves being through sin fallen away from his love,
might make less account of these means, whereby he does first of all offer
himself to be reconciled unto us, and then never to fall away from that
estate, as though it were not so needful for us to sanctify the day by them?

Therefore let us confess, that these are, though not all, yet the most
especial parts of Gods service, wherein we are to be occupied upon the
Sabbath, and without which we are nothing near that manner of keeping holy
the day, which the Lord requires at our hands. And so I conclude this point
with the saying of Master Gualter: Dei bonitatem exosculemur: Gualt. in Mark 1.
Homil. 11.
Let us thankefully acknowledge the goodness of God, who has consecrated unto
his service that rest, which we stand in need of for the refreshing of our
bodies, least that it should degenerate into filthy and hurtful idleness.

And here, because we speak of the Lords service, which only sanctifies the
day, we must consider, All these parts of Gods service must be performed with
our whole hearts, and not only outwardly, and of a custom. Ioh. 4 24.
that he is a spirit, and therefore will be worshipped of us in spirit and in
truth: and therefore in all the above named parts of his worship, we must
perform a spiritual obedience, if we will serve him: so that whenever the
word is read, preached, or heard, the Sacraments ministered, and received, and
prayers made upon the Sabbath of custom, and not for conscience sake, because
we would do as others do, and would not be noted to be singular, and so in
doing of these things, we, as it were, do them not: For hearing we understand
not, reading we conceive not, praying we desire not, and all is done in the
letter, and not in the spirit: we serve our selves rather then God, and so
though the day be holy, we make it not holy to him, and for his sake. Thus
many when they have seemed most of all to have kept holy the day, have done
nothing less the^ that. Therefore as we must repent us of all our hypocrisy
in Gods service, so we must at all times endeavor that the holy exercises be
not unhallowed of us, least the Lords service being neglected, (which is
spiritual in all things) we be found breakers of the Commandment in that very
thing, wherein we did most of all presume that we had kept it: and if the best
things that we do be thus justly refused, what shall become of those, which
in our own eyes carry not that credit with them, much more in the eyes of
the Lord, who examineth all things more narrowly?

Furthermore, And so as by them we may be furthered in our salvation.
because the Lord in commanding us to serve him, has not so much respect to
himself, who has no need of us, as to our own good, which may by this
means be procured, we must so behave our selves in all the parts of Gods
worship, as may bring greatest profit to our souls health: 1. Cor. 14.26.
For in the Church of God, all things must be done to edifying, that al may
learn and have comfort, as it is in the 31. verse of the same chapter. And
therefore in the 11. chapter finding fault justly with the abuses that were in
their meetings, generally he charge the^ with this, 1. Cor. 11.17.
that they came not together with profit. Therefore both minister and people
must so behave themselves in Gods house, that they may depart with profit to
themselves and others. Which that they might attain unto, they must use all
such good means privately, both before and after the public exercises, as
might make the^ most profitable (which what they be, we shall hereafter see
more particularly) and in the very worship it self behave our selves so
reverently and attentively, as whereby greatest commodity might redound to us.
And indeed as Master Calvin says, Calvin in Exodus 20.8.
in this Commandment is included a promise: For God promises, that as he has
sanctified the seventh day for his service, so he will thereby sanctify them,
that rightly keep it: and therefore the promise of this blessing should be a
principal motive to our obedience.

And if in all other things we are careful not so much to use them, as to use
them to the best advantage, why should we not put that out to the greatest
gain, which in it own nature is most gainful indeed? For seeing that there
is nothing in the world that has so great a promise made unto it, as the
public service of GOD, should we not so behave our selves in it, that we
might be made partakers of it? And whereas it is blessed for our sakes, with
the full treasure of all Gods graces in this life, and eternal happiness in the
end; can it be but a most grievous sin, by our negligence, to spoil it of
that honor, and to make it unprofitable to our selves? Wherefore, though I am
not ignorant, that the proper place to speak of the manner of Gods worship, is
in another Commandment (where also it has been handled at large) yet because
all things comprehended in the other Commandments, must be practiced upon the
Sabbath, we must understand that it is not impertinent to this treatise: and
that the Sabbath is then only truly sanctified, when of Gods worship there
comes some fruit and commodity unto us.

For this cause the Prophet Esaias tells the Jews, that then they shall have
truly sanctified the Sabbath, and made it holy to the Lord, when thereby they
are made more able to rest from vanity and sin both in word and deed, and
be made more fit to serve the Lord in all duties afterward: Esaias. 58.13.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will upon my
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it, as glorious to the
Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own
will, nor speaking a vain word. Where his meaning is not that the whole
sanctifying of the Sabbath consists only in these, as though he would
exclude all the Sacrifices, the reading, and the preaching of the law, prayer,
and the whole ministry of that time established by the Lord, (whereof he
speaks not a word) but he rather aims at this, to correct their hypocrisy
in these things, and to show them that all was to no purpose, unless this
fruit followed of it, for which cause, the whole worship of God and the
Sabbath was first of al ordained. For as when David says: Psalm. 40.6.
Sacrifice and burnt offering thou did not desire, but mine ears have thou
prepared: burnt offering, and sin offering have thou not required: then said
I, lo I come to do thy will, O my God, as it is written of me in the roll of
thy book, for thy law is within my heart. He does not say that the Lord
required no sacrifice and burnt offering at all, (for he had commanded them in
his word) but he testifies that all sacrifice and all the outward worship is
nothing accepted, when it is severed from obedience, and when we thereby are
not made more fit to obey God in all other duties, even as it is expounded in
another place: 1. Sam. 15.22.
Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to
hearken is better then the fat of rams.

So the Prophet Esaias in the place above mentioned, expounding the law (as it
was the chiefest office of a Prophet) preaches unto them the true
interpretation of it, that though all Gods service be observed in every
outward point upon the Sabbath, yet all is ceremonial without these fruits,
appearing in us afterward; neither is it done in that manner, that GOD
allows, or that they thereby could look to inherit that promise, which in
the same place he makes to them that shall truly keep holy the Sabbath.
And thus are all other places to be understood, which are of the like nature
in this Prophet, and others; neither do they prove, that to rest from sin,
is a proper duty of this Commandment, more then any other, to which purpose
they are alleged of some (that I may speak it with their favor) but only
show what should be the fruit of these exercises, both upon that day, and
all other besides. And therefore in like manner, the same Prophet exhorting the
Jews to unfeigned repentantance for their sin, and a diligent care to please
God, framing their lives according to his word in all duties to his majesty,
and to their brethren, and then promises all manner of blessings unto them so
doing, in the midst of this exhortation once or twice speaks of sanctifying
the Sabbath day, as a chief means to bring them to this, saying: He that
keeps the Sabbath and polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any
ill. And verse. Esaias 56.2.
4. He that keeps my sabbaths, and chooses the thing that pleases me, and
takes hold of my covenant. Wherein as he declares unto them, that this is the
way to come to this faith and repentance, which has those promises annexed
unto them, even to serve God in all parts of his worship upon the Sabbath: so
he there requires this at their hands, that they would in such wise sanctify
the day, that they may be thus altered, and changed thereby.

Whereunto agrees that, which is in the Prophet Ezekiell, where he tells the
Jews, how many means the Lord had bestowed upon them to do them good, and
yet how unprofitable they were under them, and therefore that their sin was
so much the greater, and their punishment so much the more due, speaking of
their forefathers: I gave them my statutes, Ezekiel. 20.11.12.
and declared my judgments unto them, which if a man do, he shall live in
them. Moreover also, I gave them my sabbaths to be a sign between me and
them, that they might know, that I am the Lord, that sanctify them. Which
mercy of his he continued with their posterity, for he said unto their
children in the wilderness, verse 19. Walk in my statutes, and keep my
judgments, and do them: 20. And sanctify my Sabbaths, and they shall be a
sign between me and you, that ye may know, that I am the Lord your God,
etc. His meaning is that he offered unto them life everlasting in his holy
word: he gave them also the Sabbaths, wherein they being wholly, and
profitably occupied in all the exercises of religion, might thereby know that
the Lord their God, would by his holy spirit work in them all that faith and
obedience, which he required of them, that they might come to life everlasting.
So then he required of them so to behave themselves on the Sabbaths, as that
thereby they might attain unto that, for which he especially gave them unto
them.

But this may be sufficient to let us see into so plain and easy a matter as
this, namely, that though we come to the Church all our life every Sabbath,
and remain there from the beginning to the ending, yet only so many days,
and no more have we kept holy as we ought, by how many we have been bettered
and furthered; (I mean in the ways of our salvation) and made more fit to
serve God and our brethren thereby: Here we have cause to repent us of our
unprofitable co^. ming to the Church.
what shall we say then to all our unprofitable wanderings to the Church and
home again? And how shall we give an account to the Lord for them? And if the
case stand so betwixt the Lord and us, that many times when we thought our
selves best occupied, even that is turned into sin unto us, what great cause
have we to be truly humbled before him by repentance for our sins, that so
we might be exalted of him in due time?

And in deed this is so great an evil, that we cannot tell where to make an
end of it. For letting pass all the days of our vanity and ignorance, spent
either in popery or in the light of the Gospel, wherein we were always
unprofitable in the service of God: we may with heavy hearts remember, how
many times since our calling, we have met in the Church with the least profit
that may be, or rather none at all, in respect of the means that did offer
unto us so great profit: in so much that though our profiting in worldly
things have been so great, that it may be seen a far off, yet our increase
in heavenly things is so small, or rather none at all, that it cannot be
descryed, come as nere as you will. And when as in all other things, we do
rejoice at the greatness of our gain, whether we look within the doors or
without, in the house or the fields, to our cattle, or to our goods, only in
spiritual matters, (I will not say our gain is so small) but our decay and
loss is so great, that we have great cause to be ashamed of it. And though
from the markets and fayres, we come not without some provision, yet upon the
Sabbath (which is the market day for our souls) we come home many times, and
carry nothing, whereby we might live the better the whole week following. To
be short, though from a common person we have not many times departed without
some profit, yet from the minister of Gods word, even in that place, where he
has the greatest blessing of being profitable to others, that any can have in
the world, and none so great as he, we have departed, and that upon the
Sabbath, without any profit at all, wherein our sin is so much the greater,
that for the most part, men do not see it, and so cannot be grieved for it.

And what is the cause of all this? S. Augustine in his time complains of
many great abuses in the Church, which hinder men from profiting (all which
and many more are true in our time) when having spoken before of them that are
ranging in the fields, when they should be at Church, adds. Adhuc, quod
detestabilius est. August. de te^p. sermon. 251.
Besides (which is worste) some coming to the Church doors, enter not in, or
tarry not there with silence to the end, but when there is divine reading
within, then they abroad are talking either of other matters; or quarelling
one with another, or playing. To whom he says afterward: Do not give your
selves to playing abroad, but to praying and singing within. And afterward
in the same place he speaks to them that are in the Church, saying: Do not
talk one with another, while you are at Church, but be quiet, for there are
many, especially certain women, Quae ita in ecclesia garriunt, who so chat in
the Church, and are so full of words, that neither themselves hear that which
is read, nor suffer others to hear, and then he concludes, Should there be
such meetings in the house of God in such an order, or should they so behave
themselves in the sight of God, and of his holy Angels? It is provided by
public authority, That no man, woman, Q. Iniunct. articl. 38.
or child should be otherwise occupied in the time of service, then in quiet
attendance to hear, mark and understand, that, that is read, preached and
ministered: but how pitifully the execution of this is neglected in many places,
it is too lamentable to consider.

And if this were all, we might hold our peace; The Ministers in many places
are the cause, why the people do not profit.
but this mischief stretches it self out further: for alas, many of Gods
people live under such unprofitable Ministers that it is not so much as to be
hope for ordinarily, that any profit should come from them at all: for besides
that, that many cannot so much as distinctly read, so that they may profitably
be understood (I would to God it were not so,) there are many that can but
read, and what is the profit of that (though I confess it is great in it
self) unto the endless profit that comes by preaching? And let them but one
show us the spirit of God (who must be the only judge in this matter) ever
speaking so magnificenlty of the one, as of the other. Others that do preach
had as good almost hold their peace: for they cannot divide the word of God
aright, 2. Tim. 2.5.
neither are they the mise dispensers of Gods mysteries, Matthew. 24.45.
and stewardes of his house, who should give to every one of his people their
own meat in due season, Zach. 11.15.
but have taken unto themselves the instruments of a foolish shepherd, whose
right arms is dried up, and their right eye is clean put out, that they have
no skill to discharge their duties in any profitable measure: neither do they
make it part of their care and study, to speak most profitably to their
people, but either care not what they say, or else seek their credit and
estimation in that which they do say. What shall we say then to these
unprofitable men, which cause so many of Gods people to be unprofitable, and
even in those things, from whence greatest profit should redound unto them,
and upon that very day, which is especially appointed for their profit?

How will they wash their hands of so many unprofitable assembles, whereof they
have been the very cause themselves? nay they have brought up a vile slander
upon the house of God, (which is the most beautiful, and fruitful place in
the world) because they have shut out the profitable preaching of the word,
which makes all other things more profitable. In so much that many say, what
good shall I get by going to the Church? what can I hear there, which I may
not hear or read at home? Have I not the Bible, and book of common preyer at
home? which saying of theirs though I do not allow of, yet you see whence it
ensues and woe be to them, by whom such offenses come: but this one thing
will require a several treatise, and I must remember my purpose, (though I
have well remembered it all this time) I mean I must be as brief in every
thing, as the time does require, and the waightines of the matter wit permit.

There are yet other holy duties publicly to be performed upon the Sabbath
day, whereby it is sanctified, but I have stood the longer upon these, because
they are most principal, most common unto all, least regarded of all: I will
be shorter in them which follow. Upon the Lords day the poor ought publicly
to provided for.
To make common provision for such poor as be in every congregation, or if
they be able to have a care of others adjoining unto them, is a work most
acceptable unto God, profitable to our brethren, commanded to be done and
practiced of the Church, most of all, upon the Sabbath. For this is that order,
which the Apostle established in the Churches of Galatia, and at Corinth, for
the relieuing of the poor saints at Jerusalem, much more then did they it,
for those that were amongst themselves: Every first day of the week let every
one of you put aside, and lay up as God has prospered him, 1. Cor. 16.2.
that then there be no gatherring when I come. When men have been prospered
the whole week before, and they come upon the Lords day to acknowledge it, and
to give tha thanks unto God for the same, the lord would have the^ declare
their faith, (namely that they have received all from him) by bestowing upon
them who are in great need, the which that they might do the rather, they
have the word that might provoke them unto it: wherein are many goodly
promises, concerning the fatherly providence of God watching over them for good
in this life that serve him, and that he has provided for them a kingdom in
heaven, and that he will requite it them double, whatsoever they give unto the
poor in his name, and for his sake, in so much that the giving of a cup of
cold water shall not be lost, Math. 10.42.
for he that has pity upon the poor, Prou. 19.17.
lends unto the Lord, and look whatsoever he lays out, it shall be
repayed. For the Lord Jesus Christ will account, Math. 25.40.
whatsoever we have done unto the least of his brethren, as though we had done
it unto himself, 2. Cor. 9.6.
and so, he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully.

Besides all this, then are we made partakers of the sacraments, wherein the
Lord offers his son Jesus Christ crucified unto us with all the merits of
his death, by who^ we are made heirs of the whole world: and there he gives
us liberty to ask of him whatsoever we want, and has promised to give it
us, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
when we pray in the name of his son, according to his will. Seeing then we
have so many things in possession, and so many more in hope and right, which
(as it is always so by faith) so we see it most clearly, when by thus many
means it is testified unto us: therefore as they that do come from a rich
spoil do send gifts to their friends in token of joy and plenty, as David in
the spoil of the Amalekites, 1. Sam. 30.26.
so the Lord would have us to witness unto the others the joy that we have
in his favor, and the riches of our inheritance, which we possess already by
faith, and hope in the end to come unto, as by many other means, so especially
by our liberality to others for his sake, whom he to that end offers unto us
as it is said, John. 12.8.
The poor ye shall have always with you.

Thus after the return out of captivity, when Ezra the Priest did upon the
first day of the month (which was a Sabbath) read and expound the law of
GOD, to the whole congregation of the Jews, (for the knowledge of which he
exhorted them to be thankful) among other things he wills them to have a
care of the poor. So eat of the fat, Nehem. 8.10.
and drink the sweet, and send part unto them, for whom none is prepared, for
this day is holy unto our lord. Iustine Martyr speaking of the order of
Christians upon the Lords day in his time, among other things says,
Conferuntur eleemosynae, Justin. Martyr Apolog. 2.
Alms is given according to the discretion of every man for the relief of the
poor, the fatherless, the sick, and those that are banished: but herein they
observed this order, (as it is said there) that it being given unto the
custody of one, it was afterward distributed according to discretion. Bucer
in Mat. 12.11.
And Bucer amongst other duties to be performed upon this day, says we
ought, Confer in pauperes, to provide for the poor: And indeed if men will
not be liberal then, when they have so many means to draw them unto it, what
hope can we have that they will be so at other times, when they shall have
none of them? Therefore men may say what they will, that they do thus, and
thus bestow at home, but who will believe them? when they do find them so
straight handed then, when the Lord does offer so much unto them that they
might be more able cheerfully to show mercy unto others.

Therefore though I cannot like of the disordered gathering for the poor that
is in many places, where in the time of divine service, you shall see men go up
and down asking, receiving, changing, and bestowing of money, wherein many
times you shall have them so disagree, that they are louder then the minister:
and the rest stand looking, and listening unto them, leaving the worship of God
(as though it did not concern them) and thus all is confused: So yet I am
persuaded that this is tire fittest time to make this provision, and I presume
that it is not the meaning of our godly wise rulers in the Church, and common
wealth, (who are abused herein) that any such thing should be done: but that
the gathering being made at some other time of the day, they might have it in
readiness before hand, to bestow at the end of service upon the needy,
according to their discretion, or generally to take some good order that God
might be best, served, our brethren relieved and no man justly offended. But
we may say of this thing, as the Papists do of the private Mass, (which they
cannot defend) that the iniquity of the people brought it in. For when men
thorowen covetousness would not follow the rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 16.2.
to put some thing apart for the poor, as they should find God had blessed
them, and so bring that with them, and have it in a readiness, being persuaded
that it is a duty, 2. Cor. 9 7.
which God requires of them, and so do it cheerfully, as unto him, who has
promised to reward it; but it being left to their discretion, they have shifted
it off as they might, and when divine service was ended, and now nothing more
was to be done in the Church but that, they would not carry it: then, the
collectors for the poor were compelled to take them there in the midst of
Gods service, when for very shame by starting they could not refuse. But from
the beginning it was not so: and seeing God is not the author of confusion, 1.
Cor. 14.33 40
all things in the Church must be done honestly and in good order.

And these are the common and public duties which are to be performed in the
assemblies of the people; and which cannot be done but where there is a visible
church established, How we ought privately to spend the rest of the day, when
the public assemblies are dissolved.
which has her ordinary meetings, which where it is: yet they continue not
together the whole day, neither can, nor indeed is it required of them, and
yet the whole day must be hallowed (as we have seen in part, and it shall
more fully appear unto us here after). For God sanctified from the beginning
the seventh day, Council. Turon. cap. 40.
not a parcel of it only: and in the Council of Turon, it was decreed, that
they should rest from all work, and be occupied in praising Gods name (vsque
ad vesperam) even unto the evening. Council. Paris. cap. 1.
And in the Council of Paris, they say, Let your eyes and hands be lifted up
unto God, toto illo die, August. de te^p. sermon. 251.
all that day. For as S. Augustine very well says, We must not think that a
little piece of that day is sufficient for Gods service, and all the rest we
may bestow at our pleasures. For as we have seen, before, therefore are they
called the Lords Sabbaths, and in the new Testament, the Lords days, because
they are wholly to be employed in his service. And therefore Master Calvin very
excellently says: Calvin. upon Deuteronomy. 5. ser. 34.
Let us know that the Sunday is not ordained for us only to come to the
sermon, but to the end we might employ the rest of the time to laud and
praise God. For as one as one very learnedly observes: It is not simply said:
Muscul. praecept. 4.
Remember the Sabbath, but the Sabbath day, and not the things of the day, but
the day it self. And so I conclude with P. Martyr, Of every seven days, one
must be reserved to God: P. Martyr in Genesis 2.
he means one whole day, not a piece of it. Therefore there must needs be
certain other holy duties, and parts of Gods worship, which we must walk
in the rest of the day, when the congregation is dissolved, and when we are
alone by our selves, which are the private religious exercises of a Christian
man, in which he sanctifies the rest of the Sabbath, and they are all such
parts of Gods service, which a man can do by himself alone, or with others of
his household, or neighbors, whereby he might prepare himself, or them for the
public ministry (which is the chiefest) or afterward make it most
profitable to himself or them.

Unto which it seems Master Bucer had respect, when as he speaking of such
things, as are to be done upon the Sabbath, and having named those that are
public, Bucer in Matthew. 12.11.
as to hear the word, to receive the Sacraments, to provide for the poor,
unto them adds: In the first part of the day we ought to prepare our selves
for the public assemblies.
Instituere ad pietatem familiam, to instruct a man's household unto goldines. In
the former part of the day therefore every one must prepare himself for the
Church, that he might come thither with profit: for if in all worldly things,
that be of any moment, we, do prepare our selves, then much more ought we to
do it in heavenly, whereunto we are most unfit, as they in themselves are the
greatest: especially when the benefit of them is so great, if we be prepared,
and the danger is so perilous, if we be unprepared: for the preaching of the
word is the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.15.
or the savor of death unto death: And in the Sacrament is offered unto us the
body and blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.24.
to nourish us up unto everlasting life, but if we eat and drink unworthily,
we procure Gods judgment against our selves. 29
The Lord in speaking to his people from heaven in an extraordinary manner,
Exodus 19.
did command them to be prepared extraordinarily: by which practice of his he
declared, that in the ordinary ministry of the word, there ought to be some
ordinary preparation, if we will be partakers of it with profit. The ground
is prepared for the seed, the stomach for meat, the whole body for
physic: this is the immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.23.
whereby we are begotten into an assured hope of a far better life: This is
the food and physic of our souls, whereby our life is preserved, and we kept
from eternal death, therefore we must be prepared for it.

The want of which preparation, is the cause that the word is so unprofitably
heard of a great many.
And this is so much the more diligently to be marked, because it is so little
known, and less practiced in the world For if the day were as long again, as
the longest in the midst of Summer, a great many would spend away the time (I
know not how) and neither at home nor in the way, nor at the Church think to
prepare themselves one whitte. And if they have made a few prayers at their
first coming in, then (if service be not begun) they are as ready to talk
of any worldly matter, with any that will give them the hearing, as ever they
were, if it were half an hour together, yea though the minister be there,
until he begin the first word: for want of which preparation, either they can
receive nothing, or it does them no good, which is the very chief cause of so
much fruitless hearing of so many good sermons, as is every where, that they
which otherwise have good wits, and great affections, here are both senseless
and without feeling; so that they sit more be like stocks then men, conceiving
no more then the very, stools they sit upon, carrying away no more then they
brought with them. And if it be not so, what is the cause that many reasonable
men hearing one man at one time speaking one and the same word of God so
plainly (that if it were possible young children might understand it) some shall
so greatly profit by it, Matthew. 11.19.
that wisdom should be justified of her children: others shall so merely not
conceive one word, as though they had been deaffe, a sleep, or in a trance, or
stark dead all the while?

And that it is so indeed, let the intolerable ignorance of men every where
after this long preaching of the word, Under the most happy reign of her
gracious Majesty (whom God still long preserve to that end, and ad as many
happy years unto he reign, as may be) speak for it, and see whether we
complain, before we have cause. Nay let men's own woeful experience tell
themselves, that when they have most prepared themselves, they have most
profited by the public ministry: and contrariwise; then have they been most
unprofitable at it, when they have come most irreverently and vprepared to it.
In so much that a man of meaner gifts shall some times be more profitable to
them, when they are thus prepared, then another that has more excellent
graces, at whom they may well wonder, but receive no profit by him, when they
be not propared for it. I know the Lord is merciful, and he does not always
deal with men according to their deserts, and therefore many times when they
come unprepared, he blesses his own ordinance unto the^, Matthew. 28.20.
that he might perform the truth of that promise, which he has annexed unto
it, and his mercy is above al our sins, but how can men look for any such
thing ordinarily? And does he not it unto them to teach them, that he would
bestow upon the^ greater mercy by these means, if they would prepare
themselves for it?

How we out to prepare our selves before we come to the Church.
But how shall men prepare themselves? Surely first of all let them be
persuaded, that they ought to prepare themselves, and this is the beginning of
their preparation; then let them examine themselves, not only how they have
spent the week past, and every day in it, calling themselves to an account
before God, what sins they have committed day or night, to be humbled for
them; what benefits received, that they might be thankful, and what duties
they have done, that they might be comforted therein (all which though they
be shortly spoken, they are not so soon done, and here is not so much need
of a good capacity to conceive, as a good conscience to practice:) but also
generally what is their estate, what graces they want, what be their sins
past, what their infirmities present: and because the Lord has appointed his
worship to comfort us over these, let us pray unto God before hand, that the
prayers of the Church might be directed, the Minister of the word so disposed,
and every thing in the Church so governed, and so blessed unto us by his
spirit, as might make not only for our good in general and the good of
others, but in these special things that we stand in most, need of.

2. There is great cause to pray, before we come to the Ministry of the word.
And so let us pray for our selves and others, and that we might be helped by
them, but especially let us pray for the Minister of Gods word, that to it
might be joined the ministry of his spirit, which when we do, the Lord
(that hears our prayers, that knows our wants) will cause us to hear that,
which we most of all desired: and that which is spoken generally, the spirit
will apply unto us particularly; even as many eating of one meat receive
sundry kinds of nourishments from it: and he will cause the steward of his
house, to give unto us that meat, which he most of all knows we stand in
need: and then we shall hear him speak, as though he were in our bosom, 1.
Cor. 14.22.
and the secrets of our hearts shall be made manifest: not that he knows
what is within us, but the Lord knows (whose minister he is, for our good)
and the holy Ghost does, which accompanies Gods ordinance) and in the word
does, which is preached; Heb. 4.12.13.
For the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two edged sword; and enters thorough, even unto the dividing asunder of the
soul, and the spirit, and of he joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and the intents of the heart; neither is there any creature, that
is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto is eyes,
with whom we have to do.

And that we might the rather be persuaded that we ought thus in the feeling
of our wants, pray unto God, we must remember, that we cannot so much as
understand the word, unless Gods spirit do teach us; Ephesians. 5.8.
For we are darkness it self: And the natural man perceives not things of
the spirit of God, (for they are foolishnes unto him) neither can he know them,
because they are spirituallie discerned: and besides, the word of God is high,
and there are many mysteries contained in it, and a wisdom that is hid, which
many princes of this world do not know, Verse. 7.8
as it in the same chapter: and all the articles of our faith are above our
reason, nay we account them foolishnes: Therefore both in the inward seeing of
our own blindness, and in a reverent estimation of Gods holy word, we had need
pray for the inlightening of his holy spirit, which searches all things, yea
the deep things of God, Verse. 10.11.
and no man knows the things of God, but the spirit of God: as it is most
lively set forth unto us in this very chapter. And so let us pray with the
Prophet in the 119. Psalm, in a great many places: O Lord teach me thy
statutes, and open mine eyes that I might see the wonders of thy law: and make
me to understand the way of thy precepts: and teach me good judgment and
knowledge, and give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments: 16.
and deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.

And when we do understand (through the blessing of God obtained by prayer) we
must pray further that our affections might be framed according to our
knowledge, which we had need to do so much the more, because it is harder then
the other; and yet our affections do more overcome us, then our knowledge, in
so much that we do not many times that we know to be best, but which we like
best: and so at some other time fo the day, we must pray that these things
might be called into our remembrance, and that we might be transformed into not
only the knowledge, but obedience of them, which is the end of all: and
generally, that the fruit of all things might appear in our lives, to our
own unspeakable comfort, the benefit of others, and Gods glory most of all,
which without the especial assistance of his holy spirit, we cannot
obtain, by the most excellent gifts, and most painful endeavors of his best
servants. 2 Cor. 3.5.
For who is Paul, and who is Apollo: but the ministers by whom ye believed,
and as the Lord gave to every man, I have planted? Appolos watered, but God
gave the increase: so then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase: says the Apostle. Therefore
as the Ministers pray much for his people, if ever he will do any to them,
even as it is said of the prince of pastors, Luke 21.37. Marc. 14.23.
that in the day time he taught in the temple, and at night went up into the
mountain to pray: so the people must pray much more for the ministers and
themselves, both before and after, both that they might be prepared obtain,
and continue in that good which they have gotten.

Many do wrongfully complain, that their minister is unprofitable unto them,
he does them no good, they cannot conceive him. (I do not say, but that the
complaints of some are just,) yet let them consider whether some great part of
the fault be not in themsleues, We ought to read the Scriptures, privately at
home.
namely the want of prayer before, and their negligence afterward: unto private
prayer must be adjoined private reading of the Scriptures, at such times of the
day, as they shall find it most convenient, both that they might generally
be acquainted with the body of the Scripture, and also that they might have
some more special use of certain parts, as they shall stand in need, either
to be confirmed in any point of doctrine publicly taught, or might thereby
receive any special comfort, humiliation, or increase of such graces, as they
labor most for, or might be quickened up unto prayer.

And hereunto may be referred that saying of Theophylacte, Theoph. in Marc.
1.21.
The law has commanded men to rest upon the Sabbath, vt lectioni vacent
homines, that men might attend upon reading, which is true, not only of the
public reading in the Church especially, but also of private reading at home.
For so it is that in most places the people do hear the scriptures seldom in
the Church, and then but certain portions of them, and not the whole word
read over: whereby it comes to pass, that they are utterly ignorant in,
and never so much as have hard before of many textes, that are alleged in the
sermons, for proof of any doctrine, whereby they are not only not furthered,
but hindered, wondering at such strange, and seldom hard things, and so the
thing is more obscure unto them, the^ it was before, being proved by that which
they understand not. Nay the common stories of the bible, they are unacquainted
with: fear the^ with this or that judgment executed upon such a people,
comfort them with such a mercy showed unto such a man; it moves the^ not; they
know no such thing; they are altogether strangers in those matters: nay some
cannot tell in what part of the Bible any such book (as is alleged) stands.
Therefore whereas we may observe it in the new Testament, that our Savior Christ
and his Apostles in alleging the places of the old Testament, do generally
say, thus it is written, Matthew. 21.13. Luke 20. 42. Act. 1.23. cap. 2 16.
Matthew. 15.7.
or as it is written in the book of the Psalms, or this is that which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel, or well prophesied Esaias of you, etc. Now men are
driven to name the book, the chapter, the verse, and all too little, to help
men to find it out, so unacquainted are they with searching the Scriptures, by
private reading, no not upon the Lords day, which is one of the peculiar works
of it.

Moreover, though we be something skillful in the Scripture, we cannot well
presently in the Church stand reading every place that shall be alleged,
least in the mean season some other most necessary doctrine ouerslip us, and
we not marking what went before, and followed after, cannot tell to what end
the place was alleged, and so we lose the profit of it, therefore (doing our
endeauours to mark the Scriptures alleged) it shall be profitable for us
afterward, at home to read them over, when we shall be more free from
distraction, and have more leisure to do it conveniently: which is that that
is commended unto us, by the practice of the church in Berea, that when Paul
had preached unto them Christ Jesus, and had proved him to be that Savior of
the world that was promised, Act. 17.11.
they read over those Scriptures, to see whether it were so or no, according
to the commandment of our Savior Christ, John 5.39.
search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me. Therefore so
many as can read, let them do it upon the Lords day, and they that cannot,
let them see the want of it to be so great in themselves, that they bring up
their children unto it, and in the mean season repair to those places where
they may have the Scriptures read unto the^, and let them get the bible into
their houses, that when any come that can read, they may have it in a readiness,
and lose not the opportunity that is offered, even as they are contented to
have many other things in their houses, which (though they know not how to
occupy themselves) yet some of their friends may when they come, especially
when the benefit of it shall redound not only to him that occupies it, but
to himself, and all his household.

Unto the forenamed exercises we must join meditation, as a most notable part
of Gods service, We must use private meditation upon that, which we have heard
and read.
which is the very life and strength of the former, and without the which they
are made weak, and unprofitable unto us. For meditation is that exercise of
the mind, whereby we calling into our remembrance that which we know, do
further debate of it (as it were) with our selves, reasoning about it so, and
applying it to our selves, that we might have some use of it in our practice,
and therefore it frames the affections of our hearts accordingly, so that it is
an occupying of the whole mind, both of the reasonable part whereby we do
remember some thing; and furthermore we (being reasonable creatures) do gather
some other things upon it, by finding out the causes of it, espying the fruit
of it, or considering the properties of it, and so do make some profitable use
of it to our selves, whereby also our affections must needs be framed some one
way or other to love, joy, desire, hatred, fear, etc. according to the
diversity of our meditations, and all those affections in their several
kinds, shall be so much the more vehement, by how much the meditation is more
serious and earnest. As for example, What meditation is, and how untoward
naturally we are thereunto.
to meditate upon the word, is diligently to call into our remembrance, that
which we have learned by hearing, or reading before, and to muse upon it so,
that we be able to go from point to point, then to apply the general thing to
our selves, and be persuaded that we must make our use of it, and therefore
wisely to examine how the case stands between the Lord and ourselves, in
that very thing, and then what is like to follow upon it, whereby our hearts
being stirred, they might drive us to put some thing in practice.

And here I would gladly speak as plainly as possibly I might, even to the
capacity of the most rude and ignorant, because I know that it is so little
practiced of men, that they are not so much as acquainted with it, to know what
it means. I confess it is an hard thing indeed, but most profitable, and
therefore we are almost unfit unto it, and the devil labors most of all to
hinder us in it, in so much that if he cannot keep us from hearing and reading
the word, and receiving the sacraments at the time appointed, yet he will
endeavor (as much as may be) to hinder us from meditating upon these, that we
might lose the profit of them. And if we mark our selves narrowly, we shall
find our untowardness this way most of al, for when we have gone cheerfully
unto the church, and there with the rest of Gods people, behaved our selves
orderly, because these are outward things, and in them, it might seem unto
us, that we have had to deal but with men, it is that which is not so yrksome
unto us, and whereunto the wickedest man may very easily come: but afterward to
take some fit time to our selves, wherein we will sever our selves from men,
and call ourselves to an account before Gods judgment seat, for that which we
have heard, and to deal with our own hearts in good earnest, for the doing or
not doing of that which we have learned, and (casting off all the cloakes of
hypocrisy) to lay our hearts naked before God, accusing our selves, where we
come short of any thing, praying unto him for his grace therein, confessing our
sins that we have been rebuked of, craving the forgiveness of them,
acknowledging his mercy, where we have received any thing, entreating him for
the continuance of it, and so to depart away either more humbled in our selves,
to avoid sin more carefully; or comforted in the Lord, to go on forward in
well doing more courageously: this I say, as it does especially build us up in
godliness, so by due proof we shall find, that without the especial
assisstance of Gods holy spirit, there is nothing more loathsome in the world,
and more tedious unto us.

And I am assured, that it is a thing so altogether abhorred of the greatest
part of the world, that they will not so much as have a purpose once to meddle
with it, yea and many that do make a profession to serve God in the other
parts of his worship, and that (as we are to presume of them) in a good
measure of truth, yet have an evil opinion of this, and so bereave themselves
of much profit. For they purposing to pass away their time in as much mirth as
may be, and having determined to abandon all sorrow, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.
yea though some be godly and necessary, as far from them as they can, will
not thus straightly deal with themselves, least it should make them
melancholy (as they say) and drive them into their dumps: And left happily at
any time they might (through Gods mercy toward them) unwittingly fall (as it
were) into this meditation, they will cut off all the means that might procure
it, and therefore be in merry company (as they call it) continually, that they
might not so much, as be alone at any time: and if perhaps they be, and so this
ouercreepe them (the Lord seeking by all means possible to do them good) then
fearfully they hasten out of it, as fast as may be: and for that purpose some
that are of great calling, are contented to maintain at their charges one or
other in their houses that can best feed their humor to be merry companions,
or rather iesters unto them, to pull them away from this good, though they will
not be at half the cost yearly in making provision for some godly books and
learned preachers, when they have none of their own, that might bring them to
the best mirth, and might show them wherein the greatest joy and soundest
comfort does consist, even that, that would endure with them, when all other
shall forsake them, and most of all accuse them.

But that we might be persuaded of the excellency of it, The great good that
may redound unto us by godly meditation.
let us hear what the spirit of wisdom and judgment speaks of it. First of all
the Lord commands Joshua, that unto the reading of the law he would join
meditation, as an especial means to keep him in the continual practice of
it, Josh. 1.8.
saying, Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe, and do according to all that
is written therein. Then the Prophet David in the first Psalm, makes it an
especial token of a godly man, and also commends it as a most singular
means of his godliness unto everlasting life, Psalm. 1.2.3.
when he says: Blessed is he whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and
in his law does meditate day and night: for he shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of waters, that shall bring forth her fruit in due season, whose
leaf shall not fade, for whatsoever he shall do shall prosper. More over is
we look but unto the 119. Psalm, and so content our selves with that, we
shall see how many times the man of God commends this unto us, when first of
all in the 15. verse, he speaks thus: I will meditate in thy precepts and
consider thy ways: and 23. Princes did sit and speak against me, but thy
servant did meditate in thy statutes: and 78. Let the proud be ashamed, for
they have dealt wickedly and falsely with me, but I meditate in thy precepts.

But above all, that is most notable which is in the 13. part of that Psalm,
where with I will end: Oh how love I thy law? it is my meditation continually:
where we may plainly see what is the judgment of the scriptures concerning
this thing, which do so often, and so highly commend the continual meditation
of the word. And it is to be observed, that this may and ought to be
continual, that is vey often) for when we lack opportunity to read and
hear the word, yet then may we meditate upon some thing profitablie, which
that we might do, let us remember what great things the Prophet speaks of it
in the verse following, which he found true by his own experience: Psalm. 119.
part 15.
I have had more understanding (says he) then all my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditation: Wherein he does assure us, that if we will
meditate upon those general rules, which we have heard out of Gods word, we
shall many times see more clearly into the truth of it, then he that
preaches it, at least wise more then he expressed unto us: for by the spirit
of God we shall be taught to apply it mote particularly to our selves, then he
did, or could, because we are most privy unto our own estates. For as in all
liberal Arts and Sciences nothing can be taught so plainly, unto which the
scholar by meditation reasoning about it, shall not be able to add something:
and without the which the easiest teaching shall seem somewhat hard: so is it
in Divinity, that by Gods holy spirit, using earnest and diligent meditation
in the scripture, we shall most easily perceive how to apply that to our own
practice, which has been publicly taught, and none can teach us to have so
many sundry uses of it in our lives and conversation as our selves, when we
give our selves to the profitable meditation of it.

Without the which all that we read and hear is but in a general and
confused knowledge: How unprofitable men are to themselves and others, for want
of meditation.
we have little comfort or edification thereby: especially seeing Gods
blessing is upon his own ordinance, and his curse is upon the neglect of the
same. This makes great hearers and great readers, to be unprofitable to
themselves and others, because for want of meditation, they know not how to
use their knowledge: thereupon it comes to pass, that many preachers can say
no more, then they find in their books, (and therefore they toss over so
many Commentaries as they do, that they might have matter enough) and so can
go no further: because without meditation all reading is vain: whereas it
would minister abundant matter unto their former readings. Besides that, they
bring themselves into a bondage to believe that, whatsoever their writer says,
because they do not meditate upon it; and they hinder their memories, because
they trust all to their books: so that if they have time sufficient and store
of books, they are able to speak with great admiration to the profit of the
hearers, and yet of the same matters can scarsely speak to a private man upon
the sudden tolerably to his ecdification and comfort, because he has but
spoken it of the book (as it were) and not labored to make it his own by
meditation, and thereby to find out how he might apply it to his own use, and
the benefit of others.

And this thing is so much the more dangerous, because it has infected also
many of the best students in the Universities. Hereupon it comes to pass,
that many of the best people can say no more, then they have heard, and they
will allege that thus they have been taught, but how to use that they know
not, nay they forget a great deal of that which they have learned. So then (as
it is in the common proverb) not the greatest Clerks are always the wisest
men: nor they that have most knowledge are always fittest to govern, but they
who labor to bring their knowledge into practice, and apply it unto the time,
by comparing things past with the^ that be present, and foreseeing as much as
they can what will follow afterward. So not the greatest hearers and readers
of the word, are the godliest men, and like to do most good unto themselves
and others, but the greatest musers and meditatours thereupon; and they are
like to be so much the more profitable, because that whereas reading indeed
does better our affections, but most of al does increase our knowledge, this so
increases knowledge in us, as that it especially breeds good affections in
us, and quickens them up most effectually, when they be begun before, and we
know that our affections be (as it were) the feet of our souls, and do more
carry us to every thing, then our knowledge.

Therefore seeing the profit of meditation is so great, and the neglect of it
brings so great loss, it stands us in hand (that so all the parts of Gods
public worship might be as profitable to us, as they be in their own nature)
that we should not only prepare our selves to them before we come, as we have
seen heretofore, but also diligently meditate upon every thing done in the
Church afterward. But I pray you let us consider of it a little further, and
so we shall soon and this matter: let us presume the best ^eacheth that is,
having a scholar of a most excellent wit, very apt to receive any thing that is
taught, yet if he do not use to meditate upon that, which has been read unto
him, what great learning can he attain unto? nay how little hope must there
needs be of him? How much more then must it of necessity be, that we being
so blind and dull of conceiving in Gods worship, as we be, should not be
unprofitable partakers of every thing that is done most profitably in the
Church, when we neglect meditation, that is the chiefest thing to keep it,
and to bring it unto profit? Therefore us be sorry that in times past, we have
made the service of God upon the Sabbath day so unprofitable to our own souls
(as we have done) by neglecting this part of Gods worship upon it, which as it
is most worthy in it self, so would have brought great commodity to our
selves: and let us purpose hereafter that we will not pass away the Sabbath
without godly meditations, and that this shall be one thing, wherein will
spend the time (that we have free from the public exercise) in meditation of
things read and heard before, and let us pray unto God for his holy spirit,
that we may perform our godly purposes.

The which that we might do every one of us to the greatest profit, let tho
simpler sort consider this, An example to teach the simpler sort how to
meditate.
for whose sake I speak it, (which the learned know very well already) that
when they will meditate, they must so call things into their remembrance, as
that they stay not there, but then (applying the same further unto themselves)
they consider whether it was a virtue, that was commended unto them, then to
examine whether they find it in themselves or no: if yea, then give thanks to
God for it, and use them means to continue it; seeing it it so excellent: if
no, then be sorry for it, and pray to God that he might give it, if it be a
sin condemned; if you find in your self present, or that it has been in
times past, then whether you have ^epeni^d you of it sufficiently, and pray to
God for the forgiveness of it: if not, give thanks to God that has kept you
from it, and beware least you fall into it hereafter, seeing it is so
dangerous. If they be the promises of God, that have been preached unto you,
then consider how you believe them, and what comfort you take in them, and
labor to enjoy them: If they be the threatenings of Gods judgments, look
unto this, what fear is wrought in you thereby, and hatred of sin to anoyd
them, even as the promises do bring forth a love unto godliness, with a great
many meditations more, which the spirit of God will teach us, if we pray to him
for it, and be acquainted with this exercise, all which for breuities fake I
omit: only these I have set down as a taste to lead us unto the rest: and
least that any thing should be left for want of understanding, even of the
rudest, I had rather seem tedious and trouble some to the learned (of whom I
am to crave pardon that I have been so long in this matter) then obscure and
unprofitable to the other. For I mine own self would not have thought, that
the professors of the word lead so neglected this duty, as they have, and
were so ignorant in it, and therefore so vprofitable in all Gods service, as I
know many of them bo, until I found it to be most true, by that certain
experience, which I am sorry for.

Therefore to conclude, we may well perceive what great reason there is, that
we should account this to be one of those private exercises, whereby we should
sanctify the Sabbath, and keep it holy, as we are commanded: unto which we
must adioyne as another part of Gods service, We ought privately to confer and
talk of Gods word one with another.
and a most excellent help of our infrimities, the conferring and talking with
other of that which we have in the word read or heard: especially seeing both
it is commended unto us in the scripture, and also by experience we shall find
the profit of it to be so great to our selves and others. For first of all,
this is that which Moses so earnestly commends into the Israelites before his
death; These words which I command this day, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
shall be in thine heart. 7. And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy
children and shall talk of them when thou tariest in thy house and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down and when thou risest up. Then the
which charge nothing can be more plain, as it is most vehement. For he would
have them all times and in all places to be occupied about the wife and sober
talking of Gods word. The which is afterward repeated almost in the very same
words, as a thing especially to be regarded. Ye shall reach these my words
unto your children, Chap. 11.19.
speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

In both which places (although he does lay this only upon the fathers and
children by name) yet his purpose is not so to restrain it unto the^, as
though others might think themselves free from it, especially seeing it is made
general in other places of the scripture, but because they are usually
together in one family, he shows in their persons, what should be the talk
of men in their common meetings as also because by this means the fear and
service of God might be planted in their offspring, being conueyned (as it
were) by hand, from father to son, he declares in them what should be the
exercises of all sorts of men, that religion might not dye with themselves but
might be established with their posterity. The Prophet speaks more
generally of it in the Psalm. With my lips have I declared all the judgments
of thy mouth: confessing thus much of himself, Psalm. 119. part. 2.
that he used to speak of the word of God to others, not thereby commending
himself unto men, but (as the Prophet of God) showing in his own person, what
should be the exercise of all the faithful. For when as he had said in the
former verse, that he diligently sought the Lord in his word, wherein
especially he is to be found, and therefore gave himself to the reading and
hearing of it, and in both he prayed to him, for the direction of his holy
spirit, that he might not wander from the true meaning and practice of it, and
that which had thus learned by the blessing of Gods spirit, he laid up in his
heart, then he says: He talked of it with others for their benefit, and his
own further good.

And indeed the Prophet Malachie notes out the godly in his time, by this
mark, that they conferred one with another of the scripture, which they had
heard, who^ he thus writes: Malac. 3.16.
Then spoke they that feared the Lord every one to his neighbor, etc. where,
though it be not precisely named of what they conferred, yet in the context and
words of the Prophet it is easily gathered. For whereas he prophecieth of the
preaching of the Gospel by John the Baptist, and our Savior Christ, wherein
salvation is offered to the obedient, and destruction threatened to the
rebellious, the Prophet sets down what was the fruit of this preaching,
namely, that the ungodly made a mock of it, whose words are first of al set
down and reproved, verse. 13. Your words have been stout against me, says the
Lord of hosts, etc. Afterward he declares what was wrought in the godly,
namely, that they conferred of those things diligently among themselves: both
of the judgments denounced, that fearing they might avoid them: and of the
promises, that believing them, they might comforted over them, and encourage
themselves to wait upon God for the accomplishment of them. Which we know to
be so, not only by the opposition of them and the wicked, whose words must
needs be contrary, but especially for that which follows; where it is said,
that the Lord listened to their conference, that is, allowed of it, and
promised to bless them for it: verse. 16 And the Lord hearkened and heard it,
and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the
Lord, and that thought upon his name. 17. And they shall be to me, says the Lord
of hosts, in that day that I shall do this, for a flock, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son, that serves him.

Thus we may easily perceive that it is the duty of all the true worshippers
of God, to confer of his word, which as they ought to do at other times, so
most of all, Especially upon the Lords day.
when they have lately heard it, and so thereby have some greater occasion to
do it, and are thereby (as it were) the rather provoked unto it: if they will
not do it then, it is to be feared that at other times, they will more neglect
it: and if whenever we hear the word, we ought to talk of it, unless we
will lose a great part of the fruit of it, the^ most of all upon the Sabbath,
when we have the word after an especial manner, and besides have ceased to
talk of other worldly matters, that we might attend upon this the better. And
this is the chief cause why we should leave talking of worldly matters, that
neither our mouths, nor ears being filled with them, we might have all the
parts of soul and body taken up with the service of God, even our mouths with
speaking of it, and our ears with listening unto the word of God. Which as it
is a thing of rare profit, so it is smally practiced of men, for how few shall
you find that will upon the Sabbath provoke themselves, Which yet in greatly
neglected.
and stir up others to speak of that which they have heard? or that will
either offer any occasion of such speech unto others, or take it when it is
offered by them? Nay we shall find that our nature is so wholly corrupt in
this thing, that we had rather speak of, and listen unto the things of the
world many hours, then unto heavenly things the least moment of time, yea even
upon the Lords day: in so much that some have tongue at will; and words enough
till their mouth run over, and you shall never find them but they will have
something to say, so long as you talk not only of the lawful commodities,
and pleasures of this life, but of vain and frivolous matters: yea let any
begin to speak of any part of Gods worship, then they will either interrupt
it, by returning to their old matters; unless some be as constant in pursuing
of it, as they will be obstinate in crossing it: or else they are suddenly
stricken into their dumpes, and have not a word to say.

Psalm. 19. part 2.
The Prophet in the forenamed place first says, I have hid thy promise in my
heart, What is the cause that there is no more talk and conference about the
word of God.
that I might not sin against thee: and then adds, with my lips, have I
declared all the judgment of thy mouth. By joining of which two together in
this order, he tells us, that if we will speak profitably unto others, we must
first have the word within us, and that not lightly sloating in our brain, but
deeply settled and hidden in our hearts. Whereunto agrees that exhortation
which the Apostle makes unto the whole Church of God at Colossa: Colos. 30.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentuously in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your selves mutuallie in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs: In which as he wills them to confer of the scriptures, to the
profit one another, so be shows them how they shall come unto it, even that
they are filled with it before hand, without which a man either can say do
thing at all, or that which he does, shall be very cold and unprofitable,
and it may easily be perceived that it comes but from the teeth outward (as
we say) neither has it that power of the spirit which ought to be, and no
doubt is in the communication of many of Gods children.

And here is that common proverb verified that our Savior Christ alleges in
the Gospel, Math. 12 34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: men are not most
usually speaking of that which they know best, but upon which their heart is
most set, and they take greatest pleasure in, or are most afraid of, etc. Then
if we will by this most certain rule of truth, measure what is in the hearts
of men, and how they are there moved at the hearing and reading of the word,
either one way or other, we shall find that the most part of men, if they be
not void of the knowledge of it altogether, yet they have no sense or feeling
of it in their hearts, neither does it affect them one whit, but are benumbed
(as it were that way, seeing that they are no more often in speaking of it.
And let us cease maruailing, why they are so prodigal of their tongue in all
other matters, and in these are more niggardly and sparing of it, then they
should; seeing that they are so stuffed with the one, but they like unto
vessels filled with new wine, which will break if they have no vent, and of
the other they have so little, or rather nothing in them at all, that you can
scarsely wring out any thing from them.

Which as it is a great sin in men, and an especial neglecting of a notable
part of Gods worship upon this holy day, What fruit we might get by such
conferences, and what we lose by neglecting the^.
so it is most assuredly a cause why all that which they have received in the
public ministry is either so soon lost, or remains so vprofitably with
them. For what if men hear and read never so diligently, if he never speak of
it afterward, is it possible that he should remember it so fruitefully in
time to come as otherwise he might? Does not experience teach all men, that
those scholars are like to prove best learned, which will confer one with
another, about that, which the master has read unto them before? And they that
do study hard themselves, if they do not confer with others, besides that
they shall stick fast many times, and can go no further, whereas they might be
helped out by others, eue^ that also which they have gotten cannot be so
deeply settled in them, as otherwise it might: So it must needs be, that if
we talk not of the Scriptures, we shall forget much of that which we have
learned, neither shall we be so profitable unto others, as the Lord would have
us.

There be many that complain they have ill memories, and when they be justly
found fault with, for not profiting as they should, say, they cannot remember
it, and it is true: but in the mean season, they mark not how the fault is in
themselves, that they might amend it, for they are not careful to speak of
that which they have heard, and so to remember it to themselves and others, but
as soon as they are out of the Church doors, they fall into other matters,
and so put the other clean out, especially when they continue in the former,
the rest of the day, and will not give that time unto these that they should.
For presuppose they have the best memories in the world, yet (hearing a strange
thing) if they will never tell it unto others or make report of it any more,
how can they long remember it? Nay must they not needs soon forget it? On the
contrary we shall find it to be most true, by sufficient trial, that they
which have but weak natural gifts, and yet through age all are now more
weakened and decayed, shall notwithstanding be able to tell you along tale,
with all the circumstances of time, place, persons, etc. which they never heard
but once in their lives, and that (it may be) twenty or forty years since:
but of the stories of the Bible, which they have that very day read, and
besides have heard, them twenty times before, they shall be able to say very
little or nothing to the purpose.

And what can we judge to be the cause of this, but that they have told the one
so many times to their neighbors and have gone it over and over again, which
makes them so cunning in it, and of the other they have scarce once opened
their mouths to speak, and therefore all is so clean forgotten? Thus men may
complain as long as they will, and make excuses to blind the eyes of others,
and to deceive their own hearts, but God is not deceived, who sees the
fruitelesse talking and unnecessary iangling, about al other matters even upon
his own holy day, when they have said little or nothing of those which did most
of all concern them. Therefore let us unfeignedly sorrowful, that we have not
heretofore so carefully sanctified the Lords day in this part of his worship,
as he required of us, and let us confess that we have been justly punished
therein, that we have lost a great part of that fruit, which otherwise we
might have reaped our selves, from Gods worship, and bestowed upon others: and
let us hereafter be more careful, to spend some part of the day in such holy
conferences, as maybe profitable both to our selves, and we discharged of our
duties to God thereby. And whereas we have a thousand things within us and
without us, to hinder us from it, let us cast them away: and seeing the duty
is so necessary, the commodity thereof so great also, let us endeavor our
selves and call upon others most earnestly to perform it. Some are ashamed to
talk of the Scriptures.
For why should we be ashamed of it? And seeing that the shame of the world,
has not kept us heretofore from ungodly communications (unto which shame
justly belongth) why should it hold us back from all christian conferences, of
which we shall never have cause to be ashamed? Nay why should we not have our
mouths filled full of all good words, and out ears open to hear them from
others, that it might appear we are now ashamed, that we have spent so much
heretofore in speaking and hearing those things, whereof there came nothing but
hurt to our selves and others?

And that we may not be so ignorant, as to imagine, Others think that it
belongs only to the Minister, and not to the common people.
that to confer of the Scriptures is proper to the ministers, and not
belonging to the common people: which once to dream of is a thing more meet
for the dark night of popery, wherein it was defended, them of the midday of
the Gospel, which does so manifestly gainesay it: For besides all the
forenamed places, which do show that this duty is generally laid upon al
men, we may see that the Apostle writing to the whole Church of God at Ephesus
does require this of them al alike, speaking of it first of all chap. 4.
Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is
good to the use of edyfying, that it may minister grace to the hearers: And in
the next chapter, Chap 5.18.
ver. 18. Would have them filled with the spirit, speaking one of them to
another in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs. Coloss 4.6.
And then unto all the Colossians. Let your speech be gracious always, and
powdered with salt, that ye may know how to answer every man: And therefore
when we be in the company of others, we must not only not leave it undone,
but we may not put it off, and as it were strain courtesy to begin. I do not
deny, but that we must have wisdom in speaking, and that we must be swift to
hear, Iam. 1.19.
and slow to speak: especially in the presence of them, that have more
knowledge then our selves; but we must not lay it so wholly upon the minister,
as that (if he neglect it upon any occasion) we should think our selves free
from it: Job. 32.4.5.
But rather follow the example of the godly man Elihu in the like case, Who
after he had waited till Job had spoken, and saw that there was none answer in
the mouth of the three men, began his speech, rather then the truth should not
be maintained. Verse. 6.7. etc.
First, making that preface which is set down of him in the same place.

Our ignorance ought not to keep us from conferring with other.
Moreover, let us not be kept back from performing this duty by the
guiltines of our ignorance, for though it be a sin in us in deed, that the
word of Christ does not dwell in us more plenteouslie, and that we be no more
filled with the spirit, and so cannot speak so profitablie as we should, yet
none that is desirous to learn can be so ignorant, but he may ask a
question concerning some thing that has been taught, and say what is the
meaning of this? Or how do you understand that? or how was such a thing
proved? and so begin the conference, and give occasion to other to prosecute
it: which if he do in the fear of God, he shall find his blessing to be such,
that though he confer with others, that have as little knowledge as himself,
he shall not depart from them altogether unprofitable. The great benefit of
mutual conference.
For that which every man severally cannot do, al of them together (as it
were joining their strengths) shall be able to bring to pass; and as in a
common gathering, though every one give but a little, yet the sum amounts
to a great deal: so the knowledge of many being put together, shall increase
that, which was in every man before. For the meetings of the godly is like a
great many of firebrands laid together, in which though there be some heat,
when they are apart by themselves, yet being laid together it is doubled, and
otherwise every one would dye of it self: so though every man has some grace
of Gods spirit in himself, yet it is greatly increased by conference (as it
were by borrowing of the heat of others) without the which even those that
they have, would by little and little decrease, and come to nothing. Nay it is
most true, that the blessing of God is so great, and so certain upon his own
ordinance (that all men might be moved to submit themselves unto it) as that
men conferring about things, whereof they are altogether ignorant (keeping
themselves within the compass of Gods word) shall come to that knowledge in
them, which not only none of them had before, but not any one of them could
have by himself alone attained unto.

For even as, though there be no fire in the flint stones, yet one of them
striking upon another do bring forth fire between them, which comes not from
any one of them, but from both, and both of them stricken together: so by the
conference of many that is found out, (as a total sum in the end) which the
several money (as it were) of every one of them, was in no wise able to reach
unto. Whereunto agrees that Proverb of Solomon: Even as iron sharpeneth iron,
Pro. 27.17.
so does the face of a man sharpen his friend: That is, even as the knife that
is blunt, being rubbed upon the whetstone (though it be more blunt then it
self) receives thereby a sharpnes, which it had not before: so one man by the
presence and conference of another receives instruction, and gets that
which he had not before. Which if the children of this world do find true, by
experience in all worldly matters, that by debating upon them, they see further
into them then at the first: why should we think that our conference about
heavenly things would be barren, which (besides the helps of all natural
guiftes common with other) the Lord has promised to water with the especial
blessing of his holy spirit, that it might not be unfruitful unto us: which
that we might do to our greatest advantage, the Lord would have not only the
people thus to confer amongst themselves, The people ought to confer with
the Minister, and he with them, and they one with another. Malac. 2.7.
but all of them with the minister, and him with them.

And that this was the practice of the one and of the other, as it appears by
sundry places of the old and new Testament, so by that which the Prophet
Malachie speaks of both, 2. 7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the law at his mouth: whereunto agrees thar of the Prophet
Haggai: Ask now of the Priests concerning the law, Haggai. 2.12.
and say: 13. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his
skirt do touch the bread, or the pottage, or the wine, or oil, or any meat,
shall it be holy? and the Priests answered and said No. In both which places it
is manifest, that in those days it was the mnnner of the people and Priests to
confer together about the law of God: unto which if all in our time were
compelled (as the word of God binds them unto it) I know very well that the
conferences of a great many would be as fruitless as might be: For whereas
the people should seek the law at their mouths, you may seek and find any
thing at them, rather then that, and you may confer with them rather of the
plough, and of the flayle, then of the word of God, seeing their hands are
more fit to hold either of them, then their lips to keep the other. Beside,
others in a stately pride of themselves, and a contempt of their brethren will
admit no conference with their people at all: whereupon many of Gods people are
driven to omit this part of Gods service, whether they will or no, to their
own great hinderance.

But to make an end of this matter, we have seen that it is the duty of all
men to confer one with another: and therefore no man can say I would feign
do it, but I have none that will confer with me, for he may find our some
one or other that will join with him in it, and if not in that manner that he
desires, yet let him begin, and it may be that he may provoke some that were
unwilling before; and if not that; if yet he shall find that the very uttering
of that (which was taught before) with his mouth unto others, shall be a
singular help to confirm himself in it: neither let any be so untoward,
Which they may do though they can say but I, or no, or ask a question.
as altogether to draw back, because they cannot speak so fruitfully of the
word as they desire, and it may be they see some others before them do. For
if they do but listen diligently unto that which is spoken, in a desire to
learn, and will but give their consent unto it, and seem to like of it,
saying, I, or no: they shall draw on the speaker, and so continue that
conference which may be profitable to them both, which I know by experience
the Lord has so blessed in some, that he has now rewarded their obedience in
the kingdom of heaven. And we must remember that the Communion of Saints
consists as well in receiving, as giving, even in receiving good from others,
as well as in doing it unto the^: And therefore as we must always carry about
with us these minds, that our desire is to further our selves, or others in
godliness, so we may be assured we have spent the time well, when we have
attained unto either of both. For as a Prophet must go in the name of a
Prophet, to do the duty of a Prophet, Math. 10.41.
so the people that receive him in the name of a Prophet: that is, to hear his
doctrine, to be made partakers of his prayer and to profit by both, shall not
lose their reward.

For this cause the Apostle writing to the Romans, says, Romans 1.11.
He was desirous to come among them for the common good of both, saying: For I
long to see you, that I might bestow among you some spiritual gift to
strengthen you: 11. that is, that I might he comforted together with you
through our mutual faith, both yours and mine. Thus we have seen how we
ought to meditate, and confer about the scriptures. But we must further
know, that though our meditations and conferences must always be kept within
the compass of the word, least they be wandering, and so not only frivolous
and vain, but wicked and ungodly: yet they are not so tied unto that, but we
both may and ought fruitfully to meditate upon, and soberly to confer about
the works of God, that so we might be taught not only by the word, but
also by experience: seeing that the invisible things of God are seen by the
creation and government of the world, Romans 1.20.
being considered in his works.

We ought to meditate upon and confer about the works of God, by which he
manifests himself unto us.
Which without the word (I confess) is so little, (because of our blindness) that
it does but leave us without excuse, as the Apostle says in the same verse,
yet being helped by the benefit of the word, (as the dim sight of an old man
is helped by the benefit of a pair of spectacles) we are guided aright, and
see more clearly into every thing thereby, especially when we are governed by
Gods spirit herein. For then we shall perceive the infinite wisdom of God,
his great mercy and power, his justice and truth, etc. which are so
plentifully spoken of in the scripture, not only by his judgments upon the
wicked, and his benefits bestowed upon his children in our own times, and in
the days of our forefathers, but also in all other the dumme and insensible
creatures, even in the day, and in the night, winter and summer, heat and
cold, etc. whereby he does exercise his judgments upon the one, or he brings
his blessings upon the other. Even as the same Apostle testifies unto the me^
of Lystra, saying, That God which made heaven and earth, the sea, Acts. 14.15.
and all things that in them are, in times past suffered all the Gentiles to
walk in their own ways, nevertheless he left not himself without witness
in that he did good, and gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness. For by those things, they might
have seen how he in great wisdom and mercy governs the world for their
good, so that thereby they should have been made more careful to serve him,
which because they did not, they were left without excuse, and had nothing to
say for themselves before Gods judgment seat: for the things should witness
against them, and by the testimony of their own conscience they should
confess, that the Lord had by all his creatures sensibly allured and provoked
them to good.

And if the heathen were justly condemned, because they did not so profit by
the view of the world as they should: how much more shall we be without all
show of excuse, that we do not labor to behold the invisible things of God,
in his works, even his wisdom, goodness and truth, and so forth: which are so
apparent in them, and (as it were written in great capital letters, to be
read of the whole world) seeing unto them we have the light of his word
adjoined to help the blindness of our eyes in this behalf. Psalm. 92.
That Psalm which was specially made to he sung upon the Sabbath day, (as
appears by the title of it) does sufficiently declare, how we ought then to
be occupied in meditating upon Gods goodness, and praising him for it, yea how
we ought to confer and talk of the same. And indeed this is the right use
of the creatures, for which they were first made, namely, to set forth the
glory of God, and to serve man, that he thereby might be made more fit to
serve God: therefore then do we use them aright, when they lead us unto God;
then are they abused, when we stay in them, and so are thereby either turned
away from God, or at least wise kept from coming unto him.

So then, let us account this one part of our duty and service to Jesus
Christ upon his holy day, to consider advisedly of his works, who is now the
heir of the whole world, and governs every thing in it, for the good of his
people, that he has redeemed: seeing all power is given unto him in heaven and
in earth, that we thereby might be more confirmed in his favor, more assured
of his promises, and made more fit to serve him: Even as in the scriptures, The
servants of God have greatly profited in faith and obedience by the
consideration of his creatures.
we may see many times how the spirit of God sends us to the creatures, to
be confirmed by them in the things that are spoken of God in the word, and the
servants of God have by them strengthened their faith in the promises, which
they had learned out of Gods word before.

The Prophet Esaias, chap. 40. propou^ding unto the people most excellent
promises, whereof they should be made partakers in the time of the Gospel
(which he does in the former part of the chapter from the 12. verse) he
begins to confirm them in the certain truth of the same, by the
consideration of Gods omnipotent power, whereby he made all things at the
first in such a wonderful order, that thereby they might be assured, that
nothing should be able to hinder him from bringing that to pass, which he
haid promised to his Church, but that they should look most certainly for it,
saying: Who has measured the waters in his fist? and counted heaven with a
span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and waighed the
mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance?

So likewise the Prophet Jeremy in his 33. chapter promising mising unto the
church deliverance out of their trouble, does persuade them of the infallible
truth of Gods word, herein by setting before their eyes the immutable course of
nature, in the continual interchange of the day and night: Thus says the
Lord, Iere. 33.20.
if you can break tny covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, that
there should not be day and night in their season, 21. then may my covenant be
broken with David my servant that he should not have a son to reign upon his
throne, and with the Leuits and Priests my ministers. 22. As the army of
heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured, so will I
multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Leuits that minister unto me.

The Psalms most of all are full of this matter, and as it is a book of
practice especially, so it is plentiful in these meditations, and the treatise
would be long, if I should but in order reckon up the principal places there,
tending to this purpose: yet the waightines of the matter will not suffer me to
pass over them all. It is most apparent, how David in the 8. Psalm stirs
up himself, and all mankind to praise the Lord for his great liberality
toward them, appearing in this, that as he made him at the first Lord and
ruler over all his creatures in heaven and earth, so he has restored him into
the same dignity by Christ, when he had justly lost it before, because of his
sin, when he thus begins and ends the Psalm: O Lord our governor,
Psalm. 8.19.
how excellent is thy name in all the world? And in another Psalm the Prophet
complains of the greatness of his affliction, and being almost discouraged,
because the Lord deferred his help so long, that he might not utterly sink
down, under the heavy weight of his grievous tentation, Psalm. 77.10.
strengthens his faith by remembering Gods former works, that he might have
hope of his mercy toward himself: I remembered the years of the rtght hand
of the most high. 11. I remembered the works of the Lord, certainly I remembered
thy wonders of old. 12. I did also meditate of all thy works, and did devise
of thine acts.

So likewise in the 22. Psalm, the man of God being in such extremity, that
he was almost past all hope, begins with this heavy complaint: Et. 21.1.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health,
and from the voice of my roaring? But afterward comes to this, verse 4. Our
fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them. 5. They
called upon thee and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded. And then he says, verse. 10. I was cast upon thee, even from the
womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly. Where we see he gets hope at
the last, of being heard, and delivered, by the consideration of Gods works,
both generally done to his servants in times past, and particularly showed to
himself heretofore. And there is great reason of this, for the Lord is always
like himself, and Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever: and therefore will do as he has done, for there is no respect, either
of persons, Psalm. 25.10.
or times with him: but all the ways of God are mercy and truth, not only
mercy in the beginning, but truth in the midst and ending. For this cause the
servant of God thus prays in the Psalm 119. Et. 119.132.
Look upon me and be merciful unto me, as thou use to do unto those that
love thy name. And verse. 149. Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness, O
Lord quicken me according to thy custom. In both which places, we see how he
prays to God that he would show him that mercy, which he was wont to show
to him himself and others in the like case heretofore, and so by the former
works of God strengthens himself in prayer. Thus we may easily understand,
what profit we might get by the earnest meditation and wise conference about
the works of God, which are done in great wisdom, thereby to confirm us in
the truth of those things, that are written in the word, and to draw us to
those duties that are required of us in the same, and so generally to further
us in all godliness: and therefore a thing not to be neglected at any time,
but most of all to be practiced upon the Lords day, that we might leave
nothing undone, which might make all Gods worship most profitable unto us, and
make us fitter unto all other duties, which is the end why the Sabbath was
ordained.

In the 104. Psalm, the Prophet speaking of the wonderful works of God, and
the marvelous governing and preserving of them, begins thus: Et 104.1.
My soul praise thou the Lord: and toward the midst breaks forth into this
speech: O Lord how manifold are thy works? verse. 24.
in wisdom have thou made them all. And in the end concludes with, Glory be
to the Lord for ever. And 33. I will sing unto the Lord all my life, I will
praise my God while I live. Hereby declaring what ought to be wrought in all
men, by the reverent considering of Gods works, and that we should not muse, or
speak of them unprofitably, but with that glory unto God, and comfort to our
selves, which he requires of us, and no doubt many of his children do.

But that I might draw to an end, one word of that, which as it is most
plain, so it is most comfortable, Psalm. 147. Sing unto the Lord with praise,
Et. 147.7.
sing upon the harp unto our God, which covers the heaven with clouds, and
prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the
mountains, which gives to beasts their food, and to the young ravens that
cry. The whole Psalm is a Psalm of praise unto God, for that he watches over
his Church by his especial providence, to do it good, and declares the same
to if, and to none other by his word: And therefore says, that the Lord will
help it, by his infinite wisdom, when it is confounded in it self, and
knows not what to do, and by his omnipotent power will deliver it, when it is
most weak in it self: which he proves in these verses that we have seen,
by the wise and merciful providence of God over his creatures, as if he had
said, God deals well with the creatures made for men, much more will be do
good to his Church, whereof he has the greatest care: He does good to the
insensible creatures, for when the earth is dried up in the heat of Summer,
and gapeth as it were for extreme thirst, and the tops of the mountains are
parched, and every thing seems withered by the roots, the Lord hears as it
were the cry of the earth, prepares rain, and waters the hills, and so
changes their hew, and makes them green and fresh again: then much more
will he renew the face of his Church, and make it beautiful, though it was
deformed, and fullied with extreme misery and calamity before. Nay, the Lord
feeds the beasts, when they are pinched with hunger, and cry for meat, even
the young ravens that cry in their nests, and must needs famish there, if the
Lord did not move the heart of the old one to find out meat and bring it to
them. If he do so much for them, how much more shall his ears be open to the
prayers of men, calling upon him in the name of Christ Jesus, according to his
promise, Ioh. 14.13.
that whatsoever we ask of him in the name of his son, according to his will,
he will grant it unto us.

And this is part of that heavenly sermon, which our Savior Christ makes unto
the people in the mountain, as it is recorded by the Evangelist S. Matthew,
where he dehorteth them from too much careful seeking after the things of this
life, by the serious meditation upon Gods providence over them, which that he
might persuade them of, he shows it them by experience in those creatures of
God, that were common before their eyes: Matthew. 6.25.
Therefore I say unto you be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink: nor for your body what you shall put on: Is not the life
more worth the^ meat? and the body then raiment? 26. Behold the fowls of the
heaven, for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes, yet your
heavenly father feeds them. Are you not much better then they? 28. And why
care ye for raiment? Learn how the lillies of the field do grow: they labor
not, neither spinne. 29. Yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. 30. Wherefore if God so clothe the
grass of the field, which is to day, and to morrow cast into the oven, shall
he not do much more unto you, O ye of little faith? 31. Therefore take no
thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith
shall we be clothed. 32. For your heavenly father knows that ye have need of
all these things. 33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. In all which
words we see, how he draws his exhortation from the creatures, to teach us,
that we should not be idle, and unprofitable beholders of them, but as the
Lord does most clearly manifest himself unto us in them, so we (besides the
present use of them) shall open our eyes to behold, that which the Lord does
offer unto us by them. For this cause the Lord himself, after he had made the
whole world in six days, and rested the seventh, that by his own example he
might stir up mankind, to meditate upon that wonderful great frame, and
every thing in it, that he might give the glory unto God, that was due to him
for it, and serve him carefully, that had so wonderfully provided every thing
for him.

But I know not how it has come to pass, through the great corruption and
blindness that is within us, that in these things we do not seek after God,
Act. 17.27.
though by them we might have groped after him, and found him. Nay, a great
many are like unto the ox and the ass, who have the use of Gods creatures,
and are filled with them, eating and drinking and taking their case, yet never
lift up their minds unto him, that sends them to that end, that thereby they
might inquire after him, who is the author of them: But contenting themselves
with thar profit and pleasure they have in them, are so drowned and overwhelmed
therewith, that whereas they should be guides to direct them more surely to the
Lord, and glasses to them to see him more clearly, they thereby are either
turned out of the way, and go further from him, or make them vailes before
their eyes looking only unto them, and not unto the Lord that is in them. For
we shall see men (that are musing upon their cattle, and upon their ground
the whole day) to be so earthly minded, that they will altogether stick fast
in them, and be as it were fettered unto them so, that they are not able to
lift up their minds to any heavenly meditation from them, but like beasts are
still groueling upon the earth, and have their minds either wicked and
profane, or vain and foolish. And such shall be their communication of them,
either finding fault at the works of the Lord, or scoffing at them, or fondly
iangling about them, or after a mere worldly manner speaking of them, which
plainly shows how barren they are within of any profit they reap by them.
And if it be not so, what is the meaning of these and such like speeches, that
are so rife in the mouths of men? Here is a dear year, it is an hard winter,
this is a sore frost, here is a great drought, this rain is like to make a
flood, etc. (because I will not so much as name the irreligious speeches of the
Atheists) which when they have unadvisedly cast forth, then they can say no
more. Whereas they should in these things see the judgments of God against
sin, that they might be drawn to repentance: even as in the rest of his
dealings, they should behold his mercies, that they might be encouraged to
serve him: and so speak of them, that they might make these things known unto
others.

The meditation of Gods works, will teach us to profit by all things and in all
estates.
Therefore if men will needs ouerlooke their grounds upon the Lords day (as
sometimes they must) and be dealing with their cattle, and talking about
them, let their cogitation and speeches tend to this end, and then in so
doing they may sanctify a part of the day, otherwise they shall be as merely
worldly upon that day, as in any other of the six. And in deed if we would
thus bend our minds, and pray to God for his spirit, and use to do it, we
should never want matter of profit to our selves and others, in what estate and
condition soever we were, about whatsoever we had to deal either in the day,
or in the night; at home, or abroad; alone by our selves, or with others: for
thus in a mean, estate of life, whereas the wicked do complain, and are not
satisfied, but envy them that are above the^, we might behold the goodness of
God toward us, providing so well for us, according to the desire of the wise
man. Prou. 30.8.
Give me not poverty or riches, feed me with food convenient for me. 9.
Least I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? Or least I be poor
and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. If we be under the cross,
either poverty, sickness or any other distress, whereas the men of this world
do repine and grudge, let us understand the wise dealing of our father toward
us, Who, by this means, Romans 8.29.17.
makes us like unto the image of his son, that we suffering with him, might
also be glorified with him. If the Lord has blessed us with the abundance of
all things, though the greater sort be puffed up thereby, and by abusing of
them do forget God, let us thereby be humbled, and using them well, not have
our minds set too much upon them, and know whiles we are here in the body, we
are absent from the Lord, and that this is but an earthly tabernacle which
must be destroyed, looking for an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. If then there be so many good things here below, what is the happiness
prepared above? If so great contentation upon earth: what is the fulness of joy
in heaven?

And not only thus, but whither soever we do turn our eyes, we shall have
matter not only to keep us from idleness, but to provoke us to all
profitablenes. For when the sun arises, how might it tell us of the comfort
of the sun of righteousness arising in our hearts? How might the spring of the
year, put us in mind of our regeneration, and new birth? What would the
darkness of the night teach us, but the horror and fear of ignorance, where
there is not Gods word? Would not our meat lead us to the spiritual food
of our souls? And our apparel to the righteousness of Christ Jesus, that being
clothed therewith, we might be comely before God and men, and not ashamed.
And to be short, if we were not beasts and no men, might not our sleep
forewarne us of death, our bed of the grave, our rising again in the morning
of the day of our resurrection? Thus all the creatures should lift us up to the
creator, and thus to be occupied about them, are the very works of the Sabbath
indeed. Thus if we did see or hear any of the judgments of God upon our
selves or others, we should think and speak of them with humility and
fear: of any of his benefits, with great joy and comfort, whereas now men for
the most part do neither the one, nor the other.

And though I know very well that the proper place to speak of these things is
in the third commandment, where the Lord wills us in all our thoughts,
words and deeds to seek and set forth his glory, and therefore so always to
deal with his creatures, that his most glorious name might appear thereby;
For he is the creator of all things, and this is his name: yet to do them upon
the Sabbath is the very work of that day, in which we should use all the
means that might make the public ministry most profitable unto us, and
either draw us nearer unto God, or make us more fit to do duties to our
brethren. Therefore let us set our hand to this truth, and confessing that it
is our bounden duty to serve God in this right use of his creatures, and
works, let us be sorrowful that we have ouerslipped this duty so carelessly
heretofore, and let us be assured that it has bereaved us of much godliness,
that otherwise might have been in us, and made us so much the less profitable
unto others: and therefore in the fear of God, and in the care of our own
Salvation let us purpose, and perform this duty most carefully hereafter,
that the blessing of God might be more upon us, and we have the testimony of a
good conscience, and of Gods creatures witnessing for us, and not against us.

And let us be so much the more careful of it in good earnest, But all sorts
do greatly fail in it.
by how much we know too well that the common practice of most men is so far
from it: In so much that even they of the university that make it their
profession to search out the nature of Gods works, and to see furthest into
them, and therefore must needs have many and deep meditations, besides often
and long disputations about them, do not so much as propounde this unto
themselves, and therefore no marvel, if they never attain unto it, namely to
behold in them the invisible things of God and Gods wonderful work in them,
thereby either to be confirmed in any part of his word, or stirred up to any
duty unto God or men: but they have in stead of these, many both vain and
too curious, and also false and untrue discourses about these with themselves
and others, even upon the Sabbath. And I am sure that in the country men are
not free from this sin: for it falls out in them, even of the better sort,
either of ignorance or negligence, that when they have sanctified the Sabbath
in some other part of Gods worship, this has not been so much as once thought
of. Nay even then when they endeavored themselves to meditate and confer
about Gods word (which is the chief) they have not done the like about his
works, and so have lost some further commodity of the word that they might
have reaped, when thus they might have been taught (as it were) by a double
schoolmaster: especially when the Lord punishes us for neglecting some part
of his service, and we do not use all the means that God has appointed to
serve his providence by.

Therefore let us remember among all other things, that we have heard of
before, to make this one part of our private service of God upon his holy day,
and so I shall grow to an end. For as it has been declared before, that we
must rest in our minds from the study and care of worldly things, so the end
of it is, that they might be meditating, and occupied about Gods service, as M.
Calvin sets it out at large. Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5 ser 3^.
Let us know (says he) that it is not sufficient, that we come to the Sermon
on the Sunday to receive some good doctrine, and to call upon the name of God,
but we must digest those things, and that by this means we be so formed and
fashioned to the thing, that all the rest of the week cost us nothing to
aspyre to our good, and that we need but call to our mind, that which we
shall have learned before, at good leisure, when our minds were (as it were)
vnwrapped from al those things which hinder us to recount the word, and works
of God. And a little before: Although God nourish us every day, yet
notwithstanding we meditate not sufficiently on his goodness, to magnify him
for it: True it is that this should be but a poor thing, if we should consider
of the benefits of God, but on the Sundaye; but on the other days, because we
are occupied overmuch about our worldly affairs, we are not so given to God,
as on that day, which is altogether dedicated unto this. The Sunday therefore
ought to serve us, for a tower to mount on high to view the works of God from
a far, when we are neither hindered nor occupied with any thing, but that we
may apply all our senses and our whole understanding to reknowledge the
gracious gifts and benefits, which he has bestowed on us: And when we shall
have practiced this on the Sunday, namely shall have deeply considered of the
works of God, it is certain that all the rest of our time should be given
hereunto, and that this meditation shall so fashion and polish us, that all the
rest of the week, we shall be led to thank our God, when so before hand we
shall have premeditated on his works to make our profit therein.

But I cannot forget, and pass over with silence that part of Gods service,
which though it be most excellent in it own nature, acceptable unto God, There
ought to be singing of Psalms in the Church, and in men's houses.
and comfortable to our selves, yet it is finally regarded every where, and
that is the singing of the Psalms. Of which I rather speak in this place then
in the former, because though I know there ought to be singing in the Church,
and that it is one piece of Gods public worship, and the discipline of our
Church is such (through Gods mercy) that the Psalms are sung in many places,
after a plain, distinct, and profitable manner, and may be every where if men
will, yet men content themselves with that, and are not mindful to sing at
home by themselves alone, or with the rest of their houshoulde: but contenting
themselves that this is received in the Church, have no care to bring it into
their houses; but as though to sing Psalms were proper unto the Church, do
neglecte this duty every where else. Therefore we shall see how this
exercise is commended unto us in the scripture, as well as any other, that we
have heard of before.

And if we look into the book of Psalms, we shall find not only a great
many which do generally concern the estate of the whole Church, and therefore
are most fit to be sung in the common assemblies: but also a great number
which do most fitly agree with the private condition of the several members
of the Church, To this end is there such variety of Psalms agreeing with all
times, and all men's estates.
and that in many things, so that there is no man which can be at any time in
such a case, but he shall see it most lively set forth in some one Psalm or
other, even as though it were made for him to sing at that very time, which it
may be, agrees not so well with others, no nor with himself at any other time;
which no doubt are left unto us by the spirit of God, that we might sing to
him as well privately as publicly. For this cause also there is such great
variety of Psalms, in such diverse arguments, that whether we will give thanks
for some great deliverance, or for the forgiveness of our sins, or for the
restoring of us to health, or for the graces of Gods spirit received, for the
hope of our resurrection unto immortal life, for the blessing of God upon our
wives, children, goods, etc. We may find some song to sing: that so all excuse
might justly be taken away from them, that have no care of this holy duty.
And if men will grant that such Psalms as do touch the condition of the
Church, generally are left in writing, that they might be sung in the Church
openly, how can they deny, but the like reason binds men privately to sing
those Psalms which do concern men's private estate at several times, unless
they will say that they only are unprofitable or superfluous, and commended to
the posterity without cause? which once to imagine is so great a sin as it
is, not only because of the contempt unto Gods word, which it carries with
it; but also because it is so contrary unto the judgment of the Church every
where, which does acknowledge the unspeakable mercy of God unto it self, as in
all the other scripture which he has left unto it, so especially in the book
of the Psalms, and in every part of it: and it does confess with all
thankfulness, that there is not one Psalm, the instruction and comforts of
which it could well want: nay it does confess, that the Lord as he does
continually give them many causes to praise him privately, so he has left
them sundry forms to do it.

And if the private singing of Psalms were not so necessary a duty of
Christians as it is, to what end serves that earnest exhortation of the
Apostle to the Colossians? Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in
all wisdom, Colos. 3.16.
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord. Where he teaches the
whole Church how they should behave themselves in their private meetings, What
estate and condition of ours is most fit for the singing of Psalms.
that they should not be profane after the manner of this world, but tending
to the edifiyng one of another, in so much that their very mirth should be
profitable to themselves and others. And whereas the wicked cannot be merry,
unless they fall into beastlines, and all kind of wickedness, at least wise
foolishnes and jesting, he tells them that they must rejoice in the Lord,
and be merry and glad in him: and therefore, whereas the ungodly have a number
of vain, frivolous, and lewd songs, they should sing spiritual songs, whereof
there are so many kinds, as appears by the diverse words he uses in this
place. Whereunto agrees that which he write^h unto the Ephesians: Be not
drunk with wine, Ephe. 5.18.
wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit: 19. Speaking unto your
selves, in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody
to the Lord in your hearts: 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God,
even the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Where in like manner
he shows them how they should behave themselves in the abundance of al
Gods blessings, that whereas the wicked are ready to abuse them, and by
ouercharging themselves with them, do fall into an immoderate profusion and
laughter, they should in the mids of these things (being guided by Gods
spirit) burst forth into the praises of God through Jesus Christ, and testify
their holy mirth, not of the flesh, but of the spirit, by singing Psalms,
whereof there are so many sundry kinds, that for every time we shall be
fitted with some one or other.

Let us not therefore deny so manifest a truth, but acknowledge as the word
does teach us, that the Lord requires of us in our private meetings upon the
Lords day, and when we are alone by our selves, to sing Psalms, as well as in
the Church. And though I do not bind men unto this, (for be it far from me
that I should lay any heavier burden upon any, then the word of God it self
does) bind them I say unto this; that in all their mirth they should sing
Psalms, as it might seem the places alleged do import. Yet this the Lord
requires of us, that in all our lawful pleasures we should look up unto him,
and so rejoice in them, that we especially rejoice in him, and so from them to
be led to him, and by them to be made fitter to serve him: And whereas it
falls out thus with the wicked, that all pleasures draw them away from God,
take away from them the remembrance of him, and drive them into sin, we
contrariwise should by all of them, come nearer unto God, set him before our
eyes, and make our selves fitter to serve him and praise him. For as that is a
godly sorrow that drives us to prayer, a blessed heaviness, that makes us
seek unto the Lord, so that is a godly mirth that ends with singing with
Psalms, and an heavenly joy, that at least wise makes us more fit to serve
God. And otherwise as we may suspect our sorrow to be but worldly, so our joy to
be but fleshly, and carnal.

And this is that whereunto the Apostle Saint James has respect, saying, Is
any among you afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? Iam. 5.13.
let him sing. Where he tells the dispersed Jews how they should behave
themselves privately in all estates: namely, that though the ungodly in their
affliction do murmr impatiently, and break out into blasphemous oaths, they
should not only abstain from those things, but in all humility should go to
prayer, that they might obtain mercy at Gods hand, and then being delivered
of him, that they should avoid the profane carelessenes of the wicked, and
stir up themselves to sing praises unto God, and so both commends this
duty unto us, and shows whereunto all our mirth should lead us. In which
place though he does not tie the singing of the Psalms to the time of
prosperity, (for there are songs of mourning) no more then he does prayer unto
the time of affliction, 2. Chro. 35.25.
yet he shows which are the fittest times for both: and besides that, as no
man can truly pray without the feeling of his wants, so no man can sing from
his heart, unless he have some persuasion of Gods favor, and so as
affliction drives him to pray, so mirth moves him to sing. Therefore when
the Lord deals so fatherly with his children, that he tempereth their
afflictions with the joy of the spirit, then he gives unto the^ just occasion
both to pray and sing unto him. Thus we read that Paul and Sylas being in
prison joined them together, Acts 15.25.
At midnight Paul and Sylas prayed and sang a Psalm unto God. Being first of
all beaten very sore, and then cast into a dungeon with their feet in the
stocks, it was then time to pray: but considering the goodness of their cause,
for which they suffered all these things, and finding the Lord present with
them, by his favor assuring them of his defense, there was just cause of joy,
and in joy to sing as they did.

So then, seeing to sing Psalms is a part of Gods service, (as we have seen
it in so many places of the word commended unto us) it must needs be put in
practice upon that day which is dedicated to his service: and especially when
we consider that the fittest time for it, is the time of joy, and there is no
joy comparable to that which we have in Christ Jesus: and we never enjoy that
so fully, as by the means whereby he conueyeth it unto us, and we never have
all the means so plentifully, and so continually, as upon the Sabbath.
Therefore as the Lord then offers himself wholly unto us, and his son
Christ Jesus to be made ours, with all his merits in the word, the Sacraments
and prayer, and so thereby does fill our hearts with the joy of the holy
Ghost, even that joy that is unspeakable and most glorious, so then especially
we ought to sing for joy of the Lord, if ever we will do it: And not only
in the Church, (which we ought to do especially, where the greatest joy is
bestowed upon us) but also because by the forenamed private exercises, this
joy is renewed, and sometimes increased; we must privately renew our
thanksgiving, Singing of Psalms testifies and increases spiritual songs.
and sing unto God again, especially when we have seen that these places of
scripture do commend unto us the private exercise of singing Psalms.

And that we might do it the more cheerfully, let us know for a surety,
that though we cannot sing at all, where there is no whit of joy, so let this
joy be never so little, by singing we shall increase it For even as al
knowledge is increased especially by hearing, reading, and conferring about the
scripture, so all affections are most of all stirred up, by meditation, prayer
and singing of Psalms. And because upon the Lords day we must labor to build
up our selves in both, we must neglect no means whereby we might attain unto
our full growth in either: Therefore even then are we justly punished with
deadnes and dulnes upon the Sabbath, because we neglect al those means, or else
do not join them together. So then we have great cause to be sorry, that we
have so many times neglected this service of God upon the Sabbath day: and
though we had not spent away the time in a profane mirth (as many times we
have done) yet there is great cause of humiliation for not stirring up our
selves (by singing Psalms) unto that spiritual mirth, whereby we might have
been more cheerfully occupied in Gods service, and comfortably to our own
souls. And let us not hereafter continue to provoke the Lord, and bereave our
selves of much comfort by neglecting to sing.

But when I so earnestly request this upon the Sabbath, my meaning is not to
exclude it from other days, no more then private prayer, reading, etc. and the
former places of scripture have proved the contrary, but my purpose is to
show, that if at any other time it is to be practiced, then especially upon
the Lords day. And truly I am so much the longer in this thing, and would
feign be as importunate in it, as I might, because, as I know it to be a
thing of great moment, The singing of Psalms is greatly decayed in all places,
and amongst al sorts of men.
so I have observed it to be greatly neglected in our time, above that which
had wont to be at the first restoring of the Gospel, and is like to be less
regarded in time to come. For besides that there be too many which are of
great years, that never sung Psalm in their lives, neither can do, nor have
any care to learn, though they can sing some other vain songs very perfectly;
and though they cannot read themselves, nor any of theirs, yet will have many
Ballades set up in their houses, that so they might learn them, as they shall
have occasion: but as for the book of Psalms, it comes not once into their
thought to make provision for it. Besides these men, I say, of whom it is a
lamentable thing to think, we may find that the neglect of this duty, has
over spread it self far and near: for even amongst them, which are given
most to sing, this is the least thing that they do: and indeed many of the
common Singing men are so ungodly, that it were better for them to have their
mouths stopped, then once to open them to pollute such holy and sacred songs.
And as for others, though they have al variety of Music both upon Instruments
and with the voice, and that every day, yet many of them very seldom, or
scarsely once a year do hear a Psalm, saving in the Church.

I do not find fault with this kind of Music, but do esteem of it, as I
ought, even of the most exquisite that may be. I confess it to be the
especial gift of God in any. I know it very well to be commended in the
scripture, and that it has had wonderful effects in time past, as in Saul and
Elizeus, 1. Sam. 16.23. 2. King. 3.15.
and that men might still have great commodity by it, if it were rightly used:
only this I complain of with grief, that the best Music is not cared for,
and that the singing of other things, has clean shut out in a great many of
places the singing of Psalms.

And that you might understand the complaint to be just, you must not only
look into the houses of great personages, where this music has ioystled out
the singing of Psalms, or rather kept it from ever entering in, but also in the
shops of Artificers, and cottages of poor husbandmen, where you shall sooner
see one of these new Ballades, which are made only to keep them occupied,
that otherwise know not what to do, then any of the Psalms, and may perceive
them to be cunninger in singing the one, then the other. And indeed I know not
how it comes to pass, (but you may observe it) that the singing of ballades
is very lately renewed, and comes on a fresh again, so that in every Fair
and Market almost you shall have one or two singing and selling of ballades,
and they are brought up a pace, which though it may seem to be a small thing
at the first, yet I am greatly afraid of it. For as when the light of the
Gospel came first in, the singing of ballades (that was rife in Popery) began
to cease, and in time was clean banished away in many places: so now the
sudden renewing of them, and hasty receiving of them every where, makes me to
suspect, least they should drive away the singing of Psalms again, seeing
they can so hardly stand together: of which I am so much the more jealous,
because I see that in other places also where these be not received in, What is
the cause why singing of Psalms is so decayed.
yet the singing of Psalms is greatly left, over that it had wont to be.

But if we would search out the cause of this evil disease in our selves and
others, that so it might be cured, we shall easily find it in those places
of scripture, where this duty has been commended unto us before. For the
Apostle says to the Ephesians: Ephesians. 5.18.
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit.
19. Speaking one unto another in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts. Coloss. 3.16.
And to the Colossians: Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentiously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with a grace unto the Lord in your hearts. In which
places he first of all forewarneth us (under one kind) that we be not
ouerfilled with the pleasures of this world, but use them as though we were
ready to leave them: otherwise we being wholly given to our bellies, and to
our backs, shall have pleasure in nothing but such as will serve them, and al
heavenly mirth shall be sorrow unto us, as to be called to the word and prayer it
shall be a vexation unto us, and then shall we be most merry, when we are
furthest off from God, and then (he says) our mirth shall be excessive, and
beastly. Secondly, he would have the word of Christ dwell in them plentiously,
that being persuaded of Gods favor, their hearts might not be vainly merry,
but thereby moved to sing unto him.

Lastly, that they should be filled with the spirit, that should prepare them
to spiritual songs, for in our flesh dwells no good: for as the flesh has
no taste of spiritual things, so the spirit has no taste of carnal things:
and therefore being filled with the spirit, it will stir us up to all
spiritual exercises. Therefore it is no marvel that men are so barren in this
thing, seeing that they are so drowned with the pleasures of this life, that
they have no pleasure but in them, and being too full of them, there is no room
in their hearts for the word of God, and for his spirit (of which they are
empty) and therefore can take no delight in the exercises of the word, and of
the spirit. So then howsoever the neglect of this duty may seem small in our
eyes, yet it must needs be great, when it bewrays that we are void of Gods
word, and of his spirit, and that we are too much possessed with the delights
of this world, and so lie in some one sin or other: whereas on the contrary,
then may we be assured, that our desire is to please God, that willingly we
do not continue in any sin, that we use the creatures and blessings of God
aright, that the spirit is in us, and governs us by the word, when we find
our hearts in the midst of our mirth sweetly moved to sing spiritual songs
spiritually.

But to make an end of this matter, that we might take upon us this duty so
cheerfully, as we should, let us in a word consider of that, which the Prophet
speaks of it, Psalm. 147. (that I might not stand upon every place that
commends it unto us) Praise the Lord (says he there) for it is a good thing
to sing unto our God: Psalm. 147.1.
for it is a pleasant thing, and praise is comely: where the Prophet exhorting
men unto it, To sing Psalms is good, pleasant and comely.
says it is good, pleasant and comely. And first of all it is good, for it is
commanded of God, and look how many times it is commended unto us by precept
or practice, in the scripture; so many proofs are there of the goodness of it.
Then it is not only good, but pleasant: for many things are good, but bitter,
as affliction: and some things are pleasant, which are not good, as sin: and
so though the beginning be sweet, the end is sower, and when the pleasure is
ended, the pain abides: but here is pleasure without pain, and of this the
good fruit and pleasure abides ever.

Last of all, it is comely, (as he says in another Psalm also) it becomes
the righteous to be thankful, Psalm. 33.1.
and to sing praises. Unto which agrees that of the Apostle: Let no filthy
communication, Ephe. 5.4.
nor foolish talking, nor jesting proceed out of your mouths, which things
are not comely: but rather giving of thanks, as it becomes the Saints. For
this commends us unto God, and unto men, and herein are we like unto the
Angels in heaven, who sing unto the Lord a new song continually. Revel. 14.3.
So that even as the ungodly have a grace in their wickedness, and are the
better liked of among the ungodly (though indeed they are then most deformed)
so this makes us comely before God, and lovely in the eyes of his Church, when
we (having prepared our hearts thereunto) do sing with affection, with
reverence, and with understanding. For otherwise even as a costly garment may
be comely in it self, yet it shall not become us, unless we be fit for it,
What makes it comely.
and it be well put upon us: so though to sing be never so comely in it own
nature, yet it becomes not us, except we be prepared for it, and do sing
David's Psalms with David's spirit. Therefore the Apostle writing to the
Ephesians, wills them in singing to make melody in their hearts to the Lord,
and not to sing with their tongue, Ephe. 5.19.
and from the lips outward, as we say. And to the Colossians: Coloss. 3.16.
To sing with a grace in their hearts to the Lord, that it might not only come
from the inward feeling of their heart, but also bring grace and profit to the
hearers, when as they do not utter an unprofitable sound, but their heart
going before their tongue, and it moving their lips, they might themselves be
first of all affected therewith, and so beget the like affections in others.

Seeing then that goodness, pleasure and comelines do all of them meet together
in this one thing, let us the rather be in love with it, and set our hearts
upon it; and whereas these are the things most of all regarded, and especially
sought for of all men (and yet seldomest found) now that they do all of them
meet with us, as it were, and jointly offer themselves unto us in this one
thing; let us be ravished with the love of it, unless we be men void of al
affections, or such as have set our hearts upon other things before: and let us
intertaine this service of God into our houses, and give credit unto it, that
we might be bettered with the goodness that it brings, and be more comfortable
with the true pleasure that it affoordeth, and more comely with the excellent
beauty that it will put upon us. And so I conclude with the confession of
Augustine, who by his own experience greatly commends the singing of
Psalms, when he says, August lib. 9. confess. cap. 6.
that oftentimes for joy he wept in the Church of God, being moved with sweet
melody that was made there. And for this cause David is called the sweet
singer of Israel, 2. Sam. 23.^.
because of the excellent and heavenly Psalms, which he as a Prophet made for
the Church of God, 2. Chron. 29.30.
whereby they were raised up to all spiritual mirth in singing of them.

The last thing of all is, that we remember especially to put all things in
practice, which we have learned out of the word, The works of mercy are to
be practiced upon this day.
and that we begin upon that very day to do all duties of love unto men, and
that we show mercy unto them then especially. Whereunto that we might be made
the more fit, the whole worship of God, and the Sabbath it self is ordained,
in so much that the Lord would have every whit of it to cease even upon the
Sabbath, rather then mercy should not be showed to the full, or any duty of
it neglected to our brethren, when both of them cannot be done together, as
we have seen it before more at large. And seeing it is the Lords day, and
therefore we must be occupied about all his work wholly, and he has in his
word commended to our care, the widow, the fatherless, the poor and the
stranger, as those whom he especially regards, we ought upon this day most of
all to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to lodge the harborlesse, to
visit the sick and the prisoners, when (besides that we have rested from all
our own works, that we might be occupied about the works of the Lord) we
have so much mercy of the Lord God showed unto us, that we might show it
unto others, and he does after an extraordinary manner open unto us all the
treasures of his goodness, that thereby we might be moved to take pity upon
others.

So that he which is then hard hearted to his brother, there is no great pity
to be looked for at his hands, and he which then neglects to testify his
love abundantly to men, when he should of purpose give over himself to all
duties of godliness, what hope can there be that he will do them upon other
days in the week, when he shall have fewer means to further him thereunto,
and more to withdraw him there from? And that this is an especial thing to
be regarded upon the Lords day, appears by that, which Moses speaks of it:
Deuteronomy. 5.14.
The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, thou shall not do any
work therein, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manseruant, nor
thy maidseruant, nor thy ox, nor thy ass, neither any of thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates: that thy manseruant, and thy maidseruant may
rest as well as thou. Where he makes this a reason, why rest is upon the
Sabbath day especially to be given unto all, that are employed unto any bodily
labor, even unto the dumb beast, that they might be eased thereby, without
the which their estate were too intolerable: And therefore it appears that
the Lord would have men exercised unto pity upon this day most of all, when by
his Prophet he persuades them to ease their servants and cattle of their
labor upon this day, least otherwise by continuance they should be most
cruelly oppressed.

Whereunto agrees that which is most plain to conceive and forcible to move:
Exodus 23.12.
Six days shall thou labor to do thy work, and in the seventh day shall
thou rest, that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy maid,
and the stranger may be refreshed. Where (besides that it is to be observed,
that in the former part of the chapter, he speaks of showing mercy and
compassion, as to the poor man in his cause, to the enemies ox going astray,
to his ass lying under his burden, to him that is wrongfully oppressed, to the
stranger that is far from his own country and friends, and to the fields
and vineyards, that they might rest upon the seventh year, for the benefit of
the poor and the cattle, (as may most evidently appear unto him that will
but read the text) and then adioyneth this unto it, as that which is of the
like nature and kind) the words themselves that he uses in setting of it
down, do sufficiently declare, that mercy must be especially regarded upon
this day, when he reckons so many by name, that most of all stand in need
of it, and would have them to rest, because otherwise they cannot sufficiently
be refreshed, and draw their breath with ease (as it were) even as the word
does import, as has been declared before.

Hereupon the Prophet Jeremy speaking of sanctifying the Sabbath, Iere.
17.21.22.
requires of them that they should set their servants free from their burdens,
and their work. By all which it may be most certainly gathered, that all
loving kindness and pity is to be showed unto our brethren, as at all other
times, so most of all upon the Sabbath, and more then after an usual manner,
when it is one of the ends why it was ordained by GOD, and therefore the thing
whereunto we ought to have an especial regard: most of all, if we consider the
practice of it, in the whole new Testament: For it is written of our Savior
Christ by the Evangelists in the Gospel, that usually he upon the Sabbath
days visited the sick, healed the cripples, restored the blind to their
sight, and does not only defend his doings herein by the law against the
cauils of his adversaries, but also leaves his own example in this to be our
president and pattern to follow: whereof that is a proof that Saint John
testifies in many words. There was a feast of the Jews, John 5.1.
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem: 2. And there is by the sheep market a poole
called in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five ports. 3. In the which lay a great
multitude of people, of sick folk, of blind, halt, and withered, waiting for
the moving of the water. 4. For an Angel went down at a certain time into
the poole and troubled the water, whosoever then first after the stirring of
the water stepped in was healed, of whatsoever disease he had. 5. And a
certain man was there, which had been diseased eight and thirty years: 6.
When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he now long time had been diseased, he
said unto him, will thou be made whole? 7. The sick man answered him, Sir, I
have no man to put me into the poole, when the water is troubled, but while I
am coming another steppeth down before me. 8. Jesus said unto him, Rise,
take up thy bed and walk: and the same day was the Sabbath. Where we see that
our Savior Christ comes of purpose to the place, where a great many of
impotent and diseased people used to lie upon the Sabbath, and healed one of
them. And in the seventh chapter, he defends this fact of his, saying, Chap.
7.23.
If a man upon the Sabbath receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should
not be broken; be ye angry with me, because I have made a man every whit whole
on the Sabbath day? If the law of circumcision do bind men to minister and
receive it upon the Sabbath, then much more does the law of love bind men to
show mercy upon the Sabbath, seeing that it is appointed of God, not to hinder
us from, but to further us in all his works, among which the relieuing of them
that be in necessity, is one of the chief and principal. And as the Lord
Jesus Christ came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it, Math. 5.17.
so he observed it very carefully in this point, and being most full of
compassion, did declare it abundantly, by taking all opportunity to succor
them that were in misery, even upon the Sabbath, as the fittest time for it.

For this is that also, which Saint Luke reports of him in his gospel: That
he taught in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath day: 11. Luke 13.10.
And behold there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
ye^res, and was bowed together, and could not lift up her self in any wise:
12. When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said to her, Woman, thou
art loosed from thy disease: 13. And he laid his hands on her, and immediately
she was made straight again, and glorified God. 14. And the ruler of the
Synagogue was moved with indignation because that Jesus had healed on the
Sabbath day, and said unto the people, there are six days, in which men ought
to work, in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day. 15.
Then answered him the Lord and said, Hypocrite, does not each one of you on
the Sabbath day loose his ox, or his ass from the stall, and lead him away
to the water? 16. And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has
bound lo eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day? Where
we do evidently see that Jesus Christ not only in wonderful great pity unto
this long diseased creature, bestows the benefit of health upon her, but
also when as the rulers of the Synagogue, either through a gross ignorance, or
palpable hypocrisy, did find fault with it, as a work altogether impertinent
to that day, he does justify it, and shows that it is most proper unto it,
because it is the day of showing mercy: and therefore if men do, nay ought to
loose the ox to the water, much more might he loose the daughter of God from
her infirmity of soul and body. And he does not so much dispute, what he
might do, as show what every one ought to do: For if it were a breach of the
Sabbath to neglect any duty to the other creatures, then much more to withdraw
our hand from our brethren, when they do stand in need of our help.

And in the Chapter immediately following when he had healed a man of the
dropsy upon the Sabbath day, he proves the lawfulnes of the fact, by the
like reason. It came to pass that when Jesus was entered into the house of one
of the chief Pharisees upon the Sabbath day to eat bread, Luke 14.1.
they watched him: 2. And behold there was a certain man before him, which had
the dropsy. 3. Then Jesus answering spoke unto the expounders of the law and
Pharisees, saying, is it lawful to heal upon the Sabbath day? 4. And they
held their peace. Then he took him and healed him, and let him go. 5. And
answered them saying, which of you shall have an ox or an ass fallen into a
pit, and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? 6. And they
could not answer him again to these things. But the time would not serve to
stand upon all the places, which show that this is a peculiar work of the
Sabbath, to help the helpelesse, to strengthen the weak, and succor them
that are in necessity, thereby to show that we are well persuaded of the love
of our heavenly father, when we are so ready to show our love to the rest of
his children our brethren.

I will therefore conclude with that which is set down by Matthew. That Jesus
went into a synagogue. 10. Matthew. 12.10.
And behold there was a man, which had his hand dried up, and they asked him
saying: Is it lawful to heal upon the Sabbath day? That they might accuse him.
11. And he answered them and said, what man shall there be among you, that
shall have a sheep, and if it fall on the Sabbath day into a pit, will not
he take it, and lift it out? 12. How much more then is a man better then a
sheep? Therefore it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath day. 13. Then said he
to the man: stretch forth thy hand: and he stretched it forth, and it was made
whole as the other. In all which places we may note that it is always
precisely noted, that Christ Jesus did all these merciful deeds upon the
Sabbath, thereby to declare how part of sanctifying the day, consists in
them, and also how the men of this world did find fault with them, which
shows how far they are from doing any such things themselves: and that the
Lord Christ does reply upon them with such reasons, as generally concern all
men, to the end that they might know, that they were not things properly
belonging to himself, but generally to be followed of all men.

Unto this may be referred the making of peace between man and man;
especially that we should seek peace our selves, and take it when it is
offered. Whereunto it seems the laws of the Emperors had respect, when they
command not only that the courts should be shut up, but also, Respirent a
controuersijs litigantes. Le. finali. C. de ferijs.
Let the parties leave of all controversies, and have a time of peace: Ad sese
simul veniant. Let them come one to another, let them be sorry and repent one
to another; let them make peace and agreement, and speak of compounding the
matter among themselves. And in thus doing, they should show great pity to
others, and to themselves, whereas otherwise by endless suites they many times
most cruelly beggar one another. Therefore in few words this is the thing
that we have to remember in this place, that we ought to be ready to help all
that be in need, according to our ability, and their necessity, and by our
presence and other helps, to be as comfortable to them as may be, enlarging
the bowels of compassion toward them, and putting the same affection upon us,
which is in them, even for the Lords sake, who has showed mercy unto us, and
whose creatures they be, and so make it the Lord his work. Which that we might
do so much the rather, We ought to visit them that be in misery.
it is profitable for us to go unto them, which cannot come to us, to look
upon them, which cannot see us, and to hear them speak, that many times cry
and have none to hear them, that the lamentable spectacle of their misery
might move our hard hearts to pity them, and in pity to help them so much
the more willingly, for though the things that we hear may touch us
greatly, yet nothing in comparison of that which we see, (that is the sense
of moving especially:) in so much that though we may partly guess of our
selves, what is the great extremity of others, and partly understand it, by
the true report of them that have seen it, and so be moved to help: yet
nothing so much as when we have been at them our selves, and seen the ruins
of their houses, and the nakedness of their bodies, the hardness of their
lodging, the thinness of their diet, and hard fare, when we have beheld these
with our eyes, and touched the cold irons of the prisoners, and marked the
uneasy stocks that they are locked unto, and the loathsome dungeons that they
lie in, and have been eyewitnesses of their extreme torments and grievous
diseases: then if our hearts be not as hard as flint, and if we have not put
off all brotherly kindness, and forgotten that we be men, our bowels may begin
to yearne upon them: and that which was in us but a sparckle of love before,
shall break out into a great flame, the heat whereof shall comfort them, and
that one drop of compassion which was before in us, shall multiply it self
into a great river, the stream whereof shall refresh the heavy heart and
dried soul of our brother.

M. Bucer speaking of the works of this day, amongst other says, Visitare
infirmos, to visit the sick. Bucer. in Matthew. 12.11.
For as beggars when they would have men to pity them, lay open their sores,
because that though things be never so great in themselves, yet til they be
seen we will hardly believe them (and therefore we do the poor wrong many
times in judging their estate to be better then it is) so thereby is showed
what is the nature of all, that if we will show mercy to others so cheerefullie
as we should, we must visit them in their necessity, and not turn our eyes
away from beholding their need. And again, that if the beholding of our
brethren, their need does not move us to pity them; then are we too hard
hearted in deed, and there is no hope that ever we should pity the^
sufficiently. This is that which our Savior Jesus Christ notes in the gospel
after S. Luke, of a certain man that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among thieves, Luke 10.30.
who robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him and departed leaving him half
dead: and by chance there came down a certain pri^st that same way, and when
he saw him, he passed by on the other side, and likewise a Leuit, when he was
come nere to the place, went and looked on him, and passed by on the other
side. In which they are both condemned of the want of al humanity, that
coming near to him, and seeing him in this misery, yet hardened their hearts
against so woeful a sight, and were not moved with so dol^full a cry. But of
the third, it is said (which was a Samaritane) that as he iourneyed, he came
near unto him, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him,
and bound up his wounds, and powered in wine and oil, and put him on his own
beast, and brought him to an Inn, and made provision for him, etc.

By which practice of his, as it is most manifest, how truly it is said of
him, that he had compassion on him in deed, so the occasion of it is noted,
that he came near to him, and saw him in this misery, which no doubt did a
great deal more affect him, then if it had been most lively described unto him
by others. Hereupon the liberality of men many times is so cold as it is, for
that they beholding nothing but plenty in themselves, and abundance in their
friends, know not the hungry meals that their brethren make with bread and
water, and not enough of that, and hear not the pitiful cries of the poor
children pinched with cold and hunger, upon whom their fathers and mothers
cannot look many times with dry cheeks; which if they would endeavor to
find out by going from house to house, and so acquainte themselves with their
estate, upon the Lords day, and do it as one of his works: then their own
eyes might move them to bestow some of that, which has not seen light many
years before the just and cancer of which shall witness against them; or to
bring out that corn; which they have kept till it be past man's meat; or to
spare but the overplus of that which might be, from their hawks and dogs, for
the relieuing of the distressed members of Christ Jesus, Matthew. 25.40.
who would account that whatsoever they did to one of the least of his
brethren, they did it to himself.

For this is that which I have heard some men say, when they have come from
such houses, that they would not have thought that they had been in half that
poverty, unless they had seen it with their eyes. Therefore even as it is
said of the wisdom of Solomon, which was so great, as it was, and the fame was
justly spread far and near, So that the Queen of Saba came among others, 2.
Chron. 10.5.
to make trial of it, which when she had done, and had seen, and heard all
things, she was greatly astonyed, and said unto the King, it was a true word;
which I heard in mine own land, of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom, howbeit I
believed not this report, till I came, and had seen it with my eyes, but lo
the one half was not told, for thou have more wisdom, and prosperity, then
I have heard by report, etc. Even so may it be said of the condition of our
brethren, that though we hear much, yet we shall not know the tenth part of
their poverty, except we will go and see it, and therefore cannot be so
moved to pity them, as the Lord would have us.

Therefore whereas we use to make many idle walks and unnecessary wanderings,
we cannot tell whither, upon the Lords day, let us hereafter go, and see the
thing which might move us to do that which otherwise we should forget: to see
(I mean) the wants of such as we may and ought to supply according to our
hability. And let us do it so much the rather, because otherwise though we do
help them, yet we cannot do it so cherefully from our hearts, and with that
feeling of their misery, which the Lord will accept. Genesis 23.2.3.
For even as Abraham (when he would provoke himself to so great an
humiliation, as such a chastisement did require) he wept in the sight of the
dead corpse, that the beholding of it might move him the rather: so if we would
look into the necessity of our brethren, and set it before our eyes, we
should be more plentiful in well doing, then we are, and be more ready to
weep with them that weep, Romans 12 15.16.
and to be like minded one toward another.

And if the Lords day be a day of receiving mercy from God, and showing it
again to all his creatures, We ought especially to do the spiritual works of
mercy to men's souls.
even to the ox and to the ass, much more then unto man, who is most like
unto GOD, and nearest to our selves; and if in all outward things we ought to
minister unto him, then much more in spiritual and heavenly: wherein is showed
so much the more mercy, by how much the soul is more excellent then the
body: the wants of the one more general then the other, and more dangerous,
yet less felt, and less sought to be supplied. For many that have great
abou^dance of outward things, yet their souls are in great misery; and their
bodies are well fed, but their souls are almost famished, wanting both
knoweledge and comfort, and yet they do not pity themselves. Now then if it
be pity (as it is) to raise up the ass that is fallen under his burden, to
lift out the ox that is fallen into the ditch, then much more to raise up men
that are fallen into sin, and to pull them out of the mire of despair (in
which they stick) by the sweet promises of the Gospel, as it were reaching
out unto them our hands: if to pull a man out of the fire; then much more to
pull him out of hell fire: if to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked; then
most of all, to feed their souls with the lively knowledge of Gods word, and
to cover their nakedness, with the righteousness of Christ Jesus by faith: If to
make peace between men and men; then much more to reconcile them unto God.
Then we must needs confess that it is the Lords work, which he requires of
every one upon his holy day, namely, that (besides the helping of them in
their outward estate) they minister unto them that want of their heavenly
riches, as God has blessed them above others: even to teach the ignorant, to
admonish the unruly, to bring home them that go astray, to bind up the broken
hearted, to strengthen the feeble, to encourage the^ that be occupied in well
doing, and in one word so to help them in the less, that the chief and
principal be not neglected, wherein true love especially does consist, and
wherein the Lord is served of us most of all.

And this is that which is spoken of our Savior Christ in the place above
mentioned, that he not only healed the woman upon the Sabbath of her bodily
disease, Luke 13.16.
but delivered her from the chains of the devil, with which she had been
long held. For it is evident in the Gospel, that (besides the infirmity of
her body) there was an extraordinary work of Satan, whereby as she was
strangely possessed, so it wrought in her many strong passions, from all which
she being delivered by Christ Jesus, received even in that especialy, the most
mercy at his hands. Therefore among all the works of God, we must be persuaded
that this is none of the least, to show mercy unto the distressed souls of
our brethren, for this is the mercy of the most merciful, even Christ Jesus
himself, from whom as we have received many great mercies, so none to this,
that he has redeemed our souls from eternal destruction, and when we were
sunk down into the bottomless pit of all misery, he came thither in
unspeakable love to fetch us out, and reconciled us to his Father, and has
made us heirs of everlasting life.

And let us be so much more mindful of this duty, by how much the fewest in
the world do think of it, no not they that otherwise are mindful to show
mercy in all outward things. And thus we see that none can be exempted from
these duties, for though every one cannot go into the houses of the poor,
neither is it meet that some should, because of their personages and calling,
yet they may make inquiry of them, and send unto them, and exhort others to do
the like, and pray for them: and may with their equals have such profitable
conferences, that they may show great mercy to their souls, by drawing them
nearer to the kingdom of heaven, and drawing them further off from the pit of
hell. And they that be poor, (and therefore it may be imagined they can show no
mercy at all, for they have not wherewith) must first of all consider: Mark.
12.43.
the poor widow that gave but two mytes, how it was accepted, and that the
Lord accepts of every one, not according to his deeds, but according to his
good will: and secondarily, that if they will instruct, admonish, comfort their
brethren, and pray for them, they shall show the greatest mercy unto them that
may be, and do that work which is most acceptable unto God, and therefore
most peculiar to the Sabbath.

So then that we might be persuaded of the excellency of this duty above all
others, let us consider of that, which the spirit of God speaks of it: Iam.
5.19.
Brethren, if any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has
converted him, let him know that he which has converted the sinner from going
out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. And indeed all our profession is nothing, and the show of religion
that we make is vain, except it bring forth these fruits in us, as the same
Apostle witnesses: Chap. 1 27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God, even the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widow in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world. Not that there is no religion but this, but that by these fruits it
shall appear, whether our religion be good or no, and whether we be profitably
occupied therein or no, even when all the public and private exercises of the
same, do prepare us to show mercy unto our brethren, and make us more fit
thereunto. Therefore whereas we have seen in the former part of this
treatise, that notwithstanding the precise commandment of resting, such
duties were permitted, as the present necessity of any creature did require:
now we do fur^her understand that they be by the commandment of God,
necessarily laid upon us and that they are in the number of those works of God,
which that we might wholly do, we are commanded to rest from our own.

All superiors ought to be careful, that their inferiors do keep holy the
day, as well as themselves.
Now the Lord would not only have us to keep holy the Sabbath our selves, in
all the parts of his worship public and private, (which we have seen
heretofore) but also that every one shoud in his several place and room,
carefully take order, that so many as be committed to his charge, should
sanctify the day as well as himself: which though it be true in all other
commandments, (namely that whatsoever we are bound to do our selves, we must
be means to further other in doing the same, because the love of God, and of
our neighbors spreads it self over all the commandments, and therefore
though it be not expressed, it is necessarily understood) yet in this
commandment it is so much the more required, because, besides the analogy
and proportion between it and the other commandments, does enforce it, the
very words themselves do bind us thereunto. For when it is said, Thou, and thy
son, and thy daughter, thy manseruant, and thy maid, though he speaks by
name only of resting upon the Sabbath, yet because the end of that is, that
the day might be sanctified; look how many reasons we have seen before,
binding the inferiors to rest, and the superiors to provide that they do so
indeed, so many are there compelling them to sanctify the day in their own
persons, and in so many as belong unto them. Therefore when first of all it is
generally said in the commandment, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy, and afterward, The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, that
is, which must be dedicated unto his service, and in the end, you must
therefore rest, that you might serve him in it as he requires; and then
names the several parties that should rest: his meaning is to declare unto
them the right end of their resting, and so speaking by name to the
governors, saying, (Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy manseruant and
thy maid, the stranger that is within thy gates) to show unto them that it is
not sufficient for them to look that they under their government should rest,
unless they sanctify the day of rest also, which they must be so much
careful of, by how much the sanctification of the day is greater the^ the
ceasing to work upon it, as the end whereunto this is but referred: and
therefore if it be a sin in them at any time, not to have a sufficient
regard unto them that they do not work, then it must needs be a greater sin,
if that through their negligence they do not sanctify and keep holy the day
of rest.

They ought not to leave it to their discretion, as a thing indifferent, but
compel them thereunto.
So that here the Lord God does require, that in all places there should be such
good laws and orders publicly in the Commonwealth, and privately in men's
houses established, and diligently executed, as whereby not only the rulers,
but also all in subjection should be compelled to sanctify the Lords day, and
that they should be sure that they do it indeed. And as he must not leave it
indifferent to them, to choose whether they will work or rest, and so think it
sufficient that they do not lay any work upon them, so it is not enough that
they hinder them not from serving God upon that day, unless they procure all
the means unto them, whereby God might be worshipped of them, and see that
they worship God in them as well as themselves. Therefore the Masters of
families must provide as much as lies in them, that the word be publicly
preached where they dwell, not for themselves alone, but for their children and
servants sake, that they might keep holy the day together with them; and they
must not only come themselves to the place of common prayer and divine
service, but bring these also with them, and so spend the rest of the day in
all private godly exercises themselves, and cause others to do so also.

And here least this might seem too heavy unto us, and that it might not be
grievous to take so great a charge upon us, we must remember, that as we have
great help by our inferiors in many things, so the Lord would have us to help
them in the chief and principal, and as he has made them our servants, so we
should make them his servants, and when they have served us six days, we
might cause them to serve him upon the seventh: and as the Lord has preferred
us above them with their service, so he would humble us with this charge and
care over them, or rather exalt us, in that he would have us to be as it were,
the overseers of his work, and not only serve him our selves, but also see
his service done by others committed to our charge: which if we do not,
wherein shall the Christian governors of households differ from the Infidels and
Heathen, and what greater thing shall we do for our servants then they? Nay,
what shall we do more for them then for the bruit beasts and cattle that
work under us, to whom we give rest and ease from labor upon the Sabbath, if
we cause them not to sanctify the day of rest, in which they shall differ from
all other, not only beasts but men?

And this is the meaning of that law which Moses gave to the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
11.20.
commanding them to write the word of God upon the posts of their houses, and
upon their gates, whereby all under government were taught what should be
required of them so long as they lived in those houses, namely, to serve God:
So have the servants of God done in time past in their several families.
and all governors were taught what especially to look after in all them that
went in and out of their gates, and lived under the roof of their houses, even
to serve the Lord in all parts of his worship, for which end he has given them
such authority over them. According to which Commandment the worthy Captain
of Gods people Iehoshua, made this protestation before all the Elders of Israel
a little before his death, exhorting them to do the like: Josh. 24.15.
I and mine house will serve the Lord. Promising not only for himself, but
for all his, which though it was hard to do, yet because he knew how many
means the Lord had given him to bring it to pass, which also God would bless
(as all godly exhortations, admonitions, and chastisements, whereby if they did
not profit, he had authority to thrust them out of his house, and to rid
himself of them) all which he was purposed to put in practice: therefore he
was bold thus to speak of himself, thereby showing what all men should
propound to themselves, and may attain unto. The like whereof David speaks
of himself in that worthy Psalm 101. which is left as a pattern for all
Christian governors to rule by, wherein he shows how he would rule not only
himself, but his household, nay the whole kingdom, by having an eye to the^
that were good, to reward the^, and to the^ that were bad, to punish them, that
so not only himself, but all his might serve the Lord. After the same manner
in the time of the captivity, when the noble Queen Hester willed all the
dispersed Jews to keep holy three days together in fasting and prayer, that
so they might entreat the Lord, for that final destruction, and utter rasing
of them out, which Haman the cursed Amalekite and sworn enemy of Gods people
had determined to bring upon them speedily, that it (I say) might be prevented
in time, she said, that she and her maids would do the like, Hest. 4.16.
Whereby no doubt she insinuated unto them, that in every household, her meaning
was, that it should be thoroughly kept on all sides, not only the rulers and
some few, but all others even unto the maidseruants.

Now this is that which we have seen heretofore, that the Sabbath and the day
of fast are both of one nature, and it is that which the word does sufficiently
bear witness unto: therefore if this has been the practice of the Church
upon that day to fast, not only of the chief alone, but with their families:
then must we needs be persuaded, that upon the Lords day, we ought our
selves and our households to serve the Lord, and to say with Joshua, I and mine
house will serve the Lord: and with Hester, I and my servants will do the
like. And how could that have been verified of the religious Captain
Cornelius, which is written of him, Acts. 10.2.
that he was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his household?
unless he had not only frequented the common assemblies upon the Sabbath
days, but had also acquainted his servants therewith. Therefore as the Lord
himself speaks of Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
who is the father of all believers, I know that he will command his sons,
and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord to do
righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has
spoken unto him. So it must be practiced of all them that will be children of
this faithful Abraham, and enjoy the same promises that he and his posterity
did, even that they cause their children and their servants to keep holy the
Sabbath, wherein consists the true worship of the Lord, that so they might
walk in that way which has the promises of this life and the life to come. So
then by all this it may most evidently appear, both by the words of the
commandment, and by the practice of the best men in the old and new Testament,
that this duty is laid upon all householders, diligently to ouersee the ways
of their family, that they serve God, as in all other duties, so especially
in sanctifying the Sabbath, as they will answer to the contrary at their
peril to him that has put them in authority, and as they will give an
account for their souls, which otherwise might perish through their default.

Which though it be so severely enjoined in all men, But in our time it is for
the most part wholly neglected.
and under so great a pain laid upon them, yet it is so generally neglected of
the greatest part, that we may rather complain of it justly with grief, then
have any hope of the speedy reforming of it. For besides that a great many
have no care to sanctify the day themselves, and therefore cannot with any
conscience require it of their servants and children, but either set them to
work or to play, and to do any thing upon that day, saving that which they
should, and do encourage them thereunto by their own ill example and words:
there be others also, who though they seem to have some care to keep holy
the day themselves (and have indeed) yet either through ignorance or
negligence, do not once look to their household, whether they come to Church
or no, and sit there attentively, and continue there with profit to the ending,
nor how they spend the rest of the day: but being demanded where their
servants were, how chance they came not to Church, etc. they answer securely
(and as they think sufficiently) as though it were a thing merely impertine^t
unto them, that they cannot tell, they do not hinder them from the Church, they
may come if they will, and they are of age to look to themselves, and they are
past boys now, and I cannot tell what.

But they must consider besides that which has been already spoken concerning
this matter, that they do too foolishly and grossly imagine to stop (as it
were) the mouth of the Lord with that simple answer in his business, which they
will not receive at their servants hands in their own. For in the six days,
when their servants are in their own business, they will not let them come and
go at their own pleasure, and content themselves with a bare imagination,
that they be at their works, but will be sure of it, and therefore set them to
it, look upon them in the doing of it, and call them to an account for it,
which if it be well done in themselves, because they know otherwise they will
be negligent, how must it not needs then be a great unthankfulness in them
unto God, that upon his day (which is but one among seven) his service should
be so slenderly looked unto, that there is no such diligence used toward their
servants, that they might perform it? And how must it not needs be a great
injury to their servants (who are naturally, and for the most part more
negligent and careless in Gods service, by reason of their corruption, then
they can be in the service of men) to be deprived of that benefit of their
governors (which is the chiefest, and for which cause especially they are
committed to their government) namely, to be furthered by the^ in the service
of God? but use them more like beasts then men, even that they might be
serviceable unto them, and then care not whether they serve God or the devil.
We know that servants look to be preferred by their masters (and so there is
good reason when they have served them faithfully) but what kind of reward is
this, that when they have bestowed some earthly benefit upon them (by having no
care to make them serve the Lord and sanctify his Sabbaths) do in the end
not only make them lose the everlasting reward, but preserve them to eternal
destruction?

Moreover, there are a company of idle serving men, who being brought up idly
all the six days, and in the^ having nothing at all to do, and are never
almost looked after upon the seventh day, are as idle, Especially in great
households, where there are many servants.
and as little regarded, as upon the other: and as they never almost do any
good days work to their masters, (for they have nothing to do) so much less
do they spend any Sabbath in the Lords service, but they especially are left
to go and come at their will. Others that have any office of great charge and
attendance (as the Cooks and Butlers, and such like in great houses) seldom
or never come to the Church, and that but by pieces, either when half is done,
or else they are ready to depart before half be ended, and so both hinder the
Lord from that service, which he should have by them, and them from that
blessing which they should inherit this way, and both cause the name of God to
be ill spoken of, and pull upon themselves and them that curse which belongs
to the continual polluting of the Sabbath. And how can they look that that
service, and that meat and drink should do them good, which is thus
prepared, and bought (as it were) with the continual danger of the souls of
their servants, besides the dishonor of the name of God?

When David had inconsideratly desired to drink of the water of Bethleem,
three mighty men brake into the host of the Philistines and drew water, and
brought it to him, but he would not drink thereof, but powered it for an
offering to the Lord, and said: 2. Sam. 23.15.16
O Lord be it far from me that I should do thus: is not this the blood of
the men that went in ieopardie of their lives? How much less then ought men to
eat and drink that, for which their servants do venture the lives of their
souls? And besides, if we do justly find fault with them, who do never or
seldom preach to the people committed to their charge, and so cause their
souls to starve and dye eternally: how can they be blameles, who seldom or
never bring their servants to the preaching of the word? And must they not
needs be culpable of the same judgment before God, seeing it is all one with
the servants, whether they live in the places where the word of God is not
preached at al, or if it be, yet they come not unto it?

that will try it in the fear of God, and in a care to serve him, and in a
love to the souls of their brethren, shall find it to be true by experience,
that many might keep holy the Sabbath, which do not now at all: others might
keep it more then they do. Which if yet it be thought impossible, (because we
go not about to practice it) let us but observe that which we shall see done
in the house, when the servant is very desirous to go to a fair, and the
master is as willing to let him go, you would wonder to see how things shall
be dispatched up suddenly, and in good order, they shall be absent many hours,
and yet not greatly missed, if any thing be otherwise then is usual, it is
borne with, because it is a day of making prouisios for themselves, and that
day is not every day. So then if the masters were persuaded of the Lords day,
as they ought to be, even that it is the time of making provision for the
soul, and were as careful for the souls of their servants, as they are for
their bodies, and did esteem it more for their worship and credit, that their
servants were religious, then that they were costly and well set out in
apparel, they would be better contented to spare them during the time of that
market, where they may buy without money all the graces of Gods spirit, and
the riches of the kingdom of heaven: whereby they should not only save their
own souls, but be made more fit to do duties to their masters of
conscience. The governors of families should take order that they and their
whole household might come to church together.


Therefore (to make an end of this matter) it is the duty of al household
governors, to cause the whole family to be in a readiness to attend upon them to
and fro the Church, and that it be not left at every man's discretion to come
when he will, but that they should go together. And indeed this has been
the orderly coming of Gods people in times past to the place of his worship,
that they have not come scattered and alone, but many together and by
companies, whereof the Prophet speaks: Psalm. 42.4.
When I remembered these things, I poured out my very heart, because I had gone
with the multitude, and led them into the house of God with the voice of
singing, and praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast. In which place the
man of God complaining, that he was banished from the holy assemblies, says,
that h^s grief was increased by remembering his former estate, when he used to
go with a great many to the Temple, even as to a feast: whereby he declares
what was the manner of their going; even as men go to a market, or to a feast,
not only with joy, but also by companies, and so many of one house as go,
will go together: so they did not only go to the house of God cheerfully,
but many of them together, even as to the market and feast of their souls. By
which practice of theirs, as the doings of many are condemned, so it appears
that the men of our time are led by another spirit then they were, and are
otherwise persuaded of the worship and place they go unto: For all the people,
nay the several households come not together, but scattered, and one dropping
after another in a confused manner: First comes the man, then a quarter of an
hour after his wife, and after her, I cannot tell how long, especially the
maidseruants, who must needs be as long after her, as the menseruants are
after him: Whereby it comes to pass that either half the service of God is
done before all be met, or else if the minister tarry till there be a
sufficient congregation, the first comers may be weary, and sometimes cold
with tarrying, before the other shall be warm in their seats.

Now if it be demanded of the masters, why they alone make such have, and
leave all the rest behind them, and they answer, truly because the time is
come wherein usually public prayer begins: can they be persuaded that it is
time for themselves to come (as it is indeed) and yet no time for the rest to
come with him? Has he no longer time to tarry, and have they time to tarry so
long after him? as though there were one law for him, and another for them: or
rather that the same law of the Sabbath, which moves him of conscience to do
that which he does, did not as forcibly bind them all as himself, nay did not
bind him to look to them, that they should keep holy the day as well as
himself: which if he grant to be true, and yet is not able to bring it to
pass (where the Lord has given him so great authority for his own sake)
partly through the frowardnes of his wife, and partly through the of obstinacy
of the rest in the family, his case is to be pitied, and he is rather to be
governed, then to govern, 1. Cor. 6.4.
and he might do well to set up one of them in his steed, seeing he does
suffer himself wilfully so be abused, and is contented to be over ruled by
them in the chiefest thing.

Therefore that he might bring this matter happily to pass, as he must go
before them by his own example, and be ready betimes, even first of all, so he
must earnestly call upon them for this duty, and exhort them unto it, and the
slower that they are, and the more they draw back, the more forward must he
be, and by his practice and words draw them forwards also. For this is that
readiness which David observed in the people of his time: I rejoiced when they
said unto me, Psalm. 122.1.
we will go into the house of the Lord: or let us go into the house of the
Lord: (for they are words of exhorting and encouraging one another thereunto.)
Even as the Prophet Esaias also foretells, that this shall be the zeal of
Gods people in the time of the Gospel, that they shall go together to serve
God, and therefore call upon one another for the same purpose, saying, It shall
be in the last days, Esaias 2.2.3.
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and al nations shall flow
unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob.

And truly this want of zeal in us to Gods worship, and love to the salvation
of our brethren, (bewraying it self in the neglect of this duty to call upon
one another) is the cause of this slownes. For the man he going first out of
the doors, says to his wife, make have, and come as soon as you can: she
coming at her leisure gives the same charge to her servants, dispatch, and
tarry not long behind; but here is no saying, Come let us go, let us go
together, and if it be once said it is not pursued, that it might be performed.
In going to a market, and to a feast, what earnest calling upon will there be
of one another, and it would seem strange to behold the household go divided,
and it were a thing that would much be marked, and every one that knew us,
and whither we were going, it should be the first question they would ask us:
How chances this that you come alone? where is your husband, your wife, or
your children? why come you not together? So no doubt the dispersed and broken
coming of households to the Church, is a thing greatly observed of the Lord
God, and of his Angels which are present at their assemblies, 1. Cor. 11.10.
and it is that which grieueth the rest of the Church, and as soon as they see
one come in alone, they are ready with grief, to ask where are the rest? what
means this party to come alone?

Therefore let all governors be persuaded that it is their bounden duty
thus to look to their families, and to be sure that they sanctify the day as
well as themselves, and therefore that they not only thus bring them to the
public ministry, but also look unto them, that they spend the rest of the
day in all holy exercises, so much as may be: examining them in that which they
have heard, and causing them to confer about it themselves, and to appoint
some to read the scripture unto them, and al of them to sing Psalms, and
generally whatsoever you have seen before, you ought to do your selves, to
call upon them for the same, and to take such order, that you be sure they do
it. And let them be sorry that they have neglected this duty so long
heretofore, and thereby have charged so many sins of their household upon
themselves: and now at the last in Gods holy fear let them begin to put this
in practice, least they do further provoke the most patient Lord to their
endless destruction. And though it be a thing so rare in the world as it is,
and men altogether so unacquainted with it as they be, nay so loathsome and
tedious to flesh and blood, that they are affraide once to begin with it: yet
let the bare commandment of God prevail more with us to take in hand, and to
continue in it, then that all that can be said or thought against it, should
way with us, either to keep us from it at the first, or afterward cause us
to give it over.

And that all men might do it so much the rather, The want of this care in
households is the cause of much wickedness, rebellion, and disorder in their
families.
let them be assured that the want of this especially is the cause of so many
wicked and rebellious children, untrusty and disobedient servants, nay
unfaithful and unkind wives every where, eue^ for that their husbands, their
fathers, and their masters do not call upon them to serve God, and see them
sanctify the Sabbath. It is a common and just complaint in all places, in the
mouth of every man, that servants and children will not be ruled, that they
cannot tell where to find a good servant, they know not whom to trust, but they
see not the greatest cause of it to be in themselves, and so go not about to
remedy it: for whiles they labor not to make their children the sons and
daughters of God by adoption, and to bring their servants within the household
of God, that they might be his servants by grace, and to make their wives the
chaste spouses of Jesus Christ, and so all of them to serve him, the Lord justly
punishes them, that they are disobedient unto them. For how can they do
duties unto men, if they have not learned to do duties unto God, and so of
conscience for Gods sake to do duties unto men? nay must not the Lord needs
punish them with disobedience against themselves, that by their own experience
they might know how grievous the neglect of his service is unto himself, when
he justly measures out unto them with the same measure, that they have met
unto him before?

1. Tim. 4.8.
that godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of the life to come,
and if we first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness in our selves
and others, Matthew. 6.33.
that all needful things should be cast unto us: Even as it is said of
Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
I know that he will command his sons and his household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham, that he has spoken unto him. So that thus to do is the
very high way not to keep us from, but to bring us unto the performance of all the promises, if we give credit unto him; who, as he only makes them in the
beginning of mere mercy, so must only accomplish the^ in the end, by his
constant verity and truth. I confess in deed, if he be an ill servant, this
is the readiest way to be rid of him, whose room is better the^ his company:
For he thinks himself to be in a prison, nay in hell all the while, but in the
end he shall perceive, that he is gone from the way to heaven unto hell, if the
Lord be not more merciful unto him: and why should we be loath to depart from
the service of them, that have no care to serve God? Or can we look that they
should do any faithful service unto us, that are so unfaithful in the service
of God?

But as concerning the rest, if any be religious, this is the best mean to
retain them, if they be but indifferent, this may win them, if they be
falling away, To have such good orders in our houses, is not the next way to
drive away our servants from us.
this may recover them: for what shall we think of all the godly fathers in
times past? That when they vowed diligently to look to their households, that
they should serve God with them, and did constantly perform it, that then they
had no servants at al? Was so great a man as Iehoshua without servants, when he
promised before so many witnesses, that he and his house would serve the Lord?
Was David left alone and constrained to do all himself, when as being a
mighty King, he bound himself unto it by that song which he made for the same
purpose, wherein he says: Psalm. 101.6.7.
Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me,
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me: there shall no deceitful
person dwell in mine house, he that tells lies shall not remain in my sight?
Had not Abraham a great household, when he was able of the sudden to carry
forth with him of them that were borne and brought up in his house three
hundred and eighteen men in armor, Genesis 14.14.
to rescue his brother Lot? of whom notwithstanding it is said, Chap. 18.19.
that he would teach his household the way of the Lord: as it appears he did
indeed, when by his only persuasion at the word of God, Chap. 17.23.
all the males were contented to be circumcised, and to receive that sacrament
unknown before, and painful, and also ignominious to the flesh, if they had
looked only to the outward sign. And must not that worthy Captain of an
hundred Italian soldiers needs have a greater family, then many of these that
cavil at this doctrine, of whom the spirit of truth reports, Acts. 10.2.
that he feared God and all his household?

needs confess, as the truth is indeed, that these men used more means to
make their servants the servants of God, then men do now adays, and that so
the blessing of God was greater upon them? And is it not set down in writing
for our learning, to show us what is that which we might look for at Gods
hands, if we would walk in the same way that they did, seeing there is no
respect of persons, times or places with him? But this much concerning this
matter may be sufficient, in which I have been unwillingly carried further then
I was purposed at the first (though now I do not repent me of it) because the
waightines of the matter is such, that I do not what might have been well
spared and with silence passed over.

Now that all households might be thus prepared unto, and furthered in the true
sanctifying of the Sabbath, it behooves all Kings, Princes ought to make laws
for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, and all inferior M^gistrates see the same
diligently put in execution.
Princes and Rulers, that profess the true religion, to inact such laws, and
to see them diligently executed, whereby the honor of God in hallowing these
days might be maintained. And look how straightly every householder is bound
to keep all his family in the obedience of this Commandment, so severely
will it be required at their hands, if al their people and subjects throughout
the whole land, or any of them do fail in it, through any default of theirs.
And the Lord will require it of them so much the more severely, by how much
they have more power to bring every thing to pass within their dominion, then
a private man has in his household, and the offense that is public is greater,
then that which is private. And that this is their very duty indeed,
appears first by the words of the Commandment, where he speaks generally
of them that be within the gates, namely, either of the house or of the city,
which because it is the furthest part of those places, therefore by them (as
under one kind) he comprehends all the parts of any their jurisdiction,
even the furthest: and though it be spoken by name but of one part of this
commandment, and that of the least, (which is to rest from labor) yet it must
needs be understood of the other part, which is the greatest, and whereunto
the other is but referred, as it has been oftentimes already said in this
treatise. For if to abstain from work be a thing of such moment before the
Lord upon his Sabbath and day of rest, that he will have governors restrain
their subjects from it, then to sanctify his holy day, and to bestow it upon
his service, must needs much more be a thing of that importance with him,
that he would have all rulers compel their subjects unto it. Therefore look
how many reasons and examples have been before alleged, to prove that they
ought to stay men from working upon that day, so many are there to induce them,
to inioyne all to keep holy the day, for which end especially they command
the rest, and without which, it is merely civil and not religious.

And for this cause did the Lord command his people Israel, Deuteronomy. 27.3.
to write his law upon the pillars in the borders of their land, both that the
people might be kept in the knowledge and obedience of it, Ecclesiast. hist.
Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap 4.
and that the Magistrates might every where see the execution of it, and know
that it is their duty to see it practiced in all parts of their dominion,
even to the very borders of them. And if the Magistrate be truly called (as he
is indeed) the keeper of the tables of Gods law, that is, one set up in his
room, furnished with his authority and power, to that end, that he might see
the whole law of God, even the first and second table, and every Commandment
in them, put in execution; then it must needs appertain unto him to provide,
that the Sabbath be hallowed, wherein consists the observation of all the
other Commandments in the first table. A practice whereof we have in the days
of Ioash King of Judah, in the very first entrance of his reign, whom when
Iehoiadah the hye Priest, had by the consent of the Rulers anointed King, 2.
King. 11.17.
he made a covenant between the Lord and the King and the people, that they
should be the Lords people, likewise between the King and the people. Where we
see there was a plain law established by the consent of the chief Rulers, in
the Church and Commonwealth, both for the abolishing of al idolatry, and
planting of true religion, that so the King and the people might be Gods people
(the execution whereof is set down in the sequent of that chapter, and the next
immediately following) and also for the loyal subjection of the people unto
their new King, and of his defense over them, that so they might be his liege
people, and he their sovereign Lord and King.

And indeed this is the chiefest end of al government, that men might not
profess what religion they list, and serve God after what manner it pleases
them best, but that the parts of Gods true worship might be set up every where,
and all men compelled to stoop unto it, and make profession of it at leastwise
in the outward discipline of the Church, that so thereby we might live more
peaceably our selves, and do more duties unto men. Even as the Apostle
writes unto Timothy in his former Epistle, willing him, and so in him all
Ministers, to make supplications, 1. Tim. 2.1.2.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, for Kings, and for all that are
in authority, that we by them might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. In which words, as he shows the people what they may
look for at the hands of their rulers, thereby to move them the rather to pray
for them; so he shows the rulers what they should procure unto the people,
namely, that they might live in the profession of Gods true religion, and
honest dealing one with another, maintaining the common peace for these ends
both at home and abroad.

Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 4. cap. 18. and 19.
And this is that good report which Eusebius gives of Constantine the Emperor,
that he made laws compelling all men to the public service of God upon the
Lords day, exempting no man there from, no not the soldiers in war (so far
forth as they might) who prescribed to them for that purpose forms of prayer,
and commanded them to be occupied in other parts of Gods worship. Therefore it
ought to be provided, that the preaching of the word be every where
established: for in that especially the sanctifying of the Sabbath consists,
as being the greatest part of Gods work, and which must direct the people in
all other parts of his holy service, and without the which the day cannot be
hallowed in the least measure of that which the Lord requires of us, and all
other parts of true religion, ought so in all places to be ordained, that none
might have just cause to complain, that for want of means, though they rest
upon the Sabbath from their worldly business, yet they cannot sanctify it, as
they are commanded. Which if it be true, then much less ought there to be any
toleration for the Mass in a Christian Commonwealth, or any bearing with such
kind of Idolatry: For beside the plain Commandment of God concerning this
matter, so many times repeated in the word, to destroy all remnants of them,
and clean to put out the monument of the^ as abominable (which ought to be a
light and a direction unto us) we have the examples also of many godly kings
in the most flourishing Commonwealth of Judah, going before us, and as it were
leading us by the hand thereunto. Hezekiah took away the hye places, and brake
the Images, 2. King. 18.4.
and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses
had made, because the people did burn incense to it. But that is most worthy
of remembrance, which the Holy ghost speaks concerning King Asa, that he
took away the Sodomites out of the land, 1. King. 15.12.
and put away all the Idols that his father had made, and he put down Maachah
his mother from her estate, because she had made an Idol in a grove, and he
destroyed her Idols, and burnt the^ by the brook Kidron: for which he is highly
co^me^ded, even for that he would not give liberty to any, no not to his
mother, to dishonor the name of God by a false shorship, and to draw others
thereunto by her example.

Last of all, we have a most excellent pattern to follow both in abolishing
al superstition, and planting the true religion in that rare and thrice
renowned king Josiah of happy memory, as it is at large described in the
second book of the Kings. 2. King. 23. P. Martyr in Iud. cap. 1.
Whereunto I may adioyne the judgment of P. Martyr concerning this matter, who
says: Magistratus non potest non damnari, etc. The Magistrate must needs be
condemned, who maintains Idolatry, seeing he has the sword to punish
sin. And a little after he alleges S. Augustine upon these words of the
Psalm (Be wise now ye Kings, etc.) They are admonished (says he) in that they
are Kings, Psalm. 2.10.
to use the sword committed unto them of God, for the defense of the Christian
faith, and for the repressing of the wicked: Igitur principibus minime licet,
vt impuros cultus concedant, etc. Therefore it is not lawful for Princes to
grant immunitie unto any false worship, yea it does especially concern them
severely to compel all unto the true doctrine, and such rites of the Church as
are agreeable unto the word. In which zeal her most excellent Majesty has
not been behind these worthy paternes of goodness before named, when as besides
the utter abolishing of all idolatry in one day (to the great peril of her
estate and life) by cutting off the head and tail of it at once: she has
since of the like princely goodness sundry times provided by statute against
all such, as should in secret corners presume to sing Mass, or to be present
at it.

But the above named examples are so much the more diligently of us to be
considered; because in them we have not only laws made for the sanctifying of
the Sabbath, but the execution of them, for that which was done then, was done
by law: and though it be a great mercy mercy of God, to live where good laws
be, yet it is greater, where they be well practiced: in so much that though
there be never so many good laws made for the enlarging of the Gospel in any
kingdom, it is to no great purpose, except they be well looked unto. Therefore
as we have seen that true religion by law ought to be established, so that it
might by all men be publicly observed, all magistrates must have an especial
care of that. Of the want of which I am persuaded there is more cause to
complain, then of the former: For though there be many things wanting to the
perfection of the Church, because of our sins, yet all things are not
practiced which the law requires for the helping of it forward thither,
neither are all things done which might be by law, for the true sanctifiyng of
the Sabbath every where: whether we respect those things that might procure a
learned ministry in time, or compel them to preach oftener that can do it,
or make the people come to it more diligently, and profit by it more
effectually then they do, which whiles it be more carefully labored after,
what hope can there be that they should be any more committed unto us, when we
are so unfaithful in this that we have? For as they preposterously labor to
reform the Church, that have no care to reform themselves, and indiscreetly
complaining of some disorders there, do not practice better orders in their
houses upon themselves and theirs, do hinder it and keep them back: so they
that labor for more means to sanctify the Sabbath, and are careless in
practicing those that they have, do stay such good blessings as God might
otherwise bestow upon his Church this way.

Therefore we may conclude that all governors in the common wealth must in
their several places endeavor by all means that GOD has given them, The
great good that redoundes to the common wealth thereby.
that all the subjects of the land do ordinarily sanctify the Sabbath as well
as themselves: and that it be not unhallowed of them, either for want of good
laws in that behalf, or the due executing of them, which that they might the
rather do, besides the precise commandment of God, binding them thereunto,
and the examples of godly rulers in times past, persuading them likewise that
they may in their godly wisdoms consider, that then are they most like to be
true subjects unto them, when they do first give themselves in true subjection
unto the Lord, and then are they most ready to withdraw their obedience from
their superiors, when they have withdrawn their hearts from God before by a
false religion: He that will honor the king, must fear God: And as our Savior
Christ teaches, Prou. 24.21. Math. 22.39.
The second commandment is like the first: that is, the obedience of the
second table flows out of the obedience to the first, in so much that they
are most like of conscience to serve their prince, that of conscience do serve
God, and none so ready to rebel against them (if opportunity do serve) as
those that have rebelled, and hardened their hearts against Gods word before.
For proof of which if we will but take a short view of all the treacheries
and treasons intended against her majesty's most royal person, since the
beginning of her most happy reign, (whom God of his goodness preserve unto the
full course of nature, or rather beyond it) we shall find that they have been
in those, who were either of a false religion (and therefore being enemies to
God, must needs be enemies to his anointed) or else of no religion at all, and
so made no difference of persons, but only sought themselves. And besides that
all tumults and commotions for the most part have been first broached in those
quarters of the land, where for want of the preaching of the word, they were
ignorant of their duties both to God and their Prince: and on the contrary,
that in those places of her dominion, her highness has always found the people
most truly and true hearted, where the word has been most syncerely
preached, and in a godly life most purely received.

And it must needs be so: for besides that all duties to our superiors done
of conscience, spring of this, that we are persuaded by Gods word, that they
are set over us by God in his room, and therefore for his sake and conscience
to him, we do give tribute, to whom tribute belongs; custom, to whom
custom; fear, to whom fear; Romans 13.7.
honor, to whom honor: And where is this wanting (which must needs be where
the word is seldom or never taught) there every misliking will move to
withdraw duty: besides this I say which is much, the Lord promises to
honor them, that honor him, and threatens to dishonor them, that dishonor
him: 1. Sam. 3.
and therefore when they honor him in their subjects, by causing them to
serve him, and keep his Sabbath, he will honor them with their obedience: so
when they dishonor him in their people, by suffering them to neglect his
service, and pollute his Sabbaths, then he dishonoreth them by their stubornnes
and rebellion.

Thus we have hitherto seen, that it is the duty of all rulers, high and
low, in the common wealth, and in private houses, to cause them that are under
their government, not only to rest upon the Sabbath, but also and especially
to bestow the day of rest in Gods service; and that they must not be
indifferent in this, and leave it to men's choice, but be sure that it be done
of them indeed, seeing God has given them such authority over them to that
end, and therefore will require it at their hands. And this is the second and
last part of this commandment, A conclusion with an application of all to our
selves and others.
teaching us the true manner of keeping holy the day, in all the public means
of Gods worship, and private exercises of religion, which every one of us ought
so to walk in, that thereby we might be the fitter to do all other duties,
especially to show mercy unto our brethren, as at all other times, so most of
all upon this very day.

But if we consider how our selves and others have practiced all these parts of
Gods service, publicly and privately, and what fruit has come thereon, we
shall find that either we have for the most part neglected them, or used them
to no purpose, and so have not attained unto the principal end of the Sabbath,
which is that whereby we might be fashioned unto the image of God, and begin
that Sabbath here, that shall be for ever continued in heaven. And here when I
look to the common course of men on this day, I may justly complain with the
learned man master Musculus, Muscul. in praecept. 4.
Non Christo, sed nostris delitijs feriamur: Men rest not to serve the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own delights, in so much that there is no time more
profanely, and corruptly spent then the Lords day, which in name and show is
dedicated to religon: but men by their deeds openly show without all
controulment, that they do consecrate them to the pleasures of the flesh,
even to Bacchus and Venus. August. in Psalm. 91.
So that as Augustine said, How much better were it for men to plow upon the
Sabbath day, then to dance? so we may say of these men, How much better were
it for them (I mean less evil) to be occupied about some worldly business,
then about these things, wherein they serve not Christ but Satan? And yet I am
affraide that herein many are fallen into that superstition of the Jews, which
that grave father, and singularly well deserving of all the Church of God, Beza
in Cantic. Solo^. Homil. 30.
Master Beza speaks of, When it is counted such a great sin to open a shop
window, Non item si lusum, si potatum, si scortatum fuerit, But not so great
if a man upon this day give himself to gaming, to swilling, and to playing the
harlot. Yea as another learned divine says, Gualt. in. Act. 13. Homil. 88.
Hodie eo res deuenit: In our time things are so come to pass, that amongst
Christians they may be accounted very good men, who break the Sabbath by their
handie labor, when they most do profane it with horrible wickedness, neither
at any time do they more offend in pride, and disdain, in drunkenness, riot,
and lust, then upon that day which should be wholly consecrated unto God, and
to the meditation of his works, and of our eternal rest. And seeing these
things are done openly and commonly (says he) do we yet marvel what is
the cause of the calamities of our time?

And Master Bucer complains yet a great deal more, Bucer in Psalm. 92.
I am nihil fere scelerum est: Now there is almost no wickedness, which is not
especially committed upon the Lords holy day, there is op^^ ^^ying, drinking,
filthy dancing, harlotting, fighting, and quarrelling, and I would to God
greater things then these were not committed. I will not say as he says: Et
nusquam fere licentius, quam in ipsis principum, and Episcoporum aulis. For I
hope better things of them, and such as accompany salvation, but in too many
places of town and country. So that I may say of them as father Chrysostom
does, Chrysostom. de. Lazar. conci^. pri.
Thou have received the Sabbath day of God to cleanse thy soul from sin, and
thou upon that day do most of all ^ommit sin. Whereupon it comes to pass
that all the week following, they are so much the more wicked, b^ how much
that which was appointed for their good, they have turned into sin unto
themselves; so that as the Gospel, which in it self is the savor of life
unto li^e, by men's abuse is turned into the savor of death: and the bread of
the Lords table, which is the food of life, is turned into poison, when men do
not rightly therein discern of the Lords body, and so by eating it, and
dri^king the Lords cup, 1. Cor. 11.29.
they procure his judgment against ^hemselues: so this day of the Lords
resurrection, which is therefore the day of life unto us, is by their wickedness
^ade unto them the day of everlasting death: Even as Master Calvin says,
Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. ser. 34.
When the Sunday is spent, not only in games and pastimes full of vanity, but
in things which are altogether contrary unto God, that men think they have not
celebrated the Sunday, except GOD therein be by many and sundry ways
offended, when men I say unhallow in such sort this holy day, which God has
instituted to lead us unto himself, is it any marvel if we become brutish,
and beastly in our doings all the rest of the week? But to reserve all such
profane beasts unto the judgment of God, whose holy day of rest, as they do
despise, so unless they repent and amend, GOD has sworn long ago, Heb. 3.18.
that they shall never enter into his heavenly rest. There are others of whom
in the same place he speaks, Calvin ibid.
Who glut themselves by ryotting, and are shut up in their houses, because they
dare not show a manifest contempt of their duty in the open streets, so that
the Sunday is to them a retreat, to withdraw themselves from the congregation
of God, whereby one may see what affection they have to all Christianity and
the service of God, when by this, which was given us for an aid and help to
draw nearer unto God, they take occasion to withdraw themselves the further
from him. For (as he says a little before) if we employ the Sunday to make
good cheer, to sport our selves, to go to games and pastimes, shall God in
this be honored? Is not this a mockery? Is not this an unhallowing of his
name?

But let us that be Christians be of another mind, and let us (as Saint
Augustine says) show our selves Christians by keeping holy the Lords day:
August. ad Casul. ^pist. 86.
unto whom (so many as fear God) let me say, as they did at the Council of
Paris: Council. Paris. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Salubriter admonemus, We do admonish all the faithful for the salvation and
good of their souls, that they would give due honor and reverence unto the
Lords day, because the dishonor of it is both contrary unto Christian
religion, and does without all doubt bring destruction to the souls of all
that continue it. And there is great reason of it: For seeing that day is
appointed for all the parts of Gods worship, Bulling. in Ier. c^ncio. 65.
He that despises the Sabbath, makes no great account of the true religion, as
master Bullinger very wisely notes: and therefore the Sabbath is many times
put for the practice of all religion, and the Prophets when they complain of
the decay of all religion, say that the Sabbaths are polluted, as he also
observes in the same place: according to which rule if we will judge of the
religion of men, we shall find that amongst a great many it is very little, or
none at all, because they have not that due care of the Sabbath that they
should.

And thus says Master Calvin, Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 5. ser. 34.
that the Prophet Jeremy in many places, rebuking the Jews for breaking of
the Sabbath, speaks unto them as if they had in general broken the whole law,
and not without cause: for he which sets at naught the Sabbath day, has
cast under foot all Gods service, as much as is in him, and if the Sabbath
day be not observed, all the rest shall be worth nothing. Now besides, seeing
the end of all is, that the fruit of Gods worship might appear in our godly
conversation to the glory of his name, and our eternal salvation, even as it
was ordained of God, at the first to keep Adam in his integrity, if we by the
grace of God escape all these horrible prophanations of this day, and have
attained unto some tolerable care of keeping holy the day, then let us see what
we are bettered thereby, and what is the fruit of our profession thereon. For
then may we have comfort, that we use it aright, when there proceeds that good
of it thereby, for which God ordained it, and which we see it brings forth
in many others.

And therefore I may say with Master Bucer, Bucer in Mat. 12.11.
if we do truly and religiously serve God upon the Lords day above all others:
Declarent hoc mores: Let our manners show it; let the holiness of our life
testify it, let our works prove it, for who will believe that he has been
present at the assemblies of the Church, and has heard the word of God, with
a sincere heart, and a true faith, who bestows the rest not only of that day,
(as he says) but of his life, not only more vainly, but more wickedly? Let
us therefore in the fear of God; and as we have a care of our own souls,
repent us earnestly of that, that is past, and pray unto him, that in all time
to come, we might make more conscience of observing the Lords day in all the
parts of his worship publicly and privately, and that we may bring forth the
fruit of them all more plentifully, all the days both of the week following,
and of our whole life, to the glory and praise of his holy name, the
unspeakable comfort and endless salvation of our own souls, the good example
of his Church, the stopping of the mouths of the wicked, and the leaving of
them without excuse, and that in and by our only Lord, redeemer, and
mediator Jesus Christ, through the operation of his holy spirit, to which
blessed Trinity in unity, for his grace upon me in finishing this work, and
for all other his mercies be ascribed as most due, all honor, glory, and
praise, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal matter contained in the first Book.
THis Commandment in four things differs from all the rest. page 1. 2. 3. 4
That there ought to be a Sabbath day continually kept of al men to the end of
the world. page 5 The Sabbath day was kept from the beginning of the world,
before it was pronounced upon Mount Sinay. page 6 The law of the Sabbath is
natural. ibid. 7. and 8 The Gospel has not taken away the observation of the
Sabbath. page 9. 10 The Sabbath was ordained for 2. principal ends. page 11.
12 It is necessary that there should be one day of rest in the week. ibid. 13
It is necessary that one day in the week should be sanctified. page 14. 15.
16 If there were no Sabbath, Gods worship would be altogether neglected. page
17. 18. 19 Objections to disprove the continuance of the Sabbath under the
Gospel, answered. p. 20. 21. etc. The Sabbath ought to be upon the seventh
day, and upon none other. page 30. 31. 32 And upon this seventh day that we now
keep. page 33. 35 This change of the day was made by the Apostles. p. 36. 38
Why the Apostles changed the Jewish Sabbath, into this day that we now keep,
rather then into any other. p. 42. 43. etc. This day must never be changed, but
continue to the end of the world. page 47 It is and must now be called the
Lords day. page 48 The first thing commanded is to rest upon this day. page 51
A very exact and precise rest must be kept. page 53. 54 The causes of this
rest. p. 57. 58 From what things we ought to rest. page 63. 64. etc. All sorts
of men, high and low, are commanded to rest. p. 82 etc. The cattle must rest.
page 85 We must not compel others to work for us. p. 89. etc. They that be
in authority must restrain other from working. page 93. etc. Object. how shall
men live, if they work not, Answered. p 98. etc. What bodily labor may be
used upon this day. p. 102. etc. Every man in the six days may do all his
work. page 119 Objection: If we be bound thus straightly to rest, we are in
as great bondage under the Gospel, as the Jews, Answered. page 124. etc.
Sundry judgments of God upon the breakers of the Sabbath. page 128. 129. etc.
We ought to rest also upon this day from al honest recreations and lawful
delights. p. 131. etc. And from speaking and hearing of worldly matters. p.
137. etc And from having our minds occupied about the same. p. 140 Objection:
Who is able then to keep this Commandment, Answered. page 144. An application
of all this to our selves. page 146
FINIS.
The principal matters in the second Book.
THe second thing in the Commandment, is to sanctify the day of rest page
149. 150 It is then sanctified, etc. ibid. Which is principally required in
this Commandment. 153. etc. We must remember the Sabbath to this end
especially. p. 156. etc. The sanctification of the day is precisely urged in
many, etc. p. 158 Then the daily service of God was doubled. p. 161 Our Church
assemblies ought to be upon this day. p. 162 At which time men ought to be
there present. p. 164 Then ought Gods word to be preached. p. 166. etc. All
men should go where they may hear it. p. 169 etc. Where it is not preached
and heard the day cannot be hallowed as it should. p. 172 They that cannot or
will not preach, are causes of unhallowing this day. p. 173 We must be present
at the rest of divine service from the beginning to the end thereof. p. 174 175.
etc. God would have us to serve him publicly in the Church p. 177 Sundry
reasons to persuade thereunto. p. 178 After what manner and to what end we
ought, etc. p 183 We must repent for our unprofitable coming to church 188
Public collection for the poor, ought to be made, etc. p. 191 How we ought
privately to spend the rest of the day. 194 We must prepare our selves before
we come to church, etc. 195 How we ought to prepare, etc. 198 We must read the
scriptures privately at home. 200 We must use private meditation upon that we
have, etc. 203 What meditation is, and the great fruits thereof. 203. 205 How
unprofitable we are for want of meditation. 207 We ought privately to talk and
confer, etc. 210 The profit of such co^fere^ces. 219 What hinders men from
the^. p. 216 With who^ we ought to co^fer. 220 We ought to meditate and
confer also of Gods works. 222 Which will teach us to profit by all things,
and in all estates. 230 There ought to be singing, etc. 235 The fruit of
singing Psalms 239 Singing of Psalms is greatly decayed. 241 The cause of
this decay. 242 The praise and commendation of singing Psalms. 244 The works
of mercy ought to be practiced especially on this day. 246 We ought then to
visit them that be in misery. 252 The spiritual works of mercy are then
especially to be done to men's souls. 255 All superiors ought to be careful,
that their inferiors, etc 258 In our time this is greatly neglected, etc. 263
Laws should be made and well executed, etc. 274 The great good that redounds
to the commonwealth thereby. 275 A Conclusion with an application of al to our
selves, and others. 281
FINIS.

