AN EPYTAPHE upon the Death of the Right worshipful, Sir william GARRAT
Knight: and chief Alderman of the Queens Majesty's City of LONDON. Who
deceased the. 27. of SEPTEMBER. 1571. ANNO AETATIS SVE. 64.
EVen as the PYLATE trains the rest,
that travail would attain:
And by the compass of his Card,
describes his Journey plain:
Even so the travail of this world
apparent seems to be,
From Childhood first to middle state:
Then finally we see:
From crooked Age unto the House,
that mortal Creatures win:
Our Mother dear the Earth, of whom
our Substance did begin.
Which full Effect considered well, as Flowers in the Field:
we may conceive this outward man, in tract of time shall yield,
And hang the head: for as the shade that glydeth on the wall,
compared with the Lilly fair, so sudden is our fall.
As here before our eyes we may prospectiue plainly try,
A Mirror and a lookyng Glass, for every Wight to spy,
In Country soil, (O LECTOR dear.) of Consulshippes degree:
A Lantern bright to Justice Seat, hear plainly thou may see
Bereaved of breath: a Knight no less, then Worships City clame:
for Rector of the Public weal, that GARAT had to name.
From middle Age by sage advise pursuyng Virtues lore:
Which is the cause that does augment, his Worship evermore.
In Godliness, or sacred life, his steps, the Lord has blessed:
whose endless Fame reuiueth still, though Corpse be now suppressed
By Natures course. In time, unto the poor a perfect stay:
maintayning Justice equailie, from every day to day.
A Patron of his Country dear intombde he has, to name:
For as the Senate graunts him right, the Commons say the same.
Though then that Fate has him assignd, his Pageant thus to play
Still puttyng us in Memory, that we shall walk that way.
There is not one, that can reprove, one Title of his right,
But as he was, (even so he died:) to live a faithful Knight.
And gave the Onset to the flesh, and conquered has the same:
As Champian bold, by Shield of Faith, to glory of his name.
Disdayning Earthly trade, or mean: embracing Heavenly light:
Committyng to the hands of God, his inward man or Spright.
If that as then such noble Acts, enlarge his loyal praise:
And by account of just deserts, his treble Honor raise.
What rufull loss has all the state, of Senators degree?
with whom for Counsel grave, he was accepted wont to be.
Or else what tears may Public weal, effuse in woeful plight?
Since fatal Doom has plucked from them so sage and wise a Knight
What double loss has Lady his? (that virtuous Matron grave,)
Whom God had linckt to him as Spouse, for term of life to have.
What loss has Children dear, of him? what loss has servants al?
what loss has each that flood in need, for Counsel his to call?
What loss has rich? what loss has poor? what loss has each estate
what remedy? naught helps herein, but wayle our woeful Fate.
Yet naught at all preuailes our tears, therefore to God I pray,
(Since he is gone:) the rest may walk, his ready Path and way:
And specially, his Brethren sage: that sit on Justice Seat,
Their Worships hearts, the Lord direct, unto his glory great.
Mayntainyng justly every cause, and plantyng Virtues right,
So that thereby the Common Weal, may floorish clear and bright
In happy state, most prosperously, great joy for to be seen:
To spread her Branches in respect, as does the Olyue green.
Grant this O God eternally, that when this race is run:
Their Worships may obtain the Fame that GARRAT has begone.
FINIS.
DIXI. N. BOVR.

This Race presents a Pilgremage,
Or Tragical Discourse on Stage:
Which once begone, draws to an end;
Let Death therefore be thought on friend:
And fear no whit the Camp to yield,
So long as Faith may be thy Shield.
Imprinted at London in the upper end of Fleetelane, by Richard Iohnes: And
are to be sold at his Shop, ioynyng to the Southwest Door of saint Paul's
Church. 1571. October. 2.


