A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF A cruel fact committed by a Gentlewoman toward her
Husband, her Father, her Sister and two of her Nephews.

First printed in French at Roan: and now translated into English.

I W
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop within Popes
head Alley in Lombard street. 1599.

A true discourse of a cruel fact committed by a Gentlewoman toward her
husband, her father, her sister, and two of her nephews.
AT Lucera, a City distant four iourneyes from Naples, there was a good
gentleman, named Signior Alexander de Buringel, who had two daughters, to wit,
Anna, and Lucienna, the which he married highly, according to their qualities.
The worthy Gentleman Signeor Appian de Boyse Chauncellor of Naples, a man most
expert, wise and virtuous, espoused Anna the elder: and Alphonse de Barseils
espoused Lucienna. The solemnities done, and the feasts and pastimes finished,
it was not long but Signior Appian went to Naples, and taking his leave of his
wife, went to Barseils to see his brother and sister in law, where having
soiourned some days, he departed with all diligence to finish his voyage. Thus
Anna remained alone very long, whereat she began greatly to grieve, and began
to think and cast, which way to procure a servant to supply her husbands
place: Finding her self greatly solicited by one Maurice Talleys, a young man,
fair, and bold, but of a base condition and bad life, she her self burning
daily with his love, gave the rains to all voluptuousness, breaking her faith
and conjugal love. Her husband having occasion to stay at Naples, sent for her
diverse times, which she refusing, he in anger sent her word, not to fail to
come, withal using some threats: She again excusing her self, sent him word
that she was sick, and that she feared to come least the air of Naples should
kill her. Some days after being in conference with her favorite Talleis, she
showed him her husbands letters, whereupon finally they conspired Appians
death. The conclusion was, that Anna should go to visit her sister Lucienna,
three iourneyes from Lucera, at the Castle of Barseils, whither Talleys also
appointed to come and there to end their complottes. Anna hearing that her
brother in law was to muster his quarter, took horse and departed to visit
her sister: Being hard by the Castle, she sent her Lackey to give her knowledge
of her coming, whereat the good g^etlewoman being very glad, went to meet her
with her two little sons, having first given order in her house for the
entertainment of her sister. After the welcomes and embracementes, they
returned to the Castle, where they found the table covered and the cates
ready, expecting their coming, the welcomes being repeated, they washed and
set themselves at table, where they were served with such cheer as any one may
judge that a sisters heart could afforde. After dinner the two gentlewomen began
to talk of the government of their houses and husbands, where Lucienna greatly
commended her husband, assuring her sister, that if he had been present she
should have had better cheer, beseeching her to hold her excused. Anna
sighing, thanked her saying, my cheer passes my desert; but truly sister,
God has done you more favor then me, being so well matched with a kind
husband, and marvel not of the great love, which my father has always borne
you in respect of me, in having matched you so well to your content. It is your
pleasure to say so (quoth Lucienna) but without comparison you are more richly
and highly matched then I am. A fig for riches (replied Anna) so I had but a
husband as you have, to my contentment, and of whom I might reap some delight,
for in truth I am as badly furnished with a husband as any Gentlewoman in this
country, and think you not that I speak this in any envy toward you, or any
ways to your prejudice: but I blame our Father for it, in having so badly
matched me. It Is strange (quoth Lucienna) for my brother your husband has at
diverse times been here, of courtesy to visit us, and has remained here some
days (though not so long as we desired) in which time we have found him so
honorable and grave in all his deeds, that in mine opinion we should greatly
wrong him to blame him: also he has at diverse times told and protested unto
me the love which he bears you, showing me the letters by which you refused
to come to Naples, because that you were sick, with many other circumstances:
he said moreover, that he desired with all his heart to return to his house
for a time, but that urgent affairs hindered him, that it was impossible (in
respect of his office) to do it. O God (quoth Anna) I think my mischiefs
increase daily from worse to worse: for she of whom I expected comfort and
succor, is my half enemy, in giving more faith unto the fained words of my
husband then to mine. If you did but know him as well as I, you would not defend
his cause so much. O you know not his tricks which he uses at Naples, not
contented with one trull, but keeps and maintains three, yea four:
therefore it is no marvel though we have no lineage, which truly greatly
grieueth me, and it would grieve me as much to declare you one thing which
lies upon my stomach, although you are my sister. The young gentlewoma^
believing her words said, sweet sister be not displeased, nor think not
strange of the things which I tell you, for in deed men are hard to be
known: but in these afflictions we ought to pray to God, and with our virtues
seek to draw our husbands hearts to us, and certainly God will change their
minds: I speak not this for my self, for (as I have told you) I have no
cause to complain. Here she stopped, by reason of the ariuall of some
Gentlewomen neighbors to Lucienna, and so their parley was broke off, and
after salutations, passed the time until supper in talk: mean while Maurice
Talleis with two other Gentlemen was come, the which for her sake were very
welcome and greatly feasted. After supper Talleis took his love Anna under the
arm, walking into the garden, and began to talk how they should perform
their damnable and wicked enterprise. Sweet love (quoth Anna) you know I have
against my will been married to this old doting fool, which makes no account
of me, who I fear by his subtlety will epsy our familiarity, which if he
do, it will cost us both our lives, and therefore the surest way is to make him
out of the way, after the subtillest sort possible, to the end that we may
live in delight without thought or fear, and finish our love in pleasure and
content, upon condition that you shall marry me, and for recompense I will
make you the richest man in this land. I swear and protest unto you (quoth
that miserable wretch) not to disobey you in any point, but to accomplish your
will to the uttermost. Well then (quoth she) you shall go to Naples, and I will
give you my Lackey with letters to my husband, and as soon as you shall have
known my husband, insinuate your self into his acquaintance, by which means
you may more easily give an end to his wretched and miserable days by some
secret death, which I think poison would do best, and with less peril. This
counsel was by Talleis found good, the hour of rest being come, they parted:
the gentlemen to one chamber, and the gentlewomen to another, where Anna forgot
not to dispatch her husband. The two sisters lay together, but Anna took small
rest, by the thought of her wicked enterprise. The morning the Gentlemen took
leave of the Gentlewomen and Anna gave her letters to the Lackey, and the
poison to Talleis as they had agreed. Being come to Naples, and marked whither
the Lackey went, and so knew Signior Appian, he saluted him, in prosering him
all humble service, whereof he thanked him. This he continued for a great while,
often saluting him, and accompanying him every where, where he went. One day
he made a banquet, to the which amongst other Gentlemen he invited Signeor
Appian: and in the midst of the Supper, and their meriment, he seeing time
made sign to a fellow (whom he had hired forth nonce, giving him fifty
Crowns) who gave him the deadly potion. Which done, he watched a time so well
that he murdered him who had done the fact, thereby to make the matter sure:
and the next day took horse and posted to Lucera, to give the news thereof to
Anna. The good Gentleman Signeor Appian finding himself ill at ease, resolved
to go to his house at Lucera, whither he could not attain, but died within two
leagues of the same. Anna being at Barseils was advertised by the Lackey that
her husband was gone to Lucera, whereof she made great signs of joy, and
taking leave of her sister, departed for Lucera, where she found her husband
deceased, whereat she seemed greatly discomforted. In fine, she caused the
funeralles with great pomp to be solemnized, at the which were diverse
Gentlemen, and especially her father, the which all comforted her, the
obsequies ended, every one departed home, and Talleis came to visit his
mistress, to who^ he told how he had effected the murder: whereat she was
maruellously well pleased, saying that thence forward they might without fear
live together contentedly, counselling him to demand her of her father in
marriage, but that whether he would or no, she was resolved never to have other
but him. Whereupon Talleis did as she willed him, but her father gave him no
answer, whereof she being advertised (possessed of the Devil) was greatly
enraged, and imagined how she might be revenged in making him die: and
presently without other deliberation thereon, resolved to poison him, together
with her sister, and her two nephews, the better to take her pleasure without
contradiction, and to enjoy the goods. Mean while her brother in law Alfonce
de Barceils fell sick in his house, to whom their father traveled to visit
him, causing him to be well tended, but notwithstanding he died, to the great
grief of Lucienna, and her father: his funerals being ended, her father
returned again to his house, leaving Lucienna with her children alone.

Shortly after, a desire took him to make a voyage into France, wherefore he
feasted all his friends, amongst the which his two daughters were not
forgotten: Anna likewise forgot not her diuilish intent. The banquet was brave
and honorable. The father being moved with mirth, called for a cup of wine to
drink to all his friends: Anna faining the good huswife stepped to the pot her
self, and filled a cup of wine, where having put the poison, with a pleasant
countenance presented it to her father, who not doubting any thing, drunk a
great draught unto all the assistants, whereof in few days he died, to the
great content of Anna and her adulterer. Lucienna was sent for to the funerals
of her father, who came accordingly with her two children, and was by Anna
greatly welcomed, and requested to lodge in her house, which she did, staying
there some days to her mishap, for her sister seeing a fit time, gave her also
a drink of the same nature: whereupon the gentlewoman finding her self
veriesicke, departed to her house, leaving her two children in the keeping of
her sister: and being come home she was not long there but dyed. Whereof Anna
being advertised, making semblance of great grief took horse to ride to
Barseils, to ordain the funerals, but before her departure set order to her
house, which together with her two nephews she left in the keeping of an Aunt
of hers, giving her charge of the children above all things: but the wicked
wretch had already given them also of the drink which she had given to the
mother, the which because but young and tender, they could not so long resist
the violence of the poison, but died shortly after the departure of their
wicked Aunt, who coming to Barseils, with a fained sorrow, having interred her
sister, took possession of the goods, in the name of the children, saying
that she was to look to their right, the which also she did by her fathers
goods: all which being done, she returned to Lucera, where finding the two
infants dead and buried, made such pitiful signs of grief, and woeful
lamentations, that her treason was never percieued nor doubted. Having brought
all things thus to her wish shortly after was married to Maurice Talleis, where
the feasts and pomps were great, and honored with a great number of nobility.
The marriage rites being ended, Talleis perceiving that he had attained his
desire, began to riot, to haunt plays and bankets, whereat Anna began to enter
into jealousy, and at length into such a hate of him, that she dispraised and
blamed him in every place where she came: for Gods just providence is such,
that it never suffers any such wicked acts to continue hidden and
unpunished, to the end that every one may take example by them, especially to
children to keep them always in the fear and love of God, and obedience of
their parents and friends.

The Devil desiring to see the overthrow of this wicked Anna, sowed such
discord between her husband and her, that they did nothing but wish one
another ruin. Signior Antonio de Boyse, nephew to the deceased Appian took
awife, and at his marriage amongst his kinsfolks and friends, Talleis and his
wife were invited, when being at the table, the company very merry, Talleis
looked angerly upon his wife, and giving her somename, told to some of his
familiar acquaintance which were by him, what dishonor she did him every
where: she to the contrary reproched him, that she had raised him up from a
beggar to a Gentleman, and that it was well known what she was, and what he
was. Talleis finding himself touched, spurned at her with his foot under the
table, insomuch that she feeling the smart called him murderer and poisoner,
and that he had poisoned her late husband: whereat Talleis drawing his dagger
stroke at her, but being by some of the company hindered, the dagger flying out
of his hands stuck in the side of a young Gentleman of good calling, of which
blow he died, Signior Anthony Boise, having heard their debate, and seeing the
murder committed in his house, presently sent for the Justice, which attached.
Talleis and his wife, and upon examination Talleis confessed all and euetie
circumstance of the murders, whereupon she being examined apart, utterly
denied all, and to be ignorant of any such matter, which greatly troubled the
Justices: yet by good means and fair words they fetched her out, that she
confessed that she was consenting to her husbands death, whereupon they showing
her that she deserved punishment, and putting her in mind of Gods great mercy
and of his horrible judgment against the wicked: she finding her conscience to
witness against her, confessed also to have poisoned her father, her sister,
and her two nephews: all at the persuasion of the Devil, for concupiscence of
her desires, the carnal voluptuousness, wicked ambition and covetousness:
imploring Gods mercy, and the favor of the Justice.


The sentence and judgment against Maurice Talleis, and Anne his wife, for the
murders and empoisonmentes by them committed.
THe justice having considered all, and finding the verification of their fact
by the agreeing of their confessions, they were condemned to make honorable
amends, naked in their shirtes with cords about their necks, and each of them
a torch in their hand, before the great church, ask pardon and mercy of God
and the Justice. After they were by the executioner of the high Justice brought
into the public place, where they had their tongues pulled out, and their
hands cut off, which done, they were beheaded, and their heads set in the
most eminent place to beheld and to serve for a memory for ever: their bodies
burned and consumed to ashes. Where before the finishing of their days, the
poor Gentlewoman showing sign of great repentance, lifting often her eyes up
to heaven, beseeched the assistants well to educate and instruct their children
in the fear of God, laudable virtues and good manners, and turning her voice
to the children, exhorted them to take example at her: that they should
always have the fear of God before their eyes, to render obedience to their
parents and friends: and often to rememorate that pitiful spectacle. Making
their prayers to God to pardon their faults, and to keep them from falling
into such extremities, and wicked accidents.

I la mort tu m'espie.
FINIS.

