THE TRVE WAY OF A CHRISTIAN, TO THE NEW JERUSALEM. OR, A THREE-FOLDE
DEMONSTRATION:

First, of the Excellency of the true and saving Knowledge of Christ; and the
means to attain it: with the Antiquity, necessity, and benefit of
Catechism.

Secondly, of our Union and Communion with Christ, and his Church.

Thirdly, of our new Creation in Christ, by the blessed Spirit.

With diverse Questions, and Cases of Conscience, most comfortable for a
Christian.

Delivered first in Brief, in a Sermon Preached at Paules-Crosse, the first
Sunday in the new year, 1617.

And newly reuised and enlarged by IMMANVEL BOVRNE Master of Arts, and now
Parson of Ashouer in the County of Derby.

LONDON, Printed for George Fayerbeard, and are to be sold at his shop at the
North door of the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Dr. PEIRS, THE NOW Reverend, and worthy
Vicechancellour of the University of Oxenford; and Rector of St. Christophers
near the Royal Exchange in London: And to the Right Worshipful, and all the
rest of the religious and well-willing Parishioners of the same: A daily
increase of saving knowledge, of that Union and Communion with Christ and his
Church; and of that new Creation in Christ, by the blessed Spirit, in the
Canaan of Grace; with the perfection of all these in the Jerusalem of Glory for
ever.
RIGHT Worshipful and the rest beloved: It is a conclusion of St. Augustines,
S. August. in Epist. ad Marcellin.
That there is nothing can be spoken more briefly, nor heard more joyfully,
nor understood more acceptably, nor performed more fruitfully then the duty of
thankfulness. This is true of thankfulness to God; of which St. Augustine
speaks; and true of thankfulness to men, as experience teaches. Of the
first S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. Hom. 51. in Genes.
affirms, Nihil tam gratum Deo vt anima grata and gratias agens: That there
is nothing so acceptable unto God as a thankful mind, nothing more pleasing
in his eyes; S. Chrysostom. Hom. 1 ad pop^lum Antioch.
and therefore he calls thankfulness a rich treasure, yea a heap of riches,
a fountain of good, and a tower of strength, because by the memory of
benefits received, we are strengthened that we fall not back by Ingratitude,
then which nothing is more detestable in the eyes of God, as S. Bernard St.
Bern. sermon. 1. de septem mise^icor^ijs. Sen lib. 2. de benefic cap. 22.
Sabellic. lib. 7. cap. 1. Exempl. Baptista Fulgos. Plutarch. in Apophth.
testifies. And for the second thankfulness to men; not only men (as Augustus
Caesar, (of whom Seneca,) Alexander of Macedon (of whom Sabellicus,) Artaxerxes
that King of Persia, (of whom Fulgosus) with diverse others, (of whom Plutarch)
reports:) But even the brute beasts themselves, may seem to have been
delighted with it, and as it were to take pleasure in it. Witness that story
of the Dragon, which (as Aelianus Aelianus de varia Hist. lib. 13.
relates) was nourished by a Boy in the City of Patras in Achaia, and being
grown big, and driven by the Citizens into the wilderness, (not being
forgetful of him by whom he was nourished) when in process of time the Boy
traveling thorough the wilderness, was set upon by thieves, hearing his
voice, he came presently to assist him, and in thankfulness destroyed the
thieves, and conducted him safe on his journey. Witness that story of the
Panther (of which Geminianus Geminian. de Exempl.
makes mention) which having her young ones fallen into a pit, and (while she
sought for help) meeting with a man whom with fear and fawning she persuaded
to follow her; when he had delivered her young she left him not, but in
thankfulness kept him from danger till he came forth of the deserts. Pierius
Valerianus Hieroglyphicor. lib. 19.
Witness that of the Eagle, which being saved by a Reaper (who came to fetch
water) from the violence of the Serpent that had poisoned the Fountain, and
almost killed her; the Serpent being cut in pieces with his hook, and the
Reaper carrying water to his fellows, the Eagle did fly after him; and when
his fellows had drunk and were poisoned, he being about to drink himself,
she hindered him from drinking, laboring with her wings to break the
pitcher: by which (seeing his fellows some dying, some dead before him) he
perceived her thankfulness unto him for delivering of her from the cruelty of
the Serpent. To conclude, witness that famous History of Androdus the
fugitive servant; Aulus Gellius.
who by error falling into a Lions den, which had a thorn in his foot;
Androdus pulling it out, the Lion nourished him for a time with him; and when
he escaped thence, being (taken for his offense and) cast to a company of
Lions, where that Lion also (being taken by hunters) was kept: The Lion knowing
Androdus his old Chyrurgion, would not suffer him to be devoured, and therefore
both were set at liberty, and the Lion following him every where like a Dog,
was pointed at by all men with this observatio^, Ecce leo hospes hominis, Ecce
homo medicus leonis: Behold a Lion the Host of a man, and behold a man the
Physician of a Lion. Thus you see not only God, but also men and brute beasts,
have been delighted with the duty of thankfulness. To acknowledge therefore
those many favors which I have received, both from you all in general, and
from some in a more especial manner. For from you the learned Pastor (I must
confess) I not only sucked my first milk in the University, but received my
encouragement and furtherance to be planted in this City, and (by a free
election) in this place, wherein (by Gods gracious favor) for these four
years and upwards, I have happily continued. And from you my worthy and ever
honored friends (with whom I have lived,) I have obtained not only a
principal part of my liuelyhood for the present; but (by a most free and noble
gift) a Pastoral charge, wherein I may exercise (with much comfort) my
ministerial office for the time to come. Nor can I here end, for from many
other in particular I have not wanted private favors, witnesses of their
piety to God, and good will toward me. How then can I be silent and suffer my
self to be justly branded with the coal of Ingratitude? To prevent this, I
have adventured to offer (as a Farewell) these my weak meditations unto you,
which though they be far unable to satisfy your deserving, yet may they
remain with you (when I am gone,) as a testimony of my desires. They are a
New-yeeres gift (in respect of the time, and in respect of the subject,) not
too high for any, nor too base for the best, fitting, pleasurable and
profitable for all, if you read, and remember, and practice them with
Conscience. They are a plain and direct plat-forme of the state of a
Christian, showing how we may walk, from the true knowledge of Christ (which
is the foundation of all) to the true Union, and Communion with Christ and his
Church; and in these to that heavenly newness, in and by which we must all
pass through the manifold Labyrinths, and dangerous temptations of our
spiritual enemies; from the old Jericho of this world, to that new Jerusalem
in the kingdom of heaven. And this is the sum of all that we can teach, or
you can desire to learn. Being therefore now (by Gods providence) to take my
leave of you, my last request shall be (both to you and to God for you,) That
not only these meditations, but also all my poor endeauours may by Gods
blessing, so remain with you, that they may work in you all, such a measure of
this excellent knowledge, this blessed Union, Communion and new creation, that
you may have peace, that true peace of Conscience, and comfort of soul for
ever; that the Lord of peace may give you peace always by all means, 2 Thessalonians.
3.16.
and that the gracious presence of God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost. may be with you, bless, preserve, and keep you all in the
kingdom of Grace, to the kingdom of Glory for ever. And thus not ceasing to
pray for you; I rest. From my study at Sr. Samuel Tryons, in the Parish of St.
Christophers. April. 1622.

Yours and every one of yours in Christ Jesus, IMMANVEL BOVRNE.

A brief Glass wherein you may behold the principal Contents of these
ensuing Meditations.
1. Occasion and connection of the text, from whence is observed, 1. THE
Excellency of the true Knowledge of Christ, with the nature and benefit of it.
2. Wherein this true Knowledge consists, in which is set forth the Names, the
Natures, and Offices of Christ. 3. With what kind of Knowledge, a Christian
must know Christ, and in that the difference of true and false Knowledge, and
o^ true professors and hypocrites. 4. Reprehension of those who teach
ignorance, with a lamentation for them which delight in it, and in this what
are the causes of so much Ignorance in the light of the Gospel: first, in the
Hearers: secondly, in the Teachers. 5. The want of Catechism and necessity of
it: And herein the care of the Primitive Church, to use it: the diverse orders
of Christians in those times, with the Industry of religious men in all ages,
to plant this true and Divine Knowledge.
2. Parts of the Text. 1 Part. Branch. 1. 1. Of the name and nature of man,
with his threefold estate in this life. 2. Of the true and false Union and
Communion: The first of the Church: The second of Heretics.
2. 1. How we are in Christ, and Christ in us. 2. How we may know if we be
Christians.
3. 1. How our second Creation is a greater work then our first. 2. What those
are who obtain this Grace. 3. What this new Creation is. 4. Who is the Author
of this change. 5. What kind of creatures we are new made. 6. By what means
we may attain unto it. 7. How we may know whether we be new Creatures. 8.
Comforts against doubting, if we want the signs: Showing the true state of a
Christian in this life. 9. How to know whether temptations of doubting come
from God or from Satan. 10. Many Cordials to answer Satan's objections,
concerning the weakness of our faith and obedience, and to keep us from
despair.

2. Part. Branch. 1. 1. What old things are past away. 2. What errors confuted
therein, and the truth confirmed.
2. 1. What things are become new to a Christian. 2. When this newness in
Christ is required, namely in the Canaan of Grace, that by this we may come to
the Jerusalem of Glory.



THE TRVE WAY OF A CHRISTIAN, TO THE NEW JERUSALEM. OR, A THREE-FOLDE
DEMONSTRATION: First, of the Excellency of the true and saving knowledge of
Christ; and the means to attain it: with the Antiquity, necessity, and
benefit of Catechism. Secondly, of our Union and Communion with Christ; and
his Church. Thirdly, of our new Creation in Christ, by the blessed Spirit. With
diverse Questions, and Cases of Conscience, most comfortable for a Christian.

2. Cor. 5. verse. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature:
old things are past away, Behold, all things are become new.
Divine and profound St. Augustine, Sanct. Augustine. (Hipponens. Epis^op circa
ann. Dom. 420. sicut ipse in Epist. ad Isichium 80.) Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
that worthy Bishop and holy Father of the Church of God, after many devout
prayers, humble supplications, and bitter tears, with strong cries of the
Spirit for peace of conscience, and comfort of soul, (in that his most
terrible combat, the Flesh rebelling against the Spirit, the Old man against
the New) he received that divine Oracle, that voice from heaven (for so he
conceived it) Toll lege, toll lege. Take up and rea^e, take up and read: by
which he was sent to the Sacred Scriptures, as to a guide in distress, to a
Physician in the sickness of his soul (while he lay groaning unto God as it
were in an agony, with Quandiu, quandiu cras and cras? Quare non modo? quare
non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae? How long, how long to morrow to morrow?
why not now? why not in this very hour should there not be an end of my
sinful impuritie?) And being obedient to that heavenly counsel, he took up
the book of Saint Paul's Epistles, which he had laid down by his friend
Alipius, and having opened it, he read those words, of the Apostle (upon which
he first cast his eyes) Not in rioting and drunkenness, Romans 13.13, 14.
not in chambering and wa^^tonnesse, not in strife and envying. But put ye on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lust thereof. And closing the Book again he concludes with this resolution
(as he himself expresses it in that eight book of his Confessions, chapt.
the twelfth) Nec vltra volui legere nec opus erat, Neither would I read any
further, nor was it needful, for that was sufficient to move that good Father
to deny himself, and to follow his Savior, to forsake the first Adam, and be
reformed according to the image of the second, to be converted and become a
new-man in Christ. In like manner (Right Honorable, right Worshipful and
beloved) or not much unlike to this (though not in the Oracie and heavenly
vision, yet in the effect and conclusion) desiring at this present, to find
out both for you and my self, as a word of exhortation, so a word of
consolation in his time and season: I opened the book of Saint Paul's
Epistles, and having found out the words of my Text; I reresolued with St.
Augustine to cease from seeking. Nec vltra volui legere nec opus erat, neither
would I read any further, nor was it needful: for this one Text is instar
omnium, as it were one of a thousand, fitting and convenient both for the time
and persons of this Assembly. First, for the time, for now in respect of the
course of Nature, that double faced Ianus looks two ways, backe-wards to the
year that is past, and forwards to the year that is to come; beholding at
once both the old and the new: And in respect of the order of grace, now is the
time when our blessed Savior (being willingly subjected to the Law for us)
received that Sacrament of Circumcision as a type and sign of our new
creation; of putting off the old man, and being clothed with the new: so that
herein my Text is parallel, for you have in it, first an incitement to
newness: Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature; and secondly
a recitement both of old and new, Old things are past away, and behold, all
things are become new. Again, fitting it is for the Persons; for so necessary
to all is this new creation, that without it, there is no happiness, no
salvation to be found. So convenient then, yea so profitable is my Text, that
if you would but read it over, 2. King. 5.14.
and that seven times (as Naaman washed him in Jordan) it might prove a
motive sufficient upon due meditation, to work in you a desire of this new
creation: in a word, so fitting, so plentiful, so excellent it is; that if you
could learn it perfectly, both by heart and by hand, both inwardly in your
souls, and outwardly in your lives, it were the best New-yeeres-gift that I
could give, or you could receive. But because all that can read and hear,
cannot rightly understand and apply (seeing it is necessary that David should
have a Nathan, and the Eunuch a Philip to interpret, 2. Sam. 12.7. Act 8.31.
) I will labor to unfold unto you both the Gammar, and Divinity; the Theory
and Practicke of my Text. Wherein if you make a diligent enquiry, you shall
find many excellent lessons worthy your most serious attention, such as are
not ambiguous and intricate like the Oracles at Delphos, but plain and easy
to be understood; not diffused and large like the Sybils leaves, but
compendious and brief to be remembered; not curious to busy your brains like
the Ephesians books, but necessary to be known and practiced for the
information of your judgments, and reformation of your lives. If you will see
this, cast your eyes upon the words:

Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past
away. Behold, all things are become new.

Occasion.
The blessed Apostle Saint Paul, that great and learned Doctor of the Gentiles,
having in the verse before my Text, set down a manifestation of that true and
spiritual knowledge of man in general, and of Christ in particular: which was
in him and ^is fellow Saints, arising from the true use of the end of Christ's
death, from which he inferres it: Henceforth know we no man after the flesh:
yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now know we him so no
more: He does again in my Text infer a conclusion concerning the state and
condition of such a Christian; Aquinas ex praemissis concludit, etc.
endued with such a knowledge: Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature: old things are past away. Behold, all things are become new.

Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature:

Old things are passed away.

Behold, all things are become new.



1. First, a coniunctiue proposition; for it consists of two. The one: If any
man be in Christ.

The other: He is a new creature.

2. And a coniunctiue confirmation: for it consists of a twofold Reason.

The One: Old things are past away.

The other: Behold all things are become new. Subdiuision.


In the Coniunctiue proposition, there is first that Therefore if any man be in
Christ.

And secondly, that which supplyeth the place of the He is a new creature.

In the first, Christ is Subiectum in quo; The subject in man who was sometime
the old Adam, is said to be; If any man be in Christ.

In the second Man is Subiectum de quo; the subject, of Christ, who is the new
Adam, is likewise praedicated, He (that is, that man) is a new creature.

Again, in the Coniunctiue confirmation you have Old things are past away.

Secondly, a Renouation or beginning, Behold, all And after this manner you
have a brief Anatomy of the whole body of my Text. Yet to express it more
lively unto you: The first part of my Man and every Christian man: Therefore if
any man;

Secondly, the vine it self, which is Christ himself, If

And last of all, the fruit of all, the pleasant grapes, If any man be in
Christ he is a new creature.

Again, in the second part of my Text, the double confirmation. There is a
twofold time of the year expressed. The first is the Autumn (or rather
winter) when Old things are past away.

The second the Spring, when every thing does bud forth in abundance, Cant.
2.11, 12, 13.
when the flowers appear on the earth, and the time of the singing of birds is
come, when the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land, when the fig tree
puts forth her green figs, and the vine with the tender grapes give out
their smell; when the earth having worn out her old garments, begins to be
clothed anew with grass and flourishing green herbs, when all things
change themselves into a new estate. And this in the end of the verse: Behold,
all things are become new.

Now of these in their order, and first of the first, the vineyard, in that of
the vine-tree, and of the first thing I noted therein, the Branches, which are
man and every Christian man.

Therefore if any man.

1. Part. The 1. Branch.
But before I come to this, I meet with an-illatiue, a conjunction, a
Therefore, which like a porter takes me by the hand and stays me in the
Entrance: Therefore if any man. This Therefore (like the needle in a
sunne-dyall) looks two ways, not only forwards to my Text, but backwards to
the occasion in the verse before, which is the ground from which my text is
inferred, and upon which the whole frame is builded.

Occasion. Beza annotat. Gualterus. Cornelius Cornelij a lapide. S. Ch^ysost.
Vatabl. S. August lib. 9 contra Faust. ca^ 7 C^rnelius a lapide.
Henceforth (says the Apostle) know we no man after the flesh: that is, we
esteem or approve of no man that lives carnally according to the corruptions
of the flesh, or according to the carnal observations and ceremonies of the
old Law, because we know that Christ is the end and fulfilling thereof. Or we
esteem not carnal things, nor of men according to these, be they never so
profitable or pleasurable, riches, beauty, friends, kindred, or the like. Our
judgments now are spiritual, nor carnal as they were; yea though we have
known Christ after the flesh, that is, after a carnal manner, glorying in him
as our kinsman according to the flesh, Chrysostom, Theod. Synodus 7. General.
Act. 6.
being of the same nation and stocke-with us, or esteeming of him but as of a
mortal man subject to infirmities; yet now know we him so no more, but
spiritually as the Son of God and Savior of the world: and the reason is,
because we are changed, our knowledge is changed, and we are become new men in
Christ. So that hence does appear the excellency of the true knowledge of
Christ, The excellency of the true knowledge of Christ.
from whence the Apostle inferres our new creation. Because ordinarily (amongst
other causes) the true knowledge of Christ is a special cause and means
thereof. For our new creation is a fruit of faith. God (says Peter) put no
difference between us and them (speaking of the Jews and Gentiles which
believed) (...), purifying (or regenerating) their hearts by faith, Act. 15.9.
And so the word is used by Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5.26. Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, (...), cleansing,
purifying, or regenerating with the washing of water by the word: and this
learned Zanchius Zanchius in Ephesians. cap. 5.26. Calvinus Institutionu^ lib. 3.
cap. 3. Vtrumque fide consequamu^, vita scil. novitatem and reconciliationem
gratuitam, neque tamen quu^ resipiscentiae originem ad fidem referimus, ^patium
aliquod temporis somniamus quo ipsam partutiat, etc.
confirms, interpeting the word (...), of our regeneration, in his
Commentaries upon that Text; and indicious Calvin is a second witness to
confirm this truth, rightly averring that regeneration is a fruit of faith,
that we obtain it by faith (the spirit of God working by faith in our hearts:)
that faith is before it in order, not in time (as he explaineth himself in the
third book of his Institutions, chapter the third.) Now faith cannot be
without knowledge, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
Romans 10.14. And therefore much less regeneration, which is the the companion,
yea the fruit and effect of saving faith. Yea further, as the blessed spirit
himself is the internal efficient cause of our new birth, kindling faith in
us, and by the blood of Jesus (apprehended and applied by faith) purging and
washing our consciences from dead works, and framing in us that image of
Christ in the inner man (as Saint Paul affirms, Titus 3. 5.) so are the
Sacraments also (as Saint Peter) 1. Pet. 3.21. Yea and the word of God and true
knowledge thereof. For we are borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives, and abides for ever, 1. Pet.
1.23. As the Poets feigned of Medusaes head, Hesiod. Ovid. Metam. 4 Aug. lib.
18. de Civit. Dei, cap. 13. Diodorus lib. 4.
that it was of power to turn the beholders into snakes, so, much more true is
it of the true knowledge of Christ reveiled in the word; it is a powerful
means by the operation of the Spirit to metamorphize our natural deformity,
to change our corrupt affections, and to raise us from the death of sin to
the life of righteousness.

Therefore our Savior calls this knowledge life, yea and life eternal, John
17.3. This is life eternal (...), that they know thee the only true God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. That is, this is the means and only
ordinary means to obtain happiness. For, there is no other name under heaven by
which we can be saved, Acts 4.12. It is the name, the faith, and the true
knowledge of Christ that brings that life unto us. Via ad Deum est Scientia,
(says Hugo Hugo de instructione nouitiorum.
) The way to God is by knowledge, by knowledge we pass to holy discipline, by
holy discipline to heavenly goodness, by heavenly goodness to eternal
blessedness for evermore. And Saint Bernard S. Bernard de ordine vitae.
well observes, that until a man by faith do know his Creator, ignorance the
mother of all vices possesses his soul: and thereupon he notes a twofold
knowledge necessary to salvation.

The first is the knowledge of God, the second the knowledge of thy self.
Because as from the knowledge of thy self there proceeds a fear of the
majesty of God, and from the knowledge of God, a love of him who is the
chiefest good, so from the ignorance of thy self there springs forth pride,
and from the ignorance of God there flows desperation. And what Saint Bernard
attributes to the ignorance and knowledge of God in general, is true also of
the ignorance or knowledge of Christ in particular: from the true knowledge of
Christ there proceeds a love of Christ (yea, a reciprocal love, not only of
thee to Christ, but of Christ to thee,) and from the ignorance of Christ,
desperation destroys the soul.

Si Christum been scis, nihil est si caetera nescis;
Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
If thou know Christ aright, it is nothing though thou be ignorant of all
things else: And if thou be ignorant of Christ, all other knowledge is nothing
auailable to attain thy wished felicity? Would thou walk the way to
heaven? Christ is the way by which thou may walk in safety. Would thou
not be deceived in thy journey? Christ is the truth to guide thee. Would
thou not faint, or dye in thy way? Christ is the life, to comfort and
strengthen thee to life everlasting, as Saint Augustine sweetly upon those
words of our Savior, Ioh. 14.6. August. in Ioh. cap. 14.6.


And thus likewise Saint Ambrose Ambr. lib. de virginitate.
excellently in his book of Virginity.

If thou desire to cure the wounds of thy soul; Christ is the Physician that
can heal thee. If thou be scorched with the burning fever of thy sins;
Christ is that fountain of living water, that will refresh thee. If thou be
weak, and feeble, and want help; Christ is that virtue and power, that is
able and willing to succor thee. If thou fear death, Christ is the life. If
thou desire heaven, Christ is the way. If thou be pressed down with the
burden of thy sins, Christ is that righteousness, that will take thy yoke
of sin upon him, Mat. 11.28.
(which is heavy) and put his yoke of righteousnsse upon thee, (which is
light) to ease thee. If thou flyest darkness, Christ is the light to lighten
thine eyes that they steep not in death, Ioh. 1.9.
yea that light who lightneth every man that comes into the world. If thou
seek food, Christ is that bread that came down from heaven to feed and
nourish thy soul and body to eternal glory, where is freedom from evil, E^t
omnibus omnia, quia isto ha^^o omnia habentur; and sine ipso nihil est quicquid
est. Chrysostom. ibid.
and fullness of good for evermore. Quid plura charissimi? What shall I say
more, beloved? (as the Father concludes) Christ is all things to all men,
because he that has Christ, he has all things; and he that wants Christ, had
he the whole world, he has nothing. All this we have by Christ, and the means
of having Christ; and this, is the true knowledge of Christ (of which our
Apostle speaks.) So that here you see again the excellency of this true
knowledge of Christ, from whence he inferres our new creation. And further,
that of Saint Bernard Bernard. super Cant. sermon 37. Ornat animam and eruditeam,
and facit vt p^ssitetiam alios erudire.
is truly verified again of this divine knowledge, this knowledge of Christ.
It decketh and garnisheth the soul, and instructs it, and makes it able to
teach others also. And hence Saint Paul did so highly esteem it, that he
counted all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Philip.
3.8. So that as Plutarch Plutarch. aduersus Colotem.
relates of that wise counsel, (...), Know thy self, that amongst all those
sayings which were written or given by the Delphian Oracles, that was generally
accounted to be most divine; so may we conclude of the knowledge of Christ,
that amongst all those things which are given from God for man to know and
believe, there is none more excellent, more necessary, more comfortable, then
is this divine and saving knowledge of Christ.

Wherein the true knowledge of Christ consists. Answ.
What is this knowledge, may some man demand, or wherein does it consist which
is so excellent, so necessary, so comfortable for every Christian soul?

And I answer, it consists, first in the knowledge of Christ's person, and
secondly of his offices. His person is manifested first by his names, and
secondly by his natures: His names in the new Testament are commonly two; The
1. Jesus, which signifies a Savior, so interpreted for he shall save his
people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. Name Jesus. Mat. 1.21.
A name that is full of joy, full of comfort, and full of unspeakable
gladness to the soul of a Christian. Jesus, it is honey in the mouth, Bernard.
in Cant.
music in the ear, and a iubile of rejoicing in the heart, (as Saint Bernard
sweetly:) a name under which no man may despair, since the mercy of God in
Jesus is abundantly sufficient for all that believe in him.

This is his firist name. His second is Christ. We have (says Peter) which is,
Name Christ.
being interpreted, the Christ, Ioh. 1.41. (...), that is, Vnctus, Christ the
anointed, yea anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm.
45.8. Christ is that anointed who gives freely to us that ointment of the
Spirit, 1. Ioh. 2.20.
by whom we have comfort in the beloved. And as his names are, so is his nature
gracious and full of goodness. And this is twofold, Divine and Humane. First
Christ is God, the second person in the blessed Trinity, that (...), that
eternal word of his Father, begotten of his Father, from all eternity, Ioh.
1.1. The nature of Christ is twofold. 1. Divine nature. Athanasius. Creed, Est
patri (...). Zanchius in Epist. 1. Ioh. c. 1. loc. 2. Eusebius. ecclesi. Hist. lib
10. cap. 1. Luke 1.35. Galat. 4 4.


Coequall and Consubstantiall, that is, of one substance with the Father and
the Spirit, as it was decreed in the Nicen Council against Arius the
Heretic. And so the Scripture affirms him to be the Eternal God, Esaias 9.6.
The brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his person,
Heb. 1.3. And necessary it was that he should be God. First in respect of that
intolerable weight of evil with which mankind was oppressed, which could be
taken off by no creature in the world, and therefore is made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor, 1.30. And
therefore the Redeemer must needs be God. Yea Christ is not only God but Man,
which is his second nature. 2 Humane nature.
For (...), The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth, John 1.14. Ditata est illa humanitas propter vnione^ ad verbum omni
sapientia and gratia, says Damascen: Damaescen. li. 3. De Fide, ca. 22.
For that admirable union of the Flesh with the Word; the humanity of Christ
was enriched with all wisdom and grace. And expedient it was that Christ
should be man, that the nature of man might satisfy the justice of God for
man, who has sinned against God. Therefore he took not upon him the nature
of Angels, but the seed of Abraham (says S. Paul) Heb. 2.16. Lastly he is
(...), God and man in one person; Athanasius Creed. Apostles Creed.
God of the substance of his Father before all worlds, and man of the substance
of his mother, conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of the blessed Virgin in
time, according to the Scriptures.

The Offices of Christ. 1 Prophetical. Mat. 5.1. Ioh. 10.11. Mat. 28.19.
Zanchius in 1. Ioh. c. 1. loc. 3. Jesus verus Messiah, id est, rex ill^,
sacerdos and prophetae vnicus promissus in lege. Bucan. loc com. Alsted.
Theolog. Catechet. 2 His Priestly Office. John 1.29. 1. John 2.2. Hebrews
10.10. Zanchius in Epist. ad Philip. Capit. 2. Vtraque pars obedientiae
Christi, id est, tota eius obedientia nostra facta est, cessitque in salutem
nostram.
His offices are three. The first is his Prophetical office, by which, first,
in his own Person, and secondly, by his Ministers, he has reueiled the Gospel
(that is, that secret counsel of his Father concerning the redemption of
mankind) unto us. For this was one end why God sent his Son, that he should
preach the Gospel to the poor, Esaias 61.1. And in this respect Christ is that
Prophet foretold by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto
thee a Prophet from the midst of thy brethren like unto me, unto him shall ye
hearken.

Again, as Christ is our Prophet, so is he also our Priest, or has also a
Sacerdotall Office, by which he being that Mediator between God and man, by
his Active and Passive Obedience, by his doing and suffering, he has perfectly
fulfilled the Law for us, fully appeased the wrath of his Father, and
reconciled us unto him, so that now God the Father beholding us in his Son
Christ, accepts us as just and righteous for his sake. Heb. 10 19. Mat. 3.17.
And thus is Christ our Redeemer, our Savior, our Priest, who by offering up
that Sacrifice of himself, once for all, Romans 3.25.
(as a sweet smelling incense of reconciliation for our redemption) has made
an atonement to God for us. The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek, Psalm. 110.4. And by this his
Priesthood, of servants we are become sons, Galat. 4.4.
and of bondslaues freemen in him.

Lastly, Christ is our King. First, by his power, 3 The Kingly Office of
Christ. Ezekiel. 37.24. Dan. 9.25. Revel. 19.16.
by which he rules over all creatures. For all power is given unto him both in
heaven and in earth, Math. 28.18.

Secondly, by his grace, by which peculiarly he defends and governs his
Church, making it rich in earth, with abundance of grace, and rich in heaven,
with abundance of glory, defending it outwardly by his power, and guiding it
inwardly by his blessed Spirit. Ioh. 14.16.17. Psalm. 2.9. Psalm. 20.1. Mat.
11.28. 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57.
And in this respect properly he is said to be a King: First, because he has
vindicated and redeemed his Church, which before Satan kept in thraldom.
Secondly, because he has overcome that king or prince of darkness the
Devil. And thirdly, because all those that do fly unto him for succor, he
defends them here, and makes them blessed for ever hereafter. And in this
respect, that is most true which was spoken by the Prophet, That he has set
his King (Christ) upon his holy hill of Sion, Ps. 2.6. And thus you see briefly
what is to be known of Christ, both in respect of his Person, and of his
Office.

But how or with what kind of knowledge must we With what kind of knowledge we
must know Christ. Answer. A twofold knowledge of God and Christ
before this doubt be fully cleared?

And to resolve this question, we must know that there is a twofold (...),
cognition or knowledge of God and of Christ. The first is a true, certain, and
perfect knowledge, and this is that by which a man does truly, certainly, and
perfectly, that is, not in part only, and aenigmatically, or as in a glass
darkely, but in whole, and most clear manner, know God, and Christ as he is
God and man in one person. Zanchius in 1. Ioh. cap. 2.3. v.
And with this perfect and absolute knowledge in this world, only Christ as he
was man did know God. But with this knowledge (in this life) Christians do not
know God, neither can they know him thus, till the life to come. Nay, with this
full, perfect, and absolute knowledge, Christ is not known of us, especially
as he is God, or as united God and man in one person, in that his most
wonderful and admirable union. For in this life we are not fully united to
Christ our head, neither shall be till we be glorified with him in heaven. And
therefore in this life that of the Apostle may be truly verified both of the
knowledge of God and of Christ, For now we see through a glass, darkely; but
then face to face: now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am
known, 1. Cor. 13.12.

Secondly, therefore there is an imperfect knowledge, but yet it is true and
certain, yea, and evident also, though not with the evidence of sense and
natural reason, yet with the evidence of faith and spiritual understanding.
And this is that by which all the elect being regenerated by the Spirit of God,
do in this life know and acknowledge God and Christ. That of the Prophet is
truly verified in this: They shall know me, from the least of them to the
greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquities, and J
will remember their sin no more. Jeremiah 31.34.

Zanchius in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 4.
And as there are two sorts of men in the Church who profess Christ: The first
of Hypocrites, who do brag indeed of the knowledge of Christ, and in words do
confess him to be true God, and true man, and a Savior, but in their deeds
they deny him, always living in their sins, and never repenting; yea,
howsoever they profess an obedience to the Law of God, performing (or rather
seeming outwardly to perform) some of the Commandments, yet in their minds
and hearts they love not the Law of God, yea, rather they hate it; nor are they
delighted with the Law, but rather loathe and dislike it, they themselves being
but Hypocrites, and their profession mere Hypocrisy.

The second kind, are of the elect and regenerate, (though their regeneration
in this life be imperfect) and these are they who do so know Christ and
believe in him, Psalm. 51. Mat. 26.75. Luke 15.21. Nam ^isi Deu^ ex animo
diligunt, and sincere cordis affectu: multam tamen adhuc cordis and animae
partem occupatam habent carnis cupiditatibus, quibus retrahuntur and ^istuntur
quo minus citato ad deum cursu pergant. Calvin. Institut. lib. 3. cap 19. sect.
4. Romans 7. Quid hic faciciam cum sentiunt nihil se minus qua^ legem praestare?
volunt, aspirant, conantur, Sed nihil ea qua decei perfectione. Calvin. lib. 3.
ca. 19. sect 4. A twofold imperfect kno l^dge.
that they do study and endeavor truly and sincerely to compose and frame
their lives according to his will and example; and if at any time they fall
into sin, into the breach of Gods Commandments, by their own weakness,
and the tentations of their enemies, the World, the Flesh, or the Devil: yet
with David, or Peter, or the Prodigal, they are truly sorrowful, and
unfeignedly repenting, they return again to God the Father of mercy, to
Christ their most gracious redeemer, and being reassured of the free remission
of their sins in him, they rise as it were from death to life, from sin to
righteousness; and being inflamed with a love of God and of Christ, with a
love and delight in his law (though imperfect also) they do strive again, and
earnestly endeavor to fulfill the same: and although they see that they are
not able to keep the commandments as they should, (often complaining with
Paul of their own weakness) yet leave they not off to desire, (though this
also be sometime eclypsed and weakened, and not all times alike) daily striving
to put off the old man, and to be clothed with the new. As there are these 2.
kinds of men (I say) the one imperfect hypocrites, hated of God: the other
imperfect Christians, like good soldiers in the Church militant, striving,
fighting, combating for this perfection; and beloved of God in Christ: so is
there a twofold imperfect knowledge. The first a bare naked historical,
hypocritical knowledge, cold, carnal, dead, fruitless and without efficacy,
residing only in the mind and vnderst^nding, and showing it self in words,
but neither pi r^ing the heart, nor by renouation of life stirring up that man
in whom it is, to the good of his neighbor, or glory of God. And this in the
Scripture is called a dead faith by Saint James, Iam. 2.20. Mat. 13.4, 5, 6
a temporary faith by our Savior, and an hypocritical faith by Saint Paul;
because it is a knowledge without practice, a faith not working by love, like
that of the servant who knows his masters will, but does it not, Luke 12, 47:
or that of the Gentiles who did know God, but did not glorify him as God, Romans
1.21. Or lastly like that of the Devil, Mar. 1.24. 1. Cor. 8.1.
who did know Christ, confessed him to be the holy One of God, but was nothing
bettered by his knowledge. And this knowledge edifieth not, but puffs up,
Luke 12.47.
says the Apostle, and in stead of comfort brings confusion to the soul:
For he that knows the will of his Master, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. There is a second knowledge therefore, which though it be
imperfect, yet it is true, certain and sound, lively, operative, and
effectual; a spiritual knowledge working in us a love of God and of Christ, a
delight in his law, and a desire to fulfill it, such a knowledge, Qua
immutamur, ita vt quae novimus opere conemur exprimere (as Peter Martyr Pet.
Martyr loc. Com.
well describes it) by which we are changed and become new men, so that those
things which we know inwardly in our minds and understandings, we endeavor to
express outwardly in our lives and conuersations; Mat. 7.21.
This is the knowledge of the Saints, who strive not to be hearers of the word
only, but doers, as Saint James exhorts, James 1.22.

And as Aquinas Aquinas prim. part. sum. quaest. 12. art. 13. Vide Suar. in
Thom. 1. Cor. 2.8, 9, 10, etc.
and the Schools dispute the question concerning the knowledge of God, whether
by grace we have a more high and excellent knowledge then that which is
obtained by natural reason, and (agreeable to Saint Paul) conclude the
question affirmatively: so may we more fully conclude of the knowledge of
Christ, That there is none obtained by natural reason, or if any, it is only
that carnal, naked, and speculatiue knowledge which is unprofitable.

But for this practical, this sound and saving knowledge, it is not only
obtained, but also increased by grace, and by grace it feeds and nourishes
our souls in faith, and hope, and charity, to eternal life.

And thus you see what is to be known concerning Christ, and what this
spiritual knowledge of Christ is, of which our Apostle speaks (in the
occasion of my text) which is so necessary, so profitable, 2. Cor. 5.16.
so comfortable for every Christian soul.

I come now to the use, that I may build somewhat upon this foundation worth
your observing.

First then, if knowledge, 1. Teachers of Ignorance, justly condemned. D. Col.
in Confer. with M. Jewel. See Jewels reply Article 127 page 471. Nicola. Cusan.
Exercit lib 6. vbi Ecclesia.
and the knowledge of Christ be so excellent; how much are those to be blamed,
who are not ashamed to preach ignorance, or at least in their practice to
muffle the people in their superstitious blindness, and hide from them this
knowledge, yea this most excellent knowledge of Christ, making ignorance the
mother of devotion, and unreasonable obedience without knowledge (as a horse
obeys his master) to be the most perfect and commendable? And with this did
the Pope in old time hoodwinke and blindfold the Princes of the world, using
them as the Philistims did Sampson, putting out the eyes (not of their bodies)
but of their souls, so enthralling them in that black dungeon of darkness,
that they could not see their miserable bondage, O miseres Imperatores and
sc^^lares Principes qui ha^ and alia sustinetis, and vos s^ruos Ecclesia
facitis. Pet. Ferra. i^n. Citat. ab li^ ^v. inter testes ^ e^tatis. Revel.
^6.13.
but willingly (or rather by constraint through the pride and ambition of
Antichrist) subiecting themselves to be his vassals, to hold his sti^rop, to
lead his horse, to kneel down and kiss his foot, and like lackies to run
and wait on him at his pleasure. For that was their hour and the power of
darkness, as our Savior once said to the chief Priests and Elders their
predecessors, Luke 22.53. And such has since been the practice of those
Romish locusts, those frogs that crawle out of the mouth of the Beast,
binding the people in ignorance by their prayers in an unknown tongue: setting
them their Aue-maries and Pater-nosters, which they understood not; and keeping
the Sacred Scriptures, the Key of knowledge from them: Contrary to the command
of Christ who bids, Search the Scriptures: John 5.39. to the practice of the
Apostles; who without question preached in a tongue not unknown to the people
to whom they spoke. For to what end else had they that admirable gift of
tongues bestowed upon them, Acts 2.4. or why did Saint Paul commend it, 1 Cor.
14.2.
and exhort so earnestly unto it? And contrary to the judgment, doctrine, and
practice of the ancient Fathers. For why else did St. Hierome translate the
Scriptures into the Dalmaticke or Slauon tongue, Alphonsus de Haeres. lib. 1.
ca. 13.
(as Alphonsus de Castro confesses) if he would not have had the people to
have understood them? Or why did S. Augustine exhort the Priests of his time,
to correct the errors of their Latin speech? and give them this reason (which
agrees with that of the Apostle) Vt Populus ad id quod plane intelligit, dicat
Amen; 1 Cor. 14.16.
That the people unto the thing which they plainly understand may say, Amen; if
he would have had the people ignorant, or to be blind-folded for want of this
divine and excellent knowledge? In a word, why does the Apostle exhort, That
the word of God should dwell plentifully in the Colossians: August. de
Catechizandes rudibus, cap. 9.
In all wisdom, teaching and exhorting one another in Psalms and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in their hearts? Coloss. 3.16. (which S.
Hierom understands of the lay people:) or why did Origin wish, Hiero. in cap.
3. Epist. ad Colos. Origin. in Esaias. hom. 2. Chrysostom. Hom. Epist ad Colos.
Chrysostom. Hom. 2 in Ioh.
that all would do that which is written, Search the Scriptures? or S.
Chrysostom, so earnestly exhort, Audite seculares omnes, etc. Hear ye men of
the world, get ye the Bible that most wholesome remedy for the soul. And
again, Hearken not hereunto only in the Church, but also at home, let the
husband with the wife, let the father with the child talk together of these
matters, and both too and fro let them enquire, and give their judgments, and
would to God they would begin this good custom? Why, I say, do these Fathers
so earnestly commend Knowledge, if Ignorance were better, or that it were good
to lull the people asleep with their faith in gross, to believe as the Church
believes, with their knowledge in gross? to be contented with that which is
locked up in the Priests closet; to bar them from the Scriptures, the Church,
or whatsoever may bring them out of darkness into light, or from the power of
Satan and his Antichrist, unto God? In a word, if this were the mind of these
holy Fathers (whose disciples these men would make the world believe, they only
are) why then are they contrary to the Fathers in practice, depriving the
people of the means of knowledge, and daily spreading the veil of ignorance
over their hearts? Certainly I can give no other reason but that of S.
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Opere imperfect. Hom. 44.
which is most proper unto them; Haeretici sacerdotes claudunt ianuas
veritatis, etc. These Heretical Priests shut up the gates of the Truth, for
they know that if the Truth be once laid open, their Church shall be forsaken,
and they from their pontificiall dignity, shall be humbled and brought down
to the common and base estate of the people. August. in Psalm. 33.
And that of S. Augustine is truly verified not only of the people who are
their disciples, but of the Priests themselves, Erat in illis regnum
Ignorantiae, id est, regnum erroris. There was (nay there is) in them the
kingdom of Ignorance, that is, (not of Devotion but) of Error; or if not of
ignorance, then certainly of malice. For as it is related of Caligula that he
set golden loaves, and all other services of gold before his guests and bade
them eat; so these like Tyrants over the consciences of poor Christians, set
their Golden-Latine-seruice before the people; but hoodwinke their eyes, and
manacle their hands; that though they hear, yet can they not see, nor
understand, and therefore neither receive, nor taste of it, neither be moved
to repentance, nor get any comfort or quiet to their conscience: and then what
profit can it be unto them? For what profits a golden key, August. de
Doctrina Christiana lib 4. cap. 11. Quid p^edest Clauis aurea si aperire quod
volumus non potest? aut quid obest lignea si hoc potest, quando nihil quaerimus
nisi aperire quod clausum erat? 2. Sam. 16.10
s^ith S. Augustine, if it cannot open, that we desire to be opened? or what
hurts a wooden key if it be able to open, seeing we desire nothing but that
the thing that is shut may be opened unto us? Knowledge in our mother tongue by
reading of the Scriptures, by coming to the Church, by hearing of Divine
Service and word of God preached, is far better then ignorance in the Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew which is not understood. To conclude this then, as David once
speak to Abishai, upon another occasion: (...), What have I to do with you, or
what business is there between me and you, ye sons of Zeruiah? (for so much
the Hebrew imports) So let every true Christian say to these Deceivers, who
creep into men's houses, 2. Tim. 3.6.
and lead aside simple women; who with signs and lying wonders, bewitch their
hearers that they embrace darkness rather then light, (because they receive
not the love of the truth, 2 These. 2.10.
that they might be saved;) What have we to do with you yea teachers of lies?
for what fellowship has light with darkness? or the sons of knowledge with
the professors of ignorance? It is not ignorance but knowledge, yea this true
knowledge of Christ, that brings true joy and gladness to the soul.

2 Those that delight in Ignorance, to be lamented.
In the second place therefore, I cannot but grieve at those, who living in the
clear light and Sunshine of the Gospel, wilfully shut their eyes, barring
themselves from the light, and loving darkness, as the delight of their
soul; who grope at noone day, and hug the mists of blindness, going on in
their idle and careless security, lest they should see the light, and
understand the paths in which they tread: who though they make an outward show
of Christianity, yet are they zealous in seeking for honors, riches, and the
trash of the world; but careless and negligent in the search of divine
wisdom. But does not Wisdom cry? Prou. 8.1.
and understanding utter her voice? How long ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity? and ye fools hate knowledge? Prou. 1.22.
Is not the merchandise of wisdom better then silver, Prou. 3.14.15
and the gain thereof then fine gold? Is not knowledge more precious then
rubies? or what can thou desire that may be compared to her? Why then in the
midst of knowledge do thou live in ignorance? why do thou not seek after
her, as for silver, and desire her more then the choicest gold? O beloved, how
miserable are these men, who having lived many years under the Ministry of
the Gospel, are yet ignorant of this knowledge of Christ, Heb. 6.1.
and had need to be instructed, even in the first principles of the Oracles of
God! who are ignorant and wilfully ignorant, which adds to their sin. A
twofold Ignorance.
For there is a twofold ignorance; the first a simple or single ignorance,
which is that deprivation of knowledge, 1. Simple Ignorance.
or defect of understanding, or blindness of the mind, which did rise and
spring from the fall of our first parents, and was derived to us through the
muddy channel of our natural corruption. Of this S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2.14. The
natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, nor can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. Thus many a man is ignorant of
the Gospel, because he has never been taught it; And this is that darkness
in which natural men delight and sport themselves like a child that is borne
in a dungeon, because they know not the benefit of the light. But this
ignorance is banished by education, and the excellent means of divine
instruction. 2. Gross and careless Ignorance.
Secondly, there is Ignorantia crassa and supina, A gross careless and
wilful ignorance, such as that of the Scribes and Pharisees, who although they
did hear the preaching of Christ, and saw his miracles, yet would they not
believe nor be instructed. For the god of this world had blinded their eyes,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. And of
this one well observes, Qui ex crassa and supina ignorantia peccat, D. Case in
A.B.C. Moral. Philos.
duplici poena dignus est, vna pro voluntaria ignorantia, altera pro scelere
quod commisit. He that sins of a gross and careless ignorance, deserves a
double punishment, one for his wilful ignorance, and another for the
wickedness he has committed. And this for the most part is that kind of
ignorance that reigns now in the world; because they esteem not of the
ordinances of God, nor desire truly as they ought to be instructed by the^.
Therefore they endeavor not to know God nor Christ as they should, but delight
rather in ignorance; for which cause God oftentimes gives them up (as he did
the Gentiles) to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not comely,
Romans 1.28. and having their cogitations darkened, they work all uncleanness
even with greediness, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. August. Tom. 7. contra Julian. Pelag.
This ignorance, was the punishment of sin, and sin it self, and the cause
of sin, as S. Augustine concludes out of the Scriptures. And therefore there
is no cause why men should delight in ignorance or in the light of knowledge
cover themselves with the thick clouds of ignorance as it were with a garment.
It is S. Chrysostomes S. Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss.
observation, That this is the cause of all evils, that the Scriptures are
unknown; and it may well be verified of the want of this divine knowledge,
this knowledge of Christ which is comprehended in the Scripture, as the pearl
is closed in the shell. Ignorance is the mother of error (says Fulgentius.
Fulgentius Episcop. lib. 1. fol. 29. Council. Tolet. 4. can. 24. Ant. in Meliss.
part. 1. ser. 50. Max. sermon. 17.
) To whom the fourth Toletan Council agrees, canon the 24. Socrates being
asked, what was the most beautiful creature? he answered: A man decked and
garnished with learning; And Diogenes, being demanded what burden the earth did
bear most heavy? He answered, An ignorant and illiterate man. If these
Philosophers did thus judge of the excellency of knowledge, and the vileness
of ignorance; how should Christians blush for shame, that having lived so long
in the School of Christ, they may yet be found ignorance of Christ, and of the
way to happiness? For this without question will prove to be true, if they
should be Catechized even in the beginnings of the doctrine of Christ. But as
the Lord by the Prophet demands the question (...), What is the cause of so
much ignorance in the light of the Gospel?
What is the defection, Jacob, or as it is read in the old translation of
Pagnine, What is the cause of the failing or preuarication of Jacob? so may
some man demand here: What is this ignorance of Christians? or rather, what is
the cause of this want of the knowledge of Christ, since by the grace of God
the light of the Gospel shines so clearly amongst us?

And I answer. First, that the cause is in the learners: Answ. 1. In hearers
the first cause of ignorance is idleness, want of meditation and prayer.
for some there are who although the means of getting this knowledge be
offered unto them, yet will they not seek nor labor to obtain it; they lend
only their ears to the preacher for the time of the Sermon, but they are so
idle, they will neither spend any time in meditation to increase and better
their knowledge, nor pray for the blessed Spirit to assist them; therefore they
hear, but they understand not, they are always learning, 2. Tim. 37.
but never come to the knowledge of the truth. Non-proficiency in the school
of Christ is their sin, and a Non noui, Mat. 25.12.
I know you not, shall one day be their punishment except they repent. Otium
stultitiam, labor scientiam generat, says Hugo. Hugo de Claustro animae.
Idleness breeds folly, but it is labor and industry that begets
understanding. As there is no fruit to be loooked for upon that tree where
buds and blossoms have not first appeared; so ordinarily, no divine and
spiritual knowledge of Christ, where labor and industry, and the grace of
God, have not first been the vshers. Therefore when Demosthenes was asked, how
he came to be so eloquent an Orator; he answered, St^laeus sermon. 27.
Plus olei quam vini mihi consumptum est: I have spent a great deal more oil
then wine; intimating thereby that he had not gotten his eloquence without
labor and study both day and night. But many men now adays spend more wine
then they do oil, and that is the reason why they want this excellent
treasure of divine knowledge; they are like those who refuse the nut because
they will not take pains to Simil.
or like a man who loses a rich treasure, 2. Note.
And here you may soon epsy the cause, why so many students in the
Universities, and Lawyers at Innes of Court, come so unfurnished, the one to
the Pulpit, the other to the Bar; the one to feed the souls of their
flocks, the other skilfully and honestly to plead the rightful cause of
their poor clyents. They spend more wine then oil; and hence we so often
hear words without knowledge, without matter, without method, light as vanity,
full of weakness, ignorance, and indiscretion, because they are laborious in
sowing the seeds of folly, and idle, spending little or no time for this divine
and most excellent knowledge. But as it is related of Bion the Philosopher,
Max. sermon. 1.
that meeting with one of his friends, who was curiously busied to have his
picture in stone, cut like unto him, but careless for the study of learning,
he reproved him on this manner: Tu vt tibi similis lapis fieret, curasti, ac
ipse ne lapidi similis fias non curas? Have thou been so careful that the
stone might be made like thee, and art thou not careful, that thou (by
ignorance) be not made like unto the stone? so may we conclude of these sons
of vanity, Are ye so careful to fulfill your lusts, which will procure your
destruction; and so negligent to be filled with divine knowledge which would
fill you with happiness? Be industrious, strive and pray for this knowledge:
Thus shall you escape the fetters of ignorance, and this divine knowledge shall
guide your souls to felicity.

Secondly, 2. Second cause of ignorance in hearers is an opinion that they are
too old. Ioh. 3.4.
some there are who think themselves too old to learn, and therefore they
continue in ignorance, and refuse to labor for this divine knowledge. But as
it is true of regeneration, a man may be borne again when he is old,
contrary to the opinion of Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. yea it is necessary he should,
because otherwise he cannot enter into heaven: so is it true of this divine
knowledge, this spiritual knowledge of Christ; a man may learn when he is
old, yea he ought to learn and labor for this most comfortable knowledge,
because without knowledge he cannot attain salvation. Ioh. 17.3. August epist.
ad Hieron. Magis tamen decet discere quam ignorare.
It was S. Augustines opinion, that to learn that which is needful, no age
should seem too late, because although it is more fit for old men to teach
then to learn, yet it is more fit to learn then to be ignorant. To refuse
learning and divine knowledge, because a man is old, is as if a thirsty
traveler should refuse to drink, because he had gone a long journey before he
could get it. And what is more foolish (says Seneca) then because thou have
not learned a long time, Senec. epist. 76.
not to learn at all? Omnis aetatis homines schola admittit, The school
admittes men of every age, Philostratus: Honestum est and seni dicere etc.
as well old as young. Therefore as Philostratus relates of Marcus the
Emperor, that when Lucius came to Rome, meeting the Emperor, he asked him
whither he went, and for what cause: to whom the Emperor answered, It is an
honest thing even for an old man to tell you, I go to Sextus the Philosopher,
Vt discam quae nondum scio; that I may learn those things which I know not.
And it is related of Themistocles, that having lived a hundred and seven years,
Brusius lib. 3. cap. 31.
and being ready to dye, he affirmed that he had spent all his time in the
honest study of Philosophy for the use and good of men; but now it did grieve
him that he was then to depart this life when he did but begin to be wise by
the study of learning: so that if he had lived longer, he would still have
labored for perfection in knowledge, and well he might: Diogen. lib. 3. cap.
31.
for learning and knowledge is profitable for all ages, for all persons, for
all estates; it brings sobriety to young men, solace and comfort to old men,
riches to poor men, ornaments to rich men, as Diogenes Laertius w^ll observed.
And if this be the fruit of moral learning, much more excellent is the
benefit of this spiritual and saving knowledge of Christ, from whence Saint
Paul inferres our new creation; and therefore let no man make excuse, but seek
with diligence to obtain it.

Thirdly and lastly, this deceives many (says Hugo Hugo lib. de didasc. A
third cause of ignorance in hearers, that they think they have knowledge
sufficient.
) that they would seem to be wise before the time; they think if they have
but a sprinkling of this divine knowledge, they have sufficient, and they need
not l^bour for any more; But as it is with the light of a lamp, except you
daily feed it with oil, the light will soon be extinguished, so is it with
the light of this divine knowledge; except you daily increase it by adding of
what you have not, you will easily forget what you have. If you anoint Cedar
or Juniper wood with oil, no canker will eat it. So if you bestow the oil of
industry upon your knowledge, the worm of ignorance cannot hurt it. But as a
standing poole will soonest putrify, or be dried up if it want a spring to
feed it; so if your knowledge stand at a stay, or be not supplied by a daily
labor of increase, it will quickly be dried up, wither as the grass on the
house top, and come to nothing before you be aware. Therefore as in the parable
of the talents they that had increased were rewarded, and the unprofitable
servant cast into utter darkness, Matthew. 25.30. And in the parable of the
seed, those only were acceptable with God, who did grow in grace, bringing
forth fruit, in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold. Matthew.
13.23: So does God require that our talent of knowledge should be increased,
and the seed of divine wisdom should grow in us. For what husbandman will
dress and till his field, if he hope for no harvest? or what vine-dresser will
prune his vines, if he despair of a vintage? or what father will set his
child to school if he profit nothing in learning? God is our spiritual
husbandman who ploweth up the fallow ground of our hearts: He is our
vine-dresser, who prunes the superfluous branches from our soul. He is our
heavenly Father who sets us to learning in the school of Christ; and if he
find no harvest, no vintage, no increase in divine knowledge, he may well
complain against us, as he did against Israel, Esaias 5.4. What could J have
done more to my vineyard that I have not done unto it? wherefore when I looked
that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Yea he may
threaten us with destruction for our unfruitfulness, as he did them, Esaias,
5.5, 6. For as the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing of God; but that which bears thorns and briars, is rejected and nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.7, 8: So likewise, those who
receive the treaties of this knowledge, so that they profit thereby, there is
a blessing attends the^; and for the rest who thinking themselves to be wise
enough, become fools, Rom, 1. Romans 1.22.
God strikes them so with blindness, that they are hood-winked with
ignorance, and whiles they seek for truth, they find falsehood, and are
fettered with error; as the Egyptians were with the bands of darkness,
Exodus, 10.23.

And thus you see the first cause why at noone days there is such darkness,
and in the abundance of knowledge, such abundance of ignorance dwells
amongst us: It is the fault of the hearers, some being idle, not respecting
knowledge, others thinking themselves too old, neglect instruction; and others
being wise in their own conceits, content themselves with ignorance, and
refuse to labor for increase in Divine wisdom.

But is there no other cause, may some man demand?

2. Cause of igrancc in teachers. Answer. Plato lib. 6. de Rep.
I answer yes. There may be a fault in the Master as well as in the Scholar,
in the Preacher as well as in the people. It was the precept of Plato,
whosoever does desire to be learned and wise, he ought (...), that is, to be
desirous of learning, of hearing, asking and enquiring of those things which
are heard. These are three good properties in a Scholar. And there are three
as needful for a Teacher. The first, soundness of knowledge, that he may be
able. The second, sincerity of heart, that he may be willing. The third,
aptness of method, that his Scholars may profit by him. Some are ignorant,
and cannot teach; more are sloathfull, and will not teach; most, though they
be able and willing, yea, and painful in the path which they tread, yet do
they neglect the surest and best means to plant this Divine knowledge in the
minds of their hearers.



Answer. Catechism the best means to Plant this Divine knowledge in the
hearts of men.
I answer, it is that most profitable and excellent means of Catechizing, too
much neglected both in City and Country, both here and abroad. I confess our
ordinary preaching is of admirable profit, of invaluable virtue, of
inestimable benefit, to edify both the understanding and conscience, both the
knowledge and practice of our hearers. But if Catechizing go not before, if
they be not first instructed in the first principles of Christian Religion,
we build as it were without a foundation; and though we edify their
consciences, and work some change in their lives, yet not laying our
groundwork in method and order, confusion overthrows the building, and
after much labor we shall find them ignorant even of the grounds and
principles of the knowledge of Christ. And hence it comes to pass that they
are so easily tossed with every wind of unconstant doctrine, so easily drawn
to error and heresy, to make schisms and divisions in our Church; and we lay
the blame on them, and speak against them, when the fault is often more in our
selves. Both these therefore, catechizing and preaching, like Hippocrates
Twins, should go hand in hand together, that verity, and unity, and
piety, may dwell amongst us.

To omit those times of the Fathers before and after the Flood: The care of God
himself in catechizing of Adam, writing a Catechism or brief sum of his
Law, and (as it were) imprinting it in his heart: The care of the Patriarchs to
instruct their Families, of Shem, Melchizedek, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Samuel,
David, Josiah, and the Prophets till Christ:

Oh how excellent was the care and industry of the Primitive Church, that this
(...), this groundwork of Christian Doctrine might bring men to the knowledge
of Christ! The Apostles themselves did use it, witness that of S. Paul, 1 Cor.
14.19. In the Church (says he) I had rather speak five words with my
understanding (...), that I might catechize others (for so the Greek
signifies) then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue: And before him, S.
Luke the Evangelist in his preface to that most noble Theophilus, he gives
the reason why he did write the History of the Gospel unto him, That thou
might know (says the Evangelist) the certainty of those things (...), in
which thou have been catechized or instructed, as our Translatours render it,
Luke 1.4. And hence Apollos, an eloquent man, and mighty in tne Scriptures, is
said to be (...), catechized or instructed in the way of the Lord, Act. 18.25.

To illustrate this further, Isidorus Isidorus l^b. 2. de Origin offic.
Ecclesi^st. cap. 10. Diverse orders of Christians in the Primitive Church. 1.
affirms, that there were three orders of Lay Christians in the Primitive
Church. The first were the Catechumens, who were learners and hearers of the
Catechism, of which many were men of ripe years, of Jews or Gentiles, who
were converted to the Christian Faith, but not yet baptized till they were
approved to be fit for the Sacrament. Such a Catechumen, was S. Ambrose, when
he was chosen Bishop of Millaine, the state of the Church then so requiring,
because of that pestilent Heresy wherewith the Arians had infected it,
Sozomen. Hist. Eccle. lib. 6. cap. 24.
as Sozomen affirms. Such a one was Saint Augustine when of a Maniche he was
m^de a Christian, and wrote diverse Books before he was baptized of Saint
Ambrose. Such a one was Arnobius, who being fitted by catechism, and desiring
baptism of the Bishops, when he saw they deferred, because they feared least
being a Secular man, and abounding with eloquence, he might mock and abuse
the Sacrament: Arnobius aduersus Gentes.
for a testimony of his Faith which before his conversion he so much impugned,
he wrote an excellent Book against the Gentiles, of whose Heathenish religion
before he had been, as Eusebius and others relate. And such a Catechumen as one
of them, S. Paul calls (...), Append. Chron.
a nouice in Christianity, of those two Greek words (...) and (...), in
English, a new plant, because they were like plants new set, such as were not
yet, or very lately baptized, being scant matriculated, or their names entered
into the university of Christ. And these the Latin Church called Auditores,
Tertull. lib. de poenit. cap. 6. Cypr. Epist. 13. The second sort of Lay
Christians. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 17. The third sort of Christians.
August. Hom. 49. de verbis illis Apost. Ephesians. 6.20. The fourth kind of
Christians.
Hearers, as Tertullian, and S. Cyprian observe.

Secondly, there were the Competentes or Competitours, who with their
fellow-catechumens, desired Baptism, and at the time of Baptism were arrayed
in white robes, as Socrates relates.

Thirdly, there were the fideles, the faithful, or believers, which were so
called after they had received the Sacrament of Baptism; such a one was the
Eunuch when being baptized, he went on his way rejoicing, Act, 8.39. To these
S. Augustine mentions a fourth kind, who were called Poenitentes the
penitents, and these were those believers, who having fallen into some open
sin, and being put back into the company of the Catechumens they were (upon
true signs of repentance and satisfaction to the Church) received into their
ancient order again.

And further, as there were these Catechumens in their several orders, so were
there also (...), Teachers of Catechism in the Primitive Church. Cypr. Epist.
24. Eusebius. hist. Eccle. lib. 3. cap. 12.
The Catechists who did exercise the office of Catechizing, and therefore S.
Cyprian calls them Doctores audientium, The Doctors or teachers of the
Hearers, and Ruffinus Magistros Catechumenorum: the Masters of the Catechumens.
For as Christ did institute diverse offices (as Saint Paul witnesses, Ephesians.
4.11.) so the primitive Church (being careful to enlarge and increase the
knowledge of Christ) following the steps of the Apostles, amongst other
offices, they did appoint some to be Catechists or teachers of the Catechism,
as S. Ambrose Ambros. in Epist. ad Ephe. Cap. 6.
affirms. And such Catechists amongst other had the Church of Alexandria, in
a continued order from the Apostles times for many years together. For as
Eusebius relates, after the Apostles they had Pantaenus, who had learned all
things from the Apostles, and by word of mouth Catechized that Church, says S.
Hierome. Hierom in Catalog.
After him they had Clemens Alexandrinus, whose Schoolmaster (a book which he
entitled (...), in respect of the variety of the matter in it) is yet extant,
and it is nothing else but a kind of Catechism with which he had instructed
that Church of Alexandria. After him came Origin, who in the eighteenth year
of his age, restored the order of Catechizing which before in time of
persecution was intermitted. And after these was Heraclas and Didimus and
Dionisius and diverse others, as S. Cyprian Cyprian. lib. Epist. 3. cap 22
records.

The like order we find in the Church of Jerusalem; Socrates. Hist. Eccle lib.
2. cap. 25.
The like in the Church of Carthage, in the Church of Rome in the purer times,
the like in diverse reformed Churches. And the like at this day commanded and
continually enforced by the authority and care of the Reverend Bishops and
religious fathers of our Church (though the practice be too much neglected.) To
conclude, Ancient Catechismes a sign of the Churches care to plant knowledge.
would you have this care of the Church further confirmed; look but to the
ancient Catechismes, and brief sums of Divinity, which have been compiled
to this purpose. Saint Paul to the Hebrews sets down a brief Catechism;
Heb. 6.1.2.
which he calls the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith
toward God, of the doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of hands, and of the
resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.1, 2. And what else
is the Apostles Creed, but a brief Catechism or sum of the Christian
Faith, made by the Apostles, for the instruction of believers in the knowledge
of Christ? For having received that command of Christ to go and teach all
nations. Matthew. 28.19. and being fitted and prepared by the power of the
Spirit, who enabled them with the gift of tongues in a wonderful manner, Acts
2.4. being about to depart one from the other, Normam prius futurae
praedicationis in commune constituunt: They do first constitute and appoint
amongst themselves a rule or square or guide of their future preaching, as
Ruffinus Ruffinus Expos. symbol. as S. Cyprian Tom. 3. page 56 a. records. Vide
Baron. Tom. 1. Annal. pa. 317. S. August de Tempore sermon. 181. Hierom. de
Script. Eccle. Betulaius Comment. ad Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 11. Ignatius in
Epist. ad Ephesians.
the Presbyter (who lived in the time of S. Hierome, about the three hundred
and ninety year after Christ) in his preface to the Exposition of the Creed
relates; and he gives this reason, that being separated, their preaching might
yet agree, and the faithful be grounded in one rule of faith, by which they
might be directed to the true and saving knowledge of Christ; And for this end
as S. Hierome affirms, there was a Catechism written by S. Cyrill Bishop of
Jerusalem; And there was another written by John Bishop of the same place,
which Betulaeius mentions in his Commentaries upon Lactantius. And to these I
might add the brief partitions and compendiums of Divinity given by diverse
both ancient and modern writers, for the instruction of the ignorant. Jgnatius
who was the second Bishop of Antioch, ordained by the Apostles, and succeeded
Euodius, the first that governed that Church (as he himself testifies in his
Epistle to the men of Antioch, the 71. year after Christ) He gives this
short division of Christian doctrine, Irenaeus Martyr. lib. 4. cont. Hares.
cap. 76. Lactantius Divine. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4.
(...). The beginning of life is faith, the end of life is charity or good
works; and these two (says he) if they agree in one, they make perfect the
man of God.

And Lactantius lib. 3. cap. 30. concludes thus: All the wisdom of man
consists in this one thing, That he may know God and serve him. S. Augustine
August. Tom. 3. lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap. 9.
Bishop of Hippo, speaking of the books of the old and new Testament, Either
the precepts of doing, or rules of believing, are diligently (says he) to be
traced out.

Answerable to these, is that of Polanus, Polan. Syntag.
who makes two parts of Christian Doctrine, the one (...) of things to be
believed, the other (...), of things to be done. The sum of all our wisdom
(says judicious Calvin) does consist in two things, Calvin. Institu. lib. 1.
cap. 1. Aquinas Catechism.
The knowledge of God, and of our selves. Aquinas in his Catechism observes
five things to be remembered: The first concerning Faith, the second Hope, the
third Charity, the fourth of Christian righteousness, the fifth of the
Sacraments. Vrsinus Vrsinus Catechism.
gives but three as principally to be learned:

The first concerning man's misery through the fall of our first Parents, and
so by sin.

The second concerning our deliverance and freedom from this misery by Christ.

The third concerning our thankfulness to God by conforming our lives
according to his Law. Johan. Duns. Scotus in Prolog. quaest. 3. fol. 10. colum.
2.
And besides these, the Schoolmen, and later Divines Musculus, Peter Martyr,
Beza, Danaeus, Zanchius, Bucanus, Nowel, Iacobus Kimedontius, and others have
taken like pains, and written several treatises and sums of Divinity. The
confessions of the reformed Churches, Harmony of confessions.
and in particular of the Church of England, in the Articles of Religion and
that Plat-forme of Catechism, set forth in the book of Common Prayer (and
rightly commanded by authority) for preservation of Unity in the Christian
faith, and to avoid the danger of Schism in the body of Christ. All show
plainly the care of the Church and of religious men in their several ages, to
plant the Catechism or grounds of Christian knowledge in the hearts and minds
of men. And well they might so do, because these principles of Catechism, not
only are, and are rightly called Theological verities, and Capita, the heads
of Christian Religion, but Cardines religionis, the very Hinges of religion, as
Scaliger Scaliger exercit. 307. sect. 20.
calls the Articles of our faith: Because upon these are turned the doors and
gates, by which the way to happiness is opened unto us. Catechism is Clauis
Scripturae, the Key of the Scripture, because as a key does open the doors,
that we may enter into the Chamber of a beautiful Palace, or fetch the
treasure out of a rich treasure-house, so does Catechism help to understand
the Scriptures, and to find the rich treasure of salvation in them. And the
ignorance of the heads of Catechism, is the cause why so many understand not
the points of religion when they are preached unto them. If we speak of the
Image of God in Man, of his state of nature corrupted, of his Redemption, his
Justification, his Regeneration or the like, they are as far to seek for
many points, even of Catechism, as those men in the Acts, who being asked
Whether they had received the holy Ghost? answered, They had not yet heard
whether there were a holy Ghost or no, Acts 19.2. Hugo Hugo de Sanct. vict.
well compares wisdom to a tree, and it is sown (says he) by the Fear of
God; watered by Grace, it is rooted by Faith, it buddeth forth by Devotion, it
is strengthened by Charity, it waxes green by Hope, and grows ripe by
perseverance in the search of it to the end. The like is true of this
spiritual and saving knowledge of Christ; it is not easily obtained, but there
are many stepp^s and degrees before it be perfected. It is planted and
increased by Catechism, by the word preached, by the true use of the
Sacraments, by that heavenly and holy duty of prayer for the assistance and
blessing of the Spirit upon all our endeauours.

And therefore Beloved, Application.
let me entreat you in the bowels of Christ to bless God for the means of
this divine knowledge, so long, so happily, so plentifully continued amongst
us; and let us take heed lest by our unthankfulness, we move him to remove
our candlestick, Revel. 2 5.
and take this light of his grace from us. Be not careless and negligent of
the rich treasure; but as Origin exhorts, Origin in Romans 10. Ideo danda est
praecipue opera setentiae, etc. Fulgentius lib. 2. cap. 1. ex Xenophon.
use diligently these good and profitable means, that you may obtain so
excellent and heavenly a blessing; for what more excellent then the true
knowledge of Christ crucified? As Fulgentius therefore relates out of Xenopho^
^f the noble Persians, that they taught their children three things above the
rest: Equitare, iaculari, and vera dicere: To ride their great horses, that
they might boldly meet their enemies: To cast their darts, that they might
defend themselves: And to speak the truth that they might be found faithful
one to the other: so you that are my brethren the Ministers, instruct carefully
your people; and you that are parents and masters of families, teach your
children and servants: First, to hearken diligently to the doctrine of
Catechism, to the word preached, and other means which are the grounds of
this knowledge of Christ. Secondly, to meditate seriously of what they hear:
and thirdly to practice religiously what they meditate, and be you an example
unto them. Thus shall they be armed against their spiritual enemies (having
religion settled in their hearts, and being seasoned with truth and piety) as
the Persians were armed against their corporal. And if you cannot teach them
your selves, yet may you be like the whetstone; it cuts not, and yet sharpens
the knife to perform the will of the master: and so may you sharpen and
encourage them to learn that knowledge which may be profitable and comfortable
both to them and you. Attalus the master of Divine Seneca was wont to give this
rule, Seneca lib. 19. Epis^. 109.
Idem docenti and discenti debet esse propositum, vt ille prodesse velit, hic
proficere: The same end and purpose ought to be both to him that teaches and
him that learneth, that the master may profit his scholars by teaching, and
the scholar proceed in knowledge by learning. And thus if you do, I have my
desire, God shall have the glory, the Church the benefit, and your souls and
consciences peace at the latter end. If you truly know Christ, Christ shall be
yours, and all the benefits of his death and passion: you shall abound with
grace here, and superabound with glory and blessedness, for ever hereafter.
And thus you see how and why I have so much enlarged my self to set forth the
dignity, necessity and utility of this spiritual knowledge of Christ, which
our Apostle intimates in the occasion of my Text: Henceforth know we no man
after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
know we him so no more. And from whence he inferres our new creation;
Therefore, or hence from this spiritual knowledge (which works a change in
man) If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed
away, Text. Explication.
and behold all things are become new.

From the occasion. I am come at last to the Text. If any man. But why does our
Apostle stop up the way with an if, as if he doubted whether there were any in
Christ or not? If he does not, why then does he speak so doubtingly? what
need an hypotheticall or condicionall proposition, where the matter is simple
and Categoricall? I answer, the Apostle here does not speak doubtingly but
indefinitely, and it is a rule in Logic, That an Indefinite proposition, in a
matter of necessity is equivalent to an universal. And therefore if any man
be in Christ, is as much as if he had said, all that are in Christ, or
whosoever is in Christ, He is a new creature.

To teach us that in this respect all are alike with God All are alike with God
in Christ.
of what nation, country or kingdom soever they be. Of a truth I perceive
(says Peter) that God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation, he that
fears God and works righteousness is accepted with him, Act. 10.34. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
new creature, Gal. 6.15. We who are Gentiles by nature, were sometimes wild
olives, but now we are grafted into the true, and are made partakers of the
root and fatness of the Olive tree, Rom, 11.17. And so are all one in Christ:
for is God the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles? yea of the
Gentiles also, says the Apostle, August. sermon. 2. in nativit. Christ.
Romans 3.29. And therefore S. Augustine observes well that Christ was manifested
both to those that were near, and to those that were far off; to the Jews
in the neerenesse of the shepherds, to the gentiles in the farnesse of the
wise men; to the Jews by the manifestation of an Angel, to the gentiles by the
apparition of a star; both to Jews and Gentiles, to show that all are one
and alike in Christ.

And if all men both Jews and Gentiles are one, and alike All Christians are
in Christ after especial manner.
then much more are Christian men amongst themselves: for as all men were one
in the first Ada^ created alike, of the dust of the earth, so are all
Christians one in the second Adam, redeemed alike by the blood of the Lamb.
The Jews before Christ, they did all eat of the same spiritual bread, and
drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10.3. And the believing Jews
and Gentiles since Christ, they are all partakers in the same communion of the
body and blood of Jesus, 1. Cor. 10.17. We are all one body in Christ, and one
spirit, we are called in one hope of our vocation; we have one Lord, one faith,
one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in us all, Ephesians. 4.4.5. So that all the Saints are as one man in Christ, not
by a corporal, but by a spiritual union; not in respect of the persons which
are innumerable, but first in respect of that one head, Zanchius Comment, in
Ephesians. cap. 2.
which is Christ, unto whom all are annexed and united as the members of the
body are to the head, but in a spiritual manner. And secondly, in respect of
that one, and the same Spirit, by whom we are quickened, and in faith and
holiness united unto Christ. For as the body is said to be one, though it has
many members, because they are all quickened by one soul, all knit together
unto one head, and all making up one and the same humane nature; 1. Cor. 12.12,
13.
so are Christians, one body being quickened by one and the same Spirit, united
to one and the same head Christ, and having one and the same nature of grace in
newness of life. And hence in the primitive times, of the multitude of
believers (...), there was one heart and one soul, Act. 4.32. not simply, but
in God and in Christ. And so Christians though many, yet are one new man in
Christ, one in spirit, one in faith, one in charity, one in will and consent,
and one in newness of life.

Unity required in Christians. Ephesians. 2.14.
And therefore being thus made one in Christ who is our peace: we should
follow the Apostles exhortation, Ephesians. 4.3. Endeavor to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace: To be at unity with our brethren, at one with
ourselves, at unity in faith and religion which is the principal point, S.
August. de spirit. and liter.
and the badge of a Christian. What S. Augustine speaks of charity is true of
this unity; it is the way of God to men, and the way of men unto God; it is the
queen of virtues, the most excellent gift: yea that very bond of perfection,
Coloss. 3.14. The love of God therefore that is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans
5.5.
should unite and cement the souls of Christians. Oh thou divine love (says
Anselme) how great is thy bond, Anselm. lib. de simil.
that thou have united, not only Angels to God, but God and man after a
wonderful manner! and much more should it be powerful to unite the hearts of
men, and Christian men one to another.

The Papists you know brag and boast much of their unity: Nicolaus Romans
Jesuit. contra Calvin. page 426. Platina in Stephano 6.
falsely applying these places of Scripture which concern unity, unto
themselves: For where has there been more discord then in the Church of Rome,
not only in the members, but in the Antichristian heads themselves? After Pope
Stephen (says Platina) it has been the custom among the Popes, that those
who followed afterward, would either break or abolish the Acts of the Popes
that had gone before them: Pope John the two and twenty, and Pope Nicolas in
their whole decrees, are contrary the one against the other: yea and that in
those things, Quae videntur ad fidei negotium pertinere, which seem to belong
to matter of Faith, Erasmus in Annot. in 1. Cor. 7. Platina in vita Silvest.
Onuph. addit ad Plat. in vita Greg. 12.
as Erasmus observes. I might show you how some of them have been forcerers,
Idolaters, Arian Heretickcs, Nestorian Heretics, Menothelite Heretics,
Montanist Heretics, and the like, all differing one from another (as their
Scotists and Thomists, and diverse others their sects) or at least differing
from Christ Jesus who is the true head and governor of his Church. Or if we
grant them unity, Ephesians. 4.15.
yet if we try their spirits, and put their unity to the touchstone, we shall
find it but counterfeite, no Christian but an Antichristian unity that is
amongst them; like that of Simeon and Leui, who were brethren in evil, or of
Herod, Genesis 49.5. Luke 23.12.
and Pontius Pilate, who agreed together against Christ; or like themselves of
whom Saint John prophecyeth, that they have one mind, and should give their
power and strength unto the beast, and all to make war against the Lamb,
Reu. 17.13.14.

They agree together to defend their own traditions of Purgatory, prayer for
the dead, Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Images, superstitious relics,
and the like which (contrary to the Scriptures, to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, Conc. Nicen. Ruffin. Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. ca. 6.
the consent of ancient Councels and Fathers) of the Church, they have invented
to maintain Council. Constantinop. 2. ca. 36.
the pomp and pride of the Pope, his Cardinals, and themselves, to fill his
coffers, and set up his Antichristian Throne, above the Thrones of Kings and
Emperors, as the History of times, and their own ambitious practice has made
manifest. It is related of the Meletian Schismatickes, Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap.
46.
and the Arrian Heretics, that at first they did much disagree in their
several opinions, but (not being able to effect their ambitious designs,
being separated) at last they agreed together, and made a league to make war
against the pious Clergy of Alexandria; In like manner this brood of
Antichrist, though separated amongst themselves in their several sects about
matters of the life to come: yet agree they well enough together to keep their
Temporal power, and worldly honors unto themselves. And if Heretics and
Schismatickes can agree in evil, how much more should the true professors of
the faith of Christ (according to the Doctrine of the Apostles and primitive
times) practice a heavenly unity amongst themselves? How should we labor to
keep that unity which is wrought by the blessed Spirit, in true faith and
holiness, by which the Saints are knit and united unto that one Head of the
Church? not the Pope (as Hosius and others would have it, Hosius in Petri
coven. Confess. ca. 27. Clem. 5. ad nost. in Gloss. Chrysostom. ad Col. Hom 6.
August. in Johan. Tract. 6. 1. Sam 4.21.
who being a man, is and ever has been subject to Error:) but Christ who is
such a head, from whom Corpus habet, and vt sit, and vt been sit, The body
has, both to be, and to be well: and by whose power which he has kept only
to himself, that unity of the Church does stand, of which it is said, Vna est
colu^ba mea, My dove is one, as S. Aug. observes. And with this unity our
Church shall prosper, and the glory of Israel, the light of the Gospel shall
for ever dwell amongst us. Menenius Agrippa long since showed the danger of
division, Liuie, Dec. 1. lib. 8.
when (the common people disobeying their governors) he told them that wise
parable of a dissentio^ between the members of the body and the belly, denying
their service so long to the belly, till they began to be feeble, and not able
to help one another. And Scilurus when being near his death, he called his
eighty sons, Plutarch, Tom. 1. moral. Apoph. descite regu^ dict.
and gave the^ a sheafe of arrows to break, and when they could not, while
they were bound up together, hebade them take the arrows asunder, and then
they break them with ease; signifying that if they being brethren, continued
in unity, their enemies could not hurt them, but otherwise they might soon be
brought to confusion. Salust. de Bell. Ingurthm.
Concordia parvae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur (said king Mycipsa
to his sons) By concord small things increase, but by discord the greatest
are speedily dissolved. Much more I might speak of Division, how hurtful it
is to the Church, especially about shadows and ceremonies, A sermon on the
Rainbow in Genesis 9.13,
and such like, but I have touched this upon another subject. Therefore I
conclude, since we all have given our names to Christ, let us all labor to be
one in him. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

If any man. None excepted from this newness that are in Christ. Genesis 17.14.
Chrystop. Marcell. in Council. Lat. sess. 4.
There is an universality in the proposition which comprehends all. To show
that there is none privileged, of what state, calling or condition soever they
be, if he be or will be in Christ, he is and must be a new creature. In the
old Law, that person who would not be circumcised, that soul was cut off from
the people of God, Genesis 17.14. And in the Gospel he that is non circumcised
in heart, and made new by regeneration, he shall have no part with the Saints
of heaven, Ioh. 3.3. The wise man is not privileged by his wisdom, nor the
strong man by his strength, the King is not freede by his crown and dignity,
nor the Priest by his power of the Keys; no not the Tu es alter Deus in
terris, C^ed^re Dominum Deum nostrum papam non potuis^e statuere, prout
statuit, Haeretieum censeretur, Extrau. John 22. cum in^ce in Gloss. impress.
Lugdun, An. 1555.
Pope himself, who would seem to be a god upon earth, opening and shutting,
binding and loosing, pardoning and punishing at his pleasure, yet if he open
not unto Christ, and become a new man in him, Christ will cut him off as a
withered branch, and with all his privileges cast him into the fire of Hell.
For if any man be in Christ, and will have benefit by him, he is and must
truly endeavor to be a new creature. Make no excuses then, nor delay the time
to leave off the bondage of Satan, and submit thy self to the service of
Christ. The service of Christ is perfect freedom, as the service of Satan is
absolute slavery; when Christ calls therefore, Mat. 11.28.
come willingly unto him that thou may find rest unto thy soul. The world
calls, and we run hastily to it. The Devil calls, and without delay we
hearken unto him; the flesh calls, and we resist not the temptations thereof:
and why should we delay or be disobedient then to the call of Christ? delay is
most dangerous, and disobedience most perilous to the soul. For as it is
related of Tamerlane that great warrior, Paul Iov^. lib. 2. vir^ru,
illustrium. Primo die castra candida rendeb at, secundo nigra, tertio ^^^ra.
who overcame all Egypt, Persia, and Asia the less, and named himself, not a
man, but the scourge of God; that when he came to fight against any City, the
first day he pitched white tents, the second black, and the third red, to
show that they who yielded themselves the first day, should be saved with all
that they had; those who deferred till the second, should be received, but not
without some punishment; but for those that delayed till the third day, they
should he destroyed without mercy. So it is with this great and mighty warrior
Christ Isesus, who is the King of Kings, Revel. 19.16.
and Lord of Lords. The first day, that is, in the beginning when he calls
men to repentance, to forsake their sins and follow ^ighteousnesse, he
hangs out his white tents of grace, to show that those who are obedient to
the heavenly call, he will receive them to favor, free them from much misery
(which otherwise sin would have brought upon them) and reward them with
happiness for ever in heaven. The second day, that is, when men have a long
time neglected his mercy, made excuse, and refused his instruction, he hangs
out black tents to show that they must come then with much repentance, with
much sorrow, with many tears, (like the Prodigal, and Mary Magdalen) before
they can taste the sweetness of his favor. The third day, that is, when then
the time of grace, the time of this life is past, at the day of judgment,
either particular at the hour of death, or general at the end of the world,
he will hang out, and pitch his red tents, declaring the vengeance that he will
then power upon the wicked, because it is a time of justice and not of mercy.
Plutarch. de sanitat. tuenda. page 257. Quam ob breuem voluptatis causam summam
amisi faelicitatem?
And then (though it be too late) as Lycimachus, being surprised in the
Country of Thrace, by King Dromichetes, and driven into such a straight, that
he was constrained to yield himself and his Army to his enemy for very thirst,
cried out, in the bitterness of his grief, (having tasted the water) good God
for how short a pleasure have I lost a most excellent happiness! So will they
be constrained to cry (but all in vain) For how short a pleasure in sin and
wickedness have we lost the pleasure of eternal felicity! Oh then beloved,
Let us not make excuses (like the unthankful guest, Mat. 22. Matthew. 22.5.
) nor suffer any thing to hinder us from Christ, (though it were our hand, or a
foot, or our eye, or any thing more dear unto us:) But let us willingly, and
readily, and cheerfully give our selves unto Christ, that in him we may
obtain that newness required; because no man is excepted, no man privileged.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.

(...). If any man be in Christ. Expositio. Beza in Annotat.
Here is the Adjective us, any. But the Substantive man, is understood, yet
necessarily employed both in the Greek and Latin, and well expressed in our
English translation, If any man. A word or two therefore of this.

That you may know man, and what man our Apostle here speaks of, consider his
name: First in Hebrew (...) which is as much as Earth or earthy, to teach man
that he is mortal, and as he was taken from the earth, so he must turn to
earth again, Genesis 3.19. The name of Man In Hebrew, first Adam, red Earth. To
teach man to remember his end. Genesis 3.19.
And therefore he should study to live in this life here, as ever remembering
he must once die, and so change this life, if he live well, Dan. 12. Mat.
25.2. Bu^aeus lib. de cont^mptu reru n so^tunarum, psum ^oelum suffi^ere h^^^mi
natura dedit, vt nom^^ Gra^u^ indicat
for a better, a life of glory, and happiness in heaven. But if he live ill,
for a worse, a life of woe, and misery for ever in hell.

Secondly, in Greek, his name is (...), which seems to signify as much as
(...) that is tending upwards (as Budaeus intimates) To show that he only
lives as becomes his name, who lifts up his eyes to heaven and heavenly
things, to God in thankfulness, who gave him Man should have his eyes toward
heaven.
both for his soul and body. But for that man who has his eyes, the eyes of
his body and mind always fixed down-wards toward the earth and earthly
things, In Latin, to teach man obedience to God. Steph. Paris sermon.


Thirdly, in Latin, the name of Man is Homo; which (as learned Varro inferres)
has his signification ab Humo, from the moist and pliable ground: easily
following the turn and winding of the Potters wheel, that men To teach unity
between man and man. Dominicus Nauus in Peliante. tit. hom. socialis est
homuus ac benefica natura, quo solo cognationem cum deo habet. Lactantius lib.
5. insititut.
easily to be turned and guided in obedience to the will and command of God.
But some derive the Latin name Homo, from the Greek (...), which signifies,
unity, concord, and agreement of mind. To show that men should strive to be at
unity and charity, one with another, like Pylades and Orestes, who had but one
mind in two bodies, so true was their love. But I go no further concerning
his name.

If you consider his nature: First, after a Philosophical manner, I find there
were three opinions amongst Philosophers concerning man. The first did teach
that The nature of man. Opinions of Philosophers.
and b^ consequence, the whole man corporeal; So Democritus, Leucippus, and a
sort of Philosophers called Epicures. The second did teach that man was only
essence of man, and his body to be but an instrument to the soul, as the ship
is to the pilot. So Plato and other Stoicall of philosophers like himself. The
third sort did affirm Aristotle and the Peri-pateticks his followers. And this
is most agreeable to the Scriptures, for when God made the body of man of the
earth, he made his soul from heaven, and uniting them both together in a
wonderful manner, Psalm. 139.14.15.
man became a reasonable creature, or a living soul, Genesis 2.7. Not that he is
only a living soul, for he is a living body as well as as a living soul, (the
body living by the soul,) but he has his denomination in that place from the
better part which is his soul. And thus you see man's nature philosophically.
If we consider him theologically, Man considered Theologically. 3. Estates. 1.
Estate, of creation.
we shall Adam, when God did give us our portion with large endowments of all
graces, both spiritual and temporal. The second our state of nature, and
natural corruption since Adams fall, 2. Of nature corrupted.
in whom like prodigals we spent our patrimony, and lost the excellency of that
image wherein God did make us. 3. Of grace.
The third and last is our state of grace and regeneration in Christ, for whose
merits God the Father does freely embrace us in the arms of his mercy, and
accepts us in him to be sons and heirs of eternal glory. And this is the
estate of a Christian man, of that man of whom our Apostle speaks in my Text,
If any man be in Christ.

And thus having gathered some fruit from the branch which is man, and every
Christian man, let us see what we can find in the vine which is Christ, 2.
Branch.
If any man be in Christ. (...), In Christ. The Scripture does as well teach
that Christ is in us, as that we are in Christ. I will give you a few places
for many, which are most emphaticall. At that day ye shall know that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you (says Christ to his disciples) John,
14.20. Know you not that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye Paul, 2. Cor. 13.5.
And if any man be in Christ, An admirable union between Christ and his Church.
A threefold union of Christ and Christians. Greg. lib. 6. epist. 61. Verbum
carne^ dicimus factum, non immutando quod erat, sed suscipiendo quod non erat;
nostra auxit, sua non minuit. Hill. lib. 12. de Trinit. Cyril lib. 1. c. 16.
Chrysostom. Hom. 10 Ambr. de. Incarn. Dom. c. 6.
is my Text. So that hence we may learn that there is an admirable union and
Communion between Christ and his Church, between our Savior and every
faithful soul. And to understand this, we must know that there is a threefold
Union and Communion of Christ with us. The first in nature: the second in
grace, and the third in glory. The first is that Hypostaticall or personal
Union of our humane nature with the divine, of which Saint John speaks, John,
1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory
thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace
and truth. The Word, that is, the Divinity of Christ, was made flesh, that is,
did take upon him our humane nature; he took on him the seed of Abraham,
says the Apostle, Heb. 2.16. and did dwell (...), in us, (as it is in the
Original) that is, in our humane nature, as Saint Hilary, S. Cyrill, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and others observe. And so they used this place
against those heretics who affirmed that the Word was converted into the
flesh; for if he dwelt in the flesh, that is, in our humane nature, then he
remained still what he was, and therefore could not be converted into the
flesh, as they falsely imagined. This exposition is true in the substance,
though it does not fully explicate this union of Christ with us; for Christ
does not only dwell in our nature as a man in his mansion house, but is united
unto our nature, as the soul to the body, yea after a far more excellent and
wonderful manner. The two natures of Christ, the divine and humane, being
united, make one person, says Damascen; Damasc. lib. 3. cap 4.
there is one Christ, not by conversion of the Divinity into the flesh, but by
assumptio^ of humanity into his Godhead; one altogether not by confusion of
essence, but by unity of person, as Athanasius Athanasius in Symb.
affirms. And by this admirable union, Christ the eternal Word of his Father
did assume in most near manner unto himself our whole humane nature, without
any conversion, confusion, alteration, or separation as the Chalcedon
Chalcedon. Symb.
creed does testify, and that, (as Damascen adds) the proprieties of both
natures being safe. Therefore the Ancients did affirm, that the mystery osthis
union was Mirabiliter singular, and singulariter mirabile, Wonderfully
singular, and singularly wonderful; it is that great mystery of godliness, 1.
Tim. 3.16. Of which there is no example in nature, which (...), in all respects
is answerable unto it: for howsoever (...) in some kind there are some to
illustrate it, as that union of the soul and the body, of the fire and the
iron red hot, of the Sun and the light (which Iustine Martyr, Cyrillus,
Athanasius, and others use in their writings,) yet none can fully explicate
this great and wonderful mystery. To conclude, this union is not imaginary
only, but true and real (though supernatural,) and the foundation of our
spiritual with Christ, both in grace and glory depends upon it. For had he not
taken our nature upon him, and so freely married himself unto us, Hosh. 2.19.
we could never have been united to him. But Christ uniting himself to us in
nature, (and God accepting us as just and righteous for his merits,) we are
united to him in grace, which is the second union between Christ and us. The
second union is of our persons with Christ here. Zanchias in comment. in Ephesians
Genesis 2.24.
And this is the union of our persons, of our whole man both soul and body,
unto the whole person of Christ, God and man, by the excellent bond of our
spiritual marriage, in which Christ has united us unto himself; as the whole
person of Adam, was joined in wedlock to the whole person of Eve, so are we to
our heavenly bridegroom. For that carnal marriage between Adam and Eve was a
type and figure of this spiritual between Christ and his Church, as S. Paul
witnesses, Ephe. 5.33. And this is in the kingdo me of grace in this life.

A union with Christ in glory.
by which we shall enjoy the presence of our Savior, yea we shall have union
with God and his Angels, and be filled with abundance of glory and happiness
for evermore: of this our Savior speaks, John 14.3. J go to prepare a place
for you, and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where J am, there may you be also. And for
this union, our Savior prays to his Father, John 17.24. Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold
my glory which thou have given me: for thou louedst me before the foundation
of the world. And this union the blessed Apostle did so earnestly long after.
Philip. 1.23. Idesire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Neither is it to
be doubted, but that our Savior in the first union, the union of our nature,
was willing to praemonstrate the second, our union in grace, and in the second
to manifest the third, that by that union which we enjoy in present, we might
be confirmed in the hope of that which we shall enjoy hereafter. Amandus
Polanus s^ntag.
The first union is referred to the second, and the second to the third, as
nature is ordinated to grace, and grace to glory. The first union is the cause
of the second, and the second is the cause of the third. For we cannot be
united to Christ in glory in the life to come, except we be ingrafted into him
in this life by grace; but we could not have been united to him in grace,
except Christ had united himself to us in nature, by taking our nature upon
him: Whosoever therefore will be united to Christ in glory, it is necessary
that he be first united to him in grace; and whosoever is united in grace, it
is necessary that he should have bin united to him in nature. Thus you have a
brief view of our threefold union with Christ. But it is the second of these,
our union with Christ in grace, of which I am now to speak.

And therefore to illustrate this a little further, I showed you it was a union
of our persons, soul and body, with the person of Christ both God and Man: For
as in the first union, the union of Christ with our nature, the whole person of
the Son of God did assume into the unity of himself the whole man, that is,
his whole humane nature, not the body alone, nor the soul alone, but both
together; So is it when Christ is united to a Christian, he is united to the
whole man, both soul and body, as a Christian is united to the whole Christ,
both God and Man. Therefore the Apostle does not only witness, that he which
is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 12.13.
but that our bodies are the members of Christ; in the 15 verse of the same
Chapter; Yea, we which are many, are one body in Christ, Romans 12.5. So that
Christ is united both to our souls and bodies. And thus are we united unto
whole Christ. To his humanity (not after a carnali but a spiritual manner)
For thus, Heb. 2.14.
we are members of his body, yea, of his flesh, and of his bones; (says the
Apostle) Ephesians. 5.30. This he speaks for that near conjunction which we have
with Christ; He that eats my flesh (says Christ) dwells in me, and I in
him, Ioh. 6.56 From whence we must consider (says Cyrill Cyrillus in Ioh. lib.
10. cap. 13
) that Christ is not in us only by habitude, as he dwells in us by Faith and
Charity; but also by a natural participation: not in respect of the matter,
for it is supernatural; but in respect of the manner, or of the thing
participated, which is the true flesh of Christ: Not grossly and carnally, as
the Papists imagine in their imaginary Transubstantiation, but spiritually by a
true and real union of Faith: The bread that we break, it is the Communion of
the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.17. That is, that thing by which we are received
into Communion with the body of Christ, as Zanchius interprets it: yea, by
this we are united to his Divinity: as S. Peter affirms, Who according to his
divine power (says he) has given unto us all things that pertain unto life
and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and
virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these you might be partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.3.4.
having escaped the corruption, that is the world through lusts.

And thus it is manifest that there is a union of our persons in grace with the
person o^ Christ; not that we are made one person with him, but that we which
are many are one body, of which Christ is the head; we are one wife and Christ
our Husband. But to explain it a little more: The question may be demanded,
What kind of union is this,

Similitude to illustrate our union with Christ.
which the Apostle S. Paul uses, Ephesians. 5.31. And they two shall be one flesh.
Which certainly is a substantial union of the Husband and Wife, because two
persons are vnit^d; and a true and real union, because they are united into
one true flesh, and are always truly one flesh; But how? In respect of that
conjugal bond in which they are united by the ordinance of God. And this the
Apostle applies to that spiritual union between Christ and his Church. This
is a great mystery (says he) but I speak concerning Christ and the Church,
Ephesians. 5.32. But this union of Christ with us is more excellent, for Christ
does not only communicate unto us all needful graces, as the wife does
partake with the Husband in all his goods; and he not only dwells with us,
as the Husband with the Wife, but in us, in our hearts, by faith, and by love,
and by his Spirit, in a far more absolute and perfect manner, then the
Husband can with the Wife; Though this be an admirable similitude, by which in
a lively manner is thus expressed the mystery of that union between Christ
and his Church.

Secondly, this union is described by the similitude of the head and the
members of the body, 2. Simil Ephe. 4.15.19
which members are united and knit together, not only by veins and arteries,
but also by one living Spirit; whereby is noted, not only our most near union
with Christ, but also that we receive our life from Christ, as from the root
and fountain, from whence all the veins of our spiritual life do spring and
flow forth. And this union without question is a substantial, true, and real
union, without which, we cannot receive the fruit of his Passion, nor the
gifts and graces of his Spirit: as the members of the body cannot receive their
nourishment, and life, and motion, being separated from the head; and in which
we grow up to perfection, as S. Paul intimates.

Thirdly, 3. Simil.
this union is confirmed by the similitude of a living foundation, and living
stones built upon it, which by the truly substantial, and real conjunction
of them with the foundation, do daily receive an increase, until the house or
building be perfected. So is it in our union with Christ. Christ is a living
stone (says S. Peter) and we as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house, 1 Pet. 2.4.5. We are built (says S. Paul) upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone: In
whom all the building fitly framed together, grows up unto an holy Temple in
the Lord. Coloss. 2.19.
Ephesians. 2.20.21.

Fourthly, this union is expressed by Christ himself in the similitude of
eating and drinking: 4. Simil.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him,
Ioh. 6.56. But this with a manifold difference, Tollet in Johan.
as interpreters observe; For first, he that receives common meat and drin^e,
is said indeed to have meat and drink within him: But yet he does not
remain in the meat and drink, neither does the meat and drink remain or
continue in him; for either it is corrupted and euacuated, or converted into
the substance of the flesh and blood of him that eats it: But Christ is not
such meat and drink unto us. Because the flesh of Christ is neither corrupted
nor converted into the flesh of the eater; But it remains still what it was,
and does rather by a new qualification change us into him, or conform us unto
his image, when we do eat or receive him by faith. Secondly, common meat
receives life and virtue of nourishment from him that eats it; for a dead
man that has not life and heat in him, yea a sick man whose life and power
of nature is so far spent, that he cannot digest what he eats, can receive
no life, nor strength from his meat, it being but dead flesh or the like; till
it be as it were quickened and raised to life by the heat and virtue of the
eater, it cannot nourish nor preserve life in him. But it is not so with Christ
our spiritual food; he does not receive life from us, but he rather gives
life unto us: and therefore S. Ambrose affirms that for this reason, S.
Ambrose lib. 6. de sacram.
Christ is that living bread that came down from heaven. Ioh. 6.51. So that
Christ remains in the eater, because he is so united unto him, that he cannot
be corrupted, nor converted into the substance of him that eats: but rather
changes it into him (as I said before:) and the eater remains in Christ,
because he receives life from him, whose blood is drink indeed, and whose
flesh is meat indeed; not carnally to feed the body (as the fleshly
Capernaits and gross Papists do imagine, Ludolphus in vita Christi part. 2.
cap. 56. Ioh. 6.55.
) but spiritually to feed and nourish our souls and bodies to eternal life.
For so Christ explaineth himself, showing (against his fleshly hearers) how
his speech was to be understood, not after a carnal and fleshly (as Bellarmine
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sacram. Eucharist. cap 5. Tertul. lib. 4. contr. Marcion.
S. Ambros. de illis qui initiantur mysteriijs. August. in Psalm. 3. Chrysostom.
hom. 11.
would have it) but after a spiritual manner (as the Fathers agree.) It is the
spirit that quickens (says Christ) the flesh profits nothing; the words
that I speak unto you are spirit and life. Ioh. 6.63. And by this union also,
you may see how our union with Christ is exemplified.

Again, Christ expresses it in most lively manner, by the comparison of the
vine and the branches. I am the Vine, says Christ, and ye are the branches; as
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. Ioh. 15.4, 5. So that as there is a union
between the vine and the branches, so is there between Christ and his Church;
and as the branches receive the sap and life from the vine, so do we from
Christ.

Lastly, 6. Simil.
it is demonstrated yet more plainly by the Emblem and similitude of the
graft and the stock, of the branches of the wild olive grafted into the good,
which S. Paul sets forth excellently, Romans 11. from 17. to 25. ver. of the
chapter: for as the wild olive cannot be changed, except it be first grafted
into the good; nor can it bring forth good fruit until it be partaker of the
root and fatness of the true Olive tree; so we who by nature are wild
olives, cannot spring out of this true Olive Christ Jesus, except we be first
ingrafted into him by grace, and after so dressed and ordered by that heavenly
Oliue-planter (the blessed Spirit,) that by little and little, leaving the
bitterness of our natural corruption, we may bring forth, and become sweet
fruit for our heavenly Father. Similitudo non Cur^it quatuor pedibus.
Herein the similitude agrees, but it runs not of four feet (as the
proverb is) but in some respect is different as are the rest; For first in
natural grafting, look of what nature the graft is, such fruit will the
stock nourish and bring forth, because the stock is turned into the nature of
the graft: But in this spiritual grafting it is not so, for it is necessary
that we who are the grafts, should be turned into the nature of the stock
Christ Jesus: that we may bring forth such fruit as is answerable to his
nature, Luke 1.75.
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Secondly, hence
there is not to be imagined any confusion, or transfusion of Christ, or of his
essential qualities into us, (as may seem to be of the stock into the graft,
and as the Libertines did imagine) but (...) quaedam, a certain power, and
virtue, and efficacy, by which Christ does change us by his Spirit, (being
freely justified and engrafted by faith in him) and does regenerate and daily
renew us unto a spiritual and heavenly life; And in this especially, our union
does consist and is made manifest: that being ingrafted by faith, we do spring
up in all holiness and heavenly virtue, and are conformed to the image of him,
2. Cor. 3.18.
(even of Christ) unto whom we are united.

Thus then you may see plainly, the verity and realitie of this union
declared unto you; If you consider the manner and order of it, you shall find
it spiritual and supernatural (as in part I have touched already.) It is a
spiritual union; Lanchius in Ephesians.
because it is wrought by the Spirit, and by faith; by the spirit in respect of
Christ, because Christ works it by the spirit; and by faith in respect of us,
because true faith working by love, is as it were the bond and tie, by which
the blessed spirit, does as it were knit and Unite us to Christ. It is the
Spirit that works faith and all other graces in us, and therefore
questionless he works and effects this union, which is the fountain and
foundation of the rest. All these works that one and the same Spirit,
dividing to every one severally. 1. Cor. 12.11. We are made the spouse of
Christ, the members of Christ, and flesh of his flesh, by his spirit, by whom
he does incorporate himself to us, and us unto him. And faith is the
instrument by which we are united: Christ dwells in our hearts by faith,
(says the Apostle,) Ephesians. 3.17. Therefore whether Christ be propounded in the
word, or in the Sacraments, it is by his spirit and our faith, that he is
united to us, and we to him; and this not in a carnal but a spiritual manner;
for the works of the spirit are spiritual, and spiritually to be understood.
De naturali in nobis Christi veritate, quae dicimus, nisi ab eo discimus,
stulte atque impie dicimus, says Hilarie, Hilary de Trin. lib. 8. page 141.
of the natural truth of Christ being in us; Those things which we speak, we
speak them foolishly and impiously, except we first learn them of Christ. And
this is the scope of Cyrill Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 10. cap. 13.
on John, that we should understand the words of Christ spiritually, and not
after a carnal manner. Thus shall we see and know that spiritually, we may
receive Christ and be united unto him; though Christ be in heaven and we in
earth; as S. Augustine August. Tract. 50. in Ioh. fol. 368.
declares excellently in his Tractate upon John: Let the Jews (says he)
hear and lay hold on Christ, who sits at the right hand of his Father in
heaven: But they will answer, Whom shall I hold? what, he that is absent? how
shall I send up my hand into heaven, that I may hold him there? (This is done
spiritually not after a carnal manner,) Fidem mitte, and tenuisti: Send thy
faith (says S. Augustine) and then thou have laid hold on Christ; thy
forefathers did hold Christ in the flesh, and do thou hold him in thy heart,
because Christ absent is also present. For except he were present he could not
be holden of us; absent in the flesh in his humanity, but present in his
Deity, present in his Spirit working faith and love in us, by which in a
spiritual manner we may be united to Christ, though he be absent; and lay hold
of him, though he be in heaven: And thus (as plain as I can) I have set forth
unto you both the substance and manner of our union with Christ.

If any man be in Christ. I have laid the foundation of our union at large, I
will once again Catechize the point, in brief, before I come to the use. That
if it be possible, you may yet more plainly understand it. The question

Answer.
we are in Christ not carnally neither, but after a spiritual manner. For
although our bodies are not carnally in Christ, nor Christ's in ours, yet
spiritually we are united to Christ and Christ to us, we are one with Christ
and Christ with us, In the Book of Common Prayer, the exhortation at
Communion. Hosh. 2.19, 20.
we dwell in Christ and Christ in us, (as our Church does witness:) and this in
a more near manner, as is admirably declared in that excellent union of the
husband and wife. For Christ is our heavenly Bridegroom, and we are his
Spouse, Cant. 5.1, 2. He has married us unto himself in righteousness and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, and in faithfulness, and
in the knowledge of the Lord: An excellent wedding ring, beset with six
beautiful Diamonds, to illustrate that most gracious and glorious union
between Christ and his Church.

be in Christ or Christ in him? Like thing are wont to be joined to like; but
between so different and contrary natures, what communion or fellowship is
any where to be found? Are we in Christ as the creatures are in God? After this
manner not only all men are in him; (For in him we live, and move and have our
being. Acts 17.28.) but also all things that live, ( for he is before all
things, and in him all things consist, Coloss. 1. verse 7.) and this were a
union common to wicked men, and to the brute beasts, as well as to us.

How then are we in Christ?

I answer, Wicked men have no union with Christ.
(but only the elect,) no not so much as the union of nature; for howsoever in
general, in that Christ was truly man as they are, they may seem to have a
kind of communion; yet in this there is a maine difference, that Christ did
not take upon him our humane nature corrupted and defiled with the pollution of
sin, August. in Ioh. Sine peccato, sine peccati macula. S. Bern, in vigil.
Natiuit. sermon. 4. Matter est sine corruptione virginitatis, filius sine omni
labe peccati. Esaias, 53.9.
but sanctified and made most pure and holy in the womb of the blessed Virgin,
by the power of the divine Spirit; he was conceived without sin, and borne
without the least spot of iniquity; he lived and dyed without sin, Neither
was there any guile found in his mouth. The wicked therefore being conceived in
sin, and borne in sin, living and dying in sin, they can have no union
with Christ, neither in the quality of his nature nor in Grace. It is only the
Elect who are purified by the blood of Christ, justified by imputation of his
merit, and sanctified, and regenerated daily by the power of his Spirit, that
have this union and Communion with Christ; He that keeps his commandments,
dwells is him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by
the Spirit which he has given us. 1. Ioh 3.24. If any man love me, he will
keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him, John 14.24. There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. (Romans
8.1.) who works a change in their hearts, and by steps and degrees
conformes them to the image of Christ; This union is a union of faith, by which
our hearts are purified, Acts 15.9. which belongs only to the Elect: and
therefore to them only pertains this union, not barely as they are men, but
Christian men; not in respect of their generation, but regeneration; not
according to the substance of the humane nature received from the first Adam,
but according as it is renewed with sanctity and heavenly purity in the
second: by the power of whose Spirit dwelling in us, Our mortal bodies are
quickened to n^wnesse of life, Romans 6.10, 11. And thus Christ is in us, not in
the wicked: he is in us by an internal, a true and lively co-adunation and
union of the spirit, which consists in a true and sincere faith, and a true and
unfeigned love, by which we are conformed to Christ our head; for by faith and
love we are translated into Christ, so that now we live, no longer in our
selves but in him: Our life is hid with Christ in God, Coloss. 3.3. I live
(says the Apostle) yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me,
and gave himself for me. Gal. 2.20. We live not by our selves, but by Christ,
who lives in us; And therefore, first this is a most excellent benefit and
comfort to the soul of a Christian.

It is profitable for us that our life of grace is not in us, but in Christ.
For if our spiritual life of grace were our own, and did consist only in our
selves, we should soon spend it like prodigals, and die that spiritual
death, that brings death eternal, But our life being in Christ, and Christ in
us, having once given this life of grace unto us, (for our eternal comfort in
all temptations) he will never take this life totally and finally from us, but
(though he may withdraw his breath for a time) yet he will return, revive, and
quicken us to life everlasting. And to this end Christ is in us by his Spirit,
as the sap is in the tree; as the blood in the body, as the quickening Son
of God, who is Lord both of life and death, who does love his Elect with a
perpetual love, and having united once unto himself, does keep and conserve
them, as his own forever.

Secondly, Simonides the Philosopher, being asked of Hiero the Tyrant, what God
was, Cicere de not. Deor. lib. 1.
did at the first desire one days respite, and then two days, and after four
days, still doubling his request; and being demanded the reason, gave this
for an answer: Because the more (says he) I do consider of the excellency of
the essence, and power, and Majesty of God, the less able am I to express
it: So must I desire time to set forth the excellency of this our union with
Christ; it is like the peace of conscience, there is no man knows what it is,
but he that enjoys it. If you would see it a little more, cast your eyes upon
the benefit of it; and I have given you already that our life of grace is in
Christ, and conserved by him. But this is a most excellent benefit, that from
hence we have (...), a Communion and Fellowship with Christ. God is faithful,
by whom ye were called (...), into the Communion or Fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.9. And by this we have Communion, not only
with his person, but we have also Communion with him: First in his Offices. He
has made us Kings and Priests unto God the Father, Revel. 1.6.

Secondly, we have Communion with him in his goods and gifts, and graces
needful for us to salvation, yea in all the benefits of his death and passion.
He is made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30.

Thirdly, we have Communion and fellowship with him in temptation and
affliction, and that for our good and comfort; because Christ has sanctified
them unto us. As the unicorn dipping his horn in the water makes it wholesome
(though before it was poisoned) for the beasts that drink after him; so Christ
our Savior, testing the cup of afflictions and temptations for us, has made
them wholesome and profitable unto us. Yea Christ being our head, and we his
members, he having a Communion with us, and we with him, he must needs have a
feeling of our infirmities, and therefore though we be tempted, yet will he not
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it, as Saint Paul
witnesses, 1. Cor. 10.13.

This is our joy therefore, that though we be weak, yet Christ is strong; His
grace is sufficient for us, and his strength shall be made manifest in our
weakness, 2. Cor. 2.9.

Paul, I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be reueiled in us, Romans 8.17.18. Thus we
have, and shall have Communion with Christ, and this is the fruit of our union
with him. Nay hence we have not only a Communion with Christ, but with God the
Father, 1. Ioh. 1.3. 2. Cor. 13.14. Ephesians. 4.5.6. Gal. 3 26. Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
with the blessed Spirit, and (with the congregation of Saints, yea of Angels
and men, the Church militant and tryumphant, as in diverse places of the sacred
Scripture is sufficiently proved.

And thus you may see the excellent state of a Christian, the excellent benefit
of our union, this most happy Communion which is a fruit of it, and the
unspeakable love of Christ in thus freely uniting us unto himself. But what
is the state of those that are out of Christ? 3. To be out of Christ is a
miserable estate.
except they repent, and Christ of his mercy ingraft them into him, For he that
is not in Christ, Christ is not in him, and, Know ye not? says the Apostle,
that Christ Jesus dwells in you except ye be reprobates? 2. Cor. 13. 2. Cor.
13.5.
Without Christ, no grace nor goodness to be found in them. If Christ dwell
not in their hearts by faith, Satan will dwell by infidelity: If Christ dwell
not by charity, the devil will dwell by malice and envy. If Christ do not
possess them by Humility, Satan will possess them by pride. If the one be not
in them by mercy, the other will be in them by cruelty: if Christ do not
work in them a conscience of chastity, liberality, piety, purity, and other
virtues, Satan will draw them to adultery, covetousness, oppression, Symonie,
sacrilege and all kind of impiety. For where the spirit of truth is not a
directer to goodness, there will the spirit of error be a leader to
wickedness, drawing his disciples through the paths of darkness to the pit
of destruction. As is a City besieged without walls or munition, so is a man
without Christ easily overcome of the enemy, and bound to eternal thraldom;
he is like a withered branch, that shall be cut off and cast into the fire of
hell, Ioh. 15.6. 4. Union with Christ requires a Christian life.


O then beloved, how are we bound to show our thankfulness to God, for this
our most joyful and happy union with Christ, since he has made us freely to
be Christians, and engraffed us into Christ! By faith we should strive
continually to live like Christians, like those that have a union and Communion
with Christ. The Apostle in my Text does describe the state and condition of a
Christian, and yet he does not say, if any man be a Christian, he is a new
creature, but, If any man be in Christ, to show that Christianum esse, est esse
in Christo, to be a Christian, Musculus in Text.
is to be in Christ; and to be in Christ, is to live the life of Christ, and to
be made like to him, in whom we live. Whosoever is without Christ, and does not
endeavor sincerely to live the life of Christ, he is no true Christian,
though he make an outward profession of Christianity; it is an easy matter to
be made partaker of the external sacraments and name of a Christian, but not
so easy thus to be in Christ; for this requires newness of life (as I shall
show at large in the next circumstance.) If then thou would know a
Christian, or know thy self to be in Christ, look not to the external and
verbal profession, but search into thy own conscience, Ioh. 5.5.6. M. Hooker
Ecclesiast. policy, book 5. page 306.
and look to the real and actual life of a Christian. No man actually is in
Christ, but he in whom Christ is actually, and in whom the life of Christ, or
of grace and newness, from Christ does appear: he that has not the son,
has not life; and he that has not life, the life of grace, we may truly
say, he has not the son. The bird is known by her singing, the tree is
known by his fruits, and a Christian is known by his life and conversation. He
is pure by imputation of purity from the merits of Christ; and he is pure by
the grace of regeneration wrought in him by the holy and blessed spirit: for
the perfection at which he strives and labors truly according to the measure
of that grace which is given unto him, and the effects of this purity, is like
a burning lamp shining forth gloriously in all his actions; it is holiness it
self, and not the name of holiness that makes a Christian. How then can
thou be called a Christian, in whom no acts of a Christian do appear? says
S. Augustine S. Aug. de vita Christiana
of the life of a Christian. Christianus nomen iustitiae est, Christian, is a
name of righteousness, of integrity, innocence, chastity, humility, humanity,
patience, prudence, purity, piety and other virtues: and how can thou
challenge that name unto thee, in whom of so many virtues, so few are to be
found? He is a Christian who is so not in name only, Aug. in Psalm. 33.
but also indeed: he is a Christian that accounts himself to be a stranger
in his own house; for here we are pilgrims, our country is in heaven, and
there we shall be no strangers, but citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God. Aug. de vita Christ.
Christianus vnctus est (says S. Augustine) Christian is as much as anointed,
and the learned know that in ancient time, those who were anointed, were Holy
men, Kings, and Priests, and Prophets, of an high and holy calling; and thus
was Christ himself anointed spiritually, Psalm. 45.7.
and his Disciples and all Christians. To teach us, that to whom there is so
holy an annoynting, there should also be a holy life and conversation; for what
will it profit thee to be callled what thou art not, and to usurp a name that
belongs not unto thee? But if thou delight to be a Christian, do those things
that are fitting for a Christian, and then take the name upon thee to thy
comfort: it is a name that is ancient (given long since at Antioch) and
honorable better then the names of any other master whatsoever; Act. 11.26.
thou may rejoice therefore in the rightful enjoying of it; but if
otherwise thou desire to be called a Christian, and not to be so, this is a
punishment miserable and detestable enough, that thou desire to be an
hypocrite, and to be called that thou art not: for no man can have any benefit
by Christ, who will be called a Christian, and not strive and labor to be a
Christian in deed. True Christians imitate the life of Christ.
Let no man then judge himself to be a Christian, who does not truly
endeavor to imitate Christ in purity of life. Excellently S. Bernard. S. Bern.
lib. sent page 496.
Christiani a Christo nomen acceperunt, and operae pretium est, vt sicut sunt
haeredes nominis, ita sint imitatores sanctitatis; Christians receive their
names from Christ, and it is worth the labor, that as they are heirs of his
name, so they should be imitatours of his holiness. Art thou a covetous man
that make thy money thy God? thou art a Christian but only in name, and thy
money shall not profit thee in the day of vengeance. A^t thou a voluptuous man
that make thy pleasure ^hy God? thou art not a Christian but only in name,
and thy pleasure shall not profit thee in the day of vengeance. Art thou a
blasphemer, that delightest in wicked and damnable oaths? Thou art not a
Christian but only in name, and thy oaths shall condemn thee in the day of
vengeance. Art thou a glutton or drunkard that delightest in drunkenness, and
make thy wine or thy belly thy God? Thou art a Christian but only in name,
and thy abuse of Gods creatures shall certainly condemn thee in the day of
vengeance. To conclude, art thou hard-hearted, and make no conscience of
spoiling thy brother, by deceit and fraud, by robbery and violence, by
oppression and cruelty? S. Augustine S. August. de verb. Apost. ser. 21.
will tell thee, Cum tu qui Christianus es spolias paganum, impedis fieri
Christianum: When thou who art a Christian (by profession) do spoil a Pagan,
thou do hinder thy self from being a Christian; and more art thou hindered
if thou being a Christian do spoil thy brother, and thy Hypocrisy shall
one day condemn thee. All these do dishonor Christ; and separate themselves
from him by their wilful impieties, and therefore except they repent, they
cannot be saved. Excellent was the example of famous Iulitta that blessed
Martyr and servant of Christ (of whom S. Basil S. Basil. in ser.
relates in his sermons) who when she was condemned to death by her Pagan
Judges, because she would not worship their heathenish gods; hearing her
sentence she brake forth with this Christian resolution, Farewell life,
welcome death; farewell riches, welcome poverty: All that I have, if it were a
thousand times more, would I rather loose, then to speak one wicked and
blasphemous word against God my Creator. An excellent resolution, and fit to
be followed of every Christian. We should walk worthy our vocation, and have
our conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ; we should lose our riches,
our honors, yea our life and all, rather then dishonor Christ our Lord and
Savior. And that we may the better do this, I will end this part, with that
excellent counsel of S. Bernard: Bern in Cant. sermon. 21.
Disce O Christian a Christo, quemadmodum diligas Christum. Learn O Christian
of Christ, how thou may love Christ; learn to love him sweetly, to love him
prudently, to love him valiantly: Sweetly, lest thou be entised from him by
pleasure; prudently, lest thou be deceived by Satan's policy; and valiantly,
lest being oppressed by afflictions, or temptations, thou be auerted from the
love of thy Savior. Zelum tuum inflammet, charitas, informet scientia, firmet
constanta: Let his charity inflame thy zeal, let his knowledge inform thy
zeal, and let his constancy confirm thy zeal in constancy unto the end. Thus
shall thou show thy self to be a Christian, and rightly enjoy the Name of
Christ.

And thus having pricked the Vine (who is Christ) and sucked out some juice to
clear the eyes of our understandings, and refresh our spirits: Let us now come
to press the grapes, that from them we may receive a draught of sweet comfort,
to strengthen us in our pilgrimage, through the wilderness of this world, to
the Canaan of heaven. These grapes are the fruit of the Vine to be found in
our new Creation. Jf any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

This is a great mystery and therefore to speak of this my request unto you,
shall be that, 3. Branch. S. Bern. sermon. 36. ^n Cant.
which S. Bernard sometime made to his Auditors; Juuate me orationibus vestris,
vt semper possim and loqui quae oportet, and opere implere quae loquor: Help
me with your prayers, that I may be able to speak those things which I ought,
and to practice that which I speak: Thus I speaking, you vnderstandding, and
both of us practicing, Beza. Annotat in 2 Cor. 5. Aquinas in ^phes cap 4.23
Aquinas in in 2 Cor. 5. Regen^ration a new Creation.
we shall receive the Crown of glory in the end.

In the Original it is (...), A new Creation, that is, as it were a thing
newly Created of God, (as Beza soundly:) For we are re-created in our new
Creation, that we might be righteous (as Aquinas.) So that our regeneration or
renouation in Christ, is a new Creation: For Creation is a motion, ex nihilo ad
esse, from nothing, unto something, from no being, unto a being. And there is a
twofold being, the first of nature, the second of grace; the first was in the
first Creation, when the Creatures were produc^d by God of nothing, in esse
naturae, into the being of nature and then the creature was new, but since it
became old by sin. And therefore it was needful that there should be a new
Creation, in esse gratiae, into the being of grace. And this was creatio ex
nihilo, a creation of nothing also; for those that are deprived of grace, are
nothing; and those who are polluted with sin, are as nothing; Sin does so
obliterate and blot out the image of God in them, August. Peccatum nihil est
and nihil fiunt homines cum peccant. Bellar. in Psalm. 51.10. 2 No newness to
man, but in and by Christ.
that it makes them of no ability to do good, of no account in the eyes of
God: for sin is nothing; and men when they sin are made as nothing (yea
worse then nothing) as S. Augustine speaks.

If then man be as nothing by sin: If (as Bellarmine against himself
confesses) when God was to new make man, and the heart of man, he could find
nothing in man of which he might make him new, but was as it were constrained
Creare to Create, that is, ex nihilo aliquid facere, to make something of
nothing, (from which (says Bellarmine) it is evident that man cannot merit
being justified freely by grace:) If I say this be the state of man before he
be new created. Tollet. in Johan, 15.
Then how can that Pelagian, or semi-Pelagian Doctrine be justified; the one
affirming, that although the grace of Christ was necessary that we might do
good more easily, yet it was not simply needful, but that the free will of man
was able of it self to do works acceptable to God: B^za Annot. in Text.
Augustine.
The other teaching, that we are assisted only by the first grace to rise from
sin? whereas not only the faculty of willing, but also the volition or
willing it self, is this (...), this new Creation; since they are both old by
sin, and both made new by God in Christ. It is God that works in us both
the will and the deed, Philip. 2.13. Yea, both in the faculty and act of
willing, we are dead by nature, and in both, we are made alive by grace. We
were dead in trespasses and in sins, Ephesians. 2.5. And our Savior did not say,
without me, can ye not do any thing easily, or ye can do no great work, but
simply, Without me can ye do neither small nor great, neither easy nor
difficult: No manner of way are you able of your selves to do any good work
acceptable to God. Without me, can ye do nothing (says Christ.) John. 15.5.
Augustine. lib. 1. de gratia Christi contra Celestin. and Pellag. cap. 29.
August. lib. 2. contra 2. Epist. Pelagianas. caep. 9.
And thus S. Augustine applies that place. And the same Father in his second
Book against the two Epistles of Pelagius, Bonum propositum quidem adiuuat
subsequens gratia, sed nec ipsum esset nisi praecederet gratia. True it is
(says he) that the subsequent grace of Christ does help our good purpose or
desire to do good, but neither would this good purpuse be, except there went a
precedent grace before; There is a preventing Grace, and an assisting Grace,
and qui praeuenit nolentem vt velit, August in Luc 24.
subsequitur volentem ne frustra velit: He that preuenteth the unwilling with
his grace that he might will, assisteth him also with his grace that he might
not will in vain. August. de gratia and lib^ro arbitrio. c. 2.
And therefore he concludes in his book of Grace and Free will: True it is,
that our will is required to do good, but we have not that will of our own
strength, but God works in us, both the will, and the deed, according to the
Apostle. Philip. 2 13.
And the same Father again: The will of the regenerate is kindled and stirred
up by the blessed Spirit. August. de corrupti^ne and g^atia.
That therefore they are able (to do good) because they will (and desire) and
therefore they so will, because God works in them that they might will. So
that as a Lantern cannot give light of it self, except it have a Candle
lighted therein, or as the branches cannot bear fruit, except they abide in
the Vine, and the life of the Vine abide in them: No more can we do good,
except Christ dw^ll in us by his Spirit, giving life and light unto us, and we
dwell in Christ by Faith. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creatures.
Again, man in his state of nature, being brought as it were to nothing, and
worse then nothing by sin:

Hence it is evident that our second Creation was a greater work then our
first; 2. Our second Creation a greater work then our first.
For in our first Creation, there was nothing to hinder the work of God,
Dixit, and facti sumus; God did but speak the word, and we were created; but
in our second Creation, Ponitur obex, there is a resisting perverseness in our
will, striving to hinder the work of Grace; yea, the ground of this newness,
our redemption by Christ, cost a great deal of labor before it was finished:
Et dixit multa, and gessit mira, and pertulit dura (says S. Bernard: S.
Bernard. Tract. de diligendo deum.
) He spoke many things, and did marvelous things, and endured terrible
things, and all to purchase our new Creation. We were not so easily remade, as
we were made at first; the work of our Recreation cost our Savior a great
price, the price of his dear and precious blood, and that not once or twice,
but six several times. As the Pelican sheds her blood to revive her young
ones; so did Christ shed his blood to revive us. He shed his blood in his
Circumcision; in his bitter Agony in the Garden; in his Crowning with thorns;
in his Whipping with scourges; in his Crucifying with nails; in the Piercing
of his side with a spear, that the dearest blood of his most precious heart
gushed out amain. O sweet Jesus, how comes this to pass? Did we owe God a
death, and do thou pay it? Have we sinned, and art thou punished? D. Bern.
in sermon.
Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo: as a Father
sweetly; This was a work without any example; a grace without any merit of
ours, and a love beyond all love that can be imagined. I owe thee much more, O
Lord, says S. Ambrose, S. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 22.
for thy injuries by which I was redeemed, then for thy work by which I was
created.

What then shall we render unto thee, O blessed Savior, for this thy
unspeakable love? In our first Creation, thou gave us unto our selves, but
in our second Creation, thou did give thy self unto us; and when thou
gave thy self unto us, thou did then re-giue us unto our selves; And
therefore being twice given; given in our first Creation, and regiuen in our
second, we do owe our selves twice unto thee, both bodies and souls; and
though we should give our selves ten times for this, yet can we by no means
satisfy thy love. But what then shall we give thee for thy self, that thou
have not spared thine own life, but have given thy self to the death for us?
Certainly if we could give thee our selves ten thousand times for this, yet
are we nothing in respect of thee, who art the eternal God, and we but dust
and ashes.

O then beloved, what shall we render unto Christ, 3. The price of our new
creation, a motive to be a new Creature.
for giving himself unto us, and us unto our selves? or what does he require
at our hands? Certainly, it is nothing but this, that we should labor to be
new creatures, since he has paid so dear for our new creation: Dominus
factus est servus, vt servus fieret dominus; the Lord himself became a
servant, that we who were servants might be made Lords: God descended from
heaven unto earth, that man might ascend from earth to heaven: the Son of
God, was made the son of man, that men might be made the sons of God: he
that was rich became poor, that we who were poor, might be made rich: the
light it self was darkened, that we who were dark might be enlightened; the
Bread of heaven did suffer hunger, that we might be satisfied; the Fountain of
living water endured thirst, that we might drink of the fountain of life;
Gladness it self was made sorrowful, that we might rejoice; Confidence it
self did fear and tremble, that we might be strengthened; the Way to heaven
was made weary, that we without weariness might go to heaven. All this did
Christ for us, and shall we not strive to be new creatures?

Christ came a Physician unto those that were sick, a redeemer unto those that
were lost, a directing way unto those that erred, and life it self unto those
that were dead; and shall we not strive to be new creatures? Christ came as
Manna from heaven, that those might rejoice who were hungry; as a cluster of
grapes from the vineyard, that those might rejoice who where thirsty; as oil
powered out in abundance from the olive, that those might be cherished who were
in misery; and shall we not strive to be new creatures? He came as a precious
stone cut without hands from the mountain; Dan. 2.34.
that those might fear who were careless and negligent; and shall we not
strive to be new creatures? As God the Father did create all things in the
beginning with his essential word, so has he re-created all his Elect by his
incarnate Word, in the end of the world; and shall we not strive to be new
creatures? As S. Augustine observes of a Rhetorician, that being asked what was
the first and chiefest amongst the precepts of Rhetoric, he answered
Eloquution (or good utterance:) and being asked what was the second, he
answered Eloquution, and what was the third, he answered still Eloquution.
After the same manner (says the Father) if you ask me what is the first, or
the second, or the third amongst the precepts of Christian religion, I must
answer Humility. And what S. Augustine August. epist. 56, ad Dioscor.
attributes to Humility in the praise and commendations thereof, I may justly
attribute to our new creation, and to the dignity and excellency of that. If
you ask me what is the first, or the second, or the third, amongst the
precepts of Christian religion: I must answer in the words of my Text, (...),
our new creation, to be regenerated and become new men in Christ: For without
this new creation, there is no freedom from damnation, no happiness to be
obtained; for if any man be in (and will have benefit by the death of) Christ,
he is and must be a new creature; O then, beloved, let us strive and labor for
this new creation; let us not rest in our selves, till we find a change in our
souls, and become new men in Christ. Thus if we do, happy and blessed shall
we be. If any man be in Christ, he in a new creature.

But that I may explicate this point a little unto you: Who are those that are
new created, or to whom does

I answer, To those that are in Christ: If any be in Christ, says my Text;
Answ. New Creation is of the Elect.
To those who in him were chosen before the foundation of the world, that they
should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1. verse 4. To those
who are of the Election of grace, to whom is given the knowledge and faith of
Christ; Ephesians. 4.20.
for they only are regenerated, and so new created who have faith, because
regeneration is a fruit of faith, Acts 15.9. and this have only the Elect, Tit.
1.1. they only are called and justified, and so sanctified, who were
predestined before of God. Romans 8.30. And therefore to them only belongs
this grace: and they either have or shall have it, when it shall please God to
call them, (either at the first, or third, or ninth, or eleventh hour, either
in their youth or middle age, or old age) and to send them into his vineyard,
Matthew. 20. Math. 20.1, 2, 3.
A comfort to those who find but the beginnings of this grace in them; it is
the gift of God, a sign of their Election: and God will in time perfect it,
for the gifs and calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29 Phil. 1.6.
And He that has begun a good work, will perfect it in his children (says
the blessed Apostle.) Yea whom God loves, he loves to the end, as Christ
himself witnesses. Ioh. 13.1.
So that our regeneration being the work of God the Father, in Christ, by the
holy Spirit; as he has begun, so at the last he will wholly conform us to the
image of Christ, in whom we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the good purpose of him, who works all things after the Counsel
of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. If any man be in Christ, or those that are in
Christ, they are, or shall be wholly new creatures.



Answer. What is our new creation. Joel 2.12.
Our new creation is a new resurrection; for as Christ after his death did rise
again unto a new life, so a Christian, being buried with Christ in Baptism,
being washed from his sins by the blood of Christ, being watered with the
tears of a true and unfeigned repentance, does rise again to newness of life;
and this is our new creation. For as the death of Christ was an image of our
spiritual death unto sin, so was his resurrection, a type of our spiritual
rising again to newness of life. Thus S. Augustine in his Enchiridion: S.
August. Enchiridion. cap. 53.
Whatsoever is done, in the cross of Christ, in the burial of Christ, in his
ascension, in his session at the right of his Father; it was so done that in
these things there might be signified, the life of a Christian which is acted
upon the earth. To manifest this further, S. August. de Tempore.
the same Father observes a threefold Nativity: The first of Adam, when he
was created of the dust of the earth; the second of Eve, when she was made of
the ribbe of Adam; the third of Christ, when he was borne of the blessed
Virgin, all different one from the other. And to these I may add a fourth
kind, which is as much different as the rest, and this is the spiritual new
birth, both of soul and body, of which our Savior speaks, John 3.7.
Marvel not that I said, ye must be borne again: in your first birth, you
were polluted by sin; in your second therefore you must be purified by grace:
your first birth was of the flesh, in which you were dead in sin; your second
birth must be of the spirit, in which you are made alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And Except ye be borne of water and the Spirit, ye cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 3.5. Our new creation then is a
certain spiritual change or new birth, of our understandings, of our wills, of
our affections, and of all our actions; for in this our understandings are
enlightened, our wills are rectified, our affections sanctified, and all our
actions directed to the will and command of God. The whole man is regenerated,
not his soul alone, nor his body alone, but both soul and body together: For
all was polluted by sin in Adam, and all must be renewed by grace in Christ.
Create in me a clean heart, Ephesians. 4.23. A total regeneration required in us.
Psalm 52.23. Romans 2.24. Psalm. 39.1. Iam. 3.10. Ma^th. 5.34. Psalm. 59 7, 8. Luke
9.5. Iam. 1.18, 19. Iam. 1.22. 2. Pet. 2.14. Psalm. 119.37. Matthew. 5.28. Job
31.1. Joshua 7.25. Ephesians. 4.28. Prou. 6.17. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Prou. 6.18. Psalm. 1.1.
Psalm. 119.32. Math. 15 19. Tit^s 2.12. Iam. 1 15.
O God, and renew a right spirit, says David. Psalm. 51.10. And be renewed in
the spirit of your mind, says the Apostle: Heart and mind, body and spirit,
all must be new created if we be in Christ. This perfect regeneration then is
to be labored for; we must be changed outwardly, in our tongues that they
speak not wickedly by blasphemy toward God, nor evil toward our neighbor:
In our ears, that they be not hardened to good and delighted with evil, but
swift to hear the word of truth to practice it, that the life of grace may be
preserved in us: In our eyes, that they be not full of adultery; and to
prevent this, that they behold not vanity to lust after it; we should make a
covenant with our eyes as Job did, least they bring us to misery, like Achan
and his family. In our Hands that they steal not, that they shed not innocent
blood, that they work no iniquity, least the reward of wickedness light upon
us. In our Feet that they make not haste to evil, that they walk not in the
way of the wicked, but be ready to run the ways of Gods commandments. We
must be changed inwardly in our hearts, least impiety slow from them; yea in
our affections and desires, least lust when it is conceived bring forth sin,
and sin when it is finished brings forth death. This is the change that is
required, and that not in part but total. As the essential parts of man must
be changed, his soul and body; so his integrall parts, his several members:
not part of them, the eye alone, nor the hand alone, nor the foot alone, but
altogether, every one in particular. And so not some part of the heart, but the
whole heart, all the affections, all the desires of the soul: Prou. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart. For turn unto me with all thy heart, is the
Plat-forme of this new creation given by the Prophet, Joel 2.1.12. This should
all labor for and that in perfection, that they may be truly conformed to the
image of Christ. To be content with half newnes is worthy reproof. Heb. 3.12.
And yet some, yea too many there are, who live in the Church, and think
themselves to be in Christ; and yet harbor in them an evil heart to depart
away from the living God, imagining that God requires not this perfection,
this total regeneration to be in them: they think if their hands be pure,
their feet may lawfully be defiled with sin. But if Christ wash not their
feet also, Ioh. 13.8.
they shall have no part in him: if they strive not for this total new birth,
they cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. They will be contented with
wicked Saul, and the disobedient Israelites to perform part of Gods
commandments, so they may let part of them alone; this total obedience, they
cannot endure. They can be contented to destroy the common people of the
Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15.8, 9.
and the worst of the sheep and of the oxen; they can be contented to forsake
some of their petty sins, which are not so profitable nor pleasurable unto
them; But when they come to Agag the king of Amaleck, and to the best of their
sheep, when they come to their kingly sin (be it drunkenness, or adultery,
covetousness, or envy or the like,) when they come to their Delilah the sweet
sin in which their soul delights; they can by no means endure a change in
this, here no new creation must work upon them; it is a string that must not
be touched, a soar must not be searched: or if it be, it makes them kick like
a galled horse, and procures harsh music to their souls; they take him for
no friend that tells them of it, yea they are angry with God that he has made
his Law against it; and yet for all this secret impiety, they will be called
Christians, and make an outward show of holiness in their lives. But tell me
whosoever thou art, do thou think thou can come with a harlots
countenance, wiping thy lips, Prou. 30.20.
when thou h^ste been a whooring, to meet thy entising lovers (the world, the
flesh, or the Devil) and stand before Christ thy spiritual husband without
blushing, since thou can not do any thing so secretly, but he sees thee?
Prou. 5.21.
For the ways of man are before the Lord, and he pondereth all his doings,
Prou. 5.21. If thou should know that thy own wife has played the Harlot,
or is estranged from thee in her affections and love to another man, so that
her show of love and kindness to thee is but in hypocrisy, least thou
should suspect her treachery to thee: If thou should see her often
meetings with him whom thy soul hates, with thy deadly enemy, would thou
take it kindly at her hands, or think her a faithful wife unto thee? would
thou embrace her in thy arms? or set her as a seal upon thy heart, though she
loved but one besides thee? What woman would do so to such an husband? or what
husband to such a wife? I appeal then to thy own conscience; How can thou
think that Christ will look well upon thee, if thou go a whoring after any
one sin, and against thy conscience live in any one impiety, which thou
know his soul hates? His pure eye cannot endure to behold any wickedness,
2 Cor. 6.15.
neith r shall any evil dwell with him. What fellowship has light with
darkness, or Christ with Belial, or thy Savior with sin, that once cost
him the price of his own blood? Oh then whosoever thou art, wash thy heart,
Ier. 4.15.
and thy whole heart trom wickedness, that thou may be saved. If thy eye
offend thee, or hinder thee from this change, that is, any thing as dear to
thee as the apple of thine eye, pluck it out from thy heart and cast it from
thee. It is better, says Christ, to enter into heaven with one eye, Man. 5 29.
then having two to be cast into the fire of hell. It is a fearful thing to
live in any known sin, it makes thy person and thy prayer abominable in
the sight of God, Esa. 1.15. Strive therefore earnestly, and without hypocrisy
for this total change. Shake off the fetters of thy beloved sin; (for I
speak to thee that have the beginning of grace in thee, and a change in some
measure wrought upon thee) and pray earnestly unto God; and I will pray for
thee with the bl^ssed Apostle, That the very God of peace may sanctify thee
wholly, 1. These. 5.23.
and that thy whole spirit and soul and body, may be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus shall thou be happy in the change.
And thus being a new man in Christ, thou shall be united unto Christ to the
eternal joy of thy soul. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature.

S. Bern. in sent.
There was a threefolde change in Christ; the first of sublimity, into humility,
when the eternal Word of the Father, became flesh, and took our nature upon
him: the second, of contemptibility into majesty, when the man Christ, who was
then despised in the eyes of the world, was gloriously transfigured before his
disciples: the third of mutability, into eternity, when rising from the dead,
he ascended into heaven, to reign in glory for evermore. And like unto this,
there is a threefold change in man. A threefolde change in man.
The first, was the change of Adams glorious innocence in Paradise, into the
deformity of sin and wickedness; the second is the change out of the state
of nature and natural corruption, into the state of grace and regeneration in
Christ, (and this is meant in my Text.) The third and last is the change of
this state of grace, into the state of glory and happiness for evermore; and
this shall be at the r^surrection. Adams fall was a change; our resurrection
shall be a change; 3. Quest. Answ. God the author of our re-creation.
and our new creation is also a change. But who is the author of this change?
The answer is given by the Apostle in the next verse to my Text, All things are
of God; and therefore our new creation is not of our selves. It is the work of
God the Father, in the Son, and by the blessed Spirit: For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. We are the work of God in
Christ, and by the spirit: For according to his mercy he saves us, by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 1.23.
Thus inwardly; and outwardly by the word and the Sacrament, by which the
spirit does beget and increase this newness in us. No creature in the world
can work this miracle, this new birth more strange then the seven wonders of
the world; Thou art created, thou art healed, S. Bern. de graetia and liber
arbitr.
thou art saved, but which of all these is from thee oh man? Thou could not
create thy self when thou wast not; thou could not justify thy self when
thou wast a sinner, and worse then if thou had not been; thou could not
raise thy self when thou wast dead, because then thy strength was as if thou
had never been. Where then is our own free will in the state of nature?
Where is our merit at the hand of God? Those that are wise do confess a
threefolde operation, not of free will to merit, but of divine grace, and
these in man, but from God. The first is our creation; the second, our
reformation; the third our consummation and perfection to glory; and God is the
author of them all. And therefore to us humility, to him belongs the glory,
for he it is that makes us to be new creatures; 4. Quest. What kind of
creatures we are ^re-made. Answ.
Jf any man be in Christ, through the grace of God in him, he is a new
creature. It is God the Father in Christ by the blessed spirit that works
this new creation. But what kind of creatures does he make us? I answer, that
as God in his first creation, did create Adam according to his own image and
similitude, Genesis 1.27. So in our second creation, he does renew and repair in
us by little and little, the excellency of that image which we lost by the
fall of o^^ first parents; he re-makes us like unto himself, in wisdom, in
righteousness, in true holiness, alike in all heavenly virtues, as much as it
is possible (as God in his wisdom thinks convenient) for finite creatures.
To express the excellency of an infinite Creator, this similitude he
begins in this life, and will one day perfect it fully in the life to come.
The absolute pattern of this image is Christ, he is the Idaea and lively
figure of our heavenly nativity, both of that which we must strive for here,
and that which we shall have hereafter: For as we have borne the image of the
earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.49. that is,
that image of the new man, Which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. In righteousness, that is, in obedience to the
first table, Zanchus com. in Ephesians.
in the duty we owe to God; and in obedience to the second Table; in the duty
which we owe to our neighbor, and in holiness, that is, in that purity of
life, which we ought to have in our own selves, our souls and consciences in
the sight of God. And, Beholding with open face, as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord; we are changed into this same image from glory to glory, even a by
the Spirit of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3.18. So that the second creature shall be made
like, but (being confirmed by grace in Christ) more excellent then the first.
In the first creation God gave unto Adam rule and dominion over all the
creatures, and in our second creation, the right of this Dominion is re-giuen
unto us. And this Dominion we should labor to exercise. Origin and S. Chrysostom
in Genesis
But as Origin and S. Chrysostom express it; we should have dominion over the
fishes of the sea, by ruling our appetites and lustful desires; over the birds
of the heaven, by pulling down ambition with the cords of humility; over the
creeping things of the earth, by keeping in avarice with the bounds of charity;
over the beasts of the field, by holding in anger with the raines of
temperance. And thus if we do, we shall seem to rule well, and be rewarded
with double honor, as Saint Paul speaks in another kind, 1. Tim 5.17. We
shall declare our selves to be new men in Christ, such as have our parts in the
first resurrection, and of whom the second death shall have no power, Reu.
20.6. For those who are new creatures are free men in Christ, and those who are
in Christ are new creatures, If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. 5.
Quest. But what means we may attain this newnes. S. August. Tom. 9. de december
chordis.


Whosoever desires to be a subject in the kingdom of Christ, he must be a
new creature. But by what means may a man attain to this new Creation? Or how
may a man come to be a new man in Christ? Saint Augustine observes well, that
the old man in the state of nature cannot sing the new song in the state of
grace, but that he may sing it, he must strive to be a new man in Christ; but
how he may be a new man, hear not me (says the Father) but the Apostle, Put
off the old man, and p^t one the new, Ephesians. 4.24. So that as before grace we are
like Lazarus, dead in the grave of our sins, unable to rise from iniquity
until Christ give us his hand and power of grace to revive and strengthen us,
(contrary to the error of Pelagians, of which I have spoken before:) so after
this grace we have a spiritual life given unto us, (our understandings being
enlightened, and wills rectified:) and though it be but weak, yet must we
not think our selves as stocks and stones, or like children sitting idle in
the market place, but we must work in the vineyard being called, and using
the grace that God has given us, labor to work out and perfect this newness
in us: on Gods part it is wrought by the blessed Spirit within, and by the word
and Sacraments without.

But there is somewhat required of us: that we strive to cherish the sparks of
grace which God kindles in us; that we reject not the Spirit, but embrace
those special means of Faith and Repentance, and Prayer, and labor earnestly
to obtain them. Because without Faith and Repentance, none of this newness
can be found in us. Faith upon sight of our sins (meriting Gods justice on
the one hand,) and beholding the mercy of God in Christ, on the other hand,
works in us that godly sorrow which causes repentance never to be repented
off: That (...), that dolor and grief arising in the heart for sin, committed
against so good a God, so merciful a Father: it is a means by the operation
of the Spirit, to beget in us that (...), that change of the mind, that
newness which is so acceptable with God in Christ. As the Eagle feeling her
wings heavy, does plunge them into a fountain, and washing off her old
Feathers, renews her youth: So likewise a Christian feeling the the burden of
the old Man, must wash himself in the fountain of repentance, Joel. 2.12.
in a river of tears for his impuritie, that by this means, washing off the
old Feathers of sin, he may put on the new wings of righteousness; by which
he may fly with comfort (strengthened by grace) to the heavenly Tabernacle.
It is related again of the Eagle, Barradius.
that when the upper crooked part of her bill does grow long that she cannot
eat her meat, she strikes her bill against a stone, and breaking off the
part that did hinder, renews her strength: After the same manner, we must
break of the impediments of our sins by repentance, that hinder us from
taking the heavenly food of our souls, (as Daniel Dan. 4.27.
counseled Nebuchadnezzar,) that with the Eagle we may be renewed; and
strengthened more and more by Christ in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16.7.
that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, and our faith appear in
holiness, without which no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14.

Lastly, S. Augustine S. August. lib. 8. de Ciuit. dei and in Psalm. 56.
relates of the Serpent, that when she grows old, she draws her self
through a narrow hole, and by this means, leaving her old skin, she renueth
her age. Our Savior bids us, to be wise as Serpents, Matthew. 10.16. And if in
any thing, sure it is in this, that we should follow their wisdom, that
forsaking the broad way of vices, we may pass through the narrow and strait
way of repentance, and leaving off our old Coat of sin, we may be clothed
a new with the rich garments of righteousness, and so become new men in
Christ. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. But how may a man know
whether he be a new Creature or not? 6. Question. How to know we are Christians.
since there are so many in the world that make an outward show of this new
Creation, and have nothing less to be found in them; that make Religion a
cloak of hypocrisy, to cover their enormities; that are like an Iuy bush at a
Tavern door, where there is no Wine to be had: or like a blazing Comet, that
seems glorious for a while, but falls to the ground on a sudden; or as
Christ himself compares them, Mat. 32.27.
like sepulchers, that seem fair on the outside, but within are full of dead
men's bones and rottenness. And therefore since there is such deceit, how may
a man know whether he be a new Creature, and so in Christ or not? The master
of the Sentences moves a like question concerning Faith, Sent. lib. 3. Did.
2^. lib 3. Trinit. cap. 1.
whether a man may know that he have faith or not? And S. Augustine resolves
it, Fidem ipsam videt quisque incorde tuo esse, si credit, vel non esse si non
credit. Every man may see Faith to be in him, if he believe, or not to be, if
he believe not. In like manner it is with this new Creation, we may see by
diverse signs, whether we be new men or no: of many I will give you a few. S.
Bernard, in simil.
which is the soul of a new Creature. The first, is the bewailing of our
natural corruption, and the guilt of sin, like that of the Sea, of the
Rivers, of the Fountains, and of the Snow, all to make plentiful with
spiritual graces; and if thou can find these four spiritual Rivers in thy
soul, then may thou be persuaded, that thou art a new Creature.

Cant. 4.1. These two are in the soul of a new Creature. The first is a true
meditation of the love of Christ, like a Cordial Electuary to comfort the
heart. Creature.

creature, which is as the grave in which he was buried. And if thou can find
Christ thus resting in thy soul, thou may certainly be persuaded that
thou art a new Creature.

that our hearts should be open toward heaven, and shut toward the earth. And
if thou have thy heart thus spiritually disposed and ordered within thee, thou
may assure thy self that thou art a new Creature.

Lastly, there is a relation of a Controversy which fell Creation is not to be
found; and therefore as yet you are neither in Christ, nor can you (without
repentance) have any benefit by him. But if the temptations of Satan, the
world, or the flesh, be but like sparkles flying in the air, or falling on the
water, that suddenly perish and vanish away: If they be but like seed sown by
the way side, that wants rooting; or like Corn on the house top, that
withers before it be plucked up, before it bring forth fruit; or if these
seed of the Devil, these evil lusts, and concupiscence should grow a while
like the tares amongst the wheat, and appear in your actions: Yet if you epsy
them betime like the faithful servants, Matthew. 13.27.
and be diligent and careful to pluck them up, that they choke not the
wheat, the good seeds of grace, the good motions of the Spirit within you. If
you labor faithfully to quench the sparks of sin* (having by Satan's
violence, and your own weakness, broken forth into the flame of some evil
deeds in your lives) with the tears of true repentance. If you find a sorrow
in your souls, that you have yielded so much to Satan, as to entertain his
evil motions; as not to have been more watchful to avoid his fleights, more
careful to escape the occasion of his entisements; but suffered lust to
proceed so far, as to conceive and bring forth sin in you, yea some open
sin, to the dishonor of God and shame of your profession: (for into such may
the dear child of God fall by the violence of temptations:) If this be a
grief to you; and that you can fly by faith in Christ, like Prodigals, to the
Father of mercy, bewailing your sins, and craving pardon; and resolve with your
selves to be more careful hereafter, to eschew the evil, and to do the
good: If you find (with S. Paul) a will and desire in you to cherish the
graces that God has bestowed upon you; Romans 7.18.
and so to increase your regeneration, that you may be conformed to the image
of Christ: It is evident that this new Creation is begun in you; And
therefore without question ye are in Christ, and Christ who by his Spirit has
begun so good a work, he will increase his grace, and one day bring it to
perfection, to the eternal joy and comfort of your souls. For if any man be
once in Christ, he is and shall be a new Creature.

But what if I have not these signs of newness in me (may some man object, 1.
Objection. Against our new Creation.
) am I therefore out of Christ, and so have no part of his death and passion?
then am I in a fearful and miserable estate; for I find that Satan's
temptations oftentimes get the victory over me, that I am not able in many
things to resist them; that I have much corruption in me; for I see a Law in my
members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the
Law of sin, so that what I would do, that do I not, and what I would not
do, that do I. Answer. To comfort a weak Christian.
I answer this was Saint Paul's complaint, Romans 7.19. And know this for thy
comfort, that if thou have but the beginnings of grace, and a desire to have
them increased, thou art entered into Gods hospital, and God will in due time
wholly cure the wounds of thy soul; Luke 10.34.
he will power in wine and oil, and not leave thee till he bring thee to
perfect health. And this striving and combating against sin (though it be yet
but in the Embrio, in the conception as it were, in desire only, yet) it is an
evident sign, that grace has entered into thy heart, and this new creation is
begun in thee. For while the strong man armed keeps the palace, Luke
11.21.22.
the things that he possesses are in peace: that is, so long as Satan dwells
in the corrupt heart of a natural man, without any grace of faith, or this
spiritual newness in him; all is in peace, there is none of this combating or
striving between the flesh and the spirit in his soul. But when a stronger
then he comes, that is, when Christ comes to dwell in the heart by faith,
and by his Spirit to work in us this new creation, then is the war begun
between Christ and Belial, and this combat to be found in the heart of a
Christian; which is a plain demonstration that thou art in Christ, yea though
thou find many corruptions which are not yet fully purged from thy heart. For
as a living body although naturally it be the subject of sense, yet one part
may for a time be benumbed when the rest are quick and lively; so a regenerate
man, in whom this work is begun, may have some part unreformed, when the rest
is renewed by grace. As a man is not borne a strong man at the first, nor a
plant grown up to a tree in a moment: so it is with the state of a Christian,
we are by degrees conformed to the image of Christ. Musculus in Text.
Vetus creatura non ita subito exuitur, nec noua repent induitur, (says a
good interpreter) The old man is not so soon put off, nor is the new man so
soon put on; this must have time to be brought to perfection. It is a
comfortable observation of S. Bernard: S. Bern in sermon. 1. Domin. Palm.
Qui parvulus natus est, parvulos a gratia non excludit, He that was borne a
little one himself, does not exclude little ones from grace, that is, such as
are babes in this new creation. For as a little branch is as truly in the
vine, as a great one, though it bring not forth so much fruit; so is a man
that is but a new convert, and newly engrafted into Christ by faith, as truly
in Christ: yea and (though he be weak in himself, and may seem easily to be
broken off, yet) Christ will keep him as sure in him, and nourish him with
grace, till he come to strength, as he that has been a long time in Christ,
and obtained an excellent measure of this new creation. For he that is once
engrafted into Christ by faith, though Christ may suffer him to be shaken with
the wind of temptations; Matthew. 14.30, 31.
or with Peter on the water to fear and doubt and begin to sink, (being
affrighted with the waves of Satan's assaults,) though Christ may leave him to
himself for a time, yet he will never totally and finally forsake him: he will
not suffer the wind to break him off, nor the waves of the sea to drown him:
For though we be weak, yet Christ is strong; though we be often unconstant,
yet Christ is constant in his love to the end.

Imperfectnesse in our brethren, no sufficient cause to condemn them for
reprobates. Ezekiel 47.3, 4, 5.
Seeing therefore this grace of newness in a Christian, is but like those holy
waters in Ezekiels vision, first to the ancles, then to the knees, after to the
loins, and at last a great river not to be passed over, that is, not perfect
at first, but increasing by degrees; and since that many who are engrafted into
Christ, may yet have some corruption to be found in them not fully cleansed: It
must teach us not rashly to condemn those for hypocrites, for such kind of
Civil honest men which cannot be saved, whom we may see subject to some
imperfections. What though thy brother has not obtained so great a measure of
grace as thou have. Is it the part of a Christian, in an instant to enter into
the treasury of Gods secrets, and condemn such a one, for a reprobate? Who
gave thee authority to climb up into the Judgment seat of Christ, that thou
should so speedily pronounce sentence against thy brother? and because
regeneration is but new begun in him, exclude him quite out of the favor of
God? Charity is the badge of a Christian, and thence thou may learn a
far better lesson. Math. 7.1.
Judge not that ye be not judged. If thou see thy neighbor wicked, labor to
convert him; If thou see him ciuilly honest, outwardly just in his actions to
men, keeping in some good measure, the second table; but not so diligent as
thou art in observing the first: if he have only restraining grace, as thou
may imagine (though it be hard to judge the heart, of which God only is the
searcher;) Damn him not presently (and much less thy weak brother, for every
slip and fall into sin by Satan's violence, or his own frailty;) but grant
him the benefit of repentance, and pray for him rather, that God would give him
renewing grace, that by little and little he may wholly be changed, and come to
that perfection which thou think thou have obtained. Thus shall thou more
easily win thy brother, and declare thy sincerity that thou desire his
good. If thy zeal be hot, guide it with knowledge. Every plaster is not fit
for one soar; some must have wine, and some oil, some the Law, and some the
Gospel; Luke 10 34.
if thou apply not aright, thou may sooner wound then heal, sooner destroy
then save the soul of thy brother. I conclude this with this admonition. Take
heed least Satan infect thee with spiritual pride. 2. Gods acceptance of
sm^ll grace (in Christ) no argument to stand at a stay.
A censuring spirit is one mark of an Hypocrite: the Pharisie condemned the
Publican; but humility received the blessing: This man went home justified
more then the other, Luke 18.14. Secondly, this favor of God in Christ Jesus,
that he accepts lambs as well as sheep, Babes in grace, as well as men of
riper years, must not move us to stand at a stay, or to sit idle, as if we
needed not to go any further; for there is a grows in graces required of us.
Grow in grace (says the Apostle) 2. Pet. 3.18. And Be (that is, strive to be)
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, says our Savior, Matthew. 5.48.
Howsoever sometimes by the subtlety of our spiritual enemies, we may be like
the Sun at Christ death, Luke 23.45.
darkened with the thick mists of temptations or afflictions; yet we must not
be like Ioshuahs Sun that stood still: Joshua 10.12 2 King. 20.9.
nor like Ezekiahs Sun that went backewards; but like David's Sun that
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, as a Giant to run his
course. Psalm. 19.4, 5. I have a Baptism, says Christ, to be Baptized
withal, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished? Luke 12.50. We have a
Baptism likewise to be Baptized with all, namely this regeneration and
newness in Christ, and how should we be straitened, till it be perfected in
us? There be many that will strive to be in the newest fashion, to have the
newest head-tyre, the newest vpholder for their pride: but they will not strive
to be new creatures; except it be by daubing and painting their faces with
hellish devices, taking upon them to mend their creation, as being angry with
God, because he has made them no better. But shall the clay challenge the
potter, and say why have thou made me thus? Certain it is, that as a painter
h^uing finished his work cannot endure that a stranger should come and lay
other colors upon it; so is it impossible God should endure that a mortal
woman whom he himself has created, should by painting her face, take upon her
to correct the workmanship of God. True it is, that cursed and painting
Iesabel was one of this number; but the vengeance of God brought her to a
fearful destruction, the dogs did eat the flesh and drink the blood of
Iesabel. 2. Kings 9.30. I will end this objection with that exhortation of S.
Bernard: S. Bern. de modo been viuendi.
Study to please Christ Jesus, not with precious garments, or new fangled
fashions, but with newness of life: not with the beauty of the flesh, but
with the beauty of the mind; not with the outward face, but with the inward
heart; by putting off the old man, and being clothed with the new: and
endeavor earnestly for an increase of this newness; thus shall thou show thy
self to be a Christian, and so to be a favorite of Christ, not only to
dwell with him (as the favorites of Kings so highly esteemed) but to dwell in
him, and he in thee, which is far better: Jf any man be in Christ he is a new
Creature.

But once again some Christian may reply, 2. Objection of Satan to move ^o
despa^re.
howsoever I have heretofore felt these beginnings of grace, and some of these
signs of newness in me, by which I might be persuaded that I was in Christ,
and Christ in me: yet now I find that I am subject to manifold temptation^,
and am sometimes overcome to fall into grievous sins which wound my
conscience; yea I see a decay of grace in me, I find a weakness of faith,
and a kind of deadness^ in my soul, so that I delight not in the Law of God,
as I should; nor do I feel that assurance of the favor of God, and of my
salvation as I desire; and therefore I fear that my faith was but feigned, and
my holiness but in show, and so that I am not in Christ nor Christ in me, and
hence I conclude that woeful and miserable is my estate.

This objection is large, and has diverse parts, 1. Answ. First of the
conclusion.
but I will answer all as brief as I can. And first for the conclusion, who is
it that tells thee that thou art not in Christ, nor Christ in thee; and
therefore thou art out of Gods favor, and the benefit of Christ belongs not
unto thee? Thou will replye, it is thine own conscience, seeing thy decay in
faith, in holiness, and the burden of thy sins too heavy for thee to bear:
this pronounces the curse against thee, because thou have not continued in
those things that are written in the book of the Law to do them; Deuteronomy, 27.26.
because thou have not that measure of grace which should be in a Christian, in
one that is in the favor of God. But once again, who is it that persuades thy
conscience to this doubting upon these grounds?

First it may be, it is God, and then it is certainly for thy good, 1. Answ.
How and to what end God suffers doubting.
that God for a time leaves thee to thy self, and suffers these doubtings to
be in thee. It may be it is for some secret sin, for which thou art not yet
humbled, or of which yet thou have not a true sight and repentance; and then
God does it to work a humiliation in thee, that thou may be converted and
turn truly unto God; or it may be, it is to keep thee from security, to
make thee the more to fear sin and the fruit of sin (this spiritual
desertion) that thou may avoid it: or to prevent spiritual pride; or to
try thy faith, patience, constancy, and trust in his promise; or to move thee
to esteem better of the seru^ce of Gods love, and of these spiritual graces
in thee hereafter: or to teach thee that confessing thine own unworthiness
and weakness in performing of the Law, thou should fly by earnest prayer
unto Christ, who has performed it for thee, and implore mercy at his hands,
with the renewing of these graces and assurance of Gods love again unto thee;
because in him God is well pleased, and in him thou may find mercy in the
depth of misery. If it be God, it is for these or the like ends, and it is a
sure argument to confirm thy faith, to ascertaine thee that thou art engraffed
into Christ, and that mercy embraces thee on every side.

2. How and to what end Satan moves to doubt. 1. Pet 5.9. Jonas 4.7. Isa. 50.4.
Again, if it be Satan that tempts and persuadeth thee to this doubting, he
does it to work despair in thy soul, and so to procure thy utter
destruction. And therefore believe him not, yield not unto him; resist the
temptation at first entrance, prevent the occasion by not musing too much
(without asking counsel at the learned) of those high mysteryes which thou
understand not; and avoid solitariness, the opportunity that Satan desires
to hatch his mischievous practices (when Eve was alone, Genesis 3.2, 3.
she was tempted by Satan.)

Be circumspect and give no credit to him that persuades thee to such evil
motions. First, because he is a liar, Ioh. 8.48. Secondly, because he is thy
enemy that seeks thy destruction, 1. Pet. 5.8. And why should thou believe
a liar, and give credit to thy adversary, rather then to the sweet promises
of the Father of mercy? This were injustice in thee, to prefer Satan before
God, and thy enemy before thy friend. How full the Scripture is of the sweet
promises of mercy, if thou searchest, Ezekiel. 18.27. Mat. 11.28. Job 13.14, 15
thou may find to thy comfort. And therefore hold this for a ground, that
though thou may be subject to doubting, yet by Gods assistance (with holy
Job) thou will never despair, but pray earnestly and without ceasing for the
gift of perseverance, and the re-assurance of Gods favor; thus shall thou
find comfort in the latter end. And thus I have answered thy conclusion, to
show that thou ought not to despair of the Favor of God in Christ: because
Gods mercy is free, for the merit of Christ, not for thy deseruings.

Again, that thou art subject to diverse temptations, 2. Answ. Of Satan's
objections.
and entised often to grievous sins: sometime to think that there is no God,
to doubt of the Scripture of God, of his providence, his power, or the like;
sometimes to deny Christ, sometimes to lay violent hands upon thy self,
sometimes to sin against the first table, and sometimes against the second:
and that although thou desire and prayest to be free from them, and from
those ill motions and corruptions that are in thee, yet thou find that thou
can not, (Satan, the world, and the flesh not leaving off to assault thee)
and therefore beginnest again to fear thy estate, to doubt of Gods love, and
to be persuaded that the promises of grace belongs not unto thee; and
therefore thou ought not apply them particularly unto thy self.

1. Th^^^ c^u^es of Co^^^^n^s in the (...) o^ G ds ch ldren. Iam. 3.2.
I answer, that these temptations and corruptions may sometim^s be f^und in the
b^st of Gods children (in those upon whom he has bestowed an excellent
measure of grace,) arising either from the corruption of their own natur^s,
from which they are not yet fully purged, and in which there are the seeds of
all th^se sins, of atheism, infi^elity and the like: or else from the
temptations of Satan, from which they neither are, nor can be free so long as
they live in this vale of misery. Paul was often buffeted with Satan's
temptations, Romans 7. 2. C r. 12.^. Genesis 9.24. Genesis 19.33, 34 Genesis 12.^9. Psalm.
51.^^. Job 13.6. Job. 16 9.
Peter had a shrewd fall when he denied his master; Noah, Lot, and faithful
Abraham had their resurrections from sin, and David was constrained to pray,
Create in me a clean heart oh God, and how t^rrible were Jobs temptations?
Job. 6.4. If these then were not free, how can thou look to be privileged?
2. Christians in this life ^^e ever soldiers and ha^^ these enemies to fight
against
But to satisfy thee further, know that thou art yet a member of the Church
militant, and therefore subject to this fighting and warring continually
against sin and Sat^ns temptations; nor can thou be free from these till
thou art a member of the Church tryumphant, which shall be in the world to
come. For first, thy regeneration is not perf^ct in this life, and therefore
the seeds of sin and corruption remaining, there is a sear and doubting in
Gods dearest children, yea and sometimes a kind of d^spayre; but Christ has
felt the terror of Gods absence that the faithful might be delivered from it:
yet there will be a continual combat in thee between the flesh and the
spirit. 1 Pet. 5.8. M^t. 27.49.
Secondly, Satan is a perpetual enemy, and he will never leave off to seek
thy destruction. Howsoever therefore thou may get the victory and be at
peace for a time, (when upon true repentance thou art reconcil^d unto God,) yet
thy enemies will adv^nture again, and thou shall be sure of many skirmages
with them before thou can pass through the wilderness of this world to the
Canaan of heaven. Temptation is one sign that thou art the child of God, and
it is profitable for a Christian, therefore Saint James, Count it all joy
(says he) that ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trial
of your faith, works patience, Iam. 1.2, 3, 4. Our Savior himself was
tempted, and that to grievous sins, to idolatry, to distrust in Gods
providence, to doubt whether he were the Son of God or not; to pride, and
vainglory, yea to lay violent hands upon himself, and be the cause of his
own death; and when the devil left him, it was but for a season, Luke 4.13.

Saint Paul was an excellent Christian, and the dear child of God, and yet
could not be free from ^hese assaults; he had the seeds of sin in him, and a
(...) in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, Romans 7.23.
and often leading him captive to the law of sin; he had inward enemies, and
he was not free from outward; the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him;
that is, 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
Satan assaulted him with one temptation or other to move him to sin. And
Saint Paul prayed thrice, that is, often and earnestly to be free from it, that
he might have had no more of these assaults; and why did not God grant his
desire? If he would have given this freedom to any, then why not to Saint
Paul? I answer, the state of Saint Paul required it, (being a member of the
Church militant) that he should not be free, least he might grow secure, leave
off fighting, and so cease to be a Soldier, which we must not do in this
life; for we must fight manfully, and be faithful Soldiers to the death, that
Christ may give us the Crown of life, Revel. 2.10. S. ^^^n. (...) ^^rm
Daemonis est mala suggerere, nostru^ est non consentire, It is the property
of the Devil to suggest evil motions, but it is our parts not to consent unto
them; for as often as we resist them, so often we overcome the Devil, and we
honor our God, who visits us that we should fight, who h^lp^th us that we may
overcome, who strengthens us that we faint not in the combat, as Saint
Bernard excellently. To be tempted by Satan is Satan's sin, not thine; but to
yield and consent to temptations, this is sin in thee. Christ was tempted (as
I said before) but temptations to him were but like sparks of fire falling
upon the waters, quickly quenched. But to us they are like sparks falling upon
tinder, or dry row, quickly set on fire; and therefore we had need to pray
that our hearts may be wet with the dew of Grace, that we may the better resist
and overcome them. And comfort thy self with this, that God (who is thy loving
Father in Christ) has the Devil in chains; and as he stays the waves of
the Sea at his pleasure, Job 38.8. so he holds Satan as with bit and bridle,
that he can tempt thee no otherwise, nor any longer then God sees for thy
good, as is evident by the example of Job. Chap. 1.12. And if the children of
God be tempted and overcome by the^, yet upon true repentance and coming unto
Christ, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation for our sins. 1. John 2.1. If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; but if we acknowledge our
sins, he is faithful and just (according to his promise) to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1. John 1.

We must not then conclude, that because we are subject to temptations, or
because the seeds of sin are still in us, and the corruption of our nature not
fully purged, that therefore we are out of the favor of God; (for these may be
in Gods dearest Saints.) But we must pray to God for help; 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
Heb. 10.35. Encouragements from the state of a Christian to endure the combat.
Because he is the Lord of peace, who gives peace to his children. Cast
therefore thy care upon God the finisher of thy faith, 1 Pet. 1.2. And labor
earnestly to resist these temptations, and endure the combat with patience,
having an eye to our Captain, Christ Jesus, who is the Author and finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12.1.2. And to strengthen thy faith, and free thee from
doubting the better, let me entreat thee to remember, that the state of a
Christian in this life, is but like a man on the top of a Ephesians. 2.14. Romans
3.24. 2.
and in whom (upon repentance) we are justified freely by his grace. Mat.
14.28.29.30.31.
Or whenever Peter on the water, whose faith at first was so strong, that at
the call of Christ he came boldly to him on the water without doubting. But
when he saw the waves coming against him, he presently doubts and fears
drowning; begins to sink, til finding himself unable to save himself, he
flies to Christ, and prays earnestly to him for help, Master save me, J
perish. And then Christ gives him his hand, and bringing him into the ship,
saves them from drowning. And in like manner it is with a Christian; at first
when Christ calls him to faith and repentance by the preaching of the
Gospel, being persuaded by the Spirit of God to believe, he comes boldly unto
Christ, being moved by the excellency of Christ's merit, and the free promises
of grace and mercy in him; but when he once comes to see his unthankfulness,
and the weakness of his faith and obedience; the unbelief, and want of
Sanctification in him: then (the waves of Satan's temptations and corruptions of
his own nature assaulting him) fears and doubtings sease upon him: and he is
ready to sink down into the Sea of despair for want of Faith.

If this be thy estate, what must thou now do, but confess and acknowle^geth
(...), 4. Weak Christians should imitate Peter. Iam. 5.13. James 1.17.
an^ insufficiency, and with Peter (b^i^g re^d^ to (...)) fly unto Christ, and
pray unto hi^ for co^^^^^, the Autho^ and fountain of life and peace. Jf any
m^^b^ ^fflict^d, l t him pray, (says S. James.) Thus will Christ give thee the
hand of his gracious assistance, (as he did to Pet^r) and delivering thee in
his due time from the w^ues of fear, and Sea of despair, he will bring thee
safe into the ship of Comfort, and re-assurance of his love and favor again.
And to find out this assurance and persuasion of thy Election and Gods favor,
to which S. Peter 2 Pet. 1.10.
exhorts that by holiness we may perfect our assurance, (as S. Paul exhorts to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, to keep us from security and
presumption, Phil. 2.12.) As he that would find the Sea, must take the River by
the hand, and follow that: So a Christian, who would find out his Election, and
be assured of his Calling, he must go to the golden Chain of his
Predestination, and lay hold on those linkes first that are nearest unto him:
He must begin, first, to find out the effects and fruits before he can
find the cause. The Sun rising is known by the light approaching, the fire
by the heat, the tree by the fruit, and so our Election by the effects and
signs of it. If we go first to that unsearchable depth of Gods secret
counsel, to that most glorious Sun of his wonderful decree: (as Satan will
move us to do, hiding the effects and signs of his free grace from us, that
we may be confounded in the search of the cause) how can we choose but be
drowned with the depth, and have the eyes of our weak faith, dazelled with
that unspeakable brightness of the wisdom and knowledge of God? For in this
manner, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?
Romans 11.33. If we find the light then in us, we need not doubt but that the
Sun of Gods favorable countenance in our free Election has shined toward
us, and once shining upon us: though it be eclipsed or darkened by the clouds
of temptation, or corruption for a time, yet when God sees it fit for us, it
will shine again; for being once given, Romans 11.29.
it can never be totally and finally taken from us. The means how to find out
our Election.
To find thy desire therefore, consider that of S. Paul, Romans 8.29.30.31.31.
Whom God did foreknow, he did also Predestinate, to be conformed to the image
of his Son, partly by inherent righteousness and sanctification wrought by
the Spirit, begun in this life, and to be perfected in the life to come; and
partly by glory with Christ for ever in heaven. And whom he did Predestinate to
this end, freely in Christ before all time, them he calls in time by the
preaching of the Gospel, from the dark ignorance of the world (who know not
the way to happiness) unto the light of the knowlegde of Christ. And whom he
has thus called to know Christ and believe in him; that is, to be persuaded
that the Sacrifice of Christ's death and Passion has sufficiently and fully
satisfied the justice of God for their sins, (they repenting of their sins
and coming unto Christ to be refreshed by him) Them also he justifies, that
is, Math. 11.28.
accepts as just and righteous freely for Christ's sake, by the consideration
of which they have and may have peace with God: (because God is reconciled and
at peace with them in Christ) Romans 5.1. And whom he justifies, them (says the
Apostle) he will glorify. But first working regeneration and sanctification in
some measure in them; and so conforming them to the Image of his Son, (of
which the Apostle had spoken before) effecting (I say) a change in them by his
Spirit. First, in their understandings to know, and in their wills to desire
good, that which may may be pleasing in the sight of God. Secondly, in their
lives and actions (in thankfulness to God for their free justification in
Christ,) to strive and endeavor to the uttermost of their powers to to do
that which is agreeable to his will, till having finished their course, they
obtain glory in heaven.

This is the order of our salvation; and we must not now begin at the first of
these, the Foreknowledge of God, or the Act of Gods Predestination, to know
whether we belong to God or no (for then we are sure to be confounded:) but we
must begin at the last of these that is given to the Saints in this life. And
this is our sanctification, and newness of life, of which our Apostle speaks
in my Text. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Prove and examine thy self then (as the Apostle exhorts) ask thine own
conscience, and look with an impartial eye, as not to flatter thy self with
the conceit of that grace which thou have not, so not to deny thy self that
grace which thou have. See if thou can find in thee: First this change, that
whereas by nature, first thy will and desires were corrupted, 1. Romans 7.5. Romans
8.5.
lusting wholly after sin, and being contrary to the Law of God, by grace thy
will and desires are now to do good; and thou art sorry that thou have not a
greater measure of grace in thee to desire better, to hunger and thirst more
earnestly after righteousness: know for thy comfort, that in this thou art
blessed, Matthew. 5.6. and in the end thou shall be satisfied. Secondly, for thy
actions, which by nature were vile and wicked, being the works of the flesh,
of which S. Paul speaks, Galat. 5.19.20.21. (or the like) unto all which we
are subject by nature; yea, not only to do such things but to have pleasure in
them that do them, as the Apostle testifies of the Gentiles, Romans 1.32. yea,
to work all uncleanness even with greediness: yet now thou art changed, so
that thou love not sin, but hate it, nor delightest to commit any
iniquity, but art sorry for it, if thou know once that thou have done that
which is contrary to the Law of God. Yea that thou have a love and desire and
endeavor to perform the whole law (which is that perfection of parts required
in a Christian in this life (for we must have an eye to all Gods commandments
as David had; Mat. 5.48.
Psalm. 18.22.
) if thou can find these and the like signs in thee, though it be but
imperfectly in respect of that perfection of degrees which we cannot attain
unto in this life. For our best actions are and will be full of imperfection;
yet these are infallible signs, that thou art in Christ, that Christ dwells
in thee by his Spirit, working these good things in thee, and therefore thou
have faith; by which thou being justified, thou art certainly called; and
being effectually called, thou art certainly the true child of GOD, and thy
name is written in the book of life, which being once written, can never be
blotted out. This is the way to be assured of thy Election, and the more
holiness and sanctification thou can get, the more sure thou may be. But
if thou yet doubtest, because of thy imperfection in these, because thou art
not yet fully regenerated, know that Christ is thy perfection, and God
beholds thee in him. For if we look upon our selves, when we have done all
that we can, we must say we are unprofitable servants: and for peace in our
selves, we cannot find it; Genesis 8.9.
so that as Noah's Dove was constrained to fly to the Arc, before she could
find where to rest, so are we constrained to fly to Christ, before we can
find rest to our souls, Math. 11.29. As the Israelites therefore whenever
they were stinged, did go presently to the brazen serpent, Number. 21.9.
by beholding of which, they were cured: so whenever thou art wounded by
sin, or moved to doubting by thine own weakness, or Satan's temptations,
fly presently to Christ, behold him by the eye of Faith, how he was crucified,
how he shed his blood, how he died, and rose again; how he sits on the right
hand of his Father, and makes intercession, and all this for thee to purchase
thy peace. James 1.12.
And with this persuasion, possess thy soul in patience, and hope that thou
shall one day enjoy that inheritance of the Saints, where is freedom from all
these fears and doubtings, which he has bought for thee, (not for thy merits)
but for the price of his own blood. This Hope will not make thee ashamed. Romans
5.5. Yea, by this Hope thou art and shall be saved, Romans 8.24. Conclude not thy
self then to be out of the favor of God, because thou art not yet free from
sin, and Satan's temptations, but comfort thy self in hope, that as Christ's
prayer for Peter was heard, (...). 22.32.
that (though he failed in faith, and that for a time, yet) he could not fail
totally and finally; so it is heard also for thee. For he has prayed for thee
as eff^ctu^lly as he did for him, yea for all that shall believe on him, John
17. I^h. 17.20.
And th refore as Job Job 19.25.
in the midst of his mis^^e did co fort himself with this meditation, that
his R^d^mer un^d: so do thou comfort thy self in C^ri^^, th^^ one drop of
his blood is of virtue to procure pardon for all thy sins, if the sins of
all the men in the world were thine. And therefore wait with pati^^ce, 2. Cor.
22.9
and b^ content with Gods answer to Paul: My g^a^e is su^^^^ient for thee, and
my strength shall be made man^fest in thy we^^^nesse. It is not for our merits,
b^t for the me^i s o^ C r^^^, that God freely accepts us. And this is the
pr^mise of God, to those who are once his ch^ldren, (on whom h^ has ou^e
bestowed, these graces of the knowledge of Christ, of faith, of repentance, of
^egeneration and newness of life, (which thou can not deny once to have
been in some measure in thee;) though he suffer them to fall into diverse great
and grievous temptations, (yea temptations of this nature) yet he will lay no
more upon them, 1. Cor. 10.13.
then he will make them able to bear; and if he suffer them to be overcome for
a time, yet will he make a way to escape, he will give them the grace of
repentance and faith, by which they shall be reconciled and reassured of the
love of their heavenly Father. Doubt not then to apply the promises of God in
particular into thy self, upon repentance and coming to Christ: because their
is no kind of sin which thou can commit, but the mercy of God in Christ,
is far greater. For that sin against the holy Ghost thou can not commit;
which is not any transgression of the moral Law, either in general or
particular, either of ignorance or infirmity, or a sin committed wilfully,
presumptuously and against a man's conscience (though these be grievous sins:
Bucan. loc. Com.
) But an universal and a final Apostacy or falling away from Christ; it is a
voluntary renouncing of the known truth of the Gospel, and a rebellion
proceeding from the hatred of it, being joined with a tyrannical,
sophistical, and hypocritical oppugnation of the same, when a man that has
been enlightened with the true knowledge of Christ, and convinced in his
conscience of the truth of it by the blessed Spirit, Heb. 6.5.
and has tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
(but it is only a taste, for they that do feed of these graces spiritually,
and do digest them, and are nourished by them to newness of life; God will
never suffer them to fall into this sin) when such an one, I say, shall
afterward universally and with a full consent, fall from the truth, deny
Christ, persecute him with reproaches, despising the sacrifice of his death and
passion, and continuing thus without repentance to the end: this is the sin
against the holy Ghost. Thus did Julian and other Apostates sin, and of these
is that of the Apostle to be understood, Heb. 6. verse 6. This sin, I say,
thou can not fall into (being ingrafted into Christ by faith:) and for all
other sins, be they never so grievous, remission is promised upon faith and
repentance; and that freely, not for the merit of thy faith or repentance, but
for the merit of Christ. Why then should thou not apply the general
promises of grace unto thy self in particular? Come unto me (says Christ) all
ye that be weary and heavy leaden, and I will refresh you: this promise is
general, Mat. 11.28. But thy own conscience will tell thee, that thou art
weary and heavy laden with the burden of thy sins; and therefore thou may
well conclude, that coming unto Christ, the promise of mercy belongs to thee:
Whosoever shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: this is a general
promise, Mark. 16.16. But thy own conscience will tell thee, that thou art
baptized, and that thou beleeuest (though it may be thy faith is but weak, but
like a grain of mustardseede (that is, very small) Matthew. 17.20.) yet if thou
can but say with the man in the Gospel, I believe, Lord help my unbelief,
Mark 9.24. If thou can but touch the hemne of Christ's vesture with the
finger of faith (if the hand of faith by which thou may lay fast hold on him
be wanting;) yet by this touch of Christ even with the finger of faith, the
virtue of Christ may flow forth sufficiently to stop the bloody issue of thy
sins, and to cure the maladies of thy soul; and with this thou may truly
apply the promises of grace unto thy self. To conclude this then, since thou
art, and must be a soldier, while thou live in the camp or field of the
Church; faint not at the sight of thy enemies, though they be many and
terrible; 2. King. 6.16.
but comfort thy self with this, that (as Elisha said to his servant) There
are more with thee then with them, yea and (though thou be weak,) yet the
strongest part is on thy side, thou have God thy friend to send thee more aid
of grace (if at any time thou art decayed in thy strength:) thou have Christ a
conqueror thy Captain, under whose banner thou do fight; thou have the
blessed Spirit to encourage thee: and though he may leave off to show his
favorable presence for a time, yet will he not long be absent from thee;
though for a moment he hide his face, yet with everlasting kindness will he
have compassion on thee, Esaias 54.7, 8. In a word, thou have myriades of Angels
to accompany thee, and the prayers of the Saints of the whole Church, yea of
Christ himself, at the right hand of his Father, like the showting of the
Israelites, Josh. 6.20.
to make the walls of Jericho, the strength of thy enemies to fail. And
therefore go on with faith and constancy to endure the combat, and faint not
though thou have many losses of grace, many wounds by sin, by thy spiritual
enemies, for Christ being thy Captain thou shall certainly be conqueror in
the end.

But if with all this thou find that thou art unable to apply the promises
of mercy and free grace unto thy self, or to do it so weakly, that fear is
not yet removed: Confession and Absolution an excellent means of peace.
Then as in the sickness of thy body, thou art ready to seek to the Physician
for help and counsel, that he may apply somewhat unto thee, to cure thy
disease, so must thou do in this sickness of thy soul. Thou must fly to the
Minister of God, whom he has appointed for thy help herein. The Priests
lips must preserve knowledge, Malac. 2.7.
and thou must seek the Law at his mouth. To him thou must open the wounds of
thy soul; Iam. 5.16.
the causes and occasions of thy fear, whether they be thy sins (if any
trouble thy conscience,) or thy temptations to sin, thy weakness of faith
and holiness, or the like; that he upon sight of thy estate, and arguments of
thy faith and repentance (though they be weak) may apply the promises of
mercy, the refreshing oil of the Gospel unto thy soul. Thou must confess thy
sins and weakness (as that reverend Divine Mr. Perkins Perkins Cases of
Conscience. lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 1.
well observes) that the Minister of God may pronounce the sentence of
absolution (of thy free remission and reconciliation with God in Christ;) unto
thee; that hence thy hope and confidence in God may be confirmed, which he may
truly do, if (by thy confession) he find in thee the grounds, and signs of
faith and repentance; of which thou may find many signs in this Treatise,
and no doubt but some in thy self (if thou be called, brought to repentance
and faith in Christ,) I will here put you in mind, A most comfortable ground
of assurance that our sins are pardoned in Christ.
but of one ground of comfort for many: And this is, that A desire to repent,
and believe, in a touched heart and conscience, is faith and repentance it
self; though not in nature, yet in Gods acceptance by Christ. This is evident
in Scripture. First, because If there be a willing mind, it is accepted, not
according to that a man has not, but according to that he has, 2.
Corinthians, 8. verse 12. Again, God does not only call all that thirst and
desire, to the waters of life, and offers them freely, Esaias 55. verse 1.2. but
if they do but desire and thirst for it, he promises to give it them freely,
Revel. 21.6. Reu. 22.17.
And he will be as good as his word to thee, thou shall be sure to receive and
taste of these waters of comfort, (if thou will pray for it and desire it, and
expect with patience, and tarry the Lords leisure for it.) Thou art blessed in
the desire of it, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness;
for (first or last) they shall be satisfied. Matthew. 5.6. and then blessed shall
thou be, in the happy possession of it. A bruised reed will he not break,
and smoking flax will he not quench (that is, the least sparks of grace, but
kindle them to thy comfort.) Matthew. 12.20.) The Lord (says David) hears the
desires of the poor (the poor in Spirit especially) who are blessed (though
they be poor in their own eyes, seeing but little or no faith or holiness in
themselves, yet they are rich in Christ, in whom God accepts them) for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 5, 3. If thou confessest that thou have but
this desire in thee: as thou thy self may apply to thy self, with the help
of thine own conscience and spiritual understanding; so may the minister also
boldly and certainly apply the promises of grace and mercy to thy soul. M.
Perkins Cases of Conscience. lib. 1. cap. 7. sect. 5.
And that with this or the like argument. He that has an unfeigned desire to
repent and b^leeue in Christ, has remission of sins, and life everlasting.
But thou have an earnest desire to repent and believe in Christ, (as thy own
conscience, cannot choose but tell thee, and as thou confessest unto him:) and
therefore (as thou may apply and conclude; so) if thou can not) he may
certainly conclude to thee and for thee, That remission of sins, and life
everlasting belongs to thee; and therefore he may assuredly and boldly (for to
procure thy peace the better,) pronounce unto thee that excellent sentence of
Absolution, The Book of Common Prayer in the visitation of the sick.
appointed by our Church for the comfort of sick and distressed souls. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all sinners
which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee thine
offenses: And by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy
sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Amen. And if thou be (as thou ought to be) persuaded of the power of this
absolution, thou may after this, possess thy soul in peace, with assurance
that thou art justified freely in Christ; and laboring to increase in
holiness, thou need not doubt of happiness in the end. For this is one end
why Christ has given that power of binding and loosing unto his Ministers,
those keys of the kingdom of heaven: That whatsoever they do bind on earth,
Math. 16.19.
should be bound in heaven, and whatsoever they should loose on earth, should
be loosed in heaven: And withal gave them the holy Ghost, to direct and guide
them; Receive ye the holy Ghost (says Christ,) whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained, Ioh. 20. verse 22, 23. And this power though it be not absolute, but
ministerial (Christ absoluing by his ministers) yet as no water could cure
Naamans leprosy, but the waters of Jordan, 2. King. 5.
because God had given a special gift unto them; So the same words of
absolution being pronounced by any other, cannot have that power to work on
the conscience, or to persuade to peace, as when they are pronounced by him,
that has this ministerial office; because the promise only is given to Gods
Ministers, who are sent forth to this end. Ioh. 20.12.13. And being pronounced
by them in this form and manner, Christ does as certainly loose thee from the
bonds of thy sins by his Ministers, as he did loose Lazarus by his disciples,
from the bonds with which he was tied, when he had raised him to life. John
11.44.

Be at peace therefore, and quiet thy conscience with divine and the God of
peace shall be with thee, 2. Cor. 13.11. And yet further: thirdly, for thy
decay in grace, Quench not the spirit, (says the Apostle) to the Christian
Thessalonians, Against decay in grace. 1. These. 5.19.
(in whom no doubt the grace of Gods Spirit was in good measure.) The Spirit
therefore may be quenched, and Gods dearest children may lose grace for a
time, though not finally and totally: because God in his mercy does in due time
renew the vigor and strength of his graces in them. Thou must not conclude
then by thy decay in grace for a time, or want of holiness, that thou art
excluded from the favor of God in Christ. The best wheat has some chafe, and
the best of Gods servants some imperfection. In this life we are not like the
Sun, 1. In this life we continue not in one stay. Job 14.1.2.
perfect in brightness and light, but like the moon, receiving our light of
grace from Christ, as the moon receives her light from the sun; and like
her we have ever one spot of darkness or other within the Center of our
hearts: we are not fully purified, therefore God tries us, sometime by
temptations, sometime by afflictions, all for our good, as S. Chrysostom
Chrysostom Hom. 32. ad pop. Antioch. 2. All Gods children have some taste of
afflictions in this life.
speaks of afflictions, that the cross is the fountain of life, because it
fitteth better for life eternal: so is it true of these temptations, by which
God tries his children for their greater glory. And first or last all must
have some taste of this cup: for as none can expect the penny without
laboring in the vineyard, so none can look for the crown without enduring the
combat. The wheat is not pure except it be winnowed from the chafe, nor the
silver except it be severed from the dross, nor the gold except it be tried in
the furnace; But this being done, the wheat is commodious, the silver
precious, and the gold glorious, and therefore all well esteemed of in the eyes
of all: so it is with them, and so it is with us, who are the servants, the
soldiers of Christ; we must pass through the fan, the fining pot, the
furnace of manifold trials and temptations, sometimes inward, sometimes
outward, before we can be good wheat for the table of Christ, good gold and
silver for the treasury of our Savior. But Christ our Savior has led the way
before us, 3. Christ's temptations our encouragements. 1. Cor. 13.12.
and to our eternal comfort gotten the victory for us. And all this makes us
more like him, and therefore more dear in his sight: it is but to purge out
the dross of our natural corruption, because as we know but in part, so we
are regenerated but in part in this life, but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part, shall be done away. If thou be tempted then
with David, and the rest of Gods children, because of thy infirmities,
outwardly with manifold afflictions, or inwardly with manifold doubtings (of
which David complained: Psa. 77.7, 8, 9.
) Let not Satan therefore make thee to become his advocate, to plead for him
against thy self (which is his policy when he sees that otherwise he cannot
hurt thee) that thou art out of the favor of God; Romans 8.28.
but know that these are certainly for thy good, (All things fall out for the
best to them that fear God) and they will bring thee happiness in the end.

4. For thy weakness of faith which makes thee to fear that true faith is
not in thee, 4. Sense of spiritual weakness, an argument of spiritual life.
because it brings forth no better fruits: let me tell thee, this sight and
sense of thy weakness is an evident argument of thy faith. For as sense of
seeing or feeling, or the like is a sign of life in the body (for a dead body
can neither feel nor see:) so this sight and sense of our own weakness of
faith and holiness, is a symptom and sign of life, the life of grace in the
soul, and therefore of true faith in us (though it be weak:) for as we
cannot have life, this life of grace, except we be in Christ, from whom we
receive the life as the branches from the vine, 5. A true faith sometimes
little or no feeling in the Heart of a Christian.
so we cannot be in Christ without faith, by which we are engrafted into him;
and therefore the signs of the spiritual life being in thee, it is an evident
token of thy faith. Nay further, if thou do not always feel this life of
faith in thy heart, but that thou have in thee a numnesse, and as it were a
deadness of faith; yet may thy faith be true and good, though it be weak, and
although, as Satan or thy own weakness (strong enough to fight against thy
self) may persuade thee, thou can see no signs or symptoms of faith in
thee. For the children of God are sometimes

thy troubles to cease, that a calm of comfort may refresh thy soul. And last
of all, that thou feel not that measure of love and delight in the Law of
God, nor that assurance of Gods favor, and of thy salvation which thou 2. Cor.
8.12.
and when he pleases, he will perfect these graces in thee. 1. Not the Act of
faith, but object that justifies.
It is not the act of our faith and believing, or the act of our holiness
that makes us acceptable in the sight of God (although these graces are
required in us:) But the Object of our faith, the thing received, the pattern
of our holiness, Christ Jesus, whom we must strive to be like, Mat. 17.5.
and in whom God the Father is well pleased with us. As it is not the hand that
receives the plaster and 2. A Christian must not content himself with a
weak faith, nor despair if his faith be not strong.


And therefore although thou ought not to content thy self with a weak
faith, but to use al good means, (the often hearing of the word of God, the
often receiving of the blessed Sacraments and prayer) to increase it: yet if it
be but weak, thou must not presently deny thy self, the benfite of Christ:
For as a hand shaking with the palsy, may as truly receive a plaster and lay
it to faith, then faith it self; and therefore if thou can not always find
these to be in thee, thou ought not, for this to conclude that thou have no
faith, that God loves thee not, that thou art not in Christ, nor Christ in
thee. For as thy sanctification, 3. Faith and holiness not always seen in Gods
children.
so thy faith may sometimes be like the fire covered with ashes, the effects
of which heat and light are neither felt nor seeene of those that stand by,
but if the fire be uncovered, they both are made manfest: yea how great a
matter will a little fire kindle, how great Iam. 3.5.
(yea what assurance of Gods favor, of peace of conscience, or the like,) when
it shall please God to kindle those sparks with the breath

and neither seen nor felt in the heart of man; but when the Spring time of
Gods grace approaches, then will it be lively and operative, and show forth the
life and virtue of it, both to thy self and others. 4. The true knowledge of
our estate in this life an excellent means of Comfort.
Be not daunted then with any temptations, but resist them with boldness; and if
this spiritual grace be asleep, or this day of holy devotion, and Divine
comfort be ended, despair not of mercy, but wait with patience and prayer,
till thy love be awakened, and till the day Star of heavenly zeal, and
blessed peace be risen in thy heart. For God does often exercise his children
with long trials before he give them deliverance, and yet all at last turns to
their good, Romans 8.28. God did try the Israelites forty years in the
wilderness, before he brought them to Canaan, (when he might have led them a
far nearer way) and they had many enemies before they could get possession of
the land of Canaan, which is a true type of our spiritual warfare in the
wilderness of this world to the Canaan of heaven. Prou. 3.11.
Through many tribulations (temporal and spiritual) we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Acts 14.22. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but
the Lord will deliver the^ out of all; Psa. 34.19. Mark the upright man and
behold the just, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.73. His morning may
be cloudy, his midday stormy, with doubts and fears, and his own corruptions,
but his end shall have a calm. The end of that man is peace. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
works unto us an excellent weight of glory. Stay thy self then in hope till
Christ thy heavenly Bridegroom return with a gracious smile unto thee. Then
shall thou see and feel the virtue and power of that Sun of righteousness
in the sweet fellowship of the Spirit of truth to thy eternal comfort. Then
shall thou be re-assured of thy new Creation, that thou art in Christ, and
Christ in thee. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.

And the reason and confirmation follow in the next place. Because unto this
man old things are passed away, and behold all things are become new. This is
the second general of my Text, consisting of two particulars, the Autumn 2. ^
The Autumn of my Text.
(or rather Winter) and the Spring. But because the Autumn and Winter is
commonly tedious, I will not be too tedious in the Autumn, but briefly pass
it through, and hasten to the Spring of my Text, and so to a conclusion,
because the time hasteneth.

Old things are passed away.

Quae aute^ vetera transierunt quae facta sunt noua? (says S. August. S.
August. de Cantico nouo.
) What are these things which are passed away, and what are those things which
are become new? The answer is, the old Law 1 How the old law is passed. Exodus
31.18.
which was written in tables of stone. This is passed, first in respect of our
justification by it, for by the works of the Law, shall no flesh living be
justified, Romans Deu. 27.26. For there is no condemnation to the^ that are in
Christ, Romans 8.1. Because Christ has satisfied the Law for them: and though by
their own weakness, or the violence of Satan's temptations, they have fallen
into sin, yet upon true repentance, and turning to God, they have an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for
their sins, 1 John 2.1. lex Fidei, the Law of Faith, true, lively, and
operative, by which we are justified in the sight of God, Romans 5.1. Again, the
ceremonies of the old Law, the Priesthood, the old Sacrifices, these are all
passed in Christ: for in that he says, Heb. 7.12. Heb. 8.13. Galat. 3.24.
a new Testament, he has abrogated the old. The Law was but our Schoolmaster
to bring us unto Christ: And Christ is the end and fulfilling of the Law, To.
10.4. And therefore in the transfiguration of Christ, there appeared Moses and
Elias, 2 The Jewish oldnesse is now erroneous.
the Law and the Prophets, to show that Christ was the end of them both. Wicked
then are the old Heresies, first of the Jews, who do violently retain the
Ceremonies of Moses Law, as much as in them lies amongst the Gentiles, 2 The
Papists oldnesse ceremonious.
vainly expecting a Messiah to come. Secondly, of the Papists Qui (...) quadam
impulsi, who being driven by a kind of evil zeal, do also keep amongst them
many Jewish Ceremonies; mingling the shadow with the substance. Thirdly, of the
Anabaptists, 3 The Anabaptists oldnesse curious.
who would bind us to live according to the Jews politickes, as if the
Gospel did not permit every Christian to live according to the honest and just
Laws of his own Prince and country. Lastly, of that new sort of old
Schismatikes 4 Our new Jews new schismatics.
amongst us, who would tie us again to the strict Ceremonies of Moses Law, to
shadows which are long since, passed, infringing thereby our Christian
liberty, and laying heavy burdens upon the tender consciences of their weak
brethren, which nor we nor our fathers were able to bear. We must not run
again into these beggarly rudiments (as the Apostle calls them. Galat. 4.9.
) Because old things are passed away, and behold all things are become new.

Old things are passed, that is, the old Adam, or the old man, in whom there
is a threefold oldnesse, Cord, ore, opere, in the heart, in the mouth, in the
hand; 2 Oldnesse of heart and mouth and hand, passed away in a Christian.
in which we sin after a threefold manner, in thought, in word, and in deed:
all these are passed away unto that man who is a new man in Christ. Old things
are passed, the old year is gone, and the new year is come, the Autumn is
past (yea the Winter passing) and the Spring time 2. The Spring time of my Text.
approaches, and therefore I will leave the Autumn, and pass to the Spring.
Behold all things are be come new. The Apostle describing the Autumn in my
Text, the abrogating of old things, enters into it without any stay, as if it
were a matter not to be stayed at, but to be passed away with the bare recital
and remembrance only. But coming to bring news of the Spring, he begins his
style with Ecce, Behold, as it were a glorious portall before some stately
Palace, or a Harbinger sent before to prepare an honorable expectation of his
Lord. Behold all things are become new. There is many an Ecce, The godly man's
guide to gain heaven, a sermon on Iam. 4.13.
a behold noted in the Scripture, which I might here set down. But I have
showed them already in another Treatise; and I will only give you this of my
Text. And this is an Ecce excellentiae and nouitatis, a Behold of new
excellency, and of excellent newness. Behold all things are become new. To
note out the excellency of the new above the old, the Gospel above the Law, 1
The excellency of the Gospel above the Law.
the second Adam above the first. For when the blood of bulls and goats, could
not take away sin, Christ by his own blood, entered in once into the holy
place, and has obtained an eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. When that
flesh and blood could not inherit the kingdom of God, Christ has recreated
us, and made us new men in him; so that being now spiritual in him by the
work of his Spirit, Romans 8.17.
we are fellow heirs with him of the kingdom of glory. O then how highly
should we esteem and earnestly labor to be made partakers of this new
Creation! For to us in Christ old things are passed away, and behold all things
are become new.

Peter 2 Pet. 3.13.
) but not till the day of judgment. Shall we expect a new glory of the Sun,
of the Moon, or of the Stars? If you look to them, they keep their old
beauty without any change. What then are those things that shall be made new? If
we look to the beasts of the earth, the days of the year, or generations of
men; we may conclude of all these with the Preacher, There is no new thing
under the Sun. Eccle. 1.10. Seeing then all these things remain without
change, and our Apostle here speaks of a change, we may justly demand the
question, What are these things that are passed away, and what are those things
that are become new?

We must not think of any such alteration as Pelagius 3. The error of
Pelagius. Chemnitius de discrimine veteris and noui Testam.
did, who falsely imagined, that at every change of time, there was a new way of
salvation, that before Moses men were saved by the Law of nature: after Moses
by the Law of Moses; and since Christ by the Gospel: this is contrary to the
Scriptures, for there is no other name by which we can be saved, but by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth. Act. 4.12. who is the way, the truth, and the
life. Ioh. 14.6. This is the same way that was preached to Adam in Paradise,
The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent. Genesis 3.15. This is
that which was from the beginning. 1. Ioh. 1.1. and therefore this is not that
newness of which our Apostle speaks. What then are those things that are
passed away? and what are those that are become new? Of the old you have heard
already; once again of both together. The first man is gone, who was of the
earth earthy; the second Man is come, who is from heaven heavenly. August. de
Cant. nouo.
Transit vetustas mentium, accessit nouitas credentium: the oldnesse of our
minds is passed, and the newness of the faithful is approached; we were by
nature the sons of wrath, we are now by grace the sons of God; we were before
carnal, but now we are spiritual; the Babylon of Satan is destroyed, and the
Jerusalem of Christ is builded up; the Egypt of sin is wasted, and the Canaan
of righteousness is enlarged. Old things are passed away, and behold all
things are become new. As there was a threefold oldnesse, so is there a
threefold newness: 4. A three fold newness.
Cordis, oris, operis, of the heart, of the mouth, and of the hand; all these
are made new by this new creation, our thoughts, our words, and our deeds.
Vetus peccatum transit, nouaque nobis anima and nouum Corpus factum est, says
Theophylact, Theophylact. in 2. Cor. 5.17.
upon my text; Our old body of sin is passed, and we have as it were a new
soul, and a new body given us. A new man is come into the world, and he has
given new precepts unto the world (says S. Gregory S. Gregory. Hom 33. in
Euangel.
) All things are become new.

I will not now stand to dispute the controversy, between the Papists and us,
concerning the oldnesse, and newness of our religion 5. A controversy about
oldnesse and newness of religion.
and theirs; neither will I detain you any longer, with the declaration of
their manifold innouations since the Primitive Church; of their strange
Doctrine, new Ceremonies, and other Popish fopperies, of merits, of purgatory,
prayer for the dead, 6. Witness the Powder Treason. ( Ann. R^g 3) 1^05. Never
to be forgotten.
invocation of saints, adoration of images, superstitious relics, feigned
miracles, denying of the Cup to the laytie, absolui^g of subjects from their
oath of Allegiance, killing of Kings and Princes, and subuerting of whole
kingdoms, by villainous treacheries, with a multitude of the like Jesuitical
abominations, contrary to the Scriptures, and unheard of in the purer times of
the Church. Yet this let me tell you, or those whomsoever that defend their
positions. Aliud est nouare, aliud renouare. It is one thing to make new, and
another thing to renew that which was made before. Those are said to make new,
who do institute and devise such things as have never been; and those are
said to renew, who do but reduce old things to their Primitive perfection and
integrity. Our religion is not a new but a renewed religion; 7. Our Religion
not a new but a renewed Religion.
what was deformed, in the darkness of Popery, is now reformed in the light
of the Gospel: their false oldnesse of superstition is banished, and the true
primitive oldnesse of Apostolic Doctrine restored. Blessed be God that their
dark oldnesse is passed, and that the true light has shined amongst us. This
newness of truth, God of thy mercy keep with us: and keep from us that
oldnesse of error for evermore; And let every faithful Christian say, Amen.
Much more I might say concerning this point. But I hasten to an end. And those
who desire to be further satisfied herein, either of the new or renewed part,
either Papists, or Protestants, who are the truly ancient Catholics: I refer
them to that learned and worthy work of a now Reverend and learned Father of
our Church, Dr. Morton in the Protestants Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 16. to the 30.
Quest. 1.
who has soundly and fully handled this question. Old things are passed away,
and behold all things are become new.

There is one question more, of which but a touch and I have done.

All things are become new. But when was it that all things did become new? or
when is it that all things should become new? If we speak of the heavenly newnes
of the Gospel, it was at the coming of Christ unto us; when the Angel brought
that glad tidings of the Gospel, Luke. 2.10. Renewed again, when the black
clouds of error and superstitious darkness (eclypsing for a time the light
of grace) those thick mists of Egyptian Antichristian blindness, ascending
from the valley of ignorance, were banished from us, with the bright beams of
truth. But if we speak of the spiritual newness of the inner man, it is and
must be at the coming of us unto Christ: 1. The time of our new creation, at
our coming to Christ and Christ to us.
no sooner can we be in Christ, but presently we are and must be new creatures,
then this change is begun, though not perfected in us. There is no deferring,
no procrastination, no posting off till the morrow: we must not say with
Augustine, in that his combat between the flesh and the spirit, Ecce modo
fiat, modo fiat, Augustine lib, confess. 8. cap. 11.
behold I will leave my pleasure anon, anon; but let me stay a while: yet
happy if we follow his example, and leave it so soon: if we pray, and sigh
out with tears, as he does in the chapter following, Quandiu, quandiu, cras,
cras, How long Lord, August. conf. lib. 8. cap. 12.
how long to morrow, tomorrow? Why not even now, even this very hour should I
not obtain this new creation? should there not be an end of my sinful
corruptions? O Lord give us this newnes, while it is called to day, lest we be
deprived of tomorrow; and the day of death come upon us at unawares.

There are many in the world, 2. Deferring of repentance a dangerous sin.
that will defer this change till the morrow; till they be old, or till the
day of their death; and think that time to be time enough, to wash away their
sweet pleasures of sin, with the bitter tears of repentance, that mend not
their lives until their lives end; but these are like a man that carried a
candle lighted at his back, and walks in the dark to destruction. If the
ship be in danger by leaking, it is to be mended in the haven, not to be
deferred till it come to sea; If the wall of a city be broken down, it is to
be builded in peace, and not to be left off till the time of war. The
soldier must prepare his weapon before the combat, otherwise, as Plutarch
Plutarch Graet. Apotheg.
reports of Alexander the Great, that seeing a soldier prepare his dart in
the battle, he banished him from his army, because he was then a preparing,
when he should have been a fighting; and such may be the state of all those
who prepare not to fight under the banner of Christ, till the day of Battle;
who begin not to lead a new life, till their life begins to leave them: for
deferring their repentance until their ends, they oftentimes come to an end
without repentance; and if thou have been forgetful of God all thy life time,
how can thou think that God will be mindful of thee at thy death? God
sometime takes a man away, and gives him time and grace; sometimes he gives
him time, but not grace to repent: and sometimes neither grace nor time. There
is a terrible example of this related in the life of S. Thomas Moore: In vita
Thom. Moore. cap. 32.
of a certain profane wrech, who living wickedly all his life, was wont
shamelesly like an Atheist to boast, that he cared not for repentance, for he
could be saved with the saying of three words, though it were at the point of
death. But mark his end; before he came to be old, riding post haste over a
broken bridge, his horse stumbled, and not being able to stay him, when he saw
he must needs fall into the water, he let loose the raines, and cried out with
this fearful exclamation, Capiat omnia demon, Horse and man to the devil:
and thus with his three words in stead of being saved (for ought we know) he
went down quick into hell.

Oh then beloved let us not defer and put off our new Creation, but labor
truly for it while we have time. 3. This new creation is to be sought while we
have time.
The feast of dedication amongst the Jews was in the winter, when they did
dedicate their new temple unto God. It is now winter, and the time of the new
year, oh then let us likewise dedicate the new temples of our souls and
bodies as a new-yeares-gift unto him. Our Savior offers unto us the new Roabes
of his righteousness, for a glorious new-yeares-gift. Let us then put off our
old rags of sin, as we put off our old clothes, but let us not put them
on again: for this new-yeares-gift of our new Creation, is a garment of great
price, of excellent virtue, that must not be put off neither night nor day; for
it is like a coat of male to defend our souls from all the poisoned darts of
sin and Satan. 4. The avoiding of occasions an excellent means to prevent
sin. Annal August.
If we be made new by Christ, let us not make our s^lues old again by sin.
Art thou made whole, sin no more, says our Savior, lest a worse thing
happen unto thee. Avoid all occasions that may cause thee with Lots wife to
look back toward Sodom.

It is related of Henry the fifth, King of England, who after his fathers death
obtained the scepter, that he called together all his old familiars, with whom
he had lived dissolutely, and giving them some gifts, he bound them upon pain
of their lives, that (except they became new men) they should never come near
the Kings Court, lest by their familiarity either he himself might he
corrupted, or he might be drawn by them to corrupt justice and judgment: so
careful was that Princely Convert to avoid all occasions that might bring him
back unto evil.

And thus should every Christian be watchful to avoid all enticements, that
may withdraw his heart from Christ unto sin, like that young man of whom S.
Ambrose S. Ambrose lib. 2. de poenitent. cap. 10.
makes mention; that having been in love with a harlot, going into a strange
country, he left his wicked love, and became a new man, and therefore at his
return home again, meeting the harlot, he passed by her, as if he had not
known her: but she called to him in her wonted manner, Non nosti me, Have thou
not known me, my love? Ego sum, it is I: to whom the young man answers, At
ego nom sum ego, But I am not I, I am not as I was. I was not as I am, I am now
become a new man, and therefore thy old enticements shall not prevail against
me. And blessed is the man that can behold this blessed change in himself,
that when those three entizing harlots, the world, the flesh, and the devil,
shall labor again to deceive him, by alluring him to his wonted sins, can
answer with this young man, Ego non sum ego, I am not I, I am now become a new
creature, and therefore my oldnesse is passed. I am free from the bondage of
sin, and become the servant of righteousness, that I may have the fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. Romans 6.22. 5
O beloved, the day of our conversion, of our new Creation, is our new-yeares
day, The day of our new conversion is our new years day.
to be celebrated with ioyfulnesse for ever: and because so long as we live in
our mortal bodies, we sin every day (less or more) against God, every day
should be our new-yeares day, wherein we should dedicate our selves, Romans
12.1.2.
our souls and bodies as a new-yeares-gift unto God. Wherefore as merchants and
tradesmen use every year to cast up their accounts, to see what they have
gained, or what they have lost: so let us every year, nay every month, every
week, yea every day cast up our spiritual account, and see what we have
gained, or what we have lost; how far we have gone forward, or how backwards in
perfecting the work of our new Creation. And as the crowing of the cock did
put Peter in mind of his new conversion, so let the return of the year, the
crowing of the cock, the rising of the Sun, and the striking of the clock,
put us in remembrance of our new Creation, so that every year, every day, every
hour, we may strive and labor to be new men in Christ, wholly conformed to
the image of our Savior. And thus if we do, 6. The newness of grace is
rewarded with newness of glory.
God will give unto us the most glorious and blessedest new-yeares-gift that
our hearts can desire; we shall have a new King, our blessed Savior to rule
over us: a new captain the blessed Spirit to guide us: a new light, the light
of grace to enlighten us in this world, and the light of glory to make us
glorious for ever in the world to come. We shall have a new city the heavenly
Jerusalem, which is above, a new union and Communion with God the Father, with
Christ our Savior, and the blessed Spirit, and the Saints and Angels in glory
for ever. And then my Text shall be verified in a higher nature, Old things are
passed away, and behold all things are become new. And to close up all with
prayer: This new King, new Captain, new law, new light, new city, (that
heavenly Jerusalem) new union and Communion, first in grace here, after in
glory in heaven: God of thy eternal and infinite mercy grant unto us all, and
to thy whole Church, for the precious merits of thy dearly beloved Son, and
our blessed Savior; to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, one God in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity, be ascribed (as is most due) all glory, honor, and
praise, might, majesty and dominion, from henceforth and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

