A DECLARATION OR PROFFER OF THE Archdukes of Brabant, concerning a truce
between them and the States of the Free united Netherlandish Provinces,
tending to the treaty for a perpetual Peace between them: or for a
surceasance of Arms for certain years. Contained in a Letter sent unto the
said States.

Also the Answer and Acceptance of the States of the united Provinces unto the
Archdukes.

Translated out of Netherlandish Printed copy.



LONDON Printed by R. R. for William Ferebrand, and are to be sold at his shop
in Pope's Head Alley. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of Exceter, Knight of the most Honorable
order of the Garter: and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel. R. P. wishes all increase of Honor and endless bappinesse.
MAy it please your Hon.
The observation which this world begets, may teach experience truly to report,
that Love and Charity are for the most part grown so cold, even in the hotest
Sunshine of our Profession, as that despised Poverty, though addicted to the
Religious exercise of endeavors commendable, is in the best employment (which
seems with greatest Favor to smile upon his Hope) so coldly recompensed, as
that poor unpitied dejected miserable Poverty knovves neither Means nor
Place how or where to vvarme it self.

Unhappy I, in this best time of greatest happiness, who being as I am a Poor
despised, hated, scorned, and unrespected Soldier so unfortunate as no
commended means, though many used, with confirmation both of love and
Loyalty, can be of power from dispayres Gulf, to raise a Spirit drowned, in
worst of misery: but were I not indeered unto those by heaven made mine, who
are indeed, to me, the^ life, more dear from who^ there is no way to run,
unless in me, self being be disolued, I would assuredly by heavens assistance
in some honest War with use of Arms, give to my life so long as I should
live, a living maintenance: but now Immured in my native home, unseperably
Yoakt with leane-fac't poverty. I have experience to conclude that as it is
most certain Pax procreat Bellum, so is it no less true, that a coufirmed
Peace, Non amat Fillios belli, until she has need of them.

In this estate not knowing how to me^d my self, Religions Law shall make my
resolution honest, and though Rerum conditionem mutare non possum, yet I will
have power to say Hoc possum magnum sumere animam et viro forti dignum, with
patience therefore shall my grieved thoghts joyfully be thrown upon my makers
providence by whose assistance I will still resolve with a constant Boso^e to
persist in the prosecution of commended deeds, for this I know Spes mea,
Christo viuens, Est viuere vt semper viuam.

And thus, my Honorable Lord, having breathed forth a sight unto the grace of
your compassionate respect: I humbly crave your Honor will vouchsafe, to
patronize in this little book (by me collected) not my own but the words of
that reverend and learned Judge, the Lord Coke, who at his coming to Norwich,
did at the Assizes there upon the bench, deliver a charge so exelent as that it
vvorthyly deserves to be continued in perpetual memory, which being thus
prodused to a public view, I hope it shall unto our Publickeweale remain a
worthy presedent, wherein Romes champions may with shame decerne their long
continued shameful practices, Puritans and Sismatickes learn to know with
what Injustice they disturb the happiness of our most happy peace, our
Justices, inferior officers, Jurors, and Commons generally, may in this book
find out commended documents, and instructions profitable as well directing
how to govern as to be governed: all which particulars the learned Judge has
wisely handled with such plausible Oratorical wisdoms eloquence, as that
when I heard him speak, I though the Poet had just cause to say, Prospera lux
orritur linguisque animisque fauete: Nam dicenda bono sunt bona verba die. If
therefore in this follovving work my Memory has given a true instruction to
my pen, I hope my labor shall be accounted profitable, when it administers a
public benefit.

Thus Right Hon. Earl, what I have herein performed, together with my most
unworthy self, I humbly refer unto your Honored vvisedomes consideration,
remaining as I will alvvayes rest,

Your Honors in all humbleness of Duty. R. P^.

The Letter of the Archdukes, sent unto the States of the united Provinces.
THe Archdukes, whose hearts most seruent and earnest desires endeavor nothing
more, then to see the Netherlandes, and all the good Inhabitants thereof at
peace, and free from the miseries of these continual wars, upon good
considerate deliberation, declare and signify by these presents, that they are
contented to treat with the States of the said united Netherlandes in the self
same quality, as houlding and reputing them to be free Countries, Provinces,
and States.

Upon the which, their Highnesses not clayming or pretending any thing. Be it
by way of a perpetual peace, truce, or surceasance of arms, for twelve,
fifteen, or twenty years, even to the free choice and acceptance of the
aforesaid States, the whole depending upon reasonable conditions. Amongst which
conditions, covenants and agreements, also shall be admitted, as well to the
conclusion of a perpetual peace, as to a truce, or surcease of Arms: That each
one shall continue to have and remain possessed of all that which he now
inioyeth, unless that by common consent it be conveniently otherwise agreed
upon, for the better accommodation of their Highnesses, and the said Stats,
together respectively with the Netherlands, in the exchange of some Cities, or
any other places. As also upon the good order and security of the common trade,
traffic, co^merce, and conversation, with whatsoever belongs thereunto,
together with the Interuentions, confirmation, and furtherance of what shall be
concluded. And their Highnesses having thus maturely considered upon the estate
of the united Provinces, and desiring to treat with the^ no otherwise herein
then faithfully, without fraud and deceit: as also to grant unto the said
States a time of deliberatio^ to consider and determine what shall be most
needfullest for the common good and benefit public.

And are therefore contented, that those persons that they shall appoint for
the said Truce (which shall be born Netherlanders) shall assemble themselves
together with the said States in like number at the time and place appointed,
to be chosen and limmitted by the said States.

And to the end that whatsoever is formerly rehearsed, may have the better
proceeding, be it for a perpetual peace, or the said surcesse their Highnesses
are contented, that for the next ensuing eight months, there shall be a
general surcease of arms, all seiges and surprisings of Cities or Fortresses,
all Incursions, and deuastatio^s whatsoever in the provinces and quarters,
together with a surceasing to build any new fortresses, or proceeding in any
other Hostile action either by sea or land, in all the Netherlands, or at Sea,
in Spain, or elsewhere, as well in respect of the King, as of their
Highnesses, from the day of (...) Anno 1607.

And upon condition provided, that if within the aforesaid time of day and
month, limited any of the parties ignorantly, without taking knowledge
hereof, should surprise or intercept any thing from the other party, that the
same shall then be dewly repaired, and restitution made, so far forth as the
said States on their parts do allow and approve the said prouisionall truce,
within eight days after the presentation of these. And before the first of
September next coming, they shall declare and signify unto their Highnesses,
(upon the aforesaid treaty) which is proffered touching peace, truce, or
surceasance of arms, together with the time and place by them to make choice
of, to that effect.

Done in Brussels the 13. of March 1607. was Paragrafied Richardot Vt: Signed
Albert, Isabell, and underneath Verreyken and sealed with the Signet of their
Highnesses.

The States General of the united Provinces, together with his Excellency,
having considered upon the Proffers, declarations, and presentations of the
Archdukes, return their Answer as follows.
THat in the quality as States of Free countries and Provinces, on the which
the High and Mighty Archdukes pretend nothing they have upon good
deliberation, and with advise of his Excellency, and counsel of Estate,
decreed and declare by these presents, That they for their parts, no less than
the other party, heartely wish nothing more, than to see the Netherlands
delivered, by means of some godly, honorable, and secure end, from the
miseries of these wars. And hoping that the Archdukes, both in the behalf
of the King of Spain, and for themselves, have made these proffers,
declarations, and presentations, sincerely and faithfully.

The said States General in the quality as aforesaid, have accepted and
accept by these presents, ye declaration, and prouisionall Truce aforesaid, for
8. months, beginning the 20. of April next coming, from all sieges,
surprists of cities, and foretresses, invasions or incursions of Provinces and
Quarters: together with the making of any new Fortes or Sconces. As also we
receive their farther proffers and presentations, to communicate and relate
unto those to whom shall belong thereby to make their declarations before the
first day of September next coming, with full assurance that God Almighty
will bless and guide the business for the best.

And thereupon the writings and bonds of the promised Approbation, and like
declaration of the King of Spaines (according to the agreement made between
the comitties of their Highnesses and Ours) shall be dispatched on the tenth of
April next ensuing. And within two, or at the farthest, three days after,
delivered, and exchanged before Lillo. Done in s'Granenhage.

Gentle Reader,
AMongst all the temporal blessings that God of his free bounty bestows upon
any Kingdom or Nation, there is not any thing more inualuable the^ that
heauen-bred happiness, called Peace and Quietness: it was a harmony from
Angelical voices, at the birth of our Savior, when those divine Ambassadors
brought glad tidings of great joy, pronouncing Peace on earth, and unto all men
good will: when our Savior departed from his Disciples, he left Peace with
them; when he came amongst them after his resurrection, the doors being
shut, he spoke Peace unto them: and Peace is that, without which, all other
things are distasteful and unpleasant.

What is it in this world, either for honor, riches, plenty, aliance, arts,
friendship, or any humane good, but with Peace it flowrisheth in glorious
sunshine?

We our selves, of any Nation under the cope of heaven, can evidence this to
the whole world, that have had the Palm Tree spread over this Kingdom, the
long reign of a peaceful Queen, and continues in flowrishing state the
present reign of her worthy successor, who is the mirror of Peace to all
Nations of the earth. But what we have not feared, others have most grievously
felt, especially our near neighbors, (the united Netherlands) whose tragedy
begun by rugged war, has continued in bloody action, many years of terror;
their calamities and miseries, which of us can be ignorant of? English ears
have heard their roaring Canons echo in the air, imitating Jove's thunder,
their Trumpets sound the fatal knell of infinite thousands, and their Drums
allarmes laden the earth with millions of dead carcasses.

English eyes have seen the deuastations, spoils, sieges, ransackings, and
flaming cities, of those countries: English lives have been liberally spent in
their martial business, followed their fortunes, bled in their quarrels, and
died in their battles.

But now, after all these bloody affairs, this supposed endless war, these
reputed irreuocable cruelties, behold a strange and admirable alteration, that
such implacable adversaries, shall most readily and willingly propound love and
amity, offering to sheath the sword till it rust (even a perpetual Peace,) or
a Truce limited, or any indifferency of faithful trial.

From whence proceeds the original of these designs? to whom must the
efficient cause be attributed? but only to that Almighty Peacemaker, who
has the ruling and ordering of hearts in his own hand, to dispose of them as
he pleases, be they never so potent, powerful, or opposite.

For as in Justice he has a severe and cruel whip of three cords, to punish
sinners (to wit of Famine, Sword, and Pestilence,) so in his Mercy he has
Plenty, Peace, and Health: freely to bestow on whom his mercy shall please
to extend them. It is to be hoped that the Lords wrath will be appeased,
toward them that the sword has destroyed, for such a long continuance of
years. And that he will rather power out his wrath and heavy displeasure upon
the heathen that have not known him, nor called upon his name. And it is a
duty whereunto every Christian man is obliged, to pray unto the great God of
Heaven, that he will remove his hand of Justice from his poor weak and
frail creatures, whom with one angry frown, he can at once destroy from the
face of the earth. The Prophet David says, It is a good and joyful thing, for
brethren to dwell in unity. All that profess Christ, are taught by him, in
prayer to call him father, and the sons of one father must needs be brethren.

This motion of Peace and concord (if it be faithful and unfeigned, to prevent
effusion of Christian blood) is most honorable, and the acceptance thereof, of
as high worthiness: he that made the heart knows it, and has the dispose of
it: he that is called the Lord of Hosts can command angels to fight his
battle, with terrible slaughter: and again, can beyond all expectation of
humane creature, cease stearne faced war, with mild imbracements of smiling
Peace.

To conclude, let all be referred to his will, who has power, and whose power
no mortal is able to resist, and let our affections join with those heavenly
soldiers, that sounded forth Peace on earth, and good will with men.

FINIS.


