A Discourse upon the SABBATH DAY Wherein are handled these particulares
ensuinge 1. That the Lords day is not Sabbath day, by divine institution. 2. An
exposition of the 4. Commandment, so far forth as may give light unto the
ensueinge discourse: and particularly, here it is shown, at what time the
Sabbath day should begine and end; for the satisfaction of those who are
doubtful in this point. 3. That the seventh day Sabbath is not abolished. 4.
That the seventh day Sabbath is now still in force. 5. The Authors exhortation
and reasones, that nevertheless there be not rent from our Church as
touching practice.


WRITTEN BY THEOPHILUS BRABOURNE.

Remember the Sabbath day, Exodus 20.8. The seventh day is the Sabbath, Exodus
20.10.

Whatsoever thing I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing
there to, nor take ought there from, Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law, to do them. Galat. 3.10.

Printed the 23th. of December. Anno Dom. 1628.



To the Godly and vvell-affected Reader whosoever.
KNOWEING (dearly beloved and Christian Reader) by experience in my self as
well as otherwise, that there is a propensity and holy inclination, in all who
are truly Gods, to have a respect unto all Gods Commandments, without
exceptions or reseruations, I judged this discourse of the Sabbath day, which
is one branch of Gods eternal Law, could not be unwelcome to thee: Caleing to
mind also, the parable of our Savior, how seuerly He will deal with that
servant, to whom he delivered but one single Talent, for his hideing it, so as
no profit came on it. Math. 25-24. remembering also, that Christ made it an
essential mark of Peter's love unto him, To fecd his Lambs: Ioh. 21.15. And,
that it is given in charge to all, to exhort one another, to admonish one
another, and to edify one another 1. Th. 5.11.14. I durst not for fear, nor
could I for love, but make known my mind in this point: To see the Church
and Spouse of Christ, to lie in the weekly breach of the 4th. Commandment, by
violating and profaning of the Lords sacred time and Sabbath (a sine of
ignorance hither to I confess) and in mean time superstitiously sanctifying a
day, the first day of the week for a Sabbath, which God, nor Christ, nor any
of his Apostles ever commanded or appointed: how could my spirit but be stirred
within me, to show unto her this error, and to declare unto her, which day is
that right and true day, which God requires of her: and the Rather, since God
has put it into her heart, wilingly to give God a day: for, this last and
honorable Parliament (blessed be God for their zeal and Godly care) has
enacted a Law for the better keeping holy of the Lords day. I know, for my good
will and love, I shall reap evil will and hatred; and for this pains I
shall undergo most harsh and bitter censures, but blessed are ye (said Christ)
when men speak evil of you falsely for my sake. They will say as some allreedy
do say, it is pride and singularity that setes me on work; To whom I answer
in Paul's words 1. Cor. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified; but if it be, I beseech God pardone the syne, but bless this work.
Others, and that more charitablie, object the unseasonableness of this motion,
because the Church of God is now under manifould afflictions, and liable to
subversion by her enemies: where unto I say, the more need she should dravv
near to her God, sticking closse to his Laws, the breach whereof he has
threatened with subversions and desolations, Deuteronomy. 28. and, Gods truths may not
wait attendance, till men be at leisure to receive them. Others, may think
and say, there are men more fit then, I am for a matter of this weight etc. To
whom I answer, by a free acknowledgement of this truth; what multitudes are
there in our Church, every each one whereof far surpass me, for parts of
nature, and for learning, and for outward dignities, titles, and preferrments,
all which might well countenance and help forwards such a cause as this, and
were much to be desired, I confess: Neither can I think, but some of those
have long agone foreseen this truth, either perfectly, or at least a far off,
as my self at first saw it in my studies, like as the blind man in the
Gospel, at first saw men like trees; but what is the cause, why they did not
prosecute the matter, till it came to perfection, till they saw men like men
clearly? was it not a slothful fear to leese their labor, and catch a shadow
for a Substance, as painful Students must do somtymes? or, for fear of the
greatness of the labor: or, for fear of the loss of reputation, dignities,
preferments, liueings,

The Lords day, is not Sabbath day, by Divine institution.
BE pleased (Christian Reader) first of all to note, that we now a days apply
the name Sabbath, to the Lords day, Promiscuosly and without difference, the
which is altogether without warrant of holy Scriptures, since Scripture says
the seventh day is the Sabbath, Exodus: 20:10. And all the Evangelists call the
Lords day, the first day of the week, Matthew: 28:1. So then there is as much
difference twixt these two as is between the seventh and the first: the last
day of the week, Saturday, and the first day of the week, Sunday. Now, thus
to confound two proper names of days, is as if we should call Sunday,
Saturday. And I desire it rather to be noted, because the ignorance of this
point is of dangerous consequence amongst the commone people, who when they
hear the 4.th Com: Remember the Sabbath day etc. or those words Isa: 58: and
call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it glorious to the Lord: etc: they
think presently upon our Lords day, the first day of the week, as if those
texts commanded this day. Whereas they point at Sabbath day the seventh and
last day of the week. Such a mistake in a lease or bond might procure a
forfeiture of them, with man, beware we then, least by the like, we forfeite
with God in the 4th. Com:

In the next place let us examine the authorities and textes of Scripture,
which usually are alleged for proof that the Lords day is a Sabbath by Gods
apointment, wherein I will show the invalidity and insufficiencey of those
textes by way of answer to them.

1. Let us begine with the 4th. Com: Remember the Sabbath day etc: this precept
is urged upon the Lords day that we should Sanctify it.

Here to I answer by denial that this Commandment does urge the Lords day;
the reason of my denial is. 1: because the Com: enioyneth a day whose proper
name is Sabbath day, like as Saturday with us is a proper name of one of our
week days: But the Lords day, is not Sabbath day, for, it is the day after
the Sabbath day; and it is a proper name for an other of our week days, that
is for Sunday, or for the first day of the week: 2. Because the Com: enioyneth
the 7th. day, which is the last day of the week; but the Lords day is the
8th. day, or the first day of the week, by the accounte of all men. And it
is no less absurd to press the 4th. Com. which enioynes the 7th. day for a
Sabbath, to the 8th. day, or to the first day: then it had been for the
Israelites out of that Com: Levit: 25.2.3.4. The 7th. year shall be a Sabbath
of rest unto the Land etc. to press this Com: unto the 8th. year or to the
first year for the lands rest. 3. Because the Com: enioyneth that day which
the Lord God himself rested on, and the which he blessed and hallowed Exodus:
20:11. but our Lords day is not the day God rested on nor did God in the
creatione, bless sanctify and hallowe our Lords day or first day of the
week; nay he wrought one it himself, and appointed it for a workeing day to
man, when he said 6. days shall thou labor and do all thou have to do
Exodus: 20:9. of which 6. days our Lords day is one, and the first. But here
unto it will be replied, true, the 4th. Com: did once enjoin the 7th. day,
Sabbath, but since the day is altered and changed by Christ and his Apostles,
so that now the 4th. Com: is changed too, and binds to the new day, though
not properly, yet Analogically and by way of resemblance: I answer, the word
(Change) betokens two things, the one is an abolition or remoueing the old,
the other is an assumption or taking up of a new; as 2. Sam. 12.20. David
changed his apparel: that is, he put off his mourning attire, and he put one
other apparel: now I deny that ever Christ, or his Apostles did thus change
the Sabbath day either by there precept or practice; did the Apostles so
preach one the Lords day, as they ceased preaching one the Sabbath day, the
day before the Lords day? can this be proved? for this is a change properly: is
not the contrary manifest, to wit that the Apostles did constantly preach one
the Sabbath days? see Act. 13.14.42.44. Act. 16.13. Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4. if
then they also preached one the Lords days too, why this is no alteration or
change though, it is but an addition of a day, and a settinge up of another
Sabbath day a new, and so you may have two Sabbathes in every week if you
will.

2. I answer, admit the Sabbath was changed into the Lords day, yet may you
not safely say the 4th. Com: was changed, for so you say the 4th. Comm: was
abolisht, and a new Comm: erected, the word (change) implying so much: Nor can
you say the 4th. Com: (being an old Com:) binds to a new day, long since
erected; how will this be proved? specially, since that it was not the manner
of Scripture to establish new things, by od precepts, Baptism that came in
room of Circumcision, it stands not by force of the old precept to Abraham
Genes. 17.10. Let every man child among you be circumcised etc. but by a new
precept Matthew: 28.19. go teach all Nations, baptizing them etc. The Supper of
the Lord, come in room of the Passover, it stands not by virtue of the old
Law Ex: 12.3. etc. but by a new Law 1. Cor. 11.23. As well may we feign that
the Law made by Queen Elizabeth to stint usury at 10. in the 100. is that Law
which now a days stintes usury at 8. in the 100. (as if Queen: Elizabeth's
Laws did add force to, and did command things enacted by King Charles many
years after) as to imagine the 4th. Comm: enacted for the 7th. day, should now
bind to the 8th. day, which is long since risen up, as is said.

I answer thirdly, by denial that the 4th. Com: does bind to another day
then it mentions Analogically, and by resemblance and similitude: by this
devise may we bind Christians to Baptize Children only one the 9th. day, and
to eat the Lords Supper only upon the 15th. day of the month once a year; and
say, we are bound to these days by the Laws of Circumcision, and Passover,
which did properly bind to the 8th. day, and to the 14th. day, but now they
bind us Analogically to the 9th. and 15th. days: 2. This devise is
matchless, for of all the other 9. Com: none do bind to other things then
those mentioned in the Com: analogically and by similitude. nay in this 4th.
Com: where we have 3. things enjoined, 1. the time, the Sabbath. 2. Holiness.
3. Rest: it binds not analogically to Holiness or Rest; but only to the day
and time, as they say: since all other parts and parcelles of the 10. Com: be
expounded properly, why should this one particle only, the 7th. day, or the
Sabbath day, be expounded improperly and analogically? Sure I am it is against
the received rule in exposition of Scriptures, to give an improper sense where
a proper may be had.

Yet furthermore, others replye thus, the 4th. Com: enioyneth a Sabbath day,
which signifies a Restinge day, now our Lords day is a Sabbath day, for so much
as it is a restinge day, and so the 4th. Com: enioyneth it and is firm for it.

I answer. 1. by like reason you may thus expound the name (Jesus) Heb: 4:8.
of Ihesus the Savior of the world, which is meante of Jesus, which is Joshua
that saved the Israelites from the Canaanites: as if because Jesus signifies a
Savior, therefore whersoeuer ye find a man that was a Savior, you may think
he was meante by the name Jesus, though the context shows it is meante of an
other Jesus. 2. True it is the word Sabbath signifies a Rest; but
Synecdochically for that special Rest specified in the 4th. Com: to wite that
Rest, which is on the 7th. day, not that on the 8th. day; for the 7th. day is
the Sabbath Exodus: 20:10. and this is the day that goes before the Lords day:
furthermore the Restinge day in the 4th. Com: is such a restinge day as is
distinguished from all other days in the week by his proper name (Sabbath
day) which with the Jews was never taken to be the Lords day, or first day of
the week, no more then Saturday with us can be mise understood to be Sunedaye:
wherefore to avoid this shifte, it were to be wished that the Hebrew name
(Sabbath) were translated into an English name, as nere as might be, though by
a circumlocution, rendringe day for day and call it (Saturday-Reste.) Remember
Saturday-reste, to Keep it holy etc. Exodus: 20:8. And thus the simplest cold
not mistake which is the day the Lord meante in his 4th. Com: Thus you see the
4th. Com: cannot be understood to enforce the Sanctification of the Lords day.

2. A second Text produced is Reu: 1:10. I was ravished in the Spirit one the
Lords day etc. Hence it is thus argued; this day is called the Lords day, as
the last Supper of Christ is called the Lords Supper, now as Christ did
substitute the last Supper in room of the Passover, so he substituted the
Lords day in room of the Sabbath.

I answer 1. it does not follow it must be called the Lords day, in the same
sense as Christ's Supper is called the Lords Supper, for, it may be called the
Lords day 1. in reference to God the Creator, meaning there by the Lords
Sabbath of the 7th. day, since these Sabbathes were caled the Lords days, as
the lords Holy day Isa: 58:13. now if the Sabbath be the Lords holy day, then
is it, the Lords day. 2. In reference to God the Redeemer, it might be called
the Lords day, as the day is wherein Christ will come to Indgment Luk: 17:24,
30. that is a day wherein Christ will show himself Maruailouse to the world,
so did Christ in the day of his Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection and
Ascension, in every of these he did a remarkable work, and every of these might
be called the Lords day, and which of them John had respect unto Scripture is
altogether silent, and therefore can we not build upon infallible growndes
herein, and we must not set up Sabbathes, tyeinge men's consciences upon
probabilities and contingencies: furthermore, who would argue from Luk: 17:24.
that because the day of Judgment is called Christ's day, Therefore that day must
then be kept for a Sabbath day? but admit S. John meant the day of Christ's
Resurrection, that is a day wherein he would declare himself mightily to be
the Son of God, by the resurrection from the dead Rom: 1:4. What is this to a
Sabbath, which men must celebrate? how does it appear Christ rose one this
day, and called it the Lords day, with this intendement that men should for ever
after keep it a Sabbath? show me an institution of a Sabbath day by Christ's
riseing one this day, or by S. John's calling it the Lords day: finally say it
were a Sabbath day, how will it appear in the Canon of Holy Scripture that the
Lords day was in the Apostles days a weekly day, kept every 7th. day as now it
is? or rather an annual day as Easter day is, for, properly Easter day is the
Lords day. I answer further; there is not like reason of these two, the Lords
day: and the Lords Supper: for a day, and a Supper differ much, so as a day may
be called the Lords in one sense, and a Supper, may be called the Lords, in an
other sense.

I answer secondly, it will not follow that there must be the same reason and
likeness between the Lords day and the Sabbath, which was between the Lords
Supper and the Passover; for the Passover was a branche of the Ceremonial
Law, and a Ceremony, and a type of Christ; and therefore to be abolisht at
Christ's comeing; But the Sabbath was a branch of the Moral Law, and a Moral,
neither ever was it made a (...) death to life? now that God Sanctified the
first day of the week for Christ to rise on, I deny not, nor do I refuse to
rejoice there on and be thankful to God for so great a work, even every day
in the week, and year, or more solemnly once in a year as at Easter, or
ofter if the Church see it expedient. But that this Text does prophecy of this
day for ever to be kept for our sole Sabbath, in a Rest all day long, and in
holy duties every 7th. day, this I deny, since this Text says not this day
was Sanctified for men, but it was Sanctified for Christ: yea we may rejoice
and be glad in it annually as the Jews were in their annual days of purim,
Ester. 9.26.27. and yet not keep it in a stricte Rest all day long as on a
Sabbath.

I answer secondly, by (day) in the Psalm is not necessarily understood a
short ordinary day of 12. or 24. hours, but rather a long space of time, as
all the time after David came to the Crown; and so it may be applied to type
out the whole time of Christ upon the earth ruleing as King in the Kingdom of
his Church, thus Abraham saw Christ's day Ioh. 8.56. thus it is called the day of
Salvation 2. Cor. 6.2. If then by day here be meante the day of grace, or the
time of Christ's abode one the earth, then here is no footing for a Sabbath day
of 12. or 24. hours long.

4. A 4th. Text they produce is Act. 2.1.14. where Peter preached one
Pentecost, which is one our white Sunday, and administered the Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper after he had converted 3000. souls, wherefore
this must needs be a Sabbath day, because in it were performed the works of a
Sabbath etc.

Here to I answer, 1. That Peter's actions are no divine institutions, unless
backed by some precept, now nor Christ nor his Apostles gave any precept for
performance of these duties one this day.

2. Peter's sermon was extraordenary, for it was upon the extraordenary comeing
down of the Holy Ghost then; and to remove away the false slander of
drunkenesse v. 13. and it was occasioned by the great concourse of people
extraordenarily met and assembled, not to hear a sermon, but to hear the
Apostles myraculously speak strange tounges v. 6. now extraordenary things
bind not to ordenary practice.

3. Preaching and administration of Sacraments be not proper duties of a
Sabbath, but commone to any day of the week: Christ administered Lords Supper,
one a Thursday night the night before he was Crucified: Phillip baptized the
Eunuch one a trauileing day, Act. 8.38.39. and for preaching, it was an every
days work if occation served, preach the word in season and our of season, 2.
Timoth. 4.2. Christ preached to the Samaritane Ioh. 4. on a working day, for
his Disciples were gone in to the city to buy meat v. 8. He preached one the
Mountain Mat. 5.1. and out of a ship, at an other time Luke 5.1.2.3. which
days were no Sabbaths, for on the Sabbaths Christ and the people met in
their Synagogues Luke 4.14. Paul preached daily in the Temple, and from house
to house, Act. 5.42. and daily in the school of Tyrannus Act. 19.9. Now unless
these duties of preaching, and administration of the Sacraments, were so proper
to the Sabbath, as they were used upon no day else, how can these duties be
marks of a Sabbath? no no, nothing but a Commandment will establish a Sabbath
day: do not we preach, read Scriptures, pray, administer the Sacrament, and
perform as many Sabbath duties on Christmas day when it falls on a week day,
as we do on any Sabbath day? and yet who will therefore gather, we keep
that Christmas day for a Sabbath?

4. Note, Walaeus upon the 4th. Com: page 161. says it is called in to
question of some whither this day of Pentecost then fell upon the Lords day or
not. yea, he adds that Pentecost may fall one any day of the week, it is not
therefore so generally a granted truth with divines, that Pentecost ever was
upon our Lords day, as we hold, and keep it.

5. If I may add mine own opinion of the matter, I think Pentecost then when
the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in cloven fiery tounges: it was upon
our Saturday, which was the 7th. day Sabbath, not one our Sunday. that this may
appear, note that Pentecost by the Law Leuit. 23.16. was to be upon the 50th.
day: and this accounte was to begin one the morrow after the Sabbath, v. 15.
by Sabbath here is not to be understood the weekly Sabbath, but the first
Sabbath of the Passover, thus the Septuagint (...); v. 11: for they had 2.
Sabbathes at the Passover, to wit the first day of unleavened bread, and the
7th. day v. 6.7.8. to the former of those had the Septuagint relation, when
they said, In the morrow of the first of the Sahbathes: to this a greeth
Aynsvvorth one Leuit: 23.11.15. alleageing the Chaldy, and the Rabbines, so
reading and understanding it. So then we must begine our account upon the
morrow after the first Sabbath of the Passover. now that we may know what
day this was on, see Leuit: 23.5.6.7. the Passover was on the 14th. day of
the Month, and on the 15th. day of the month which was the very next day,
was the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread, which 15th. day was the
first Sabbath also, now then the morrow after this first Sabbath it was upon
the 16th. day of the month, and this 16th. day must be the beginning af our
accounte; Now to apply this, for so much as Christ suffered on good friday, and
eat the Passover on the day before at evening, hence it follovveth that
Christ eat the Passover upon Thursday, and it was the 14th. day of the
month, and friday wherein he suffered was the 15th. day of the month, and the
first Sabbath of the Passover, so as Saturday was the 16th. day of the month,
and the morrow after the Sabbath, and so the first day of our accounte to 50.
days, or to Pentecost. To proceed, if Saturday be the first day of the 50.
then upon a Saturday again will fall the 50th. day: to make this appear,
count from Saturday, taking it for one day, 7. weeks complete Leuit. 23.15.
and there you have 49. days, the 49th. day falling upon a friday, here un to
ad the next day which is Saturday, and the morrow after the 7th. Sabbath or
week v. 16. and so you have 50. days, and also you see that the 50th. day
fell upon the Saturday: To conclude, since Pentecost wherein Peter preached
Act. 2.1.14. was not one our Sunday but one our Saturday.

Hence it follovveth 1. that this Text Act. 2.1.14. makes nothing for the
prooving our Sunday or Lords day to be Sabbath day now: 2. it follows, that,
if those actions of Peter's preaching, converteing 3000. and baptizing them on
that day, were a sufficient proof that the day wherein they were done, was a
Sabbath day, and so ought to this day to be, Then was Saturday at that time the
Sabbath day, and so ought ^o this day to be; because one Saturday those actions
were performed: But that those actions of Peter's preacheing, Baptizeing and the
rest, are (...) sufficient argument and proof, that the day where one they
were done, was and is a Sabbath, themselves confess it: Ergo Saturday was then
and ought now to be the Sabbath day. So you see their own argument makes
strongly against them, and for me, for the Saturday Sabbath.

5. A 5th Text they produce is Act. 20.7. where the Disciples being come
together to break bread, one the first day of the week, Paul preached unto
them: now by the phrase of breaking bread is commonly meante the Lords Supper,
so here again they argue as before, this must be a Sabbath, because Sabbath
duties were performed in it.

I answer, 1. by refering you to those things in the answer to the Text last
above Act. 2.14. which at first sight do after themselves in answer to this
place, as they did to that, the argument being the same.

I answer secondly, though Paul's preaching does bind us to preach also, yet
does not the time wherein he preached bind us to preach at the same time and
day weekly, for then were we bound to preach every Lords day till mid night,
for so did Paul here, so that the day and time here (which is our very
question) does not bind us.

3. Paul's preaching now at Troas was extraordenary 1. in that he preached till
mid night, 2. in as much as he was to depart away from them the next day,
never to see their faces again v. 38. he cold do no less, then give them a
sermon one such an ocation, had it been one any day of the week.

4. This preaching of Paul's at this time can make nothing for the Lords day,
for this sermon was only in the night not in the day time: This appears by
the time of celebration of the Lords Supper, which in days of Christ and his
Apostles was at Evening, at Supper time, for then our Savior celebrated it
first Mark. 14.17. and it was in use so still in Paul's time 1 Cor. 11.21. now
the Text says, The Disciples being come together, one the first day of the
week, to break bread, or to receive the Lords Supper; now the end of their
comeing, which was to receive the Lords Supper declares plainly what time of
the day they assembled in, to wite in the Evening, at Supper time, to eat the
Lords Supper: there is no culler therefore to think they met in the morneing
about breakefast time (for then be gines the public duties of the Sabbath) to
go to Supper: and it adds a little light to the time of their meteing, to
consider of the place where they met, that is in an upper chamber as it is in
our English Bibles v. 8. but Original says (in a supping chamber, (...), in
caenaculo) so it is more then manifest, they came but to Supper: Now the
disciples being assembled to that end to receive the Lords Supper, Paul took
occasion of this present meteing after, (and I know not how long after) they
were met, to preach unto them, and after he had begune once then he held one
his preaching till midnight, but at what hour of the night or Eueninge Paul
begun his Sermon, or how long after they were met, I can not find: It Is true
the disciples met one the first day of the week, but it might be and it was
most likely they met a little before shutting in of the day, like as a man may
be said to pay and discharge his bond due one the 7th day of June, though he
bring his money but one quarter of an hour before Sune set: But here it must
be remembered that it is their part to prove, Paul begane his Sermon in the
morneinge, who say Paul, kept this day, a Sabbath day, by preaching in it:
yea moreover they must prove that the disciples here at Troas did refrain all
servile labor and the ordinary works of their caleinge all this first day
of the week, or Lords day, from morneinge to the end of this day, if they
will prove this day kept as a Sabbath: for to refrain all works, and Rest,
is a branch of the 4th. Com: and one part of a Sabbath days duty, but how
they can prove this out this text passes mine understanding.

5. I deny that Paul preached now at this time in conscience of the 4th. Com:
and this they must prove, or else they say nothing; might not Paul preach at
this extraordinary time in conscience of that Com: 2. Tim. 4.2. preach the
word in season, and out of season? surely this text was warrant sufficient for
Paul to take all occasions of preaching the word every day or night, Sabbath
day or other days: finally, how will it be proved that Paul kept this Lords
day here for a Sabbath day by his preaching, since that preachinge it is an
every days work, as has been shown before? can it be proved that Paul's
intent and purpose in preaching was to celebrate thereby that day for a
Sabbath? this must be proved.

6 A 6th. Text produced is 1. Cor. 16.2. upon the first day of the week, let
every one of you put aside by himself etc. here say they was a constant
weekly collection for the poor; now collections used to be after the word
preached and Sacraments administered, all which were done one the Sabbath day,
as appears in the histories of the Church, ergo this first day of the week,
was a Sabbath.

I answer 1. indeed our oulde translation gave some way to us to think this
collection was weekly, when it read the text thus: Every first day of the
week, let every one of you put aside etc. but our new Translatores have well
amended it and do read it thus: upon the first day of the week etc. as of a
single action once to be done only: and this further appears to be true by
those words in latter end of v. 2. that so there be no gatheringe when I come;
so as Paul would have this collection cease when he came emongst them, but had
it been weekly, Paul would rather have had it reuined a fresh at his presence,
who was a furtherer of all holy performances: This collection therefore was
extraordinary, and tyeth us not to ordenary practice, for if it did, then were
we bound every Lords day in every Congregation to gather for the poor, as a
Sabbath days duty. 2. This collection was extraordenary, in that it was not
for their own poor at Corinthe, but for the poor of other Churches, and
therefore this money collected was to be sent (...) upon the first day of the
week? If any shall demand which first day, of the week the Church was to
lay aside their alms one, because there were many first days of the week in
a year; I answer since I find it not differenced from others in the text, I
therefore think it must be understood of the first Lords day, or first first
day of the week, which came next after the Corinthians received this Epistle,
like as if I say to a friend, come to my house one Saturday, it is to be
understood of the next Saturday, first cominge after my invitation of him.

7 A 7th. and last text produced, is Ioh. 20.19.26. where Christ's frequent
apparitiones to his disciples upon the Lords day, is made an argument to prove
it a Sabbath day; but by what authority or rule of just consequence Christ's
apparitions must constitute a Sabbath day, nor can I conceive, nor ever have I
heard, nor do I think ever shall hear.

I answer 2. whereas the frequency and constancy of Christ's apparitions one
the Lords day is so much urged, I would feign see where Christ appeared one the
Lords day ever above once only and that in Ioh. 20.19. as for his second
apparition in v. 26. eight days after: which is supposed to be the next Lords
day after his first apparition, it is quite other wise, for in the original
it goes thus, (...), and after eight days etc. now after 8. days cold not be
the same day sennight, upon the 8th. day, but after the 8th. day, as on the
9th. or 10th. days after, and so this second apparition was not upon the
Lords day: I grante there is a phrase Mark. 8.31. that Christ, after three
days must rise again; and yet it must be understood thus, upon the third he
must rise again: But herein we must know thus to read it, is a departing
from the natural and proper sense of the words, which is not sufferable save
in a case of necessity, as to reco^cile two textes of Scripture, or the like,
as in this instance last propounded because other textes of Scripture say,
Christ rose upon the third day, 1. Cor. 15.4. and this text Mark. 8.31. says
after 3. days etc. therefore to reco^cile these two, we understand this latter
text and the word after to be no more but upon but now to apply this, is there
the like necessity in Ioh. 20.26. to understand by after upon? is there any
other text affirminge that upon the 8th. day Christ appeared to Thomas and the
Disciples? or is there any inconveniency or absurdity to take the words in
their common and proper sense? if neighther of these can be shown then the
readinge which I urge is sound and good.

I answer 3. if Christ's apparition to his disciples cold be an argument of a
Sabbath day, Then (...) of Gods word for the keeping of an other day then God
appointed in his moral Law or 4th. Com: least I partake of that brande of a
wicked man prophesied of Daniel 7.25. in changing times, and the Law: now since
it is a propriety of God to change times and seasons Dan. 2.21. had not I need
be careful there be no new day (as is the Lords day) set up for a Sabbath,
unless it can be expressly infallibly and demonstratiuely proved to be of Gods
own doing? least I say I be accessory to the sin of changeing Gods times,
Dan. 7.25.

Thus have I answered their textes of Scripture brought for the Lords day to
be a Sabbath, and the common objections; now let us in next place examine their
reasons whereby the Lords day is proved a Sabbath.

1 The first reason is drawn from the frequent and constant practice of Christ
and of his Apostles celebration of the Lords day, the which is authority
sufficient for justification of the Lords day to be a Sabbatth:

I answer 1. admit Christ and his Apostles did preach on the Lords day, and
thereby honor this day above any of the 6. working days, yet how does it
appear they did this on this day to this very end and purpose to sanctifye it
for a Sabbath day, and in obedience to the 4th. Com? let these 2. things be
proved, or else nothing is done.

I answer 2. as touching our Savior Christ, whereas it is supposed he
constantly kept the Lords day as a Sabbath: I deny it, let it be proved that
ever Christ did sanctifye as a Sabbath any on Lords day: Nay is not the
contrary manifest, that Christ travailed a matter of 15. miles out and home
upon the very first Lords day that ever was, it being the most eminent Lords
day of any ever after, because it was that very Lords day whereone he rose from
the dead? see Luke 24.13.33. Christ went with the 2. Disciples from Jerusalem
to Emmaus v. 15. which is in accounte 7. miles and an half, counting 8.
furlonges to a mile: and thence he returned to Jerusalem back again that
night, which is 7. miles and an half more: now 15. miles is above a Sabbath
days Journey, since a Sabbath days Journey is in esteem, but about 2. miles
Act. 1.12. Neighther can it be proved, Christ went to Emmaus to preach and
keep Sabbath there, for 1. he went from the Congregation of his Disciples
which he left behind at Jerusalem, and we read not of any assemblyes of
Disciples that were at Emmaus; now Christ being the pastor of his flock, and
the minister or preacher to his Disciples, can it be thought he would leave
them destitute of his help to sanctify the first Christian Sabbath that ever
the Church saw? 2. how cold Christ keep that day for a Sabbath since he was
not in the Congregation, but in the field travailing, from about noone (as is
gatherable from circumstances of the text) and so forwards all the remainder
of that after noone; for he went alonge with the 2. Disciples, and they went
not above a matter of 2. miles an hour, as is probable by the ordenary pace of
trauailers, so then 15. miles spent them a matter of 7. hours: Had Christ
imitated God in the creation (as is supposed) in setting up a Sabbath day, then
surely as God did rest on the 7th. day, and set us his own pattern: so would
Christ have rested all this Lords day after the work of redemption, to have
been an example to us. what if Christ being risen from the dead cold now
travail without pain? so cold God in the Creation create without pain, yet
would he leave nothing to be created on the 7th. day, but rested on it, for us
to imitate him. and Adam in Innocence cold labor without pain, yet he must
rest on the Sabbath day, and what if Christ did open the Scriptures concerning
himself v.27. to the 2. Disciples as they went on their way together, must
this therefore be a proper Sabbath days work? as the Lord by Moses commanded
(Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.) parents, that they should talk to their children of the Law of
God as they walked by the way etc. on what day so ever; and as every Godly
minister now rideing on the way upon a Saturday toward Market or fayer, will
upon occasion be talking to people that ride with him of heavenly and divine
things, so much rather would our blessed Savior be teaching, and upon all
occasions instructing the people upon every day; especially consideringe it was
his office to teach, and therefore a daily task to preach in season and out of
season upon all occasions, as we read he did in the Gospel, and as we read
Act. 1.3. Christ was seen of his Apostles for 40. days after his
resurrection, speaking to them of the things appertaining to the Kingdom of
God. now what did Christ preach more to these 2. Disciples, on that Lords day,
then he preached to his Apostles every day after it for 40. days together? To
add one thing more, be it, you make exceptions against Christ's travailing one
the Lords day, what exceptions do you find against the 2. Disciples of
Christ, with whom Christ travailed? these travailed one the Lords day, Christ
himself not disallowing, but by his companying them justified them. they went
from the Congregation of Disciples at Jerusalem where the Sabbath was kept, if
any where, they went to a town not to keep Sabbath for it was near night ere
they got thither, and they but stayed and supped and came back again; (...)
member what I have formerly given in answer to the texts brought to prove the
Lords day to be the Sabbath day; as for Peter's sermon Act. 2.14. it was not
made upon the Lords day, but upon Saturday or on the Lords Sabbath day, as is
proved: as for Paul's sermon Act. 20.7. this was in the night, not in the day;
now I hold the night is no part of the day, I say no part of the Lords day,
as shall be proved here after, in my exposition of the word Day in the 4th.
Com: yea, if they began their Sabbaths at Eueninge, as is holden by many; from
even to even ye shall celebrate your Sabbath Leuit. 23.32. then Paul preached
not on the first day of the week, but on the second, because he began his
sermon at Evening, after the Disciples were come together upon the first day
of the week; or else Paul travailed and set sail on the Lords day, if the
Lords day began that evening when he began his sermon, for next morneing he
went to shipe Act. 20.11.13. as for that text 1. Cor. 16.2. here is no mention
of any preaching at all, only it treates about a future collection etc. as for
the text Ioh. 20.19. here is no mention neither of any Sermon made when Christ
appeared to his Disciples; it is true the text says they were assembled indeed,
but wherefore? to hear a sermon? no such thing; but text says, they were
assembled together for fear of the Jews, like as the Lords Prophets were in
Caves in Obadiahs time 1. King 18.4. to shrowde themselves from danger of
persecutores, what other end they had in assembleing the Scripture is silent:
lastly admit here was a sermon, yet it was not upon the Lords day, for it
was in the night following the Lords day, now the night is not in Scripture
account any part of the day, as shall be shown: as for the text Revel. 1.10.
where it is called the Lords day by John, here is not the least mention of any
readeing or preaching at all, nay not like there cold be any, since revelations
usually came to holy men when they were solitary and alone, not in assemblies
where preaching and sermons be: thus I have examined all the textes wherein
is any show of sermons, and I find not in any of them that ever any of the
Apostles did so much as one single time preach any one sermon upon the Lords
day, the which if it be true, as is most true, where is any the least ground
from Apostles practice of keeping the Lords day for a Sabbath, they must needs
prove me false in this point, or else the foundation being shaken yea removed,
the building must fale: if Apostles neighther left precept for the Lords day,
no nor their own practice, who can imagine it should be a Sabbath by Gods
appointment?

I answer lastly, whereas they build upon the practice of the Apostles
preaching, so as on (...) all is, because there is not in all the new nor old
Testaments any commandment to set up any other Sabbath then that 7th. day from
the creation, no nor ought else that has the force of a commandment, as no
practice of Christ nor his Apostles, as have been shown before nay we have
Gods apointement to the contrary that no day of the 6. can be Sabbath day, for
in the 6. days we may labor Exodus 20.9. Six days shall thou labor, etc.

I answer 2. Be it that Saturday Sabbath being abrogated, an other Sabbath
must rise up in its room, yet it follows not that Sunday, or the Lords day,
on first day of the week must necessarily be the new day, for there may be a
Sabbath though none upon the first day of the week, if there be one kept upon
any of the 6. days, Moneday, Tewsday, Wensday, or Thursday etc.

But hereto it will be said though the new Sabbath may be on any of the 6.
days, yet we ought to choose the first day of the week before all others,
because on it we received a greater a greater blessing then one any other of
the 6. days, since on that day our Lord Christ rose from the dead, and
therefore it is caled the Lords day. I answer 1. be it so that in choosinge a
day, we ought to take that day which has near relation to the greatest
blessing, yet would we imitate God in instituting a Sabbath at Creation, we
should not set a part for a Sabbath that very day vvhereon we received that
blessing, or whereon Christ performed it, but the day after it, so God having
finished his work of creation on the 6th. day, he then sanctified the day
after, the 7th. day: and so it seems the believing Jews learned of God to
set a part the day after a deliverance, not the very day, see Ester 9.17.18.
where the Jews that conquered their enemies on the 13th. day of the month,
they rested on the 14th. day of the month, and keept it a day of feasting and
joy; and those Jews that conquered on the 13th. and 14th. days, they rested
on the 15th. day: But we immitate neither God, nor those Godly Jews, for we
rest upon the very day where on we received that great blessing, that is upon
the first day of the week, wherein the Lord rose; and we should rest rather on
the second day of the week, which is Moneday: I answer 2. be it so, that the
Lords day were to be kept of us above any other day, in memory of the
resurrection of our Lord, yet it follows not that we should count and keep
every first day of the week, and one day in 7. for a Sabbath, for this were
Jewish (as it is caled) and to imitate God in the creation; but we Christians
have an other pattern, that is Christ the Lord and Redemer to imitate, and
that in respect of the work of Redemption: So as if we hold it best to
sanctify the very day whereon Christ rose; why then must we sanctifye every
third day for our new Sabbath, and cale and count every third day since the
first Lords day vvhereon Christ rose, The Lords day; let it fale upon the first
day of the week, or on the 2th. or 3th. or 4th. etc. one any day of the week:
my reason is because the Scriptures tells us that our Lord Christ rose upon
the 3th. day, as God rested on the 7th. day; so then Christ being crucified
one good Friday, and riseing again one our Suneday, it appears he was but 3.
days upon the work of redemption: Now if we Christians must imitate Christ
in the work of redemption, as did the Jews God in the work of creation, Then
look as God working 6. days and resting the 7th. the Jews also wrought 6.
days and rested the 7th. So as Christ was 3. days, or 3. parts of 3. days,
in the work of redemption, and rested from the same sufferings on the third
day, In like manner should we Christians in imitation of Christ work 3. days,
or 3. parts of three days, and rest on the third, keeping it for a Sabbath:
So we should not then keep these we now call Lords days for our Sabbath but
others, nor keep a Sabbath once in 7. days, but ont once every 3. days.

I answer now to the reason whereby they would choose out the Lords day before
any other of the 6. days for a Sabbath, because on that day we received the
Lord from the dead, the greatest work and mercy that ever we received etc.
here unto I answer, if the greatest work shall determine the day, which it
shall be, Then in mine account as far at yet I can see, good Friday should be
our new Sabbath day: for on that day Christ performed the greatest work of any
other day; let us therefore compare these 3. days works; on good Friday (not
to mention the the particulares of his grieueousse passion) Christ upon the
cross hanging there in our rooms, bare that most intolerable and
insupportable wrath of God, which was due for the sins of all Gods elect, from
beginning to the end of the world, which wrath was so hot as caused him to
utter these words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and then as
having borne the utmost of his fathers wrath for sins of his elect, he yielded
up his Spirit with these words, It is finished, Ioh. 19.30. as for the next
day, the 2d. day of his passion, our Saturday, and so also for the 3d. day of
his passion, our Sunday, until he rose, what cold he suffer? his soul was in
paradise, his body in the grave dead and senseless: now judge vvhither of
these 3. days had the greatest work done in, in which of them but Friday was
the greatest passion? or if you will compare Christ's resurrection with his
passion, I trust it will be fond a greater work for his Deity to supporte
the Humanity upon the cross, then to send his soul from heaven into his dead
body in the grave to quicken and raise it up.

But you will say on the 3d. day Christ rose, with out which all the former had
been insufficient 1. Cor. 15.14. if Christ be not risen our preaching, and
your faith is in vain etc. and Christ died for our sines, and rose again for
our justification, Romans 4.25. so that it is rather the day wherein all was
perfectly finished, then the day wherein the greatest work was done, that we
should keep for our Sabbath: where to I answer 1. Christ upon the cross on
good Friday said then, it is finished Ioh. 19.30. secondly, if you will stay
for a day where in every complement was fulfilled, then must you make your
Sabbath on Ascentio^ day being Thursday: or rather you must tarry till the
worlds end: till Christ has conquered sines and death, 1. Cor. 15.26.56. if
therefore by reasons we shall institute Sabbathes, it may be thought good Friday
is the only day for our new Sabbath, or else to tarry till this worlds end.

4 A 4th. and maine reason of all is to this effect; If the Jews kept a
Sabbath in memory of Gods Creation, Then much more ought Christians keep an
other Sabbath in memory of Christ's Redemption: and the common reason hereof is,
because the work of Redemption is a greater work then the work of Creation.

I answer 1. the reason is not the same, and therefore it follows not; for
the Jews they did not set up a Sabbath on their own heads, with out a precept
for their direction, only to commemorate the creation, if they had, it had
been no better then will worship, but they stayed for a Commandment from the
God of the creation to command them a Sabbath by his 4th. Comm: and to tell
them which day of the 7. to keep; and it was Gods Commandment principally
that set them one work to keep a Sabbath; now this which is the maine for the
keeping of a Sabbath day, is left ont in their argument, as if Gods Comm: were
but a by thing and not necessarily presupposed in every Sabbath: wherefore let
them put into their argument the main and principal thing moving the Jews to
keep the Sabbath, that is Gods 4th Com: and then I fault not their argument,
as now I do, but I bide them prove likewise that we Christians have such
strong reasons to keep our Lords day a Sabbath, as Jews had for their day,
that is, I require to show me where Christ or his Apostles left us an express
Commandment to sanctify the Lords day, as God did to the Jews to sanctify the
7th. day, and then I say indeed, If the Jews kept the 7th. day, we Christians
ought keep the 8th. day. Or thus is greater then the work of creation? if it
be greater the answer will be to the elect and to the redeemed it is greater:
well be it so, but what is this to our question, which is general of all
Christians that live with in the pale of the Church, affirming that if Jews,
that is, all Jews kept a Sabbath for the creation, then ought Christians, that
is all men with in the pale of the Church, keep a Sabbath for redemption: so
the question being general of all men with in the Church, you bring a reason
to enforce all these men, to keep a new Sabbath, which reason is proper to
some of these men only: as if you would thus argue all men are bound to keep the
Lords day for a Sabbath, because the Lord died for some of these men: this
arguing is much like absurd to this; If the Jews under King Ahashuerosh Ester
9.17. did solemnize a day every year with feasting and joy, in memory of
their deliverance from Hamans conspiracy, Then so ought Christians, both
English, French, Dutchmen and Spanyardes etc. that is all Christians solemnize
a day every year with like feasting and joy, in memory of our deliverance
from Spanyardes in the year 88. or from Papists powder treason on 5th.
November: and here to may be added a like reason, as that our deliverance in
88. or on 5th. of November, was as great as that of the Jews from Haman: now
who does not see the vanity of this kind of arguing? yet just thus do they
argue to set up the Lords day for a Sabbath: as here it is argued from a
particular deliverance of some Christians, as English men, to all Christians:
as French, Dutch, and Spaniards, who had no share in that deliverance of 88.
and 5th of November; just so do they argue, from a particular deliverance of
some Christians as Gods elect, unto all Christians both elect and reprobate,
believers and unbelievers: what reason is it that such as have no part in
Christ as a Redeemer, should weekly celebrate on whole day, neglecting their
proffit and callings, in memory of Christ the Redeemer? of right therefore only
such a day should be a Sabbath as binds all and every man, one as well as an
other; and such is the 7th day Sabhath, in memory of the creation, for in the
creation we all, believers and unbelievers have our share, not so in the
redemption. I conclude therefore, that though the work of redemption be greater
then the work of creation, and therefore does require a Sabbath, as well as the
creation, yet does it not require so general and universal a Sabbath as did
the work of creation; all men are not bound to the one, as they are to the
other: Nor can I conceive how any more men should be bound to keep this Sabbath,
by this reason, then only a few which do actually believe in Christ, an
handful of (...) most free Agentes, so as they eighther of the^ produce
effects at their pleasure by Counsel, so as they be not tied ever to produce
the same effects the one as does the other: that this is so, will appear even
in these points in question, it pleased God to create the world by action,
but it pleased Christ to redeem the world by passion: 2. it pleased the
Father to be 6. days in creation, but it pleased the Son to be but 3. days
in redemption: 3. it pleased the Father to rest on the Sabbath day: but it
pleased the Son not to rest on the Lords day, but to travail 15. miles to
Emmaus and back again. 4. it pleased God to leave a commandment in wrighting
to posterity to keep the Sabbath day; but it pleased not our Savior Christ to
leave any commandment for the keeping the Lords day. if therefore God and
Christ be so variouse in their actions, how will it follow, that if God kept a
Sabbath, or instituted one in creation, then Christ must necessarily institute
an other like Sabbath at redemption?

5 A 5th reason, seems to ground on the 4th. Com: thus; The 4th Comm: enioynes
a 7th day for the Sabbath, now our Lords day is a 7th day, for we keep it
every 7th day for a Sabbath.

I answer 1. the 4th Comm: enioyneth such a 7th day for a Sabbath, as is and
was amongst the Jews called by his proper name, the Sabbath day also, now our
Lords day was called with them eighther the first day of the week, or the
first day after the Sabbath, so it can not be that 7th day there meante. 2. if
we call our Lords day the 7th day: we depart from all churches, which call
it the 8th day, or the first day of the week, as do all the 4. Evangelists
in the Gospel: 3. if you call the Lords day a 7th day. I pray, where or at
what day will you begin to reckone for your first day of the 7? you must
begine at some renowned day, as at the first day of worlds creation: or at the
first day of the worlds redemption, it is groundless to set any other beginning;
now Sunday is the common reputed day for the first day of the worlds creation;
and the 7th from it is Saturday the Lords Sabbath day: but if you refuse this
beginning, and will fetch a first from the redemption, then good Friday
vvhereon Christ suffered must be the first day of your 7: and then Thursday will
be your 7th day, and so your Sabbath day: or else Sunday vvhereon Christ rose,
must be your first day, and then Saturday, the Jews Sabbath day will be your
7th day and new Sabbath day now behold though you seem to stand to a 7th day
for your Sabbath, yet you cannot any approved way make the Lords day a 7th
day: unless, you take Mooneday for your first day of the week, which no
approved Authors do, and which computation is not Divine in old or new
Testaments, but is merely humane and devised. and by like reason if you
groundlesly begine at Mooneday, may not we begine at Tewsday, or Wensday, or
Thursday, etc. and so skippe over as many days as we please, so as no man
shall know where or when to begine, nor what day shall be his 7th day for a
Sabbath? and if we may skipe over as many days as we please before we take
one for our first day: may we not skipp over as well 7. days as one day? and
if we may skipp over 7. days: why not 700. or 7000 days? and so, many
weeks, yea years may be without any Sabbath.

6 A 6th and last reason they fetched from practice of the primitive Churches;
for the Historyes of the Church say they relate that they kept the Lords day
for a Sabbath constantly.

I answer 1. I find the contrary, and that alleged too by M. Perkins upon
the 4th Com: who thus speaks? The Sabbath (meaning it the Lords day) was
neglected of those Churches which succeeded the Apostles, until afterward it
was established by Christian Emperoures: and this he proves to be so by
alleging his author for it, Leo: and Anton. Edict. of holy days. now if Mr.
Perkins who was so well seen in history of our churches would affirm
this, and that too when he pleaded what he could for our new Sabbath, then
surely in his judgment, it was a clear case that the primitive churches kept
not our Lords day ever, or constantly. 2. Ignatius, where he exhorted to keep
the Lords day: there he exhorted to keep the Sabbath day too. now it is not
likly both these days were kept for Sabbathes, but that one only, and that
was the Sabbath day, as is gatherable, in that Ignatius calls the Lords day
the Queen and Princess of all days, where he left out a higher place for
the Sabbath day, as the Kings and Prince of all days. it is likly therefore
that our Lords day was kept as we keep an holy day with us: and when those
Christian Emperoures did establishe by Laws our Lords day to be solemnized, at
which times it flourished most: yet even then they kept it not as a Sabbath
day, but as we keep an Holy day. for Constantin the Emperor, and most
religiouse patron of our Lords day, as is well known in his Edicte for the
celebrating of the Lords day; yet therein gave liberty for men to do works
of Husbandry on the Lords day. now ploughing and sowing, and reaping, and the
like work of husbandry be quite against the very letter of the 4th Comm: and
against and contrary to that rest from all servile works, in earing and in
harvest, and at other times, enjoined in the Law for Sabbath day duties: can we
think Constantin, directed by his reverend Clergy would can given such liberty
had they counted the Lords day for the Sabbath day, and to stand by the 4th
Comm? finally, if we should imitate the primitive churches as touching days:
we should weekly keep holy Friday vvhereon Christ suffered, as well as
Sunday whereon Christ rose. for Constantin did by one and the same Law command
his whole Empire to sanctifye the Friday, and the Sunday, the day before the
Jews Sabbath, and the day after it, see Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4. cap.
18. and see Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. the Lords day, because of Christ's
resurrection, the Friday, because of Christ's passion, as says the text: and
here again it appears the primitive church kept not the Lords day for their
Sabbath, no more then they kept Friday for their Sabbath, but both of them as
we keep holy days.

Having answered all their reasons that I can find or hear of, in next place
let me pass my censure of reasons in general. How feeble a thing our best and
refined reason is every man may know that uses reason? S. Paul shall speak
for us, we know but in part: and we see through a glass darkely, 1. Cor.
12.9.12. says he. 2. let all our learned Divines speak, who not only in
public prayers to God confess our blindness of mind; but moreover, in
their Sermons they dare not deliver a doctrine collected by reason out of their
text, unless they can soundly prove the same by some plain text or other, as
you see their constant and laudable practice is, and this they do, least they
should deliver for doctrines men's precepts, whereby you see what an holy
ielousy they have of their reason, that though in their private studies, they
have collected a doctrine by helps both of nature and arts with great
diligence: yet dare they not trust to their reason until they find God in his
word to back them. 3. let Logicianes speak, who are the masters in reason;
do not they in their books of Logic show how many and sundry ways reason
is subject to be corrupted by fallacies and Sophistical arguments? all which
testimonies of the dimenesse and weakness of our reason, teaches us thus
much; that as it is too great boldness with God, and ouergreate confidence in
our reason, by bare force of it to dispute against any thing which God has set
up, as the 7th day Sabbath: So it is a matter of no less dispraise and
presumption by only force of reason and consequence to innouate and set up a
new Sabbath. and yet for all this. do I not exclude the use of reason about
the Holy Scriptures, so be it be but to find out what God says in his word.
I only exclude the use of reason as by collections to add any thing to Gods
word, wherefore I reject all reasons and consequences touching in nouation and
bringing in a new Sabbath, unless as divines back their doctrines in sermons
by plain textes: so these do back every collection and consequence by a
clear text of Scripture or at least, if I may be bold to grante so much, that
every collection and consequence be such as is necessarily and demonstratiuely
true, so as it apparently cannot but be true: Hence is that laudable usage of
our church, which though it permits Apocrypha Scriptures to be read
sometimes in our congregations: yet it permits them not to be used and
alleged as a sole ground to establishe any doctrine of our church. and what I
pray is our reason better then Apocrypha Scriptures, that we should lean more
to tone then to other? were it meet, we should receive doctrines into the
church which have a binding power over the conscience, tying the whole man to
obedience of them, upon pain of damnation, which are framed and maintainede
only by force of our reason? wherefore to conclude let reasons be subseruient
and handmaide to the Holy Scriptures, and ever follow them, never to go before
them, nor to go without them. and therefore since our Savior Christ and his
Apostles be avouched to be the founders of our new Sabbath: I pray in the first
place show us where ever Christ, or any of his Apostles gave any commandment
for it, or whereas you say collection for the poor, and preaching, be marks
of a Sabbath; show me your text of Scripture where it is said that collections
and preaching be proper and infallible marks of any Sabbath day. or which is
yet less, let it be shown where ever they said or did any thing, which
necessarily and infallibly does give us notice, that it was but their mind,
that ever after, the churches should every week keep the Lords day a Sabbath,
in conscience of the 4th Com: and since God at creation gave a commandment for
that Sabbath, why should we not think Christ would a given a commandment too
for this Sabbath, if ever he had intended to have had it kept as a Sabbath?
would God give a commandment for his Sabbath, and Christ leave his Sabbath
without a commandment, and to be collected by feeble reason? was our Savior
so careful to give a commandment for the Lords Supper, to be done in
remembrance of him; and did he forget think you to leave a commandment for
the Lords day, to be kept in remembrance of him? could it be possible, a matter
of so great importance as is a Sabbath, and such a Sabbath as would make so
much for his remembrance to the worlds end, should be passed over in deep
silence, not only by Christ himself, but also by his succeeding Apostles, so
as not only not to command it, but which yet is less not so much as mention
it by the name of a Sabbath? who that considers of this, would or could ever
think that Christ did institute and appointe this Lords day for a Sabbath?
was not these those considerations which made Calvin upon Col. 2.16. say, it
is not unlawful to labor and work on our Sabbathes? thus in effect he: was
not this it also which moved zanchie upon the 4th com: Thesis 1. to say, The
Apostles left the Lords day at liberty; and that we are not bound to keep it
for a Sabbath, by any bond or tie of conscience: thus he. To come yet nerer
home, to our own divines; was it not hence that Perkins though a great friend
to the Lords day for Sabbath, as Walaeus on the 4th com: quoteth him, thus
Perkins ingenuously (says he) confesses, that as touching Christ's
institution, the arguments he bringes for our Lords day, they be not
necessary, but only probable ones etc. and see Perk: cases of conscience chapt.
16. where the holy man durst not speak to the conscience peremptorily as of a
thing for certain true, but tremblingly as it were, repeatinge his doubtful
speeches, 3. or 4. times over, in 6. or 8. lines wrighting as 1. In all likely
hoode, says he: 2. as I take it etc. 3. now I suppose etc. 4. for in these
points still we must go by likely hoodes etc. surely, had there been any
sufficient grounds for our new Sabbath, this holy man durst not have concealed
them, no nor would he have spoke so doubtfully, who in other points speaks
peremptorily and confidently: and was it not hence that Doctor Prideaux in his
work upon the Sabbath, says, where is there the least mention of surrogation
of the Lords day in room of the? Sabbath? page 140. Again, where (says he)
amongst the Evangelists, or Apostles, is there any distinct institution of the
Lords day? yea further, where is the text whence you will necessarily prove
it? what should I reckone up particular men, is it not the doctrine of our
church? very lately a book came to my hands, printed at Oxford in the year
1621. written by M. Broad, touching the Sabbath, where on the margent page 2.
thus he wrighteth; Christian people chose the first day of the week, and made
it their Sabbath, says the book of Homilies: By the doctrine then of our
church, says M. Broad, the observation of the Lords day, is an Ecclesiastical
ordinance, and not an Apostolical precept: and again page 21. It is not by
any express command from Christ or his Apostles, but by an ordinance of the
church, as is the doctrine of many great divines, and of our church in the
book of Homilies, that we sanctify the Lords day, rather then any other day of
the week, thus wrighteth M. Broad of the Lords day, and of its institution,
as being in the judgment of our own church, not from God, nor from Christ,
but from certain Godly christian, and well disposed people.

One objection remains to be removed, which is, That the Church of God has
kept this Lords day for a Sabbath many hundreds of years; and can it be
thought Gods whole church should err, and that so long?

I answer, it is true indeed, we ought to hold a reverent regard of the
tenentes of our Mother the church, so as not lightely nor rashely to receive
any opinions which blemishe her practice: Nevertheless this we must know also,
that the church whilst on earth is liable to miscariages through ignorance, for
as much as God does not reveal his whole truth to her at once, but
successively now on thing, and then another, as she is able to bear it, and as
the times may permite, and as it seems good to his Godly pleasure; do we not
see, daily light is brought into the church, and God reueales himself more and
more? and what does this argue, but what we cannot deny, that is, that before
such light came, we were in darkness and error, as touching those points? yea
we must grante the church may and does err in some things unless we will
affirm that she is grown to fullness of stature, and perfection in
knowledge, so as nothing more can be added: I verily persuade my self these
very co^ceipts that the true Church of God cannot err in any maine thing, is
the very foundation of error in those minds where such conceits rule: for
who would be so idle to spend labor and time, to try all things: and with
the Bereanes, to search the Scriptures, if already our curch has tried all, and
serched all to perfection, so as they have no vvayes erred? more humble
thoughts of our church does better become us: all that I aim at hereby is no
more but this, that we allege not the practice of our church as an infallible
rule and touch stone of truth, but though a Paul preached it, yet with these
Bareanes Act. 17.11. rather to search the Scriptures then to rely upon the
Testimony of man.

Finally, that our church has kept this Lords day so long; and therefore the
more strange it should be an error: I answer, it is true the Lords day has
been kept for about this 1200. years; as nere as I can guess from about the
year 364. at which time the Laodicean counsel enacted a Law for the
abolishing the Sabbath day, and for the sole setting up the Lords day: till
then both days were in use, save that as has been shown the Lords day was
sometimes omitted: since then, only the Lords day has been in request, and
that is about a 1200. years; but here it is to be noted, what church it is
that principally (...) ground of our future discourse, I think it needful
therefore in the first place to stay a while upon the exposition of it, or
rather of some such things in it, as may make way for our future discourse.

First, as touching the substance of the Com: note, that as in a bond you have
two essential things: the one, is the sum of money to be paid; the other is
the day when it is to be paid: and as in circumcision there was two things
commanded, the one was the act of circumcision; the other was the time and
day when to be done that is, on the 8th day, Genes. 17.12. and as in that other
Sacrament the passover, two things were commanded: the one was the slaying and
eating of the passover; the other, was the time and day when to be done, that
is, on the 14th day of the month, Exodus 12.6.8. Just so, in this 4th Com: God
commands us expressly two things, as essential parts of his Com: the one is
Holiness and Rest; the other is, the time when these ought to be performed,
and that is in the Sabbath day, which is the 7th day: the former may be called
the duties in the day, the latter, the duty of the day: the duties in the day
ye have in these words; To keep it holy, Exodus 20.8. the other duty in these
words; In it thou shall not do any work, v. 10. the duty of the day, ye have
in these words; Remember the Sabbath day v. 8. the 7th day is the Sabbath, v.
10.

The use of this point serves for confutation; Is it so that God in his 4th
Com: straightly charge us two things, that is the duties in the day, and the
duty of the day, or thus, the duties to be performed, and the time when they
be to be performed? how is it then that so many say of the time of the 4th com:
oh the time, that is but an accident, but a circumstance, God regards not
circumstances so much, it is the substance of the duties to be performed in the
time that God looks at etc. and therefore you are but superstitiouse and vain
to stand so much upon time: where to I answer 1. time may here be considered
two ways, 1. in relation to the duties of Holiness and Rest: and so I grant
the time is an adiuncte, wherein these duties were to be performed: 2. in
relation to the commandment it self; considered as a thing commanded,
together with Holiness and Rest: and thus it is no adjuncte, but thus it is an
essential part of the Com: the time being no less commanded then the duties
of Holiness and Rest. I answer 2. but admite that time, here were an accident
or adjuncte to the Com: and that you esteem of adjunctes as light and triuiale
matters, little or nothing to be regard for their nature as in them selves, and
in comparison of things substa^tiall etc. I say, be it the time here were as
mynte and annyse and commine, and the duties to be performed (...) Sabbath day:
Remember the Sabbath day etc. where it is to be noted that this phrase Sabbath
day was among the Jews a proper name for one of their week days, namly for
that week day, which is the last of the week, as Saturday is with us, and it
answers to our Saturday, in so much as if we should translate the Hebrew words
Sabbath day we should read it Saturday. Remember Saturday, to keep it holy
etc. now that Sabbath day was a proper name of one of their week days is
apparent to all, since they counted all the other 6. days of the week by the
Sabbath day; thus, the 7th. and last day of the week they called Sabbath day:
the first day of the week; our Suneday, they called the first of the Sabbath:
the second day of the week, our Moonday, they called the second of the
Sabbath: our Tewsday, the third of the Sabbath etc. so as you see no day of
the week was called Sabbath day, but this one only: I confess the word
Sabbath, signifies a Rest; but it also signifies a proper name of the last
day of their week. Secondly, if this be not enough to show that God had set
aparte one certain well known day before any of the other 6. days for Holy
duties. Then mark what the Lord says further in this Com: The Seventh day is
the Sabbath etc. not the third day, nor the 4th. day, nor the first day of the
week, but the 7th. day is the Sabbath: where to take hence all scruples about
the order of the day, it has pleased God for our certain information to
point directly and distinctly to the day which he would have kept, as by the
finger, saying, The Seventh day; Thouchinge which word of number Seventh it
is to be noted, that it is not a Cardinal number, but an Ordinall, notifying
which for order: the property whereof is to denote, 1. one, and one only: 2.
it notes that individual particular one, which for order is the last of that
number: for instance, The Third: it is not any of the three, as the second,
nor the first; but it is the last of the three: so the fifthe, it is not the
4th. nor the second, but it is the last of the 5: so, the Seventh day is the
Sabbath; not the 6th. day, nor the third day, nor the first day of the week,
but the last day of the week, the 7th. is the Sabbath: so again you see the
Lord has culled out the last day of the 7. for his Sabbath, and has not left
it indefinitly and undetermined: Furthermore, left any should think the 7th.
day may be separated from that day called the Sabbath day, as is usually
thought; therefore note 1. the Lord God has joined them together in his Comm.
The 7th. day is the Sabbath, see Levit: 23.3. and Exodus: 35.2. Luk: 13.14. not
the 8th. nor the first; now what God has joined let noe man put asunder. 2.
Note, that these two; The 7th. day: and the Sabbath day: they be used in holy
Scripture promiscuously, as both pointeing at the same very day and time, see
Genes. 2.3. God blessed the 7th. day and hallowed it etc. the which Moses
repeateing again Exodus: 20.11. says, The Lord blessed the Sabbath day and
hallowed it: so as a man may say, the 7th. day is the Sabbath day: and the
Sabbath day is the 7th. day: take away one, and take away both; grant one
and grant both: they are like the names Jesus, and Christ: both which belong
to one person, our blessed Savior: or like to the names, Lords day; and first
day of the week, both which belong to our Sunday. Thirdly, the particularity
of the time and day is apparently pointed unto in the reason of the 4th. Comm:
which is fetched from the day wherein God rested, thus, That day which I the
Lord sanctified, the same day must thou sanctify: But the 7th. day I the Lord
sanctified: Therefore the 7th. day must thou sanctify: now since it is absurd
to think the premises should speak of one 7th. day, and the conclusion of
some other 7th. day, therefore if we can find out what 7th. day it was God
rested on, we may by it know what day we must rest on; now it is most
apparent that God rested upon the 7th. day from the creation, which was that
day which immediately followed the six days of creation. So then are we to
keep by virtue of the Com: the same particular seventh day which next
followerh Gods and our six days labor.

The use of this point is 1. to discover the error of our times, which will
apply this 4th. Com: to the 8th. day, or to the first day of the week, which
is appropriated to the seventh day of the week by God the Lavvgiuer: or will
apply it to the Lords day, which is the day after the Sabbath, when the Com:
is appropriate to the Sabbath day, which is the day before the Lords day.

Use 2. is for refutation of those that say, it matters not so be we give God
a day, which it is: so be we give God a Sabbath, or a 7th day, it matters not
whither this or that day: Noe, say you it matters not which, why then did God
take such care to decipher out the very day wherein he would be served, by
those 3. marks, 1. he tells you it is the Sabbath day. 2. that it is the 7th day.
3. that it is that 7th day whereon himself rested? Further, this were to make
hallowed things common, and common things hollowed; and to cross God, who
therefore culled out the 7th day from the others, because in it he had rested,
Genes. 2.3. Exodus 20.11. besides the reason why God hallowed the 7th day, was
because in it he had rested: which reason cannot be true of any day of the 7.
save the 7th. If God would require it at their hands that did not circumcise
one the 8th. day, and eat the Passover one the 14th day, the which times God
did without repetition once only in the same text mention, what will he do
to us to whom he has deceiphred out that time by 3. such notable marks, in
the 4th Comm: it is noe dallying with God.

Use 3. is for confutation of a common but frivolouse answer, saying. when
they be urged to this particular set time of 7th day from creation: the Com:
speaks not of The Sabbath: but of A Sabbath: by a Sabbath understanding any
day indefinitly and uncertainly: and thus they make Gods set and certain
times uncertain and doubtful, which is quite contrary to Gods mind, since
God did limite and determine which of the 7. days he would have, by those 3.
notable marks above said: when the Lord said, Remember the Sabbath day: the
Jews were not left at random, as not knovving which day of the 7. God
meante, for they knevv it well, like as if God should say, Remember Saturday: is
it uncertain which day of the week Saturday with us is? Furthermore, this
reading of A for The it crosses all our Translatours both old and new, who
judge it the most fit to read it. The not A Remember The Sabbath day: not
Remember A Sabbath day: finally, were it lawful thus to wrest Scripture,
whereas the third Comm: is, Thou shall not take The name of the Lord thy God in
vain etc. might not I here cauile thus; Thou shall not take A name of the Lord
thy God in vain; understanding by A name some Titles and Attributes of God
uncertain what, or which: or understanding by A name some name of God as then
unknown, like as by A Sabbath, we would have our new Sabbath meant, which then
to the Jew at Mount Sinay was utterly unknown? In a word were this lawful
might not I in like sort delude them of the Lords day, for being the first day
of the week? and whereas S. John says Revel. 1.10. I was ravished in the
Spitit on The Lords day: I might say, on A Lords day; understanding it of any
day of the week uncertain which. Again since neighther Christ, nor the 4.
Evangelists, nor any of the Apostles after Christ's resurrection, did ever
alter the name Sabbath, from Saturday, there for Saturday is still the Sabbath
day by name.

Besides, this use is likewise to be urged by way of confutation to those who
would have it read or understood not The Seventh, but A Seventh day, as of an
uncertain day; the why is made certain by God: for it is such a seventh day
as is the last day of 7, or of the week: 2. it is (...)

3. Thus having fond out the particular time and day of Gods worship; before I
can come to speak of the duties to be performed in the day, we have 4. more
particulares to speak of concerning the time: 1. to Remember this time 2. that
it is called Sabbath: 3. that it is called a Day: 4. of the reason why God
Sanctified this day before any other: To handle these in order as they lay in
the Comm.

Remember etc. here the Lord prefixeth a Memorandum to the seventh day
Sabbath: Remember the Sabbath day etc. a reason why God prefixeth a Remembrance
to this Comm: is rendered by divines, to be for prevention of carelesnes and
forgetfulness one the 6. working days, of the Sabbath next ensuing; least
that men leave some common works of the 6. days to be done on the seventh
day Sabbath; this I confess a truth indeed, but this is not all I suppose;
for, if one demaundes a reason why God prefixeth a Memorandum to this Comm:
more then to any other of the Commandments, that cannot be the reason, because
by not forethinking of the Sabbath, some works are left to be done on the
Sabbath, and so the Sabbath is profaned, for since we break every one of the
Commandments, it should a been likewise nedfull to have had a Memorandum
prefixed to every Comm: lest through forgetfulness, and want of forethinking we
break them too; but since a Memora^dum is put to this and not too others, a
reason would be sought, such a one as agrees to this Com. and not to others: now
if I may take leave to deliver mine opinion, I cannot find out a better reason
than this, God foreseeing that after a long time, that is about 364. years
after Christ, this his Sabbath would be not in part violated, but utterly and
altogether blotted out of remembrance in the Church for 1200 years together,
and so this 4th. Comm: forgotten and not the other 9. or this 4th. above, or
rather then the other 9. therefore was a Memorandum set to this, and not to the
other, or to this above the other, to bring men into the Remembrance and
practice of it again: I said, this Sabbath was blotted out in the year of
Christ 364. that is by the Laodicean Counsel, as hereafter you shall hear
etc. from thence until this present hour it is not Remembered, for we profane
it, buy, sell, market, fayer, and work in it, I pray God bring this to our
remembrances and close home to our consciences: I said also, this Comm: is
forgotten above the other 9. for there is no one thing in all the other 9.
commanded that is wholly and altogether forgotten, as is this seventh day; and
though Papists have forgotten foulely, the second Comm: yet blessed be God,
the Reformed Church of Protestants remember it well, but as for the seventh
day Sabbath, and the Command upon it, Remember the Sabbath day: this is
forgotten at all hands utterly by both Protestants and Papists: and so much
of the word Remember.

4. The next point to be considered is the name of this sacred Time and day,
it is called Sabbath: Remember the Sabbath etc. In this name two things are
considerable: 1. that it is used as a proper name for the seventh and last day
of the week with the Jews; of this I say no more, referring you to what I
have else where before, said touching the Sabbath as a proper name etc. 2. That
the word Sabbath signifies Rest.

The first use I will raise bence, shall be from the consideration of both
those joined together, and may be for information, sheweing that the Hebrew
word Sabbath, may be translated into English words, if we do but join
these two together, that is, the proper name, and the signification of it: so
for Sabbath, as it is a proper name of the last day of the week, put Saturday;
and then hereto add that signification of the word Sabbath, Rest: and then thus
it may be rendered Saturday-Rest: Remember Saturday-Reste, to keep it holy etc.
the profit that would come of this is, that there would be no scruple in minds
of the ignorant, which day of the week it is that God requires in his 4th.
Comm: to be Sanctified. Further, it would reform the confusion of such as call
our first day of the week, or Lords day, The Sabbath day: thus doing they
woefully confound things, as times and days: just as if we now a days
should begine to call our Sunday by the name Saturday, what a confusion would
this breed of time? transplaceing the proper name of the seventh day of the
week unto the first day of the week: Hence in part is that delusion of well
minded ignorant people, that when they read the 4th. Comm: Remember the
Sabbath day etc. and then bethink themselves that we call our Sunday, Sabbath
day, surely then conclude they, our Sunday or Lords day is the day that God
appointed by this his 4th. Comm: which is a gross error, since we all say
the Sabbath day is changed into that which we call the Lords day: and if the
Sabbath day be changed (as is said) into the Lords day why do we not put away
the old name, and take up only the new name, like as the name of that Father
of the faithful, it was of old Abram, but when God changed his name into
Abraham; the Lord said, neighther shall thy name be called any more Abram, but
thy name shall be called Abraham Genesi 17.5. and so let us no more call it
Sabbath day, but Lords day: But if you will retain the proper name Sabb.
still, as is not unmeet you should, since it is a name that may perpetually be
kept in the Church, it being a particle of the Moral Law, which is perpetual,
why then I beseech you, let every day have its own proper name, do not
miscall days by wrong names: Let our Satuday be called Sabbath day, for so it
of all the days in the week answers to the Jews Sabbath day; witness the
Jews, when they lived in England, they kept Saturday for their Sabbath day,
and as they do likewise in other parts of the World, where they live at this
day: and witness the Lattines, who to this day call Saturday, Sabbath day,
Dies Sabbathi: I doubt not but this exhortation might prevail, were it not for
an inconvenience, which would be this then, that if we called Saturday, Sabbath
day, then our people would grow to think that Saturday should be Sanctified by
Gods will in his 4th. Comm. for our Sabbath day: and if we call the first day
of the week Sunday, or Lords day only, then the people would not so easily be
made believe, that the 4th. Comm. binds them to the Lords day, because the
Comm. binds only to the day, called Sabbath day, not speaking one word of the
day called Lords day: But if we call the Lords day, Sabbath day once, then it
goes down the stomach without any let or scruple, that the 4th. Comm:
points directly to our first day of the week, or Lords day, and so a wrong
day is kept, one day being taken for another, and so Superstition is used for
Religion, and one day God shall say, who required this at your hands? who may
the people say? why our watch men, our ministers taught us so, and called it
so, and told us it ought to be so, as for us, we were not learned in the
tounges and Arts, we must believe our Ministers: The Priests lips must
preserve knowledge, and we must ask the Law at their mouths: but this plea
cannot altogether free the people see Ezekiel: 33.6. nor can the Ministry be
altogether free of a shrewde taxatio^, (were it not hitherto done of ignorance
and of a good intent) in as much as they are guilty of this transgression,
partly by misenameing of days, which causes an error in the people.

But hereto it will be said Sabbath, signifies a Rest: now on our Lords day we
Rest; and therefore we may call it a Sabbath day: I answer, it is true Sabbath
signifies Rest, and so the Lords day might be called Sabbath day, but yet in
no other sense then every common Holy day, wherein we work not, may be called
Sabbath day, that is, Resteing day: now if the nameing of Holy days, Sabbath
days, should beget an inclination in the ignorant to sanctify them as
Sabbaths? were it not time to forbear such names? Furthermore note, that we
may call the Lords day, or first day of the week, and other common Holy days,
Resting days, but we must know with all that thus to call and to name them, is
merely humane, and of our own devise; for God never named or called the Lords
day, nor common holy days, Resteing days; if therefore we will call days, as
God calls them, then must we call only the 7th day, Sabbath day, or Resting
day, for said God Exodus 20.10. The 7th day, is the Sabbath, or Resting day. I
answer 2. Sabbath day may be used in reference to the 4th Com: or not in any
reference unto it: if it be used not in reference to the 4th Comm: I am not
against it, for so may we call Christmas day when it is one a week day, Sabbath
day, and so may we call days of public thanksgiving and rejoicing Sabbath
days, as coronation days, and Gunpowder Treason days etc. but if we call
any day Sabbath day, religiously, in relation to the 4th Comm: as in that sense
we call our Lords day Sabbath day, then know, it cannot be called Sabbath day,
for that this name Sabbath day in reference to 4th Com: it must have these
properties, 1. it must be set upon its proper day, our Saturday, the which is
named by God Sabbath day, or Resting day: 2. it must be the 7th day from the
creation, or last day of the week. 3. it must be the day which God blessed
and sanctified Genes. 2.3. Exodus 20.11. now none of these things agree to our
Lords day.

5. The next point to be treated one is the word Day, Remember the Sabbath
day: now as before we have heard of the Sabbath day, which it is for order
and place, as vvhither the first, or 2d etc. or 7th or 8th day. so now we are
to hear of the duration and length of that Sabbath day. A day is commonly
divided into a day natural of 24. hours, or artificial of 12. hours; but I
must crave leave to depart from this distinction though a common received one,
because how ever it may have its use in civil affairs, yet is it not
Canonical and Divine, and therefore not to be a rule in expounding the word Day
in Scripture: that I may not seem sleightily to deny a common distinction,
note the reasons moueing me here too are.

1. Because it is no where found in Scripture that they had any day of 24.
hours; a day of 12. hours I read of I confess, but I never read of a day
of 24. hours; it is not safe therefore by Day in 4th Com: to interpret it of a
day of 24. hours.

2. By a day natural of 24. hours we understand both the light and the
darkness, the day and the night which fale within compass of these 24.
hours; now I pray what a woeful confusion and jumbling of things together is
here? what is this but to put light for darkness, when ye call the night or
darkness, Day? and may you not as well put darkness for light, and call the
day or light, Night? may we not as well comprize Hell, under the word
Heaven; as darkness under the word Day? unless it be Ironically, I think this
is matchless.

But hereto it will be said, does not Scripture thus? Genes. 1.5. So the
Evening and the morning were the first day? by Evening here is meante the
night, and by morning the day or light, and both these made up the first day. I
answer, the Evening does no where in Scripture betoken the night or
darkness, and that I am not singular in this, see Perkins cases of conscience
at end of 2d book: but by Evening we are to understand the afternoon, as we
in this land do, saying, Good euene to you Sir, if once it be past noone: that
evening is taken for the afternoon, and time of perfect light and before Sune
set appears by the phrase of evening sacrifice, which was celebrated about 3.
or 4. a clock in after noone, and see these textes Ex. 29.38.39. Deu. 23.11.
losh. 8.29. Ezra 9.4.5. Iere. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 16.6. so then according to Scriptures
sense, by Evening I understand the afternoon, and by morning the forenoone:
and thus the Evening that is the afternoon: and the Morning that is the
forenoone, made the first day Genes. 1.5.

Having thus given my reasons why I reject a day natural, of 24. hours,
consisting of day and night both; In next place I am to show what I mean by
Day in 4th Com: By Day I understand the time of light only, namly all that
space of time and light from day peep or day break in the morning, until day
be quite off the sky at night: that by Day is meante the light, see Gene. 1.5.
God (who know best to name things) called the Light, Day, see 1. These. 5.5.8.
1. Cor. 3.13. and that the day begines even whilst it is but a little light,
and much dark, see Ioh. 20.1. and see Mark. 1.35. this last text is to be
read as Chemnitius well observes thus, In the morning, whilst it was very
much night etc. (...): and so Beza reads it too: of days I may say, there are
2. kinds according to Scripture, 1. a natural day, and this is from first
aproche of light upon our horizon before Sune rise unto the last departure of
light, after Sune set, from off our horizon. 2. is an artificial day, and
this consistes of 12. hours Joh. 11.9. are there not 12. hours in the day?
the natural day is variable now longer as in Summer, now shorter as in
Winter. The artificial day is constantly of the same lenght, 12. hours long:
I conclude, by Day in 4th Com: I rather think the the natural day to be
meante, then the artificial day, for it is the safest to give God the longer
of the two, that is the day from day break, to last shutting in of the day, so
long as is any light in the sky.

Here a case of conscience would be discussed, that is, if our Sabbath be but
from day break to shutting up of day, how shall we do in depth of vvinter,
at what time we have not 12. hours of day light? now your opinion was even
now that it is the safest to give God the longer of the two days, rather the
natural than the artificial, but in depth of vvinter the artificial day of
12. hours is the longer day: I answer 1. though for that time the
artificial day be longer than the natural day, yet it is so but for a little
while during the depth of the winter only, which time excepted, all the year
after the natural day is the longer, and so these 2. days compared together
in all times, we give God the longer day when we give him the natural day.
2. For so much as it is not likely that God would have us measure him his day
by two diverse metevvands, that is by the day natural at one time of the year,
and by the day artificial at an other time, therefore I think it the more
likely that we are tied only to the day natural in Winter, though it be
shorter then, then the other: Nevertheless, because the safest way is best, and
an error on the right hand rather to be admitted then one the left, if any
man judge it better, for the depth of vvinter, to keep his Sabbath by the
artificial day, I say not to the contrary, yea, I say for mine own
particular, I purpose to accompany him whoesouer he be, in performance of
Sabbath days exercises, and refrayning all servile labors, not only for the
artificial day, but after it is ended, until it be time to go to rest and
sleep.

Here an other question arises, if we be tied but to the day time and light
only for our Sabbath, what then shall become of the time of night, before or
after the Sabbath? I answer, nature teaches that God has made the night for
man to rest in and sleep, and so necessarily he that time rests from all
labors, as in the Sabbath day time: but you may say again what and if a man
be not disposed to sleep, as not to go to bed so soon as the artificial
day in depth of Winter be done, may he set upon the duties of his ordenary
calling until he go to rest? heretoo I answer, where God has left no order
what to do as in this case, here then it is left to Christian discretion; In
this case then I should judge it very behoofefull that we deal with God in
this night, as we do by our selves on other nights of the 6. working days,
in these, if we be not disposed to go to bed, we will spend that part of
the night we please to set up in, in the works of the day before, so let us
be as mindful of our souls as of our bodies, and on the Sabbath night if we
please to rise before day, let that part of the night be spent in a holy
preparation to the duties of the day following, to set forwards them; if we
please to set up after the day light be spent, then again let this part of
the night be spent suitable to the day before, in reading, conference,
meditation, singing of Psalms, and Prayer; To this may I fitly apply that of
Holy David who spent much of the night in prayer and praises, Ps. 42.8. The
Lord will grant his loving kindness in the day, and in the night shall I sing
of him etc.

The first use of this point may be for confutation of an error of some
divines, houlding the Sabbath does begine over night, on Saturday at night, or
on Saturday Evening: If God enioyneth only the day; Remember the Sabbath day
etc. by what authority can any say, we be bound to sanctify more then a day,
as namly to sanctify the Sabbath day, and also a part of the day, or night
goeing before the Sabbath day?

I know well the end these divines aim at is holy and good, and their
arguments carry a strong show of truth yet not strong enough me thinks, the
best that I could ere meet withal are these 3. the foremost Taken from Genes.
1.5. The evening and the morning were the first day: where by Evening, they
understand the Night from about after Sune set forwards; by morning, all the
day after; now hence they thus argue, That look as God made the day at
creation, so we must after keep it: But God made the day to begine at Evening,
Ergo etc. I answer, the grownd of this argument is from a common indeed, but
mise understanding of that text, Genes. 1.5. as I have formerly shown, so I
deny that by Evening, in the Text is meant an Evening which begines the night
and comprises the night in it, as the argument understands it; for by Evening
is meante only the afternoon till Sune set, as formerly I have shown: but
against this it may be said, this sense is to make God to speak of things mise
orderly, if by evening you understand the afternoon, and by morning the
forenoone, then it is as if God had said, So the afternoon and the forenoone
were the first day, whereas it had been more orderly to a said, So the
forenoone and the afternoon were the first day: since the forenoone is in
order before the afternoon. I answer such liberty though God does take in
speech, for instance, to go no farther for an example, see Genes. 1.2.3.4.5.
darkness was for order before light; and yet in v. 4.5. God mentiones the
light before the darkness, and why not then, the after noone before the
forenoone?

Their 2d argument is taken from Levit. 23.32. from Euene to Euene shall ye
celebrate your Sabbath. Hereto I answer this a peculiar law to the ceremonial
Sabbathes annually, not common to the moral Sabbath weekly, now we must not
draw the law of ceremonial Sabbaths upon the moral Sabbath, for then must
the moral Sabbath on 7th day, be annualy only; and on the 10th day of the
month; as Leuit. 23.27. without regard to the day of the week: besides many
other differences twixt the moral and ceremonial Sabbaths that might be
shown; but chiefly note in the 4th Com: is but one day only mentioned, to wit
the 7th day but in Leui. 23. is two distinct days commanded to wit the 10th
day, v. 27. and the 9th day apart of it, v. 32. now would any infer hence,
that we should give God the Sabbath day, and a part also of the day, goeing
next before it, every week? were not this to give God more then one day, when
in his 4th Com: he required but one day?

A 3d to enforce the beginning of the Sabbath on the Evening, is taken from
Mark. 15.42. It was the day of the preparation, that is before the Sabbath;
whence it is gathered by many, that the Jews used on the Evening before the
Sabbath, to have a preparation to the Sabbath, by setting a part that evening
for holy exercises, refraying ordenary works, as they did on the Sabbath:
where unto I answer, more is gathered out this text then it will afforde; and
that preparation which was proper to a ceremonial Sabbath, is applied to our
Moral Sabbath: To this purpose it must be observed, that at this time of
Christ's passion, and on that day whereon he lay in the grave; our Saturday,
there fell out two Sabbaths, a moral and a ceremonial upon that day, as Beza,
Piscator, and others affirm, and as every divine knows; and as must needs
be, for our Saturday wherein Christ lay in the grave was Jews Sabbath day, of
the 4th Comm: so there is one: now again the day before this, namly good
friday, was the day the Jews kept for their passover day Ioh. 18.28. Ioh.
19.14. now the Law of the passover was, that the passover should be killed
and eaten on the 14th day of the month Leuit. 23.5. and on the next day, the
15th of the month they had an holy convocation and assembly wherein they did no
servile labor v. 6.7. and this was a Sabbath day, to wit a ceremonial Sabbath
day: now the Jews killing their passover on good friday, as the 14th day,
then Saturday, must be the 15th day, and so an holy convocation and Sabbath by
the Leuiticall Law: and so here is an other Sabbath fell on and with the weekly
Sabbath: now to come to the point, the parascue or preparation spoken of Mark.
15.42. has respect of these two Sabbathes, only to this latter, that is to the
Ceremonial Sabbath, which was on the first day of unleavened bread, or on the
15th day of the month, and it has not respect unto the Moral Sabbath: now the
reasons moving me to say so are, 1. because this parascue or preparation is not
any where applied to the Moral Sabbath, but only it stands in reference to
the ceremonial, and therefore we read the Evangelist Ioh. 19.14. calling it
the preparation of the passover, not the preparation to the Sabbath, as they
would. 2. we read of a preparation ever on the day before the 15th day of the
month, the Sabbath on the first day of unleavened bread, but of none before the
weekly Sabbath, see Luke 22.8.9. and ye know there must be a preparation of
the passover before it be eaten, for it must be killed, and roasted first,
Exodus 12.6.8. and a place where it must be eaten in must be prepared too, Luke
22.11. and to wind up all in a word, the parascue or preparation whereof
Scripture speaks so often; is nothing else but the preparation and making ready
of the passover to be eaten, the which labor fell as now upon the day before
the Sabbath, understand whither Sabbath you will Mark. 15.42. so then this
preparation over night, being proper to the Ceremonial Sabbath of the
passover, it belonged not to the weekly Sabbath, and so the weekly Sabbath
began not over night ere the more for this Text, Mark. 15.42.

Finally, the clearing of this text Mark. 15.42. by the way may be useful, to
show their opinion is growndlesse, who urge a preparation to the Sabbath on
Saturday afternoon: or, on Saturday even, pressing us then to refrain our
weekly labors, and to spend that portion of time in holy exercises: for my
part I know no other preparation to the Sabbath to be performed more on
Saturday after noone, than in the forenoone, or then on Friday or Thursday
before; that is, I know none but this, that we should remember it before hand,
and so to be more and more mindful of it, as it draws nerer and nerer unto
us, lest when it is come we profane it.

You have heard the first use, showing when the Sabbath does not begine, as
namly, not over night etc. The 2d use shall be to show by way of instruction
when the Sabbath does begine: The Sabbath is to begin in the morning, when
the day begines, as break of day; this flows naturally from the Comm: for if
God commanded us to keep holy the Day, then must we begine with the day, then
when the day begines: to begin it before the day, as at midnight, or the like,
is growndlesse, and is more then God ever required: so, to delay the beginning
an hour, 2. or 3. after day break, is to rob God of a part of his day, by
sanctifying to the Lord not a day, but a piece of a day.

6 The 6th and last point in the Comm: as touching time and day, is to enquire
1. what day God sanctified, but this needs no labor, since it is apparent God
sanctified the 7th day, and last day of the week, that day which followed
his 6. days work. 2. we are to enquire after the reason moving God to
sanctify this day of the week before any other; and this is plainly laid
down in the last clause of the 4th Comm: and again in Genes. 2.3. So God
plessed the 7th day and sanctified it. Because that in it he had rested from
all his work: where you see God renders the special reason moving him to
bless and to sanctify the Sabbath day; and it was, Because that on that day
himself had rested.

Use 1. may be to show us that God in his 4th Comm: enioyneth not a day at
random, but a particular day, such a day as has this reason, of Gods Rest;
belonging to it; now this belonged only to the 7th day of the week; not to
the 8th day, nor to the first day of the week, our Lords day, for God the
creator rested not upon our Lords day, when he had finished the work of
creation, but upon our Saturday the 7th day which goes next before the Lords
day.

Use 2. may be to show us, that the 4th Com: can not be urged or applied to
the first day of the week, our Lords day; because that reason of Gods Rest,
upon the 7th day, which moved him to sanctify, it neither does nor can belong
to the Lords day: now since that reason of Gods Rest, which is a part of the
4th Com: can not belong to our Lords day, no more can the whole Com: belong
unto it.

Use 3. and me thinks the reason of Gods Institution should say some thing for
the morality and perpetuity of the Sabbath, for as sine moved God to bring
death into the world at the first upon Adam Romans 5.12. so the same continuing,
moves God still to continue death in the world upon Adams posterity: So Gods
Rest upon the 7th day moving him at first to sanctify it, the same reason
remaining to worlds end, should move God to continue the sanctification of the
7th day for ever; the ground of which consequence is taken from that axiom,
That God is immutable and unchangeable and ever the same, so as if things be the
same toward him, he again is the same toward them: Hence it is we thus
argue, did God so to Abraham, to David, to Pharaoh etc. if thou be to God as
they were, so God will be to thee, as he was to them: now as God is ever the
same, so is Gods rest on the 7th day.

And so we have spoke of the duty of the day, and of the time; next we should
come to speak of the duties in the day, and in the time: the duties in the day
are 2. Holiness, and Rest: Remember to keep the Sabbath day Holy: and in it
thou shall not do any work: but as touching exposition of these two, Holiness
and Rest, I purpose to desiste for as much as we differ not in these, saving
about the latter, that it is houlden partly moral, partly ceremonial, but of
that by and by.

Having spoken of the duty of the day; and mentioned the duties in the day:
here a question would be scanned touching both these comparatiuly, to know
whither is the more excellent and that which God did first and principally aim
at, the duty of the day, or the duties in the day? a question at first sight I
confess it seems friuolouse; the rather I move it, because I hear the most
so sleighting this sacred time, as but a circumstance etc. and as a thing not
required of it self, and by it self, as are the duties in this time Holiness
and Rest, but only for an other things sake, as for the Holiness sake, that is
to be performed in this time, and so as if the Holiness be performed, it
skilleth not so much for the time.

For my part therefore I cannot see, but the time of the 7th day is more
excellent then be the duties of Holiness and Rest, in the time; if these
duties be not considered absolutely and in relation to God, but respectiuly as
subseruient to the time. Holiness, consider of it only as a duty of first
Table, in this branch of praising and lauding God, in an acknowledgment of his
power, and wisdom, and goodness etc. so reflecting Gods holy works and
attributes upon himself: now consider, as the Heavens declare the glory of God
Ps. 19.1. So think on that 7th day, as the Prophet David speaks of days in
general v. 2. Day unto day utters, the same too: or Day after Day, as
Aynsworth observes: so then if days do utter the glory of God, and show
forth his handy works, reflecting unto God, and declaring the same to men,
then doubtless the 7th day Sabbath has a kind of secret speech unto and
praise of God, by reflection unto God, and declaration unto man, the whole
work of creation done upon the 6. days before, showing forth these Attributes
of Gods wisdom, power, and goodness, manifested in those days: and surely
this day does more completely in its kind, reflect and give God the full glory
of his work of creation then can any man, who because he knows things by
halues can speak of them but by pieces: well, there is some thing in this,
though I will not be curious nor stand upon it.

2. As for Holiness, as prayer, praises, and the like, I consider of it
absolutely, or relatiuly: Absolutely without reference to any special time, as a
part of Gods worship and service, and so I grant it may be greater then the
7th day time: relatiuly, as it is employed to the 7th day to honor it withal,
and thus it is not so great nor excellent. I explain my self by this simile,
a son has a book of his deceased father, for his fathers sake he is so in
love with the book, as he will put upon it silver ot goulden claspes, silkin
strings, double gild it, and other cost to the double or treble value of the
book, if now you demand, whither the book or the cost, be the more
excellent; why, sure the cost is the greater in it self considered, and not as
made serviceable to the book, but the book is the greater and more excellent
in that for the books sake, he begildeth it and puts on all that cost: So, as
this Son gildeth and bewtifieth the book, because it was his fathers; just
so, the Lord God blessed and sanctified the 7th day, because that in it he had
rested, Genes. 2.3. Exodus 20.11. The reason then moving God to adorn and
beautify the 7th day so with Holiness and Rest, was because God had once rested
on that day; so as the 7th day was not set apart for holiness sake, but
holiness at this time was appointed for the 7th days sake. Even as Angles are
ministering Spirits for our sakes, and so are inferior to men in some
respects, that is, as they be attendants to us: yet further, to this end see
the 4th Comm: where in the first place the Sabbath is commanded, Remember the
Sabbath day: and as the chief thing aimed at, it is twice mentioned, whereas
Holiness is but once named: yea, does not the very order of the words and manner
of uttering them importe the same? like as if one should say to his servant,
remember such a book, that you save it, and lay it up carefully; or, that you
gilde it and bewtifye it with the finest gould etc. would not a man think by
these words that all the servants care and diligence and cost about the book,
were for the book, and less than the book in worth and excellency? why just
in such frame of words the Lord deliured the 4th Comm: Remember the Sabbath
day, that you sanctify it, the which sanctifying the day, is the adorning and
the bewtifying of it.

I conclude, if any man of better judgment think that so much is not to be
attributed to the day and time as these my words importe, yet I think these
things considered, he will judge there is much more in the time, and that by
Gods ordinance, then is commonly thought on, and so as every sleightie probable
argument, and curiouse distinction should not force a man to abolish this
sacred Day, and profane this time; me thinks we should stick more closse to
Gods Commandments, than so; God has left us but 10. Com: and they be the rule
of our life, a light to our feet, and lantern to our paths, and that
according whereto we shall be adjudged at that last day Mat. 25.34.35. Iam.
2.12. how should we contend for the maintenance of this truth, which was once
given unto us, not suffering any of these 10. lights to be extinguished, no nor
any one of the^ to be eclipsed in least degree, nor enduring that any one link
be broken from this chain, no nor so much as the least piece or percell from
any of the linkes, but that we maintain them in the full weight and measure
that ever they had: not so much as the day or time once altered or changed:
remembering Deuteronomy. 12.32. whatsoever I command you etc. thou shall put Nothing
there to, nor take any thing there from: and Galat. 3.10. Cursed is every man
that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law:
And so I have done with exposition of this 4th Comm.

The 7th day Sabbath is not abolished.
THat with the more culler of truth they might abolish the Sabbath day, many
have taken in hand (out of a sincere affection to their knowledge, as I verily
persuade my self, yielding too much confidence to antiquity, and trust to the
labors of our worthy forefathers in this point) to make one of Gods ten and
moral Commandments, namly the 4th, to be partly Moral, partly Ceremonial; a
thing at first hearing very strange, that of 10. only one should so far
differ in kind from its fellows, when all were equally and a like delivered
by the immediate and audible voice of God, and written all a like together by
the finger of God in Tables of stone, which no ceremony was; Nay, which is
worce yet, that not one whole commandment is said to be ceremonial, but only
one piece of that one commandment is a ceremony: as if one of the linkes of
this chain were partly gould, partly lead, whereas all the rest were pure
gould, what were this but to suppose our God to plough in his field with an ox
and an ass yoked together; and to sow it with seeds of diverse kinds;
which kind of unequal mixtures God would not abide amongst his people, how
much less would him self use it? as if God had vvrote moralls and
ceremonialls both upon the same Table of stone, and twisted in one Commandment
some thing perpetual, other some thing temporary; for they make the time in
the 4th Com: a ceremony, and Holiness, a Moral; yea, the one individual Rest,
is partly a moral, and in other part of it a ceremony, oh monstrous, what a
hotch potche have we here! what a mingle mangle, what a confusion and
iumbling of things so far distant together, as when moralls and ceremonialls
are supposed to be here mingled together: the one to last but for a time, the
other to last for ever: the one belonging only to the nation of the Jewe: the
other belonging to all nations: and both of these thoug mingled in one single
word, in the word Rest: was the like ever heard of? can the like instance be
shown in all the 10. Commandments? and yet again contrary wise, what a
rending and violent tearing in sunder such things in the Com: which God has
joined together, as to sunder the Sabbath, from the 7th day; when God says
expressly, The 7th day is the Sabbath, Exodus 20.10. and so inviolably linked
them together: thus they imagine Moses to iumble things unskillfully together,
and then come they and rend and slash them asunder again; if this be lawful,
then which of the 10. Comm: may not suffer violence, laying out such parcells
of them as disconceit us, and letting stand still what fansy us? and is not
this with that wicked man, To change times and the Law, Dan. 7.25.

To come yet nerer, they endeauer to show the 4th Com: is partly ceremonial,
and that in two things: the one is as touching the Rest; the other is as
touching the particular time of 7th day: now least they should seem to hold
only the 7th day, which is the question, to be ceremonial, there is great
labor used to find out some thing else in this Com: ceremonious too, and so
the 7th day should not stand nakedly alone for a ceremony, and to this purpose
every text that may seem to savor of any exrraordenary strictnes about the
Jewish Rest, that and those textes are not expounded with a grain of salt, or
dram of qualification, but stretched upon the tainterhoockes to the utmost: of
these two things we will begin with the Rest, and see how they make it in
part ceremonious: A worthy and late wrighter (whose name I spare for honors
sake) makes this rest, ceremonial in three things, the which he terms that
rigourous and precise rest, prescribed to the Jews: these three things we will
examine one after an other, and having dispached these, we will also examine
some other like textes, and if upon their examination, it be found, that God
never required any such strict rigorousenesse of rest of the Jews, as is
supposed, then is it but a forgery to say, the strictnes of the Jewish rest
was a ceremony, for how can it be a ceremony, which is not?

1. The first is, that the Jew might not on the Sabbath go forth, or take a
journey any whither, for any business of his own, Exodus 16.29. this says he
was temporary, and does not concern these times of the New Testament.

Heretoo I answer, This text forbids only unnecessary iournying on the
Sabbath, to provide that thing which God gives him enough of, the day before,
for because God had given them Manna on the 6th day enough for two days,
therefore God forbad them to travail for it forth the doors on the 7th day: so
here God forbade only needless and idle iournyes on the Sabbath: and what
rigorouse precise strictnes then was here imposed upon the Jewe? is this such
a hard intolerable burden as besemes only the showlders of a Jew, and not of
a Christian, that a man should not travail vainly, and to no purpose on the
Lords Sabbath? 2. The Text is excedingly wronged to say, it forbad a man to
take a journey for any business of his own; for, it forbad him not to travail
a few miles for himself in a case of necessity, since it only forbad him to
travail in a case friuolouse and idle. 3. If this text and law perteined only
to the Jew and left us at liberty, then may we on our Lords day and Sabbath
now, take such frivolous iournyes, which yet all sound divines condemn.

2. The 2d thing wherein stood the rigor of the Jewish rest (as says he) is
that they might not kindle a fire on the Sabbath day, Exodus 35.3.

Hereto I answer, this text is set upon the tainters and stretched farther
than need is, why should the same men qualify some textes about the rest of the
Sabbath, with due limitations, and yet extend other some text about the same
rest, beyond all limitation? for instance Exodus 20.10. In it thou shall not do
any work: which though it according to the letter forbids generally any kind
of work whatsoever, yet they do well expound it to be understood only of
servile works forbidden, not of works of charity and necessity: But in this
Text Exodus 35.3. ye shall kindle no fire; this can needs be understood
literally and generally, as if the Jew might in no case kindle any fire,
without exception: I pray what differs the Law Exodus 20.10. Thou shall not
do any work: from the Law here, Exodus 35.3. Thou shall kindle no fire? is not
that the general, and this this the special, is a limitation to be added to
the genus, and none to the species? wherefore, by the same authority that they
limite the words in 4th Comm: thou shall not do any work: that is, not any
common unnecessary servile work; by the same authority may I limite this Com:
Exodus 35.3. Thou shall kindle no fire; that is, thou shall kindle no fire to
do unnecessary servile works vvithall, such as is of common brewars and
bakers, to got their living by as on the 6. days, and such as was for the
building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 35.3.4.5. etc. whereof there was no such
necessary have as that they should kindle fyers to work about it on the
Sabbath: But think you that God who allowed the Jew to labor in case of
necessity on the Sabbath day, to lead a beast to the water: to pluck and
ruble ears of corn: to help a beast out the ditche; was so rigorous to him
in an other thing of like use, as not permit him to kindle a fire to warm his
body, in the depth of winter when it is freezing could, or to dress a bite of
warm meat for his dynner on the Sabbath, whereby he may be cheered up the
cheerfully to attend upon God in his ordinances, in the after part of the
Sabbath? was God think you so careful for oxen, or was it not rather spoken
for men, who are made after the image of God? and for whose sake the Sabbath
it self was made, Mark. 2.27? To conclude, did not our blessed Savior in his
time approve of fire making on the Sabbath (think you) or at least of as great
works, and so of that, by like reason, when he vowchsafed his presence at a
feast of the Jews on the Sabbath, Luke 14.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc? where were many
guestes, now at a feast, and many guests, could not but be a fire to dress
meat, or as great labor in dressing meat and tendance of the guests, as is the
bare kindling of a fire.

3 The 3d thing is, that the Jew might carry no burdenes on the Sabbath day,
Ierem. 17.21. Nehem. 13.15.

I answer 1. If this be a part of the rigorous precise and strict rest
required only of the Jewe, why do all divines now a days press this
rigorousnes upon Christians, forbidding us now to carry burdnes on the Sabbath
day? if this was a ceremony and to end with Christ, then we Christians may
freely bear burdenes upon backs of men, or beasts, or on carts, now on our
Lords day, is not this goodly stuff? hereby you may have a taste what it is
for worthy divines to captiuate their judgments, to yield to much confidence
to the labors of our forefathers if of Note, or to take points of divinity by
tradition upon trust from others, for had this learned man used his own
judgment in these points, he had never ouershot himself so far as to put
down such things as these, so undigested. 2. In this text God forbad carrying
of burdenes only as an unnecessary servile work, but he forbade not carrying
burdnes in case of necessity, as a work of charity, for Christ allowed the
sick man, to carry his bed on the Sabbath day, Ioh. 5.8.9.10. now where then
was God so rigorous and straight unto the Jewe, since he permitted them
burdens bearing if and when necessity so required? and so we have examined
these 3. things above mentioned.

4 A 4th Text I may add, which I have often heard alleged for the former
purpose, and it is written, Exodus 16.23. Bake that to day which ye will bake,
and sees that which ye will sees, and all that which remains, lay it up
till the morning for you, etc. where (say they) here the Jews were commanded
to dress all their meat on the Friday, the day before their Sabbath day, and
by consequence they were forbidden to dress any on the Sabbath.

I answer 1. To this I oppose an other Text Exodus 12.16. where the Lord
forbade the Isralites to do any work, but with this exception, Save about that
which every man must eat, that only may ye do: this text so plainly giving
leave to dress such and so much meat on the day as a man should eat upon the
day, gives me to think no other text should forbid the same: but hereto it
will be said the Text Exodus 16.23. treats of the Moral Sabbath, but your Text
Exodus 12.16. treats of the holy days of the passover. I answer, it is true,
this text speaks of the first and of the 7th days of the feast of unleavened
bread only, but this must also be noted, that these festival days, had their
holy conuocations and assemblies, and wherein they were forbidden to do any
work, as the text shows, just as on the Sabbath days, yea, these festival
days were also called Sabbath days; and threatened with death also if they
wrought on these days, Leuit. 23.30.32. now, if God as strictly bound the Jew
to rest on these festival Sabbaths which were annual, as on the moral
Sabbath weekly, then look what liberty God gave upon one of these Sabbaths,
we are to judge, I suppose that God gave the like liberty on the other
Sabbath, the cases being a like, and the ceremonial Sabbath being as strictly
to be rested in from all manner of servile works, as was the moral Sabbath.

2. I answer to the text directly: This Text in my thinking is vvonderously
misunderstood, they suppose that Moses lade the Isralites bake upon Friday
both the two Omers gathered on that day, and then by these words, all that
remains lay up etc. they understand all that remains of the 2. omers backed
and uneaten, so as that which remained uneaten was backed: But first they err
in supposing Moses bad them bake on the day before the Sabbath both these two
omers which they had that day gathered, where as Moses left it free to their
choice to back (as the text faith) what they would, more or less: Bake that
which ye will bake, and sees that which ye will sees etc. and so it is most
likly they baked that day about one omer of the two they had gathered, just as
they did on the other 5. vvorking days, they gathered every day one (...)
world, So then the Sabbath if it must last till heaven comes, it must then last
to every particular saint, and believer so long as he lives on earth, and
abides in the church militant, and it must last to the church generally, to
this worlds end: and if so then I trust the Sabbath is no ceremony temporary,
and abolisht long since.

I answer 2. Admit the Sabbath here were a type, yet is not the Sabbath as men
keep it made a type of heaven, but as God kept it at creation, as v. 4. Now if
only Gods keeping Sabbath rt creation was a type of heaueu, what is this to
make the Jews keeping Sabbath any type of heaven? for our question is of the
Sabbath in reference to men.

I answer 3. Gods rest at the creation is not a type properly, as having
relation to Christ incarnate but a similitude only, as shadowing out Heaven,
and such similitudes are not ceremonious and temporary, but perpetual and
eternal: for instance Heb. 4.10. He that is entered into his rest, has ceased
from his works () as God did from his: if then Gods rest, because a similitude
to be a ceremony and temporary, then also is the perfection in God a temporary
ceremony, for it is made a similitude of our perfection, Mat. 5.48. ye shall
therefore be perfect ((...)) as your heavenly father is perfect: see a like
example Joh. 5, 21.

And these are the textes, which are usually brought to make the Rest of the
4th Comm: in part, eighther too strict and rigorous, or else typical, and so
ceremonial; and so the 4th Com: it self to be partly a ceremony; and all to
this end, the better to make way for the down fale and utter ruin of Gods 7th
day Sabbath; the which by Gods Mercy they have not yet attained, but you see
are frustrat of their purposes, and so I trust shall ever be hereafter: And now
I come to the time of the Sabbath the 7th day, which is the maine of all, and
against which they have bent all their forces: and if it fall so out they have
no better success against this 7th day Sabbath, then they have had against the
Rest in the Sabbath, all their labor will be lost, as I trust in God it will
appear at the last: what they say against the 7th day Sabbath, I reduce to two
heads, the former shall consist of textes of Scripture and artificial
arguments; the latter of testimonies, and authorities of men: for their Textes
of Scripture whereby they would prove the 7th day Sabbath is abolisht.

1. The first text shall be that of Isai. 66.23. from month to month, or from
new Moon to new Moon, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, shall all flesh come to
worship before me etc. whence it is collected by them, that the weekly 7th day
Sabbath was a sign, and that of the everlasting Sabbath in Heaven and therefore
the ceremonial and temporary.

Hereto I answer 1. that this phrase of speech in this text is obscure and
dark some to us, for what shall be meante by these words, from Month to Month:
whereof are these a sign? now it is unmeet that so plain a text as is the 4th
Com: touching the Sabbath, which is deliured in plain and proper words should
be contradicted and blotted out by an other text, which is in Metaphoricale
phrases, and of a doubtful sense. 2. if this Sabbath was a sign of heaven, it
is so far from being a temporary ceremony, as rather it is perpetual Moral,
to last till Heaven comes, as has been said before, for the sign or shadow
is to last until the body a substance be comne: or, admit this Sabbath a sign
both of the whole time of the Church of the New Testament on earth, and also of
the Church triumphant in heaven, as some would, why yet I hope the body of
Heaven has as much force to moralize the Sabbath, as has the body of the new
Church on earth, to ceremonialize and temporize it, yea more, by how much
better but it is not worth our labor, to spend more words about this text, it
having so little culler to any thing in it for their purpose.

2. A 2d text to prove the Sabbath a ceremony and so abolisht is Numb. 28.9.10.
where it was commanded the Isralites to offer two lambs for for a sacrifice on
the Sabbath day.

Hereto I answer 1. why should the sacrificing of two lambs on the Sabbath,
make the Sabbath a ceremony and abolisht any more then the sacrificing of one
lamb every day for a daily burnt offering Numb. 28.4.6. make the working days
of the week ceremonial and abolisht. 2. Has not the Moral works in the
Sabbath, as Rest, and Holiness, and remembrance of Gods Rest after creation,
as much and more power over the time and day wherein they were done to moralize
and eternize the Sabbath, as has the sacrificing two lambs to ceremonize and
temporize the Sabbath? or if sacrifices could abolish the time of the Sabbath,
which was commanded, why did they not also abolish the duties in the time, as
Rest and Holiness? 3. The Sabbath was a Sabbath in nature and institution
before there was any sacrifices, for it was in time of Adams innocence before
the fall, wherefore as the Apostle Gal. 3.17. reasons of the promise and of
the Law, that the Law could not disanulle the promise to Abraham, which came
430. years after the promise; so say I Sacrifices cannot disanulle the
Sabbath, since the Sabbath was before any Sacrifices; and since Sacrifices came
after the Sabbath: as therefore the Sabbath had a being before sacrifices and
ceremonies, so may it have its being after all sacrifices and ceremonies be
abolisht.

3. A 3d Text is in Deuter. 5.15. where the Lord tells the Israelites, He
brought them out of Egypt, and therefore the Lord commanded them to keep the
Sabbath: whence they would argue to this effect, since that the Sabbath is an
effect of, or has necessary dependence upon their deliverance out of Egypt, it
follows if that deliverance out of Egypt be but ceremonial as a thing proper
to the Jew; Then so is the Sabbath also.

I answer 1. The Sabbath may be said to be an effect or have dependence of an
other thing two ways: one, as touching its observation; the other, as touching
its institution: now this deliverance out of Egypt, was not cause of the
Sabbaths institution, for the Sabbath was before they ever went down into
Egypt Genes. 2.3. neither was or could the deliverance out of Egypt be the
sole cause, nor the chief cause of the Sabbaths institution, for Gods own
rest upon that day Genes. 2.3. was the chief cause; and next the Sabbath was
made for man Mark. 2.27. that is for the ease and benifite of his body, and for
the good and edification of his soul, in duties of holiness. But as touching
the Sabbaths observation, the deliverance from Egypt might be a cause, and was
and ought to be a motive to obedience in observance and keeping the Sabbath
day, and so all blessings whatsoever should be motives to obedience, as Deuteronomy.
6.20.21.23.24. Deuter. 28.47.48. but what if these blessings fail, and God
give others in room of them, shall our obedience and observance fail and
vanishe? what and if we Christians have not that one particular blessing of
deliverance from Egypt which the Jewe had, have we no many other blessings and
deliverance to move us to obedience, as from that Armade in 88. from the
Gunpowder plott, and I know not how many more. I conclude, that since the
deliverance out of Egypt, was not the cause of the Sabbaths institution, but
only of its after observation, therefore, though that deliverance was
ceremonial, yet was not the Sabbath ceremonial. 2. I answer, if this motive
of Isralites deliverance from Egypt, because not belonging to us Christians,
therefore shows the Sabbath belongs not to us neither; Then may we by as good
reason abolish not the Sabbath alone, but the whole moral law also; and then,
as we will none of the Jews Sabbath to be ours, no more need we will the
Jews God to be ours, commanded in the first Com: for the reason to induce to
obedience and having the true God for their God, was this, I (...) Law; as
therefore when the Apostle says Ephesians. 2.15. Christ abrogated the Law of
Commandments, we understand it only of the ceremonial law of commandments,
not of the moral: So where here the Apostle takes away the difference of
days, I understand him to abolish only ceremonial days, but not the Moral
7th day Sabbath. I answer 3d. if all difference of all days be abolisht, why
then keep we the Lords day now for a Sabbath in a religiouse manner? if you
say you keep it not as a ceremony or type and shadow of Christ to come, which
was the reason of the Sabbaths abolition, but in other respects, as in
remembrance of Christ already comne: why then by like reason may not the 7th
day Sabbath, be now kept by us, so be we lay aside that supposed typical
shaddowish respect which it had of Christ to come? and we keeping it in other
respects, as in remembrance of Gods Rest on the same day after the work of
creation, and as it is a day for the benefit of both our bodies for rest, and
our souls for holiness?

Thus none of those former textes you see can prove that the 7th day Sabbath
was ever ceremonial, or yet abolisht, but yet they have two textes more
behind, wherein they put great confidence, and especially in the former of
the two, and, if they fail in these two as I trust in God they shall, then are
they quite gone, and for ever to hold their peace, for speaking more against
the Lord Gods Sabbath.

6. The 6th text is that Colos. 2.16.17. let no man condemn you in meat and
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ: Lo
(say they) here you have Sabbath days forbidden, the very point in question,
and they are counted a shaddaw of Christ and therefore abolisht.

I answer 1. as there is two Laws; a moral Law consisting of 10. Comm: all
written by the finger of God, upon Tables of stone; and a ceremonial Law
written by Moses and delivered to the people; so are there Sabbaths moral,
that is such as God engraued upon the Tables of stone with other 9. precepts;
and there are Sabbaths ceremonial, that is such as you find no mention of in
the Decalogue, but such as you find recorded by Moses dispersed here and there
in the 5. books of Moses, specially in Leuit. 23.4. etc. to the end of the
chapter: Now as when you read Heb. 7.12. Ephesians. 2.15. If the priesthode be
changed, then must there be a change of the law: you will not here permite
any man to iumble confusedly together the law moral and Law ceremonial, and
say both these laws are here changed, but you will distinguish of Laws,
granting them the ceremonial Law to be meante here, but not the moral, so do
I in answer to this text Col. 2.16. distinguish of Sabbaths, granting them
here is meante only ceremonial Sabbaths, denying that here is meante the
Moral Sabbath of 7th day: That this distinction is good, and that by Sabbaths
here is meant only ceremonial Sabbaths, do bear witness to me, even worthy
divines of their own side, as, Greenham in his work upon the Sabbath day;
and Perkins in his cases of conscience book 2. chapt. 16. Sect. 3. and Dod
upon the 4th Comm: page 133. and Elton upon the Colossians 2.16. and Ames in
his Thesis touching the Sabbath. 2. That here is meante only ceremonial
Sabbaths is plain by the context, and that by two reasons; the former, in that
these Sabbathes are ranked with other things all which be ceremonies, as
meats, and drinks, and new Moons, and holy days, so that all other things
in this text which the Apostle abolisheth being ceremonies, it gives us cause
to think the Sabbaths placed and joined with them be only ceremonial
Sabbaths, as M. Dod well observes upon the 4th Com: the latter reason, is for
that this 16th verse is, as you may see by the word of inference Therefore a
conclusion, whose premise you have in the 14th verse, and here the Apostles
discourse is on this wise: If the hand wrighting of ordinances (which is the
Law, that commanded meats and drinks, and Holy days, new Moons and Sabbath
days) be put out, and taken away; Then let no man condemn you in meats and
drinks, in Holy days, new Moons or Sabbaths days: But the handwrighting of
ordinances, is put out, and taken away: Therefore let no man condemn you in
meats and drinks, in Holy days, new Moons, or Sabbath days: The minor you
have v. 14. the conclusion in v. 16. Now for as much as it is a rule with
Logicians, that there should not be more in the conclusion, then was in the
premises, Hence it follows that if by the word Sabbathes in v. 16. you
will understand the moral Sabbath of the 7th day, then by handvvrighting of
ordinances in v. 14. you must understand at least that part of the Moral Law,
which is the 4th Com: the which commanded that Sabbath: The which if you
do, then you rune upon this absurdety, that you make the Apostle to abolish in
this text a branch of moral Law, as the whole or at least a part of the 4th
Com: and so whereas the Lord wrote upon the Table ten commandments Deuteronomy.
10.4. you make by this interpretation but nine commandments, or at most but
nine and an half, or but nine and three quarters or there abouts; for ten
complete, there is not I am sure.

Against my distinction they say, by Sabbaths, in this text of necessity must
moral Sabbaths be meante, because under the name of Holy days, is comprised
all ceremonial Sabbathes, so that then the word Sabbaths must mean the moral
Sabbath: whereto I answer that I will lay you out for every word its proper
day it signifies, and yet the moral Sabbath excepted: 1. by new Moons is
meante only the first day of month Numb. 28.11. 2. Holy day is in the
original, feast day, or a feast; or, in part of a feast (...): now the Lord
had commanded the Jews a feast of 7. days Leuit. 23.34.39. of which feast,
the first day, and also the last day were Sabbaths; now the days goeing
between the first and last day, these were the part of a feast, (...), and
these the Apostle aimed at, by holy day: and then 3d. and lastly by Sabbaths
are meante those annual Sabbaths, which were on the first and last day of
the Feast of 7. days: now least ye think this distinction and application but
a conceipte, see Leuit. 23.37.38. where the Lord himself distinguishes twixt
Feasts and Sabbathes: when he said, These are the Feasts etc. besides the
Sabbathes etc. Or, if by Holy day, or Feast, you will understand all these 7.
days, with the first and last days which were Sabbathes; then by the word
Sabbathes in Col. 2.16. may be understood these Sabbathes Leuit. 23.24.32.
which were feasts but of one single day a piece, and eighther of them called
Sabbathes, and these were the Sabbathes which Paul abolished: so you see,
there is no necessity by Sabbathes, to understand the Moral Sabbath at all.

I answer 2. to the text Col. 2.16. that hereby we ought not to understand
the Moral Sabbath, as if that were abolisht, for this were to set Paul
against Christ, the servant against his Lord; for Christ established the moral
Law, and every iott and title of it to the worlds end Math. 5.18. now the 7th
day Sabbath was not less than a iott or title of the Law; and did Christ
please to ratify it to the worlds end, and shall we make Paul with in a few
years after to abolish it? what necessety is there of such large
understanding of the word Sabbathes? is there any besides men's pleasures, so
to have it, that they might throw down the sacred time of the Lords Sabbath?
Beware ye be not found fighters against God; and to side it with that branded
wicked one in Dan. 7.25. who thought he might change times, and the law.

It is not to be passed by without observation that the Apostle condemns
Sabbathes but indefinitly, he said not all Sabbaths generally, but Sabbaths
indefinitly, as of some Sabbathes only: but say now that an indefinite axion
may be conserved eighther generally or particularly, a^ the matter, and
circumstances of the place requires, why show me now what occasion this
context gives you to understand here Sabbathes, of all Sabbathes moral and
ceremonial, or of any but ceremonial: or if you have grownds so to do from
some other text, I pray show the text or if from some reasons, I pray show the
reasons, and let them be necessarily sound, and demonstratiuly true, for there
is great cause it should be so, since by force thereof you will confront one
of Gods express commandments; you had need look you go on sure grownde
when you attempt to altar any branch of those commandments which God
himself took care to wright in Tables of stone: for my part, I trust it shall
ever be my care to death, to maintain the inviolable and eternal Law of God,
those is commandments and every iett and title of them, so as not to depart
with any of them, nor suffer a title to be snatched from me by any light
distinctions, or humane unnecessary enlargement of the sense of words; I trust
God will ever give me to make conscience of that Commandment Deuteronomy. 12.32.
whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: Thou shall put nothing there
to, nor take ought there from: if I must not take any thing from the Law of
God, then resolve I, not to consent to, or yield that the Lords Sabbath should
be rent from Gods Law, upon every or any light conjecture, and probable
argument.

I answer 3d. if by Sabbathes here must be meante all Sabbathes, as well the
Moral as the Ceremonial Sabbathes, then by like reason may I gather an
abolition not only of the ceremonial Law, but also of the moral Law, for
Ephesians. 2.15. it is said, Christ has abrogated the law of commandments: and Heb.
7.12. of necessety there must be a change of the Law: now why may not I by the
word Law understand both moral and Ceremonial Law: as well as you by the
word Sabbathes to understand the Moral and ceremonial Sabbathes? see
therefore what absurdetyes would follow if it were lawful thus to extend
words: but happily some think it no absurdety to say that Christ by his death
abolisht both Laws, the ceremonial and the moral: but if such thoughts and
sayings be not blasphemouse against the Law of God, I know not what are; if
such collections be not of most perniciouse and dangerouse consequence in Gods
Church, I cannot tell what be: did not the same Christ whom they would make to
abolish the moral Law, renounce this fact, and also contrariwise establish
this moral Law Mat. 5.17.18. saying, I came not to destroy the Law etc. and
then, until heaven and earth perish one iotte or title of this Law shall not
pass? but they will say, it was reestablished again after by the in the 4th
Comm: and then you give liberty for men to exercise themselves in servile
labors, at home in their families, and a part a broad in the fields in
ploughing, dikeing, carteing, and the like; now these exercises do utterly
abolish Holiness. I do not say Holiness absolutely, for a man may be holy in a
calling, but I say it abolisheth a Sabbaths Holiness, which is, to be
exercised in holy performances without labor, and a whole day, and in holy
assemblies: but how can they be in the congregation, in the assembly
together, who be every man at his own house severally, or in the field
scatteredly at their labors? the same whereof is, that take away Sabbaths; and
you take away Rest, which is signified by the word Sabbath: again, take away
Rest, and you necessarily take away Holiness, that other duty also. And
again, if you by this text of Col. 2.16. do abolish the very duties of the
Sabbath, Rest, and Holiness, as you do, have you not made fair work think
you, by abolishing that which you call the morality of the Sabbath, ever Rest,
and Holiness.

7. The 7th and last text they produce for the abolishing of the 7th day
Sabbath is that in Exo. 31.13. where the Sabbath are said to be a sign that
the Lord did sanctify his people; now they say all signs be abrogated, and
therefore the Sabbath day.

I answer 1. The Lord God does not say expressly in this text, you shall not
hereafter, as namly after the death of Christ, keep the Sabbath day any more,
because I have made it a sign now: no, but thus much is collected by humane
reason, because God made the Sabbath a sign: now I can but vvonder how mortal
man dares by bare force of his blind and feeble reason thus to confront his
God: God said in his 4th Comm: (which he wrote above all Scripture by his own
finger) Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: The 7th day is the Sabbath,
in it thou shall not work: Now the quite contrary to God, men now a days
blushe not by bare force of reason to anowche: Namly that the Sabbath day is
abolished, and therefore not to be remembered any more, nor to refrain servile
work in it: yea, they contradict their Savior too, who said of the Moral Law,
one iott or title of it should not pass to the worlds end Mat. 5.18. but they
say yis, that one iott to wit the 7th day Sabbath may pass etc. now choose
you vvhither it be safer to leave the weight of your souls upon Gods and
Christ's express words, or upon men's force of reason by way of collections
and consequentes: we have formerly shown how blind a thing man's reason is in
matter of religion, and especially in the duties of the first Table which
conserueth God, and that therefore Divines in other (...) are signs, and yet in
use still.

I answer 5. by distinguishing of signs, and that two ways: first there be
signs of things present, as is the Sabbath Exodus 31.13. it is a sign etc.
that I the Lord do sanctify you, here the sign and the thing signified are
together in time: and there be signs of things to come, and such was the
sign of circumcision, Genes. 17.11. which aimed at Christ to come: now though
I grant that signs of things to come be abrogate, yet I deny that signs of
things present be abrogate, and such are the Sabbaths mentioned, Exodus 31.13. a
difference must be put twixt the signs of things present, and future, since
that when a sign and thing signified futurly, do mete together in time, then
the sign vanishes; as when circumcision and Christ's death came together then
the sign circumcision vanished; but it is other wise with a sign and the
thing signified which ever were together, as was the Sabbath keeping, and
Gods sanctifying them; for, if presence of a sign, and thing signified then
together had caused an abolition of the sign, why then the Sabbath day
(because a sign of Gods present sanctifications) had been abolisht even then
when Moses vvrote these words Exodus 31.13. and if presence of the thing
signified could not then abolish the Sabbath, why should it now, since God is
ever the same to them that keep his Sabbaths then or now? he sanctified them,
then he sanctifies us now: there is no reason therefore that such as are signs
of things present, as is the Sabbath Exodus 31.13. should be abolisht. My 2d
distinction of signs is, that there be signs of things future as has been
shown Genes. 17.11. and signs of things past, as the Sabbath is made a sign
of the creation and of Gods Rest at the beginning of the world, which is a
thing past, Exo. 31.16.17. keep the Sabbath etc. it is a sign between me and
the children of Israel; for or that in 6. days the Lord made heaven etc. in
the 7th day he rested. The word (for) is and may be translated (that) as
Deuter. 29.6. now though signs of things future vanish when the thing signed
comes in place, yet is there no cause why we should think a sign should
vanish, as the Sabbath day, whose thing signified is long since past, as Gods
Rest at the creation: why may not, the Sabbath day signify and commemorate Gods
Rest and Sabbath day at the creation, even to the worlds end, as well as in
Moses his time? and why should we think the coming of Christ in the flesh
should have more force to abolish the Sabbath day, if it had been a sign of
Christ to come, then the work of creation, which is eternally to be remembered,
has force to perpetuate and eternalize the Sabbath, since that the Sabbath was
a sign of its remembrance?

I confess, I hear them produce one Text to prove that all signs be
abolisht, and that is written in Colos. 2.16.17. where the Apostle seems to
give a reason why meats and drinks, and Holy days, and Sabbath days are
abolisht, namly because they were shadows of things to come; whence they
collect that all shadows be abolisht; and all signs be shadows; ergo all
signs be abolisht. Here unto I answer 1. it is true that it is commonly taken
that these things being shadows, were therefore abolisht; but vvhither this be
a necessary, or but a contingent truth, I will not now question. 2. Whereas
they suppose all signs to be shadows, this is false: for, the word shadow,
being but thrice (as I take it) used in the New Testament, as in this Text Col.
2.17. and Heb. 8.5. and Heb. 10.1. with reference to Christ; it ever
signifies a shadow of things to come: now a sign is used to signify, and
sign out some time a thing past, as Romans 4.11. some time a thing present, as
Exodus 31.13. some time a thing future, as Genes. 17.8.11. now all signs then
be not shadows, since some signify things past, some typifie things present.
2. Shadows, still hane reference to Christ, Col. 2.17. which are a shadow of
things to come, but the body is of Christ, so a shadow aims at Christ: but a
sign often has reference to God to Jehouah, as in Exodus 31.13. Isa. 38.7.
Thus as a shadow and a sign differ in words, so you see they differ in use
and application, and therefore they be not both one, as they would.

But when they see this proof thus will not hold, then they fetch about the
bushe an other way, laboring to make the word sign in Exodus 31.13. to be a
sign of a thing future, and that of Christ too; and then they think this
done, the word sign in this text, and the word shadow in Col. 2.17. will be
both one, and so their propose become good again: To this end, they add these
words, (By and through Christ) to the Text Exodus 31.13. and understand the
text as if thus read, The Sabbath is a sign etc. that I the Lord do
sanctify you; by and through Christ: and the reason of this addition, they say
is because God does all that he does to his Church, by and through Christ, as
in Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in Christ.

Hereto I answer 1. admit that God did sanctify, by and through Christ: how
will it follow and be soundly proved, that because God and Christ do
sanctify man together, that therefore also what God made to be a sign of his
work of sanctification, the same also must necessarily be a sign of Christ's
work of sanctification? prove I say that it was Gods pleasure to make the
Sabbath here a sign of Christ, as well as a sign of himself: for though it
was a sign by Christ, yet was it a sign of Christ: we must know signs are
not applied to God or Christ naturally, but voluntarily, even according as it
pleased the Author of those signs to appointe them, to one or more persons, to
himself or to other.

I answer 2. if Christ's coworking with God, causes that which is a sign of
Christ; Then it follows too, that the Ministers of the Gospel, coeworking
with God and Christ in the work of sanctification, that therefore if the
Sabbath be a sign that God sanctifies his people, the Sabbath must be a sign
also, that we of the Ministry do sanctify Gods people, and such an use of the
Sabbath was never heard of before.

I answer 3. if they will conioyne any of the persons in the Trinity, with
the work of God the Father in sanctifying us, it were most proper to join
the Holy Ghost (and so Piscator upon Ezekiel. 20.12.20. applies it) and say, God
sanctifyeth us by the Holy Ghost, rather than by Christ since sanctification is
more properly attributed to the Holy Ghost than to Christ: for the Father
creates, the Son redemeth, the Holy Ghost sanctifies: But I will not stand
upon this.

I come to the Text Ephesians. 1.3. God has blessed us with all spiritual blessings
in Christ: if you understand these words so, as if whatsoever blessing the
Church enjoys, Christ does equally equally and a like with the Father
dispense effectual and bestow it on the church, you misunderstand them, does
not Piscator upon this text, that the word all must have a limitation?
Justification is an act solely of God the Father, not of God the Redeemer,
absoluing and acquiting a penitent believing sinner: likewise Election is an
act of God the Father, not of Christ the Re-Redeemer: Also the donation of the
elect unto Christ Joh. 6.37. is of like nature: can it be said here, God the
Father gave the elect unto Christ, in Christ, by Christ, or through Christ?
whereby you see Christ is so far from effecting equally and a like all
works with the Father, that some works he has no hand or stroke in; and
yet if they will have this text to make for them, they must prove by it, that
not only Christ does effect all works the which his Father effects, but
also that Christ does them, every way equally and a like as God the Father does
them; for, else how will it follow by like reason, that the Sabbath being a
sign of Gods sanctification, it must also be a sign of Christ's sanctification
too, unless it be from this grownd, that God his sanctification, and Christ
his sanctification be both performed equally, and a like in all respects? but
since the former cannot be proved, the latter can much less be proved: But
there unto it may be said, though the general cannot be proved, yet the
particular in question may, Heb. 10.10. where it is said, we be sanctified by the
offering up of Jesus Christ etc. so that Christ does sanctify as well as God the
Father: Hereunto I answer, whither sanctification here imports any more then
a washing us from the guiltiness of our sines, or not, I will not dispute: but
let it go for granted that by sanctification here is meant that inherent new
quality of Holiness; yet it will not follow, that because Christ sanctifyeth us,
as well as God the Father sanctifyeth us, therefore whatsoever is made a sign
of God the Fathers sanctifying us, is necessarily must be a sign of Christ his
sanctifying us to, so as if God made the Sabbath a sign of his sanctification,
he must also make the Sabbath a sign of Christ's sanctification; how by force
of our feeble reason we dare put such a necessity upon God, I cannot see: nay
rather the contrary appears to me, that for so much as Gods sanctifying us,
and Christ's sanctifying us be far unlike each other, therefore they should not
by force of reason obtain a like preuiledges and relations: to this purpose
see how they differ, 1. God sanctifyeth by virtue of his Godhead and Divinity;
Christ sanctifyeth by the offering of his body Heb. 10.10. now great is the
difference twixt the Deity and the Humanity. 2. God the Father sanctifyeth us
of himself, and by himself originally; but Christ his death and sufferings,
or Christ his body offered up, sanctifyeth not of and by it self, but of; from,
and by God, and by his blessing upon it: so you see there is not so strong
reason that Christ should have the Sabbath made a sign of his work, as there
is that God should have it made a sign of his: and so much of his answer,
wherein you see they put me to much nedlesse business, by showing themselves too
to busy with humane reason, for as by bare force of reason without any precept
they will erect and vphould new Sabbathes, as the Lords day; so by mere force
of their reason they will make new signs, or else will make those signs, to
appertain to such persons (as to Christ) newly, the which Gods word is deeply
silent in, I can but wonder that discreet men who woll know the defects in our
reason, dare there withal wade into the deepes of God, thus far: yea, I
vvonder the more, when I consider the end thereof, which is to defeat God of
his chosen sacred time for his worship, and to thwarte a moral precept.

I answer 5. admite that God does all by Christ, and so ever did, and also
admit the Sabbath was a sign of Christ's sanctification, no less then of
Gods, yet though I may truly and soundly distinguish of Christ's works and
sanctification: some are ever present with the sign, some are future, whose
sign goes long before the thing signified: of Christ's present sanctification
was the Sabbath a present sign, Exodus 3.13. keep ye my Sabbath for it is a
sign etc. That I the Lord do sanctify you: where the sign and the thing
signified are together: of Christ's future sanctification, you have the
Sacraments of the old Testament circumcision and the Passover and also as
they would those meats and drinks, and Holy days, and Sabbath days, which
are a shadow or sign of things to come, Col. 2.16.17. where the signs and
things signified are far dista^t in time, and tone long before the other: Note
farther, Christ may be said to sanctify virtually, or really; as I may say
virtually, and as thus he is the lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
the virtue of whose death did save the Patriarchs, so the virtue of Christ's
incarnate may be said ever to sanctifye, as in days of Moses Exodus 31.13. and
thus although I grante Christ did sanctify with God Exodus 31.13. and that
(perhaps) also the Sabbath was a sign that Christ did then sanctify the
people, yet this sign being present with the thing signified, could not be
abolisht by the presence of the body or thing signified, for if it could then
had the Sabbath been abolisht even in Moses days when he wrote those words,
Exodus 31.13. since the Sabbath which was the sign and sanctification, which
was the the thing signified, were then both together present. 2. Christ may be
said to sanctify really, and that is whilst he was God man, Incarnate, and thus
he is considered of only as to come afterward, as Col. 2.27. which are a
shadow of things to come, that is of Christ to come then; and here I deny not
but signs of things to come may be abrogate, but, yet here I deny that the
Sabbath Exodus 31.13. was made any sign of any thing to come afterward; So
then until they prove the Sabbath Exodus 31.13. was accounted and called by God
a sign to come, of Christ's sanctification, they cannot prove it abolisht: The
Text says not, The Sabbath shall be a sign etc. that I the Lord will
hereafter sanctify thee: but it says, The Sabbath is a sign etc. that I the
Lord do sanctify thee: now we must not confound times, the present tense with
the future tense, and so overthrow Grammar.

I answer 6. and lastly, I have cause to reject that which is their sum and
scope out of this text Exodus 31.13. namly to prove this conclusion and
assertion, That the Sabbath day is not abolisht: it being brought in direct
opposition to Gods commandment Exodus 35.2. The 7th day shall be unto you the
Holy Sabbath etc. God said, the 7th day shall be your Sabbath: and they say,
The 7th day shall not be your Sabbath: now I reject this, because these two are
not of equal authorities: tone is an express plain infallible word of God;
the other is but a collection by man liable to error in his collections; now if
Paul so sleited men's contrary judgments of him; I pass not to be judged of
man's judgment 1. Cor. 4.3. may not I sleite men's contrary judgments of Gods
Law? saying, I pass not what censure and collections men bring against Gods
Law? shall man's collections and conclusions bear equal authority with an
express Commandment of a God? or countermaunde it? Never with me, I trust to
God.

Finally, to give one answer that may serve for both those textes, the 6th and
the 7th, where to I have last answered, that is to the text Colos. 2.16.17. and
to the Text Exodus 31.13. say, I should grante them out of these two Textes even
all which they desire to have, as namly that by Sabbathes in Colos. 2.16. is
meante the Moral Sabbath of the 4rd Com: and that it was reckoned for a shadow
of Christ to come too: yea, let it be granted them that the Sabbathes Exodus
31.13. were signs and shadows of Christ to come, why yet it will not follow
that these Moral Sabbaths of the 7th day be abolisht absolutely and altogether.

To this purpose note with me, The 7th day Sabbath may be considered absolutely,
or relatiuely and significatiuely; for instance, John the Baptist, was a man,
there is his absolute nature; again he was the fore runner of Christ, there
is his office and relative nature, where by he pointed out Christ for to come
after him: now when Christ was already comne in John's presence, so as John
pointed to him, saying: Behold the Lamb of God, now forth with John lost, his
relative nature, of being any longer Christ's forerunner, and to preach of
Christ as to come, because Christ was already comne. Nevertheless John lost
not but still retained his absolute nature of being a man, for he was a man
still after Christ comne as well as before: An other instance, an Iuye bushe
hung up at a vinteners house, it is an Iuy bushe: and also it is a sign of
wine to sell in that house; now take down the bushe, or pull down the house
where the wine was, and then the bushe cease to be a sign any longer yet
it remains to be an Iuy bushe still: Just so the Sabbath, it has an absolute
nature, as it is a Sabbath? and it has a relative and significatiue nature as
it is a sign of Christ, as they say: now be it at Christ's coming, the body and
thing signified being comne and in presence, the sign or shadow then is to
vanish, why be it so, let the relative and significatiue nature or quality of
the Sabbath vanish as it was a sign of Christ, why yet it follows not
therefore the Sabbath as a Sabbath, in its absolute nature should also vanish:
but you will (...) diverse respects, if they kept it significatiuely, and we
morally: Also Paul might abolish theirs as significatiue by Col. 2.16.17. and
yet not meddle with ours, no more then he abolisht fasting by this text. We may
not make an Image to worship, yet may we make an Image for ornament, and not
violate the 2d Com: so you see respects do alter things not a litlle.

2. The Rock, was made a sign of Christ 1. Corin. 10.4. They drancke of the
Rock that followed them, which rock was Christ: now when the Rock ceased to
be a sign of Christ, yet it ceased not to be a Rock still, it lost but its
significatiue nature only by the coming of Christ, and so the Sabbath lost but
its significatiue nature neither: but your arguing is as if once a thing be
abrogate in its significatiue nature, why so it must be also in its absolute
nature, which you see is false.

3. Holy days, had a significatiue nature, being shadows of Christ to come,
Col. 2.16.17. now at Christ's coming, in this respect they were abolisht; and
yet to this day in other respects we retain Holy days, for we keep Pentecost
or whitsuntide now still to this day: if therefore we may retain a Jewish Feast
day as Pentecost, notwithstanding it had a significatiue nature, and
notwithstanding that Paul expressly forbad it Col. 2.16.17. why may we not by
like reason retain the Jewish 7th day Sabbath, though it had been
significatiue, and though Paul in that respect had forbad it Col. 2.16.17. if
we yield not this, our own practice in still keeping Pentecost day will
condemn us: Moreover, you know all difference of days was taken away, Romans
14.5. and Gal. 4.10. namly, as shadows of Christ, or as Heathenishe
superstition; Nevertheless to this day we observe difference of days in
other respects; in a moral regard, for we keep fast days solemnly; and we
keep the Lords day every Sunday, so as our own practice tells us a day
abolish in some one regard is not forth with therefore abolisht in all respects
absolutely, by those textes which speak against them.

4. David, a sign, shadow, or type of Christ to come Ps. 2. Ps. 118.22.24. he
had a relative or significatiue nature as he was a King, so as his Kingly
office was a type of Christ's Kingly office; why yet when Christ the body
came, all Kingly offices did not cease, for we retain them to this day: The
High Priest, he was a type of Christ, now that very High Priest who lived
before and after, and at Christ's passion, so soon as Christ had finished all
upon the cross, that High Priest lost his typical nature, he was no longer
High Priest or type of Christ, yet he ceased not to be a man still, or a
Servant of God and the like.

5. Circumcision it was a sign Genes. 17.11, Romans 4.11. now those infants that
were borne, and circumcised a little before Christ's passion, the cuting of
their foreskine was a sign of Christ to come, until Christ had suffered upon
the cross, and no sooner had Christ suffered but their circumcision ceased to
be any sign of Christ to come, and yet for all that their circumcision ceased
not then also, for they remained ever after with the foreskine cut of: yea, and
it is not to be passed by without observation, that though there was a means
by the art of chirurgry to draw on the foreskine again, and so to nullify and
vncircumcise themselves, yet Paul would not have them take away their
circumcision, see 1. Cor. 7.18. if then it had been necessary that at Christ's
passion, all things that had formerly been made signs, should then have been
abolished amongst christians, why then would not Paul have given way to these
christians newly called, to have gathered their uncircumcision, or undone their
circumcision, and taken away the scarre? so you see the incision or scarre
might and and did remain, though the sign annexed to it was abolished: By
all which examples it is more then manifest that though they could prove the
Sabbath day a sign, or a shadow, yet it can not follow that therefore it must
be utterly and absolutely abolisht in all respects, by those two textes Col.
2.16.17. Exodus 31.13. nor will it follow necessarily, that ought in a Sabbath
is abolisht, save its typicalnesse and significatiue nature only.

Thus you see all their textes fully as I trust answered, so as they have no
ground in Gods Book for abolishing of Gods Sabbath; and to conclude, I can but
wonder what should set wise and religiouse men on work, thus to sharpen
their vvittes against the Lords Sabbath, it being a branch of that inviolable
and eternal Law of God, wrote in Tables of stone, to notify its perpetuity:
they having no plain and direct Text of Scripture necessarily abolishing it,
it can be nothing then, but their bare vvilles and pleasures to have it
abolisht, and this grownded upon the custom of the church, because she has
abolisht it, now a long time.

They have not thus done with it though for they have also certain reasons and
arguments more, which we now come to my mind against the time and day;
where by they would prove the Sabbath day abolisht.

The first is taken from Christ himself: Say some men, why Christ himself
abolished the Sabbath day, and that even in his own time whilst he was upon
the earth, for, He gave leave to work upon the Sabbath; as to lead beasts to
water, to toil about lifting a beast out of a ditche; yea himself made clay
on the Sabbath, to open the eyes of the blind man, in so much as the Pharisees
taxed him for a breaker of the Sabbath, and for a godless man for it, saying,
This man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day Ioh. 9.16.14.

Hereto I answer 1. what matters it, what those superstitious Pharisees censured
of Christ, who were the blind leaders of the blind, and of envy could not
endure Christ should do any thing but they would carpe and cavil at it if
possibly they could: though here they would not endure Christ so much as to
cure a blind man on the Sabbath, yet it appears it was but envy and but
superstition in them, for Christ approved his own fact of healing on the
Sabbath day, by a common practice among the Jews themselves at that day, of
the like saying: what man among you, if his sheep fall on the Sabbath, into a
pit, does not take it, and lift it out? Mat. 12.10.11. yea it appears the
Pharisees and Doctoures of the Law, even under the Law, allowed other men
(though not Christ, nor his Disciples) to do works of charity and necessity on
the Sabbath, as to lift a sheep out of the ditch: and for the Priest to kill
the Sacrifices on the Sabbath, Matt. 12.5.11. I answer 2. let not us attend to
the Scribes and Pharisees censures, but hearken we to Christ the true expounder
and obseruer of the Law, now he allowed works of mercy and works of necessity
to be done on the Sabbath day, as those instances before mentioned do prove:
but for any to suppose Christ meante hereby to abolish the Sabbath, is a simple
conceipte, for Christ says of the Moral Law, whereof the Sabbath day is a
branch, He came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. But
suppose the Sabbath had been a branch of the ceremonial Law, why yet it is
absurd to think that Christ would abrogate any thing of it so long as he
lived, for the ceremonial Law was equally in force with the Moral Law until
Christ's death: So then these things did not argue any abolition of the Sabbath
day then, but rather gives us to understand how we Christians are to keep the
Lords Sabbath to the worlds end, not in any superstitious strictnes as if we
might not on that day do works of mercy and necessity, but the contrary; for
if Christ allowed it to the Jews, even before his death whilst no man doubts
but all Laws moral and ceremonial were in force; why should we think but
that he allowed as much liberty to Christians to the worlds end?

2. A 2d reason, is fetched from that phrase Mat. 12.8. The Son of man is Lord
of the Sabbath day: whence it is thought, that since Christ is called the Lord
of the Sabbath: that therefore Christ may change the Sabbath day: and secondly,
that Christ as Lord of the day, did abolish the day.

I answer first to the former; Say I should grant that Christ the Lord of the
Sabbath may or might change the Sabbath, what is that to our question? we
dispute not of what Christ may or might do, but what Christ did do? I answer
to the latter; that neither the context, nor yet the phrase, of Christ being
Lord of the Sabbath; will afforde any such matter: see the absurdety of such
collections from a like phrase, Romans 14.9. Christ died, and rose again, that
he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living: can any hence collect,
that because Christ is called Lord of the living? that therefore Christ might or
did abolish or destroy the living? 2. to suppose Christ here did abolish the
Sabbath day as a ceremony, is altogether growndlesse, for both at this time
when Christ spoke these words, all ceremonies were in full force; and also
so they remained ever after, until the day of his death and passion; for not
until then was the handwriting of ordinances taken out of the way Col. 2.14.
nor until his death, did Christ ever abolish any ordinance formerly in use in
the Jewish church: To conclude, no more can be gathered out of this text Mat,
12.8. but the right use of the Sabbath; Christ freeing it from the
superstitions of the Pharisees, who held that no work might be done in no case
upon the Sabbath day, but Christ showed that in a case of necessity his
Disciples might pluck and rubb a few ears of corn, to satisfy present
hunger; and Christ did bear them out in it, allowing a dispensation in such a
ease; for, as he was Lord of all the commandments, as touching his Godhead;
so of the Sabbath day also, and therefore he might dispense with that law, and
that day; or rather, he might therefore be betrusted to have given the true
sense and exposition of the commandment, and to have shown them the right use
of a Sabbath day: as if he had thus said, since I am Lord of the Sabbath, do
not you Pharisees think that I will give way no not to my Disciples to do any
unlawful fact on this day, nor suffer them to profane this sacred time, for
it is mine, I am Lord of it, if therefore their plucking ears of corn had been
blame worthy, you should have found me so far from defending them, as I
would have been the first that would have rebuked them for it; but herein I
see they have done no more then I do allow them to do: the Lord of a corn
field will allow his servants, to make a footpath through his corn, in case
of a necessity.

3. A 3d reason is, because all things are become new, now in the Kingdom of
Christ 2. Cor. 5.17. and therefore the old Sabbath is abolished, say they.

Where unto I answer 1. if all things be become new, now in Christ's Kingdom,
I pray show me then where you have a new commandment for the 8th day, or
first day of the week, or for the Lords day, in stead of the old 4th
commandment for the 7th day, or Sabbath day: and where the Israelites were
commanded in the first comm: to serve the true God only; show me where now we
are commanded to serve any new God. 2. If all things be now become new, why
then did S. John say, that he vvrote not a new commandment to the elect Lady,
but that which they had from the beginning, 2. Ioh. 5. to conclude, the Text 2.
Corin. 5.17. is ignorantly wrested to a sense it never meante; fot the Apostle
treates not of new laws and ordinances, but of new obedience, and of
regeneration; that a man in Christ is not an old man, but a new man in
conversation: therefore says the Apostle, if any be in Christ, he is a new
creature etc.

4. A 4th reason is to this effect: That which is changed is abolished; but
the 7th day Sabbath is changed, wherefore the 4th day Sabbath is abolished:
That the 7th day Sabbath is changed: they prove by the standing still of the
Sun in Jos huahs time, Josh. 10.13. where it is said, the Sun abode in the
midst of Heaven, and went not down of a whole day; whence they gather, that
here time was changed, and if time was changed, then so was the 7th day
changed which was a part of time.

I answer 1. A man may judge of the soundness of this argument, by a like
absurdety that will by as good reason be thence concluded, for if the standing
still of the Sun in Ioshuahs time, could make, that time was changed and the
Sabbath day, then the same standing still of the Sun then did make that time
was changed, and the Sabbath day too, even then at that present in Ioshuas
time, when the Sun stood still; and if then changed, so then abolished; and
so there was no Sabbath in Gods church never after Ioshuas days: yea, if times
formerly appointed in the Law were now changed by standing still of the Sun,
how did the Jews ever after to know which was the 14th day of the month for
the Passover? and the 50th day for Pentecoste?

I answer 2. that it does not follow that the Sun standing still, time is
changed; but admit it were, and that the time being changed, the 7th day
Sabbath is changed, as a part of time, yet is it not changed in such respect
as God commanded it, and as I urge it: Note therefore a day may be considered as
a certain duration and space of time, consisting of so many hours: or, and
that more properly for the Light, as Genes. 1.5. God called the Light, Day:
Now be it the 7th day Sabbath was changed, considered as a part of time, yet
was it not changed by the standing still of the Sun, as a Light; for though
standing still of the Sun made that day a longer day (as in Summer you have a
longer day then in Winter) yet not an other day: there was no change of light
or day: and for all the standing still of the Sun, made one day a longer day,
yet did it not make the 3d day or the 7th day and light, to be the 4th day or
the 8th day and light: nor did it transplace the 7th day or light, so out of
its order, as that no man could ever after know which was the 6th, which was
the 7th, or which was the 8th day or light that the Sun made to the world.
Now this is the day which God commands in 4th Comm: and which I urge here,
namly the time of Light; as for a day in respect of so many hours, God in
wisdom has said nothing of that, least his 4th Comm: should not be general
and extend to all nations who every one have their day and light, but no
certain number of hours, such a day is ever, and in all countries variable,
some where consisting of more, some where of fewer hours.

5. A 5th reason, may fetch its ground from my answer to the reason last
above, where by Day I understood only the time of Light, and not a certain
space and duration of hours, whence they may and commonly do reason against
the Jews Sabbath by an absurdety thus; if all nations be bound to the Jews
Sabbath day (which you say is all the time of light) then in some parts of
the world where is half a year light together, there they must keep half a
year Sabbath, and then also more inconvenience, for that they are to have a
Sabbath, but once in the space of 3. years and an half, that is every 7th
half year, now in so long space for people to want Gods ordinance of
preaching, many a soul may perish for want of Gods Word in the mean time.

I answer 1. to this latter inconvenience, what though they had no Sabbath for
3. years and an half together, no soul needs perish for lack of Gods Word
preached, for they may have sermons in mean space as many as they please; since
there is a Comm: To preach the word in season and out of season, at all times
and occasions: I answer 2. to the former absurdety, of keeping a Sabbath half
a year together; I marvel why it should be thought more absurd for those
nations to keep one in 3. years and an half, half a year for a Sabbath,
then it was for the Jews once in 7. years (by Gods express commandment) to
keep an whole year for a Sabbath, Leuit. 25.4. I answer 3. suppose it were
absurd for those nations to keep half a year for a Sabbath, and the Church
of God did judge it so, and that present necessity did call for a more frequent
Sabbath, as once in 7. twenty four hours, in such a case of necessity, it
being foud there is a true necessity upon sound judgment, and upon weighty
consultation and deliberation, then I doubt not but God would dispense; and we
have some examples to countenance the matter, as Circumcision though commanded,
yet omitted during the time of Isralites travailing through the wilderness,
Josh. 5.5. and the Passover commanded to be eaten on the 14th day of the first
Month, yet in case of necessity, a man being on a far journey he might eat
it on the 14th day of the second Month, Numb. 9.1.3.10.11. thus in cases of
urgent necessity, God has dispensed, and I doubt not but in like cases God
would do the like again. But what is this to us in our countries where we
have intercourse of day and night much what as had the Jews? say it were
absurd or impossible to these countries, so as the 4th Com: cannot properly be
extended to those so, but they must have a dispensation touching the word day,
to take it in an improper sense, would this free us from obedience to the 4th
Com: in its proper sense, who have no need at all to depart from it, or to
seek for any dispensation? what though David in his hunger and necessity did
eat the shewbreade, Mat. 12.3. was it therefore lawful for all Israelites
upon that to eat the shewbreade, who were not in like need or hunger? and
what though the 5th Com: of honor thy Father, does not bind a King whose
parents be dead, does it not therefore bind a subject whose Father is still
living? and so what if 4th Comm: did not bind that country, where they have
not night a day so successively and commodiously in short time following each
other, to a day light; does it not therefore bind us, who have not the like
case?

And thus you have seen their artificial reasons, against the time and day of
the Sabbath answered, now it remains that we answer to their inartificiall
reasons and testimonies; the which are fetched from the Primitive Churchs.

1. The first Testimony and Authority they produce against the 7th day Sabbath,
is that of Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesianes, says he: Let not us
keep Sabbath, in a Jewish sort, rejoicing in idleness, for who so does not
work, let not him eat, as says the Scripture: where Ignatius would have
them not Sabbatize, but work rather on that day.

I answer, let the words be well weighed, and they make nothing at all
against the Sabbath; to this end note, a little before he had dehorted the
Magnesians that they would not suffer themselves to be seduced or deceived with
other doctrines, nor with fables, nor with genealogies, nor with Jewish
smoke: thus in general: next, he descends to particulares, and first he
inueighes against the Judicial Law, and Circumcision etc. and this done, next
he bringes in the words citod above, Let not us keep Sabbath etc. now it is
to be noted unto which of those generalles above said, from which Ignatius
dehorted the Magnesians, these words have relation: for my part I must think,
they have reference to those words (fables, and Jewish smoke:) as if he had
joined them thus; Suffer not your selves to be seduced with fables, nor Jewish
smoke, or vanity, but cleave unto Christ, and let not us keep Sabbath as do
the Jews etc. thus he counted their Sabbatizing, such as it was there, no
cleaning to Christ, but a vain Judicial vanity: now that this relation must
stand thus I prove. 1. Because he spoke of other doctrines, and of fables: now
its fitest to refer Circumcision to Doctrines, because it was a Drctrine
once; and to refer those things he dehortes from on the Sabbath, as
idleness, and daunceinges, to the words fables, and Jewish smoke. 2. Because
he dehorted them from observance of the Judicial Law; now those fables and
Jewish vanities of idleness and daunceinges on the Sabbath, were never any
ceremonial Law, and therefore cannot be referred to that, forespoken of the
Law. Now if Ignatius in this passage did not dehorte from any thing written in
the Law, touching the Sabbath, but from other fables and traditions of their
own, then Ignatius did not dissuade from keeping the Sabbath, as it is
commanded in the Law of 4th Com: but from keeping of it according to their
fabulouse and vain manner: let these two things therefore be noted: 1. that
Ignatius did dehorte from things never commanded the Jews in the Moral Law:
2. That the things he did dissuade from they were fabulouse and vain things:
as from eating meats dressed the day before; and from drinking lukewarm
drinks, (what he means by lukewarm drinks (...) I cannot imagine, I never
read of any such drinks forbiden in the Law) and from rejoicing in
dauncinges, and uncivil howtings or clapping of hands in the Sabbath day, and
other like he disswades from; which things are merely Jewish fables and never
found in Gods Law, wherefore I conclude, that Ignatius did not forbidd an holy
keeping of the Sabbath day, such as stood with the Law of God, but he only
forbad that carnal and superstitious keeping of it fore mentioned, such as
was never commanded by any law. That this is so, yet more plainly appears, in
that 1. in this very place and text, He does exhort the Magnesians to keep
the Sabbath Spiritually, in meditation of Gods Law, and in admiration of the
works of God. 2. In that Iguatius does not dissuade from keeping the Sabbath
simply, but after a sort and in some manner: He says not, Let not us keep
Sabbath: but thus, Let not us keep Sabbath, (...) after a Jewish sort, and
fashion, as rejoicing in idleness (...): so you see it is a carnal sensual
rest from labors, that this good man inuaigheth against.

Only one thing in his disswasion would be cleared, which is that he adds
these words; Who so does not labor, let not him eat etc. these words are not
to be taken simply, as if he would they should work in their ordenary callings
on the Sabbath day, for so we make him contrary to himself, who exhorted them
to keep the Sabbath day Spiritually, by meditation of Gods Law, and Gods
works: now to work, and to rest from work (which the word Sabbatizing
signifies) are contraries: besides, how can a man so meditate on Gods Law, and
the works of God, as in a Sabbath one should, whilst the boby is in unquiet
labor? yea, in many callings, men's works are such as they cannot at all both
do their works, and also meditate Gods Law, as in the trades of grocers, and
other retailing shopkeepers who sell by little parcelles, and are ever in
bargayning: so scriueners who are ever wrighting; and the like trades which
occupy the mind; specially if they kept market on Sabbath day as we do, how
could their minds in the market be occupied about Gods Laws? and it is to be
noted Ignatius did not oppose Spiritual Sabbatizing, or Resting to Sabbatizing
or Resting simply, but thus he opposed Spiritual Sabbatizing, to Judicial
Sabbatizing fabulously, (...): wherefore to salve all seming contradiction a
fit sense may be given of the words, taking them to be comparatively spoken, as
that they should rather work on the Sabbath in an honest calling then so
fabulously, carnally, and irreligiously, to spend the Sabbath in daunceing, and
uncivil showting, and the like; and here it seems to me he alludeth to the
like manner of speech in Isa. 1.13. I cannot suffer (says the Lord) your new
Moons, nor Sabbathes, my soul hates your appointed Feasts etc. now here God
did not simply forbid Sabbaths, but that irreligiouse, profane, judicial
keeping of Sabbaths. Thus you see Ignatius his words, makes nothing against
the Sabbath, being well considered of, but rather (...) nesse of the
abolishing of this Sabbath, because these had their hands in it, then I should
have done, if I never had heard that they had any hand in it.

Thus you see, neither their textes alleged out of Scripture, nor yet their
reasons, nor their testimonies can prove the Rest in the Lords Sabbath day, to
be partly ceremonial; nor yet the time and 7th day to be abrogated: So then in
the last place I address my self to give some possitiue reasons to show that
the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, even to this day, and so consequently
must be to the worlds end.

The 7th day Sabbath, is still in force.
IN the first place I would free the Sabbath day from a prejudicate opinion,
arising in minds of men from calling it, the Jews Sabbath day: Touching which
name, were it used in a good or in an indifference sense I should say nothing,
but since I find it so termed in a reproachful sense, to rescue it herefro, I
would feign know a reason why the Sabbath day, commanded in the 4th Com:
should rather be called the Jews Sabbath day, then the Lord our God, whom we
are commanded to worship in the first Com: should be called, the Jews Lord
God? I can see no reason but that the one may be so called as well as the
other; Nor any reason but if we may call the Jews God, our God; so we may
call the Jewish Sabbath day, our Sabbath day: and if we do not call it our
Sabbath day, because we keep it not the fault is only in our selves: wherefore
to avoid all difference about the name, let it not be called the Jews Sabbath
day, nor the Christians Sabbath day, as proper to eighther; but let us call it
the Lords Sabbath day, as common to Jews, and to Christians both; and as
appertaining unto all nations, unto whom soever the 10. Comm: do appertain:
This name you shall find justify able by Moses in Exodus 20.10. where he calls
it, the Lord Gods Sabbath; when he said, The 7th day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God.

1. My first argument to prove the 7th day Sabbath is still in force, is
because the 8th day Sabbath, or Lords day, is not in force; and thus it may be
framed.

If our now Sabbath called the Lords day, which is eighther on the 8th or on
the first day of the week, be not in force, Then must the 7th day, which is the
day next foregoeing the Lords day, be now in force.

But our now Sabbath, called the Lords day, which is on the 8th or first day of
the week, is not in force. Therefore the 7th day, which is next foregoeing
the Lords day, is now in force.

More briefly thus, If the 8th day be not in force, Then the 7th day is in
force: But the 8th day is not in force: Ergo the 7th day is in force.

I prove the consequence to be good, because eighther the 7th or the 8th day
must be Sabbath, the one of them, for of all the seven days in the week,
there is no scruple or question between them, and me save only about these two
days, so as one of these two days must be Sabbath by both our consents:
especially since we all hold it moral, that one day in every 7. must be a
Sabbath, which to deny were great impiety: I prove the Minor, that is, That the
8th day, or Lords day, is not in force: and this I prove, because there is
neither precept, nor practice, neither of Christ, nor of any of his Apostles in
Scripture, to put the Lords day in force: and this task I have particularly
and largely made good in the first part of my Book, where I have shown by way
of answer, That the Lords day, is not a Sabbath day by Diuiue Institution.

2. My 2d argument is, because the 7th day Sabbath is not abolished: and it may
thus be framed.

That which is not abolished, that is now in force.

But the 7th day Sabbath is not abolished: Therefore the 7th day Sabbath is now
in force.

I need not prove the Mayor, since it is plain to every eye: for the Minor, this
I have proved particularly and largly in the 3d part of my book, where by way
of answer I have showed, That the 7th day Sabbath is not abolished.

3. My 3d argument is, because the 7th day Sabbath was never changed; and it
may thus be framed.

That which was never altered nor changed, by Christ, or by his Apostles, That
is still in force to this day. But the 7th day Sabbath was never altered nor
changed, by Christ, or by his Apostles.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath is still in force to this day.

The Mayor is clear of it self, since things once instituted by God in the
old Testament, if ever they were altered it must be by Christ or his Apostles
in the New Testament.

For the Minor, note that the word change intimates two things; the one is the
abolishing of the old; the other is the bringing in of a new, as David, 2. Sam.
12.20. he changed his apparel, that is, he left or laid of his mourning
apparel, and he put on other apparel: now thus did neither Christ nor his
Apostles change the Sabbath, by abolishing it, and by setting up a new: if they
did change it, it was by precept, for by practice; but not by precept, for they
as they did not blot (...)

For the truth of the Mayor, 1. the vvrighting of this Law in Tables of stone
by God, what could it intimate unto posterity if not this for one, namly that
those Laws should be perpetual? else they might have been vvrote on paper or
parchement, or the like vanishing things. 2. what reason can be rendered, why
God should put such an apparent difference twixt the 10. Com: and the
ceremonial Law, as that he would wright the one with his own finger, but
the other he would not, but set Moses to wright it: the one he delivered by
his audible voice unto the people; the other was delivered solely by the voice
of Moses: what may be judged to be the reason hereof, but that God did more
esteem of the one, then the other, and so would have it more durable. 3. This
Mayor is the common received truth at the hand of all Divines, witness Doctor
Ames in his Theological Thesis page 499. Haec enim regula est certissima, and
inter optimos omnes Theologos, recepta; praecepta moralia a ceremonialibus in
eorum traditione sic fuisse discriminata, ut omnia and sola moralia public
fuerint coram toto populo Israelis, ex monte Sinai, ipsius Dei Voce proclamata,
and postea etiam proprio Dei quasi digito scripta, and rescripta, idque in
tabulis lapideis, ad perpetuam and immutabilem ipsorum durationem indicandam:
For this (says he) is a most certain rule, and received by all best Divines,
that the Moral Commandments were thus differenced in their delivery, from
the ceremonials, that all and only, the Morals were proclaimed publikly before
all the people of Israel, from Mount Sinay, by the Voice of God himself, and
after also were wrighten, and again written as it were by the singer of God,
and that in Tables of stone, to declare their perpetual and immutable
continuance.

As for the Minor, this you have it in the 4th Comm: and delivered as a
commandment in preceptiue and commanding terms: Remember the Sabbath day etc.
In it thou shall not do any work etc. now if you ask which day we must
remember, the Lord in, the same Com: tells us, it is the 7th day: But the
seventh day is the Sabbath etc. So the 7th Sabbath was commanded; and so it
most plain, Exodus 35.2.

5. My 5th Argument is, because there can be no day for a Sabbath weekly and
ordenarily but the 7th day: and it may thus be framed.

If no day of the 7. can be Sabbath weekly, but the 7th day, Then must the 7th
day now be Sabbath day.

But no day of the 7. can be Sabbath weekly but the 7th day.

Therefore must the 7th day now be Sabbath day: the consequence is clear of it
self, and needs no proof to him that howlds there ought to be a Sabbath, as
we all do.

The Minor I thus prove, because God without repeal or exception has
commanded us, or at least permitted and freely given us leave, to labor and
work, and do all that we have to do, in those 6. days whichgoe next before
the Sabbath or 7th day Exodus 20.9.11. six days shall thou labor, and do all
thy work, for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth etc. so then we may
work upon the Lords day, or any other of the six days, and that by Gods
authority, by his Moral Law; neither may it be thought that this branch of the
4th Comm: is repealed, for the 6. days for labor, were never made typical
and ceremonial, these were never shadows of Chtist; yea, the Lords day it
self was never excepted, for Christ himself after his resurrection did both
travail upon the first day of the 6. namly, the Lords day, a matter of 15.
miles, and also approved of the like fact in the two disciples by his
iournying together with them to Emmaus that day Luke 24.13. as has been more
largly declared in the former part of this book: now look what Christ did,
the like we may do safely; follow me as I follow Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1. said
Paul: so then Christ's example is our pattorne and president, so as we may work
still upon the first day of the week, or on the Lords day: if then we may work
upon any of the 6. days, then are we not tied to keep any of those days a
Sabbath in resting from work.

If any shall think we now keep the 7th day and that day which follows
these days labor: to him I say, that our Lords day which we keep is the 8th
day or first day in the week by Divine accounte, and the 6. days labor
spoken of in 4th Com: are those 6. days which go next before our Saturday,
for those are the days we are to imitate God by working in them, since we all
confess Saturday was the 7th day, and that day whereon God rested after his 6.
days work, and since we confess those were the days the Jews till and at
Christ's death, did labor in.

6. My 6th Argument is, because God must have one day in every 7. days, from
the creation to the worlds end: and it may be thus framed.

If God must have one day in every 7. days for a Sabbath, Then must he have
Saturday the 7th day for a Sabbath, and not Sunday the first day of the week.

But God must have one day in every 7. days for a Sabbath.

Therefore must God have Saturday the 7th day for a Sabbath, and not Sunday the
first day of the week.

For the Minor, it is confessed of all: and it may be proved by the 4th Comm:
where the Lord said, Remember the Sabbath, that is every Sabbath: Again, The
7th day is the Sabbath, that is, every 7th day is the Sabbath: like as, Thou
shall not kill, that is every thou: Love thy neighbor, that is, every
neighbor etc.

For the Mayor, I prove its consequence; Saturday the 7th day, it being the
last day of that week, if you omit it, making a change (for you say that
day is changed, and if so, then it is omitted by just consequence) and give God
Sunday the first day of the next week for it, then it is plain God has not
a Sabbath in every week or 7. days, for the wanted one Sabbath, in that
week, wherein the change was made from Saturday to Sunday; now this lack and
want of a Sabbath in that week, can no ways be supplied, but by returning
back to give God Saturday the 7th day again; So then, if God must have one
day in every 7 you must give him Saturday which is the last of 7. without any
change to the day after: or else you both deny that in practice, which every
man houldes in judgment to wit, that God must have one day in every 7. and
also live in the breach of the 4th Com: which enioyneth every 7th day: neither
will it serve your turn to say, this change was made by others many 100.
years a gone, for so long as you vphould their day and change, you tread in
their steps, and justify their fact, and are accessory to it.

7. My 7th argument is, because God had expressly commanded us the 7th day
Sabbath in his Moral Law: it may be thus framed.

Whatsoever God has commanded in this Moral Law, that is now in force.

But the 7th day Sabbath, God has commanded in his Moral Law.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath, is now in force.

For the Minor, see it expressly proved Exodus 20.8.10. Exodus 23.12. Exodus
31.14.15. Exodus 35.2. Exodus 16.29. Leuit. 23.3. where, both the Sabbath day is
commanded, and likewise the 7th day is commanded equally: and if any shall
answer, a 7th day is commanded, but not the 7th day, I refer him to my
exposition upon the 4th Comm: and unto the 2d thing there in, where I have
sufficiently proved that God pointed at one singular well known day from all
others, and left us not at rouers to take any day.

For the Mayor, namely, that whatsoever God has commanded in his Moral Law,
that is now in force: this Maxim is so Orthodoxe, as it should trouble the
conscience of any man once to hear it questioned: fearing men hereby go about
to serve God by halues, and by pieces, to take and to leave out what they
lost, not having respect unto all Gods Commandments: the very naming and
mention, that a thing is commanded; and that in the 10. Commandments, it
bears down all contradiction: Hereby we control the Atheist, the Papist,
the vain swearer, the Sabbath breaker, the disobedient child, the murderer,
adulterer, theife, false witness bearer, and the couetuouse person: but now if
any begin to question this truth, and once to make one breach, the flood of
iniquity will flow in amain, and if any exception be given way too for the
7th day commanded, under what pretense soever, why other sinners and profane
persons will and may be look for the like, and so the whole Law shall be of
no force to bind us now: why may not the Papist cauile against 2d Com: and
say, that I indeed, it forbad Images to the Jews, but not to Christians: why
may not the Atheist cavil at first Command: Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart Matt. 22.37. I says he this belongs not to us, for it is
impossible so entirely to love God as with all the heart: why may not the
profane man cavil against the Sabbath day, because it is said, In it thou shall
do no work, what not any manner of work? what not feed our children, nor
cut our own meat? this Commandment is Jewish: Again, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self? who is able thus to do? wherefore this Commandment
pertained only to the servitude of the Jewish nation, says the uncharitable
person? and again, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor any thing
that is his, that is, thou shall not have the least desire to the least thing
of the neighbors; Oh says the lawless Protestant, these things are partly
Moral, partly Ceremonial, this same living so accuratly and so strictly
pertained to the Jews, it is to us a yoke, nor we nor our fathers could bear
etc. if I say an exception be once made from this general truth, for you, for
the 7th day why may not every of these come in also with his exception too?

Yet farther, since this is that general truth, which all Ministers both in
pulpit, and in their books, do vphould whatsoever they say or wright, that
it must be so and so, because God had commanded it in the Moral Law: which
particular flows from this general, that, whatsoever God has commanded in
his Moral Law (...) now in force: since I say they pay out such coin to
others, why should they not be willing to be paid in the same coin by others?
why therefore should I be put to prove this principle, and fundamental truth,
which in other cases themselves make no scruple of? If so be that this be not
sufficient that whatsoever is commanded in Gods Law, the 10. Comm: is now in
force to bind us, our very principles shall become disputable and doubtful.

If they shall answer by any distinction, where by they empaire the full force
and virtue of any branch of this Law of God, they offend against a plain text
Deuteronomy. 12.32. whatsoever I command you, you shall take nothing therefro: yea
they falsify Christ's words and predication, Mat. 5.18. who confirmed the Law,
and every jot and title in it, to abide in such force as it was in, when he
preached that sermons in Mat. 5.18. thence forwards unto the worlds end: yea,
and they side it with these Priests Zepha. 3.4. who wrested the Law; or, who
did violence to the Law of Scripture, we have but two parts left us, the one
is the Law Moral, the other is the Gospel: now whosoever shall enfring or
deny any jot or title of eighther of these portions of holy writ, he is no
friend to God.

2. Nevertheless, some thing may be said to prove, that whatsoever God has
commanded in the 10. Commandments, the same is now in force: as 1. because all
the 10. Commandments were all and every one equally and a like delivered by
the same God, by the same voice, at the fame time, and wrote upon the same
tables of stone, therefore one should bind as well as the other, and one should
last as long as any other, they should have the same duration, in common
reason: 2. Our Savior Christ himself ratified the Moral Law, and every jot
and title of it unto the worlds end, Matt. 5, 17.18. which is to the full, as
much as can be desired I should prove: 3. If some thing commanded in the Moral
Law does not bind now, then are there not 10. Commandments, for there is but
9. Commandments and an half, or but 9. Commandments and three quarters, or
there abouts, but sure I am ten fully there is not, for there wants the time
of 7th day, commanded in the 4th Comm: if you except it; now Moses telde Jews
and consequently us, that God wrote in the Tables ten Commandments Deuter.
10.4. if therefore we have not ten commandments complete, then have we
Christians not the Law of God as it was delivered at first entirely, but
defectiuely and maimedely, and some pieces only of it. 4. If that reasoning of
S. James, Iam. 2.10.11. be sound and good, where by he proves that, whosoever
breaks but one Law, is guilty of all the other precepts, by this reason,
because he that commanded one Law, he commanded the other Laws also; Then so
may I reason and prove, whosoever shall violate the 7th day, is guilty of all
the other precepts, by this reason, because, he that commanded us to beepe the
Sabbath day, (...) prove it from a like phrase in Scripture, as in Genes.
14.21.23. said Abraham to the King of Sodom, I will not take so much as a
thread or shoolatchet of thee etc. and as in Matthew. 5.26. said our Savior
Christ; thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the utmost farthing:
both which phrases intimate thus much, that if the debtor should not come out
of prison till he had paid every farching, the^ should he not come out till he
had paid every penny, every shilling, and every pownd: and if Abraham would not
take a thread or shoolatchet of the King, then would he not take of him
raiment, cattle, silver, or gould: thus you see it the manner of Scripture, by
mentioning and denying of the very least; to intimate there by a denial of all,
any, the whole, and every part and parcel of that thing, where to that least
belonged: a like phrase you have Mat. 10.30. yea, and the hairs of your head
are numbered etc. if the hairs were numbered (may we reason) then were the
hands, eyes, ears, the teeth, and the fingers numbered also: just so is my
atguing above, if every title of the Law be in force, then so also are these
letters and words in force, to wit, the 7th day is the Sabbath: so you see the
consequence proved good and sound.

I prove the Minor, to wit, that every title of the Law is in force to the
worlds end, by Mat. 5.18. where our Savior prophesied of the duratio^ of the
Law, and of every jot and title of it, to last to the worlds end, saying;
Amen, or verily Isay unto you, ((...), donec) until Heaven and Earth pass,
one jot or one title of the Law shall not pass, etc. where you see, Christ
did ratify this prophecy by a vehement assueueration prefixed to it, Amen, or
verily said he etc. Farther note what learned, Chemnitius says upon this
Text, by way of exposition, says he; Jot is a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet,
and a letter of the least value of all the rest in the Alphabet: and title
(says he) is as a prick to a letter, or as a comma to a sentence: so you see,
Christ did stablish for ever, the very least things of moment in the law: and
thus is the minor made good.

Nevertheless against this Text many answers are brought, as 1. that by Law
here is not only meant the Law Moral, but also the Law ceremonial: Here unto
I say 1. that it is a growndlesse answer, it has no foundation in the Text,
or context, for since all the Laws, in the sequel of the chapter, which Christ
expounds, be only Moral Laws and not Ceremonial Laws, why should it be
thought here should be any Ceremonial Laws meant? anddoe we not use to
restrain general words unto the subject matter of the text and context; were
it not a racking of the word Law, Heb. 7.12. to understand it of all Laws,
Moral and Ceremonial, where the subject matter does occasion us to limite it
to the Leuiticall Ceremonial Law? I confess Mat. 5.17. there the word
Prophets added to the word Jewe: think not I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets etc. but I see no reason, why the word Prophets should have any
aim at the Ceremonial Law, more then the word Law in verse. 18. for the
Prophets were exercised about the Moral Law, in urging and expounding it,
as Matthew. 22.40. yea, since we find this phrase of, The Law and Prophets, to
be applied to the Moral, and not to the Ceremonial Law, by Christ himself,
and that too in the same Sermon, as Matthew. 7.12. why should it be urged any
larger here? 2. By Law, here must not be meante the Law Ceremonial, but the
Law Moral only, for, Christ says, he came not to destroy or loosen the Law,
but to fulfill it; which speech cannot be true of the Law Ceremonial, for he
came both to destroy or loosen it as by his death, and also to fulfill it, as
in his life, and by his death. 3. The time wherein Christ foretold the duration
of this Law, was but about a matter of two years before his death, at which
time every jot and title of the Ceremonial Law, was to be utterly
destroyed, now would Christ foretell touching this Law, that it should endure
as long as the Heavens and the Earth, when as with in two or three years after
it was to be abolished? nay, what likelihoode is there that Christ would
conioyne the Moral and the Ceremonial Law together touching duration, as if
they were both equally and a like to last, and to vanish together?

A 2d answer is, that the duration of the Law here is but until Christ's
passion, which they would ground from those words Mat. 5.18. Till all things
be fulfilled: to this I say 1. This thwarteth and crosses Christ's words, in
the precedent v. 17. I came not to destroy or loosen ((...)) the Law etc. but
if the Law had retained its force but till his death, then Christ came to
destroy or loosen the Law, for it must be his death or nothing that altered the
Law, and what was done by his death, that he came to do: 2. This sense were
to make Christ words senseless, as if in former part of the verse he should
vow not one jot of the Law shall pass, until heaven and earth pass, that
is, not until this worlds end; and instantly should add until all things be
fulfilled, that is, until a two or three years hence. 3. The Law is to last
after Christ's passion, as is plain by that of Paul To. 3.31. where be says,
faith does not make the Law of none effect, nor they the Apostles of Christ,
but they established the Law: now this was after Christ's passion: and indeed
the Law must be in force to this day, to show us our fine, and to bring us to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. further, all things shall not be fulfilled, until the
mystery of God be fulfilled Revel. 20.7. and until Christi second coming Act.
3.21. and 1. Cor. 15.24.25.26.54. etc.

A 3d answer is, that some iotes of the Law are passed, and do not bind us
now, as the preface to the Commandments, I am the Lord thy God, that brought
the out of the Land of Egypt; and as the promise to the 5th Comm: That thy
days may be long in the land, which the Law thy God gives thee: the one of
these concerned Egypt, the other Canaan, and both concerned the Jews, but
neither of them concerns us Christians, Ergo: Here unto I say 1. neither of
these do, nor ever did bind any, for these be but reasons and motives to
obedience of the Commandments, they be no commandments, since they command or
forbid nothing, only they be appartenances to the Commandments, so the Law
whereof Christ spoke, may stand still as a Law, though these motives fail, for
God can move us to obedience by other motives Evangelical, as Romans 12.1. and
though these motives were failed, yet were no part or jot of the Law failed
or passed, since these motives were, nor Law, nor part or jot of the Law:
Again 2. it cannot be said that these 2. motives be failed to this day, for
look to whom they did at first belong, to the same nation and people they
do at this day belong, that is, to the people of the Jews, for the
deliverance out of Egypt, is yet true of their people, and ought still to be a
motive to them, even to the worlds end, so then though that reason concerns
not us, yet is it not failed, since it is in force as largly as ever to the
Jew: unto us Christians it did never belong: for that other annexed to the
5th Com: I see not but that may be general to all nations.

9. My 9th Argument is, because the Sabbath day, is a means to keep in memory
the miraculouse work of the creation: this argument is taken out of Exodus
31.16.17: and thus it may be framed.

That thing which was a special means and help of Gods appointement, to
keep in his church, the memory of that memoriable and renoumed work of his to
wit the creation of this world: That thing and means, ought now and for ever,
to be in use in Gods Church.

But the 7th day Sabbath, was that special means and help of Gods
appointement, to keep in his Church, the memory of that memorable and renoumed
work of his, to wit, the ereation of this world.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath, ought now and for ever. to be in use in Gods
Church.

For proof of the Mayor, there is no man in our Church but freely confesses,
that both now and for ever, there ought to be an honorable, admirable, and
thankful remembrance of Gods workmanship in the creation of this world, as
well as was in the days of Moses, and of old: if then it be granted, that
there ought now to be a memory kept thereof, why should it not be granted also,
that that special help and means, ordained once of God for that end, should
now be in force and in use? 2. There was never any help or means, once
appointed to keep memory of the worlds creation, which was afterward
abolisht, and if none were abolished, then every one that once was, remains
still: true it is, some Sabbathes were abolished, as in Col. 2.16.17. but, we
must know, there were 2. sorts of Sabbathes: there were Sabbathes which were
shadows or signs of the Redemption, the body whereof was Christ; annual
yearly Sabbaths, these indeed be abolisht by this text; now there was also
Sabbaths which were signs of the creation, weekly Sabbaths, every 7th day,
now these which were Sabbaths and signs of things past, as was the creation,
these be no where abolished: great is the difference twixt Sabbathes, as signs
of things to come; and Sabbathes as signs of things past. 3. It is of as great
necessity, if not of greater, that we now should have all or any such special
helps and means to keep in remembrance the worlds creation, as had those
Israelites in Moses time, for, we are a people as forgetful of Gods works of
wonder, as were they: yea, and we be in greater danger of forgetting the
worlds creation then those Israelites, by how much we live longer after the
creation then they did; old done things wear out of memory.

For proof of the Minor; to wit, that the Sabbath was an help, to keep
memory of the creation. 1. All men grant it, when they thus argue, that the
Lords day was instituded for the memory of the resurrection, as was the Sabbath
day, for memory of the creation. 2. I prove it from Exodus 31.16.17. where 2.
things be to be marked, 1. that the Sabbath is called a sign, 2. whereof it
is a sign, and what is the thing signified: For the latter, the thing
signified by the Sabbath considered as a sign, is the creation of the world
in 6. days, and Gods rest upon the 7th day: since every sign, must signify
some thing, and this Text mentions nothing but the creation, and again,
where God gives a sign, he uses to show whereof it is a sign, and here he
mentions nothing but the creation, therefore the creation is the thing
signified: and this truth may yet farther be shown by the very Text v. 17. for
in 6. days etc. where note that the Hebrew word translated, for, may also be
translated, that, as those skillful in the tongue know well, and find sundry
examples in Scripture: yea, the word (for) must be translated (that:) to make
good sense: so then, read the Text thus; that in 6. days etc. and you have
good sense; and also you see it plain, that the Sabbath was a sign, that in
6. days God created and rested: and the creation was the thing signified by
the sign.

The other thing to be considered in the text, is, that the Sabbath is called a
sign: and hence I thus argue; If signs be helps and means to bring to
mind or keep in memory the things where of they be signs, then does the
Sabbath day help us to mind and keep in memory the worlds creation: but
signs be helps and means to bring, to mind, and to keep in memory the
things whereof they be signs: therefore the Sabbath day does help us to mind
and to keep in memory the worlds creation, the consequence is good, it
proceeding from the genus to the species, the Sabbath day being one kind of
signs; and what belongs to all signs, appertains to every or any sign. I
prove the Minor, by an induction of particulares; the raine-bowe in the
clouds, Genes. 4. it is called a sign or a token v. 13. and the Lord said, He
would look upon the bow, that he might remember the covenant (which was the
thing signified by the bovv) v. 16. The Passover was a sign or token Exodus
12.13. which when the Angel of the Lord saw, then he remembered the covenant,
and spared them. Circumcision Genes. 17.11. it was a sign and token, to put
them in mind of Gods covenant made with Abraham etc. and see Exodus 31.13. a
text pregnant to the same purpose: The Sacrament of the Lords Supper it is a
sign; and this sign is to be used in remembrance of the thing signified,
which is Christ, 1. Cor. 12.24. neither can any example be shown to the
contrary, for, it is the very nature of a sign, to bring to mind the thing
signified: I conclude, as the Lords Supper is a sign of the work of
redemption; So the Sabbath is a sign of the work of creation.

10. My 10th Argument is, because the Sabbath day puts us in mind, who it
is, that is our Sanctifier, namely the Lord our God: This argument is taken out
of Exodus 31.13. and it may be thus framed.

That thing which in the time of Moses, was used as an help and means, to
put the children of Israel in mind, who it was that sanctified them; that
means and help ought now and for ever to be in the Church; to show us who is
our Sanctifyer.

But the 7th day Sabbath, was used in the time of Moses, as an help and
means, to mind the children of Israel, who it was that sanctified them.

Therefore the 7th day Sabbath, ought now and for ever to be used in the Church,
as a mean and help, to show us, who is our Sanctifyer.

For proof of the Mayor, 1. what reason can be rendered, or instance given to
the contrary, to show that our churchs and people should not now, have the same
means and helps to put us in mind, and show unto us who is the author of
our sanctification, the which the children of Israel, and Church of the Jews
had? 2. No help or means once appointed of God, to mind the Israelites, who
did sanctify them, was ener yet abolished, and if never abolished, then must
they remain: True it is, Sabbathes ceremonial, and annual, which were signs
of Christ, and of justification, such were abolished in Col. 2.16.17. but
Sabbathes Moral, and weekly, which were signs of God the Father, and of
sanctification, such were never yet abolished: besides, the Sabbathes abolished
in Col. 2.16. were such as were signs of things to come afterward, as of
Christ: but the Sabbathes Moral in Exodus 31.13. were signs of things present,
as of God presently sanctifying, as you may see in the Textes. 3. We now in
these times, have as much need of that help, to put us in mind of God our
Sanctifyer, as they had in former times; for instance, let a Christian pray
fervently; give alms bountifully, hate syne unfeignedly; do the duties of his
calling conscionably; preach powerfully; and in a word, live holily and
blamelesly in this evil world; whereby he out strippeth the men of this
world, and is as a light set upon an hill; is not this man in great danger to
be puffed up with pride, as were those Israelites Deuteronomy. 8.17, arrogating to
themselves the glory of their abundance, forgetting God the author? and is not
this man in danger, to use his gifts as if he had not received them, and to
glory in them as his own, 1. Cor. 4.7. surely upon a search, we can not but
confess, we Christians are as subject to spiritual pride, and as backward
and sluggish, to give unto God the glory of his merciful work of sanctifying
us, as ever were the Israel of God: now what help could be better to foreward
us in this Divine work of hallowing Gods name, then to have once in every 7.
days, that 7th day appointed of God, to be a sign and remembrancer unto us,
that Jehouah the Holy God is that fountain and author of our sanctification
and holiness? Well then, since we Christians have as much need of helps and
means, to mind us of the author of our sanctification, as those Israelites
had, and God has given us no other helps or means in the room of those he
gave to the Israelites; then it follows, that we now (...) and the 7th day,
do both notify but one time, which is the last day of the week: so them
conjoined by God, and also permiseously used Exo. 20.10. Leuit. 23.3. Exodus
31.15. there you have them conjoined by way of apposition, Genesis 2.3. Exodus,
20.11. Exodus 16.29. Luke 13.14. here you have them permiscously used the one
for the other: so as the name Sabbath, and the time the 7th day, cannot be
separated. 2, Whereas they deny me the accident of time, the 7th day see it
expressly commanded in so many words, Exodus 16.29. Exodus 20.10. Exodus 23.12.
Exodus 31.15. Exodus 35.2. and so you see not only the Sabbath is in force now,
but also the time and 7th day.

The other commone answer is, that the 4th Com: and so the Sabbath day are now
in force indeed, as touching the Morality of them, but not as touching their
special application unto the Jewish state: Here unto I say, it is but a fained
thing to think that eighther the 4th Com: or the Sabbath day, were so
commanded and appointed of God to the Jew, as if made peculiar and proper to
their state, and not common to all nations; To this end, perpende we the
particulars of the 4th Comm: to see if ought there be that might give us
occasion to think it was applied to the Jewish nation exclusiuely; or, if all
Nationes might not equally participate with them, in this Commandment, as
well as in the other 9. Commandments: In the Com: ye have these things
enjoined: 1. Remember the Sabbath: 2. to rest in it: 3. to keep it holy: 4. a
day 5. the 7th day, or last of 7.6. because God rests on that day. What is
here now, that is peculiar to the Jew, so as other nations cannot observe the
same? Cannot we in England, as well as they in Jerusalem, 1. Remember the
Sabbath? 2. rest in it? 3. keep it holy? 4. a whole day? 5. the 7th day, and
last of 7? 6. in imitation of God, because he rested on this day? could no
nation beside the Jew observe these 6. things?

Perhaps it will be said, The Sabbath, and so the Comm: was applied to the
Jewish state, because of that reason moving them to obedience of it, which is
annexed to the Com: Deuteronomy. 5.15. namely, Gods bringing them out of Egypt: Here
unto I say, This motive and reason may be said to be applied indeed to the
Jewish state exclusiuely, as not belonging to other nations, and if they mean
no more but thus: that the 4th Com: and so the Sabbath, are not now in force,
as touching this special application only to the Jewish state, because the
Lord brought them out of Egypt, and that this reason should not now be properly
pressed upon us Christians; I am not against it, nor does it at all help them:
who goes about to prove the Sabbath is in force now to us, with relation to
that reason, of Gods bringing Israel out of Egypt? or to move Christianes to
obedience by that reason? The 4th Com: stands on two parts; The one is Law,
commanding or forbidding some thing to be done, this part only I urge: The
other part is reason or motive, to enforce to obedience of the Law, now this I
urge not, nor need I, for it is no Law properly, for it nor forbides, nor
commandes any thing: Be it, that the Law as touching the motives be applied
specially to the Jewish state, yet the Law as touching all things commanded or
forbidden in it, is universal to all nations.

Thus having proved the 7th day Sabbath is still in force to this day: in next
place I will show you how this Sabbath has been practiced and in use in the
Christian Church both in the days of the Apostles, after Christ his
resurrection; and after also in the more primitive churches: for the practice
of the Apostles I do the rather produce it, because the contrary side I see
lean much upon their practice, laboring much though all in vain (as has
been shown) to prove the practice of the Apostles upon the Lords day;
wherefore since Apostles practice, is with them of so great strength, if I
shall prove now, that the Apostles practiced the 7th day Sabbath, I trust they
will forth with yield, that the 7th day Sabbath is now in force, and make no
further question of the matter.

For this purpose look Act. 13.14.15.16. Act. 13.42.44. Act. 16.13. here ye
see 3. several Sabbaths, and in two several places, the Apostles preached
upon the Sabbath day: and see Act. 17.2. Paul as his manner was, vve^t in unto
them, and three Sabbath days, disputed with them, by the Scriptures: Here you
see in an other place and Church, three Sabbaths more kept by Paul and those
that travailed with him; nor was this any extraordenary thing: for the Text
says; it was an usual thing for Paul so to do, Paul as his manner was etc.
and see Act. 18.4 here Paul in an other place and Church, namely, in the Church
of Corinthe v. 1. disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath day: so here was a
constant practice, Sabbath by Sabbath; Every Sabbath day says the Text: and
thus I trust I have more soundly proved, that the Apostles kept the Sabbath
day; and that constantly, and the same in soundery Churches, then they have
proved that the Apostles kept the Lords day: The keeping the Sabbath day, was
an Apostolical practice, but so was not the Lords day: Let the indifferent
reader judge now and let him choose to practice that day of the twain, which
he sees most soundly and plainly proved before his eyes, practiced by the
Apostles.

Against this be sundry answers brought, as 1. True, Paul preached on the
Sabbath day amongst (...) the Sabbath day, but they undertook indeed, but
never did, nor ever will be able to prove the Apostles did constantly keep the
Lords day, so in this point of Apostles practice, I have the better of them,
since they can not prove Apostles constantly kept the Lords day amongst nor
Jews, nor Gentiles, no nor Jews and Gentiles mixed.

Secondly, I produce an other Text against their answer, showing the Apostles
preached amongst the Gentiles, in which Text is not the least grownd for any
such exception, as to say, there was a mixture of Jews and Gentiles: see Act.
16.12.13. here Paul and Timothy preached on the Sabbath day: and note 1. that
there was no thing constrayning them to preach, rather on this then on any
other day, unless it were the 4th Comm: they had been there as the Text says,
certain days; and of all these days, the Sabbath day was chosen; and what
can be thought should incline them to this choice, but the 4th Comm: 2. Note,
here is not any reason to think here were any Jews, because we read not of
any Synagues the Jews had here: and the people assembled in the open fields,
besides a river to pray, as the Text speaks, and therefore not with the Jews
in their Synagogues, as they were wont to do where the Jews had Synagogues.
As for Lydia, it will not follow she was a Iewesse, because the Text says,
she was a worshipper of God: for so was Cornelius Act. 10.2. but yet no Jew,
no nor any proselyte, for he was uncircumcised then, Act. 11.3. finally, I
say, suppose here was a mixture of Jews and Gentiles, and also in that other
place Act, 13.42.44. yet there is no cause of scruple or doubt, that the
Apostles would use any ceremonies (as they suppose the Sabbath) to be amongst
those Jews that were mingled with the Gentiles, no more then they would
amongst the Gentiles alone; for, says the Text Act. 21.21. Paul taught those
Jews that were mixed among the Gentiles, to forsake Ceremonies etc. and you
see it his practice Gal. 2.11. he would not endure no not a Peter to Iudaize it
amongst the Gentiles; and can we think himself would do what he reproved in
an other? besides, it was against reason, for so he should build up things (as
ceremonies) which he labored to destroy, Gal. 5.1.2. I say build up, for Paul
counted Judaising amongst Gentiles, a constraining of those Gentiles unto
Judaizme, Gal. 2.14. for all this, I deny not, but Paul did Iudaize, but it was
only in such places of assembly where were none but Jews only, as at
Jerusalem, and the like places, Act. 21.17.20.26. but in assemblies mixed of
Jews and Gentiles, there he would not Iudaize, lest he should constrain the
Gentiles to Iudaizme, as has been said.

An other and second answer usually brought against this practice of the
Apostles is, that Paul did keep Sabbath here with the Jews, to bear with
their weakness for a time, and as he did Iudaize it by circumcision of
Timothy: Here unto I say 1. it appears he did not keep Sabbath only for the
Jews sake, for then would he not have kept the Sabbath with the Gentiles, as
he did: 2. was it a weakness in the Jews to yield obedience to a moral
precepts, to the 4th Com? 3. The things vvherin properly Paul was said to
Iudaize, were Ceremonial things, standing in force by the Ceremonial Law, as
Circumcision and the Rest, but things standing in force by the Moral Law, as
does the Sabbath day, performance of these is no Iudaizing, but Moralizing, if
I may so speak.

A 3d answer is, that the Apostles must take such days, as they found in use
in the Church then, or else they cold not preach and divulge the Gospel: and
the Jews then would assemble on no days but the Sabbath: Here unto I say, the
Apostles cold make known the Gospel, though they had never frequented the
Jews usual assemblies, for the Apostles taught and preached Christ, in
private housen, from house to house Act. 5.42. and when Paul forsook preaching
in the Synagogue, he taught else, where as in the School of one Tyrannus, and
there frequented him both Jews and Grecians Act. 19.9.10. yea, Paul cold
assemble the Jews them selves upon occasion, and the very chief of them
refused not to assemble at his call, Act. 28.17.20. wherefore, necessity
compelled him not to keep the Sabbath with them.

To make a more full answer to those common objections which they bring
against the practice of the Apostles, in keeping the Sabbath day: one of which
maine objections is that fore spoken of to this effect, true the Apostles
practiced the 7th day Sabbath, but it was amongst the Jews, not amongst the
Gentiles: where unto I say, what and if it were only amongst the Jews? are
therefore the Apostles practices and actions vnvvareantable and inimitable,
because they were done amongst the Jews? are all their actions amongst Jews
but, of an indifferent nature? if such objections be lawful, if a preacher
confirms his doctrines in the pulp it, by the practice of the Apostles, then
is it lawful for any thus to cavil against it, oh but that, it was done
among Jews: for instance, suppose this the doctrine; Ministers must preach
constantly on the Sabbath day: now after it is proved, etc. then he confirms
it by the constant practice of the Apostles, Act. 13.14.44. Act. 17.2. Act.
18.4. is it tolerable for an auditor to cavil thus, oh this it (...) dience
and reference unto some of those Commandments.

The last objection is, that it is true indeed, the Apostles kept the Sabbath,
but it was but for a time, till the Jews were better instructed, the which
if they had refused to keep, the Jews would never have heard them preach of
Christ etc. Here unto I answer, this objection presupposes now as granted,
two false suppositions; the one, that the Apostles would not (if they cold
have avoided it) have kept this Sabbath: the other, that the Jews were
needlessly religiouse, making conscience of this Sabbath now, when they neded
not: for the former, for any thus to imagine or say is growndlesse, for where
has any of the Apostles declared themselves any enemies to the Moral Sabbath,
that it should be thought they had rather not to have kept the Sabbath, then to
have kept it? for the latter, it is true, of Circumcision, it might be said the
Jews were needlessely religious and careful of it, because we find the
Apostle inueighing against it Galat. 5.2. but how can we say so of the Jews
as touching the Sabbath day, since we no where find the Apostles inueighing
against it, or reprehending the Jews for keeping it, as they did for
Circumcision? The maine error in these objections is, that they take it for
granted which is not granted, that is, supposing the Sabbath day in the 10.
Commandments to be a Ceremony, as well as Circumcision, and that so it was
abolisht by Christ; whereof there is no grownd in Scripture, as else where I
have largely showed; nay farther, for any to say, the Sabbath is a ceremony, or
that any word or letter of the Law or 10. Commandments is Ceremonial, is no
better then blasphemy against Gods Law and Truth, and to speak evil of the
way of God.

Thus you see, I have proved, the practice of the Apostles, was constantly to
keep the Sabbath day, and the keeping of the Sabbath day was an Apostolical
practice; the which proof I have made to this end, that you might see we
have better grounds for the Apostles keeping the Sabbath day, then for their
keeping the Lords day, nay there is good ground for the Sabbath day, but no
ground at all, for the Lords day; Further more, as by the way, you may see it
has been shown the Apostles kept the Sabbath day, 1. constantly, not once,
or twice, or thrice, and no no more. 2. In sundry places and in diverse
churches, not at one place or two, but at more. 3. that where they abode
diverse days, they chose the Sabbath day, not the Lords day, to teach and to
preach in, as Act. 16.12.13. Act. 13.42.44. Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4. 4. They kept
Sabbath with both Jews and Gentiles together, and sometime with (...) you see
the duties of a Sabbath, meditation in Gods Law with joy and delight; and
admiration of the works of God. There be I confess, that would have all this
understood of the Lords day; but Ignatius speaks both of the Sabbath, and also
of the Lords day, distinctly in the same Text: for the very next words are
thus, And after the Sabbath, let the Lords day be celebrated etc. Athanasius in
his Homily de semente, says thus; We assemble together in the Sabbath day,
not as if we were sick of Iudaizme: but therefore we meet on the Sabbath,
that we may worship Jesus, the Lord of the Sabbath: where ye see Athanasius
not only auowching that they of this time kept the Sabbath, but also he
defends their keeping of it from superstition or Iudaizme: but our times are
now of a contrary mind, thinking and saying, if we should keep the Sabbath
day, we should play the Jews, and be infected with Judaizme. Socrates in his
History chap, 8. book 6th says: Assemblies were wont to be in the Churches,
every week upon the Sabbath, and upon the Lords day: Zanchie ypon the 4th Com:
These. 1. says out of Sozomen, That those of Constantinople, and almost all
others, have Ecclesiastical assemblies, to hear Gods Word, on the Sabbath
day, and on the Lords day: Doctor Prideaux on the Sabbath; says, The Churches
after Christ, kept both the Sabbath, and the Lords day, for diverse years,
with holy assemblies, and this thing is so manifest (says he) as it needs no
proof etc. In a word, is it not plain the Sabbath was in use in the Church,
until the year of Christ 364. at what time the Laodicean counsel enacted a
Law against it, and for the Lords day? Hosp. de Orig. Fest. cap. 9. page 27.
but how unjustifiable this their act was, may appear, in that they enacted a
Law against Gods Law: and were guilty of that brande in Dan. 7.25. of unlawful
changing of Times, and the Law: yea, how full of suspicion this their fact
was, may appear in this that Church of Laodicea, it was the worst of all the
7. churches that S. John wrote unto in his Revelations: yea, and in that this
change was not made till the year 364. it is of small accounte, since the elder
the church grew, the more corrupt it grew; for, 364. years after Christ
crept into the church superstition, and so daily thence forwards popery by
degrees: But how soever, it is plain that the Sabbath day was in use in the
church at that time, in which they enacted a Law against it; or else they made
a Law against nothing.

Here it shall not be amiss to add the testimony of two or three of our own
Divines, auowching the morality of the 7th day Sabbath, I could produce many,
but two or three for all; (...) strengthen my self, and wrong not them. 3.
Doctor Prideaux upon the Sabbath, lately comne forth, page 140. says. Where
did Christ abrogate the Sabbath? where is there any mention of setting the
Lords day in the room of it? well, Christ ascends, he left his Apostles
preachers, and did not they without any scruple observe the Sabbath of the
Jews, which the Jews? did not they institute most freely assemblies in the
Sabbath day? and did not the succeding churches the like, etc?

And now let me propounded unto your choice, these two days, The Sabbath day
on Saturday; or the Lords day on Suneday, and keep whither of the twain you
shall in conscience find the more safe; If you keep the Lords day, but
profane the Sabbath day, you walk in great danger and peril (to say the
last) of transgressing one of Gods eternal and inviolable Laws the 4th Com:
but on the other side, if you keep the Sabbath day, though you profane the
Lords day, you are out of all guneshot and danger, for so you transgress no
Law at all, since Christ, nor his Apostles did ever leave any Law for it.

1. To conclude, let me take away two or three objections and so an end; Say
some what a do is here about a day, is God so strict for a day? so be he has
the duties, it matters not so much for the time: To whom I answer; and make
not you as much a do too as you can, for the Lords day, the 8th day, else why
may not Mooneday, or Tewsday, or some other day, be kept in memory of Christ's
Resurrection, as well as Sunday, the first day of the week? and do not our
divines of best rank, lay it down as their judgment, that the Church, the
whole Church cannot now alter the Lords day to any other? it seems then in
your own judgment, that time and day, how light a circumstance soever you
make it, when you dispute about the 7th day in the 4th Com: yet it is a matter
of weight and moment when you argue for the Lords day, for which yet you have
no Com: 2. Think you it a light matter, the which God has been pleased to
stamp his Commandment upon Exodus 35.2. The 7th day shall be unto you the Holy
Sabbath etc. Will you slight Gods Commandments? admite the time, and 7th day,
be as thing little profitable to God, as was the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, in Paradise, dares any man hazard with God as
Adam did? The less the thing is, with the more ease we may show our
obedience, and the greater our sine, if disobedient. 3. We dare not forfighte a
bond with man, upon such shifts, saying when it is paiable on 7th day of
January, oh my neighbor regards not so much the day, so I carry him the full
some, though it be the day after it is due: nor durst those faithful Israelites
so slight Gods times, as to circumcise on the 9th day, to call Passover on
the 15th day, when God has commanded CIrcumcision on the 8th day, and the
Passover on the 14th day.

2. Says an other, this were to bring into the Church Iudaizme again, and
that strict rigorous observation of the Sabbath which they used: Here to I
answer; Athanasius before cited, said: They kept the Sabbath day in their
times, and yet he says, they were not infected with Judaizme; Further,
Iudaizme is when obedience is yielded to a Law Ceremonial, but he that keeps
the Sabbath day, does it in obedience to a Law Moral: And as touching the
rigorous strictenesse of the Jewish Rest or Sabbath, it is not better than an
evil report, brought up upon the Lords Sabbath, to loathe men of it; what
and if men erroniously think, the Jews were more strictly tied then indeed
they were, that is their error: and what and if the Scribes and Pharisees
were superstitious in keeping the 4th Com: and forbad works of charity to be
done on the Sabbath, were they not erroniouse too in expounding and observing
other of the Commandments? But sure I am our Savior Christ the true expounder
of the Law, he gave leave even to the Jews in his time, (before any Ceremonies
were abolisht) to do works of charity and works of necessity even upon the
Sabbath day, as to rub ears of corn: to carry a bed: to lift a beast out
of a ditch, and the like: yea, do not we hold our selves now thus strictly
tied upon the Lords day, as not to do any works thereon save works of
necessity and charity? I find not that a believing Jew was any thing more
strictly tied then so: For my part I see no difference twixt the doctrine of
our Church of Engeland, touching keeping the Lords day for strictness: and the
doctrine of Moses and of Christ, touching the keeping of the Sabbath day: nor
can I see how a believing Jew, was more strictly tied then a believing
Christian is, in right account.

3. Says a 3d. Should we embrace the Sabbath day, then should we be accused
of nouelty, and the neighbor Churches of Papists would vpbraide us: Here too
I answer, what if man accuses, where God commends; it was new doctrine,
that Paul brought to Berea, but it was their commendations, that they
received the word, with all readiness, and serched the Scriptures daily, to
see vvhither those things were so or not: it was not the newenesse of the
Gospel, nor the singularity of Paul the teacher, that cold daunte them: and
for Papists it is not the first time that they have vpbraided us for nouelty,
if they think it a matter of reproach, to confess we know but in part, and
that the best Church and purest may be more pure, and grow nerer to God in
knowledge and reformation daily, let them scoff on, what David will regard a
Michal, or Isaac an Ishmael? what and if we offend the Church of Papists, if
we may gain the Church of the Jews; do we not wright of, and speak of,
and pray for, and hope for conversion of the Jews, and can there be a better
way for their entrance into our Church, then by removing a way this great
stumbling block, that is, our profanation of the Lords Sabbath day? said not
the Jews of Christ, this man is not of God, because he keept not the Sabbath
day Ioh. 9.16. and can the Jews say any better of us at this day, who are not
causelessly taxed as was Christ; why these Christians (may they say) were
their religion good, they would never live in so manifest a breach of the 4th
Commandment weekly, as they do, profaning the Lords Sabbathes.

4. Says a 4th: This were to bring an imputation upon our Church, that have
not seen this, of 1600. years etc. I answer, for 300. or 400. years after
Christ; this Sabbath was kept, and that by the purest Churches of the
primitine times; so the over sight was not above a matter of 1200, years:
Again, at these time, when the Lords Sabbath was abolisht, by the Laodicean
counsel in the year 364. even then the churches began to decline strangly,
and then began superstition and popery to creep into the Church, and by little
and little it ouerspreade the Christian world, until about Luthers time, all
which time our Church was covered in the Romish Church, as corn in the
chafe, and we were as captives in a foreign nation, where we were kept
from knowledge of the Laws of our Lawful and rightful sovereign, the Lord
our God: now what imputation is it to our Church, that the Romish Church did
ouersee this, and blott out the 4th Com: as they had done the 2d Com? Since
Luthers time indeed by the mercy of God, the chafe has been fanned away, yet
have we not had a setteled constant shine of the Sune of the Gospel, but twixt
times it has been elouded, as in the reign of Queen Mary etc. and for this
short breating time, since Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, has not our
Church had work enough to hold the ground, which our forefathers wone for us,
have we not been in a continued warfare battailing with Romish doctrine,
both by pen, and by preaching, even until now of late years, during which
conflict, our church has had scarce leisure to bethink her self of any
further purification: but now, since God has in some sort given us rest from
our enemies, labor we to grow in grace, both in knowledge and in obedience;
labor we to perfect Holiness daily more and more: and let us rather imitate
the more pure primitive churchs, (from whom the Church of Room is fled in
practice of the Sabbath day,) then the corrupted Romish church, from whom we
suckte this evil milk. Neither is it to be thought a thing impossible, for a
Church of God ignorantly, to lie in the breach of one branch of Gods Law for a
season; for did not the Church of God in Josiah his time as much when the
book of the Law of God it self had been lost, for I know not how long time,
2. King. 22. now to whom was this great sine of carelesnes in loosing the
book of Gods Law to be imputed, was it not unto the Idolatrous times and
church, which went last before the Reign of Josiah? and so who is mostly to
be blamed for our ignorance in this, but the idolatry and superstition and
irreligion of former times, which began at the Counsel held at Laodicea Anno
364. for they first puffed out this light?

There are two sorts of people to whom this discourse does pertain, the
Laity, and the Clergy: as for the Laity, God he knows they can do no more
then they can do; though of vviling minds that all should go well, and that
God might have this own times, and it is not a far thing gain to them, whither
they give God the Saturday or the Sunday: but since they want the Arts and
tounges, those instruments of knowledge in this points they must be guided by
their Ministers, The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and they must ask
the Law of their mouths, I say the lesser care of this matter pertaines to the
people, I do not say no care, for their is a spur for them in Ezekiel. 33.6.
and a president, in those Noble men of Berea, for serching the Scriptures: and
let them in Gods fear both privately pray to God, to direct their Ministers
with Spiritual illumination; and also let them often call upon them to see to
their Ministry, showing them the price of their souls is in their hands, and
if Ministers neglect, the souls of people pay for it.

As for these of the Ministry, these do know, this matter mostly conserueth
them, to know vvhither Saturday, or Sunday, or Sabbath day by Gods
appointement: And hereof it is that our Savior Christ having ratified the Law,
and every jot and title of it, to the worlds end Matthew. 5.18. He turnetb
himself to those of the Ministry to look to it before others, that by their
liefe and doctrine, they teach, not break not one of the last of those
Cemmandements, saying v. 19. whosoever therefore shall break one of the last of
those commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the last of the
Kingdom of Heaven: (...) my self, so far forth, as to cause me liften redily
to what may be said to the contrary, and to scanne and search it to my utmost:
yea so far forth too, as in partt to with hold me from the practice of it,
and so accordingly upon the same ground, to counsel others to do the like.

If it please God to bless this point, so as it be generally found to be a
truth of Gods, then will there be a far more comfortable and laudable course,
to go together with ioynte petitions, and humble requests, unto his Majesty,
and that honorable house of Parliament, desiring them to take this matter into
their considerations, whose it is properly to reform Ministers may inform,
but Magistrates should reform; it was Nehemiah chapt.
13.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22. that reformed the profanation of the Sabbath day,
in his time: and having done it; Remember me, O my God, conseruing this, says
he etc. it was Christ a King, as well as a Prophet, who whipped the buyers and
scelleres out of the Temple, that holy place; and it is the office of Gods
Anointed a King, to purge the Lords Sabbath day, on our Saturday, that sacred
Time, from buyers and scellers, and markelinges; Let us patiently therefore
with prayers to God wait and expect, until God shall be pleased first to move
the hearts of mcn generally to embrace this truth, and then to stir up the
heart, and couradge and zeal of King to do this great work.

For conclusion of all, one scruple and case of conscience would be satisfied,
and it is this; If our consciences be once rightely informed, (as we think) that
Saturday is the true Sabbath, by force of the 4th Comm: how can we dispense
with Gods Commandment, and still our consciences, until a public reformation
comes? and is it not hypocrisy, to think one thing, and practice an other,
judging Saturday to be Sabbath day, and yet keeping Sunday Sabbath? For, thus a
Divine of note delivered it in public; that for a man to divide betwixt his
profession, or (in judgment) and his practice, is a note of hypocrisy. Here to
I answer, 1. Hypocrisy is when a man makes an outward show of doing some
thing, but indeed he does it not: now this agrees not to us, since we make no
show to men, that we keep Saturday Sabbath, but the quite contrary, for both
our actions, and our shows, and appearances to men are both one, that is, to
labor on the Saturday, so we use no hypocritical dissimulations: Paul, when
he became all things to all men, that he might wine some, therefore he
circumcised Timothy Act. 16.3. the which fact him self else where, in an
other case speaks against, Gal. 5.2. and it was unlawful to be done. It was
a Law of God, who so shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shede,
Genes. 9.6. and the Magistrate is Gods Minister to take vengeance etc. Romans
13.14. now David being King, Ioab murdered 2. Captains, 1. King. 2.5. here it
was the duty of David, to have taken vengeance for God, but David finding Joab
to strong for him, 2. Sam. 3.27.39. omitted execution, and gave it in charge to
his Son Solomon, to execute it after his death, 1. King. 2.6. I trust no man
will count David or Paul herein Hypocrites, and yet their judgment and
practice was divided.

2. To the scruple of conscience, in a case of necessity, you read what David
did, when he was an hungered, he profaned hallowed bread, contrary to Gods
Law, and Christ justified him, Math. 12.3.4. you read how Circumcision was
omitted all the time the Israelites were in the wilderness Josh. 5.5? if in
case of necessity these might do thus, I trust there is mercy for us also, if
our case be like; specially, since we do not utterly abolish all days, for
we do but change the day, and for a time give God one day for an other: That
necessity is upon us, as it was on those Israelites, is plain; do not we
live in a Church whose government is established by law, the which law cannot
be transgressed with safety to our persons, and goods? besides, is not
necessity upon us, as touching the good of our souls? A Sabbath should be
celebrated with public and holy conuocations and assemblies Leuit. 23.3. (...)
with public preaching and reading Luke 4.16. now can we have in safety
assemblies in private housen? or can we have possible a preacher in every
family? and how shall they hear without a preacher? Romans 10.14. were not
these the very causes, why the good King Hezekiah 2. Chron. 30.3. altered the
day of the passover. 1. Because they had not Priests, who had fitted
themselves for that day; 2. Because the people, were not together assembled in
public, on that first day? It may be said, how do they in a voyage at Sea
keep Sabbath, who cannot have these? I answer, the case is not a like, for,
would they put of the Sabbath day, from one day unto an other, they cold not
amend themselves, but we by a change and defering the day, we may obtain all
those comfortes which else we cannot enjoy: and if any shall say, Keep both
days: I answer, it is more then ever God required; nor will the necessity of
our callings permit it, God himself thought it needful we should have 6.
days for our works, to one day for his service, as in the 4th Com.

One instance more, showing God permitted a change of a day, in case of
necessity; The Passover was to be eaten ordenarily on the 14th day of the
first Month, Numb. 9.1.2.3. but in case a man were in a far journey, then he
might keep the Passover in the 14th day of the second Month, Numb. 9.10.11.
now it is farther to be noted, that ever the next day after the Passover, it
was a Sabbath, Leuit. 23.7. so that as the Passover day was altered, so also
this Annual Sabbath was changed answerablie: so that not only the Passover
day, but also the Passover Sabbath day, in a case of necessity might be
altered and changed: But it will be said, these were Ceremonials, and what is
this to a Moral? I answer, why Ceremoniales in their time, whilst they
stood in force, called for obedience, as well as Moralls, yea the first
Sabbath of the Passover; which followed next day after Passover day, it was
eommanded to be kept just as a Sabbath, in holy conuocations, and in resting
from servile labor, Leuit. 23.7. yea, death was to be inflicted upon the
breakers of this Ceremonial Sabbath, Numb. 9.13. as well as upon those that
violated the Moral Sabbath, Exodus 31.15. The sum of which is this; That
since the Ceremonial Sabbaths, whilst in force, did bind as strictly, as did
the Moral Sabbath, therefore there is the same reason and the regard, of the
Ceremonial and of the Moral Sabbath, for strictnes of observation; and
therefore it follows by like reason (as far as man may judge) that if a
dispensatio^ be granted in case of necessity, for a change of that day, so a
dispensation likewise in like case, is granted for a change of the Moral
Sabbath, so long as that necessity unavoidably lasts, unless groundlesly we
should think, God is more strict toward Christians about the Sabbath, then he
was toward Jews about the Sabbath of the Passover.

One objection more, what and if we cannot have public assemblies in the
congregation, may are we not bound to keep the Sabbath as we can privately,
every man in his own family? I answer, since God had ordained the Sabbath to
be kept, with public assemblies, and with the help of Priests or Ministers,
as has been shown, therefore I judge it better to alter the day, until the
time of reformation, that so we might enjoy the public assemblies, and
benefit of an able Minister on an other day, then without these, to keep the
very self same day; that this opinion is justifiable, see the like practice of
the good King Hezekiah, fore mentioned 2. Chron. 30.1.2.3. who because the
Priests were not prepared to keep the Passover, in the first Month: nor were
the people publicly assembled together in the same month, for these two causes
the King with his Princes altered the day of the Passover to the second month.
If any shall object or doubt that I strain things to far, when I would
justify the change of the Sabbath, by the change of the Passover, because
these two are things of a different kind etc. and because the reasons moving
us to change the Sabbath, are not the same that God mentioned in the Law of the
Passeouers change Numb. 9.10. for satisfaction of the weakest in this point, I
thus answer 1. to the latter, touching the reasons of our change: they be not
the same indeed every way, yet if they be (as they are) as necessary to enforce
a change, as these, Numb. 9.10. it is sufficient; and for proof hereof, see it
in the practice of King Hezekiah, who changed the day of the Passover, 2.
Chron. 30.3. not upon these very particular grounds, which God specified in
Numb. 9.10. for God specified only these two defilment by a dead corpse: and
being in a far journey: but Hezekiah by like reason gatheted, that they might
alter the day upon other grounds also, if as weighty as those first, and
namely upon these, 1. Because the Priests were not sanctified: 2. because the
people were not assembled: so these two differ both in the persons, and also in
the things, as may be seen by co^paring those two textes together. Secondly, I
answer to the former, and I justify my arguing from the Passover to the
Sabbath, from the practice of our Savior, who argued from David's eating the
Shewbread, to the Sabbath, Math. 1.12.2.3. which were things far more
different, then the Passover day, and the Sabbath day, for both these are of
day and time, but those were of bread and time: Further, by this practice of
Christ, I find it lavvfull for us to reason from a ceremonial, as the show
bread was, or by like reason, from a ceremonial as the Passover was to a
moral, as the Sabbath was: concluding that the same exceptions, and
dispensations belong to the moral Sabbath, which God granted to the
ceremonial Law of Shewbread, or to the Law of Passover, if there be necessity
in the one as was in the other.

For a conclusion let me stopp up one gapp, where at I perceive some will be
ready to breek out, saying, since that we have not now the very day which God
sanctified, but an other day in its room, we are not tied so strictly to
keep this day, in the duties of Rest and Holiness, as we should be if we had
the right day, and therefore we may take liberty etc. where unto I answer,
how ever the right day is to be desired principally, and before any other, and
all good means to be used for obtaining it, yet until a time of reformation,
I hold this day ought as strictly to be Sanctified, as that other: suppose a
debtor bound in a bond to pay 10li. on the seventh day of March, and his
creditor seeing him in a straight, and necessity is upon him, so as he he cannot
bring the money just upon the day, in mercy the creditor permits him, to make
payment on the next day after, on the 8th. day of March; shall now this
unthankful debtor, thus revvard his merciful creditor, saying, since I carry
not my 10li. upon the right day of my bond, being dispensed with all for the
time; why therefore I need not be strict neighther in the some, nor yet in the
currantnesse of the money, I may take liberty and carry but 9li. 10s. therefore,
yea and I care not if also I put in some light gould, and clipped silver: is this
good dealing think you by the debtor toward his merciful creditor? Why apply
this, the case is thine, if thou vvilt give Godless duty and service on this
8th. day, then on the 7th. day: yea farther, consider of that text Number. 9.12.
where though the Lord had permitted, that in a case of necessity, the time and
day might be changed for the Passover, yet as touching the duties of the
Passover, to be by the Law performed in the time and in the first day, God
would abate none of them, though upon another day, for so says the text,
According to all the ordinances of the Passover they shall keep it. So may I
say, of this first day of the week (until a time of reformation, and
necessity be removed) According to all the ordinances of the Sabbath, on the
seventh day, shall ye keep it.

FINIS.

