A fruitful treatise and full of heavenly consolation against the fear of
death. Whereunto are annexed certain sweet meditateons of the kingdom of
Christ, of life everlasting, and of the blessed state and felicity of the
same. Gathered by that holy marter of God, John Bradford.

Perused corrected and augmented according to the original, and Imprinted in
Fletestrete near to saint Dunstons Church by William Powell.

Ecclesiasti, 5. MAke no taryinge to turn unto the lord, and put not of from
day to day: For suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the day of vengeance he
shall destroy thee. Stand fast in the way of the lord: be steadfast in thine
understanding, and follow the word of peace and righteousness. A treatise
against the fear of death.
BEING minded, through the help of God, for mine own comfort and encouraging
of others, to speak something of Death (at whose doors though I have stand
a great while, yet never so nere, to man's judgment, as I do now) I think it
most requisite to call and cry for thy help, Oh blessed saut our Jesus Christ,
which have destroyed death by thy death, and brought in place thereof, life
and immortality, as by the gospel it appears: grant to me true and lively
faith, wherethrough men pass from death to eternal life, that of practyse and
not of naked speculation, I may somethynge write concerning death (which is
dredful out of thee and in it self) to the glory of thy holy name, to mine
own comfort in thee, and to the edifying of al them, to who^ this writing
shall come, to be red or heard. Amen.

There be.iiii. kinds of death, iiij. kinds of death.
one which is natural, an other which is spiritual, a third which is
temporal, and a fourth which is eternal. Concerning the first and the last
what they be, I need not to declare, but the second and the third, perchance,
of the simple (for whose sake especially I Spiritual death what it is
write) are not so soon espied.

By a spiritual death therefore, I mean such a death as the body living the
soul is dead. Whereof the Apostle makes mencio^ in 2. Tim. 5
speaking of widows which linyng daintely, being a live in body, are dead in
soul. Thus you see what I mean by the spiritual death. Now by a temporal
Temporal death.
death I mean such a death, where throught the body and affections thereof are
mortified, that the spirit may live. Of which kind of death the Apostle
speaks in Cols. 3.
exhorting us to kyl our members. And thus much of the kinds of death: wherein
the judgment of the world is not to it approved, for it cares less for
spiritual dea the, then for natural death: it estemeth less eternal death
then temporal death, orels would men leave syn, which procures both Sin is
the cause of death.
the one and the other (I mean spiritual and eternal death) and chose temporally
to dye, that by natural death they might enter into the full fruition of
eternal life: which none can enjoy nor enter into, that here will not
temporally dye, that is, mortify their affections, and crucify their lusts
and concupicences: For by obeying them at the first came death, as we may read
Genesis the. 3. If Eve had not obeyed her desire in eatinge the forbidden
fruit, By what means death came into the world.
whereby she died spiritually, none of these kinds of death had ever come unto
man, nor ben known of us. Therefore (as I said) we must needs here temporally
dye: that is, mortify our affections, to escape the spiritual death, and by
natural death, not only escape eternal death of soul and body, but also by
it, as by a door, enter into eternal life, which Christ Jesus our Savior has
procured and purchased to and for all that be in him, translatinge eternal
death into a sleep or rather into a delyueraunce of soul and body, from all
kind of mysery and sin. By reason whereof we may se that to those that be in
Christ: that is, to such as do believe (which beleuers I mean, are discerned
from others, by not walking after the Roma. 8.
flesh, but after the sprite) to those I say, death is no damage, but a
vantage: no dreadful thing, but rather desierable, and of all messengers most
merry, whiles he is looked upon with the eyes of faith in the gospel. But more
of this hereafter.

Thus have I briefly showed thee the kinds of death, what they be, whence
they come, and what remedy for the^. But now, for as much as I am purposed
hereafter to entreat only of the first kind of death, that is, of natural
death, something to comfort Natural death.
my self and others against ye dread and pains of the same: I will speak of
it as God shall instruct me, and as I accustom with my self to muse on it now
and then, the better to be prepared against the hour of temptation.

I have showed how that this natural death came by spiritual death yt is, by
obeying our affections in ye tra^sgressio^ of gods precepts: but through the
benefit of Christ, to such as be in him, and Death what it is to christians.
die temporally, that is, to such believers as labor to mortyfie their
affections, it is no destruction, but a plain dissolution both of soul and
body, from all kind of perils, dangers, and miseries, and therefore to such
is not to be dread, but to be desired: as we se in the Apostle, which desired
Philip. 1. Luke. 2.
to be dissolved: And in Simeon which desired to be losed, saying: dismiss or
lose me, O lord, By which words, he seems plainly to teach, that this
life is a bondage, and nothing to be desired, as now I will something show.

First consider the pleasures of This liffe is not to be loved in respect of
the pleasures there of, being nothing else but vanity.
this life, what they be, how long they last, how painful we come by them,
what they leave behind them: and thou shall even in the^se nothing but vauitie.
As for example: how long lasts the pleasure that man has in the act of
generation? How painfully do me^ behave them selves before they attain it?
how does it leave behind it a certain lothsomnes and fulness? I will speak
nothing of the sting of conscience, if it be come by vnlawefully. Who well
saying this, and forecasting it aforeha^d, would not forgo the pleasures
willingly, as far as need will permyt and suffer? If then in this one,
whereunto nature is most prone, and has most pleasure in, it be thus: alas how
can we but think so of other pleasures?

Put the case that the pleasures of this life were permanente during this life:
yet in that this life What this life is, mark here, and learn.
it self is nothing in comparyson, and therefore is full well compared to a
candell light, which is sone blown out, to a flower, which fades away, to a
smoke, to a shdowe, to a sleep, to a runnynge water, to a day, to an hour, to
a momente, and to vanity it self: who would esteem these plesures and
commodities, which last so little a while? Before they be begone, they are
gone and past away. How much of our time spend we in slepyng, in eating,
in drinking, and in talking? Intancie is not perceived: youth is shortly
ouerblowen: middle age is nothing: old age is not long: and therefore (as I
said) this lif, through the consideratio^s of the pleasures and commodities of
it, should little move us to love it, but rather to loathe it. God open our
eyes to see these things, and to wey them accordingly.

Secondly, consider the miseries of this life, that if so be the pleasures and
commodities in it should move us to love it: yet yt miseries This life is more
to be loched for the myseries, the^ loved for the pleasures there of. The
myseries of this life concerni^g the body.
might counteruaile and make us to take it as we should do: I mean, rather
to desire to be losed and dis^^ssed hence, then otherwise. Look upon your
bodies, and se in how many perils and dangers you are. Your eyes are in
danger of blindness and blerednes: your ears in danger of deaf nes: your
mouth and tongue of cankers, tothache and dumnes: your head in danger of
rewmes and megrims: your throat in danger of horsenes: your hands in danger
of goutes and palseys. etc. But who is able to express the number of
disseases, whereto man's body is in danger, seeing that sum have written yt
more then. diseases may happen unto man? I speak nothing of the hurt that
may come to our bodies by prisons, venomous beasts, water, fire, horses, men.
etc. The miseries of this life concerni^g the soul. Byloki^g on our old falts
and te^ptatio^s, and other mes falts we may see what danger we are al wais
ready to fall into.


A gain, look upon your soul: se how many vices you are in danger of, as
heresy, hypocriidolatrye, courtouines, idleness, security, envy, a^bition,
pride. etc. How many temptations may you fall into? But this shall you better
se by lokinge on your old falls, foily, and temptations, and by loking on
other men's faules: for no man has done any thing so evil, but you may do the
same. Moreover, look upon your name, and se how it is in danger to sciaunders
and false reports. Look upon your g^o^es, se what danger they are in for
thieves, for (...). etc. Look vopon your wise, children, parents, brethren,
systers, kinsfolks, servants, friends, and neighbors: and behold how they
also are in danger, both soul, body, name, and goods Great and weighty
causes for us to be sad and heavy, and little to joy in the pleasures of this
life.
as you are. Look upon the common weal and country, look upon the church,
upon the mynisters and maiestrates, and se what great dangers they are in: so
that if you love them, you can not but for the evil which may come to them,
be heavy and sad. You know it is not in your power nor in the power of any
man, to hinder all evil that may come. How many perils is infancy in danger
of? what danger is youth subject unto? man's state is full of cares: age is full
of diseases and sores. If thou be rich, thy care is the greatter: if thou be
in honor, thy perilles are the more: if thou be pore, thou art the more in
danger to oppression. But alas, what tongue is abie to express the
myserablenes of this life? the which considered, should make us little to love
it.

I can compare our life to nothing An apt comparison between a ship on the
sea, and the lif of man: for what dangers are so great? what so like?
so fytly, as to a ship in the mids of the sea. In what danger is the ship
and they that be in it? Here are they in danger of tempest, there of quick
sands, on this side of pirates, on that side of rocks, now may it leake, now
may the mast break, now may the master fall sick, now may diseases come
amongste the maryners, now may there dissension fall amongst them selves. I
speak nothing of want of fresh water, meat, drink, and such other
necessaries: Even such an other thing is this life. Here is the diuyll, there
is the world, on Behold the great miseries and mischiefs that this life is in
danger of, on every side.
this side is the sleshe, on that side is sin, which. thurowly cleaves unto
our rybbes, and will do so long as we be in this flesh, and natural life: so
that none but blind men can se this life to be so much and so greatly to be
desired: but rather, as the men that sail, are most glad when they approach to
the haven, even so should we be most glad when we aproch to the haven, that is
death, which sets us a land: whose commodities 1. Cor. 2.
no eye has seen, no tongue can tell, no heart can conceive in any point, as
it should. Happy, oh happy were we, if we saw these things accordingely:
God open our eyes to se them. Amens

If any man would desire testimonies of these things, although experience, a
sufficient mistres, is to be credyted: yet will I here mark certain places,
where unto the reader may resort, and find no less then I say, but rather
much more, if that with diligence he read and wey the places. Job the.v.
calls this life a warfare. Job. 5. Job, 8.
In the.vii. chapter he paynteth it out something lively, under diverse
similitudes. Saint James Iaco. 4.
compares it to a vapor. All the book of Ecclesiastes teaches it to be but
vanity. Saint John John. 8. Psalm. 91.
says, it is altogether put in evil. Daniell says, the best thing in this
lif is but vanity, labor and sorrow. But what go I her about How short
transitory and misera
saying that almeste every leaf in the scripture is full of the brevity and
misery of this life? So that The life of man is, the scriptures do every
where declare.
I think as saint Augustine does write, that there is no man yt has lived so
happily in this world, that would be content when death comes, to goo back
again by the same steps, whereby he has come into the world and lived,
except the same be in despair, and look for nothing after this life but
confusion.

Thus I trust you se, yt though the commodities of this life were The brevity,
vanity, and misery of this life, should cause us little to regard it.
such as could cause us to love it: yet the brevity, vanity, and misery of
it is such, as should make us little to regard it, which believe and know
death to be the end of all myseries to them that are in Christ, as we all
ought to take our selves to be, being baptized in his name (for our baptism
requires this faith under pain of damnation) although we have not observed
our profession as we should have done, if so be we now repent, and come to
amendment. To such I say as are in Christ, death is to be desired, even in
respect of this, that it delivers us from so miserable a life, and so
dangerous a state as we now be in. Do that I may well say, they are senseles,
without wyrte, void of love to god, void of al hatted and sense of sin 1.
Pet. 7 Apoc. 7.
(wherewith this life flows) that rather desire not to depart hense out of al
these miseries, the^ here still to remain to their continual grief.

But if these things will not move us, I would yet we beheld: the commodities
whereunto death brings us. If we be not moved to leave this lif in respect of
the miseries, whereof it is full: yet we should be moved to leave The
commodities whereto death brings us, should make us wylling to forsake this
life.
it in respect of the infinite goodness which the other life, whereto death
brings us, has most plentifully, Men, though they love things, yet for
things which are better, can be content to forgo them: even so we now, for
the good things in the lif to come (If we consider them) shall and will be
content to forgo the most commodious things in this present life. Here we
have great pleasure in the beauty of the world, and of the pleasures, honors,
and dignities of the same: also in the company of our friends, parents, wife,
children, subjects: also in pientie of riches, cattle. etc. and yet we know
that never a one of these is without his dyscommoditie, The commodities of this
life mixed with discommodities, lest we should love them to much.
which god sends, lest we should love them to much: as if you will weye
things, you shall easly perceive. The Sun, though it be fair and cherefull,
yet it burns sometimes to whot. The air, though it be light and pleasant,
yet sometimes it is dark and troublous: and so of other things. But be it so,
that there were no discommodities mingled with the commodities: yet (as before
I have said) the brevity and short time that we have to use them, should
assuage their dulcetnes.

But if this were not also, but that the pleasures of this lif were without
discommoditie, permanent, and without peril (whereof they be full) yet are they
nothing at all to be compared to the commodities of the life to come. What is
this earth, heaven, and The pleasures of this life what they are, in comparison
of the pleasure of the life to come.
shape of the world, wherein beasts have place, and wicked men Gods ennemies
have abiding and liberty, in comparison of the new heaven and earth, wherein
righteousness shall dwell? in comparison of that place where Angels and
archangels, and al gods people, yea God him self has his abiding and
dwelling? What is the company of wife, children, etc. in comparison to the
company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, tste Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
martyrs, confessors, virgins and all the saints of God? what is the company
of any in this world, in comparison to the company of the Angels, Archangels,
Cherubins, Zeraphins, powers, thrones, dominations: yea of god the father, god
the son, and god the holyghost? What are the riches and pleasures of this
life, in comparison of the felicity of everlasting lif, which is without all
discommodities, perpetual without all peril and ieoperdie, without all grief
and molestation? Oh the mirth and melody: Oh the honor, and glory: The blessed
state of the life to come.
Oh the riches and bewtye: Oh the power and majesty: Oh the swetenes and
dignity of the life to come. The eye has not seen, the care has not heard,
nor the 1. Co. 2.
heart of man is not able to conceive in any thing, any part of the eternal
felycitie, and happy state of heaven. Therefore the Saints of God have
desired so earnestly and so heartily to be there. Oh how amiable are thy
tabernacles says David? My soul Psalm. 84.
has a desire to enter into yt courts of the Lord: my heart and my The
vehement desire and lo^ging of Goods saints to be dissolved and to be with
god.
soul rejoice in the lyuinge god. Blessed are those yt dwell in thy house,
that they may aiwayes be praising thee: for one day in thy courts is better
then a thousand else where. I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my GOD,
then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness: For the lord god is a light and
defense. And again, as the Heart desires the water brokes, so lo^geth my soul
after thee Psalm. 24.
oh god. My soul is a thyrst for god, yea even for the living god. when shall
I come to appear before the presence of god? And my soul thirsts for thee:
my flesh Psalm. 63.
also lo^geth after thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is. They
(gods people I mean) desire the day of their redemption, and they still cry,
let thy kingdom Roma. 8.
come: they cry, come lord Apoc. 22.
Jesus, come: they lift up their heads, loking for his appearing which will
make their vile bodies like to his own glorious and immortal body: For when
he Philip. 1.
shall appear they shall be like unto him. The angels will gather Math. 24. 1.
These. 4.
them together, and they shall mete him in the clouds, and be always with
him. They shall Math. 2^
hear this joyful voice, come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning. Then shall they be like unto his Angels:
then shall they shine like the Sun in the kingdom: then shall they Apoc. 7.
have crounes of glory, and be endued with white garments of The glory and
felicity of Gods children in the kingdom^ of God. Death ye Haven of eternal
life.
innocence and righteousenes, and palines of victory in their hands. Oh
happy, happy is he that may with them, se that imusrial and incorruptible
inherytaunce, which the^ we shall enjoy for ever.

Thus you se (I hope) sufficiently, that in respect of heaven and eternal
bliss (whereunto by the haven of death we land) this lif, though there were no
evil in it, is not to be loved: but rather we that he pilgrims in it, should
desire with Paul and Simton, to The miseries and dangers we pass, and the
be losed and dissolved, that we might be with god. Here our bodies (as before
is spoken) are in danger of innumerable euilles but there our bodies shall be,
not only without al danger, vutalso be like the glorious and immortal Phil.
3. Mat. 13. Dan. 12. Mat. 17.
body of the lord Jesus christ. Now our bodies be dark: then shall they be
most clear and light, as we se Christ's face did shine in his transfiguration
like to the suane. Now our bodies be vile, miserable, mortal and corruptible,
but then shall they be glorious, happy, immortal and incorruptible. Cor. 15.
Io. 3.
we shall be like unto Christ our savior: even as he is, so shall we be. As we
have borne the image of the earthly, so shall 1. Cor. 15
we bear the image of the heavenly. Here our souls are in great Now folish
and sensles are they which in respect pect of so glorious a state will not
gladly forsake so miserable a life?
dearknes and dangers of many euyls: but there they shall be in great light,
safe security, and secure felicity: we shall se god face face, where now we
se him but as in a glass, through a dark speaking. There shall we behold him
even as he is, and be satisfied without lothsomnes of his presense: yea we
shall be endued with most perfect knowledge. where now we know but partly, there
shall we know as we be known. Here our commodities are measurable, short,
uncertain, and mingled with many incommodyties: but there is mirth without
measure, all liberty, al light, all joy, rejoicing, pleasure, health,
wealth, riches, glory, power, treasure, honor, triumph, comfort, solace,
love, unity, peace, concord, wisdom, virtue, melody, mekenes, felicity,
beatitude, and all that ever can be wysshed or desired, and that in most
security and perpetuity that may be conceived or thought, not only of men,
but also of aungelles, as witnesses he that saw it, (I mean Paul) who was
carried 1. Cor. 2.
up into the third heaven: The eye has not seen (says he) the tare has
not heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the felicity that God
has prepared for them that love him. There the archangels, angels, powers,
thrones, dominions, cherubins, Seraphins, Patriarchs, Prophets, apostles,
martyrs, Virgins, confessors, and ryghteous spirits cease not to singe night
Apo. 44.
and day, Holy, Holy, Holy, lord God of hosts: honor, majesty, glory, impery,
and dominion be unto thee, oh lord God the creator: Oh Lord Jesus the redemer:

(...) O holy spirit the comforter. For the light of the moon shall be as the
The claritie and brightness of Gods children in his kingedome, above the seven
told brightness of the su^^.
light of the sun: and the light of the sun shall be seven fold, even as the
light of seven days in his blessed kingdom, where and when he will vinde up
the wou^des of his people, and heal their plagues. Oh that we might have some
lively sight hereof, that we might rejoice over the undefiled and unmortall
inheritance, whereunto God has called us, and which he does keep for us in
heaven: that we might hear the sweet song of his saved people, crying
salvation be unto him that sits on the throne of our God, and unto the lamb:
that we might* with ye elders and Angels, sing and say: praise and glory, and
wisdom, and thankesgeuing, and honor, and power, and might, be to thee our
god for evermore: that we might be covered with a white stole, and have a
palm in our hands, to stand befort Gods throne night and day, to serve him in
his temple, and to have him dwell in us: that we might hear ye great voice
saying from heaven: behold Apoc. 22.
the tabernacle of the lord is with men, and he will dwell with them and they
shall be his people, and God him self will be with them, their god. Oh happy
were they that now might have a little she we of that holy city, new
Jerusalem, descending from heaven, Apoc. 21.
prepared of god as a bride decked for her husband, which he showed to his
servant saint John. Trewely this should we se if we were with him in the
spirit: but this can not be, so long as we are in the flesh. Alas then and
well away, that we love this life Lack of faith is ye cause whi we do so
little desire to be out of this sinful life.
as we do. It is a sign we have little faith, for else how could we but night
and day desire the messenger of the lord (death I mean) to deliver us out of
all miseries, that we might enter into the fruition of eternal felicity?

But here will some man say: Oh Sir, If I were cerrayn that I should depart
from this miserable An objection procedinge of the sense of sin and reason,
which is an adversary to faith.
life, into that so great felycitie, then could I be right glad and rejoice as
you will me, and bid death welcome: but I am a sinner, I have grievously
transgressed and broken Gods will, and therefore I am afraid I shall be sent
into eternal woe, perdition, and mysery. Here my brother thou do well that
thou do acknowledge thy self a sinner, and to have deserved eternal death:
for doubtless, if we say, we have no sin, we are liars, and the 1. John. 1
truth is not in us. A child of a nights birth, is not pure in gods
syghte. In sin were we Job. 25.
borne, and by birth or na^^re we are the children of wrath, and her brandes of
hell. Therefore confess our selves to be sinners, we needs must. For if the
lord will observe any man's iniquiries, none shall be able to abide it, yea we
must needs all cry: enter not into judgment, O Lord, for in Psalm. ^^^ Psalm.
141
thy syghte no flesh, nor man living can be saved. In this point therefore
thou have done well to confess that thou art a sinner.

But now, where thou stantest in doubt of pardon of thy sins Three things
where by the afflicted conscience may be assured of pardon and forgeuenes.
and thereby art afraid of damnation, my dear brother, I would have thee
answer me one question: that is, whether thou desire pardon or no: whether
thou do repent or no: whether thou do unfeignedly purpose, if thou
sholdest live, to amend thy life or no. If thou do even before god so
purpose, and desire his mercy, then harken (my good brother) what the lord
says unto thee: I am he, I am he, that for my Esaias. 43.
own sake will do away thine offenses. If thy sins be as Esaias. 1.
red as scarlet, they shall be made as white as show, for I have no pleasure in
the death of a sinner. As surely as I live, I will not Ezech. 33
thy death, but rather yt thou sholdest live and be converted. I have so loved
the world that I would not spare my dearelye beloved Son, the Image of my
substance, John. 3.
and brightness of my glory, by whom all things were given: but gave him for
thee, not only to be man, but also to take thy nature, and to purge it from
mortality, sin, and al corruption, and to adorn and endewe it with
immortality and eternal glory, not only in his own person, but also in thee,
and for the: where of now by faith I would have thee certain, as in very deed,
thou shalt at length feel and fully enjoy for ever. This my son I Philip.
2.
have given to the death, and that a must shameful death even of the cross
for thee, to destroy death, to satisfy my justice for thy sins: therefore
believe, and according to thy faith so be it unto the. Harken what my son
himself says unto thee: Come unto me al Math. 11
ye that labor, and are laden, and I will refreshe you. I came not into the
world to damme the John. 3.
world, but to save it. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners Luke. 5.
to repentance. I pray not (says he) for these mine Apostles only, but also
for all them that by their John. 15.
preachi^g, shall believe in me. Now what prayed he for such? Father (says he)
I will that where I am, they may also be, that they may see and enjoy the
glory I have and always had with thee. Father save them and keep them in thy
truth. Father (says he) I sanctify my self, and offer up my self for them.

Lo, thus thou hear how my son prays for thee. Mark now what my
Apostle Paul says: we know (says he) that Heb. 5.
our Savior Christ's prayers were heard. Also this is a true saying that
Jesus Christ came 1. Tim. 1.
into the world to save sinners. Harke^ what he says to ye Iaylor: believe in
the Lord Jesus and Act. 16. Heb. 9.
thou shalt be saved: For he by his own self, has made purgacio^ for our
sins. To him (says Act. 8.
Peter) bears all the prophets witness, that whosoever believes in his name
shall receive remission of their sins. Believe man, pray, Lord help mine
unbelief, lord Mark. 6. Luke. 17.
increase my faith, ask and thon shall have. Harken what s. John says. If we
confess our sins, 1. John. 1
God is righteous to forgive us al our iniquities, and the blood of our lord
Jesus Christ shall wash us from our sins. For if we sin, we have an advocate
(says he) with the father, Jesus christ the 1. John. 2
righteous, and he is the propiciation for our sins, Harken what Christ is
called: Call his name Jesus, says the Angel, for he shall Luke. 1.
save his people from their sins: So that where abundance of sin Romans 5
is, there is abundaunce of grace. Say therefore, who shall lay any thing to my
charge? It is god yt absolueth me, who then shall condemn Romans 8.
me? It is Christ which is dead for my sins, yea which is risen for my
righteousenesse, and sits on the right hand of the father and prays for
me. Be certain therefore and sure of pardon of thy sins: be certain and sure
of everlasting life. Do not now say in thy heart, who shall descend into the
deep? that is, dobute not of pardon of thy sins, for that is to fetch up
Christ again: neither Romans 10.
say thou, who shall ascend up in to heaven? that is, doubt not of eternal
bliss, for that is to put Christ out of heaven. But mark what the lord says
unto thee: the word is nighe thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart, and this
is the word of faith which we preach: If thou confess with thy mouth that
Jesus Christ is the lord, and believe with thy heart that God raised him up from
ye dead, thou shall be safe. If thou believe that Jesus Christ died and rose
again, even so shall thou be assured (says the lord god) that dieng with
christ, I will bring thee again with him. 1. These. 4.


Thus dear brother, I thought good to write to thee in ye name of the Lord,
that thou fearinge death for nothing else but because of thy sins, might be
assured of pardon of them, and so embrace death as a dear friend, and insulte
against his terror, stinge, and power, saying: death where is thy stinge? hell
where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. The greatest dishonor to god is, to dout of
his mercy.
Nothing in all the world so displeases the lord as to doubt of his
mercy. In the mouth of two or three witnesses, we should be content. Therefore
in that thou haste heard so many witnesses, how that in deed, desiring mercy
with the Lord, thou art not sent empty a way: give credit thereto, and say
with the good Virgin Marye, behold thy servant (Oh Lord) be it unto me Luke.
1. in ye word only, we behold gods love and favor toward us, and therefore
we should give credit to it against al our sense, reason, and judgment.
according to thy word. Upon the which word, see thou set thine eye only and
wholly: For otherwise, here thou see not god thy father but i^ his word,
which is ye glass wherein now we behold his grace and fatherly love toward us
in Christ, and therefore herewith we should be content, and give more credit to
it then to all our lenses, and to all the world besides. John. 12
The word (says our Savior) shall judge. According to it therefore, and not
according to any exterior or interior show, judge both of thy self and of al
other things else. Concerning thy self: if thou desire in deed Gods mercy, and
lamentest that thou have offended, lo it pronounces yt there is mercy with
the lord for thee, and plenteous redemption. Psalm. 130
It tells thee which would have mercy at ye lords hand, that the Lord
wills the same, and therefore thou art happy for he would not thy death. It
tells thee that if thou acknowledge thy faults unto the lord, he will cover
them in his mercy. Again, concerning death, it Death what it is by ye word
of god.
tells thee that it is but a sleep: that it is but a passinge unto thy
father: that it is but a deliver a^ce out of misery: that it is but a putting
of of mortality and corruption: that it is s putting on of immortality and
incorruption: that it is a putting a way of an earthy tabertabernacle, 2. Cor. 5
that thou may receive an heavenly house or ma^sio^: that this is but a
calling of the home from the watching and standing in the warfare of this
miserable life. According to this ((...) word I mean) do thou judge of death,
and thou shall not be afraid of it, but desire it as a most wholesome medecin
and a friendly messenger of the lords justice and mercy. Embrace him therefore:
make him good chere, for of al enemies he is the least. In ennemy quod I? nay
rather of all friends he is the best, for he brings thee out of all danger
of ennemies, into ye most sure and safe place of thy unfeigned friend for ever.

Let these things be often thought whi death ought to be premeditate and
thought often upon
upon. Let death be premeditated, not only because he comes vncerteinly (I
mean for the time, for else he is most certain) but al so because he helps
much to the contempt of this world: out of ye which, as nothing will go with
thee, so nothing canste thou take with thee: because it helps to ye
mortifying of the flesh, which when thou fedeste, thou do nothing else but
feed worms: because it helps to the well disposing and due ordering of the
things thou haste in this life: because it helps to repentance: to bring
thee unto the knoweledge of thy self, that thou art but earth and ashes, and
to bring thee the more better to know God. But who is able to tell the
commodities that come by the often and true consideration of death? whose time
is therefore left unto us uncertain and unknown (although to god Job. 14.
it be certain, and the bounds there of not only known, but appointed of the
Lord, over the which none can pass) because we should not prolonge and put of
from day to day ye amendment of our life, as did the rich man, under hope
Luke. 12.
of long life. And saying it is the ordinance of god, and comes not but by
the will of god, even unto a sparrow, much more then unto us, which are
inco^parably much more dear the^ many sparowes: and in that this will of god is
not only just but also good (for he is our Father) let us, if there were
nothing else but this, submit our selves, our senses, and judgments unto the
pleasure of him, being content to come out of the room of our souldership,
whenever he shall send for us by his purseuant death. Let us render unto him,
that which he has lent us so long (I mean life) least we be ^ounted
unthankful. And in that death comes not but by sin, in that we have sinned
so often and yet the Lord has ceased from exacting this tribute and
punishment of us until this present: let us with thankefulnes praise his
patience, and pay our det, not doubting but that he being our father and our
almighty father, can and will, if death were evil unto us (as god knowech it
is a chief benefit unto us by Christ) convert and turn it into good. But
death being (as before I have showed) not to be dred, but to be desired: let
us lift up our heads in thinking Luke. 11.
on it, and know that our redemption draws nigh. Let our The.iiij. last
Artycles of the faith often to be meditate and thought upon.
minds be occupied in the consyderation, or often coutemplation of the four
last articles of our belief: yt is the communion of saints, or the holy
catholic Church: remission of sins: resurrection of the fleash: and the life
everlasting.

By faith in Christ, be it never so saint, little or cold, we are members in
very deed of the catholic and holy church of Christ: that is, we have
communion or feloweship with all the saints of God that ever were, be, or
shall be. Whereby we may receive great comfort: For though our faith be feeble,
yet the Churches faith (whereof our Savior Christ is the head) is mighty
enough: though our repentance be littel, yet the repentance of ye church,
wherewith we have communion, is sufficient: though our love be languishinge, yet
the love of the church and of the spouse of the church, is ardent: and so of al
other things we want. Not that I mean this as though any man should think
that our faith should be in any or upon any other, then only upon god the
Father, the son, and the holy ghostener there that any shonide think I mean
thereby any other merits or mean to salvation, then only the merits and name
of the lord Jesus: but that I would the pore christian conscience, which by
baptism is brought into gods church and made a member of the same through faith,
should not for his sins sake, or for the want of any No sin or want of
any thing, what so ever it be, should cause us to despair of Gods final
favor and mercy.
thing he has not, despair: but rather should know that he is a member of
Chrisses church and mistical body, and therefore cannot but have communion and
fellowship of both that is of Christ himself being the lord, husband, and head
thereof, and of all that ever has been, be, or shall be members of it, in all the
good things that ever they have had, have, or shall have. Still does the church
pray for us by Christ's commandment: forgive us our sins, lead us not into
temptation, deliver us from evil: yea Christ himself does pray for us, being
members of vys body (as we us in deed) if that we believe, though it be never
so litel. God grant this faith unto us al, and increase it in us. Amen. Out of
this church no Pope nor prelate can cast us, or excommunicate us in deed,
although exteriourly they segregate us from the society of gods saints. But
enough of this.

As I would have us often to muse upon the catholic Church or co^muniu^ of
saints) whereof we That we are partakers of this communion and fellowship we
may not doubt being receued there unto by baptysme.
may not doubt, in what state so ever we be, under pain of damnation, being
baptized in the name of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost:) so would I
have us to meditate upon the other artycles following: that is, remission of
sins: resurrection of the fleash: and life everlasting. It is an article of
our faith to believe: that is, to be certain, yt our sins are pardoned:
therefore doubt not thereof, lest thou become an Infideil. Though thou have
sinned never None so great or grenous a sinner but there is mercy for him with
the Lord.
so sore, yet now despair not, but be certain that god is thy God: that is,
that he forgeueth thee thy sin. Therefore (as I said) dout not thereof, for in
so doing thou put a sallet on the head of thy soul, that the dew of gods
grace can not in deed drop into it, but Cantic. 5
slip by as fast as it droppeth. Therefore without that sallet or soul
nightecap be bareheaded: that is, hope still in the mercy of the Lord, and so
mercy shall compass thee on every side.

In like manner, the article of the resurreiction of the flesh, have often in
thy mind, being assured by this, that thy carcass and body shall be raised up
again in the last day when the Lord shall come to judgment, and shall be made
incorruptable, immortal, glorious, spiritual, perfect, light, and even like to
the glorious body of our Savior Jesus christ: for he is the first fruytes of
(...) Philip. 3
dead, and as god is all in all, so shall he be unto thee in Christ. Look
therefore upon thine own estate: for as he is so shall thou be. As thou have
borne ye image of the earthly Adam, so shalt thou 1. Cor. 15
bear the Image of the heavenly: therefore glorify thou now god, both in
soul and body. Wayt and look for this day of the lord with groaning and
sighing. Gather together testimonies of this which I do omit for times sake.

Last of all, have often in thy mind, life everlasting, whereunto thou art
even landinge. Death is the haven that caryeth thee unto this land: where is
all that can be wished, yea above all wishes and desires: for in it we shall
see god face to face, which thing now Exodus 34
we can in no wise do, but must cover our faces with Boyses and Heltas, till
the face or foreparts of ye lord be gone by. Now must we look on his back
parts, beholding him in his word, and in his creatures, and in the face of
Jesus Christ our mediatoure: but then we shall se him face to face, and 1. Cor.
13
we shall know, as we are known. Therefore let us often think on these
things, yt we may have faith, lustely and cherefully to arrive at the happy
haven of death, which you se is to be desired, and not to be dread, to all
those that are in Christ, that is, to such as to believe in deed: which are
discerned from those that only say they do believe, by dyeng te^porally, that
is by laboring to mortify Roma. 6.
through gods spirit, the affections of the flesh: not yt they should not be in
the^, but that they should not reign in the^, that is in their mortal bodies,
to give ever them selves to serve sin: whose servant we are not, but are
made sernauntes unto righteousness, being now under grace and not under the
law, and therefore has god mercifully promised that sin shall not reign in
us:

The which he continually grant for his truth, power, and mercies sake

Amen.
A meditation
A Meditation concerning ye kingdom of Christ, and that it is no corporal
thing, as the Jews and Anababtistes do feign: to who^ ye Papists (in manner)
assent, making the church so glorious and gay a dame, far unlike to be
christ's Spouse: who was here on earth in no such felicity and worldly glory,
as their church is. They make more of the good wise then of the good men, and
therefore set forth to us a strumpet for Christ's spouse.

OPen mine eyes dear lord, to see thy kingdom, for it is spiritual, and of
carnal eyes simply cannot be considered, and therefore less ought we to
marvel to see it contempned, and the children thereof persecuted: ye most part
of men, and specially ye great men of the world being carnal and not
spiritual, although by title many be called so. Give me thy light to see,
that thy kingdom (O christ) is thy sitting on the right hand of thy father
and ours, and thy interpellation and mediation for us, and also thy giving of
pardon and forgeuenes of sins, and the holy sprite to thy church, that is,
such as believe in thee and call upon god the father through confidence in thee:
and hereto, thy sanctifyinge of of them, that thou may raise the^ up in ye
last day, to life and glory everlasting. Grant me to know, yt for the
atteining of al these been fits (which be the liberties and priuilegies of thy
kingedome) thou haste ordained ye ministry of thy gospel and sacraments,
thereby to call and bring men to ye knowledge of thy father and thee, which is
eternal life. Grant yt I may feel in my self lively and co^fortably ye
efficacy and virtue of thy holy ghost, which is effectual by ye ministry and
word. And lest afflictions should dismay me, and ye company of evil me^ mingled
with the godly, overthrow me or offend me: grant yt I may not only know how yt
thy church and the true children thereof shall in this world until ye last day,
suffer persecution, and that gotes will be amongst the sheep, until the day of
judgment: but also yt I may in affliction rejoice and glorifye thy holy name,
being preserved always from ye council of the ungodly, from the way of the
wicked, and from the seat of the scorneful: to delight in thy law night and
day, to be made spiritual and to have the benefit of thy kingdom and priest
hode, which be both spiritual, preserving thy people from ye tyranny of sin
and Satan, although in this life y^ permit their enemies to vex the^, to thy
further glory and their increase in repentance and and godliness: which give
unto me and increase in me for thy holy names sake.

Amen.
Scriptures proving Christ's kingdom to be spiritual.
My kingdom is not of this world. Thou have given John. 18.
him power over all flesh, that how many soever thou haste given unto him, he
might give to John. 17
ye same everlasting life. What is it? any worldly policy? no: therefore it
follows: and this is everlasting life, yt they may know thee Romans 8. Esaias. 12.
to be the only true God, and whom thou did send Jesus Christ, which
sits on the right hand of god and prays for us. The rote Esaias. 11.
of Iesse shall stand up and ye gentiles shall make their prayers unto him. etc.
By these two sentences we may see Christ's kingdom and priesthode to be
spiritual, and no polytike regimente. He prays for us to his father, and so
raygneth that he will be called upon, will hear us, satisfy us, and keep us
with his holy spirit, as gods children: for they are led by the spirit of
God: in their hearts he will write his law etc. which benefits let us look for,
and no corporal kingdom. We are fellow heirs with Christ. If so be we do
suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. We are saved by hope. For thy
sake we are killed all the day long. In this world Psalm. 44.
you shall have affliction. Al yt will live godly in christ must suffer per John.
16. 2. Tim. 3
secution. And many places there be, which teach us ye the glory of Christ's
kingdom is no worldly dominion or power, but a spiritual thing, that we should
be resuscitated and have a new and an eternal life, righteousness and glory,
eue^ such as Christ has. Besides this Paul tells yt Antechrist shall 2.
These. 2
bear rule in the Church, until Christ come to judgment: then shall he
destroy his kingdom. So yt the true church of Christ shall not have worldely
dominion and kingedome, but rather be persecuted, and especially toward
thence of the world, as Peter tells, yt as there was before Christ's coming
1. Peter 2
in ye church, false prophets, and the regiment was with the adversaries which
bear the name of ye church, under the whch they destroyed ye church: so shall
it be in the church after Christ's time. There will be (says he) many false
teachers which will deceane not a few or the fewer part, but many and the
greater part, as now the Papists have done almost all Christendom. Again he
says yt there will come mockers, which will make a mock of religion, so that
the church cannot but be persecuted. Daniel plainly shows 1. Dan. 7
yt the beasts, that is the empires of ye world: shall be cast into ye fire,
when Christ shall come to judgment: so yt some wicked Empires shall continue
until the last day. The true Church of Christ is careful for inward beauty,
as it is written of the kings daughter: whereas the papistical church nothing
Psalm. 45.
passes thereof, but altogether cares for external gear.

So says our Papists in England: Come to the church and do as other men do
outwardly, and kept your conscience to your selves.

Scryptures prouinge that in Christ's Church upon earth there shall be good and
bad mingled until the day of judgment.
AS it was in the days of Lot, so shall it be in the coming etc. In ye night
there Luke. 17 Math. 13
shall be two in one bed, one shall be taken etc. Let them (the tares amongst the
Corn he means) grow together until the harvest. The Harueste is the end of
the world: then the son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather all offense geuers out of his kingedome, and those which work
wickedness. So shall it go in the end of the world: the Angels shall go forth,
and separate the evil from the righteous, and cast them into the furnace of
fire. By these sentences we may see ye Hypocrites shall be mingled with the godly
until the day of judgment.

Whereas the Anabaptists do cite the Prophets, who speaking of Christ's
kingedome, use often figures and similitudes of worldly Empires, that by
temporal and visible things we may arise to a deep consideration of
spiritual and eternal things in christ's king dome, let us learn so to do:
and again let us know, that the Gospel is the exposition of the
Prophets, and therefore those corporal metaphors in the Prophets, paynting
forth the kingdom of Christ, must be interpreted according to the Gospel,
which teaches clearly Christ's kingdom to be a spiritual and no temporal
thing, as before is showed. Esaias. 53.


Moreover the Prophets even them selves do plainly show Christ's kingdom to
be a spyrituall thing. Do the not Daniell Daniel. 9
say that Christ shall be killed? And Esaye also, does not he say that
Christ shall give his life for sin? So that we may see no affirmation of
corporal dominion here on earth in this life. Besides this, the Prophets do
affirm also Christ's kingdom to be eternal, and therefore cannot be
temporal. Figures and Metaphors can be no otherwise the^ Allegorically
understood. I need not to tell how that the prophets use to speak of
Christ's kingdom, that they do not dyscerne the times of this life and of the
life to come, because Christ's eternal kyngedome is begone in spirit and
faith in this life, and afterward endures for ever. How be it some times,
and often they do otherwise, and plainly show that Christ's kyngedome and
Church shall suffer persecution in this life, as in the. 2. Psalm. and Psalm. 115.
precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. And Psalm. 72.
Esaias. 30. Daniel. 12.

That there is an everlasting life, where it is, and what knowledge and
understanding thereof may be had in this life.
THat there is an everlasting life, none will deny but such as will deny God.
For if he be true and just (or else he is not God) then can there not be but
an eternal life. That he has both spoken it and. promised it in Math 25. 1.
Cor. 15. Hebre. 4. 11. 13. 1. Peter. 1. it apereth, and else where in very many
places. So that to deny an everlasting life, is to deny God, to deny Christ,
and all that ever he did: also to deny all pity and religion: to condemn of
folyshnes all good men, Martyrs, Confessors, Evangelists, Prophets,
Patriarchs. Su^ina, the denial of eternal life is nothing else, but a denial
of the immortality of the Soul, and so a plain making of man nothing better
then beasts. If it be so, let us then eat and drink, for to 1. Cor. 16
morrow we shall die. Lord deliver us from this Sadduceal and Epicureal
impiety, and grant us for thy mercies sake (dear God) that we may be
assuredly persuaded that there is in deed an eternal life and bliss with thee
for the^ that put their trust in thee: amongst whom account me for thy
mercies sake.

Again, this eternal life, Where this eternal life is
and the place appointed for them that be thy servants, all men do grant to
be with thee. Not, because thou art every where, they do therefore think
so of eternal life that it is every where. For they by thy word do know, that
in as much as no 1 John. 4
man can see thee and live, this eternal life and thy blessed presence is
most pleasant and had in fruition after in an other world, whereunto by
corporal death they do depart, and are translated to a place above them, where
thou dwelleste in a light where unto no man can approach. Abraham's 1. Tim. 6
wsome (they read) was above, as the place for the wicked was allow and
beneath. Helias was caught up into heaven: and thy sone our dear savior
prayed, that where he is, those also might be which thou had given him, and
might see his glory. Now he (dear father) we learn by thy spirit, was
asceuded and taken up in his very body into heaven, whether Steueu looked up
and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand, to whom he prayed: Oh Lord
Jesus receive my Act. 8. 7
Spirit. Grant I beseech thee gracious God and father, that I may have a
clean heart more and more to see thee, and so in spirit to see and look upon
often this place: whether bring me at the length in body also, I humbly pray
thee.

Now, what a thing this everlasting What manner of thing this everlasting life
is.
life is, no man is hable to conceive, much less hable to utter: For the peace
of God which is eternal life, passes all understanding. The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, neither can man's heart conceive those thin ges,
which thou (dear god) haste 1. Cor. 2.
prepared for them that love thee. whatsoever therefore can be spoken or
imagined of thy kingdom, of the clerenes, joy, and felicitye of the same, is
nothing in comparison: as we may see by thy Prophets, which (because they
could not otherwise) under corporal things have shadowed the same. So that the
confidence of eternal life, what a thing it is, can in no wise be told. How
ve it, somewhat we may be brought into some sight of it by earthly things,
to think on this sort: If God have given here so many things in a strange
place, how many are the great good things that be at home? if in a prison are
so many mercies, how many are they in the palace? If the wicked have so many
benefits, what is ye store prepared for thy servants, Oh Lord? if thy
children find such comforts in ye day of tears and mourninge, what shall
they find in the day of the marriage? If with beasts men being have ye use of
so innumerable blessings, oh how many are the blessings which they shall
enjoy with thy Angels, and with thee thy self (O dear God) when they shall
see thee, and have the fruition of thee, in whom is fulness without lothing of
all good and fair things: so that nothing can be more desited, and that for
evermore?

This thy Children do not so see, as they now believe it: I say that eue^ in
their bodies they shall see it for ever, as Job said: They Job. 19.
believe that they shall see thee and their own eyes behold thee, when these our
corporal eyes, our bodies being raised, shall do their duties. Such a
knowledge of thee they believe to have, as shall not be only intellectual and
by faith, as now it is: but even a full sight and fruition, yea a coniunctio^
and fellowship with thee. Now they see but in a glass, even in a 1. Cor. 13
dark speaking: but then they shall see face to face. For faith though it be the
substance of things hoped for, and a certain dark sight Heb. 11
of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith, and glorious
sight which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope shall cease,
Now thy children 1. John. 3
know that they be thy sons, though it yet appear not what they shall be,
we know (say they) that when our Christ God and man shall apeare, then shall we
be like unto him, for we shall see him even as he is. Oh great prerogative to
see Christ as he is: which is not to be considered so much for the manhod, as
for the Godheade it self: as Paul does also write, that when all things are
subject unto the son, then shall 1. Cor. 19
he be subject unto thee (dear father) allo, that God may be all in all. And
therefore Christ our Savior prayed for us, that we might know thee the only
true God. Not that our Christ thy Son, is not with thee the true coequal and
substancial God: but that we might know how that after the judgment, such a
mystery of his mediatorship shall not be in heaven as is now in earth. The^
thou blessed trinity, God the father, God the son, and God the holy ghost,
shall be al in all: thou shalt be the end of our desires: thou shall be looked
upon without end: thou shall be loved without lothing: thou shalt be praised
without werines. Although lothsomnes be wont to follow fulness, yet our
fulness in the contemplacio^ of thy pleasurs, shall bring with it no kind at all
of lothsomnes. Sacietie of joys Psalm. 16.
shall be in the beholdinge of thee: pleasures are in thy right hand for
ever: we shall be satisfied when we arise after thine Image, I Psalm. 17.
mean, in the resurrection. Oh dear Father, show thy self un to us and we
ask no more. Oh grant us with thy Saints in everlasting life, to praise
with perpetual praises, thy holy name. Happy then and happy again were we, if
that day were come, that we might singe with thy Angels, elders, and
innumerable thousands, a new song and say: thou christ Jesus which waste
Apoca. 5.
slain, art worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. In this blessed life al kind of maladyes,
griefs, sorrows and euilles be far away, and all full of all kind of
mirthe, joy, and pleasure. Oh that we might see now a little with S. John
that holy City new Jerusalem discending from heaven, prepared of GOD as a
bryde trunmed for her husband. Oh that we might now something hear the
great voice speaking out of the throne: behold the tabernacle of GOD is with
men, and he will dwell with them, Apoc. 21
and they shall be his people, and he shall be unto them their God: he will wype
away all tears from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor wepinge nor
crying, nor sorrow, for the former things are gone.

A Meditacion of the blessed state and felicity of the life to come.
THis body is but a prison wherein ye soul is kept, and that verily not
beautiful and bright, but dark and most dirtie, disquiet and fusty, frail,
and filled up with much vermin and venomous vipers (I mean it concerning our
affaccions) standing in an air most unwholesome, and prospect most loathsome, if
a man consider the excrements of it by the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hands,
feet and all the other partis. So that no bocardo, no little ease, no dungeon,
no bishops prison, no gate house, no sink, no pit may be compared in any
point, to be so evil a prison for the body, as the body is for and of the
soul. whereby the children of God have been occasioned to cry, and lament
their long being in it. Oh says David, how long shall I lie in this prison?
Oh wretch that I am, says Paul, who shall deliver me out of this body of
sin? Romans 7.
which is an heavy burden unto ye soul, as ye wise man says. And therefore
the godly cry, now let thy servant depart in peace: Oh Luke. 2.
that I were dissolved and had put of this earthly and frail tabercle: Take me
unto thee, and bring my soul out of this prison, Psalm 142
that it may give thanks unto thee, O Lord. For so long as we be in this body,
we cannot see the Lord: yea it is an heavy habitation, and depresseth down
sore the spirit from the familiarity, which it else should have with God.

This world and life is an exile, a vale of miserye, a wilderness, of it self
being void of all virtues and necessaries for eternal life, and full of
enemies, sorows, sighings, sobbinges, groninges, miseryes, etc. In danger to
hunger, cold, heat, thirst, sores, sickness, temptations, troubles, death, and
innumerable calamities: being momentanie, short, unstable, and nothing but
vain, and therefore is compared to a warfare, a womans travail, a shadow, a
smoke, a vapor, a word, a storm, a tempest, in the which Gods people feel
great molestations, grefes, and troubles, now of Satan himself, now of the
world, now of their own flesh, and that so wonderfully, diversely,
daungerously, and contrarily, that they are enforced to cry: Oh Lord when shall
we come and appear before thee? When shall this misery end? when shall we be
delivered out of this vale of misery? out of this wyldernes? out of this
continual affliction and most perilous seas?

But where thou art (Oh lord and dear father of mercy) there is not only no
prison, no dolors, no sorrow, no sighings, no tears, no sickness, no hunger, no
heat, no cold, no pain, no temptations, no displeasure, no malice, no pride,
no uncleanness, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sin, no filth,
stink, dearth, death no weping, tears, misery, myschiefe: There is (I say) not
only no such thing or any evil, noisome, or displesaunt thing: but al
liberty, all light, all plesantnes, al joy, rejoicing, mirth, pleasure,
pastime, health, wealth, riches, glory, power, treasure, honor, triumphh,
comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord, wisdom, virtue, melodye,
mekenes, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can be wished or desired, in
most security, eternity, and perpetuity yt may be thought, not only of man,
but of Angels and Archangels, yea above all thoughts. The eye 1. Cor. 2.
has not seen the like, the ear has not heard it, nor no heart is able to
conceive in any point, any part of the blisseful beatitude, which is with thee
most dear God and father, most dear lord and savior, most gracious good
God and comforter, where thou art (O blessed God) The Archa^gels, Angels,
thrones, powers, Dominations, Cherubi^s, Ceraphins, Patriarchs, prophets,
apostles, martyrs, virgins, confessors, and ryghteous spirits, Apoca. 4
cease not to singe night and day holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts:
honor, majesty, glory, power, empire and dominion be unto thee, Oh God the
creator, Oh Lord Jesus the redeiner, Oh Apoca. 5.
holy spirit the comforter.

In recordation of this, oh how thy Children rejoice: how contemn they the
pleasures of this world? how little esteem they any corporal grief or
shame? how desire they to be with thee? How amiable are thy tabernacles, Oh
Lord God of Hosts, Psalm. 84.
(say they:) my soul has a desire to enter into the Courts of the Lord: my
heart and my soul rejoices in the living God: blessed are they that dwell in
thy house, they yt may always be praising thee. For one day in thy courts is
beter the^ a thousand else where. I had rather be a bore keeper in the house of
my God, then to dwell in the tents of vngonlynes: for the Lord God is a light
and defense. And again, like as Psalm. 24.
ye heart desires ye water brokes, so longs my soul after thee, oh god: my
soul is a thirst for god, yea even for the living god. When shall I come to
appear before the Psalm. 13.
prsence of god? My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also lo^geth after thee
in a barren and dry land, where no water is. They (thy children I mean O lord)
desire the day of that their redemption: they still cry, let thy kingedome
Roma. 8.
come: they cry, come lord Jesus: they lift up their heads, lokynge Apoc. 22.
for thy apearing (oh lord) which will make their vile body like to Philip. 3.
thine own glorious and immortal body: for when thou shall appear, they
shall be like unto thee. Math 14
Thy Angels will gather them together, and they shall meet thee in the
clouds, and be always with thee. They shall hear this Math 25
joyful voice: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared
for you, from the begin Math. 12
ning. Then shall they be like to thy Angels. Then shall they be Math. 13
like unto the Sun in thy king dome. The^ shall they have crowns of glory,
and be endewed with white garments of innocence and Apoc. 7.
righteousenes, with palms of victory in their hands. Oh happy is he that may
but see that immortal and incorruptible inheritance, which they shall enjoy
for evermore.

Amen.
A short introduction to the understanding of the Scriptures, conteininge the
sum of all the Diuitie necessary for a Christian conscience.
By John Bradford.
A Man that is regenerate and borne of God (the which thing yt every one of
us do beeleue, our baptism the Sacrament of regeneration does require under
pain of dampnation, and therefore let every one of us with the virgin Mary say,
be it unto me O Lord according to thy word, according to thy sacrament of
baptism, wherein thou have declared our adoption: and let us lament the dowting
hereof in us, striving against it as we shall be made able of the Lord) a man I
say, that is regenerate, co^ sisteth of two me^ (as a man may say) namely of
the old man and of the new man. The old man is like to a mighty Giant, such
a one as was Goliath, for his birth is now perfect. But the new man is like
unto a little child, such a one as was Dauide, for his birth is not yet
perfect until the day of his general resurrection.

The old man therefore is more stronger, iusty, and stirring, then is the new
man, because the birth of the new man is but begone now, and the old man is
perfectly borne. And as the old man is more stirringe, lustye, and stronger
the^ ye new man: so is ye nature of him clean contrary to ye nature of ye new
man, as being earthly and corrupt with Satan's sede, ye nature of ye new man being
heavenly and blessed with the celestial seed of god. So that one man, in as
much as he is corrupt with the seed of the serpente, is an old man: and in as
much as he is blessed with the seed of God from above, he is a new man. And
as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a sinner and an enemy to god: so in
as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous, and help, and a friend to God,
the seed of God preserui^g him from sin, so that he cannot sin, as the
seed of the serpente, wherewith he is corrupt even from his co^ception,
inclines him, yea enforces him to sin and nothing else but to sin. So
that the best part in man before regeneration, in Gods sight, is not only an
enemy, but enmity it self.

One man therefore which is regenerate, well may be called always just, and
always sinful: just in respect of Gods seed, and his regeneration: sinful in
respect of Satan's seed and his first birth. Betwixt these two men therefore,
there is continual conflicte and war most deadly. The flesh and old man by
reason of his birth that is perfect, does often for a time, prevail against
ye new man (being but as a child in comparison) and that in such sort, as not
only other, but eue^ the children of God themselves think that they be
nothing else but old, and that the sprit and seed of God is lost and gone away,
Psalm. 77
where yet notwithstanding the the truth is otherwise, the spirit and the seed
of god at the length appearing again, and dispelling away the clouds, which
cover the son of gods seed from shininge, as the clouds in the air do ye
corporal son: so that some times a man cannot tell by any sense, that there
is any son, the clouds and winds so hiding it from our siht: Even so our
cecitie or blindness and corrupt affections
do often shadow the sight of Gods seed in Gods children, as though they were
plain reprobates, whereof it comes, that they praying according to their
sense, but not according to the truth, desire of god to give them again his
spirit, as though they had lost it and he had taken it away. Which thing God
never does in deed, although he make us to think so for a time: for always
he holds his hand under his children in their faules, that they lie not still
as other do which are not regenerate. And this is the difference betwixt Gods
Children which are regenerate, and elect before all times in Christ, and the
wicked cast awayes, that the elect lie not still continually in their sin as
do the wicked, but at the length do return again by reason of gods seed,
which is in them hid as a sparkle of fire in the ashes: as we may see in
Peter, David, Paul, Marye Magdalin

and others.

For these (I mean Gods Children) God has made all things in Christ Jesus: to
whom he has given this dignity, yt they should be his inheritance and spouses.

This our inheretour Christ Jesus, GOD with God, light of light, coeternal and
consubstanciall with the father and with the holy Ghost, to the end that he
might become our husband (because the husband and the wife must be one body
and flesh) has taken our nature upon him, communicating with it and by it in
his own person, to us all his children, his divine majesty, as Peter says,
and so is become 2. Pet. 1.
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones substancially: as we are become
flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones spiritually, all that ever we have
pertaining to him yea even our sins: as all that ever he has, pertains unto
us, even his whole glory. So that if Satan should so^mon us to answer for our
dettes or sins, in that the wife is no suitable person but the husband, we
may well bid him enter his action against our husband Christ, and he will make
him a sufficient answer.

For this end (I mean that we might be coupled and married thus to Christ, and
so be certain of salvation and at godly peace with god in our consciences) god
has gegeuen his holy word, which has two parts (as now the children of God
do consiste of two men) one part of gods word being proper to ye old man, and
the other part of Gods word being proper to the new man. The part properly
perteining to the old man is the law: the part properly perteining to the new
man is the gospel.

The law is a doctrine which commands and forbids, requiring doing and
avoiding. Under it therefore are contained al precepts, threatenings, promises
upon conditions of our doing and avoiding etc. The Gospel is a doctrine which
always offreth and gives, requiring on our behalf, not as of worthiness or as
a cause but as a cerificat unto us, and therefore under it is contained all the
free and sweet promises of god: as I am the lord thy god etc.

In those that be of years of discretion, it requires faith, not as a cause,
but as an instrument whereby we our selves may be certain of our good husband
Christ, and of his glory: and therefore when the conscience feleth it self
dysquieted for fear of Gods judgment
against sin, she may in no wise look upon the doctrine perteyninge to the
old man, but to the doctrine only that perteyneth to the new man, in it not
loking for that which it requires, yt is Faith, because we never believe as we
should: but only on it which it offreth, which it gives yt is, on gods grace
and eternal mercy and peace in Christ. So shall she be in quiet, when she
looks for it altogether out of her self in Gods mercy in Christ Jesus: in
whose lap if she lay her head with saiut John, then is she happy and shall
find quietness in deed. when she feleth her self quyete, then in Gods name let
her look on the law and upon such things as it requires, thereby to brydel
and keep down the old Adam, to slay that Goliath, from whom she must needs
keep the sweet promises, being the bed wherein her spouse and she mete and
lie together, as the wife will keep her bed only for her husband, although in
other things she is contented to have fellowship with others, as to speak,
sit, eat, drink, go, etc. So our consciences, which are Christ's wives, must
needs keep the bed, that is, Gods sweet promises, alonly for our selves and
our husband, there to meet together, to embrace and laugh together, and to be
joyful together. If sin, the law, the devil, or any thing would crepe into
the bed and lie there, then complain to thy husband Christ, and forth with
thou sahlte see him play Phinees part. Thus my dearly beloved, I have given
you in few words a sum of all the Divinity which a christian conscience
can not want.

A Prayer, which Ihon Bradford said a little before his death in Smithfelde
Merciful God and Father, to whom our savior christ Math. 26
approached in his fear and need, by reason of death, and found comfort:
gracious God and most bounteous Christ, on who^ Stephen called in his extreme
Acts. 7.
need, and received strength: most beninge holy spirit, which in the midst
of all crosses and death, did comfort the apostle s. Paul, 2. Cor. 1.
with more consolations in christ, then he felt sorrows and terrors in the
world: have mercy upon me a most miserable, vile and wretched sinner, which
now draw nere the gates of death deserved both in soul and body eternally,
by reason of my manifold horrible, old and new transgressions, which to thine
eyes (O lord god) are open and kuowen. Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me
for the bitter death and blood sheddinge of thine only son Jesus Christ.
And though thy Justice do require in respect of my sins, that now thou
sholdest not hear me, contemning thy daily callinges: yet let thy mercy, which
is above all thy works, and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercy (I
say) prevail toward me, through the merits and mediation of christ our
savior, for whose sake it pleases thee to bring me forth now, as one of his
witnesses, and a record bearer of thy verity and truth taught by him, to give
my life therefore. To which dignity I do acknowledge (dear god) that there was
never any so unworthy and unmeet, no not the thief that hanged with him on ye
cross. I humbly therefore pray thee that thou would accordingly, aid,
help, and assist me with the strength and heavenly grace, yt with christ thy
son I may find comfort, with Stephen I may see thy presence and gracious
power, with Paul and all others, which for thy names sake have suffered
afflictious and death, I may find so present with me thy gracious
consolation, that I may by death glorify thy holy name, set forth and ratify
thy verity, comfort ye hearts of the heavy, confirm thy church in thy truth,
convert some that are to be converted, and so depart out of this miserable
world (where I do nothing but daily heap sin upon sin) and enter into the
fruition of thy blessed mercy: whereof now give and increase in me a lively
taste, sense, and felinge, wherthrough the terror of death, the torments of
fire, the pains of sin, ye darts of Satan, and the dolours of hell, may never
overcome me: but may be driven away through the working of that most gracious
spirit: which now ple^teously endue me withal, that through the same spirit I
may offer (as now I desire and am redye to do) in christ and by him, my self
wholly, soul and body, to be a lively sacrifice, holy and acceptable in thy
sight (dear father) whose I am and always have been, even from my mothers
womb, yea, even before ye world was made: to who^ I commend my self, faith
and name, familye and friends, country, and all the whole church: yea, even my
very ennemies, according to thy good pleasure: besechinge thee entierly to
give once more to this realm of England, the blessinge of thy word again,
with godly peace, to the teaching and settinge forth of the same. Oh dear
Father, now give me to come unto thee: purge and so purify me by this fire, in
Christ's death and passion, through thy spirit, that I may be a burnte
offeringe of sweet smell in thy sight, which live and raygnest with the Son
and the holy ghost now and foreuermore, world without end.

Amen.
Ephe. v. Awake thou that slepest and arise from the Dead, and Epriste shall
show light unto thee. Certain faults escaped.
In the 7. leaf and first side, read in the margent thus: By loking on our
old faulles. In the 13. leaf and second side add to ye later note i^ ye
marge^t: Felicity which we obtain by Death. In the 43. leaf, in ye title of
the Introduction read Divinity. And in the other titles, for Instruction read
Introduction.

