The Shepherds Star, Now of late seen, and at this hour to be observed
merueilous orient in the East: which brings glad tidings to all that may
behold her brightness, having the four elements with the four Capital
vertures in her, which makes her Elementall and a vanquishor of all earthly
humors.

Described by a Gentleman late of the Right worthy and honorable the Lord
Burgh, his company and retinue in the Briell in North-holland.

Tu sihic esses aliter senties. Terent. (...).

Amor fa molto: Argento fa touto.

Printed by Robert Robinson, for William Jones, and are to be sold at his shop
near Holborne Condit. 159^.

TO THE RIGHT Honorables, and puissant Barons, Robert Deuorex Earl of Essex,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, great Master of the Horse for her
Highness: And unto Thomas Lord Burgh, Baron of Gayns-burgh, Lord Governor of
the town of Bryell, and the Fortes of Newmanton, and Cleyborow in
North-Holland for her Majesty: health, and increase of honor.
YOu have read, I take it, right honorables, of Polycletus rule: Polyclet^
Regula.
A speech applied to those men, whose excellency many have imitated, more
have envied, but none have attained. Those that have imitated, have been
Socordes, and so unworthy, because they never travailed to know matters of
estate. Those that have envied, have been Vecordes base conceits, and so
unwilling because unworthy. And those that have not attained, are Excordes in
pusillanimitie and infirmity of the mind. But there are yet another number
Cordati Homines renowned men for wisdom, yet are not renowned for wealth.
These envy not any man's estate, but attribute unto Fortune, the goods of
Fortune: To the body, the goods of the body: to the mind, the riches of the
mind: and to Caesar, all things due unto him. Such should wise men be, that
what they are not thought worthy of by the worthiest; they should content them
selves with, as well as the meanest. Whereupon I considering, that I cannot
atchieue the knowledge which is worthy of your most honorable favors,
request, this may be worthy of your patience. Wine which in base Dutch is
called Drozen or Mother, is good for somewhat, it will make a compound. So my
wit may hereafter with your present protections and honorable allowance make a
simple. But as there is of the year four quarters: so is there of a man's
knowledge, fouretimes. The Spring: the Summer: the Autumn: and Winter. The
infancy, the youth: the middle age, (ripe judgment:) and the old age (right
folly.) And because my knowledge is none, it cannot be termed any. Howbeit,
for that I have ever heard, my true honorable Lord and master, publish your
lordships excellent parts, which he records often from his heart: I do the
rather presume of your Lordships clemency in his absence. That I may approach
with all this simplicity unto all that singularity: Who in wit being a
Pattern to all men: may (where it wants) be a Patron to me. I cannot be
tedious in my writing. Would I had the like privilege, not to be odious in my
enditing. But so had I need to be in Art Polycletus: in hap Polycrates:
which because I am not, I care not. Only, I respect your Lordships true
estimation, and I expect the Readers due consideration. I cease, not ceasing to
remember your Lordships in my daily wish for your long prosperity.

Your Honorable lordships bounden, and servant to command: Thomas Bradshaw.

To my well beloved brother, health and increase of knowledge.
BRother, I have made bold to publish the book which you left me to my
private use. I was moved thereunto by your friends, and my fauourets here in
England. The matter is adjudged by some of learning, not to be unworthy of the
light. I mean not that light which you meant, when you gave it me to commit
it to Vulcane. But I have saved it, and it shall save you: if not from unjust
vexation of backbyting words: yet from just occasion of carping thoughts.
Many will say, that an English book of love, is like a Marchpane, of which
one may soon scale the walls, and leap into the Castle: for there is no food
in it to stay a hungry stomach, nor substance in pleasures to peruse a learned
Censure. It Is true, the argument of fond love is feeble: because the subject of
the matter is but an abject. And the Genus of the thing will decay, where the
species is only fair without other qualities. But your scope is such you aim
at, that you could not speak less of it, nor well say more. Since the manner
was as truly inacted, as the matter is duly reported. And seeing in all
demands, there is but four things to be known, (...). You may easily resolve
any one that shall carpe, with all these four: For the strictnes of the
intention, shall excuse the dulnes of the invention. So I commit you to your
delights of those cold countries. From the Court at Greenewich, upon Saint
Georges day 1591 April. 23.

Your brother to command: Alexander Bradshaw.

I. M. Esquier, his farewell to England and to the Author.
Since the time and tide with instance,
And their stately troops of sailing,
Must convey my sweet remembrance,
And my self, my self bewayling.
Why should Thyrstie thoughts enduring,
Not be quenched with weeping moisture,
Why should she should she alluring,
Walk in me as in a Cloysture,
Let hope sell away her helping,
For help sends away her master,
Since hope and help both inuenting,
Finds for loves sore no sweet plaster.
Farewell native soil and substance:
Farewell love in presence panting:
Beauty, you whose large allowance
Made me not remember wanting.
Farewell all delight of Courting:
Farewell pretty book my treasure.
Farewell Fairie Nymphs exhorting,
Idle heads to die in pleasure.
I. M.

Quod natura negat, reddere nemo potest.
Quod natura dedit, tollere nemo potest.

The Authors farewell to England, and to his most intier friend I. M. Esquyer.
THe growing hatred of my deadly foe,
Which groaning lamentation would forgo:
Does more enforce me when I weep and wail,
As does the roaring wind the raging sail.
And as the tempest is increast with rain:
So watrie tears my dririe cares maintain.
The sprowts of young invention limber shake,
Like Willowes made by calmest gale to quake.
Mistres Experience, youthful wits she rypes:
But all her knowledge costeth pinching strypes.
Jove all my labors brings unto naught:
For that against his will my wit has wrought.
Wit learn to will, not by sinister driftes:
Wit learn to will, not by thy privy shifts.
Learn wit to will, not by unlawful helps:
Learn wit that will is one of Careless whelps.
And as a thing untimely brought to light:
Which being blind, is fittest for the night.
For when in secret bed like grave I lie,
Thoughts aptest are unfittest things to spy.
Wit learn to will all things encounter will:
Wit learn to will thy base intents to kill.
Learn wit to will no more wealth by deceit,
Lest wit and will be caught with beggars beight.
Tall Cedars, Pyne trees, and aspiring states,
Have humble shrubs and valleis to their mates.
When whirling wind on high things takes hold:
Then in the vale is lesser blast of cold.
The mean betwixt both high and low is best:
Therein the Author sets up his rest.
(...), De Coelo descendit.
T. G. Esquier, his replye to the farewell of the Author.
Since that wisdom is divine:
Wit to wisdom must resign.
For though wit does dwell on earth,
Wisdom has immortal birth.
Witty men and no wise mind,
Are sugar sweet new refinde.
Which for taste does bear the bell:
Yet does wast before it sell:
So does wit make a show
Like goodshewers, but is a dew:
A dew, which still does display,
Wisdom like a Summer day.
For both they one to the other,
Dearer are then any brother:
Dear so dear, as when a child
Thou in Pallas lap have smyld.
Pallas bosom, Pallas arms,
must shroud, must save thee from harms.
Base inventions vilde annoy,
Still intending ending joy:
That Euphues is never good,
Which wears Had Jwisthis hood.
Dictum puta, Thomas Groos.

To the courteous Reader.
CVrteous Reader, I know no reason to move me to write unto you, since I
cannot remove you from your prejudicial opinion. It is peculiar to every one,
to conceive of a book so singular, as that no most exquisit work can satisfy
the meanest expectation in his desire of reading. The very reason is, because
every Readers emulous and covetous mind, hops to find once a book made
all by the figure (...). Cicero 3. de Orator. illustris explanatio rerumque
quasigetantur sub aspectum pene subiectio.
Above all conceit: And so longs to find a writer, that can set down his
matter as well as his heart can think. This shall never be God wot. For, first
the simple may, I confess, be pleased soonest with that which they understand
least, but admyre most. But what a fond pleasing were this? Yet it is so. For
Iris is fained to be Thaumantis filia. The Raynbowe is the daughter of
Admiration. The colors please much, because they are little perceived, and
least of all colors known what they are. The Diamond is only rare, because
it deceives the eye with new variety, such as the sight is not still capable
of: Mark it when you will. For the learned, to please them, I will not presume
to speak how, because I cannot. Only this I protest: There is not a letter
in this silly Pamphlet, that by my placing is set there, to displease any one,
or to please many. Only this: Let the wisest give their verdicts, and the rest
hold their tongues. If I fall by the one, I will be sure for ever hereafter to
stand by the other: and so displease neither with any more Toys. In have on
Saint Georges day. April. 23.

T. B.

A Paraphrase Upon the third of the Canticles of Theocritus, Dialogue wise.
Amaryllis. Corydon. Tityrus. COrydon. The prime of beauty may I presume to tell
you my lot?


Amaryllis. yes Corydon, so that your folly therein seem to be no greater then
your fortune is, that being by generation a Shepherd, you clyme not by
usurpation from Italy, to be God Pan in Arcadie.


C. I am not Pan, for I have not arms to show: or if I have, they are not
fair and glittering like the sun beams visible like the same which women
give. The properties of God Pan the son of Demogorgus an inchaunter.
Yet am I Pan for fair Amaryllis sake, or I bear in my breast the love lie
star Nebris, the very Image of your singelaritiy. And of my flock, I learn to
be lascivious. I presume to make you merry, because it is of me deity always
to laugh.


A. Well Corydon, tell me your lot, and I will be prejudicial unto you, that
you shall have the shortest cut for your labor. Crotona an ancient town in
Italy on that side where Sicilia called Trinacria bordereth.



C. There is a custom amongst us Swaynes in Crotona to elect bie our
Diuinatione Lords and Ladies, with the leaf of the flower Telephilon, which
being laid before the fire leapeth unto them whom it loves and skippeth from
them whom it hates. Tityrus and I in experience of our lot whose hap it
should be to inioye your love, insteede of Telephilon we burned Mistletoe and
Box for our Divination, and unto me Amaryllis you fled, and chose rather to
turn to an unworthy Shepherd, then to burn like an unworthy lover.


A. Sorry I am Corydon that the love of fools is apt to take hold, where there
is no handle, and many times so quick of conceit is love, that in steed of
her own mate, she conceiues with child in the dark with a Niger, though she
never saw the man. But because such events are incident to the citizens of
Crotona, when they are far from it: I therefore do banish from my discretion
all fond love, when I am nearest unto it.


C. o honorable Amaryllis it is not my inductio^ to persuade you to vouchsafe
to favor base mortality as your equal, but to protect simple mankind as your
servant. For I know being a blasing star as you are, and walking no where
but in the milkie way, you do destinate as comets do, the very death of a
prince for love of you, rather then any body shall enjoy it.


A. No; you do exceed in your accounts, for I can love much because it is
laudable, but not love many, because it is not allowable. Not as of a good
thing, the possession is his that has it, but the communication of it does
belong to all men; but as of a bad thing, such as love, which is a lewd toye,
the possession beeinge in a woman which cannot surrender, the communication
must be but to one man, lest the inheritor should prove base, where the
Landladie has too many tenants. And so my discretion, be far wide of that
you wish it to be.


C. Yet in the grauest modesty there may be a smile, and on that is dead with
sound may chance to scral, and once a year the driest Burr Oak will weep unto
you, if you offer but to write the first letter of your name upon her stately
breast. Why may not then Amaryllis once a year use the like womanish tears, to
any that shall prefer their minds to her stately consideration?


A. Not so; for faithful love is good in it self, and not respective good: for
in it self, it does consider a sympathy, which ever is betwixt two, and no
more, according to a ground among the sages: True-loue never builds her own
nest, but succeeds the Turtle Dove in hers: and they are said above all
other birds to have teats and pappes, to nourish loves darlings in their nest:
wherein she never, brings but two unto light, and they are both copercioners
of each others vital spirits, and not unlike twins, unto which one more
admitted makes like a monster, from which one taken away, causes present
death. As they say Pythagoras writ for his firm to al his epistles: two in
body, one in mind.


C. I hold it felicity for me to be borne only to hear you speak, but more
happy it were for me to die quickly if this be true, for then I see by the
perspectiue glass of your angelical beauty, how it is written in my forheade,
that my heart does bleed for love: yet if neither of us stand in election, and
because the gawdie day is come, and the fellowship is granted to some noble
personage that can show best friends for it: then give Corydon leave to
sacrifice for his loss the simplest gift that may be, a handful of lines, in
ease of a world of sorrows.


A. You may do well to writ, that with your wit you may write a way your care:
no doubt but having Mars left you, if Neptune favor you as he did Pelops,
you may win king Aenomaus daughter in warlike race: so coming home, if your
hungry father Tantalus be alive he may bake you in a pie, and bid the gods
to the banquet for joy of your departure out of this miserable world: but
beware least Ceres be there at the feast, for she will eat a whole shoulder
of you for mere spite: because she knows that you have been very
unfaithful to women kind. But if Mercury love you so well as he did Pelops,
and lend you an Ivorie shoulder to bear away a bobbe, and command Clotho to
call you to life again, then come to me and I will say more to your matter of
love, till then I pray you give me leave to choose whether I will love you or
not.


C. Some women think it is as martial a victory with their tongues to
overcome and win the wisp, as we shepherds with our pipes to win the garland.
But in all the dialogues where shepherds use to speak, note that he which
speaks last overcomes most. Would I might say no more but Vici (as none may
say) not Veni, vidi, as all may say, or Veni, vidi, vici, as Caesar and those
which are more worthy of your presence.


A. And would I cold conquer Caesar with words as he won some nations without
deeds then I protest Corydon should feed my sheep on the mountains, and
Tityrus my goats on the rocks, but unto my presence, no such vulgar creepinge
worms should approach; no not to my solitary presence.


Tit. Content you fair lady albeit you are the pride of every branch, it
stands with your humility and honor, to entertain service sometimes unto
your person: least forgetting what you are, you remember what you should not,
and so always using to walk in the air, you forget to walk aright upon the
earth: and for want of the true use of your self, you may soon fall. For all
things that are of great substance do decline down-ward, and the light things
are lifted upward: so you may catch that foul fall on the back.


C. Tityrus counsel is good, though somewhat swinish.


A. And so is not your talk because it is more then swanish.


C. You are not to be angry when you are giltles, for that is not the entire
property of a courtier, but rather the contrary.


A. Neither are shepherds to prate but of goats and lambs.


T. So we do of the lambs of Venus, which cause the sons of careful parents
to come home once a year for their sins, with the prodigal, when they have
eaten acornes for their mistress sake seven long years.


C. Come Tityrus, let us sing for Amaryllis sake, and contend for her, since we
can not have her given unto me.


T. Then if I sing best, king Midas shall judge for me, because her dignity
ought not to be censured by one no worthy then our selves.


A. Do so, and if he judge for either of you I will bestow a green Velvet
hoode on him, to hide his Asses ears: and on you both my iollie Shepherds two
Oten pipes that you may conuoye unto his ears, such melody as is most fit for
his merit. R. M.A.H.A.As. But begin your plain song.


Corydon and Tityrus contention.
Cor. In a time of merry sport,
Amaryllis did resort,
With her gracious loving looks
To the Crystal running brooks:
Where I Corydon did dwell,
Corydon the sheapheardes spell:
For to shepheardes does belong,
All the pride of wanton song.
There to Amaryllis view,
Shepherd sent his homage dwe:
Such a service as of right,
Came to short of such a wight.
For I sent my thoughts unfit,
To admire at such a wit:
And I sent my daseling eyes,
To behold the Empire skies.

Tity. Shepherd leave thy fond conceit,
For her beauty proves a beyte:
To beguyle the craftist eyes,
That in court do skale the skies.
Like as fishes say to flee,
When dame Venus star they see.

Cor. O sweet Amaryllis face,
Gives my muse a sower disgrace:
Drownds in Lethe al my art,
Sets at her heel my smarte:
Tityrus my fellow swain,
Seeks her heavenly looks to gain.

Tity. It Is our tender Lambs have part,
Of the joys of her sweet heart:
They as she, and she as they,
Innocents fair looks bewray.

Cor. Amaryllis whiles we strive,
Keeps our tender flocks alive:
For our flocks well kept do prove,
That she cares not for our love.

Tity. Hapless we, and happy she:
Of all that dwell in Italy.

Corydons contention.
In Crotona Sicill mount,
Amaryllis Paramount,
Lives and loves no worldly fame,
Loves of life to keep her name.
He that does approach her grace,
Must appear an Angels face:
For her presence will appale,
Him that best can tell his tale.
Whispering lips, like nets, which call,
Heavenly quails to be her thrall:
Sweet notes liking to inspier,
Like, but not like, Sirens hier.
Such a voice as does inchante,
Nightingals her walks to haunt.
In both cheeks her ruddy type,
Makes them sing of cherries ripe:
Then like Ecco she does use
Notes, which makes the^ stay and muse.
Notes which from the hearers eye,
Make drops fall as from the sky:
Notes which through her strange right eye,
Send forth pictures of the sky.
Which eye when it does ascend,
Then behold I see my end:
For no tongue can then relate,
How sunbeams love thoughts amate:
Apelles by whom only Princes were pictured began Amaryllis so exquisite that
he cold not finish, because he could not conceive her perfection, where upon he
remembered Venus picture far unfit to express Amaryllis.
Apelles did miss to apply,
In her picture this right eye.
Where upon some do coniect,
By that shadow imperfect:
He meant Amaryllis shape,
And that Venus was her ape.
Then did Zeuxis frame her shape,
In her breast a bunch of grape:
For love whereof in her sweet breast,
Nightingales do make their nest:
As tame fowls so they afforde,
All the year birds to record:
And in the merry month of May,
Nightingales for night and day.
In the sequel of the year,
To her voice their burden bear:
In the Quire of her heart, Amphion whose eloquence tames wild Satyrs, he was
the first inuentors of harmony.

Rules Amphion with his art:
Which makes me uncivil swain
her perfections to maintain.
Amaryllis reanswer to the Shepherds contention.
Iollie Shepherds, no fond praise
is of force my mind to raise:
If I had Adonis hear,
which the purple Rose does wear:
If I had Dianas grace,
If I had dame Venus face,
If I were king Titans child,
namde Aurora fair and mild,
Beauty, birth, Grace purpurred,
holds no soul from fatal bed.
Wisdom, wit, and knowledge hid
Servants are to Clothos third.
The true use of harmony, The ancient Graecians were used to salute their
children into the world with tears, and to laugh at their domes day. Lucretia
of Rome that repelled Sextus Tarquinius allurements.

Is to wail our misery:
It Was invented to take place
at our death and happy case:
At our birth a sadder vain
was still used to show our pain.
If I have Lucretias gift,
to discern Tarquinius drift:
And obey chaste Vestas call,
and beware by others fall:
Sweet voice, fair looks, and chaste life,
are large portions with a wife.
And the Jewels virgins wear,
Is good fame hangde at their ear.
We by this may rise withal,
Rising well may never fall.
Cor. Can there proceed from Nature more gifts, or of nurture more rewards
then Amaryllis inioyeth? not to her self inioyeth, but does to her frinds
participate, virtues for their learning and examples for their living. And
surely Tityrus it is in vain that we solicit her with vain love, for they
whose sage wits are inhabited with such relations, cannot be at leisure to
Cupids inventions, For the Cock is most prove to Cupide.

For the Parrat is most prompt to speak.


the which secure conceit has first engendered of the brain of a Cock, as
they feign, that wisdom sprang first of the brain of Parrat, which was the
first Iuppiter that ever spoke: And so Mynerua was as much a kin to a Parrat
as Venus to a Cock.


Tity. True, very true. But I see she is elected by Vesta to be Vestall, and
has either sworn Chastity, or Chastity sworn her. Yet because in moving of
her, we cannot remove her from her true estimation of honor, we will hear
her and see her and say the best, for of lest meddling with her beauty we shall
soonest get her bounty: And of most praising of her, we shall (to her repute)
most flatter her. For if she would admit titles and vain appellation, then
she would of her self soon have high estimation, and so be Philautos. As on
the contrary, if she would endure fugillation, then had she of her self a
base estimation. Plutar. de Educatione.

Quae se plus iusto amat qualis est vide Aristot li 2 mag moral. cap 13. and.
14.


To this end Plutarch notes that (...). They that are inamorde of them selves,
are at leisure to be flattered by others.


Cor. I will assay her gravely again with some merry news, to which in honest
recreation she has ever inclined: yet therein from precisest virtue she has
never declined. You know Amaryllis, in Virgill there was sometimes a famous
learned man of our trade of shepherding, who was also a famous learned man in
his own trade of theeuing, who after many theeuish exploits, at the last stole
away great Hercules fair herd: which he brought from Geryon the tyrant of
Spain, brother to the Philip which usurps those dominions. This Cacus
mistrusting least the tracke of the beasts would be pursued by worthy
Hercules, drew them all backward by the tails into his cave. Hercules
freshsuing his herd, and seeing no print of a foot toward the den, but all
fro^ward, was persuaded as the craftiest Fox in all Aesope would have bin, if in
reuiewing the Lions den he had but seen the like steps: and have thought
nothing less then any harm in Cacus. Hercules and Simia

Craft against Force does little avail.

Camelus and Formica.


Presently after driving the rest of his herd by the wales of the cave, they
chanced to low: (and as all creatures know their own call) so these stolen
cattle did bellow unto their fellows, which the noble personage hearing, brake
the door of the cave, and the neck of the thief, and so had his fair flock
again.


Amar. Too fair a death for so foul a fact.


Cor. We hear in Italy that there is now as cruel a Philip in Spain as there
was a Geryon then, and as renowned a Hercules in France now, as ever there
was king of Egypt. This Spanish tyrant has many Cacus of his league and
nation, which seek to steal away that fair herd all of milk whit cattle,
which Hercules and his friend preserve for breed. The Cacuses do practice by
policy to draw them deformedly into their vgglie caves, but the Herculeians
endeavor to preserve such beautiful breed for sacrifice, and to serve holy
uses. The Cacuses have often committed this pillage upon all the neighbor
kings herdes that inhabit thereabout. I require therefore of thee my Tityrus,
who have often heard of this action, why the Herculeians do not presently
invade some of their usurpations and gain the patronage to themselves: for of
all trials speed is the scope and felicity, and that which is the appetite of
all hope.


Tity. This I think the first labor that Hercules must achieue, is to see the
death of the monstrous Lion in the wood Nemea, which can neither be slain by
metal nor stone: then may they more easily aspire to that which is the effect
of the first labor. And the first will be the cause of the second. Jerome of
the twelve labors of Hercules, writes to this effect on the 10 chap. of
Genesis.
So that Hydra in lerna malorum may be easily victord: Si Leoni vulpem
adiungas. Hydra is the second labor of the Herculeians which daily they do
victor: albeit an hundred heads succeed upon the neck of that monster so soon
as he is beheadded: yet at last when nature shall extinguish that monster, sich
Art cannot sink him, (when that is done, if it be yet undone:) Then I assure
my self, that Hercules in France shall have such success, as that he need not
neither for public honor nor for private weal, undertake any more of the
twelve labors, the one being a work of policy, the other of prowess.


Cor. Then Amaryllis honor you sincerity of Religion with your chastity of
life, that when you have all things belonging to present estate, you want not
that little Atomus the soul (which other women they say want) which of your
future and celestial estate must be the forerunner.


A. For your counsel Shepherd I render you gracious looks, the rather for
that your theme tendes not unto graceless love. My religion I account the
right of my country, and the inheritage usually of them which have none other
lands. Every one may be an heir (as in Gauelkind) to sincere religion, in
which the youngest has a title as well as the eldest. And therefore we learn
that worthy men have carried the burden of their country Gods, in the midst
of any spoils upon their backs away: amongst whom Aeneas the founder of our
native soil is canonized, Ea est falsae Religionis nota cu^ sit (...). Plato.
not so much for conueying his parents in safety from the sacking of Troy, as
for that he preserved his country gods, knowing it to be a false Religion, to
have sought new gods elsewhere for money or rewards.


Cor. Then do I marvel Amaryllis at one thing greatly: I have often heard you
allege as an authority of a wise Senator in our land, who used to
pronounce, that of the two Religions, there is but one end and that the one is
but a little the farther way about, both may come to one home.


Ama. I have by hearsay so been informed, but esteem no truth but one,
neither love I that Ianus should mock me in my journey; and when I were fair
for it, should stand in some place of doubtful way, with two faces under one
hood, and point both ways: so that I may mistake him, and go the longest way
about: I may so be weary of my life, if the way be a purging and faintie hot
way, before I come to my iourneys end. I have heard of two Ladies which often
are placed in the way where all Herculeians walk: the one lady Voluptuous,
the other lady Virtue: and that the plesurable lady has the more efficient
persuasions to induce travelers to their destruction, then lady Virtue has
to reduce them to their salvation: That her way is fair and broad, and
promises more assurance of rest then lady Virtue does: whose paths are
unpleasant, whose ways tedious, but in the end, there is a Paradise of most
dainty devises, which Corydon you know is most fit for Ladies, and most
favored of me.


Cor. Good reason Amaryllis, that you should favor the souls health above the
bodies, and things to come rather then pleasant co^ceipts which are present
deceites. The Dialogue I have converted for your use out of his proper language
in the most famous memorables of Xenophon.

A Dialogue betwixt Hercules and the two Ladies, Voluptuous, and Virtuous.
Xenophon. li. 2. Memorabilium.
As I wandered all alone,
In these greenewoods Summers clothing,
To my self I made my moan,
Why I had my life in loathing.
At the last the careful air
Did convey my cause of mourning
To these Ladies passing fair,
Who well knew my inward burning.
To whom when I vaild my Crest,
Vailde my Arms before their presence,
And beheld lawne apornes pressed,
Pure like Altars for my Incense,
Then I ceast not to recall,
Hills, woods, groves, trees, dales, al wandering,
Which accompanied my thrall,
Words, nor deeds, nor comfort rendering.
When these Ladies had agesse
Who I was that so did travel,
Did their sacred terms address,
To convey me from my peril.
Voluptas. First dame Pleasure did presume,
Shining brightly not by Nature,
Shinde cares like clouds to consume,
With the blasing of her feature.
And her eyes were open wide,
That she quickly might entangle,
Most vain looks which catch at pride,
As the fish does at the Angle.
And her garments in like sort
were as wide and worn wide open:
Entertaining bold resort,
Knew her shop without a token.
But I musing at her gate,
Marueiled at no such wunder,
As to see her shadows state,
And her self to stand a sunder.
For I thought no Atomie
To be of so small acquaintance,
As to want her company,
Or to seek her lewd alliance.
She began to make report
Of the youths of her profession,
Which she called a sweet consort
Of fine wits without discretion.
Those that love me call me (...), Those that hate me, call me (...),
Felicity. Igna^^e.
Then I knowing what she would,
For she called her self, Dame Pleasure:
Told her that I would be bold
To go seek a richer a treasure.
Of love, desire, lust, sweet words,
To my eyes, ears, taste, and speaking:
There appeard with shrill records,
Helens Eunuke Nectar eating.
All which pleasures without pains
She commended to my favor:
But I did resign the gains.
Which comes of too sweet a savor.

^^tus. Then virtue fair of her self,
Did inform my simple meaning,
What was pleasures idle pelf,
Not to sow but live by gleaning:
She began in weeping wise,
To entreat my tender nonage,
To beware by her advise,
Of fair looks the gate of bondage.
It Is not pleasure brings rest,
No man makes the gods his fautors
By delighte or pleasant jest,
Of the which they are not autors.
It Is desert that does present,
Every labor to his hire:
Pleasant wits do often invent,
Perfect art does still aspire.
Do but mark good naturd ground,
How it does reward the sower:
Do but mark good naturd sound,
For one touch it yields four.
Seely sheep that yield you cloth,
Must be washed in due season:
Lazy kine are very loath,
To yield you milk without some reason.
Hercules is borne to wars,
Those that honor such a calling,
Must not sit and gape at stars,
Till they see their foes a falling.
If in boystrous wars at length,
Thou incur some rare distress,
Virtues Rescue with thy strength,
Shall bring desprate care redress.
If thou would prevail in force,
Know that exercise confirming,
Is to strength a better course,
Then the books of Pleasures learning.
Farewell noble Hercules,
Of all warlike prowes the Engine,
Let no wandering Knights distress
Force thoughts base shifts to imagine.
Then I song loath to depart,

Voluptas. Then dame Pleasure red this leason,
That this painful school of Art,
And dame Virtues paths are geason.
I reanswerd to my skill,
This is all your pleasures fullness:
That the belly you may fill,
Though the body live in dullness.
And those false Joys you may wash,
With fierce Bacchus which is lusty,
To deceive the silly passh,
To be drunk not being thirsty.


Corydon. I joy Amaryllis to see a fable so to agree with truth. They say, into
the Elyzean fields there be two ways prepared, one fair, broad, pleasant,
careless: the other foul, narrow, tedious, hideous, and careful. He that
takes his pleasure on the way, there is no reason he should have it at his
iourneies end. He that labors and is in his travail, will be merry at
night. This pleasant way has assayed many wise men, but allured none: For it
assaulted Ulysses by incantation of Circe and Calypso, by vocation of Sirens
music, by bitter sweet delights: such as the voluptuous lady preferred to
our Hercules. If Ulysses had not discoursed like a wise trauailer with Circe,
and persuaded in the deepest property of an Orator with Calypso, and
prevented in policy, by stopping his ears from the womanish harmony of
Sirens, in the one he had been metamorphosed with his whole Regiment into
Bores and hogs and brute beasts (for such are all men sensles in their
delights,) in the other he had been turned headlong into the sea for a pray
to a sight of hungry fiddlers, who never pyped better then when they lacked
meat for their dinner. And then they played to pick such noble men's purses as
Ulysses, and bring their lives into a Sea of utter destruction and want.


A. Corydon, I desire to know why Tityrus being so faithful a friend unto you,
and so continually in your company learneth not your vain of speaking, and
speaks not more often.


Cor. Tityrus my beloved Tityrus, speaks seldom and therefore more wisely.
Herein I thank you, that you reprehend my multiloqus and fribolus words: in
deed he that speaks much, offends much, and silence sometimes is safe
speaking, for the tongue a little creature is too often a tall fellow of his
hands, but the heart often makes the heels to be nimble and the tongue
speakinge so much idlelie, leaves nothing for the heart to say or allow:
which makes and turns golden mines into leaden pigges, and often makes a
mountain to bring forth a mouse.


Am. Say no more of promises Corydon, for though you insinuate thereby into the
feeblenes of women's wits, which are often drawn with pleasant delights of
men's subtlety, and importunate flattery to promise more then honestly they
may perform: Yet holding second counselles, with the friends that belong to
their own honor, (...). Cicero Philip. 12. posteriores cogitationes
sapientiores.
they answer you foolish swains (who are of opinion, that every woman loves
you that makes you believe so) how that all promises are not to be kept. Nec
omnia, nec nulla, nec non aliqua.


Tityrus. Naie then Amaryllis, you disparage the works of fidelity, which are
inherent more in generous minds, then in degenerous persons: whose fear of
some misfortune arguing their cowardice, do not because they dare not,
perform all they promise.


Ama. Naie do not, because they cannot perform any such hasty promises.


Tityrus. What call you promises in have that be not promises in wast.


Ama. Promises in have are, when suitors whose green attire profess them to be
Robin Hoods men: yet shoot in Cupids bow at Dianas servants. To them a tale
of Robin Hood, and a promise sent home, by Long the carrier belongs.


Tity. And when promise you in wast?


Ama. In wast when the faith of promise opposed to the falsehood of men, makes
them fully persuaded of love at our hands, when they seek nothing but lust,
and so being entangled with fair promises will think no more of foul acts.
And so we induce them to wast in fond love: because they would induce us to
taste of filthy lust.


Cor. For their vile regard of your honor, they have a vile reward of your
honesty.


Tity. Naie of our honesty, for they have but small honesty, that use men so
dishonestlie.


Ama. Women are very ungracious, because men are very ungrateful.


Tity. Men are very ungrateful, because women are very unfaithful.


Ama. Women are very politic, because men are very deceitful.


Tity. Men are very deceitefull in deed, because the women are very
beautiful indeed.


Ama. Women are very fair indeed, and therefore men are very false in word.


Tityr. And women being very fair in face, and not true in heart, are as
their physiognomy presageth of them.


Amaryllis. Are you skilled in the physiognomie? as how I pray you?


Tityrus. If high in forehead, then women are high in mind, courageous like a
Lioness, and very liberal of one thing or other. And it imports desire of
Empire and rule, and the government to rest in their feeble discretion.


Amaryllis. But how if they be contrary, and in the forehead low?


Tityrus. Then it signifies accordingly low and base minds, and sorrowful
hearts, passionate and discontented, because the blemish being in the fairest
place and most visible causes them to seek the darkest places, eschewing
company to live solitary and invisible.


Amaryllis. And what purporteth a frowning forhead with clowdie looks?


Tityrus. It imports boldness, and in a woman foolehardines, and savage
Lyonlike (or if you will have it) in desire like a Bull, as in forehead like a
Bull frowning: and also ready to wish her husband those ornaments which
should manifest to the world her secret disposition, not without some reason,
for they are more fit for a man then for a woman.


A. Well, pass on with your pastoral discourse and skill to determine of
things beyond your Tarbox, and tell of the physiognomie of the eyes.


Tityrus. Small Ferits eyes, show them to be toyish like Apes, as big
settled, dull: vnsharp eyes, show them to be sluggish, vnwelding like a Cow
with a bonegrace on her head: hollow eyes, witchcraft full of rancour and
secret malice: great gogling eyes, foolishnes, for you know it is proper to an
Ass. Somewhat a little hollow, signifies stout courage and magnanimity like
a Lioness. But if they be very open and rolling, beware of impudency: for it
is one of the two viperous brood and daughters of my lady Careless, and
Insolency is the other daughter: For as Tully has, to neglect what repute the
world shall carry about of you, is not only the property of an impudent
creature, but of a dissolute body. But to come to particulars, Amaryllis, eyes
more fit for Aristotle's description are black, which signifies no mutation
but constancy. In that they have the little Hasle circlet which does inuiron
and hedge in a golden fleece in the midst of your right eye, which shepherdes
think to steal, if it spy them first, it depriueth them of all living sense,
leaving them only vegetative sense like unto trees, because of their
presumption, which are but marks to tell of the boldness of them that went
before, unto them that shall follow after. And in a word, the whole
physiognomie of the eyes shall be in this sentence concluded: Quanto mayor
tanto minor malitia: sed stultitia mayor.


Amaryllis. I like your Rosemarie you give me Tityrus, but not your Fenell.
Let us hear of the lips.


Tity. They cannot be divided except they were first closed; nor can not be
described, except they be disclosed: and cannot be disclosed openly, except
they be touched secretly. Therefore fair Amaryllis, since ever you have
repelled me from the one, blame me not though I fail in the other, for honor
me first in this, and honor will nourishe a^tes. Tantalus has not any nice
taste, if he have any at all: nor Sisiphus any knowledge of the Christmas
holidaies, if he know of any: nor any end of his labor, if he have any
end of his water and work. Wherefore that I may report of Paradise, let me
taste of Euphrates: (...). In vanis osculis suauis ^ucunditas, Theocritus.
for there is in one of the senses of tasting, all the liberal sciences of
learning. And in vain kissing true pleasure.


Ama. You are besides your manners, and therefore I marvel not to see you
besides your matters. But in conceit use your pleasure, so you may by
imputation be admitted to be blessed.


Tity. I shall thereby be as happy as the Hackenie man is, who often is as
poor as Irus, because often his Horses are of the color of Iris, which in
deed is no color, as they are often to him, because they are not with him. As
to me you use the word conceit, so to him they use the deed deceit. And
they say to him as you say to me, believe well and have well. Sic ego
rescribo de tuo palfrido, creed quod habes and habes.


Ama. Well now you may return from your pleasure, and describe the want of
your pleasure.


Tityrus. In a word, the lips are praised as please every man to like of
them. And there is no greater heed to be taken, then that they open not their
wards for fear lest they let out many out of their dungeon.


Ama. Many what?


Tity. Many chargeable prisoners, which will cause a heavy action to lie
against the person, I mean corrupt words, for which all men may condemn one,
or corrupt breath, from which all men will commend one.


Ama. You are disposed to enjoin my absence.


Cor. No, Amaryllis rather to enjoy your presence. I will proceed if Tityrus
will not.


Tity. do so, and I will clime with admiration up into the fair branches of
this tall Castanea tree, from which by that time Corydon has told my tale by
Arithmetike, I can deduct three little sprigs, and then Amaryllis, and this
goodly tree will be of one name and nature.


Cor. Lips which be soft and smooth and neighborlike kiss each other,
signify unity and redines to wage battle against the ravening Lions that
would rudely pray upon their cheries. Such are yours Amaryllis. Those that are
very hard and rugged and blewe like a Sapphire, declare that swine live upon
the Acornes which they find under every tree, where for a mess of commons in
Epicurus kitchen, they open their quiver to every man's arrowe. A very thick
upper lip hanging over too much, is never troubled with too much wit. And a
thick upper lip turning upward that the gum may be perceived, is construed
by the similitude of snarling to be a dog, at least a reprochefull creature.


A. And what of the nose?


Cor. The tippe of the nose being fleshie, signifies no worse matter then
fleshly lust: But turning up withal, signifies by comparison a Swyne, and in
verity it notes sluggishnes. The tippe being sharp foresheweth, as the
proverb of (Mucterisme) Nasuti homines tells, an angry Scoffer: (...), to
be a secret scoffer. Of that kind of nose, read Pliny. li. 11. cap 32.
And as the nose of a Woolfe, it shows secret cruelty. For the nostrels if
they are wide, they signify Lyonlike and full of force. Narrow nostrels are
full of motions as children, and by comparison of birds apt to sing sweetly,
because vnapter to let the sound through the nose. A nose flat to the face, and
crooked imports often a crooked body, and by the comparison of a carren Crow
shameless, and a light huswife. But in this description of a flat nose, a
certain writer has many reasons that still Nurture amendeth Nature. On the
contrary, if crooked Eglelike, then high minded but low couraged. Simonased
is libidinous. Also broad nosed, is furious. But lovely long nosed reaching
downward toward the mouth, presageth all the virtues in Tullies Offices, and
especially fortitude.


Ama. ^uni^ quam similis turpissima beltia nobis.
And what of the ears.


C. little, like an Ape. Great, like an Ass. Flapping, like a fool. But
moderate ears are natural to all people, and show some moderation in the
rest of the senses, if the senses be framed accordingly. Very round ears are
very unfit to learn. And very long ears, are very envious. And very much
cleaving to ones head, are of some unknown ill disposition. If hears be in
the ears, then apter to hear quickly: From whence our term hearing may be
taken.


Amaryllis. Now tell me in general, what shape of the face and countenance
is best destinate by dame Nature unto women.


Corydon. If fleshie, then somewhat sluggish: If lean, then curious, If bigg
and foggie, fearful like an Ass, or as the Heart is. If round and somewhat
fat with a little black spot or two on it, then fair Amaryllis, The roundnes
shows aptnes of proportion, as a temple of better gifts which are within.
And the reason why the spots are, is that a little contrary opposed to a
marvelous singularity, does make that which is very excellent to be better:
because the imperfection standing near beauties grace is made a less
imperfection, and beauty a more beauty. As black annexed to white, makes
white more white, and black more perfect black.

Now for the countenance, if it look downward and groueling, it is a sign of
an Hypocrit, and of discontented wickedness. And a drunken countenance, a
drunkard: an angry countenance, a bed-lame: and on the contrary, a shamefast
countenance, a gracious woman. Any one that is deformed is ill manerd likely,
if Nurture be not the predominant over Nature: as Thersytes of whom the Poets
say venerat ad Troiam quo non deformior alter. And of all that be correspondent
in manners, in a proverb they call it Thersitica facies: Thersites was caled
(...) one that defomed his face with hasty de^^ring like a Raven as the word
does signify in Arist. lib 9. Anim. ca. 24.
A very large visage is unshamefast. Those that sweat in the face with small
motions, may have small honesty. But often times they are crafty, and still
they are great eaters. Very little round faces signify simplicity. Very
crooked long lean faces are malicious, but only for profits sake. And
Amaryllis, you have hereby a glass to decerne your choice, but not so sure as
a touchstone to try gold by. For neither is all gold that glistereth, nor all
that ashes that seems: Saepe sub. cinere doloso latet ignis. Horat. ergo
cave. (...). Lucret ex Theophrasto.
but often gold is hid in earth: and often under deceitpfull ashes lie coals of
fire.


Ama. Why then I perceive no assurance of judgment but uncertain guess to be
in the physiognomie of women, and all your proofs to be like the Physicians
judgment of a woman's inferior parts by her water. It is not of the
necessity of his science to know more by the water then is done above the
gyrdlesteede, nor of your Art to decerne more then you see apparent in the
face. And that you describe out of your shepherdes Calender: Whereby you can
tell, if you see a cloud, that it is a sign of a shower, and many stars
bring a frost: and the evening red, a fair morning: and the morning gray, a
fair evening. And by the backebone of a Woodcocke, you can tell as well as the
Woodcockes self, what weather shall ensue: But by looking in ones face, you
cannot tell what money she has in her purse. Your science makes you often in
hope of a fair weather to clime the mountains where the Muses stand with
goads in their hands to repel you swains, and you forsake the base and humble
valleis which are more fit for you.


Corydon. This and more of Amaryllis will her true hearted swain endure, only
impatient of this, that I should have Tityrus my Rival.


Tity. Only impatient of this, that I should have Corydon my Rival.


Cor. Wherefore I pray you: Dicite Riualem vix ego far Iouem. Amaryllis. No,
I am only impacient in this, that you should strive about nothing.


Cor. Are you nothing Amaryllis?


A. I am no such thing.


C. Why not?


A. Because I am not.


C. That is a woman's simple reason.


A. It is a good and subtle reason. For in all things that are so, your senses
ought to take notice that they are so, and not to call in question why they are
so: Libro (...). Aristo. lib. 1. Analyt.
For your Aristotle has it in his wisdom, that Sensus nulla de re cur ita
sit indicat. As if it be fire, no reason to ask why it is hot: but only to
have relation to the effect of the thing. As if it be fire, to know that it is
hot: if water, to know that it is cold.


Tit. And if a woman, to know that she is wilful.


Cor. And if fair, to know, that she may be false.


Ama. And if a man, to know that he knows many more then women, and therefore
he that is every where, they say he is worthy to be no where.


Tity. How know you that men know many things?


Ama. Because many things are known of them.


Tit. Why, that is the same by the same, which is no good reason.


A. So is their knowledge the same by the same, which is no good order.


Tit. How?


Ama. As to know the younger by the elder.


C. Blame not men therein Amaryllis.


A. Why by what rule Corydon?


C. Because new wine has often an old garland.


Ama. I but good wine need no garlande, nor good women any such customers.


Tit. You say well, for they are known as well without a Poesy in their
breasts, as if they had it written within their Rings: Viresco semper vulnere.


A. But tell me Corydon, by what privy mark of countenance I may know the
complexion and disposition of such creatures?


Cor. In the male, note a bonnye-face lean, it signifies a dailaborer, and a
man of a cold nature by reason of many losses at sea.


A. How at sea?


C. What Sea you will, either the Sea where Flemish hoyes bear English
burdens: or English hoyes bear the French loading, whether you will.


Am. And how in a woman?


C. In a woman, if she be shameless, who of nature should be shamefaste. And
though in a man, the face is almost immutable: yet in such a woman very soon
Vultus mutatur, na^ a volando dicitur. Their countenance is coming and going:
for it is derived of a fugitive word, by reason that every Art has special
terms to express it. If she look ill, you may soon perceive it: for the
countenance is a certain sylent speech and dombe show to declare what the
mind and the body are.


Amaryllis. I but is all this any thing certain that you have told me?


Cor. Not so sure as never otherwise. But this know Amaryllis, that these
things are most apparent in men and women, such as are not regenerate and
washed from the inclination of Nature: As in the Adamites, whose hard hearts
want mortifying of government: Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. Every
man follows his instillation of Nature. The use of Physiognomie is very
ancient: For Jacob the father of all shepherdes told by Labans physiognomie
unto his wives, what mind Laban bare toward him.


Amaryllis. Then I see some certeintie to be in the science. But in a word,
give me the signification of a comely person, and of a deformed creature, what
they are noted throughout all parts to be in both sex.


Corydon. In a word, a woman fair in all parts without some secret or
hidden blemish, cannot be without fair conditions and honest: for she is
called of the Primotor of all things Man hu: Respond. Danum Dei.
as one deformed in the least sort, is not without some fault notorious: So is
it of all people an old said saw, and prouerbially true: Distortum vultum
sequitur distantia morum. Of them beware, whom God has any way noted in the
face or else where. They that are not deformed, are more like their Creator,
whose perfection in his creatures shows him to be without blemish or
deformity.

By this you have a fair caveat to beware the imperfection in shape of Tityrus
my fellow swayne, whom you have often noted for his savage looks, and love
you the simplicity of Corydon whom you have found, though somewhat mutable,
yet always honest in endeavor to perform his obedience, though in deed, too
short of his duty. And if time shall heal greifes by killing of care, then
Amaryllis, my herdes of Dear, and flocks of sheep mounted upon mine own
hills, where my little mansion is, even Tame like sheep entangled as are their
leaders thoughts, shall wait upon you to pay their own ransom with their
dearest blood.


A. I but Corydon, shall not I wait too long upon them first? Care is yet but
young, and therefore strong enough to fight with Time, and Time is rather a
deuourer of men's expectations, then a healer of their griefs: for to gape for
dead men's shoes is often to go barefoot. And whiles your parkes may be
clothed with Flora, and your woods armed with strength: and your Swannes that
in Leander at the bottom of your mount do surmount in number, we may be laughed
at by your pleasant fields that shall be for our present folly that is, and
may be blowed coldly upon by your boisterous Oaks, yet have we no authority
to control them with the Axe. And your lovely Swannes muing themselves under
your chamber window, may make us wish our envious eyes were out, rather then
to be hold so much future pleasure, and so little present joy. And what were
this for us to be in obedience of elder Care as his children continually? You
be gotten as it were of his own marrowe, I adopted to be the daughter of Care
for love of you. You in want of maintenance to live a shepherds life: I in want
of sustenance to die a lingering death: or if lingering in subjection cannot
happily die, but must in viewing about your bitter sweet delights, behold any
of mine own consort, as the Nightingale which now in my virginity carries no
fether to her nest, but asks leave first of me, to accompany her with the
noates of my simple voice, that thereby the labor may seem more easy, yet
then I shall see them carry apace, but must needs think as they poor they
do: That not for me, but for others this nest is built: for the profits are
still our elder Cares. We should see the Bees have their working thoughts and
their thighs loaded with Treasure to our fightes: and as they say, we must
say: not for our selves but for others. See the wanton Fawnes skipping to fat
themselves with speed, and as they say we say: not for us but for others. See
the plentiful and grateful sheep for their bare sustenance render this
maintenance: vdders strowting with milk including farther profit, most fit
nourishment for our infants: fleeces on their backs, whereof the finest cloth
is made: tender carcases, whereon the finest people feed: marks on their
foreheads, which mean not for our gentle shepherds, but for our cruel masters
the elder Care. We may see the travailing Ox work out with fear and
trembling his own destruction. And so all things we may see but nothing we
must have.


Cor. O but Amaryllis! it is somewhat to go halting by Nature, better then not to
go at all. And better have half a loaf then no bread. And that so we enjoy
love for ever: Let us endure patience for a while. Our pleasures will be more
then common persons are. I am nobly descended though sauagely I live. All mine
is all yours which to enumerate will be comfort, though yet not commodity.
Fair houses without large rents: great parks without trouble of tillage, both
seated sweetly in a rich province: which ever as now they are, so were they
the Granare and storehouse of provision and victuals to all our Island: From
whence the whole people of Crotona have transported usually to comfort the
borderers in annual relief, an hundred sail of boats and lighters laden
with grain. But lest the praise of mine own country seduce my pen to
lavish, and lest I should be carped at to write our incredible perfection by
reason of my unspeakable affection: I entreat your sweet consideration to
accept in good part the confirmation of our blessedness by mine own
relation. For native soil carries away every sense with desire of delight to
praise it and pray for it.

O most happy dominion, whose hap it was to be more blessed then any other
part of the Continent. Thou art the prime and the chiefest that beheld the
renowned Constantinus Caesar. In thee he left his Heart for liking, and his Hind
for feeding. On the one thy name was written for remembrance: on the neck of
the other, his name was written for assurance. Nature has repaide thee thy
desert beyond thy desire, thou art endued withal the fruits of the earth, and
all the favor of the air, in thee the rewards of seed are so plentiful,
that Ceres has her barnes endued with grain, and Bacchus his press fulfilled
with grape, in whom are huge woods to cover, without hydeous beasts to
devour: in whom are fertile grounds to manure for food, without fearful
serpents to procure death. Again, of silly and gentle and profitable sheep,
so great is the multitude, that for their bare food, as hating ingratitude,
they yield fleeces fit for Iasons labor, or from their backs for Corydons
hyre, vdders for Corydon and Amaryllis children, which only they hold up, till
that day with groaning to have none but Amaryllis infants play with their young
ones: And none but Amaryllis servant to bring down their pride and swelling
teates: To make cruds and cum-butter and walwhay only for Amaryllis dairie.
Save that they rather choose to lose their wool on briars for charities sake to
the poor, then that their masters elder Care should sheare them too too near
for covetousness. And they will often counterfeit sickness before their time, to
be given to the relief of the poor, rather then their masters elder Care
should take them home to infect their shepherds with the rott of Mutton: for
old Care is ever more covetous then young Careless is prodigal. Touching that
which all men hate the darkness our Climate is daily prevented with that
which al men love the lightness, for we have none but humble valleis unto our
champion, and no fence for which the daytide being of great length, the night
is never without some lightness: Except at such time of the night as the
uttermost plains of the earth, receive no light, then when as the goall of
night and of the heavens is overcome, and that the starlight departs even in
the intercession of the new day. In so much as the Sun which to all other
people seems to go down and fall, to us appears but still to pass away.
Since then Amaryllis, this is creat only to bear flowers for my garland which
I mean to bestow yearly upon you, as a Coronet for your patience, till I can
indow you with the whole, I request you, accept my ability as a possibility,
though not a possession to enrich you withal.


Ama. Yes Corydon, I take well in worth your singular courtesies, but may not
break Vesta her laws for love of Ceres, nor leave Diana her grace to seek
Lucinas help, nor leave fountains of Nectar to taste rivers of water, nor
leave Manna to taste of Ambrosia. But as I have put on the stoale and Robe of
dignity, so must I learn to shun indignity, for I have many eyes object
upon me: eyes such as the Pecocke does spread to envy fair weather and
prosperity: eyes such as can fascinate the tender lambs of Diana, and for
their pleasure have induced them to adversity eyes that are poreblinde, and
therefore look nigh unto others. Eyes that are bleared and so cannot see into
themselves. Eyes like the Owl to see what is done in the night. Eyes like the
Stare to watch for the day. Eyes like the Hawke, to watch aloft for a foul.
Eyes like a Buzard, at hand to sease upon any thing. Eyes of a Dove, but ears
withal. Beware of little Pytchardes, they have great ears. And therefore it
behooves me to borrowe of the Eagle her eyes, that I may behold the Sun and
not be confounded of the glory. And because it is a custom among Dianas
servants to banquet much in honor of our mistress, I do use to repress that
outrageous god with a more sober: (...).
and mingle water with my wine, which in taking away that which is hurtful,
does leave only that which is healthful. And because there has bin the
Mandrage a stark poison growing near unto Vines in many countries, I use to
give every one leave to drink thrice for my once. I have read in a writer of a
certain Pearl, which I mean to send for shortly, Plinius lib. 25. cap. 9. li
14. c. 2. Plutarch lib. de Audi. poetis. (...).
called Amethuston, to hang at mine ear: they say it does use to repel
desires. Some were used to receive into their bodies Amuletos before such times
as they went to banquet, and some to carry it about them, it will surely repel
oversight in drinking, or ouerdelight in eating. These experiences since I have
learned first of you Corydon, I will rest your scholar still for your virtues,
but no lover of any ones person.


Cor. Why then my song shall be of patience perforce, and I will still be
attendant upon your preferment, though I mean to go hide my shame in my
fathers woods, that once might not have repented me too late, but have
relieved my true love in time, even with the enjoying of Amaryllis, whose joys
now increased shall increase my bad Muse to entreat of them day and night.
And now both you fountains and drierie woods, lend of the infinite soundes
and innumerable busshes in you, a verse for every budde, and a line for every
leaf. And you immeasurable mountains in height expressing my high desire in
everliving greenes, manifesting my eternal good will, in hugenes remembering
her impossiblenes of me now to be embraced: in having but one way to go up,
and that very narrow, it foresheweth that only virtue must be the path that
leads unto her: In being stored with Cedar trees, foretells me, that she
inclyneth to high honors: In being stored with sheep, says she shall be
rich: In having a fountain, shows she has wisdom: In having humble and
low valleys, shows that she has true humility: In bearing the name of
Pimplea, assures the beholders, that none must presume before they be called,
lest they be repelled by her swains with their hooks, and by her maynie with
their whips. You senceles creatures receive me into your herd for as mute a
creature, though not so brute a substance as you, till I being well acquainted
with your kind, yield glory to my mistress for making me silent, as you do
to your creator for making you a subject. Yet not silent Corydon til I have
said my mind, once more to move her spirits to sing unto my Roundilay her
mornings tune, which putting upon with her gown all gravity, she may use to
modulat to this dittie.

Corydons Hymn to the praise of Amaryllis.
Would mine eyes were cristall fountains
Where you might the shadow view:
Of my griefs like to these mountains
Swelling for the loss of you.
Cares which curelesse are alas,
Helpless, hapless for they grow,
Cares like tares the number pass,
All the seed that love does sow.
Who but could remember all,
Twinkling eyes still representing
Stars, which pearce me to the gall,
Cause they lend no longer lighting,
And your Nectar lips alluring,
Humane sense to taste of heaven.
For no art of man's manuring,
Finer silk has ever weauen,
Who but could remember this,
The sweet odors of your favor:
When I smeld I was in bliss,
Never felt I sweeter savor.
And your harmles heart anointed,
As the custom was of Kings:
Shows your sacred soul appointed,
To be prime of earthly things.
Ending thus remember all,
Clothed in a mantle green,
It Is enough I am your thrall,
Leave to think what eye has seen.
Yet the eye may not so leave,
Though the thought do still repine:
but must gase till death bequeath,
Eyes and thoughts unto their shryne.
Which if Amaryllis chance
Hearing to make haste to see,
To life death she may advance,
Therefore eyes and thoughts go free.
Now Amaryllis, ending my mirth, begins my moan. Now departing from your
sight, I shall be blind, and from your presence I shall perish. Yet vouchsafe
beauties wanton darling, so called for that you have been pleasant with my
Kiddes, and learned to smile quickly of dame Flora your grandmother, suffer my
thoughts to be sent as suitors to your honor to protect their baseness, though
my body be absent from your sight, by reason of unworthiness. Now I have fed a
wanton eye, I will go feed my starued flock: and since greater dignity is
befallen Amaryllis then my infirmity must think, of my accustomed boldness
shall not approach your presence without some present, worthy to gratify so
high degree. All this while Tityrus gathers my straying flocks to his straying
thoughts, and keeps my Kiddes from pride which would insult, since they have
notice of Amaryllis success. But let Tityrus my beloved Rival, beware lest
that Libyan white one, which wanting a playfellow, and going to Amaryllis
fountain to seek her, do not fall into a frenzy for absence of his foster
mother, and so strike him suddenly with her horn. O gracious Amaryllis, why do
you recall me your quondam lover, roming like the Woodoses in these groves, to
view that you must fly them, and go to Dianas courts? Do you hate me? No.
Then you must love me. True. For in Dianas nymphs there is but two
dispositions, and in a woman there is no third thing: Mulier aut amat, aut odit,
nihil est tertium. Then do so still. Shall I be the same in favor when I come
to man's state, as now being a beardlesse youth? Then destroy me presently that
I may die before the cogitations of departure bereave me of my joyful bliss.
Behold, I cast before thee twelve Queenapples, though the Gods sent down but
one, all pourporting this poesy: To the fairest of twelve. I gathered them
from a tree planted with thine own hand, which makes them look so like
heavenly food. Behold my bitter grief. Why hide you your face Amaryllis?
Would I were made a humming Be to serve Dianas hyues, that so in her mount
garden I might see my Amaryllis mounted, wearing her daily garland, knotted
with her own hair, to show how she hates to wear any other bodies
Thyrsus. Now do I know O love, that thou art a plagie god. Certes, some
Lioness was thy foster mother (or else the Poets feign) when Iaculus and you
ran away from your own mother. Or else you were Astyages son, one of the
first Monarchy that was, whom when your mother was with child of you, your
father dreamed that she bare a Vinebranch in her womb that would ouershadowe
all Asia: Asking counsel of the Soothsayers what brood she should breed:
they told true, such an one as would disturb all Nations, and deposede your
own father from rule of himself. Then he gave thee, O Cupid to Harpagus to be
overwhelmed with the obliuious waves of the Sea. But he unhappy engine of all
men's woe, returning into a wood in unlucky Persia, there left thee at random,
to the wide world. Then Spacon, which in the Persian language is a dog, was
thy Nurse, and so art thou cruel by his education.

Such an one is Love, that whom a mad dog byteth, he is mad presently upon
it. I burning with inward fire, seeking with outward tears to quench the
outward apparent flame of love, my tears serve to smother my heat, the smoke
whereof is the sooner seen. So outward medicines show there to be inward
griefs. Fair looking like the glorious Diamond, in worth the most precious
Pearl, Nymphe embrace a shepherde with your looks, then they may kiss me,
though I not them, with the lips of admiration. In fair looks, are vayled
with modesty sweet kisses.

I will go gather a Coronet, and will weaue and infolde it with the knottes of
truest love, with green laurel Apollos scepter, which shall betoken her
wisdom, and with the Myrtle fair Venus Poesy, which shall show her
beauty. And with Amaranthus Dianas herb, whereby blood is stenched, so may
she imitate the herb, and have remorce. Woe is me, what Aetna shall I
possess. Will not Amaryllis hear? Then off goes my pastoral robes made of my
dearest Goats clothing, and into this Lethe I run, where if I be not
drowned, yet eternal forgetfulness shall make me happy. Yet there the
fisher Olpis still watching, may take me to be the great fish Thynnus, and so
save my life, and bring me to shame again. But I will do it, for then sure I
am, that some pleasure in hope that I am dead will possess Amaryllis: so she
retourning with joy to see, I may take her in her good mood. All is in vain,
Diana calls, and honor allureth. Lately, I asked counsel of Agraeo a
Prophetess, how to know whether Amaryllis should ever love me, she taught
me to take Telephilon a kind of leaf that Pepper bears so called of (...),
because it foresheweth love, and to clap the leaves in the palm of my hand. If
they yielded a great sound, then surely she should love me greatly: if a
little sound, then little love. But either I was deaf being senceles through
love: or else no sound at all was heard, and so Agraeo the diuinatrix told me
a true rule. Now I prefer my garlande made in sorrowful have, of which the
flowers, some signifying death, and some mourning, but none belonging to
marriage, do manifest, that Amaryllis has no respect of mean men. Come gentle
Amaryllis, I will go fetch that milkewhite Goat, which has now a twinne which
you have ever liked, and sacrifice her to your liking. Will you not? Then
Erithacis rich though not so fair, who is an earnest suter to me shall have
them, because she is delighted with my presence. But my right eye watreth, it is
a sign of somewhat, do I see her yet. O fair Amaryllis, be not angry, though
I talk idly, and speak like one distract. At the foot of this Pine tree, I
will end my lamentations, where perhaps she may look back and see me; for
she is no Adamant. I would I could prevent her swift pace as Hippomanes did
unto Atalanta, with golden Apples which Venus has sent me to cast before her,
that she stooping to gold, might be overtaken. But gold cannot tempt
Chastity. I would with Bias make shift to obtain fair Perones, though the
Oracles said I should die for it, if I take the labor in task. But she
seeks not the death of a lover. I would with Adonis one of mine own
faculty, for love of Venus watch so long in the woods, that the wild bore
should slay me for my duty. But she hating to be called Venus, will rather
let me continue dead then revive me for loves sake, as Venus did her Adonis. I
would be like Endymion if I could, who for that he eschued all love, and
followed Dianas life, he fell in delight with perpetual hunting in the woods.
But Amaryllis will not be Luna to induce me into a perpetual sleep, to the
intent to embrace me: but will be Luna to the intent to fly from me. I would
be Jason if she would be Ceres, and vouchsafe to sleep with me, (...) quasi
(...).
then might she be Ceres in deed quasi Geres: but that were admirable, that
by one bare sleep should happen, yet might she be Ceres for she bears glad
tidings unto him that shall have her. Thus I fainting, and she not caring,
must think that what is hapless should be careless, but that will not be.
Then here will I lie and let my flock starve, that when the Wolf has eaten
them, he may be so good unto me. This shall please Amaryllis rather then
continual importunity, yet departing; honey of the Comb shall be my food: yet
will I eat nothing but sweet thoughts: and the joyce of Pieres shall be my
drink, yet will I drink nothing but the spring water that she last washed
in. Where by the purity, I shall think of her sincerity, and see my sorrows
written in the sands. Here will I wait and haunt these plains and woods,
looking for no companion, but the loving bird which delights to behold the
face of a man, of him I will love to behold the face of a goddess. Here shall
I find none to tune unto me but that ladies bird that counterfaiteth to
chatter with a small shrill voice as they do, and faines the voice of a Lady,
to whom I will use to say: O the voice of a goddess! And whiles Tityrus is
with our flock in Crotona, I will sit here till I see Diana come bie, and will
bethink me upon a number of Hieroglyphiks, which I will compose in some order
shortly, and prefer them to Amaryllis. In the mean while, let this my
Roundilay end my folly.


Since the Nimphs are thought to be happy creatures,
For that at faier Helicon a Fountain,
Where all use like white Rich Iuorie foreheads
Daily to sprinckle,
Since the quire of Muses atend Diana,
Ever use to bathe heavy thoughts refyning,
With the Silver skin, Ciuet and Mir using,
For their adornment,
Since my sacred Nymphs privilege abateth,
Cause Dianas grace did elect the Myrtle,
To be pride of every branch in order
last of her handmaides:
Should then I thus live to behold euerted,
Skies with impure eyes in a fountain harbourd,
Where Titans honor seated is as under
All the beholders?
Help woeful Ecco, reabound relenting,
That Dianas grace on her help recalling,
May well hear thy voice to bewail, reanswere
Fair Amaryllis.
Fairer in deed then Galataea, fairest
Of Dianas troop to bewitch the wisest,
With amasing eye to abandon humors
of any Gallants.
She Thetis faier, Galataea modest, Possis simul Thetide^ and Galataeam amar^
set. voluptatem and gloriam, contra Prouerbium.

Albeit some say in a Crystal often,
It Is a rule, there lurketh a deadly poison,
It Is but a false rule.
For what Yse is hid in a Diamond Ring,
Where the wise beholder has eyes refusing,
Allabasters veins to no workman hidden,
Gold to no Touchstone.
There bedeckes fairest Rosamond the fountain,
Where resorts those green Driades the watrie
Nimphs, The Driades are supposed to be trees that have life and sense.
of Olive plants recreat by Phoebus
Till they be married.
So beginning ends the report of her fame,
Whose report passing any pens relation,
Does entreat her love, by reinspiration
To dull heads yielding faer eyes reflection,
Still to be present.
FINIS.

