A COPY OF A CERTAIN LETTER WRITTEN BY A person of reputation, to a Prelate
of Brabant, being at Brussels.

The 25. of February. 1599.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are (...)-Alley, n^^e (...) the
E^^^^^ge. 1599.

To the Reader.
Loving Reader,
the Coppie of this Letter, being come to my hands, with the Annotations upon
the gift or yielding up of the Netherlandes, to the Infanta of Spain, which
in my opinion, is not to he smothered in obscurity, I thought good to put the
same in Print, to the end that all lovers of the Netherlandish rights and
privileges, may the better understand (what by the virtuous Catholics
themselves is censured of these Spanish dealings.

A copy of a certain letter, written by a person of reputation, to a prelate
of Brabant, being at Brussels.
The 25. of February 1599. HOnorable, noble, high learned, wise, prudent, and
most discreet Lord.
I have received your letters, dated in Brussels the xvi. of November last,
with the enclosed copy of the gift of the deceased king of Spain, to the
noble princess Isabella Clara Eugenia, his eldest daughter: of the
Netherlands, and the Country of Burgundy, in respect of the marriage between
the above named illustrious princess, and the illustrious Prince Albertus,
Archeduke of Austria, her cousin, with your request, that I should sincerely
wright unto you my opinion thereof: to wit, whether according to my judgment
and feeling, the same be a meet means to quench the Netherlandish wars,
and to reduce them to a quiet and peaceable estate: whereupon I have at diverse
times considered, and notwithstanding that I have been in great suspense, in
what sort and what imported, to give my judgment and advise in so weighty a
matter: yet in respect of the reverence I owe to your honor, I have been forced
to resolve and to accomplish your will upon a sure trust, that this my advice
should remain betvveene us, and not to bewled to the hinderance and scandal
of other I cannot bide from your honor, but that upon this matter in the last
month, diverse aduises have bin sent me, as well out of England, France, and
Germany, as out of some quarters of the Netherlands, vvherof some are of this
opinion, and other of other, that the deceased king conside ring his great age
and desiring to leave his son, the new ^ing a peaceable estate, should have
faithfully and in good meaning proceeded herein: other that it is without any
apperanne that the Spanish counsel should as any time find good indue meaning
to sever the Netherlands from Spain, as having more commodities requisite to
the greatness of a Prince, then all the realines of Spain, and that therefore
the said dealings did only tend and stretche to attain and being that to
pass, which by arms or other means can hardly be done. Besides that, a
certain person of no smascredit with the great, writes, in confirmation of
this last opinion, to know certainly, that by the high borne Princess and
Prince, counter letters should have been given. And also that for security of
their promises thereof, of it is agreed, that four of the cheifest places of
the Netherlands should remain in the possession of the Spaniards. But without,
to build upon any foundations of these devises, I will only by manner of a
gloss, coat what I find to be considerable, and finally to set down my
feeling, to understand the true ground thereof, hoping that your honor the
better will consider in what sort ought to be dealed for the common quietness
and tranquillity, union and well fare of the Netherlands, and to bring and
maintain them in their old right splender, respect and prosperity,
beseeching your honor, according to your wisdom and bountiful discretion, to
understand and interpret the whole to the best: and the Lord God Almighty
preserve your honor able, noble, high learned, wise, provident, and most
discreet Lordship, in a long and prosperous government.

Written the 25. of February. 1599. Your Honors most humble servant.

Superscription. To the honorable, noble, high learned, wise, provident and
most discreet Lord, Abbot of Saint, etc.
Phillip Rex.
To all present and to come which shall see or hear these letters: greeting.
WHereas we have found to be most be hoouefull not only to our Provinces of
the Low Countries, but also, unto I wish that this Preface were shorter, and
with words more pleasing to the Hollanders, and touching that which the K of
Spain says of the great desire and care he has for all Christendo^, I
doubt that our adversary will labor but too much by the former and present
acts, to show the contrary.
all Christendom in general, The reasons of no longer to defer or delay the
marriage (being now well near come to that age, that there is little
appearance of having children, falls also not well, not yet the Popes
holiness dispensation, to give the high above named Infanta, to his Brother,
Nephewe, or Cousin, cannot be very pleasing.
no longer to delay the marriage of our dear and eldest daughter the Infanta,
Isabell Clara Eugenia, being moved thereunto, as well for the conservation of
our house, as diverse other good respects: as also, for the great gogd
affection, which we bear unto our beloved Brother, Nephewe, and Cosine, the
Archouke Albert, (at this present) Lieftenant, Governor, and Captain
general, for us in our Netherlands and Burgondie: we have cast our eyes on
him, and choosing him for the future husband of our said Eldest Daughter, the
whole, as well with the consent and pleasure of our holy father the Pope, who
condiscendeth, and grants the dispensations thereunto belonging, as also
with the agreement and consent, of the most high, excellent, and puissant
Prince, our beloved Brother, Nephew, and Cousin, Rodolph, the second of that
name, Emperor of the Romans, together with our well-beloved sister the Empres
his ^other, which being considered, and to the end that our said daughter might
be furnished with reasonable means, such as are required for her great
calling and merits. Also to show and make known, I fear that against this
singular and especial love will be objected the deaths of the knights of the
fleece, many Noblemen and Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the Netherla^ds, by
thousa^ds which have by violent means, and against the rights and privileges
of the countries.
the love which we have and do beer^, unto our said Netherlands and
Burgundy, we have resolved (to the advancement of the said marriage) to I
foresee, That it will be said that this grief does not agree with the
general and particular fights of the Netherlands, in such sort to give them in
Spain, but that the one ought first to have been lawfully assembled, the
States general and particular of the Provinces of the Netherlands, to consider
duly all the members, if the same ought for the good of the countries to be
permitted, or no: also I fear that it will be assuredly supposed and believed,
that by this gift the Netherlands shall seem not by usurpation, but quasi by
their own consent, to be made subject to the Spanish counsels disposition. A
matter at times highly detested by the Netherlanders, and this opinion, shall
apparently be confirmed by sundry conditions and restraints, contained in this
gift, many whereof seem to assubiect the Netherlands to Spain, the which I
believe will not be so understood nor taken to be either honorable or lawful
to the Netherlanders, not only by the States and Communaltie of the adversary,
nor yet by theirs of Brabant, Flaunders, Haynolt, Artoyes, and other countries.
give and transport all those said countries, unto our said Daughter, and all
thereunto belonging, in the manner which shall be specified here under. The
whole, with the content and good will, of our dear and well-beloved good son,
the Prince Phillip, our only son and heir: according to the advertisement,
which (by us and our said son) has been given unto the principal Lords
and Knights of our order, Governors and Estates of our said Netherlands, which
are in our obeisance, together with those of our country of Burgundy. All the
which have witnessed and declared by their answer, the joy and contentment
which they received at our so kind resolution, which they know and confess to
be for the rest and tranquillity of our said Netherlands, and that it is the
true and right course to attain to a good I wish moreover, that this design
of the kings to see the Netherlands in a su^e peace and tranquillity had been
soberly rehearsed since that the present and former proceedinges will be
objected against the same, out of which this desires can hardly be judged,
especially being that fire and sword, not only in the Netherlands, but also
upon the neutrall neighbors is yet daily as much used as ever before. I will
not rehearse the great ^oades and other disorders committed in the Netherlands
on that side in this year, nor the neuer-to-fore heard mutenies and unworthy
proceedings upon the castle of Antwerpe, to the charge and against the same
good City and Citizens of the Spaniards, also the dealings with the Cities
of the Empire, Accken and Wesell, the horrible tyranny of the land of Collen,
Cleue, Berge, VVestphalie, Munster, Marcke, and against Earls and other
persons, only I consider upon the answer of the Admirant D'arragon, who
being showed and told of the Archbishops promises, says, that Gods service
and the kings, permit him not to his faith, which will be esteemed far
worse then the former, to wit, That no faith need be held to Heretics: and
I am sorry that with so small consideration, by the abouenamed Lord Admirant,
is spoken and written to the Empires members, that he only desires to have
the Romish religion, by them maintained and excercised, with the deposing as
well with the Lutherian as the Caluian doctrine, fearing that same will breed a
great scandal to the Kings, Electors, Princes, and other not using the Romish
religion.
and a firm peace, and and to be delivered from such a troublesome war:
which quiet and tranquillity, we have always wished unto them. It being true,
that the greatest felicity which may happen to a country, is to have a good
and wise Prince, and to be governed of him in person, undoubtedly by the
adverse party hereupon will be alleged, that the deceased king desired not
the felicity of the Netherlandes, as not vouchsafed, in the space of forty
years once to see them, but choose rather by the Duke of Alba, and other his
Tyrants, with outlandish mean of war, enemylike to invade the same, to hold
the Netherlands as a new conquested land, to put to death the chief Lords,
Nobles, and principal Citizens lovers of the lands, rights and privileges,
or to bannish them out of the country, and to confiscate their goods, to use
the rest as slaves to their tyranny, to build castles in their chief
cities, to fill them with Spanish soldiers, to set up and erect new and never
to sore heard counsels, against the wills of the States of the land, to appoint
and raise such contributions as they thought good, under the pretense of
treating of peace, to set abroach new treasons, and revenge in great powers:
and in brief, to reduce the Nethetlandes to such a point, that therein they
might plant Sedum belli, thereby with the countries opportunity, and good
commodities of the rivers, havens, and sea holds, the multitude of seafaring
men and Ships, together with the abundance of all provision needful to a
mighty army by water and land, to further the insatiable Spanish ambition, in
the incorporating and establishing laws to all Realms, Countries, and
Commonweales, (as they say) with the proceeding against Germany, England,
France, Ireland, and other Realms and countries manifestly show. That the king
has been this forty year so busied with matters of such importance, that he
has not been able once to see the Netherlands, (being such worthy, fair,
and important countries, which by his Lord and Father, Grandfather, and other
his predecessors, have been held in so high esteem) will by many but pass
for a slight excuse, especially it being answered that his Lord and father the
Emperor Charles, only to set order in a cause of the City of Gaunt, not
without peril to his person, came our of Spain through France into the
Netherlands.
And considering that (which unto all is most manifest) the greatest felicity
which may happen to a country, to be governed by the sight and presence of
their natural Prince and Lord, God is witness of the trouble and care which
we have had, because we have not been able in that sort to do it personally,
as (truly) we well wished, if other great and important affairs of our Realm
of Spain, had not forced and constrained us to make a continual residence
therein, without moving any thing from thence, as also at this present they
constrain us.

And although the age of our said son, seem more fit to travel then does
ours, notwithstanding it has been the pleasure of the Almighty, to give so
many other kingdoms and Countries, for the good government of which, there will
never want offaires of great importance, for the which also his pretense shall
here be needful. We have then found most convenient to take this resolution to
the end that our said Low countries be not left in the forepassed
inconveniences, together with the reason that we have to appoint the portion of
our said daughter the Infanta according to her merits, and the If the highness
of the birth of ye illustrious Infanta, or her great merits oght to give her
the Netherlands: wherefore then (might be said), Have they not been furthered
unto the states, being lawful^y assembled, pure, clear and without any
conditions side commissions, or ^estrainctions, for all the conditions and
restraints, will be adjudged to be traps and deceites, thereby (according to the
doctrine of ^he doctors of Tyr^^o) (...) b^^ng that to pass under the veil of
a Foxes skin, which could not be ^l with Lions cl^wes.
greatness of her birth.

As also perticularly, that next unto the said Prince (...) (unto whom God
confirm with long years and prosperity to his service) our said eldest
daughter is the first and nearest heir unto the said Countries, and therefore,
by virtue of the will and pleasure of our said Son, she may from this time be
constituted in the same. The more because we have chose these means, hoping
that thereby our said Netherlands may return, to their ancient flower, rest,
and prosperity, which heretofore they have had.

Wherefore we make known, That desiring at this present to put in execution,
that whereon we have so ripely considered, and in respect of the voluntary
consent, which our said Son the Prince has so liberally given thereunto,
after her had understood, the It is wonder that herein they have used the
word submission since that undoubtedly it will be saved not to be strange,
though the states of the Provinces sything and panting under the Spanish
tyranny, seeing the Cities environed, their countries suppressed with
Spaniards, and other outlandish soldiers, and the whole and entire government
of countries and cities, compou^ded according to the Spanish will: of many
mischiefs, were sain to choose ye least, aand that they therefore thereon have bin
compelled to submit and yeald themselves to the Spanish Councels will and
pleasure, and to accept the propounded conditions. how unreasonable burdensome
and unworthy soever they seemd, but it will never be believed, that neither
the States nor the Communaltie, which by the staes are represented, being in
liberty, will keep those forced conditions.
submission where with our said countries, did confirm our will and intention,
we have resolved and decreed, to cede and transport to our said Daughter the
Infanta, and to the advancement of the said marriage, all our said Provinces of
the Netherlands and Burgundy, in the form, manner, and conditions here under
expressed.

The conditions whereupon these answers are written, are to be found in the
Book before Printed, entitled, The transportation of the Low Countries, etc.
Upon the first condition. BY this first and many other articles, the intent of
the Spanish king is but too clear, and the Spanish counsel manifest, to wit,
that by all means they will not only have the Netherlands joined to Spain,
but especially, that by this gift and transport, as with the consent of the
lands, they shall be assubiected to the Spanish government, in steed that
until now they have destred to usurp the same by unjust and false titles.

Upon the third condition. I have considered upon the contents of this third
article, to wit, that the Archeduke dying without leaving child or children,
procreated by the high borne Infanta: in such case this gift shall be nothing,
and of no worth, and that she instead of these Netherlands, shall have her
lawful portion. Heerevpon will be said, that it is a fit means to hold the
Netherlands combustion, being that no body should be able to make the
legitimate portion of all the realms and countries possessed by the King of
Spain, as well in Europe, as the East and West Indies, that this catch brings
with it the before said Spanish enterprise, to get the Netherlands in their
claws.

Upon the fourth condition. That word, return to the king of Spain, set in
this fourth Article, manifests likewise the self same intent.

Upon the fifth condition. By this fifth Article appears vnreplicably, that at
least the Princes of the Netherlands, should for ever remain subjects to the
king of Spain and the Spanish counsel, a matter altogether unworthy not only
for the Netherlands, but also for the Princes thereof, and truly, the virtue
of the states of the Netherlands provinces of above certain 100. years past
was so great, that such indignity durst not have been offered them.

Upon the sixth condition. By this sixth Article, is given full power to the king
of Spain and the Spanish counsel, that when as the Netherlands should by
succession fall in a woman's hands, to draw the same to Spain again, by
marriage with the King or Prince of Spain, or by hinderance thereof, the
Spaniards turning over the leaf, and insteede that Spain is now by marriage
come to the hands of the Princes of the Netherlands, they will always make the
Netherlands fall into the king of Spain, thereby with a better title of the
same to rule them to their pleasure.

Upon the seventh condition. The conditions contained in this seventh Article,
in more manifest sort explaineth the intent of the Spaniard, willing that the
Princes of the Netherlands, neither their sons nor daughters shall marry,
without the advice and license from the king of Spain: In what plainer and
manifester sort might we set the Princes and the Netherlands (against the
right of all peoples and nations) in the Spaniards protection or wardship.

Upon the eight condition. In this eight Article, I have considered the
arrogancy of the Spaniards, in forbidding the Inhabitants of the Netherlands,
the traffic and Navigations of the East and West Indies, a matter never to fore
heard of, and against the right of all nations. How much differs this from
the furtherance of the welfare, prosperity, and ancient flourish of the
Netherlands. The greater part of the East and West Indies, known the king of
Spain. What right (I pray you) have she Spaniards to forbid the Netherlanders,
the traffic and nauightion in those parts? What reason has a Prince of the
Netherlands (who is bound to his power to further his subjects, in trade and
welfare) to propose such unmeet and unreasonable conditions against himself
and his subjects, and to take upon him to set penalties, that the Netherlands
in such case should be confiscated and deuolued to the Spaniards: by what
title, foundation, or color, have the Spaniards ^ot such right in the
Netherlands? Truly I am of opinion that many thousands, as well Prelates, Lords,
Nobles, as virtue us citizens in Brabant, Flaunders, and other countries (as
now sighing under the Spaniard) would rather dye for the countries liberty;
then for their successors, to accept such dishonorable and unlawful
conditions, and it is not apparent that any of the other Provinces would once
think upon such intolerable and dishonest propositions.

Upon the ninth condition. It will be said, that by this ninth article, the
right of the States of the land, is contaminated and deminished, unto whom
during the nonage of their Prince or Princess, the government of them and the
lands (according to their rights) does belong. Which rights may not be
acquitted and laid aside, according to the Spanish counsels appetite.

Upon the tenth condition. Upon this tenth article I am to say nothing as
touching the Catholic faith, but I doubt that this precise condition of taking
such an oath as the text shows, and the penalty of dispossession of the
propriety of the lands, shall be thought to tend but little to a peace and
quietness of the Netherlands (for those of Holland and Zealand, and other united
Provinces, will esteem the said condition such, as thereby is meant, that it is
not desired yt any time they should be conjoined with the other lands, which
notwithstanding (in my opinion) is the only way, to bring Netherland out of
these broiles of the Spanish tiranie, and in her old flourish.

Upon the oath. Nor yet upon the form of this Oath, am I to say any thing, but
I fear, that the Hollanders will expound the same, that not only the Prince
binds himself and his successors to the Romish religion, without considering
that the faith is a gift of God, but also that he must maintain his subjects
therein, and thereunto will bring forth the Spanish Inquisition.

Upon the 12. condition. Upon this. 12. article I say (according to my
judgment) that no sure peace, love, nor correspondence, can be had between the
Spaniards and the Princes of the Netherlands, mor no hope thereof, as long
while as the said, Spaniards, sick (in the least) to usurp any thing over the
Netherlanders, which notwithstanding by this gift seems to be all their
pretense.

Upon the 13. condition. I am and have been offended in the highest degree,
(...) ^standing by this 13. article, that these Netherlands should be held as a
feoffe o^ ^feoffe to Spain, and do not think that any Netherlander, (not over
Hispaniolized) would find it good: for that the Princes of the Netherlands
which (...) certain hundred years past have always been souer^^ and absolute
Princes, should henceforward (...) to the king of Spain, which will never (...)
in any true virtuous Netherlanders heart, but undoubtedly will be a cause that
the Hollanders and their associates, will with these indecent and unreasonable
conditions, more justify their causes before all the world, then ever to fore,
especially with this opportunity by the kings decease, whose decease has
discharged every one of all bonds, and their bonds may not be renewed, according
to rights, privileges, and customs of the country, without their consent,
which they will never yield to such conditions.

By this my brief annotation, your honor may understand, what (in my opinion)
upon each point may apparently be said by the catholics themselves, I have
therein roundly and in good meaning executed your honors charge, upon hope that
my writing shall not be showed to any, and upon the same hope, I cannot hide
from your honor, (that in my mind) this conditioned gift will not prove the
right means to reduce the Netherla^d in rest, peace, and prosperity, but would
esteem it more convenient, that in this opportunity, and by the kings decease,
ye States of all the Netherlands should take arms against the Spaniard and his
adherents, thereby to compel the said Spaniards, and other strangers to depart
the Netherlands, leaving by provision, every one in his own in such order
touching the religion as otherwise, as they are: to the end that the Spaniards
and strangers being driven out of the said lands, and the same land, being so
reduced in their rights, freedoms, and security, that as then the General
States of all the Netherlands, might assemble, and by good means take advise
and resolve, upon the points which should tend to a right and true welfare, a
during and assured peace, rest and union of the Netherlands, which would be a
good and convenient means, not only for the service of the Netherlands, but
also for the high above named Infanta, and the illustrious Archeduke her lord
and husband, which otherwise, by this conditioned guifte would hold them in a
perpetual slavery and servitude of the Spaniards. I know that many honest
persons of all qualities amongst you, and also amongst the adversaries of the
Spaniards unto which these means would be heartily pleasing, and trust that if
the same were in earnest and effectually by your honor and others, taken in
hand, the Almighty God would yield his blessing thereto.

FINIS.

