To the reader.
HE, that generally reads the histories, not oneli of the old ancient
Philosophers but also of al writers in these days, shall easily perceive and
understand, that the most hard and difficill thing of al other is, for any
mortal man to wythstande the invincible force of nature, who as we see daily
endeuoreth her self to the very hour of death, to overcome man's wit,
reason and force. For although we be encouraged earnestlye, by our master and
sauyoure Christ, with the hope of perpetual pleasures, and the perfyte belief
of everlasting life, to leave these vain, folyshe and most uncertain desiers
or delectacions of this most wretched world, and boldly, without fear, to
pass through the ports of death, out of this vile, caducke, If nature be of
such strength, never think that Spaniardes can cha^g their vile nature.
and most transytorye life: yet ye see, that nature is of such a mighty power,
in her most overthwart operacions, that al manlines, all force, strength,
power, riches, honor, wisdom, and knowledge not with standing, she compels
all me^ generallye to fear death, to resist death and to fly from that
port, through the which we should pass to everlasting life, and eternal
felicite. I mean that like as nature forceably compels us, contrary to all
reason, to resist death, for the utter most of our power, when by no means
we can escape or fly from it: Even so nature co^pelleth me, being an English
man, for the natural love which I bear toward my country, to take upon me
contrary to al wisdom, if I would seek mine own private safetye, to declare
the nature of spaniardes, ct discover their most vile, and detestable treasons,
which by no means I can devise to expres plai^ly, or to bring to any perfect
end and good order, because their most cursed conditions be so uncertain and
notable. But although I can not express my matters, either wittelye, eloquently
or learnedlye, yet I shall desire thee, most ge^tile reader: al rethoricall
writing, and eloquent style laid a part, to have an earnest respect to the
perfect ground of the matter: which is either the preseruacion, or
destruction of the whole realm. The preseruacio^ of the land, if all English
men will love charitably, faithfully, truly, and Justly together, and every one
from the highest degree, to the loweste, seek, as we are most bounden, stoutly,
boldelye and justly, to defend his native countri, and without fear manfully
to with stand, and resist the fallible force, of our enemies. The destruction
of our most noble kingedome, if one part of our nobilite and commons do resist
another, and treaterousli receive our enemies, assist them, aid them, or
maintain them: In Antwerpe there was at one ti^e above xvii M. pound of
English re^ones and grotes of good silver, melted and new stamped to
mayntai^e your enemies.
if ye suffer them to carye your treasure out of the land, as they have done
very much lately: if ye permit them to inhabit or plant themselves strongly
within your coasts, holds, or haven ^ownes: if ye believe false promyses: if
ye will be disceaued with great gifts, or beggarly bribes: if any ambicion
blind your eyes. And finally if there fall amongst English men dissension,
strife, treason, sedicion or rebellion: the whole realm shall be destroyed, and
all english men brought to perpetual bondage and slavery: yea the first,
chief, and principal workers of these mischeffes, how many so ever they be,
shall be brought to the most shameful death as thou may plainly perceive in
reding this letter that follows. In the first part of the which letter, thou
shall find such examples, as if thou diligently peruse and follow, according
to my exhortacion and doctrine, thou shall find out easily a million and more
mischeues touching the vile nature of Spaniardes, then I have plainly
expressed in writing: In the second part I have discovered such treasons, as
I found written in their letters. And I declare their words, whereby thou
may plainly perceive, to what purpose al their flattering promises, craftye
polices, great gifts and large bribes, be prete^ted: and how it appears
plainly, by their own words and letters, that they pretend none other thing
but only to bring our country under their subjection, and then to bring all
our nobility to their utter confusion and destruction. T^rdlye I have showed
the orders of tie ki^gs court, the manner of Spaniardes living, how they
purpose to appointe us a viceroye, and how vilie he shall use the Queen's
majesty, and all the whole realm afterward. Last of all I have showed thee
what vilany, shame and dishonor they have reported by the Queen's highness and
her honorable Ladies, what honor Londo^e has won in punishing vice, and
exhorted all men to keep love, quietness, Follow this counsel.
peace, and tranquillite, amongst themselves, and when necessite compels
them, to take all wholly one perfect way, in defendi^g their country, and
withstanding their enemies: which exhortacion if english men will observe,
and keep, puttyng their whole trust in our Savior Christ, he will
undoubtedly, defend them, that they may be sure to live quietly in their
country, without fear of the malice or cruel tyranny of all nations. One
thing I have thought necessary to admonish the in, good reder, because I am
but young, and a seruyng man, continuallye brought up in service, without all
knowledge, or learning, and am at this present among Spaniardes, where I can
have the advice of no learned man, as thou may perceive by the unsavory
telling of my tale, and the rude style of this my inordinate letter to place my
work in order, adorn my matter with apt words, or fine eloquent frases of
rhetorike: that thou another reprove my work, though there be many barbarycke
words, and folishe frases, ignorantly placed, out of time or good order Nor
think me parciall because I speak always of Spaniardes vices, without
reciting any virtues: Nor yet be not offended with any folishe reasons, which I
according to my conscience have made concerning our religion. But rather
think truly, that the natural love, which I bear ^o my natyue country,
consyderyng all these eminent mischefes, which ^e at hand, and the detestable
trea^ons, which at this present be wor^ing for your destruction, compelled ^e
to send over this rude letter hately, without correcting or ame^di^g it and
plainly, without dissimulacyon* to discover such treasons, as I knew, and give
englyshmen warninge spedely, lest I should have come to late, when the matter
had been past remedy. I thought it not nedeful to write of their virtues,
because they set out al their virtue to the uttermost themselves, when they
were last in England, so that every man knows it perfectly: but to show
their hid vices and treasons, which few men did understand. And for
religion, I will not in such posting speed take upon me to teach any doctrine,
knowing mine own ignorance, though I have showed my rude reasons, but therein
will submit my self to the correccion of those, which be perfectly learned in
scripture, confessing this work not to be made, to confirme^ any doctrine,
most humbly besechi^g thee, although many men be of diverse and sundry
judgments, to judge the best of this my rude letter ^o pardon mine
ignorauncye, For the defense of our na^iue cou^trye.
and to ^pplye my work, and thy self also to the same good purpose that I do
ordain it unto, and to accept it ge^^ly, with as good a will, as I have
dy^ected it to thee. Whereby thou may encourage me, to take other matters
in hand e^reafter, for the honor and glory of god, and the common vtilite of my
native country. The Lord Jesus Christ lighten and strengthen us in all
verite, and preserve England from Spanishe bondage and slauerye. Thy louinge
friend John Bradeforte.

To the right ^onorable lords etc. the earls of Aru^^ell, Darby, Shreusebury ct
Pe^brok, ^eir true and faithful servant wi^eth, as to al other of our
nobilite increase of grace in gods favor, with perfect honor, and the
preseruacyon of their most honorable estates and country. Though ye rejoice
not in readyng my foolyshe reasons, yet give God thanks, that I have
discovered such detestable treasons.
THere have been certain pestiferous books and letters lately printed in
English, under the cloak of a fervent zeal, or love toward our country,
against Spaniardes, by the ^euelishe device of certain heretics, thinking
thereby to ground i^ the hearts of all people, according t^ the old accustomed
and most curse^ polices of hte devil, many abomin^ble heresies, and most
detestable ^rors, Beware of them.
stinking before the face of go^ and man.

One of the which books has co^^ to my hands, entitled a supplicacio^ to the
Queen's majesty, whereby it apeareth perfectly, that the authors o^ the same
books knew not perfectly the nature of Spaniards: but have there written it by
report, then perfe^ practice. Which books because fe^ men dare use them
openly, leste^ your lordeshippes, and other of t^ Queen's most honorable
counsel, su^vile stinking wedes should be rot^ up, and with the most folishe
gath^rers cast out of the good corn, I t^^ have not ben read of your honor So
that where the said books sho^ have declared unto your lordship^ the nature of
Spaniardes, they pro^ nothing at al, nor should though the came before your
sight. But according to their pretensed purpose, the^ have undoubtedly infected
many sim^le persons. Who, being desierous ^o gather the pleasant sweet
flouers of the gospel, do lack the shoes, The doctors of the church.
which Saint Paul commands us, ^o put on our fete, that we may, with ^ut
danger of pricking, pass fresh^y through the s^arpe thorns. I have ^herfore
purposed, right honorable ^ordes, to leave the full ans^eringe ^o the said
heresies, because I perceue the authors themselves lack that ^odly knowledge,
which I desire to obtain: And some what to declare unto you the nature of
them, with whom I am dailye conuersaunte, tru^ing your lordships will favorably
re^eiue my work, because I will declare nothing by report or hearesaye, but ^he^
those things, which I know ^erfectly by experience. I will write nothing to
disturb the true and most ^odly state of our religion, which ^he Queen's
majesty most gracious^e sets out at this present, and wherein god has
preserved me: not yet, to disturb the quiet estate of the common wealth: But
in showing what is pretended to the contrary declare unto you the way, if it
please you to follow my counsel, how to preserve your lordeshipes, and the
whole realm, from most miserable bondage and captivity. I purpose to declare a
part of the natural disposicion of Spaniardes: certain of their premeditate
mischeues, and pretensed treasons, Not the half.
not only against you^ most honorable persons, but also against the whole
realm: so far, a^ I have heard, seen and proved, for the space of two
or.iii. years in their company. My friends put me t^ learn their language
and compelle^ me to live amongst them, because might know perfectlye,
whethe^ their nature were so vile, as men^ ported, or not. And I assure your
lor^shipes, and all my friends, that the (...) left report, that ever I heard
Englishmen speak, The king except in all evil.
by the worste of all Spaniardes, is nothing to the vileness which remains
amongst the best of that nation, except the ki^gs majesty. Ye will say the
noble men be very civil persons. Objections.
In very deed I have not seen so much virtue in all the rest, as in that
most noble Prince the duke of Medenazelye. The duke of medenazelie.
A Prince, undoubtedly, endewed with perfect humilite, truth, love, charity
and all other prince like virtues. There be many other noble men, Mark the
nature of the nobibilite and their polices.
undoubtedly very wise and politik, which can through their wisdom bind
themselves for a time from their nature, and apply their conditions to the
manners of those men, with whom they would gladlye be frended. Whose
mischeuouse manners a man shall never know, These be the rotes of Spa. nature.
till he come under their subjection. But the^ shall ye perceive perfectly
their puffed pride, with many mischeffes beside, their prowling, and poli^g,
their bribinge and shauing, their most deceitful dealing, their braging and
bos^ing, their flatteringe and faininge, their abominable whore hunting with
most rufull ruling, their doings unjust, with insaciate lust, their stout
stubbernnes, crooked crabbednes and unmeasurable madness in enui, pride and
lechery, which, they say, god loves hartelie, vain glory, and hypocrisy
with all other vilanie, of what kind soever it be: supersticion, desolacion,
the worst of all is when the king does maintai^e mischief continually, and
bestows his power in wickedness.
extorcion, adulacion, dissimulacion, exaltacion, suppression, inuocacion, and
all abominacion: with in numerable more mischeues, which I could plainly
declare, that no nation in the world can suffer. Their masking and mumbling, in
the ^oli time of lent, makes many wives burnt, the king being present night
after night, as a Prince of most might, which has power in his hand, that
no man dare withstand: yet if that were the greatest evil, we might suffer it
well. For there is no man living, but would suffer the king to have wife sister,
daughter, maid and all, both great and small, so many as he list, no man
would him resist. But the worst of all the company must have my wife
priuelie, when I am present by: this is more vilanie, that one must keep the
door, will not that grieve you sore, ct dare not speak for your life when
another has your wife. Perhaps the king, yet that were a noble thing. Naie
perchance so^e other slave or vile pockie knave, this thing in deed shall make
your hearts blede, when your wife bears the mark of that nights warke,
which still will abide, under neth her side, and grieve her sore, half a year
and more: ye perhaps with such mocks you may both come to pockes. For few of
the^ be clear, though they make lusty cheer, as Surgentes do me tell, and
so^e I see right well, which did me co^pel sore against mi will, to take so much
pain, as to make plasters fine for the same thing, which has made me
conning. But wherefore should I spend my time, in showing so mani of their vile
conditions, as I know most perfectly. For me think I hear so^e noble man
starte at these few principal points, Noble men's knaves.
saying: what a vile knave is this, that raileth so much against the Queen's
friends* would to god that were true: we know most perfectly, No^e
they love her treasure faithfully, and her crown heartily. But if her grace
work prudently, she shall perceive spedely, they love her person fainedly* I
have not spoken the worst nor the most, like a rayler, but showed a small
number of ripe rotes, from the which spring a thousand more mischeffes, for out
of eueri rote spring.vii. branches, Mark how the spanishe fruit springth
and out of every branch do spring.vii. worse worms or stinkinge serpents
of more mortal poison, then either the rotes or spitful branches. As for
example, take their pompynge pride, The first rote and first branch.
and ye shall prove their purpose once obtained, they will tread your heads in
the dust, and compel you to live at home porely, without bearing rule in the
commen wealth. Think you, to live at home in your country: no they know
perfectly you would then have all people upon your part and make
insurrections, to drive the^ out of the land: they will provide for this
matter, and put you to death lovingly, before you make such controuersye, that
they may gather up again their great gifts, upon your treasures, and
maintain their gorgious garments, with their false brybrie: their fine
Spanishe brauerye with oppression of the pore people, and bye their lustye
liueres with exceading great excises. There be many other branches, but I
show these for a brefe example, that ye may by your wisdoms pick out the
rest. And yet if ye pull of every branch vii. serpents, The serpents of the
first branch
ye shall find a deuelish company.

As for example. When ye be trodden under foot, mark my words well, every
skur^eie knave shall come to your house and take the best part, leaving you the
worste. Ye must obeie him like a Senioure, A Senior
ye must give them the best beds, and take the worste pacientlie for your
selfs: for you have lord Dannes come again of them, and they shall put you
in rememberaunce of the miseres that your parents suffered under them, which
ye have forgot, they ar so long past.

The worste of them shall be better esteemed, with the king and his counsel,
then the best of your realm, ye must be gladd to give them place not of
courtesy, but of perforce: they must be set in the higheste place, and you in
the loweste. If one of them be appointed in your house, by the king or his
counsel, or else received for his moneie, Obieccions.
the house must be his and not yours.

And yet will he depart without taking leave or paying for lodegi^g.

Some man will say, that is not true: for they have paid eueri man justly the
uttermost penny. I speak not of that, which they have done in England, but
of that which the most part of them do in these countries, and they will
do, when they may bear rule, even amongst you in England.

And yet, I think, there be some, that paid not very justly for all things
when they were amongst you last. For I my self know many worshippeful
men, which, if they durst, would take their oath, and seek for recompense,
that lodged, ye that lodged Spaniardes, in their house a year and more, and
let them have half a dossen beds and chaumbers with all things
perteininge to them, a great part of their fire wood, The Spaniardes keep
chereles kitchens
and such other stuff for buttery and chereles kitchen, ct c. And yet the
Spaniardes at their departing would another pay for many things that were
stolen, nor for many things that were lost, as they said, nor for many
things, that were broken and rent, nor to speak plai^ly, for many things
which were so bawdye, Pockie plasters.
with their pockie plasters, that no man could lie in them afterward. I know
diverse of them, that paid their accoumptes so iustlye, and took their leave
so ho^estly: The manner of taking leave among Spani.
that their hosts knew not of their departing, but left the bakers, bruers,
bouchers, woodmo^gers and coliers, one of the^ to pay another skore. If they
departed stoutly in these days, when they dissembled al goodness, when they
trusted to win the governance of the realm and the crown with gentleness
and good conditions: what will they do, I pray you, when they have the crown
indede. But to return ye must give them leave to speak, when you must hold
your peace, ye must cap to them in all places where ye see them, although it be
not your custom, or rather there is in deed, yet he is a very rusticall beast,
that does it not to the^: for ye know, the worste of them is a Senior: ye must
prefer them in all things, and give all the names of honor, except
majesty, to the vilest slave amongst them. VVoulde not any man be agreued to
read my work, if I should show al their peuishe pride, is there any man so
folishe, that thinks I could not easily suck out of their pride a thousand
pestiferous poisons, and yet not rack it half so sore, as a wise man both
would and could do. The second example of flattery. The branches.
Take another example, look upon their flattery, which is the least fault of
fiftye and the smallest rote of all the rest: Remember their pleasant
promises, repaide with preposterous performacions: ye shall prove, that the
vileste wretch of them all shall be in more credit, then the best of your
friends. And yet their promises shall be so fair that an^ man living would
credit their words. Their countenance, shall be so pleasant toward you,
that ye would think the^ to be your very friends, when in very deed they
shall seek your utter destruction, and to cast you out of favor. Ye shall be
glad to make long labor for small matters: Another obieccio^ made by
slatterers
and at the last not sped* And yet would they be in god your faithful friends.
Some of their false flattering favorers will say, that all men may perceive
perfectly, that I slander Spaniardes wrongefullye: for they have helped many
since their coming into England. But remember I told you they counterfeited
conditions, These were cou^terfeite co^dicio^s to disceue us.
because they might seem like unto us, and the more e^sely disceaue us.

For that, which they have done in England, was no part of their nature, but
the greatest part of dissimulacion, Dissimulacion.
and a plain preparacio^ to disceaue our nobilite. For wherefore should they
seek to maintain our nobilite, and the honor of the realm in his own estate:
do ye think, if they obtain the crown, they will mai^teine the nobilite and
the realm upon their own charges: were it not better for them to destroy the
nobilite and bring the kingdom, This they go about dyligently.
which they love so well, to their own commodites. Mark more of their naturs.
One of them shall laugh to your face when his acquaintance shall kill you behind
your back. How many English men did the Spaniardes kill in their arses, or
not much above the arse, when they were in England last of favor received: most
co^mo^lie one of the^ will talk with you pleasau^tly, and kill you sode^lie when
he se^eth most your friend How many bitter biting serpents, think you, do
spring out of every branch. Take their pleasant promyses, where one of
them shall seem your friend, and be your utter enemy. The serpents of the
first branch. Therefore they would not that you should know their treasons.
Take this point of wisdom. This is painful.
They say every fool can beware of his enemy which he knows: but I
assure you he is a wise man, that can hear their false faining flattery, and
abhor the^ as his mortal enemies. One of them shall flatter you in the ^all,
when another works mischeffe in your chamber. They will borow all that you have
if ye know not their conditions, and pay nothing at all. Though ye will lend
them no money, yet either for fair or foul, ye must credit them til a pay
day, either willingly or against your will.

And then will they stillely steal a way and pay nothing: for the pay day
shall either be at their departing, or else so long before, that of force they
must take up.iii. times so much more to leave upon the skore, before their
departing.

They will speak like faithful friends til they have their purpose, and then
beraile you like devils with cursinge and gri^ni^g, swering and shaking the
heads.

So that ye shall be glad to lose your own right, Note.
that ye may get out of their company. But if ye would lose your goods, to
be dispatched from such villanes company, how much yet shall it grieve your
hearts to be under their subjection, to let them rule you continually, that
they may poole you lawfully. Yet some of them will take their leave crafteli:
and leave a sturdie stuarde to make a rekeninge: and the stuarde in one night
shall steal away and pay no thing.

They will flatter you more falselie, then any nation in the world: take heed
mi lords they be false traitors toward you privily.
and that many of our noble men shall prove perfectly in short time, if they
work not wisely: and yet for all this ye may not say they lie, when in deed
they cannot speak t^ueth. They will boast themselves to be most righteous
judges on the earth. But if ye come once in trouble, the falseste knave in
their company, if his tale be once told, shall cause you to be cast in prison
immediately: and there shall ye remain till ye be glad to say, that truth
is falsehode, and falsehod is truth.

For ye may not say, as ye know well enough, that the falseste knave among
the^ has told a false tale. Is not this equal justice: And shall do if I
seek all my life time.
do ye not see it is in vain and over tedious to write all things. I am
far past my promise, and yet the farther I seek, the more deuellishe fruit I
find.

Let us leave all order, and take another rote by chance, that ye may be sure
ye cannot go amiss, but ye shall find every tree bringing forth her fruit
plentifully. As for example. Mark their abominable and most supersticious
hypocrisy.

And ye shall prove, the third example of supersticious hipocrisi The branches.
they care ^or no part of Gods most holy service, but a mass only,
whether it be holy day or work day. If the mass be begone before their
coming, God hears not their prayers.

But if they be present all the mass time, though they talk of al manner
bawdie vices, the matter is good enoughe: though they knelle, all the ^ime
mass is celebratinge, spienge, where is the fairest woman, it is well: though
they pray not.iii. words, and those with out all devotion, yet is he holy
enoughe.

If he imagine all that time, how to obtain another man's wife, maid or
daughter, it is no sin: when they deuyse to disceiue another man, to spoil
him of his goods, to rob him of his good name, to ^ill him or such like
mischefe, it is no offense.

If a Spaniarde be going to church on a Sabbath day, and remember a mischeuous
deed to be wroughte, Great abuse.
he may return to his mischefe, and give a riall of plate to a Priest, that he
man say mass: and that evil which he goth about, is good and just: that day
he may use al vilanie* but if he have be^^ at mass, whosoever says he canne^
sin that day, shall be called a Lutheran, though he return after mass to al
mischefe, as a dog to his vomit, though he follow the world the flesh, the
devil, and all his works, yet preachers say not contrary, but they be gods
dear brethren. Every man knows, the branches, that spring out of this
root, be innumerable. whosoever speaks the truth is half an heretic. Note the
difference.
If ye cannot number the branches* how will ye number the buddes or rather the
biting serpents which spring from every branch. Ye will call me half an
heretic. There is difference, between confirming of heresy, and reproving
ipocrisie. I served in king Edwardes time the right worshippefull, and mi
good master, sir william Skipe wi^he, in Lincolneshere, and although he be
offended with me, because more wildelie then wittelie I departed from his
service, yet both he, and all that country can report mi doings. For I am
sure, though he knew not my departing nor knows where I am, yet his worship
will record truly, that I never loved heresy, because I never pretended nor
did any evil, falsehode or mischief, toward him. I have not spoken this,
because thou should think, as heritikes teach, that the most holy
sacrifice of the mass as we call it, should be naught: from which error thou
shall come easily, remembering that the holy catholic church has ordained that
most holy sacrifice in all parts like to the supper, The sacrifice of the
mass the passion of Christ.
and passion of our savior Christ, to be a perfect rememberaunce of his
passion ^ill he return to judge the world. Heretics will say, Heretics
here ye may prove the mass to be but a rememberau^ce* this, but, is heresy:
for undoubtedly there is ministered and received, in or under the form of
bread and wine, the very body and blood of our savior Christ.

Another sore heresy,
We read, says another simple foul, that god made man, but we never read
that a knave priest could make Christ. Nor thou shall never read this, so
long as thou lyueste. How is he there then: even by his most holy
omnipotente word. For like as it pleased him, Mark how Christ is in the
sacrament. The virtue of Christ in the supper consecrate in the mass.
being very omnipotente God, to make himself for the ineffable love, which he
bare toward us, by his omnipote^t word perfect man. So likewise, it pleases
his divine majesty, to be ministered unto us, in the most blessed sacrament,
that we being many members receiuinge that most blessed sacrament wortheli
may receue the^ our savior christ, which is our head and being co^glutinate,
and joined to the same, may be made one perfect and most semeli mistical body.
I would handell this matter more largely, Those me^ which will dispute in
divinity, ought to be perfectly learned. The serpents of the first branch
The first and most deuelishe serpent has bitten the Priests. Presumtyon.
but it is not semely to cast pearls among hogs. I mean, it is not meet,
to mingle such divine matters, amongst such deuilishe dregs, as I have
begone to write of.

And ye remember I told you, I lacked knowledge to entreat of such hiegh
divinity: return and look what evil fruits spring out of this brau^ch of
hypocrisy, for in that they think it sufficient for the^, to say, hear, or
se mass, mark what follows. The Spanish priests may, for the deuelish
example to all other persons, lead ^hores to church in the morninge, ^ande in
hand. When the Priests ^e in the temple they will talk more ^ilie and more
baudelye, then al others, and yet will the vile wretches presume, to say mass
immediatlye, thinki^g, as did the vile traitor Judas, that he does god good
service, when he da^neth his own soul. After mass will the deuelishe priest
return, leading the whore home again, keep her company all the day time,
with out exhortacio^ to repentance, and lie with her all the night. I speak
not of men's wives, but curtesaunce and commen whores, that for money receive
every knave* I would not that any man should think the mass evil which this
cursed priest does celebrate: for the mass, which is vndou^tedly gods most
holy word, is so perfect and so pure of it self, Mark this lie.
that the evil priest can not make it worse nor the good priest can make it
no better.

The evil priest can not corrupt it nor the good priest, can not purifi^ it:
for like as if a good priest do ba^tise one child, and an evil priest ba^tise
a another child, A true example
her both the children receive one holy ghost an^ are both equally cleansed
from sin Even so though an evil priest say mass, and consecrate that most
blessed sacrament, and ministre it to me, and a good priest does likewise
minister to another man, yet both we receive the most holy body and blood of
our savior Christ, and are both joined, The virtue of the sacraments is not by
the prists power, but by gods word* the prists reward. if we receue worthily,
we shall be saved, judging our selves says paul
and made members of the same: for these holy mysteries be not made by the good
priest, nor the evil priest, but by gods most holy word.

Which word remains ever most perfect and pure: mary the evil priest,
undoubtedly, offends many men's consciences most greuouslie, dishonoreth god
most shamefullie, with living so viciouslie condemns his own soul
perpetually, because he comes presumptuouslie, to the ^ordes board
unworthily: where the good priest, clean contrary, bri^geth many to gods
verite, honoreth god perfectly, with keeping perfect charity, and in living
religiously, his soul shall live assuredly with Christ continnually in joy
everlastingly. The reward of a good priest* the abuse of gods service damnable.
All men may perceive that I write not this, because any man should think
evil or despice gods most holy service: But because al men may know, that the
very nature of Spaniardes is abominable, in all things. Because every man may
know, that gods most holy service is pure, and perfect: And the abuse of it is
damnable: and because al men may know, this oght not to be
that such cursed knaves make not only gods word, which is most good and
godly, most just and most true, but also all good priests, evil spoken of
and abhorred in every place: what greater mischife can there be, amongst
Christen men, then that the Priest should think himself cleansed with
speaking the words, and the people judge themselves purified with hearing the
same. Be not these worse then the Pharisees, that think to be saved with
saying well and working evil: or if the Jews were not saved with hearing
christ himself preach, Hearing of mass does save no man
how much less shall these wretches be saved with hearing mass: Mark and you
shall find al such superstycious hypocrisy damnable. The gospel teaches us,
that not eueri one, which said, lord, lord, God, would have us to follow his
commandments in word and deed
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that works the will of god
shall be saved not the hearers of the law, but the workers, shall be accounted
just. Not those which say the commandments daily, but those which both say
in their hearts, and endeavor themselves in all their doings to keep the
commandments, shall please god. Not those which say in their pater noster,
good lord deliver us from evil, but those which forgive their neighbors
with all their hearts, what people the lord will pardone.
and fly from sin with all their might, shall be forgeuen of God, and be
saved. Yet though we do al this, we cannot justify our selves, because we
can not fulfill the law. But our savior Christ has fulfilled the law
perfectly, Christ is the oneli redemer and the perfect fulfiller of the law.
Note.
and undoubtedly redeemed us, with the sheddinge of his most precious blood.
And therefore he bids us not seek to justify our selves, but commands
us, to do all that we can, toward our own iustificacion: which Spaniards
another do, nor will not do. Christian men must call them selves unprofitable
servants, when they have done all that they can do: Ergo they be not only
neighbors to mors but also, morishe Jews the^ selves.
but Spaniardes call them selves, gods profitable servants, and do nothing.
what should I declare, how they carry their beads openly, to be seen of all
people: how they pray in every corner of the streates, that every man may
hear them: how they knele at every man^ door, before Imags knockinge,
crossinge, Sobbinge, syghinge wringinge their hands, hipocrits
waggynge their heads, with such other unseemly manners, that all men may
perceive their repentance, and within a quarter of an hour afterward ye
shall find these dissimulate sorrows abiected, Good Christians doubtless and so
is beelzebub Alms.
and the vnpenitente person among a number of arrante whores: do ye not know
that most part of them, will not give alms but where they may be set in a book,
that all their contremen may know, how much, and how mani times in the yer they
give alms. What other thing did the Jews and Pharisees. Did not Christ in
the.vi. of Matthew, Mat. vi.
reprove such hypocrisy: but let all christians take this general rule: that
like as our pater noster can not be made evil, though cursed wretched persons
use or rather abuse it hipocritically, but ever remainth perfect, pure and
good, even so the mass, alms deeds, holy bread, holy water, goinge with
procession, auriculer confession, beads, Images, and all other things, which
Christ and the holy catholyke church have commanded, ordained, confirmed and
established, to move us, (...) After the roots, take the branches out of
e^eri rote, Mark this multiplicacion.
last of all, put out the buddinges, or bitinge serpents, so many as ye
can, out of every branch, and ye shall prove, if ye reke^ perfectly, that
these.lxxvii* rotes, where I have named them but once, do spri^g.lxxvii. times
in one year, and at eueri spring time, each rote brings forth.lxxvii.
branches, and every branch brings forth lxxvii. serpents, and every
serpent spitteth out lxxvii. kinds of poison.

And the least part will kill, if they but taist of it.lxx. English me^. I
mean with thoughts care and misery to be in slavery.
For the Spanishe ground is so hot, fertille, and fruit full, that every
poison is worse then other, and the best of them al incurable: ye perceive now
perfectly that I rail not, except ye will prove Christ himself a railer. I
am sure Christ railed not, in declari^g the iniquites of the Scribes and
Pharisees, because he spoke but the truth and not so largely as he might have
done: truth cannot lie, nor rail, The authors excuse.
and then ye must needs grant, that I am no railing knave, though ye name me
so* because I have spoken nothing but the truth, and not so much by a
thousand parts, as I both could and would prove, if I might have leisure
to write, and set out the rotes, branches, serpents and poisons, every one
in order, as they ought to be. Surely but that I desire to show your
lordeships other matters briefly, I could write of the nature of Spaniardes: A
volume importable. But If I should write all, that I know, ye would not
credit me: ye ought to believe all that which I have written, because ye know
perfectlye, I have written nothing, but that which every man knows to be
their commen customs, and immutable manners.

And ye see by these examples, Morishe manners.
that I write not half the morishe manners which they use continually. Many of
my friends have given me counsel to write my letter, but not my name for fear
your lordeshippes would punish me, with impriso^ment, racki^g, hanging, drawing
and quarteryng, for speaking against the kings coronacion, which I think ye
cannot do lawfully: take heed your selves, for this touches your lives. Like
as it is honor for a true man to dye for the defe^s of his country, so it is
shame, to die like a traitor, against his country Note.
for so long as he is not crowned, that manne is no traitor that speaks
against his coronacio^, but after his majesty has the crown the best of you
all, that speaks against the Spaniardes proceadings, shall be proved and
ponished, like a ra^cke traitor. But I have written my name plainly, that I may
thereby, either give your lordeshippes warninge, to keep your honors and the
whole realm out of their bondage, Or else that I may go honestlye to the
galowes, and end this pore life, with an honorable death, for me and my
country. When your most honorable lives, if ye disenherit the realm of the
crown, shall be ended with great dishonor, wretchedness, misery, and shame,
for you and your successors for ever: yet I would hope to escape, when you are
sure to die. For doubteles after that Spaniardes have safely planted themselves
in the ^ande, they would trust me to be their faithful fre^d: because they know
I ^oue truth, Spa. will never trust traitors. I say not ye be so.
and am true to my cou^^rey, when they will never trust your ^ordeshippes, if
ye will be so rank and ^als traitors, as to give the^ the crown of our realm
willingly: and I would not your lordshippes should think me so foolyshe, as
to speak against his coronacion, if your lordeshippes grant to it. Some men
say ye have gone so fair, ye cannot turn back. I know not what ye have
do^e, but I am sure, what ye may do. It lies yet in your power.
if ye have granted hi^ the crown, it shall be much better for you, to stand to
that which ye may do, the^ perform that which ye have pro^ised. For I am sure,
so long as the king of Jerusalem is not crowned in England, ye may chose,
whether ye will crown him or not. And surely if I were worthy to be one of the
counsel in England, my counsel should be, that the king should fir^ be
crowned in the City of Ierusal^ lawfully, For christ chose to be king of the
Jews.
because it is the more ancient and more noble kingdom, and bring all the
Jews into subjection and make them good Christians, before he should have the
crown o^ England wrongfullie, either for fa^ words, great bribes, false
flatterin^ promises, cruel manacinges, terribl^ threatninges, or any other
false craf^ polices.

I thought your lordeshippes ha^ knowledge partly of their counsel as they
report, that the french kin^ knows yours. But now I percei^ their secret,
privy, and conclude counsels lie hidden from your lordshippes, Rude pri^ciples.
when ye know not the (...) principles, where upon many gre^ matters be
grounded: if ye do know them, and will not credit them, It prevails not, to
disclos treason, if ye will not with stand it or credit the truth God
witnesses with truth, which boweth to another party. whi this letter is
written. Take warning in time or else.
pardon me for writing in vain: if ye know them not, how can ye be offended
with me, for declaring to your lordeshippes such things, as be pretended to
your destruction, the loss of your ^iues, lands, wives and children, and
finally the loss of your honors, the ^uine of the realm, the suppressio^ of
^he commenwealth, and the bondage of your country for ever. Ye ought ^he
rather to credit me, because I speak nothing, god I call for wyt^es, for
malice of Spaniardes nor to ^atter English men: I think never ^o come seek
bribes at your hands ^or my labor, and therefore it appea^th plainly, that I
write for none over purpose, but only to ge^e your ^rdeshippes knowledge and
war^ng of their most morishe manners, and cursed conditions, that ye may ^e
more prudently provide to with ^and their terrible threatninges, pretensed
treasons, and pestiferous polices, and so preserve your honorable persons, and
the whole realm out of their tyranny and bondage. Do ye think, I durst be so
bold as to offe^de god, in speakinge contrary to the truth, and lying
slaunderousli and shamefullie, against my Christian brother: I know we are all
brethren, if we have the love, and fear of God continually before our eyes, in
our savior Jesus Christ, and we ought to love one another mutuallye like
brethren: Nature causes me, to discover the Spani. treason.
but as god divided the langguages of men, so has he caused every nation to
love more naturally all those, that be borne in the same self country, then
foreners, and has given, As England for English me^. Spa. for. Spa. etc.
according to his ineffable goodness, certain places of the earth for every
nation severally to inhabit, commanding us straightly, that one of us shall
not wrongfullye couete another goods, and specially our Christen brothers,
which commandment the Spaniardes say they will keep. For whatsoever say
they is done in England, touching the crown or the governance of the realm,
Sei^g this must come to pass take good head to your selves. Mark this police.
The ki^gs first good work to England. At that mark they all shote.
shall co^^ through procureme^t but of the counsel themselves. For we know
well enoug,h say they, that there be such deuillishe people in England to work
treason and make insurrections, that it is in vain for our king to have the
crown, except the counsel will also deliver him certain of the strongest
holds and port towns, mark my words well, for his refuge at all times, till
his majesty may be able to bring in power to withstand his enemies: and then
we shall make all our haven towns more strong, to the ^andes ward, then they
be toward ^he see. But know ye for what purpose they pretend this policy:
that ^ small number of Soldiers, may ^ee able to keep the Realm, quietly,
Let them not have such vantage at your hands. For the king si^ce his commi^g
into England cannot yet get a grote, from Spain. The ki^gs treserer went out
of england but returned not till our money was come over and new stamped,
which made store ever sins in antwarpe
and burn the countreye.iii. or iiii. times eueri year til we can be
contented, to obey all their constitutions, ordinances and laws: they brag
that if they may be vitled by the sea at their backs, they shall trouble, and
toil English men so long, til we be able to suffer no longer, for what great
trouble will it be for us to burn, between Southha^pton and Dover. They trust
the queen's hignes for the kings maintenance, will poole the realm, with
subsidies and beneuole^cies, so much as in her grace lies, and give al our
treasure out of the land, now at the kings coming to her grace: so that the
kings majesty with our treasure, and his own revenues in this time of
peace, shall enriche himself, that when we have small force of money because
our^ treasure shall be carried out of the la^d the king and all our enemies may
co^^ into the realm, and work mischefe against us: for they shall have mone^
from all places and aid of many nations. And they believe assuredly to be
aided by the greatest part of our own country men. For the Queen and good men
will take their part against heretics: they think there be but few noble me^
in England, but they will be contented, Take counsel be ti^e. These rentes be
better lost, then found.
either by gift of the Queen's highness, or else for great bribes, rich rentes
and good gifts, to grant that the king may have a iust^e title to the crown,
or else receue him in upon one party, that he may overcome the other perforce.
And they think there will be but few men against them for at their first
coming they will give such great gifts and pay money to poor soldiers so
largely, liberally, and surely, But when they be helped and bear rule you shall
pay it triple in excises.
that when we have scante of money, poor men will be content to serve for their
money, gentell men and noble men for covetousness to e^crease their livings and
lands: but wott ye to what end ^ll this comes: Though ye receive them into
the la^d, and serve upon their part, If ye be true among your selfs they dare
never give you battle. If they kept not covenant with Milla^e or Naples,
how should they keep couenaunte with you
yet dare they not trust you, but ar mi^ded to pay you well for a time, that
you may fight ma^fully against your own country, whiles they come skirmishing
at a back winge, or else stand loking upon you: for they say they be not so
madd, as to fight with english men, and be killed like beasts: but when ye have
brought the^ in, and wo^ne the^ the victori and stablished the^ surely and
quietly, the^, as I have told you, will they destroy all you, and gather up
again their great gifts upon your treasures.

Is not this a lamentable case, that we english men, for fear of mutabilite
or change of religion, which comes by gods ordinance, shall seek to plant
willingly such a nacyon in our own country, as seek the utter destruction of
the same: But this is most miserable, most shameful, mos^ detestable and most
abominable, that so noble and prudent governors, a^ your lord ships, should
either for fair words, love, fear, gifts, bribes, Let not these things bli^d
your eyes, the^, may you like most noble governors, defend your own country.
If ye another care for your own lives nor your children, I ca^ give you no
counsel to care for the whole realm.
threatenings, manacings or any kind of covetousness, seek the subuersyon of
their country, the destruccio^ of the comme^ wealth, and the utter decay of
your most noble blood for ever. this last point do I lament, more the^ all the
rest: for if any of your most noble lineage might live in autorite, as the
Spaniards sai in deed, we might have some comfort, to restore the realm and
the weal public to his old perfect estate: but if ye deliver the crown out
of your hands, I mean not the crown of gold only, but also the power that
goes with it, ye shall in short time have so great a fall, that their shall not
live one of your ^inage, that shall be able to defend his own right, nor to
rule, as his predec^s^ours have done, nor yet to revenge ^is fathers death.
This ye must needs grant, that it is necessary for the ^inges majesty to
work the sureste ^aye for his own commodite and preseruacion, that can be
devised or found out by the advice of his counsel.

And then I am sure there is none of you so foolyshe, that thinks to bear
rule in the common wealth, or about the kings majesty: This suspicion ha^eth
your death
for all the world knows the most detestable and most abominable treasons,
which our nobilite do work against their own natural kings continually.

And therefore Spaniardes might be called men of small wisdom, if they cold
not forecast such dangers, I beseech your lordships to look uprightly, I
desire you not to remember me, nor my profit.
but they have provided for it well enough, would to god your lordships knew
perfectly so much, as I have seen with mine eyes, and heard with mine ears,
or else would for your own profit, your own honor, your own wealth, the
preseruacio^ of your country, the love of your children, and the safegarde of
your own lives, credit my words. For then your most prudent wisdoms could
the better provide to withstand their pretensed treasons. Ye will say, Make
good provision with this warning Yet will they deny that ever they thought
hereof. I will show only that I saw in the leters
how could this fellow see, hear, or kno^ matters of their counsel: I was as
all men know chamberleine to one of the kings privy counsel. And gave my
self with all diligence, to write and read Spanish: which thing once
obtained, I kept secret from my master, and his servants, that I might the
rather with dilligent service be trusted in my masters closet or study, and so
read such letters, as I saw brought to the counsel chamber. Which thing
I did, as opertunite served: yet I cannot understand any part of their privy
and concluded counsels, but the effect of such letters as were written from
one counselor to another.

I know not how, nor what they have determined upon the said letters, but I
found this written in certain letters that were sent from the Emperors
majesty also, The effect of the Emperors letters. Mark if they practice not
after this sort daily
a year before the kings coming out of England, that the kings majesty
should make his excuse to the quens highness, that he would go see his father
in Flanders, and return immediately. But seeing the good simple Queen, pardon
me though I follow the frase of the letters, is so Ielous over my son, as the
letter termed it, we shall make her agree to al our requests before his return,
or else keep him here exercised in other effaires, til we can agree with the
counsel, who vndoubtedli will be easeli wo^n with fair words, great bribes
and good gifts, politickly placed in ti^e, with many other things, take heed
mi lords ye can keep your gifts, but at the kings pleasure,
how these matters must be handled, how they must be brought to pass, how al
parties must be followed, whom they might trust, what men would disceue
them, whom they must win with bribes, and whom they might win with fair
promises, who^ they thought like true me^ would with stand them, Mark whom
they call true me^ and traitors,
and how the false traitors vvoulde receue them: that the Emperor would
appointe the king such counselers for the same purposes, as he in many years
had proved to be true and wise in their doings, so that the kings majesty
might be bold at the first present, to put his trust in them, whom his
father in long process of time, and with great experience, had proved and
circumspectly picked out, among many false dissemblinge flatterers, with
innumerable such prudent counsels touching France, Flaunders, Naples,
Millane, Boemia, Hungery, Turkey, and diverse other countries, as between
Spain and the Mores.

VVherof I know perfectlye they have brought many things to pass and mani
they be like to obtein, al which matters, because they pertein little to our
country, I will pass over with silence. But why then is not the Queen endowed
as fully in all his.xxv. kingdo^s. For her own destruccio^.
In other letters I have found the case disputed that the quens highness was
bound, by the laws of god to endowe the kings grace, her husband, in all
her worldly possessions and goods, so far as in her majesty lies, and they
think she will do it in deed to the vttermoste of her power* No man can
think any evil in the Queen's highness, though her grace be something moved,
when such bonds, as touch her conscience, be beaten into her memory
privily. Let all men therefore take h^de, and beware diligently, Let no man
prete^de evil to the Queen's person, for then god will plage the whole realm.
that no man be so bold, or rather so deuelishe, as once to pretend any evil
toward the queen's majesty, in pain of perpetual punisment. For undoubtedly
^f any evil should be wrought against her hyghnes person, god would not only
require her blood with condemnyng such malefactors for ever more therefore but:
also would plage the whole realm most greuouslie for such wickedness. But if I
were worthy to give your lordesh^ppes counsel, Being crowned he will live away
and appointe you a sp. viceroye
ye should banishe from the court, except when the king is present, which will
be very seldom what wai soever ye work, mistres Clarentius, Elizabeth Dyas, the
Lady of phisike, I know not her name, and all other that speak Spanishe. I
will not say that like foolyshe girls, do love Spaniardes, which might seem
like to give the Queen counsel in these matters. wemens councels deuelishe
For they undoubtedly have and do beat into her head, more then all you ca^
devise to pull out. The Spaniardes know not, whether the crown do belong to
the Queen's majesty or the realm, whether it be in her power to give it where
please her, Mark diligently what they pretend after wards,
or in the power of the whole realm to bestow it lawfulli where it of right
should be: nevertheless they can well be contented to flatter your lordeshippes
till that be perfectly proved. And if they receive any comfort therein, to
bribe you freli til the same be delivered, Here begins destruction.
but then they must begin to govern and bear rule. For which government would
to god I knew their counsels, or else that your lordships would beeleue that,
which I have heard and seen. I have found other letters, which I would not
that any man should credit, touching mi lord Paget. That he should be the
kings adversary and the French kings sede debite, to declare unto him all
your counsels. Talbotte the lords Greye, and Clinton must dye for captains.
Ye se my lords what the Spa. prepare for you.


But in these letters be contained diverse other: as the lord Treasorer is
counted the kings ytter enemy, the lord Talbot is not their friend, the lord
Gray they trust not, the lord Clinton they love not, therefore they think, if
these and diverse other lords in the North were made away, they should be in
less danger, and the rather obtain their purpose. And yet they say, they
must of necessite flatter my lord Treasorer and my lord Paget craftili, til
they may obtain their purpose. Because they two be apt vessels to work
treason by. Ye may well perceive therefore that they will flatter al you, seei^g
they flatter these whom they take for their enemies, and so feign these lies
against my lord Paget invented treaterously, to make him out of the way, with
the rest. For if ever the king bear rule, these which I have named shall be
examined as straitlye, as the Spanishe laws will extend to handle the ki^gs
enemis. There be many other noble men, whose stowtnes must be pulled down, and
their power abated. It shall be more for your commodite, to agree among yourselfe
Be true to your country
I write not this to bring any of these noble men in suspection, but that ye
may perceue, what ways they inuente to bring variaunce amongst you, that
they might be called to make agreement* for they hope, if one part of the
nobilite would once withstand the other, that then should they be received,
though they prevail not before time. But read further and you shall know the
truth. They think your lordeshippes, my Lord Admiral, the earl of Oxforde,
and diverse other, To this end ye shall prove their friendship to extend.
to be their friends: therefore they purpose if ever they bear rule to join
with you in council, for a time, and the state of the realm once known, let
you die pleasantly, with racking, hanging, drawyng, quartering, and whirling
upon whils ius^ly according to your deserts, Objection
ye will say the king does not use his cou^sellers so in any countrei: in deed,
the king has in every country certene churles of the same land picked out
which be crafty knaves, Crafty chourlish knaves.
and can find at their hearts, for their own lucre and private gaynes, to
invent all the ways possible, to pole their own country, according as his
counsel can devise to command them, and to live, as ye shall read hereafter,
according to the nature of Spaniardes. and so the true men to their country are
traiterouslye over come perforce, but they make another reason for your
destruction, and sai they may not trust, Mark I se names and what example shall
destroy you
those men long in the counsel nor about their king, nor keep the^ in
auctorite, that willingly will be false traitors, to their own country. I
found two pieces of a letter, but the third I could never find, or else I should
have known perfectlye, what bribes had been appointed for every noble man, It
is better for your lordship to be Earl of Penbrok still I cannot tell what
should be done, but this ye were appointed at the first
wherein the Erl. of Penbroke was appointed to be governor of the kingdom of
Granatha, and to have forty thousand crowns of yearly re^t: but they
purpose, he shall enjoy it but a short time. Do ye think my lord of Penbroke,
that ye shall have forty thousand crowns from Granatha, and live safely in
England: ye must go thither with the king or some other, to take such sure
possession, that ye shall never return

For I assure you they dare not give you so much power more the^ ye have and
let you live in your own countri* be ye assured ye shall offend their laws a
thousand times, If they do not yet move it to you to go thither, they will cut
of your head ni England for such profet cannot long come out of Spain The earl
of Darby betrewe my lord Shreusbery lest ye lose your son and your auncetors
praise for their truth. Of your son my lord of Arundell this was written or
he died, fear the sequel in your self. The Spaniardes would ended this or you
should understood it and therefore now deny it.
before ye know them, and your head shall perhaps pay for the first. My lord of
Darby shall perceive, that another he, nor his son shall live long after the
king is crowned. The Earl of Shreusbery may well perceive they flatter him
shamefully, when they go about to destroy the noble lord Talbot. I am sorry
that my lord of arundell has escaped so many treasons as have bee^ invented
before against him, and shall now be disceaued and destroyed amongst vile,
treaterous, and most false flattering Spaniardes. And yet I am sorry that the
realm should be robbed of so wise, so noble and so manlike a gentell man, as
the Lord matreues his only son: do ye think these things will not come to
pass or do ye believe, I have not told you truth, or trust you to live still
in your country: ye undoubtedly my lords, they dare not suffer you. The reason
is this, they say, that nation and those men, that will work treason and be
false traitors to, and against their own natural king and country, the same
men so sone as they be agreued, and begin to smart, will work treasons
against them, and their king: but these things may be wrought in their time.

Ye think I speak my pleasure, but I assure you most truly I write nothing
of suspeccion, nor blind judgment, but those things, which I have seen and
proved perfectlye and that be most surely pretended and will undoubtedly be
wrought, if ye take no better counsel to withstand them. Mark my lords if
these be well gotten goods, that shall be the destruction of you, and your
country for ever: do ye not encrese your rentes properly, when ye seek the
loss of your lives, and children, without remedy: be not those bribes dear
bought that bring with the^ the ruin and the subversion of your country,
Mark what manyfolde mischiefs the beggarly bribes do bring, if it be not your
deaths at the end receive them. The crafty treaso^s be to hard for you to
understand, but by Suspecting many things. which if ye would then preserve
England from bondage I would show the^ if I hanged for it Your lordships shall
first curse the time of these bribes and false flaterye. So my lord Darbes
sons title to the croun by his wife will cost al iii. their life
the bondage of the land, the suppression of the common wealth the beggerie of
all the quens subjects, the loss of our liberte, the death of our nobilite, the
perdicion of al our rentes, lands, goods and children, these things I have
found in their letters bu^ doubteles, the kings counsel have pretended weighty
matters toward you, in devising how these things shall be brought to pass:
these be but rude principles, but in the ground work be prudent counsels. I
know ye will call and account me a very fool because I show you the truth
plai^ly, and put my self in danger of ha^ging to save your lives, and
preserue^ my country from bondage, but foolishly or prudently I speak nothing
but that which I know perfectly, y^ may take my words, as it shall please your
honors: if ye work wittelye: as your lourdships ca^ do, if it plese you, I
shall rejoice at your preseruacion^ but if ye will submit your self to bondage
willingly, now ye know the dangers that will follow, what man living would
lament the miseres that shall fall amongst you. Harken there words after their
writings. They purpose, if their power will serve, not to leave one living,
that by any manner title, ought to make claim for the succession of the cowne.

Ye will think there could not remain in them such cruelty: it is in vain
for me to write truth, if ye believe me not. It is damnable without remedy, to
call God for witness in false matters, and what would it profit me, to save
your lives, preserve al England, or wine the whole world and condemn mine own
conscience But in truth I dare follow the example of S. Paul, and call god for a
just and true witness, that I have hard with mine ears and seen the same
persons, with mine eyes, that have said, if ever the king might have a just
title to the crown, and obtain it, he would make that most virtuous Ladi
Elizabeth's grace sure, The Lady Elizabeth condemned.
for ever coming to inherit the same, or any other of our cursed nation: for
they say if they cold keep England in subjection, they could do more with
England and Flaunders, then all the rest of the kings kingdoms: therefore they
will not work so foolishly, as to make dissension between these two lands and
bring the^ in controversy or set them at variaunce. But inuente all polices
to join them both a like under their subjection. they have promised to bring
e^glande in subieccio^ to Flaunders. When she must die trust not ye to live
long after. Sedicion among your selfs will be your destruction for traitors seek
in englishmens variaunce, to bring in Spa* upon the^. If ye live quietly within
yourselfs ye preserve your cou^trei against your enemies etc.
I speak of no fools, but of the wisest sort, and no mean persons, though
they knew not me in such corners, to hear their counsels. Remember if this
warning be not sufficient, to cause noble men to take heed, that so virtuous a
Lady so beautiful, and so comely a princes, should first of all, beside all the
great number, that should follow afterward, be either banished the land, or
else put to death miserabli for that, which should be her own right, by
just and lawful discente. If they, that love women so well, will not favor
such a Lady, how much less will they favor your lives: I speak not this,
as some men would accuse me, to make sedicion nor treson in the realm: for
that were the best way for Spaniardes to come to their purpose.

For our enemies can never hurt us, till we make dissension amongst our
selves: such a time they look for, such a time they desire, and such a time
some noble men have promised them. Let all men, because I know not those
traitors names that would prepare this time, endeavor themselves, to live, and
love one another charitably and quietly, that ye may all take one way and
hold together like good people, the better to preserve your country, and
withstand al these deceitful and most detestable treaso^s, The Queen's grace
disceaued with flaterers
and premeditate mischifes, which be pretended against you and your country.
Ye have heard many evils, but god is witness I cannot for shame write nor
declare the vile, shameful, detestable, and mo^e abom^nable reports, The
Spaniardes report of the Queen's majesty There words arge they me^t more then
was performed, to speak truth they purposed rather to wine her crown then
her body.
which they have spoken by the Quens maie^ie: and yet her grace thinks the^
to be her very friends: but this one truth I will show covertly, and wrappe it
in as clean cloutes as I can, desiring all men and the Queen's highness herself
most humblye, to take it after their words. The Spaniards say, if they obtain
not the crown, the may curse the time that ever their ^inge was bound in
marriage to a ^ife, so unmeet for his majesty by natural curse of years, but
yet if the thing may be brought to pass, which was meant, in the marriage in a
king, they shall keep old rich robes, for high festif^l dais. If there be any
man that does not understand this saying of Spaniardes, let the Q^enes
highness, so long as her grace* (...) have any favorable friendship of the
kings majesty, keep her self as heig^ in auctorite and as rich, as she is at
this present, or else her grace shall perceive perfectly, as she may partly at
this present, that Spaniards naturally love fresh wares, yo^g dei^tie dishes,
and change of new things. Mark the most honorable and court like customs in
their courts here in Flanders
I think the Queen will blame me, for showing this one truth, but by that
time her grace shall be glad, to tie horses underneath her chamber window, to
suffer vile stinking do^g hills at her privy chamber stairs, to see her guard
chamber garnished about with plain walls, finely furnyshed with rich pallets,
of st^o^g corse canuas, well stuffed with straw, the walls most comely colored
with coals, to see sitting among her graces ye me^, curriers, carmen, and
cobblers, wood monges, vintners, and waggeners, pointers, pi^ners, and pedlers,
show makers surgeaunts, A misordered hospital. The chapel chamber made when
strangers be present, the guard chamber The ki^gs court much more carterly
the^ a farmers house in the country.
and sadlers, book binders, bakers, bre^ers, with all ki^de of lousy loiterers,
and every one a bag, a budget, or a bot^ell ^anged open before him, tied
under his arm, or behind upon his back, more like a most misordered
hospital then a kings guard chamber, that another her highness, nor any of her
nobility, can pass that way. For in deed the gard^ in the kings court be
such bawdye, burly beasts, that they never come in the kings chapel,
except for necessite when strangers come to the court and abide the smell,
of such a stinkinge stue. Her grace will say I speak not all. When her
pallice gates shall stand open, without porters, that not only beggars, slaves,
and all kind of wretches, but also oxen, kine, hoggishe old swinne, sheep and
lambs, goats, kiddes, and rams, cattes, dogs, geese, duckes, cocks, and
hens, with all other such good household stuff, may enter into her court,
and standing, rubbing, rowteing, digge^g deluing, and donging, before her
chamber window, like a good fermers house in the country, when her highness
hall shall be one day hanged with rich arreisse, and half a year after,
either shut, and locked up, the king is the vylest tauerner of all his court
or else furnished finely with spinners, silke-twiners, weuers of laces, rop
makers, coblars, and botchers of old hosen, most shamefullie without all
order, and be glad to keep within her most princelike palice a vile stingking
baudy tavern, that every one of these fore said crafts men, The ki^ge
sells wine and water more dearer the^ other and has the lies himself.
and all other baudes, beggars, slaves, and vile dro^ken wretches, may bie
within her court bread, bear, nuttes, apples, and chese, and fetch wine and
water out of the kings court, by iiii. penny pintes, and that with the
dearest, according to the old, auncyente, and most honorable customs of the
Emperors majesty's court, and the kings majesty's palaies here in flaunders,
her majesty shall well perceive, that I keep many things secret which I am
ashamed to declare. Ye will think I speak the worste, but when the Queen's
grace shall be glad to fetch her wine out of the tauern by eight pense, and a
half penny, the quarte: as the king and both the Queen's do here in this
court, The ki^gs wine fetched out of the tavern by the quart but in England
freely by Iugges and bottels. My lord Ambassador is worthy of blame if more
then this be not written, for he should se the Queen, be not disceaued herin.
Thus ye shall live when ye be in bondage. Take heed ye sai not hereafter would to
god we had done it, for now ye may do it
her highness shall well know, that I cold show much worse orders, and many
things more vile, more shameful, and more dishonorable then these, and by
that time all these things be wrought ordinarely, in the court of England, ye
shall smell them more vnsauerly. Al me^ that be here co^ti^uallye, do see
much more and many worse things, then I write. But if these things, will not
make your lordships work wiseli and be circu^spect in delivering the crown,
look further upon your proceadinges, and when your lordships shall be glad, if
ye might escape so well, to be at the Spanishe counsels commandment, and
wander with Spaniardes from one country to another, and where ye live at this
present with all plentiful provision in your own houses, be compelled to lie in
good tiplinge houses, and roast half a capo^e to your supper and keep the rest
for your diner, with a pint of white wine and water, a pigge^ petitooes, a
young sheep trotters, half a loine of lean mutton and iiii. or.v grene
sallettes, as the best of the kings counsel do live daily, ye will say, would
to god we had kept the crown in our own hands, for the right and lawful
heirs of the realm to whom it belongs by just and lawful descent, and been
true to our country, so that we might have reigned still, and lived more
honorable, in rest, wealth and quietness, then any nation in the world. The
Spaniards say your lordships most specially, and all the rest of our nobilite,
with the most part of our counsel, be without knowledge, learning, language
or perfect experience, and therefore they hope though not spedely, yet in process
of time to disceaue and over come you, with their learning, I desir ye should
follow your own preseruacion
wisdom, craft, and policy. Let your children therefore, if ye love them, be
brought up in learning, and wisdom, that they may be able to govern the
realm prudently, after your days. And follow your lordships, for the
preseruacion of your lives, honor and children, this worthy and notable
example of the most worthy king Codrus, who seeing his country assauted, by the
most cruel tyranny of his enemies, sought by all means possible to deliver
his people from bondage, with least destruction of his subjects blood: and
being answered that there was no way to preserve his realm, except he himself
should be slain, appareled his most princelike person in a poor palmers wede,
and after great lamentacion of his subjects, which would rather have lost
life, lands and goods, The king a turn spitte.
then suffer so noble a king to die for their deliverance, became a turn
spitte in his enemies kitchen, and when his adversary had prepared a great
armi for the invasion of his country, he provoked with cruel words, If
pani^s so much loved their country, should we Christians betraie ours
remembering the commen and public weal of his subjects, which he desired so
earnestly, his enemies so much, that a skuruye kitchen slave without mercy
thruste him to the heart, with a whote spitte of yrone* who, being stripped
naked to be buried, was known perfectly to be the king himself by a cross
underneath his breast: whose death so much discoraged his enemies, that they
flyeng before his subjects, when the battle should be fought, were slain
and taken in the chase, his country preserved, and his majesty obtained
immortal fame. I would wish your lordships, for your honors and the preseruacion
of your lives and countreye, as I trust assuredly ye will, though not so
daungerously, Keep the state that ye have.
as this noble Prince did, yet with suertie observe this counsel: I mean ye
are in such estate, at this present that ye may without the danger, or
loss of any ma^s life, keep the crown and the realm quietli, but if ye will
deliver the crown out of your hands willingly, Spaniardes report England to
be the strongest and best kingdom on the earth.
then where ye ought to venture, ye to lose in deed life, lands, goods and
rentes, with honor for the preseruacion of your country: ye shall not only lose
life, lands, goods, wife and children, but also al honor, fame and renown,
with the most noble, and the most mighty kingdom, as Spaniardes say, on the
w^ole earth, with the loss of innumerable thousands of Christen men's lives.
For what nation in the world is able to suffer the very nature of Spaniardes:
have I not showed you many things which ye cannot suffer: ye may expel nature
for a time, as Spaniardes did in England lately, but all the world can not
expel her so much, but she returnth in short space. what deuelishe nature is
this, that no man can suffer: the time is short, or else I would tell you much
more: their pride is of such nature, that she can suffer no man, to be fellow
with her. The nature of Spani.
Pride would ever be the highest, and then who has more pride then Spaniardes,
who can bear rule above the^. Doubteles I know no man can set forth more
mysery, then the peo / ple be in in Naples and if ye go forth; ye shall come to
the like.
The Spaniardes deny not them selves to be the proudest and most lecherous
men living, and can they then be without all other vices, seeing pride is the
root of al sin, and the mother of all mischief. Their hearts will boil and
borst, to see any nation nere about them prosper in wealth and tranquilite. I
hear say there be certain books amongst you which in deed I never saw, as
the lamentacion of Naples: the mourninge of Millane, and such other, which
have showed you the tyranny that Spaniardes have used in other countries, and
in those points I would counsel you to believe the same books and take heed ye
come not in like bondage. For if ye do, be assured that the same tyranny, which
they have used in other countries, But if ye will not take warning of them which
do show you then shall you suffer all the plages that be named in this book for
your incredulity.
they will undoubtedly use amongst you: for if they favored not those noble
men, which they say be Christened, how much les will they favor you, whom they
accoumpt worse then Jews: but like as they have destroyed the nobility in
other countries, even so will they according to their pretensed purposes
destroy and murder you privily one after another, so soon as they may bear
rule amongst you. Some Spaniardes say we must not take example by those
countres, which they be compelled to keep perforce: but be you assured they
must be compelled within one year, to keep England perforce also. For
doubtelesse English men will never pay such excises willingly, as other nations
be compelled to pay against^ their will: nor let their rentes be raised so much
above the rate which they be at in these days, as Spaniardes would amount
the^. Objection
Ye will say the Spaniards keep their old rentaking: Mark ye people of England
how ye must be taxed
how can that be, when every poor man must pay yearly for every chimney in his
house, and every other place that is to make fire in, as oven, fornes and
smithes forge, a french crown: will englishmen, or can they suffer to be poled
and pilled most miserably, in paye^g continually such poling pence, and
intolerable tollages for all manner grain and bread, be^e, bear, and mutton,
goose, pigge and capone, hen, mallard and chicken, milk, butter and chese,
eggs, apples and pears, wine white and read, with all other wines beside,
salt white and graye, Note this.
al things must pay, small nuttes, and wall nuttes, cheries, and chest nuttes,
plumbes, damassens, philbeardes and al both great and small whatsoever they may
se to feed the pore co^menalte, Salmon and hearing, this is a shameful thing,
If ye can suffer this then crown the king of Jerusalem. The third part of al
things: keep your selves from that bondage. Mark this yo men and husband
me^, keep your liberte, that ye pay not for your own chickens when ye be
sick. If ye follow this counsel, ye save your lives, your lands and country.
And will with speed. For all your learning is lost, your law destroyed and al
your liuinges decayed for ever* the office of true men.
tench, ele or conger this shall keep us under, and make us die for hunger,
flounders, floucke, plaice or carpe, here is a miserable warke, that England
must abide to maintain Spanishe pride: ye pay your tenthes for all these
things, but I speak not of church rentes, nor balifes fees, for that is but
the tenthe part, but this shall grieve your heart, to pay the third part more,
that burden waieth sorer then fines or re^ts, take heed therefore. Ye will think
their co^me^s be not so oppressed: there is not a ye man, farmer nor husband man
in these parts, that dare eat a capo^e in his own house if his friend come to
viset him, but the capo^e must cost him a noble, if it were worth, xx. pe^ce and
even so of hens, pigges, geese, chickins* and all other things. Do ye
think to make prouises for all these mischefes, which I have rehearsed: the
best prouiso ye can devise to make is, that for the avoiding of all these and
innumerable more mischefs ye keep the crown in your own hands, and give it
to no forreyne prince. For when the king is crowned, who dare withstand his
doings do not the laws of England bind al men to obeie him: but seeing they
understand not our law, may not the king change it, as shall seem good
for him, by the advice of his counsel: I need not to fear the danger of my
book, for I hear say, I shall be outlawed, with a pension writ, for.iii years
pension, in cliffords inn. Do it spedely, least it take none effect: for if
Spaniardes bear rule fare well all English laws, the king will reach you
Spanish laws, and look what laws Spaniardes make is not he a traitor that
speaks to the contrary but til his grace be crouned, it is mete for all true
men, to hold with the right, and speak against his coronacio^. Ye say, the
queen's highness has al power in her hand: Objection
we must obey her surely in acts that be paste by parliament and confirmed by
the hole realm, we ought to obey her highness during her life: but I think
there is no law confirmed and past, where by the Queen may lawfully disinherite
the realm of the crown. And for that which is to come, eueri man may lawfully
speak against it: for she can make no such law without your aid. If ye read
the enchiridio^ of Erasmus in the leaf, Erasmus.
lxxv. ye shall find that the Queen's highness or any other Prince, What the
queen ought to do.
that will follow gods commandment and seek the kingdom of heaven, ought not
to make any laws or statutes against the commen wealth of her countr, and
that she ought not to do that, which she may by her power, but that which she
may do iustlye by the laws of the realm. A true example
For like as Christ was not borne for himself, nor died not for himself, but
was borne to fulfill the law, lived to teach us the perfect truth of the law,
and died to redeem al those that would follow his steps and keep his
commandments: eue^ so the Queen ought not to do that thing which is for her
own profet, her own pleasure or her own pryuat commodite but that which is for
the commodite of the whole country, the profit of her poor people, and the
strength, aid, preseruacion, and the comfort of the whole realm. How the
Queen ought to govern us
Her grace ought not to govern us if she will follow Christ, but to se us
governed uprightly in all spiritual matters after gods word, and in all
temporal matters according to the laws of the realm iustlye, for our
preseruacion

In the.iiii. next leaves following ye shall find the office of a king, a
magistrate, an officer and bishop. I show you the place because ye should
remember it and follow it in this case. But if the Queen's grace will not seek to
win heaven, with following Christ and keeping his order, for the commodite and
profet of all her people, then she must without grace, in breakeynge Christ's
order, and leaving his steps, without any second way follow the steps of the
devil, and so seking her own private commodite, her own will and her own
pleasure, ru^ne straight headlong to hell. Mary if the Queen be the last heir,
so that the crown remain wholly, perfectly and lawfully in her, without any
other discente, she may by gods law give it for the commen wealth of her
subjects and the realm, where or to whom soever pleases her, and then if it
be for the commen wealth of the realm, as ye se plainly it is not, she may
give it to her graces husband the king: but if it belong to the heirs of the
realm, after her death, and if there be any heirs in England living after
her, Mi lords for such counsel ye shall be more hardly plaged in hell then ye
ca^ be in the tower. See what they take upon the^ or this. Give a Spa. one
inch, and he will take a hundredth foot.
to whom the crown ought to come by just and lawefull descente, she, and all
that give her such cursed counsel, do commit deadlye and damnable sin, in
taking, and geui^g it, from them wrongfully. If ye could restore it again
afterward, and so make them recompense, she might have pardon of god: but I
am sure the Queen's grace, and all her honorable counsel, have seen the kings
style where he writes himself king of xxviii kingdoms, with England,
France, and Yrelande, and there ye perceue, that he leaves out the quen in
all his writings and deades, whatsoever he makes or confirmth. And in the
first leaf and first side of the patten, or rather the Emperors will which he
has made, to establishe the king jointly with him in the Empir, they write
that the king wo^ne england by the Queen's marriage, and upon the second side
of the sa^e first leaf they write, that the king at this present has autorite
to make, change, ordeine and constitute, what decres, statutes, ordinances or
laws soever please him in the same kingdom of England. Seeing the king,
having but the name given him, does take upon him such power, and bee^ore he
has the crown does expulse the Queen from all title of the realm or the
crown: She shall be at low estate in short ti^e.
ye may be sure that when he has the crown, he will take from her all power and
honor, saving only she may have the name to be his wife with his more beloved
harlots: so that she shall never be able to restore the crown to the right
heirs. Beware of this, it were better for your lordships* to lose your heads
and die in the truth, then damn your fols in presu^ption.
I have sent you the copy of the sa^e will, because ye may know perfectly, that
she shall never be able to restore the crown again to the right heirs Then
seeing the Queen, and all your lordships, do know assuredly before hand, that
she shall never be able to make recompense in restoringe the crown again to
the right heirs, and yet will presume to do such wrong, as unlawfully to
take it from the^: ye must needs grant and believe it truly, that not only
the Queen but also your lordeships, if ye resist not this wickedness, and al
other that help her, or give her such cursed counsel, may be sure for such
deuilishe presumpcion to go to the devil and be damned without mercy. Ye
dysceaue the Queen when ye cause her to lose her husband and her power also.
Ye are disceaued


For Christ has judged your doings before hand, saying: whosoever sins
against the spirit shall never be forgeuen in this world nor in the world to
come. Do ye not know my lords, that there was never traitor against king or
Queen, that cold long prosper: and will your lordships sek the destruction of
the que^e and the hole realm and think to live prosperously afterward: will ye
be false traitors to the Queen and al your own country and think to be put in
trust, and made me^ of great power in strange contries: There is no man at
this present, that thinks any treason to remain in any of the que^s most
honorable counsel but surely if ye crown king Philippe though ye could do it
by a just law, Mark this part of their nature.
or if ye receue him in with disceitfulnes, guile, aid, fraud or subtlety,
to destroy the land: undoubtedly all the world will accoumpt you rank
traitors, So will the great Turk. Poor bakers daughters of brussels. A farmers
act of the kings majesty in Antwerpe.
and the very Spaniardes themselves durst never rest in quietness, till it
were rewarded accordingli. ^il ye crown the king to make him live chaste with
his wife contrary to his nature: peradventure his majesty after he ^ere
crowned would be content with one woman, but in this mean time his grace will
every night, have v. or vi. to see which of them pleases him best. If they
were ladies or gentle women, it were more tolerable, but bakers daughters and
such other poor whores, is to abominable. In Antwerp before shroftide, there
were as there be many at this present, certain merchauntes, which had very
fair wives, whom the king cold not have privily. Where the king is so
vicious, the people must neds be much worse. They brag more of this, then of
all the wars that ever their king made. The ki^gs majesty a meri midwife at
midde night.


But hearing by chance of spies, that some of the same wives were upon a night
with their neighbors wife, to help her in her travel or labor of child,
the king with certain other went masking the therein woman's apparel: and the
kings majesty, as all Spaniardes reported for a great honor, held the
wives back, till she had brought forth her child.

But what was wrought amongst the middwiues afterward, let other men
judge: for I had not known this, but that all Spaniards, bragged of it
themselves, that we might rejoice to have for our king in England such a
stowte, bold and mighty prince, as durst mask among women and play the
midwife, at midnight. I could not for shame write this, but that I think the
Queen's highness, has heard tell how sharpeli the go^d bishop of Castila was
checked, The Bishop of Castyll.
because he desired the king to keep him self for his wife, and told him it
was not lawful for him to live in such lothso^e lechery. The notable sermon,
that this good bishop made though he lost his rochet for speaking against
lechery and such other vices, is talked of so much throughout al these parties,
that I am sure this tale cannot be hidden. I write his name, because the Queen's
highness is bound to give him thanks and reward him with another bishopric,
They esteem the crown above the quen Unlike similitudes. Some good Lady show
our Queen this truth, that her grace be not brought into mor miserye. Paget
should brought in douch men and ben viceroy if vprors cold ben moved by the
wro^ges that the Que^e attempted last year
that would put himself in such danger of trouble to cause the king her
graces husband to love her. But know ye their reports: they say the good
bakers daughter is more worth in her goun then Queen Mary without her crou^.
God witnesses with me, that it greueth my heart sore, to hear such vile
reports and so unlike similitud^s. They say old wives must be cherished for
their young rich gifts. For old wives, say they, for fair words and a little
crafty cuckering will give all that they have: but how they be used afterward
let the Queen's Ladies and gentill women discuss. If the king do so much esteem
his wife in these days, when he seeks to obtain by her honor and great
commodite: after what sort will he use her highness, when he has obtained
his purpose: does the Queen's grace think to cause the kings majesty still to
remain in England, with geuynge him the crown: No I assure you plai^ly? and
perfectlye the counsel of Spaines purpose is to establyshe other matters: they
have determined and agreed among themselves to a point a viceroye with a
great army of dronken douche men, with diverse other soldiers. And that the
lord Paget knows by the false flatteryng words, which I heard the Emperor
speak before him, to the king the xv. day of April, biddinge the king, make
much of that man, for he was worthy to be cherished, The Queen shall be a Nun
when the king is crowned And eue^ so shall ye do if ye write as long as ye live.
promising to make him the greatest man in England^, to keep us in subieccio^,
as I have told you before, and let the Quens highness live at her bedes, like
a good ancient Lady. Ye se the further I go, and the more I write, the
greater evils I find* but I promise you assuredlye, ^f I should write so much
of their viciousnes, as I know most perfectly, the ladies and gentell women
would be much ashamed. VVoulde to god the honorable ladies of England knew
the vile reports, which Spaniardes have reported by them: for then I assure
you the good Ladies would not love to kiss so pleasauntlye, and so many times,
with strangers, nor to receue and send into Flaunders so many milk mouthed
messengers, and most untrue taletellers, nor receue and send so many tokens,
with so loving and humble co^mendacions to their most loving, or rather most
dissembling Spaniardes, in whom lies all their love, all their hope, all
their trust and confidence. Oh most abominable whores: for I speak of no good
Ladies: were ye borne in England, do ye live in England, have Englismen kept
you all this long time, Pockye Spani. Ye would be offended to be openly named
for whores and yet ye love Spa which name you openly so
do English men put all their trust in your honesty because ye should be
Spaniards whores* and leaving your own natural husbands and friends put all
your trust, all your love, which is very littell to those whom ye ought to
love, al your hope, al your comfort in vile pockie Spaniards: If I being an
english man should have so little honesty, and tell so many of your names
openly, as I have heard Spaniardes name to be their whores, many of you would
lose your friends, many be banished the court, many be deuorced from their
husbands, and sent to their most trusty and most loving Spaniardes. I would
name diverse of you, which within these few days have sent your messengers,
who^ I could also show, and tokens to spaniardes in Flaunders, like arrante
whores: but I will favor you at this present and keep the counsels, Amend
good Ladies or else.
which another Spaniardes nor your own messengers will hide nor keep close,
because I trust ye will amend and be honest weme^ hereafter now ye have warning
of their vilnes. Or else do ye not know right honorable Ladies, for now I leave
all whores, The manner of Spanishe women. This is great dishonor for your
husbands, shame for your selves and a great slander for your country
that the manner of spain is, if one man kiss a another man's wife or daughter
it shall be lawful for her husband or father to kill him: or do ye not know
that there be no women in Spain but commen whores, that will kiss any man
except their husbands: this has caused Spain. to report in every place that
they may for a small portion of gold or a precious stone have the best ma^s
wife in our realm which report has sprede so far, that the yonkers of
Spain do write, as god is witness that I have see^ their letters to peuish
boys, that the princockes be so familierli received with Ladies of England,
that they have no mind on Spanishe wenches: for the Spaniards say and it is so
in deed in their country:

Oscula qui sumpsit si non et cetera su^psit, hec quoque, que data su^t, per
dear dignus erat: he, which has obtained kisses, say they, if he win
nothing else, is worthy to loose that which was given him. But take heed with
this warning, or else ye will shortly be named and shamed.
For in Spain he that can get a kiss shall have all other things: ye
wotte what I mean: and they think the same true in England also. Peradventure
some will be offended because I speak so plain. GOD is my witness I cannot
for very sha^e name such, as I cold and have heard Spaniards name with shame
enough, nor show you half the vile reports which they according to their
nature have made of you I write not this, because I think they have obtained so
much of the noble Ladies of England with kisses, as they may do of Spanishe
whores, nor because I think their reports true: for undoubtedly I know
their words to be a thousand parts worsse then their deeds: but because
the good and honorable Ladies of England knowinge their vile reports may use
themselves more strau^gely toward Spaniardes at their next return.

So that they may know perfectlye, that all noble men's wives and daughters
with other Ladies, and gentill women, that by the curtesi of England will
receive their friend with a kiss, be not commen whores for every pockye
Spaniarde. And surely I would wish you to leave that curtesye, specially
among Spaniardes. I give you this counsel because I desire your honors and
your husbands also, ye may take my words as it please you. London
The noble City of London has won more honor for punishing whores the^ for
any other several act: and yet Spaniardes say that all their diligent
watches not withstanding there be more mo^grels borne within this ii. years in
London then Englishmens children. Mo^grels
I speak not this because I think it so in deed: for I told you their words
were worsse then their doings, but because that most noble City may
continue in their most verteouse punishing of vice, It is the chefest virtue to
punish vice.
remembringe what vileness they would have reported if they might have had
liberte. I would write many other things that appertain to their nature, how
swinishe they use themselves at their table, tearing their meat like dogs,
drinking like horses, hangi^g their heads over their disshes that one part
beeinge ^lauored in their mouths may fall into the co^me^ dish afterward,
smacking like hogs, how vilie they use themselves in their chambers etc. but
because the time is short and many Englyshme^ know these things, I will here
make an end, most humblye besechinge your honorable lordeshippes to pardon my
doings, if I have without knowledge written any thing contrary to your
expectacion because I may do it of ignorance: but be you assured my whole
desire is, to seek the maintenance of your honor, and in declaring such
things, as be pretended against our country, Mi desire in writi^g this
letter
to seek the preseruacion of the whole realm. I shall therefore desire al
noble men, worshipful men, yomen of the Queen's guard and all other officers of
her highness most honorable court that they and every one of them will exhort the
people in every coast and part of the realm to live in tranquillite, peace and
concord by this familiar example of Esopes husband man. Who having many
sons, that despicing their fathers admonicions lived continually in debate
and strif, studied to plant amongeste them love, unite, concord and peace.
His sons upon a time being at home in his own house, he commanded his
servant to bring before him a burden of rods, such as husbands use for
their plowes and other busynes, and commanded his sons, the bundell being
fast bound together, to break the same rods wholly togethers.

But when their strength failed, the good man bade his servant untie the said
burden, and the rods being losed, he commanded every one of his sons to
break one wa^d: which thing when they had do^ with ease, the good old father
said, after this sort shall it be amongst you my children: if ye persevere
together in one loving mind perfectly, Note
your enemies shall never overcome you. But if ye will disseuer your selves one
from another, this your deuilishe discord and variaunce shall make you an apt
pray for your enemies: even so I say unto you most dear beloved brethren,
that like as a castle builded in the mids of a strong rock can never be
won til discord fall among the captains and souldyers, so that one part
treaterouslye suffer their enmies to enter in at the gats: so likewise England
is strongly compassed with strong rocks, which no artilery can pearse, and so
long as english men like good faithful soldiers will lovingly and faithfully
agree together, Keep this order and ye shall save your country
and every man from the highest degree to the lowest seek to maintain the
weal public of his native country and the state of the realm, all the world
can never over cum us: but if the noble men or one part of the commens will aid
and like false traitors receive in our enemies, Be sure to fly these
mischiefs or else ye work your own destruction. All you have been disceaued by
the flattering of Spa. take heed with this warning Yet though your lordship
were not perfect before take heed at the last. I desire your safe guard. This
should been do^e if the Queen could have moved sedicion by her quarrels last
year to the gentel men.
or if sedicio^, treason, rebellion, insurrections and such like mischiefs
fall amongst us and be wrought within our selves, our enemies shall come in
rejoicing at our most deuilishe dyscorde, and destroy the realm, and bring
all English men to such perpetual bondage and slauerye as I have here before
declared. Yea those that be their greatest friends and first bringers into the
land are appointed to dye the most shameful death so far as I perceive:
there is pryuye treason working against you at this present, which will be
brought to pass spedely, take wise counsel, man all your havens strongly,
least your enemies come upon you suddenly. I am sorry that I gave the lord
Page^e warning what treason is pretended against him: for I think ambicion so
much blinds his eyes, that he has no better grace but to go about as many
fleminges report, to conduct a great number of high Almaines privily into
England amongst you to destroy your corn and destroy the realm or else to
take the Lord graie, the lord Depute of callis and the hold with all, which we
have here seen. Suddenly suffer not your enemies to enter into the land, as
ye did the Danes in times past, in hope to drive them out after such like
sort. For I assure you the Spaniardes can and will provide more politic ways
to suppress the country and keep us in subjection, then ever the Danes did in
times past. I shall therefore exhort you, and in the name of our savior
Christ require you, to fly all manner things that may be like to make
discord, debate, strife, sedicion, commocions, treasons, rebellions or such
like mischiefs amongeste you

And specially leave those most deuilishe names of Papystes, heretics,
Lutherans, protestauntes and such like, according to the Queen's most gracyous
proclamacion. Join your selves to gether with love and amite, reioysinge to
take upon you the most blessed name of our savior Jesus CHRIST, the GOD of
equitee, peace, love and tranquillite, and to be called Christians: knit your
selves together in perfect charity, love together like Christen brethren,
remembryng we have al one father which is in heaven, We have al one father,
which is in heaven, then we ought to love together like brethren.
and that we be all redeemed with one rau^some, even the shedynge of the most
precious blood of our sauyoure Jesus CHRIST: whose commandments if we will
endeuore our selves to keep for the vttermoste of our power, and if we will
take upon us his most mighty name, he will undoubtedly defend us with his
most mighty arm, so that we shall be able to withstand our enemies and live in
our countrei quietly in peace, love and tranquillite, like as the children of
god and loving brethren in our savior Jesus christ: to whom with the father
and the holy ghost iii. persons and one living god, which was without
beginning, beall honor and glory world without end. Amen.

Your lordships obedient, true and faithful servant Ioha^nes bradfordus.

Once again beware of had I wifte.

A tragical blast of the Papisticall trompette for maintenance of the Popes
kingdom in England.
NOw fill the cup and make good chere,
This golden chains must neds obei:
England is ours both far and nere,
No king shall reign if we say nay.
Now all shaven crowns to the sta^derd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
Spare another man, woman or child,
Hang and head the^, burn the^ with fire:
What if Christ were both meke and mild
Satan our lord will give us hier.
Now al shaven crounes to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
Pope innocent our father old,
When Peter's ke is cold do no good:
He cursed them a thousand fold,
And drowned them in Tibers flood.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
He said we must paul's sword now take,
Splay the banner, strike up the droome,
Fall to array, pike and half hake,
Play now the men, the time is come.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniarde.
Our golden hatte we must defend,
Though Christ say nay, we will it have,
And it maintain unto the end,
Al kings to us be bond and slave.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
The Pope our father has al rule,
The devil to him will never say nay,
But makes him richly to ride on mule,
In worldly pomp which may not decai.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
The Spaniards has sworn us to defend,
So that we betraye England to them:
Make hauock now the people to spend,
As Herod did once in Bethleem.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
Do you not see this English in fear:
Their heart is driven into their hose.
xiii. we burned of late to gether:
They durst not snuff o^ce with their nose
Now al shaven crowns to the sta^derd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
Hey courage, courage, my fellows al,
The getti^g ship must bear a proud sail,
If we draw back our kingdom will fall,
If we be stout nothing shall us fail
Now al shaven crowns to the sta^dard,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
Lay shame aside, let honesty go,
Bear out al matters be they untrue:
Say true men be traitors and the Qu. foe,
Banish al truth and falshode renew.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome pull down for the Spaniard.
Our just must we have, who can sai nay,
This god once said to our father Caine,
The world is our reign and worldli stay,
We shall not decay but alwais remai^e.
Now al shaven crowns to the standerd,
Make rome, pull down for the Spaniard.
The author to England his natural countreye.
England repent whiles thou have space,
If thou could repent as Niniuie did,
Then sholdest thou be sure of gods grace
And so might thy enemies quite be rid.
But if thou be blind and wilt not see,
The^ hastes destruction for to destroi the.
FINIS.

