Errata.
Page 51. l. 15. for rather, read either. p. 53. l. 4. for The, This. p. 55. l.
for note, root. p. 65. l. 4. dele, not. p. 98. l. 10. for use, enjoy. p. 101.
l. 7. for walk, wash. p. 108. l. 20. dele, that. p. 109. l. 7. deest, to. p.
119. l. vlt. for that, if. p. 120. l. 3. deest, to. p. 140. l. 11. for turning,
curing.

A TREATISE FVL OF CONSOLATION for all that are afflicted in mind, or body,
or otherwise. Which armeth us against impatiencie under any cross.

By NICOLAS BOVVNDE Doctor of Divinity.

Lament. Ierem. 4.27. It is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1608.

To the right Worshipful Sir HENRY WARNER Knight, and to the virtuous Lady
FRANCIS WARNER his Christian and godly wife, the daily increase of that true
godliness, that has the promises of this life, and of the life to come.
RIght Worshipful Sir, in respect of your place indeed, some learned Treatise
of Justice might have seemed more fitting: which if I had attempted, I could
have added nothing unto that, which you daily practice, and have done many
years, to the great good of that part of our country, wherein God has placed
you. But yet, as you are a Christian, and a professor of the Gospel, and so
(even in the multitude of Gods blessings, many ways, and plentifully powered
out upon you) are subject with all the rest of Gods children, unto some
afflictions and crosses; this argument, I hope, for the time present, or to
come, may seem not altogether unseasonable. Seeing that the Lord has said,
that if any man will follow him, Matthew. 16.24
he must take up his cross and follow him. And therefore that is it, which
every one must look for, at one time or an other, and in what kind it shall
seem best to his heavenly wisdom. For here I have labored, to show out of
the word of God, many reasons of the patient and comfortable bearing of the
same. But whatsoever it be, it proceeds from an heart unfeignedly well wishing
unto you: and so I pray you accept of it, as an apparent testimony of the same.

And for your self, good Madame, though your own virtues and kindness deserve
much, God having put upon you that crown of glory, Prove. 16.31.
that Solomon speaks of, namely, that your age is found in the way of
righteousness, even in these most corrupt and dangerous times: yet the worthy
memory of M. Robert Forth sometimes of Butly, Esquire, Prou. 2 17.
heretofore the guide of your youth, your self being joined unto him in the
nearest covenant of God, had been sufficient to move me among other his
friends and allies, to show what testimony of love I could unto any of his.

Whose zeal to the Gospel of Christ, and love to all, that professed it: with
his sincerity in executing of justice, hearty affection to all his
neighbors; great hospitality and relief to the poor, even in the times of
greatest scarsitie and want; with most excellent orders in his family for daily
prayer, for reading the Scriptures, and for singing of Psalms, do yet speak
for him, and shall whiles this age remains. Whose uprightness of heart unto
God (wherein he was a right Nathanael, Ioh. 1.47.
even a true Israelite indeed) I pray God, that all his right worshipful
children, sons and daughters may set before their eyes, as an example to
follow.

And so praying God to bless you both, with many comfortable days together in
this life, and eternal happiness after death in the kingdom of heaven, never
to be severed: with the like blessing of God upon the right worshipful your
children, and childrens children on both sides, I bid you all most humbly and
heartily farewell in Christ. Norton in Suff. Iun. 24. 1608.

Your Worships in all unfeigned love for Christ's sake, Nicolas Bownde.

Errata.
Page 19. l. 5. read, that God. 25.4 r. mixed thing. 27.20. r. distracted. 2^ 9
r. our selves. 33.16. r. infirmities. 42.20. deest are. 24. r. rich mercy.
47.11. r. want. 53.7. r. meaning. 57.18. r. favor of God. 62 3. r. searing.
99. 5. after man, put in colon.

A COMFORTABLE TREATISE for the afflicted.
Romans 8.26, etc. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know
not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us
with sighs, which cannot be expressed. 27 But he that searches the hearts,
knows what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he makes request for the
Saints, according to the will of God. 28 Also we know that all things work
together for the best unto them that love God: even to them that are called of
his purpose. 29 For those whom he knew before, he also predestinate to be made
like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren, etc.


THe general intent and purpose of the Apostle here is, to entreat of the
matter of afflictions, to this end, that he might show, that none of them
shall be able to hinder us from our salvation, that so being well persuaded of
them, and of the goodness of God toward us in them, we might be the better
prepared for them, and have more comfort in the bearing of them. For he having
proved before, that we are justified and saved by faith in Christ, for the
further assurance of all those that rely upon Christ for their salvation, he
remooueth out of their minds, those things that might seem to weaken their
faith herein.

And namely, first of all the consideration of our natural corruption,
cleaving fast unto us; hindering us from that which is good, and drawing us to
that that is evil, even after such time, as we do believe: of which he has
spoken in the former chapter, Romans 7 15.
saying, I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do I not: but
what I hate, that do I. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells
no good: for to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
that is good. For I do not the good, that I would, but the evil that I would
not, that do I. I find then, that when I would do good, I am thus yoaked,
that evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God in the inner
man. But I see an other law in my members rebelling against the law of my
mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

For answer unto which he says, that by the imputation of the perfect
holiness of our Savior Christ, the guiltines of this is taken away, and is
not imputed unto us before the judgment seat of God: and therefore he says,
verse. 17.
it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: for if I do that
I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me:
and therefore it shall not be laid unto my charge: and 25.
for I my self in my mind serve the law of God: though in my flesh I serve
the law of sin: and therefore in the next chapter he breaks out into this
comfortable saying, and avouches it most confidently, that there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh,
Romans 8.1.
but after the Spirit.

And this communion and fellowship that herein we have with Christ for the
discharging of us from the guilt of our natural corruption, we know by two
infallible tokens: the one is the Spirit of sanctification, which we have
received from him, whereby it comes to pass, that we walk not afrer the
flesh any more, but after the Spirit. verse. 11.
For if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us: he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in us: 13.
and therefore if we mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, we shall
live: for as many as are lead by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God:
and thus this sanctification of ours, which is in sincerity and truth, though
in much weakness and great imperfection proceeding from the Spirit of God, is a
sure token that we are partakers of the righteousness of Christ to the perfect
justifying of us in the sight of God, and to the taking away of all the
remnants of sin inhering and dwelling in us continually.

The second testimony hereof is the Spirit of adoption, which he gives us, to
assure us of his favor, and to deliver us from our fears in measure, and to
teach us chearefully and comfortably to pray unto God, as to our most merciful
Father: for he says that this spirit of sanctification, verse. 15.
is not the spirit of bondage, to fear again: which fear is wrought in us by
the sight of our sins through the ministry of the law: but it is the spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father, that is, it seals up our adoption
in our minds, and so opens our mouths in prayer unto God: and therefore he
adds: that the same Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the
children of God: and if we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs
of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Thus by the Spirit of adoption, which
is discerned by this most excellent operation of his, that it causes us to
pray in hope to God, as to our father, and to call him not once father after a
faint manner, but twice or thrice; yea continually, Abba, father, or father,
father: we know that we have our part in Christ, for whose sake only he is our
father, and so are by him delivered from the guiltines of all the remnants of
corruption and sin, though they are in our flesh, and dwell there
continually, as the Apostle says: and do show themselves both by unbelief,
and by hindering us from doing of that good that we would, and causing us to do
that evil that we would not.

Another thing whereby our faith is assaulted and often weakened, is the
consideration of those manifold and grievous afflictions which may and do
befall us in this world; whereby it might seem unto us, that our ways are not
so acceptable unto the Lord, that we might have comfort in them. For answer
unto which, he shows, that of what nature or kind soever they be, they shall
be so far from hindering us from the favor of God, and from our salvation;
as that in them we have Christ Jesus, who went before us in all our
afflictions, further then we can, and yet at the last came unto glory: and
therefore if we patiently abide, as we have not only the Prophets, and
Apostles, and Martyrs, and other holy men; but even Christ himself to be our
fellow in them; so we shall be fellows with him, and like unto him in glory:
for he says, 16.
If so be that we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him.

And least that it might seem grievous unto us, to go to so happy an estate
through so grievous and painful a way, and so might think, that the kingdom
of heaven, though it be never so precious in it self, we should buie it too
dearly; he tells us assuredly, that by considering the afflictions of this
world on the one side, and the felicity of the kingdom of heaven on the other
side, and so casting up the account of the one and the other, he has found
the total sum of them both to be so far differing, that all the
afflictions of this miserable and wretched world endured by any, and from the
first hour of their birth, unto their last breath, are not to be compared in
greatness or continuance, unto that glory and happiness that shall there be
revealed and bestowed upon us, according to the express words of the text: I
count, verse. 18.
or all things being well considered, I gather, that the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto us.

And as this glory is thus great, so it is most sure and certain, though we
do not presently enjoy it; and therefore we need not in any wise to doubt of
it: for all the other creatures of God, besides man, which are unreasonable and
dumb, have in their kind a certain sense and feeling of it; for though they
be now subject, (and that yet but for a time) unto this vanity, that is,
corruption and abuse, which they are in: yet by the instinct of nature they do
most earnestly, and as it were with their heads lifted up, and necks stretched
out, that they might see a great way off, look for the revealing of the sons
of God, that so they themselves also might then be redeemed from bondage into
their glorious liberty; and they shall not be disappointed of their hope.
Therefore much more we that have received the first fruits of the spirit,
should with greater patience in trouble abide the will of God a while, and with
more certainty and earnestness of desire look for an happy change of all our
afflictions in that most glorious day.

Which the Apostle sets out in much more patheticall and significant words
then I have expressed, and therefore I could not pass them over; for he says,
and 19.
The fervent desire of the creature, that is, of the whole frame of this world,
and of all things in it, waits when the sons of God shall be revealed. 20.
Because the creature is subject unto vanity, not of his own will, or natural
inclination, but by reason of him which has subdued it under hope. For though
he did by his curse upon all the creatures, which he had made for man, show
how greatly he was displeased with the fall and sin of man, yet he would give
them hope to be restored: and therefore he adds, 21. For the creature also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and
trauaileth in pain together unto this present: as a woman with child, not
only with exceeding sorrow, but with hope of a comfortable deliverance in
time. And not only the creatures, but we also which have the first fruits of
the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption even the
redemption of our own bodies, that is, our last restoring, when as our
adoption shall be fully accomplished in soul and body.

Which condition of ours in affliction, though grievous for a time, but most
happy in the end, that we might not refuse to undergo, with the rest of the
creatures, and our brethren and sisters: he calls us to consider the wise
order which God has appointed in saving of us, which is by hope: verse. 24.
for he says, We are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that he sees, but if we hope for that we see not, we
do with patience abide for it. Therefore we must not imagine so soon to enjoy
all happiness, as we believe it: but be content to want all things for a time:
that hoping for them with patience and long-suffering, we might come to them at
last: unless we will go about to inuert this excellent order, which the Lord
has determined and appointed to be in saving us; which is by trayning us up in
the hope and expectation of all things promised for a season.

But now because the hope that is deferred, is the fainting of the heart, as
Solomon says, that is, Prou. 13.12.
it makes a man sick at the very heart, to be long deferred of that that we
desire and hope for: and therefore we might fear both in respect of our own
weakness, and also the greatness, together with the long continuance of
affliction, that we should not with patience under the cross continue to hold
out happily unto the end: he further adds for our singular comfort, that the
Spirit, which we have received, whereby we are sanctified, and whereby we pray
to God, as to our Father, shall perform this office also unto us, that it
shall help to bear the burden of our affliction with us; and so though we be
never so weak, yet being supported by the power of it, we shall be able to
endure them well enough: Romans 8.2^.
for he says, Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities.

So that it shall be all one with us, as with a young child, upon whose
shoulder the father laying a heavy burden, which of it self were able to
press him down to the ground; he should so put his hand under it, that he
should bear the whole weight almost and stresse of it himself, and so he
should make him carry it. Now if the earthly father will not of his natural
affection ouerlade the poor child, then we need not to fear, but that the
Lord our spiritual father will so increase our strength, according to the
measure of our afflictions, that we shall find this promise to be true by
experience, That his holy spirit shall help our infirmities.

And thus David commends the mercy of God unto us, Ps. 103.13.
That as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion
on the^ that fear him: he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we be
but dust: where he renders this one reason of the merciful dealing of God
toward us, even the knowledge that he has of our weak and frail estate;
which thing, as it is most comfortable to consider, so we shall find it to be
most true by experience; because our Savior Jesus Christ has prayed for us,
as himself witnesses in the Gospel, unto his heavenly father, that he would
give us a comforter that might abide with us for ever; Job. 14.16.
even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive.

And the blessed Apostle confesses of himself, that he was partaker of the
fruit of this prayer; for being in many afflictions that were able to have
ouercom him, yet by the power of Gods spirit, he did hold out happily in them:
2. Cor. 4.5.
saying, We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress; we are
in doubt, but we despair not; we are persecuted, but not forsaken; we are cast
down, but we perish not: Every where we bear about in our body the dying of
the lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also be made manifest in our
bodies; for we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake,
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our bodies. Where he
compares the miserable estate and condition that the faithful, and more
specially the Ministers are in, unto a continual dying, and the virtues of the
spirit of God in them unto life, which oppresses that death: and he renders
this reason, why the Lord does thus often afflict his servants, namly, verse. 7.
That the excellency of that power might be of God, and not of us, that is,
that all men might perceive how they stood not by man's power, but by the
singular virtue of God, in that they die a thousand deaths, but never perish:
and so in many dangers as he defends them, so in much weakness he vpholdeth
them, and his Spirit helps their infirmities.

And this grace of God also upholding him in great weakness against most
dangerous temptations he acknowledges in an other place: for when he felt
himself so sore troubled with them to his continual grief, as if he had had a
prick thrust into chap. 12.7.
his flesh; and the messenger of Satan did so molest him, as though he had
been most shamefully buffetted on the face: for which he besought the Lord
thrice, that is, very often, that it might depart from him: he received this
answer from God, verse. 9.
My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is made perfect through weakness.
So in this spiritual combat, the Spirit of God did uphold him against the
temptations of Satan, and of his own corruption: and so he concludes, that
when he was weak, then was he strong: that is, in his greatest weakness he
felt the power of God upholding him; and so shall we, if we wait upon him.

For the Apostle shows that this which he found by experience in himself,
by the goodness and mercy of God, belongs to all the rest of the faithful,
when he writes thus to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that you may be able
to bear it: where he says, The God that would have us tempted for our good,
will by his spirit so strengthen us, that we shall be able to bear them, and
have an happy issue out of them. And if there were no Scripture to prove it,
our own experience might tell us the truth of it; for if we have observed any
thing, we may remember that many times we have been brought very low, and
have undergone such hard brunts, that we thought we should never have been
able to have borne them. Neither indeed should we, but that there was another
thing in us, far above our selves, which did help us, and caused us both to
endure, and to overcome those things, which we thought we should have fainted
in the midst of them: and so we may boldly say with this holy Apostle,
Blessed be God, 2. Cor. 1.3.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercies and God of all
comforts; which comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to
comfort them that be in affliction, with the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation abounds through Christ.

Thus the Lord increases the comforts of his Spirit in his servants according
to their afflictions, so that they do not only equal them, but also exceed
them in time: and so being supported by the Spirit, they are able to bear
them. And this promise of God, that his Spirit shall help us in our
infirmities, is so much the more worthy to be considered of us, because it is
so general, that it shall help us, not in some few only, but in all our
infirmities whatsoever: for he speaks indefinitly, and not limiteth the
promise to any one. So that there can be no weakness in us so great, or
infirmities so many upon us, in which the Spirit shall not stre^gthen us, even
to the bearing of the greatest cross, that God shall lay upon us; as we have
seen it in the Apostle before, who said, that God did comfort him in all his
tribulations, and his consolations in Christ did abound, even as his sufferings
did abound.

But in the mean season Paul gives us to understand, that the afflictions of
Gods children are oftentimes so great, that they far pass any strength that
is in us to bear the^; and that we are not able to do it of our selves: yea,
that we are very weak of our selves, and subject to many infirmities, though we
have received the Spirit of sanctification, and of adoption: for the same
Spirit does not clean rid us of them, whiles we are in this world, but does
only help us in them: according to the express words of the Apostle, Likewise
the Spirit also helps our infirmities. In so much that he confesses not
only of other the faithful, but also of the Apostles, and of himself, in
whose name he speaks, and joins himself with them, that they were not able
to have undergone so many and great things, as they did, being frail men like
unto us, but that they had the Spirit helping them in their infirmities: for
he does not say, that the Spirit helps your weakness, but us, that are the
strongest, and helps us in our infirmities: then no man must think to be
free from them, it is and must be sufficient for us that the Spirit does help
us in them.

The truth of which may likewise appear in the great complaint of David, Job,
and the rest of Gods servants, who though they did patiently bear many great
things, yet not without the bewraying of many great infirmities in themselves:
for Job though he be commended unto us as a most tried pattern of all
patience; yet how many and great infirmities appeared in him it is evident,
when he thus cried out against himself, Let the day perish, Job 3.3.
wherein I was borne, and the night when it was said, there is a man child
conceived: let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither
let the light shine upon it: and why died I not in the birth? or why died I not
when I came out of the womb? why did the knees prevent me? and why did I suck
the breasts? and many more such bitter words proceeding from great weakness
he uttered against himself. And David, though he was a man after Gods own
heart, 1. Sam. 13.13
and did bear many afflictions under Saul with great patience; 1. Sam. 13.13.
yet in many Psalms he bewraieth great infirmities: Psalm. 31.22.
I said in mine have, I am cast out of thy sight; he acknowledges his
infidelity to be such, that he did rashly say that God had clean forsaken
him: and in an other place he speaks thus of himself; I said in my fear,
and 116.11.
All men are liars, that is, he said in his temptation, that Samuel the
Prophet, when he told him, that he should be King of Israel, did not speak
it from God by the spirit of prophecy, but of his own head, and so did but
lie and dissemble with him.

Therefore we are not to imagine of such a portion of Gods Spirit, that might
swallow up all our infirmities, and clean rid us of them, (for then we
should be no men) but it must be sufficient, that we are aided with the
strength of it, so that we finally fall not down, and lie still under the
heavy burden of affliction, yiedling to our infirmities, and so overcome of
them: so that there is a ^^xt thing, as it were in us; namely, our own
infirmities to humble us, and the strength of Gods Spirit to enable us to bear
our afflictions. So that having so strong and so able an helper, to bear with
us the burden, we may be comforted with hope of enduring the greatest thing,
that may befall us in this world, though continuing upon us never so long. Not
indeed always in that manner, that we ought, and do desire, but so as it may
be acceptable unto God, and so far forth as his holy Spirit shall help us in
our infirmities: for though there be nothing in us but infirmities, yet there
is help for us from the Spirit of God.

And that we might even in our infirmities, by the help of the Spirit of God
bear all afflictions as we ought, the Apostle further adds, that the same
Spirit shall likewise stir us up in all necessities of ours, to pray unto God
for help, and for his grace, and to make our moan unto him, as to our father,
and we shall be heard of him therein, Romans 8.26.
saying, For we know not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self
makes request for us with sighs, which cannot be expressed: but he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he makes
request for the Saints, according to the will of God. Where we see, both what
great infirmities we be subject unto, and also how the Spirit of God helps us
in the same. For sometimes through the greatness of our misery, we know not
what to say, or how to pray to God as we ought: and yet then his Spirit does
stir up in us, though not many well ordered speches or words; yet those sighs
and groans which being unspeakable, and not felt of them, in whom they are,
are well understood and accepted of God, because they proceed from his spirit,
whose meaning he knows and grants, because it makes request for the Saints
according to the will of God.

Wherein we are first of all to consider, that though we have received the
spirit of God, even the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father, which
spirit teaches us to pray, and by which we have many times called upon God
with great assurance and comfort, both for and with our selves and others also;
yet there may be a time, and that very often, wherein we may be so dishorted
by some great affliction, and in such a case, that being as it were astonished
and overcome with the greatness and strangeness of it, we cannot well tell
what to pray, or what to ask of God. And though prayer at such a time
especially be our only refuge, according to the saying of the Prophet, Psalm.
50.25.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee: yet we cannot tell
how to begin, and what to say. And so unlike shall we be unto our Father, and
to that that we have been in times past, as though we were not the same:
nay, our estate may seem to be like unto the wicked, who are at their wits
end, and know not how to pray unto God at all. For if we were asked then, what
we would have, we cannot make a direct answer; and though we have liberty to
ask of God according to our need, yet we cannot use it: for we cannot tell
what to pray.

O what a wonderful thing is this! but yet most true; and that which is to be
found not in some few mean persons only, that are ignorant, and have not
accustomed themselves to prayer; but in the most excellent servants of God,
even the Apostles themselves; as Paul here brings himself in with the rest
for an example, and in this great infirmity makes himself like unto the
rest, saying; For we know not what to pray as we ought. And though there be
many excellent prayers in the old and new Testament, by which we might learn
how to pray; and especially we have a perfect form of prayer prescribed by
our Savior Christ to direct us in all things needful for us: yet in
temptation we ask those things many times, which if we had them, would be
hurtful unto us: and when we do ask that that is profitable and good, yet
even then by prescribing unto the Lord the time when, and the manner how, and
the means whereby we would be delivered, according to our own mind, we
pray with such impatience and distrust, that it may be truly said of us, We
cannot tell what to pray as we ought.

This was the estate of that good King Hezekiah, when he was sick unto death;
at what time being greatly pained in his body, and sore troubled in his mind,
and out of all hope of life, he turned his face unto the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord; but how? he does express it in these words. Like a Crane or a
Swallow so did I chatter, Esa. 38.14.
I did mourn as a dove: that is, in the bitterness of his soul he did not
use many words; yea, he was altogether so confused, that his prayer was like
the chattering of birds, he knew not almost what to say.

Such was the perplexity and more then infirmity of David, when as in his
great afflictions, in stead of praying, he roared all the day long, as he
says of himself; Psalm. 32.3.
When I held my tongue, my bones consumed, and when I roared all the day: so
that sometimes he held his peace, being betvveen hope and despair, and
sometimes he uttered many desires; but being carried away with the present
feeling of his adversity, they were more like the roarings of a vvilde beast,
then any well ordered prayer. And at another time he says, Mine heart
trembles within me, Psalm. 55.4.
and the horrors of death are fallen upon me: fear and trembling are come upon
me, and an horrible fear has covered me: in which words, he shows in
what infirmity and weakness he was then fallen into: and for his prayers,
after what manner they were framed, he declares in these words; Verse 2.
I mourn in my prayer and make a noise, so that there was mourning and some
kind of noise, and little else. And another time he expresses his outvvard
estate, and the inward affection of his mind, and the manner of his prayer then,
after this sort. Psalm. 102.3.
My days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burnt like an herth: mine
heart is smitten and withered like grass, because I forgot to eat my bread:
for the voice of my groaning my bones do cleave to my skin. I am like a
Pelican of the wilderness, and am like an owl of the deserts. I watch, and
am as a sparrow alone upon the house top. Surely I have eaten ashes as bread,
and mingled my drink with weeping. By which kind of speeches he shows how
greatly his affliction did work upon him, so that in them he did groan and
weep, and cast out many fearful cries, but all things were so out of order
in his prayer, that they were like the chattering of a Pelican and of a
sparrow, and the skreeks of an owl, rather then any thing else, if God had
considered them in his justice, and so he might have rejected them.

Thus we see, that these most excellent servants of God in their greatest
conflicts and agonies, were so far from being able to pray unto God in any
tolerable manner, that in their own sense and feeling they did but roar and
cry, sob and sigh, weep, mourn and complain; and that also very confusedly,
even like the Crane, the Swallow, the Pelican, the Sparrow, even the shreeke
Owl it self: so distracted were they in themselves, and full of disorder, and
fallen into so many great disorders at once. Therefore we may not judge of our
selves, or of others, by any one such accident, or few particular cases, least
we should deceive our selves, saying, I have not the spirit of God, for I
cannot pray nor call upon God in mine affliction; and if I do at any time, it
is not as I ought: for this is that which Paul confesses of himself, and of
other the servants of God, and which we have seen in these two excellent
Kings, Hezekiah and David, that in affliction oftentimes we cannot tell what to
pray as we ought.

But yet in this great unfitness of ours, we must not be like to the wicked,
who then give over all prayer, because they are unfit for it: and we are
subject unto this temptation, to put off prayer, because we see that we cannot
pray as we ought, and so we are made to think, that we should offend God in
prayer. But we must then strive earnestly against this infirmity of ours, and
so pray to God that we might pray; and as the Disciples said unto Christ, Luke
11.1.
Lord teach us to pray; so let us desire the Lord to give us his good spirit of
prayer: which if we will do, no doubt we shall find his promise to be true,
that then The spirit of God in us shall Romans 8.26.
make request for us. For as our Savior Christ comfort his Disciples in an
other case, Math. 10.1^
seeing that they should be brought before the Governors and Kings for his
sake: But when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what you shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that hour, what you shall say; for it is
not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you: Even
so we shall find by experience, that when we are most unfit to pray, if we
will not yield to this infirmity and slothfulness, but strive against it,
there shall be a secret inward working in us, whereby we shall be stirred up
to do something; and there shall be a labor of the heart, and an endeavor of
the mind, aspiring unto that which we may seem not to attain unto: and there
shall be many sighings, though few words; many great desires, though few
voices: yea, there shall be that which we cannot greatly conceive of our
selves, and every thing shall be unspeakable: according to the saying of the
Apostle, That when we know not what to pray as we ought, the spirit of God
shall make request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed.

For no doubt these men that we spoke of before, Hezekiah and David, even at
those times, when they could not tell what and how to pray of themselves; yet
the Spirit of God helping their infirmities, they did pray in some good
acceptable manner, and there were at the least unspeakable sighs and groans
stirred up in them: for it is said of Hezekiah, 2. king. 20.3.
that he then turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord: and
afterward it is said, The Lord did hear his prayer. And David, when as in his
own feeling he did but roar and sigh, and mourn; as he says, Psalm. 38.6.
I go mourning all the day, I roar for the grief of mine heart: yet then he
made his desires known unto the Lord in prayer, and poured them our very
plentifully before him. And when he did but mourn and make a noise, he
desires the Lord to hearken unto him, and 55.2.
and to answer him: and when he says, that his groanings were like the
Pellicans, and the sparrows, and the shrike owls, yet to show, that in them
there was a work of Gods spirit, which made them acceptable to God, he
begins the Psalm thus: O Lord, and 102.1.
hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee: incline thine ears unto me,
when I call make have to hear me. And to show that his example in thus praying
was for the instruction and comfort of the Church, it is thus entitled, A
prayer of the afflicted, when he shall be in distress, and power out his
meditation before the Lord: Showing not only that the afflicted in their
distress do thus pray, but that the Lord hears them therein, and grants
their desire.

And thus is it said of the whole Church of God in Egypt, at what time, Exodus
1.14.
as they were greatly oppressed, so that they grew weary of their lives, by
sore labor in clay, and in brick, and in all work in the field, with all
manner of bondage, which was laid upon them most cruelly; so there was great
ignorance and much weakness among them, and therefore not knowing well many
of them how to pray to God, Chap. 2.23
They sighed to God for the bondage, and cried; and their cry for the bondage
came unto God, and he heard their moan, and looked upon them, and had respect
unto them: and he said unto Moses, and 3.7.
I have surely seen the trouble of my people, and have heard their cry, for I
know their sorrows, therefore I am come down to deliver them.

This is then a most notable comfort in all afflictions, that we believing in
Christ, and made thereby partakers of his holy spirit, it shall so help us in
all our infirmities, that when we cannot tell what, or how to pray as we ought,
it shall teach us so to do it, as we may have hope and comfort of being
heard. For this is that which Paul adds in the next verse, Romans 8.27.
That he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the Spirit;
for he makes request for the Saints according to the will of God. Where by
knowing, he does not only mean that he understands it, as he does all
other things; but he accepts and allows of it, and does most willingly
grant such requests, as though they were made in far better liking to our
selves: and so is the word taken in the first Psalm, where the Prophet says,
The Lord knows the way of the Psalm. 1.6.
righteous, that is, he does make account of them, approve, and allow of
them, regard and prosper them.

For as we have seen even now, he heard the cry of the Israelites, when
they did but sigh and make their moan, and did deliver them from their cruel
bondage; and he did hear king Hezekiah chattering in his prayer like a Crane,
and raised him up from death, and added fifteen years more unto his life; 2.
Ki. 20.11
and to confirm him therein, he brought again the shadow ten degrees
back, by the degrees whereby it had gone down in the dial of Ahaz. And he
heard David when he roared for the extremity of his pain, and forgave the
punishment of his sin; that is, forgave him his sin, and removed the
punishment thereof. And we may remember our selves, if we have marked any
thing, how the Lord has heard us many times in our greatest need, when we have
howled and cried, rather then made any settled and well ordered prayer: yea,
when we have rather moaned then spoken, rather sighed then uttered a word. For
the Lord in this case regards not so much the multitude of words, as he
looks to the meaning of his spirit, and grants that, though they speak
never a word.

For even as a father or mother having a young infant sick of some sore
disease, though the child cannot speak and call for this and that, yet they
are ready to help it; and if it be elder, and can speak, yet being full of
pain, it cannot call for things as it ought: nevertheless, if they can by any
signs guess at the meaning of it, they will accept as much of it, as though
the child had spoken very distinctly, and used many words: Even so the Lord,
who is infinitely filled with the bowels of compassion toward us in Christ,
far above any father or mother; insomuch as the Lord says, Can a woman
forget her child, Esa. 49.15.
and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though they should forget,
yet will not I forget thee: though he delights to hear us pray to him, as
Christ himself witnesses to his Church, saying, My dove, show me thy sight,
let me hear thy voice; Cant. 2.14.
for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight comely: yet when by the extremities of
our miseries we are so oppressed or distracted, that we cannot in any orderly
manner pray unto him as we ought; yet he allows of the sighs and sobs that
we offer up unto him, and grants not so much our words (which sometimes none
or very few) as the meaning of his spirit, which is large and plentiful in us.

And hereupon it comes to pass, that the Lord in his just mercy imputes
not unto his servants the manifold rebellions of their flesh, or great
complaints in their prayer; as he did not unto Job nor to David, who were full
of them, as we have seen before; because he has respect unto the meaning of
his spirit in the^: As the mother is not so much grieved or offended with the
murmurings, impatiencie, and froward outcries of her poor sick child; as she
by the least token guesseth at the meaning of him, and takes that in good
part, and gives to him accordingly.

What shall we say to these things? Is it true indeed, that the Lord will
vouchsafe to look upon the low degree of his servants; and have respect unto
poor sinful creatures, who when they are fallen into the bottom of their
just deserved misery, and even then can not pray unto him one word aright; and
when they begin to speak unto him, even then their tongue cleaves to the
roof of their mouth; that he will yet hear their sighs, and their cries? yea
undoubtedly, he that of his great mercy will bear with such great weakness
in men, Matt. 12.20.
that he will not break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; he will
of the like mercy hear, not only the well ordered prayers of his Church, but
even the very cryings and roarings of his servants, though they be like the
Pellicans and the owls: yea their mournings, though they be like to the doves:
yea, when they say nothing, neither indeed can, their very sobs and sighs,
which come from the abundance of a troubled spirit, and can not be expressed:
for he allows of the meaning of his Spirit, which works these things in
them: and if they could, thereby they are willing to perform better service
unto him, and are sorry that they can not do it. What can be more comfortable
unto us, then this?

Therefore in all our necessities let us go unto the Lord in Christ with great
boldness, and come unto the throne of grace: and though we can not utter many
words, yet let us speak unto him: for surely the acceptance of our prayers
consists not in the multitude or well placing of our words, but in the
request and desire of our hearts: and therefore if we can pray but two or three
words, and say with the poor Publican, Lord, Luke 18.1^.
be merciful unto me a sinner; or with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith;
and 17.5.
or with the man in the Gospel, Lord I believe, Lord help mine unbelief; Mar.
9.24.
or with the blind man, Matt. 9.29.
O son of David have mercy upon me; or with the thief upon the cross, Luke
23.4^.
Lord remember me in thy kingdom, etc. this short prayer proceeding from the
Spirit of God in us, and offered up in the mediation of Christ Jesus, and in
the virtue of his prayers, shall be as well received of him, when we can do no
better, as if we had spent an whole hour in prayer.

Yea, if we do but lift up our minds unto God, and pray in our spirit, though
we utter not one word, as that godly woman Hannah the mother of Samuel did; 2.
Sam. 1.10
who being troubled in her mind prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore: but how
did she pray? she spoke in her heart, her lips did move only, but her voice
was not heard: The Lord will hear us, as he did her, and give her according to
her desire: as she afterward confessed to Heli the Priest: I prayed for this
child, and the Lord has given me my desire, which I asked of him. And so did
Nehemiah pray unto God, for he waiting upon the King of Babylon as he sat at
table, and being sad in his presence more then he had wont to be, the King
demanded of him the cause, and he told him: then having leave of the King to
ask what he would for the accomplishing of his desire; it is said that he
prayed to the God of heaven: that is, Nehe. 2.4.
he lifted up his mind unto God, and desired him to bless him in that
enterprise of his, and so he did. So we if either we can not pray in words, or
wait opportunity of time and place, and do but sigh unto him after an
unspeakable manner, the Lord will not refuse that, because it proceeds from
his Spirit.

And as this may be no small comfort unto us in our affliction, so the Apostle
Paul in the next verse following does for our further comfort show what is the
end of all the afflictions of the children of God; namely, their benefit and
good, when he says, Romans 8 2^.
Also we know that al things work together for the best to them that love God,
even to them that are called of his purpose. In which words he ministers this
sovereign medicine against the contagion and poison of all affliction, telling
us, that they come to the believers not for their hurt, but for their singular
good; especially seeing they befall them not by fortune or chance, but by the
special providence of God, and that for the same end: who as he has chosen
them from everlasting, so in the same counsel of his he ordained that they
should in their crosses be like unto his son. Verse. 29.
For those whom he knew before, he also predestinate to be made like to the
image of his son, that he might be the first borne of many brethren: and
therefore he calls them in time, justifies them by faith, and by the cross
brings them to eternal glory, as he did his own natural son: as it is
said in the next words, 30.
Moreover, whom he predestined, them also he called; and whom he called,
them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

Whereupon he boldly concludes, that no affliction shall be able to hurt them,
seeing that the Lord is with them in the same, meaning thereby to do them
good: for he speaks after a most confident manner, What shall we then say to
these things? 31.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? as if he had said, seeing that
God is with us in all our afflictions by his providence and power, and by the
assistance of his holy Spirit, none of them shall be able to do us any harm:
And the truth of Gods love and meaning toward us this way, he confirms by a
most excellent proof, when he adds, 32.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he
not with him give us all things also? In which words he shows, that we have
no cause to fear, no not in any cross, that the Lord will not give us
whatsoever is profitable for us, seeing that he has not spared his own Son
to save us.

Therefore when he says, All things work together for the best to them that
fear God, it is most true, whether we take it generally, as the words may be
expounded, namely, not only prosperity but adversity also, not only health
but sickness, not only liberty but imprisonment, not only honor but
dishonor; make for the best to those that love God. Or whether it be
restrained to this particular purpose of his; namely, to affliction of what
nature or kind so ever. It is no doubt the intent of the Apostle to speak of
this latter, and to show, that all afflictions do not only not hinder the
salvation of the godly, but do greatly further the same. Which saying of his,
though it contains an whole and entire matter by it self, yet being
inferred upon the former words, he seems therein to answer a secret
objection, which might arise in men's minds from thence; namely, that it
seems many times that the Lord does not hear the prayers of the afflicted,
because their afflictions be not only not removed, according to their
prayers, but sometimes increased contrary to their earnest desire.

Therefore we must remember, what has been already said touching this
matter, namly, how the Lord in granting our requests, looks not so much to
the particular things which we desire, as to the meaning of his Spirit in us:
and grants that, in turning our afflictions to our singular good: whereas if
they were presently removed, the Lord sees that it would be far worse with
us, though we imagine the contrary. For as if one in a burning fever should
in the midst of his fit impatiently desire to be washed with cold water; and
then the skillful Physician standing by, being his friend also should give him
some wholesome conserues or other cooling thing, he should in denying that
particular thing demanded, grant unto his general meaning, which was, that he
might have some thing given him, that might do him most good, though now being
diste^pered, he was not able to judge of it, but did mistake one thing for an
other, and thought that to be best, as to be plunged into the cold water,
which indeed is the worst: So we whatsoever we ask in our distress by
prayer unto God, our meaning is and must be, if it be ruled by Gods spirit,
that we would have that given unto us, which might procure our best good, and
further our salvation most of all. Therefore if the Lord suffer our crosses to
remain, and turn them to our good, though we in particular prayed for the
clean taking of them away, he fulfilleth both these promises unto us at once;
namely, he gives us according to the measure of his spirit in us; and he also
causes them to work together for the best to those that love God.

Thus then Paul besought the Lord thrice, that is, very often, 2. Cor. 12.8.
that the messenger of Satan might depart from him; and yet the Lord suffered
him still to buffet the Apostle, least he should be exalted out of measure,
through the abundance of revelations that were given unto him: and the Lord
gave him this further answer, that his grace should be sufficient for him to
uphold and strengthen him, and that the power of God should be seen in the
Apostles weakness. The Lord in denying this request of his, did give him
according to the meaning of his spirit in him, which was, that the Lord would
deal with him this way, as it should make most for his own glory, and for
the furtherance of Paul's salvation; and also did cause this affliction to work
together with other things for his best good; for this did him more good
remaining, then if it had been taken away: for hereby he had more experience
of his own weakness, and of the power of God, then otherwise he could have
had.

And thus also the Lord has verified from time to time unto the rest of his
servants the truth of that promise of his, which is uttered by the mouth of the
Prophet Solomon, Pro. 10.24.
God will fulfill the desire of the righteous; that is, God will not only
bless those that serve him, but he will bestow those blessings upon the^
most of all, which they especially desire, and do most earnestly pray unto him
for: according to that that is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 145.19.
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. Which promises are so to
be understood, not that he will always give them every particular thing that
they ask, for many times through ignorance, or being distempered with some
temptation, they ask that that is hurtful, and then God denies them: but he
gives them some other thing that is more profitable for them, according to the
general meaning of the spirit of God in them. And so do parents unto their
little children, whom they love full dearly, when they ask knives and such
hurtful things, in stead of them, they in wisdom give them some other thing
that they shall delight in as much; and so still their frowardness, and give
them their desire in another kind.

Even so the Lord fulfilleth the desire of his servants, by making an exchange,
when as they name one thing, and he gives them an other as good, or better: as
it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 21.4.
He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life, even for ever and
ever: where in the person of David he shows how God deals with his Church,
they ask life of him, and he gives not only that, but eternal life: as he
did to Hezekiah; but yet sometimes they that are weak and sick, and desire
life, they have it not granted, but linger and pine away even unto death, and
so God takes them into his blessed kingdom, and gives them eternal life,
which is better then that life that they desired. And thus did he deal with
many of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.32.
who^ he did by death judge and chastise in this world, that they might be
saved in the world to come.

And this was the case of his faithful servant Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.25.
who in the wilderness desired earnestly of the Lord, that he might go over
and see that good land that was beyond Jorden, and that goodly mountain Sion,
and Lebanon: but he would not hear him in that, and so caused him to go up
into mount Nebo, chap. 34 ^.
unto the top of Pisgah where he showed him all the land, and there he died,
and so entered into the kingdom of heaven, and took possession of it for ever,
whereof this land was but a type and figure: and so the Lord denying him that
particular, eue^ to come into the land of Canaan, gave him that that was far
better, and whereby he was more confirmed in the same of God, and in the truth
of his covenant; even to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and so gave him
according to the meaning of his Spirit.

But further touching this matter, we are more generally to understand, that
the Apostle says not only, that the cross shall turn to our good, but that
this shall be verified of all the crosses that every way come upon us, be they
never so strange, or unlooked for: whether it be sickness, poverty,
imprisonment, banishment, loss of husband, wife, children, father and mother,
friends and kindred, loss of name and credit, or any thing else: as sorrow and
grief of mind, and affliction of the spirit. Which is wisely to be marked of
us, least at any time we might be deceived, to think when the Lord shall lay
his hand upon us, as it pleases him, that if it were some other affliction,
then that which now is come upon us, we could have some good hope in it; but
this is so great, it touches us so nearely, that we can not possibly see, how
or which way it should bring us any good.

And as the Devil is ready to assault us with this temptation, so we by
reason of our corruption are too prone to yield unto his persuasion therein,
and so by impatiencie to be weary of the cross, as not able to look for any
good from it. We therefore that we might comfortably withstand this temptation
of his, besides that we must hold our selves fast to the words of the Apostle,
who says, that all things work together for the best to those that love God;
Gal. 1.9.
he speaks of all, not of this or that: against which if any, yea an Angel
from heaven should persuade us, we must hold him accursed. We must consider
that this good comes from all affliction, not as though it were natural and
proper unto it: for indeed it is otherwise, that of it self it makes men
worse, as the sun hardens the clay: and it drives men from good, as the
rod drives the child away from the mother. And this is that which Satan
aims at in all men, Job. 1.11.
as he did in righteous Job, though he prevailed not, when he said of him to
the Lord, Stretch out thine hand, and touch all that he has, and see if he
will not blaspheme thee to thy face. And thus he prevails with the wicked in
all crosses that come upon them, as we see in the example of Pharaoh king of
Egypt, who by the ten plagues that God sent upon him, was made more hard
hearted, and waxed still worse and worse, and would not hear the commandment
of God, to let the people of Israel go.

But with the children of God it is not so, the goodness of God toward them
overcomes the malice of the devil against them. And as in the wilderness
the sting of the fiery serpe^ts were healed in the bodies of me^ by looking up
to the brazen serpent; Number. 21.8.
so the venime and poison of all crosses is taken away in the children of God,
by virtue of the cross of Christ; so that contrary to the nature of it, it
works good: as also by the death of Christ, 1. Cor. 15.55.
the sting of death is taken away, so that it cannot hurt any of his, but does
them the greatest good, being thereby made for them a passage into eternal
life. The which that it might not seem strange unto us, much less impossible;
namly, that affliction hurtful in it self to the wicked, should work for the
best to those that love God: we must remember that even men by their wisdom
are able to make those things serve for the benefit of man, which of themselves
are most hurtful unto him.

For the Physician through his skill can cure a man by Gods ordinance and
blessing, and so make him stronger then he was before, by taking away some
part of his blood, even that wherein the life consists; and by taking away
other humors, and so diminishing a great part of his flesh: and the Chyrurgion
by cutting and piercing the flesh with an hot iron, or eating it away with
some corrasiues, is able by these wounds and hurtful things, to preserve the
state of the members of the body: Then the Lord much more by that which in it
self would hurt our souls, is able to cure them; and to do them good. And if
the Apothecarie can so temper that which in it own nature is poison (as the
Vipers flesh) so temper it I say, with other wholesome ingredients, and correct
it with those that be cordial; that of it he will make a most sovereign
Treacle, and such an wholesome confection, as shall expel poison, and drive it
from the heart; and so make that which of it self would cause death, to be a
special preserver of life: Shall not the Lord by his infinite wisdom,
goodness, and almighty power, the Lord I say, 2. Cor. 4.6.
which caused the light to shine out of darkness, contrary to the nature of
it, and who calls the things that be not, as though they were, and so
causes the^ to be, and which brings good out of evil, even his own glory
out of the sin of man; shall not he be much more able by the most grievous
crosses that can befall us, to work the greatest good for us that may be?

Therefore when we would look for good from our afflictions, and so be
comforted in them, patiently bearing them, in hope of the blessed fruit that we
shall reap by them; we must not so much look to the things themselves, how
fit they be for us, nor to our selves, how we be fitted for them; as to the
truth of Gods promise made unto us concerning this matter, and so be sure that
the Lord will work our good thereby, because he that is true and all-sufficient
has said said it. And this one persuasion no doubt, should work in us great
patience in all our afflictions; yea it should make us cheerfully, and with
our heads lifted up, and not hanging down, to bear them; for how many grievous
things will natural men endure willingly, if they see that they will make for
the bettering of their estate? As what will not the sick patie^t suffer at the
hands of the Physitio^ or Surgeon by launcing, purging, fearing, diet, etc.
when he is persuaded that they will procure his bodily health? should not a
Christian man and woman much more endure hard things at the hands of God,
seeing he has said that they shall procure the health of his soul, and work
his good that way.

But indeed herein lies the point of this matter, and this is all in all,
namely, that the poor afflicted soul knows not, that the Lord by his
affliction will work his good: and that makes him so unquiet, and ever
complaining: for give him this faith, and the feeling of it, that his
affliction shall be turned unto his good, and lay upon him whatsoever you will,
he is content to bear it. Therefore for the satisfying of our selves herein,
let us hearken to that which the Apostle says, We know, Romans 8.28.
that all things work together for the best to those that love God: which is
as if he had said, though you because of your ignorance, unbelief, and want
of experience, are uncertain what will be the happy issue of all your
afflictions, yet we know very well, that all shall work together for our and
your good. Which he speaks confidently both as a teacher of the Church, an
Apostle, and as a man of experience, and therefore we ought to give credit unto
him, rather then to our selves. Even as the patient does to the Physician,
though himself had never experience of any such thing before: when he says
unto him, I know that this will make for the health of your body, and the
preservation of your life.

And in this thing we ought to give credit unto the Apostle so much the more,
because unto his own word and saying, he joins the testimony of many other,
saying, We know, meaning the rest of the Apostles and ministers, and men of
experience; he says, that all of them knew it, and therefore this word being
confirmed by the mouths not of two or three witnesses only, but having (as
the Apostle speaks) so great a cloud of witnesses for it, H^b. 12.1.
it should be received without all gainesaying. For it is all one, as if the
sick patient fearing to take the potion that is prescribed unto him, lest it
should make him more sick, he should have not only one, but an whole counsel
of Physicians saying unto him, that undoubtedly this medicine is like to do you
good; we know the working of it very well, and have had great experience of it
in many, you need not to fear it, take it upon our credit. This would much
move and encourage him unto it.

So no doubt this should correct the too much fear that is in us, of being
hurt by the cross, when we hear so many excellent and famous men, very
skillful therein, to speak so boldly unto us of the benefit of it: even those,
whom seeing that we are most ready to believe in all other things, why should
we not give credit unto them in this also? But that we might do it the rather,
let us a little consider in particular of the benefit of the cross. And though
the Apostle name one great one here, which might be sufficient; yet before we
come to it, let us see, what other ends of it the Scripture affoardeth unto us.

And first of all, we shall find it to be a special means to draw us from
the too much love of this world; that according to the saying of the Apostle,
2. Cor. 7.31.
they that use this world might be as though they used it not, that is, that we
might be so addicted to these worldly things, that we set not our affections
too much upon them. For such is the corruption of our nature, that when we
have all things at will, we are so wedded to this world, that we think it best
for us always to abide here, and here we would set up our tabernacles for
ever; and we are ready to say with the worldling in the Gospel, Luke 12.19.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat and
drink, and take thy pleasure: and though heaven be a thousand times heavenly,
yet we desire it not at all, or not so earnestly as we should; but we are
still earthly minded, and as it were groueling upon the earth: so hardly or not
at all can we come unto that that we are exhorted unto, to seek, Colos. 3.^.
and to set our affections on those things that are above, and not on things
which are in the earth; yet when by affliction we shall find that there is no
contentation in any estate here below, it may move us to despise all worldly
things, and to aspire unto heaven, Psalm. 16.11.
where in the presence of God is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

For this cause the holy Patriarchs suffered so many afflictions in the days
of their pilgrimages, as appears in their several stories; in respect of
which one of them said, Genesis 47.^.
That his days were few and evil. For whereas many earthly things were
promised unto them, yet that they might not stay in them, but from them, as it
were by certain stairs, they might ascend unto the consideration of heavenly
things, which the earthly did shadow out unto them, and which they were
especially to look for; he mingled his manifold great blessings with manifold
crosses: and in that land that was promised unto them, they had no certain
abiding, that they might seek after the kingdom of heaven: As the Apostle
says unto the Hebrews, H^b. 11.9.
By faith Abraham abode in the land of promise, as in a strange country, as
one that dwelt in tents, with Izaack and Jacob heirs with him of the same
promise; for he looked for a city having a foundation whose builder and maker
is God. These men had none inheritance in the land of Canaan, that they might
not dream of a perpetuity there, but might think of heaven, as of a better
country, where they should remain for ever, confessing themselves continually
to be but strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

Thus also the Lord deals with many before their death, laying long and
grievous diseases upon them, as he did upon his servant Job, that they finding
no rest in this world, might be willing to go out of it when he shall send
for them, and say with old father Simeon, Lord, Luke 2.29.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace: yea that they might desire death
most willingly, which before as most ougly and loathsome they did abhor: and
so say with S. Paul, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is best of all. So that as the mother by some unpleasant thing weaneth
the sucking child from the breast, now when stronger meat is more fit for it,
upon which otherwise it would always linger to the hurt of it; so the Lord by
the cross weaneth our affections from the profits and pleasures of the world,
and so turns it unto our good: and therefore if by experience we find that by
any affliction we grow more weary of the world, or less in love with it, we
are not only to take it patiently, but therein see the truth of this promise:
we know that all things work together for the best to those that love God.
Romans 8.28.


Moreover by affliction the Lord brings us to a more thorough repentance and
sorrow for our sins, and works that in us thereby, which the word did not
before; when we find by woeful experience what great miseries our sins have
brought us unto, and how just and true God is in all his threatenings. 1. Cor.
11 31
For if when we have sinned, we would judge our selves before hand, God would
not judge us: but when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
might not be condemned with the world: whereunto agrees the saying of the
Psalmist, which is found to be true by daily experience; that whether the Lord
lay upon men sickness, or imprisonment, or poverty and want, or banishment,
or such like; Psalm. 107.11.
when he hu^bleth the heart with heaviness they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble: so that affliction brings men to humility for their sins, and to
pray unto God to be pardoned, and to be delivered. As we see in the example of
the prodigal child, who by great misery came to repent him of his riotous
life; for when he had spent all, Luke 1^.
there arose a great famine in that land, and he began to be in necessity,
which afterward was so great, that he would feign have filled his belly with
the husks that the swine ate, but no man gave them him: then he said, I will
rise and go to my father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me
as one of thy hired servants. Thus we see by affliction unto what measure of
humiliatio^ and repentance for his sins, and confession of them he was
brought unto: a most excellent fruit of the cross.

The like may be said of the brethren of Joseph, who after that they had sold
him into Egypt, and made their father believe that he was torn in pieces of
some wild beast; though we may presume of the^, that they being brought up,
and still living in the house of their godly father Jacob, they did secretly
repent the^ of their ill dealing toward their brother Joseph: yet many years
after, even twenty or thereabout, when they were in adversity, the memory of
it renewed it self afresh, and thereby they were brought more seriously to
judge themselves for it; for they said one to another, Genesis 42.21
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul when he besought us, and we would not hear him, therefore is this
trouble come upon us. Thus this cross was turned to their good, in that it
brought them to a further sight and feeling of their sin, and to a more
voluntary and free confession of the same.

So that affliction in this respect is compared to fire that purges the gold,
and consumes the dross of it; and unto a file that scowreth off the rust of
iron, and makes it bright; and unto a purgation, that expels the corrupt
and superfluous humors out of the body. Therefore even as the fire does not
hurt the gold in consuming the dross, neither the file hurts the iron in
taking away the rust, neither does the purgation hurt the body in expelling of
ill humors: So afflictions causing us to abhor and leave some sin or other,
which if we continued in, would destroy us, may truly be said not to hurt us,
but to work our good, of what nature or kind soever they be: according to
the saying of the Apostle, All things work together for the good of those that
love God.

In the third place, this is the benefit of affliction, that it preserves us
from many sins, which otherwise through our own corruption, and the
temptations of the world and Satan we might fall into; but that being under the
hand of God, as it were under the rod, we are thereby kept in more awe: So
that as Physic serves not only to cure us of the diseases which we are
already fallen into, but also and especially to prevent them, and to keep us
in some tolerable estate of health: So the cross recouereth us out of sin,
when we are fallen into it, and preserves us from many, which otherwise might
creep upon us. And therefore as some sickly bodies are driven to diet
themselves, and are in a continual course of physic, to prevent that which
their corrupt estate would otherwise necessarily pull upon them: So others by
reason of the corruptions of their souls, and the manifold offenses that they
live amongst, are always, or the greatest part of their lives in the diet of
affliction, as it were the physic of their souls: not so much to bring them
from gross and grievous sins, which they are as yet free from; as to keep
them from falling into them, which the Lord foreseeth they are most ready to
do, in respect of their ages, callings, and places, that they live in.

If then the Lord at any time deal with us, as men do with unruly co^^, or
untamed heyfers, which are kept from straying out of their pastures with hedges
and ditches, so that they can not break out without their own hurt: so the Lord
puts thorns and briars as it were in our ways, that is, lays affliction
upon us, and so stops the way against us, that we might not break forth by
any kind of disobedience either on the right hand, or on the left, to our own
hurt must we not needs say, that even this way, as well as any other, the Lord
works by affliction our singular good? And this is that, which God promised
to his own people among the idolatrous Israelites, namely, that by his
afflictions he would so keep them in, and bring them to such straitnes, that
they should have no lust to play the wantons, and to fall away from him by
idolatry after the example of others: when he faith, I will stop thy way
with thorns, Hos. 2.6.
and make an hedge, that she shall not find her paths. So that their
affliction should be an hedge of sharp thorns to prick them, least they
should break out, and stray from Gods commandments.

And this as it is a singular end of affliction, so David pronounces the^
blessed that are partakers of it to that end, and can make that good use of it
to themselves, saying, Blessed is the man, whom thou chastisest, O Lord, Psalm.
94.12.
and teach in thy law: that thou may give him rest from the days of
evil, whiles the pit is dug for the wicked. So that it is a blessed thing
to be so corrected, that he is taught the right use of it, even to walk more
carefully in the obedience of Gods law, that so he may escape those punishments
which shall come upon the wicked for their sins to their destruction. And this
use David made of his affliction, as he professes of himself, and 116.^7.
before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy words: so that by
his affliction he was kept from going astray, as he had wont to do, and was
constrained in a reverent fear to walk in the compass of Gods holy law:
whereupon he concludes thus by his own experience: 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may fear thy statutes.
Thus affliction was a sensible kind of teaching to cause him to live after Gods
statutes, and not after the common course of the world.

Fourthly, afflictions in the Scriptures are called trialls, because that by
them the Lord tries us, and proves what is in us: not that he is ignorant of
it; for David says unto God, Psalm. 139 2.
Thou know my sitting and rising, thou understand my thoughts a far
off; thou compassest my paths, and my lying down, and art accustomed to all my
ways: for there is not a word in my tongue, but lo thou know it, O Lord.
So that he has full and perfect knowledge of us without any trial: yet he
tries us by affliction, because thereby he would have our selves and others
thoroughly to know, what is in us, and in what measure: and that both in respect
of the good and evil that is in us; which without the trial could not so well
be known. Which kind of trial serves to this end, that if we have received
any good grace, we might be thankful to God for it, and for the measure of
it: if not, we might labor for it; and if we have any sin in us, we might
repent and strive against it: if not, we might take heed, that we fall not
into it for the time to come; and so every way God might be glorified.

And thus speaks the Apostle S. Peter of the afflictions of the church,
comparing them unto fire, whereby mettalls are tried, when he says, Now for a
season (if need require) ye are in heaviness, 2. Pet. 2.6.
through manifold tentations; that the trial of your faith, being much more
precious then gold that perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found
unto your praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
Where the Apostle says, that if men by the fire will try their gold, to that
end, that they might certainly know, what is the value of it, and yet it is but
a thing that perishes, and therefore in no wise to be compared to faith and
other most excellent graces of the spirit of God: Then the Lord much more may
make trial of them by affliction, to the end that all men may see them to be
so precious, and so pure as they be; and that they may be discerned from the
hypocritical and counterfeit shows of virtue that are in the wicked and
ungodly: that so men might make sure reckoning of the one, and not trust to the
other, and so be deceived by them.

Thus it is truly said, that God did prove Abraham, Genesis 22.1.
when he said unto him, Take thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and
get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon
one of the mountains, which I will show thee: and he did so: and therefore the
Apostle says, that by faith he offered up Isaac, when he was tried: Heb. 11.17.
so that this was a great trial unto him, to sacrifice his own son, whom
he so loved, and in whom he had received the promise. But when he stretched
forth his hand, Genesis 22.10.
and took the knife to kill his son, the Lord said unto him from heaven, Lay
not thine hand upon the child, neither do any thing unto him: for now I know,
that thou fear God, seeing for my sake, thou have not spared thine only
son. The Lord knew the obedience of Abraham before, but he speaks according
to men's understanding, that now he by good proof and trial knew it, and made
it known to Abraham himself, and to all posterity.

And thus our Savior Christ in the Gospel by a parable shows, how it is
known, who have received the seed of Gods word into good hearts, and who into
bad: namely, they that continue in the obedience of it in the time of
temptation and trial, and they that fall away, saying, They that are on the
stones, Luke 8.13.
are they, which when they have heard, receive the word with joy; but they have
no roots: which for a while believe, but in the time of temptation go away.
Thus though they seemed to believe for a time, yet when they fall away in
temptation, by this trial it appears, that the word of God was never
thoroughly rooted in the^. And by an other comparison also he shows, how upon
trial it is manifest, who are profitable hearers of the word of God, and who
are not: for he that hears the word of God, Math 7.24.
and does it, is like a wise man, which has builded his house on a rock; and
the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house, and it fell not: for it was grounded on a rock. But he that hears the
word, and does it not, is like a foolish man, which has builded his house on
the sand, and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the wind blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell, and the fall of it was great. Temptations
therefore and trialls, which are here compared unto storms and tempests, will
show what is in all sorts of men, and whether they have been profitable, or
unprofitable hearers of the word of God; and this is a special end of them,
thus to lay open men, both to themselves, and to the world: when as it shall
appear, that in affliction and under the cross they are the same that they
were before, or they are not, but far unlike.

After this manner were the Israelites tried and proved in the wilderness by
the space of forty years, in which time some of them proved themselves
murmurers, some fornicators, some idolatours, some disobedient, some faithful:
and all this was by the several afflictions and crosses that did befall them.
And thus also by the great afflictions that did befall Job in one day, as the
loss of all his goods and children, it appeared what great vprightnes and
sincerity, and faithful obedience was in him: when as he said, Naked came I
out of my mothers womb, Job 1.21.
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord. And in all this great loss he did
not sin, nor charge God foolishly.

For though Satan took him to be like other men, and that he served God more
for his commodities sake, because he blessed him, then of conscience, and
therefore said, and 1.9.
Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not made an hedge about him, and
about his house, and about all that he has on every side? thou have blessed
the work of his hands, and his substance is increased. But stretch out now
thin hand, and touch all that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to
thy face: and then the Lord said unto Satan, Lo, all that he has is in thine
hand: and thereupon Satan destroyed in one day all that he had; and yet he
continued in his vprightnes, and was the same man that he was before: by this
great trial it appeared, that that was true, that the Lord had said of him
before: that he was an upright and just man indeed; and one that feared God,
verse. 10.
and eschewed evil: for all these great afflictions could not make him to fall
from his former course.

And thus lastly by trial appeared the great weakness of the Apostle S. Peter,
and the rest of the Disciples, who though as a most resolute man he had said,
Mat. 16.13.
Though al men be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended; and then
Jesus said unto him, Verily this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny
me thrice: and Peter said to him again, Though I should die with thee, I will
in no case deny thee, and so said also all the disciples: 47.
yet when they saw a great multitude with swords and staves from the high
Priest and Elders of the people, and Judas with a kiss betrayed him into their
hands, and so they took him and led him away; then all the Disciples fled.
And whereas there seemed to be a little more courage in Peter then in the rest,
58.
for he followed Christ though a far off, and so came into the high Priests
hall, and sat down with the servants to see the end; yet when he saw greater
danger like to ensue, and he was charged to be one of Christ's Disciples, at the
voice of a maid he grew to be so timorous and fearful, that he swear and
forsware with cursing and banning, denying Christ, 74.
even that ever he so much as once knew the man. Neither himself, nor any
other would have thought that so much weakness should have broake out from him,
before he came to this trial; but thereby it was laid open.

Therefore, if it be good for us not to be ignorant of our selves, as indeed
has been thought to be a point of greatest wisdom, for a man thoroughly to
know himself, that so he might not be deceived with an ouerweening of
himself; if it be good I say, for any man to see his wants and weaknesses,
that he may be humbled by them, and seek to have them supplied; if it be good
to know certainly that we have received such and such graces of the spirit of
God, and in that measure that we have, that so we may be thankful to God for
them, and comforted in our selves over them: Then seeing that affliction and
the cross brings forth all this fruit at once, and by trial we find what
faith, hope, love, patience, obedience, etc. is in us, and what not; insomuch,
that whatsoever we seemed to be before to our selves, and to others, yet now we
know certainly that we are thus and thus, and no otherwise: it ca^ not be
denied but that affliction works much good unto us, and we ought upon
experience to say, that we know it to be so, even as the Apostle does here; We
know that all things work together for the best to those that love God.

Which also we may so much the more co^fidently say, when we shall see
(omitting to speak of many more uses that the cross has) that last and
greatest of all, which is spoken of in the verse following, in these words; For
those whom he knew before, Romans 8.20.
he also predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, that he might
be the first borne of many brethren: where he shows this one end of the
cross, namely, that thereby we might be made like unto Christ in his
sufferings. But before we come to that, we must remember that hitherto we have
seen, that there is great use of affliction, and that it works much good:
and therefore we must consider that in every cross, besides the present
bearing of it, the Lord offers great commodity unto us, and works it in us
thereby, according to the words of the Text, All things work together for the
best to those that love God.

So that as in all other things there is not only the present possession, and
enjoying of them, but there is the use and comfort of them; insomuch that men
may have great store of goods and possessions, and yet have no use of them, as
Solomon by his great wisdom observed, and set it down in the book of the
Preacher, saying, There is one alone, Eccles. 4.8.
and there is not a second, which has neither son nor daughter, yet is there
none end of his travail, neither can his eye be satisfied with riches,
neither does he think, for whom do I travail, and defraud my soul of
pleasure: Even so many have great and long crosses upon them, but make no good
use of them, neither do labor after the fruit of them: but God works by
them their good, in those that be his.

Seeing then afflictions are common both to the good and the bad, and God
lays them upon them both alike, and they must bear them whether they will or
no; the one must labor for the good which the Lord offers to them thereby,
which the other not once so much as look after: of which duty of theirs, when
Gods children are somewhat more careless of then they should, then no doubt
the Lord in wisdom and in mercy continues his rod upon the^ longer; yea, and
often increases the^, because his purpose is to do them good thereby: and so
herein deals with them as a most loving and tender father (as indeed he is)
who spares not the rod, until his child be thereby humbled, and brought to
the confession and amendment of his fault: because his purpose is, by his
fatherly correction to do him good.

Wherein parents often put a difference between their children and their
servants; for often they let their servants alone, and leave them as
incorrigible, when they will not profit by words, or a few stripes, as not
caring for them, because they purpose not always to be troubled with the^: but
their children, because they see that they cannot cast off natural affection
from them, therefore they leave them not after once or twice correction, but
still follow them with the rod, till they amend: So the Lord, when he spares
the wicked in their sins, and reserueth them for a further and more heavy
judgment at the last, correcting his own children in the mean season again
and again; he shows that his purpose is thereby to do them, above all
other, much good.

Therefore let no man in the continuance of his afflictions, though long and
grievous, be too much discouraged, as though the Lord were continually angry
with him, or had a purpose to destroy and make an end of him thereby; for he
could do that in a moment at once: but let him rather thus think with
himself, and reason but of the word of God; Now I know assuredly, that the
Lord loves me indeed, because he purposes to do me good by all things,
even by affliction, according to his promise: and therefore whereas I through
the untowardness of my nature, have not profited sufficiently by his former
chastisements, according to his good meaning toward me, he has sent me a new
fatherly correction, thereby at the last to work my further good: and whereas
I thorough the crookedness and untowardness of my sinful disposition do
not yet profit by them, as he would have me; therefore I see, that in much
mercy and loving kindness he continues it, that so I might get good by it at
the last.

Wherein the Lord deals with us like a wise and conscionable Physician; who
purposing not so much to give physic unto the sick patient, and to practice
on him for his own gain, as to cure him by those medicines that he applies
to him, and so seeks his health and recovery: if the first medicine will
remove the disease, the^ there he leaves him, and goes no further; if not, he
ministers an other medicine after that, and it may be the third and the
fourth, because he has a care of him, and seeks his health. And if at any
time he makes any intermission in the course of his physic, and cease to
practice any further on him, it is not because he means to leave him, and to
give him over, but because of the patients weakness, that he might gather some
further strength, and have a breathing time to that end.

Even so the Lord purposing according to his gracious promise, to do us good
by affliction, and he having sanctified it by the cross of Christ to that
end; when by the first cross we profit not, as we ought, the^ either he
lets the same lie the longer upon us, that it might do us good at the last;
or else taking it away, leaves an other in stead of it to the same end. Which
though he do not presently, because we were not then able to endure, yet
sometime afterward, when it seems best to his heavenly wisdom. Therefore the
best thing for every man is, soon to profit under the cross, that God has
laid upon him, that so it might speedily be removed: and not to labor so much
for the remoouing of it, as for the fruit of it; least it going away without
profit, and not working that in us, for which God did send it, the Lord bring
upon us some greater afterward, seeing it is his purpose thereby most
assuredly to do us good.

Moreover, by this we know, that whereas every man naturally desires that
which is best for him, and yet most men err in the particulars, they desiring
that which is most pleasant, profitable, and honorable, etc. in this world:
which desires of theirs the Prophet expresses in these words; Psalm 4 6.
Many say, who will show us any good: By this, I say, we know, that that thing
indeed is best for us at all times, whatsoever it be, which makes most for
the glory of God, for our own salvation, and for the edifying of our
brethren: which because the Lord works many times by afflictions, as we have
heard, and often more by them, then by his benefits; we must be persuaded, that
eue^ they are then best for every man which though it be contrary to man's
reason, yet it is agreeable to the word of God, and which we ought to believe.

Even as when a man's body is greatly distempered with abundance of blood, or
ouerladen with superfluous and gross humors, or has some member greatly
putrified: then and in these respects it is best for him to have his blood
taken away, and his humors, that his flesh may be abated, and fall away; yea it
is best for him in these cases to be launced and cut, to be seared; and to have
a part cut off, that the rest might be saved. Which though they be grievous in
themselves, yet at this time they are most profitable, and to be desired.
Therefore when any affliction or calamity does befall us, let us not be
discontented therewith, as with that that is hurtful for us, neither be too
impatient and weary, as of a thing that we would feign be rid of; but
submitting our judgments and wills to the judgment and will of God revealed
in his word, let us quietly endure, seeing that even now the Lord gives us
that, not which we fondly desire, as the best; but which he knows to be, and
is indeed at this time the best.

Seeing then it is so, (for the further clearing of this truth) what I pray you
is the cause, why not only the wicked and ungodly, who are not able to judge
of this matter, by all the wit and reason that they have; but even the very
godly, who being enlightened by the spirit of God, ought to know this doctrine
to be true, and to believe it, that they, I say, do so grievously complain of
their afflictions, as those which are the worst for them that can be? and as
those that should not only do them no good, but much hurt: when as we have
seen already how many ways they work their good, and therefore are the best
for them indeed.

Why did Job, seeing his afflictions were sent unto him by God for his trial,
and for his good, why did he so complain of them? Job 6.2.
Oh that my grief were well waied, and my miseries were laid together in the
balance? for it would now be heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my
words are swallowed up. For the arrows of the Almighty are in me, the venime
thereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against me,
etc. Why does David also make so grievous complaints in respect of the
affliction that did befall him, when he begins the Psalm thus lamentably; O
Lord, Psalm. 38. ^.
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath: for thine
arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me: there is nothing sound
in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because
of my sin. My wounds are putrified and corrupt; I am bowed and crooked very
sore; I go mourning all the day: for my reins are full of burning, and there
is nothing sound in my flesh: my heart pants, and my strength fails, and
the light of mine eyes, even they are not mine own, etc.

If these afflictions of theirs did work their good, why did they thus
complain of them? Truly it cannot be denied, but that men for the most part
do more complain of their afflictions, then they ought to do, and are more
full of murmuring and impatiencie under the hand of God, then they should be:
and they do not so comfortably bear their crosses as they should and might
yet all this hinders not, but that the Lord by them seeks their good, and
they should labor to profit, and to be bettered by their afflictions, and be
persuaded that they shall work together for the best unto them, though they be
full of complaints, whiles they are in the midst of them. For who ever
complained more of their afflictions, then these two men, Job and David, and
yet who had more profit, or got more good by the^ then they? both of the^
being thus tried, and in the trial found to be most faithful and patient,
and constant unto the end.

And concerning this pronenesse in us to complain, we must consider that such
is our nature, that we must needs have the feeling of our afflictions, unless
our hearts were hardened, like iron or steel, and so we were senseless like
stocks and stones, and not as men. And therefore seeing it is otherwise, namly,
our hearts naturally are soft and tender, and ready to be broken with
affliction, and some more, and some less; it cannot possibly be, but that
every thing that befalls us, should work upon us, and that we should be
moved according to the nature and quality of it; either to joy or sorrow,
love or hatred, anger or fear, and such like: and therefore tribulation must
needs trouble us, and affliction must needs afflict us, and the cross cannot
but crucify us; and yet we may and ought for all that be persuaded, that it
is for our good, and look for it from thence, and pray to God in faith that we
may find it.

Even as the sick patient, and painful languishing creature under the
Physicians hand, cannot as he is a natural man, endued with sense and reason,
but feel to his great grief the launcing with sharp knives, and the searing
of his flesh with read hot yrons, and so complain of them with much
heaviness, and many tears; yea cry out and roar for the extremity of his
pain, though he knows it be best for him then thus to be handled: and
therefore though he be sometimes bound in the dressing both hand and foot, or
violently held by men; yet after a sort he does most willingly suffer it. And
this is one cause of complaining in affliction, though they are persuaded that
it is for their good, even the infirmity and tenderness of our nature, whereby
all crosses work on us as they do.

But there is an other cause more principal then this, which proceeds from
ignorance, or want of faith: for many are too full of complaints in their
affliction, because they are not persuaded at all, or not at that time, when
they are in temptation, that adversity, or the cross is for their good; or at
least not that particular cross, and in that manner, that it is upon them:
which if they could come unto, whatsoever should be laid upon them, they would
not greatly complain of it, for the hope of future good would mitigate and
assuage all. Therefore all such are to meditate upon that which has already
been spoken concerning this matter; namely, how many ways by affliction the
Lord does us good.

In the latter part of the verse, when he says, To them that love God; that
is, all things work together for the best unto them that love God: as he
thereby restrains this general promise, because it is not made to all; so he
shows to whom it appertains; namely, to those that believe in Christ, and
are sanctified by his Spirit, whereof this is one special fruit; The love of
God. For he entreats here of the certentie of the salvation of those that
belong unto Christ, as appears by the first words of the chapter; Romans 8.1.
Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Where he also discerns the
true believer from others, by this fruit of faith, namely, sanctification; and
here he does name one principal of it, which is love: Love to God, from whence
arises love unto men for his sake, and from them both, all duties to God and
man.

And thus the Apostle also in an other place joins faith and love together,
as those that are inseparable, when he says, Gal. 5 6.
that in Jesus Christ neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any
thing: but faith, which works by love: where his meaning is, that no outward
thing, or service of God, though commanded by him, as circumcision was,
commends us to God, or makes us acceptable unto God, but only Christ, and
his obedience: which we take hold of, and so make ours by faith: which faith is
then effectual and lively, when it breeds in us a love, which love appears
by the fruits and effects of the same. So then the Apostle here under one
fruit, which is love, comprehends all godliness, and sanctification.

But he takes this thing rather then any other, (The love of God) as that,
that is most fit for his purpose: for speaking of affliction he says, that by
this we shall try our faith, if our love to God continue even then: so that
we cease not to love God, though he afflict us. For whereas the very wicked
will pretend to love God in prosperity, and as long as all things go well
with them, they will profess that they love God, as much as any, yea; and that
they were worse then the bruit beasts, if that they did not love him, and that
with all their heart, who bestows all things upon them so liberally, and many
such glorious words they will utter: but in adversity, and when God lays
affliction upon them, their love is changed: yea, they fall into open hatred
and defiance with God, yea even unto plain cursing and banning; as appears
by the example of Jobs wife, who said unto her husband; Job 2.^.
Do thou continue still in thine uprightness, blaspheme God, and die. But
he that loves God truly, loves him not for his back and belly, as we say,
but because he is goodness it self, and therefore principally to be beloved for
himself: and so their love continues, though all outward blessings be taken
away.

And herein the wicked too manifestly bewray vile minds, and servile natures;
that like as servants love not their masters, nor maidens their mistresses, if
they once begin to correct them for their faults; and so grow weary of them,
and are ready to run away from them: as the maid servant Hagar the Egyptian
did from her mistress Sarai. Genesis 16.6.
But the godly do this way as apparently show their liberal nature, and
ingenuous disposition; in that as no correction or stripes of the father or
mother, can make the child to change his love to them, and wholly to alienate
his mind from them, much less can they drive him clean away from them, but
he will abide in their house, and in all his need resort to them for succor:
so will they still in affliction love God, and depend upon him for all things
needful.

And this corruption to be in the nature of all men generally, even by
affliction to fall away from the love and service of God, Satan knew well
enough, and therefore thought to have found it in Job, though he did not, when
he said unto the Lord, Does Job love, or fear, Job 1.9.
or serve God for naught? as if he had said, he does not serve thee for thine
own sake, or for any love that he bears unto thee, but for the commodity
that he receives by thee: for he adds, Have not thou made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side: thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land: but
stretch out thine hand, and touch all that he has, to see if he will not
blaspheme thee to thy face. In which words he notes that vice, that men
commonly are subject unto, that is, to hide their rebellion in prosperity, and
in adversity to bewray it.

Therefore if we be free from this vice, and so cease not in affliction to love
God, and in love to serve him, we shall be sure, that he will fulfill this
promise of his unto us, of turning all things to our good: and causing all our
crosses to make together for the best unto us, so long as we love God: and this
unfeigned love that we find we bear in our hearts unto God, is a sure
testimony unto us of it, and we ought thereby to be persuaded of the undoubted
truth of it, and so comfort our selves for the time present, that God will do
us good by this correction of his, even because we love him.

Moreover, seeing that the Apostles purpose here is, to entreat of patience in
affliction, and to prepare us for it; this no doubt is most fit for the fame,
namely, the consideration of that love, which we ought to bear unto God,
whereby we might be moved to take all things in good part, that he sends unto
us, because we love him, and in love are desirous to please him. For we see
daily in all worldly matters, what great things all sorts of men will bear at
the hands of them, whom they love: as how many grievous things does the mother
put up at the hands of her froward child, whom she tenderly loves? And the
husband passes over with silence many things that are offensive proceeding
from his wife, because she is dear unto him, and his love toward her causes
him not to regard them; yea for her sake he bears with many things at the
hands of others.

As it is said of Jacob, Genesis 29.20.
that he served Laban a very hard master seven years for Rahel, during which
time he took great pains day and night: and 31.40.
for in the day he was consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and his
wages was changed ten times: yet they seemed unto him but a few days, because
he loved her: thus love unto men causes us to endure hard things for their
sakes whom we love: and the more we love them, the more willingly to gratify
them do we chearefully undergo any hard service for them. How much more then
ought we patie^tly to bear all things at the hand of God, whom we know, that
he so loved us, that he spared not his own son, Romans 8.32.
but gave him for us all to death: and therefore we ought to love him above all
other things, yea above our selves again.

And no doubt we would thus bear all crosses laid upon us by God for our
good, a great deal more patiently then we do, if there were in us that love
unto his majesty, that there ought. 1. Cor. 13 5.
For love seeks not her own things: that is, it is the property of love,
not so much to seek to satisfy their own mind, as to gratify the party
whom they love, eue^ in things osten contrary to their own liking: therefore
let us labor for that pure and sincere love unto God, which may abide in the
greatest affliction, so shall we not only patiently bear them, but be
assured, that they shall be turned unto our good: according to the saying of
the Apostle here; All things work together for the best unto them, that love
God. Romans 8.28.


When he adds these words in the end of the same verse, (which are called
of his purpose) as he does in them further show to whom this promise does
appertain, namely, that all afflictions shall work for their best: even unto
such as are effectually called unto the knowledge of their salvation in Christ,
according to the good purpose and decree of God toward them: So he shows the
cause, why all afflictions are made profitable unto them especially, and turned
unto their good in the end: which is not any worthiness of theirs, that they
deserve it at Gods hands, or any right behauing themselves under the cross, as
though they were able to work it out themselves; for of themselves they are as
weak, and frail, and impatient under it, as any other: but the free love of
God toward them in Christ, whereby before the beginning of the world, he
purposed to do them good, and therefore in time effectually called them. Which
purpose of his nothing can alter, but he makes all things to further it, yea
sometimes contrary to their nature, as afflictions.

So that from the first unchangeable cause of their salvation, and of all good
intented toward them, he shows the certentie of this, that all afflictions
shall work together for the best to those that love God: for who can hinder or
frustrate the determinate purpose of God in any thing? None in the world, no
not the devil himself: and therefore afflictions can not hinder the good that
he means to his children, because he has purposed to do them good. Which
purpose of his for their good has always appeared by their fruitful and
effectual calling. For when he had purposed to save them by his son Jesus
Christ, he called them by the ministry of the Gospel in his good time some
sooner some later unto the knowledge of it; and from the same purpose of his it
came to pass, that the word was made effectual unto them by the inward
operation of his holy Spirit, working in them faith and repentance: and so
became unto the^ The power of God unto their salvation, Romans 1.16.
as the Apostle calls it: that is, the mighty and effectual instrument of
God to work their salvation, when it was altogether unprofitable unto others,
that heard it, as well as they.

So then the Lord continuing the same purpose of his toward them, it shall
undoubtedly come to pass, that though al other men should not profit by their
afflictions, but wax worse and worse, as commonly the wicked do, as we see in
the example of Pharaoh king of Egypt, who after many grievous plagues brought
upon him, Exodus 9.35.
and upon the whole land, one after an other, his heart was still more and more
hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go: yet the Lord would
turn all this to their good, because he had purposed it. And for the certentie
and full assurance of this, he leads them to the consideration of the purpose
of God appearing in their calling, which being very strange, and many things
to the outward appearance against it, yet the Lord brake through them all, and
none of them could hinder it, or stay it, because God had purposed it.

And truly it is worthy our consideration, to remember how many things have
been in the way to hinder the calling of men unto salvation, yet none of them
could do it, because God had purposed. As who would ever have thought, Act.
9.1.
that Paul sometimes called Saul, breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord, and having now in this great fury and rage
of his obtained letters of the high Priest to Damascus, that if he found any
that were of that way or profession, (either men or women) he might bring them
bound unto Jerusalem: should at this time be so suddenly converted, that he
should not only become a Christian, but an Apostle: so that it should be truly
said of him, he which was a great persecutor in time past, Gal. 1.22.
now is a zealous preacher of the faith, which before he destroyed: but he
shows the cause of it there himself, verse. 15.
when he says, that God had separated him thereunto from his mothers womb,
and so called him unto it of his grace: that is, in his everlasting counsel he
first appointed him to be an Apostle, and secondarily even from his birth he
did separate him to this office; and thirdly, in time of his mere grace and
favor he called him unto it, according to his purpose.

The like may be said of some other, as of Manasseh king of Judah, 2. Chr. 33 2.
who doing evil in the sight of the Lord like the abominations of the heathen:
setting up altars for Baalim, and worshipping all the host of heaven, causing
also his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of Ben-hinnom: and
giving himself to witchcraft and to charming, and using them that had familiar
spirits; there was no likelihoode that he should be converted unto God, there
were so many things against it: but the Lord, that had purposed to show him
mercy, did bring him unto it against all these: for he caused the King of
Ashur to come against him, who took him prisoner, verse 11.
and put him in fetters, and bound him in chains, and carried him to Babel; and
when he was in tribulation, he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself
greatly before the God of his fathers; and prayed unto him, and God was
entreated of him, and heard his prayer: and then he knew that the Lord was God.

But to let these pass; let every man consider the manner of his own calling,
and see how many things were within him, and without him, that might have
hindered him from coming to that measure of grace, that he has now received,
that so he may acknowledge upon his own experience, that nothing is able to
hinder the good purpose of God toward those that love him. And then he shall
find, that the great ignorance, idolatry, or Atheism, in which all his
kindred were left might have stayed this good work, but that God did draw him
out of them, as he did Abraham, Romans 12.1.
commanding him to forsake his country, and his kindred, and his fathers house:
or that the manifold great corruptions that were rooted in us, and confirmed by
custom, like unto the seven devils that were in Marie Magdalen, might have
kept us from the hope of it: or the loose and dissolute life that we lead,
mispe^ding our time, and the gifts of God, our wit and strength in riotousnes
and wantonness, as the prodigal child did; might have kept Gods good hand from
us: or that we did despise and tread under our feet the precious pearl of Gods
word, when it was offered unto us, like unto the profane beasts, or swine that
Christ speaks of in the Gospel: or that many things else might in the
judgment of all men have been as a bar to keep us from an effectual
calling; but that the Lord in much mercy had purposed it, and so according to
the same purpose of his, he bore all things down before him, and came thorough
them unto us for our good.

And so we shall be the better persuaded, that the Lord of the same
unchangeable goodness of his having purposed even by the cross, and all
manner of affliction to do us good, how many things so ever may seem to our
selves, or to others to be against it, that he will verify this promise unto
us, and we shall find it to be true, as well as others, that all things shall
work for the best to those that love God, even those that are called of his
purpose.

Romans 8.29.
In the next verse when he adds; For those whom he knew before, he also
predestinate, to be like to the image of his son, that he might be the first
borne of many brethren: he declares an other most excellent end, wherefore
the Lord lays the cross most of all upon his children: namely, that thereby
they might be like unto Christ their eldest brother, as the Lord has ordained,
that all that are his should be, some more, and some less. And so by this
means especially it works our good, when it makes us the members
conformable and like unto Christ our head. In which words he not only says,
that all afflictions do befall us by the very special providence and hand of
God, and not by fortune or chance: but also he shows, to what end he sends
them; Luke 24.26
namely, that as Christ himself first suffered, and then entered into glory: so
all others going the same way, that he did, they might be like unto him; as the
Lord has appointed, that they should be. And therefore we need not to fear,
that the cross should hinder us from our salvation, no more then it did Christ
from glory: but rather that we ought in the midst of it to have such hope, that
we shall be like unto Christ in glory, because we are like unto him in the
cross: according as it is said in an other place, If we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him.

Now concerning the former of these two points, namely, that no affliction
comes by casualtie, or befalls us by hap hazard, as we say, neither that
any thing is done by fortune or chance, but by the very special appointment of
God: he not only willingly suffering it, and beholding it, and us in it with
his own eyes, but laying it upon us himself, even with his own hands, and
first of all ordaining it: this, I say, not only contains in it most notable
comfort, and singular consolation, considered alone and apart by it self: but
also is that, unto which the whole Scripture of the old and new Testament
bears very plentiful witness. For seeing that we believe, according to the
first article of our faith, that God made all things of nothing, therefore also
we are assured, that whatsoever are the means known or unknown, of any thing
that befalls us, that the Lord himself is the doer of the same: for that
which they did, they did by his special power, seeing that of themselves they
were first nothing, and therefore without him could not do any thing.

And thus the Psalmist professes his faith, in the name of the rest of the
servants of God, acknowledging that the Lord himself has brought all their
troubles upon the^, which they suffered by the violence and cruelty of their
adversaries; and that he alone did in the end deliver them out of their hands:
when he speaks thus, Praise our God, ye people, Psalm. 66.8.
and make the voice of his praise to be heard; which holds our souls in
life, and suffers not our feet to slip. For thou, O God, have proved us,
thou have tried us as silver is tried; thou have brought us into the snares,
and laid a strait chain upon our loins: thou have caused men to ride over our
heads: we went into fire and into water, but thou broughtest us out into a
wealthy place: where they confess that though men did so oppress them, as
though they should ride over them, yet that the Lord caused them so to do, and
he brought them into the snare, and by the cruelty of tyrants laid a strait
chain upon their loins, which pinched them: and so he did not only behold
their afflictions, but by them did of purpose try them, as men do silver.

Whereunto agrees that most excellent saying of Job, containing the like
profession of his faith in this very point; that God brings all affliction
upon men, though he uses men, or any other means, or the devil himself, as
instruments and means to work under him in the same thing. For when Satan had
desired the Lord to stretch out his hand, Job. 1.11.
and touch Job in his possessions, to see what would become of him then: and
thereupon the Lord said unto him, Lo all that he has is in thine hand. then
he stirred up the Shabeans, who came violently and carried away all his oxen, as
they were plowing, and his asses as they were seeding: and he caused fire to
come down and burn up his sheep and his servants that kept the^: and he
moved the Chaldeans to set upon his camels; and to carry them away, and to
slay his servants: and he raised up a tempest of wind, which blewe down the
house where his sons and his daughters were, and slew them all. And when the
tidings of all these were brought unto him on the sudden, then he fell down
upon the ground, verse. 20.
and worshipped God, saying, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither: the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it:
blessed be the name of the Lord. Thus though he saw the means of his undoing,
yet he looked up to God, and confessed him to be the principal doer in this
business: not ascribing his losses unto the Chaldeans or Sabeans, but unto God
working by them: and therefore he said, The Lord has taken away.

Thus we ought so believe and confess, that whatsoever does befall us either
by wicked or ungodly persons, or by Satan himself, and all his hellish power,
that the Lord is the doer of the same: for the very devils themselves were
constrained to acknowledge unto Christ, when he was upon the earth, that they
could do nothing without his permission, or rather without his warrant and
special commandment: and that not only unto men, but even to the worst and
meanest of his creatures. For when he was in the country of the Gergaseus,
there met him two men possessed with many devils; Matthew. 8.28.
and the devils speaking in the^, besought him, saying, If thou cast us out,
suffer us to go into the heard of swine; which was feeding a far off upon an
hill: so they all confess, that they were not able to enter into those very
bruit beasts to hurt them, until such time as Christ gave them leave.

Mark. 5.12.
But S. Mark speaks of it more significantly, namely, that they said unto
him, Send us into the swine: and then as S. Matthew says, he did not only
suffer them, and give the^ leave so to do, but bade them go, and so sent them
to them: whereupon they entered into them, and carried them headlong from the
hill into the sea, and so choked them there. So that they confess, that they
could do nothing but by the power of Christ, sending them, ruling them, and
restraining them at his pleasure.

Thus also it is written of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Matthew. 4.1.
that he was lead aside of the Spirit of God into the wilderness, to be tempted
of the devil; to show us, that whatsoever did befall him there, the Lord God
sent him thither, and to that end: and that God was not only contented to
suffer him to be diverse ways tempted by the space of forty days, and
forty nights continually; but that he went thither by the immediate direction
of the Spirit of God for the same end and purpose: who could otherwise have
preserved him, that the Devil should have had nothing to do with him. And
according to this dealing of God with him, Christ has taught us all thus to
pray, Lord lead us not into temptation: Luke 11.4.
which kind of words, as they be agreeable unto the words of the Evangelists,
yea of our Savior Christ, So they are more full of faith and comfort, then if
we should say, as many had wont to do, Suffer us not to be lead into
temptation: because therein we confess, not only that the Lord beholds us
in our troubles, and suffers us to be lead into them, and so is in those
things a looker on; but that he, that is our father, and therefore loves us;
who made us, and therefore knows our strength, lays them upon our backs
himself, and does not as it were stand by till an other does it: and therefore
we need so much the less to fear, lest we should be ouerladen with them: for
as it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 103.13.
as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him: for he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we
are but dust.

The consideration of this should not only make us patient in all afflictions,
and willingly to bear them, because they come from God, that loves us: but
also to look for some good from them in the end, because that he, who has
promised to work our good thereby, does lay them upon us himself. And unless
we be thus persuaded of them, we shall be ready to fret, and storm, and
impatiently to bear them; much more shall we think them to be for our hurt,
rather then for our good. If Job when he lost all, if he had looked unto the
violence and robbery of the Chaldeans Job 1.15.
and Sabeans; who spoiled him* or to the malice of the Devil, who set them a
work, and had gone no further, he must needs have had a number of revenging
thoughts against them, and he could no ways have put it up at their hands; but
when he considered of the providence of God working by them in wisdom and
mercy, beyond that that flesh and and blood could conceive: and was resolved
of this, that the Lord had taken all away: that made him patiently to bear
all, and to give thanks unto God; and not to utter one foolish word, verse. 22.
or to offend with his mouth.

Gen 37.24.
And this made Joseph patiently to put up those injuries and wrongs that were
offered unto him by his brethren; when as first of all they cast him into an
empty pit, that there he might perish: and afterward they drew him out of it,
and sold him to the Ishmaelites, who brought him into Egypt. Where afterward
he being advanced unto great honor, when in the time of famine his brethren
came thither to buie corn, and he at their second coming made himself known
unto them; saying, Come near, I pray you to me: and 45.4.
I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt: but he staieth not there:
for then he might in some great heat of affection have expostulated the matter
with them, and have don the^ some harm, seeing he had power in his hands: but
he adds further for their comfort, and to show what stayed him: Be not sad,
v. 5.
neither grieved with your selves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me
before you for your preservation: for now two years of famine have been
thorough the land, and five years are behind, wherein shall be neither earing,
nor harvest: wherefore God sent me before you, to preserve your posterity in
this land, and to save you alive by a great deliverance. Now the^ you sent me
not hither, but God, who has made me a father unto Pharaoh, and lord of all
his house, and ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. Where we see, how he
turns his eyes from his brethren, and looks unto God, saying it was not
they that sold him, but God that sent him thither, and that for the good of
them all: and this made him so patiently to bear it.

And thus the Lord, though he detesteth such sins as these in men, yet he
often uses them to his glory: which when men can wisely consider of, and
discern the one from the other, it will make them quietly to bear great
things at the hands of men, because they stay not in them, but cast up their
eyes unto God: whereas if they should only look unto men, and go no further,
they know that they in their doings mean them no good, but hurt: and knowing
that they have deserved no such measure at their hands, they would be like the
dog that bites the staff wherewith he is beaten, and considers not of him
that strikes him: therefore in all afflictions, let us believe that we have to
deal with God, so shall we be patient, and comfortable under the same. And
this is that, no doubt, that stayed the old man Heli the Priest, when he heard
that message from the Lord by Samuel, which otherwise would have been a great
deal more uncomfortable unto him, as appears by his words, and answer, that
he gave unto him. For when he told him, that God would judge his house for
ever, 1. Sam. 3.^3.
for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons ran into a slander, and
he stayed them not; then he answered, 18.
It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good. This faith, that he knew,
that all things should fall out not according to the will of man, but of God,
was that, that gave him hope of a good issue of all those troubles in the end:
and so it must do to us.

For this is all one, as if the sick patient should have a Physician to deal
with him, who were his father, his brother, or his friend: who should not only
prescribe the quantity of all the ingredients for his medicine, knowing well
the qualities and working of them; but should also make the confection
himself, bring it unto him, and minister it with his own hands: of whose
fidelity and care toward him, and desire of his health, because he doubts
not one whit; that would make him most willing to receive it, though very
bitter and unpleasant: and though at the first he found it in the working
somewhat churlish, yet he would hope to receive some good by it in the end;
knowing who made it, and brought it unto him.

And after this manner, and under this very comparison, our Savior Christ
speaks of his own afflictions, and did most willingly endure the cross,
which others would have put off from him, because it was that, that his father
did lay upon him. For when Judas and the rest came with weapons to take him,
Ioh. 18 ^.
Peter having a sword drew it out, and laid about him, hoping to have rescued
him out of their hands: and striking at the head of one of the servants of the
high Priest, cut off his right ear. 11.
Then Jesus said unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: shall I not
drink of the cup, which my father has given me? Wherein he shows not
only what made him so patient, and what caused him to stay Peter, even the
will of his Father: but thereby he does also teach us, that whenever any
cross does befall us, it is that portion and cup, which God our father in
great wisdom and mercy has mingled for us: and therefore we should not fear
any hurt by drinking of it, but rather take it willingly, and hope that it
shall work our good, according to his meaning toward us, and as he has
promised in his word.

If when the child has offended his father, he should say to one of his
servants in his anger; Take him out of my sight, and punish him so and so: this
would be more grievous and fearful a great deal unto an ingenuous child,
then if the father should take correction of him himself; because he was
better persuaded of the goodness of his father toward him, then of the
servants, and so might look for more mercy from the one, then from the other,
Even so it may minister unto us no small comfort in all our afflictions, that
we believe, that in the^ we are under our fathers hand, and he himself deals
with us, and that he has not in his displeasure delivered us to any other to
be tormented by them.

Again, if one that were blind, offending his father, should be suddenly
taken away, and carried to some punishment, he knew not whether, nor by whom,
he might justly fear what would be the end and measure of it: but if he knew
it were his father, part of his fear would be diminished, and he would be the
less unwilling to go with him, and more quietly submit himself unto his
correction: So we if at any time through our ignorance and blindness do not
rightly conceive of our crosses, and of the author of them; but as uncertain
we ascribe them to this, or to that, or to we know not what, we are so much the
more timorous and fearful: but if the eyes of our mind by faith in Gods word
be so opened, that we see clearly God to be the author of them, and that we
are in the hands of none but of our father; our minds are so much the more
pacified, and we shall find a wonderful alteration in our selves, over that
was in us before, in respect of the patient bearing of our present estate,
whatsoever it be.

Or (to show it in an other comparison) if one should be so hardly dealt
withal, as is the manner in the Spanish Inquisition; in which men are examined
for their faith in Christ, and religion to God, that the poor soul might be
put into the greater fear, and so the sooner abjure his faith; if he should
have a tormentor sent unto him very ougly disguised, more like a devil then a
man, who should carry him into some dark dungeon he knew not whether, and there
lay him upon the rack: this would no doubt increase the grief of his
affliction so much the more, because he knew not who did deal with him, and so
could look for no mercy at his hands. But now, if when he were in the midst
of his torture he should hear the voice of his father speaking unto him,
though thus disguised, that might somewhat uphold him, and rid him of a
number of thoughts that he was troubled with before.

So all afflictions must needs be so much the more uncomfortable unto us, as
long as we look not up unto him, that sends it; and are so blind, that we
consider not, who strikes us. Yet when we hear out of the word the voice of
our father speaking unto us, and telling us that it is he that deals with us,
how strange and deformed so ever the tormentor may seem to be, that is, how
grievous and unlooked for so ever the affliction be, and contrary to our
nature; let us not be too much discouraged, because that then when he strikes
us, he still loves us, and the bowels of his compassion do yearne upon us, ^.
king. ^.26.
more then in a mother toward her child, when she sees what harm is like
to come unto it: and he then seeks thereby to do us good.

And this is that, which the Prophet Jeremy speaks of in the person of the
Lord, showing how he stands affected toward them when he does most of all
afflict the^. Where first of all he brings in the Church of the Jews
sorowing for the greatness of their affliction, which God had laid upon them for
their sins: and in the same committing themselves wholly to God, and praying
to him for his salvation; when he says, I have heard Ephraim lamenting Ier.
31.18.
thus thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an untamed calfe; convert
thou me, and I shall be converted: for thou art the Lord my God; surely after I
was converted, I repented: and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh: I was ashamed, yea confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth. Then the Lord makes this answer, that he had not cast them off, though
he had so afflicted them, but did still love them, and when he did most of all
afflict them, then he was moved with pity and compassion toward the^,
saying, Is Ephraim my dear son, v. 20.
or pleasant child? I surely: for since I spoke unto him, I still remembered
him: therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have compassion
upon him, says the Lord.

Thus we see, that all afflictions are ordained, and sent of God, and that for
our good, and that he bears the same fatherly affection toward us in them,
that he did before. And therefore that the salvation of the Church, and of
every member of the same is by Gods decree joined with bearing the cross: in
so much that we are not to look to be free from it, unless we will pervert
this order established by God himself. Neither need we to fear it, when as
the Lord, who has determined to save us, has appointed this way and means
also to save us by, and to work our good: and so his decree and purpose of
saving us can not be severed from his decree of exercising us under the cross.

And that none of us all might look to be freed from the cross, or fear,
that it should hinder us in our salvation, or in any gift that might further us
thereunto: the Apostle tells us, wherefore the Lord has thus decreed of the
whole Church, to exercise them under the cross; namely, seeing that his own
dearly beloved son, Math. 3.17.
in whom he is well pleased, (as it was testified from heaven) seeing that he
came no other way but by the cross unto his great glory, to be set at the
right hand of God: he being the eldest brother in the house of God, all other
by their practice and obedience to the cross, might yield unto him
sovereignty, and acknowledge him to be chief, when they will not refuse to
go that way to their inheritance, which Christ went before, the eldest and
only natural son of God, though it seem never so grievous, even thorough
many afflictions.

For even as a noble man will have all his servants to wear one liuerie, and
all of them to have the same cognizance, that they may be known whose they
are: So the Lord would have all his servants and children, to be known from
the rest of the world by one and the same badge: and though there be some other
marks of them, whereby they may be discerned, as the outward profession of his
worship and service, and his holy Sacraments; yet there is one more special:
now the badge that he put upon Christ Jesus his eldest son, was affliction
and trouble in this world: according to that that was prophesied of him, Esa.
53.3.
he is despised, and rejected of men; he is a man full of sorrows, and has
experience of infirmities; he was oppressed and afflicted, 7.
yet did he not open his mouth; he is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and
as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. The lord
did break him, 10.
and make him subject unto infirmities: all which we see verified in the Gospel
in the whole course of his life, but especially in his death. Seeing this was
the case of the first begotten, none of us the younger brethren must refuse it,
or be weary of it.

We see by experience, that in every family great is the prerogative and
privilege of the eldest brother above all the rest, he by the law of God was
by his double portion preferred above all the rest: and Jacob in blessing all
his children, Genesis 49.3.
called Reuben his eldest son, The excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power, and so did show what belonged unto him as he was the
eldest, if he had not lost it, namely, that he should have been the chiefest
of all his brethren. None therefore must look to go beyond the eldest, nay
all can not be like unto him: and if any of the younger might come to as great
an inheritance as he, by doing the same things that he did before them, though
never so hard, and by going to it the same way, that he did, though full of
many difficulties and dangers; they might not with any color refuse the
conditions, unless they would preposterously and without reason prefer
themselves before him, and think themselves better then he.

In like manner seeing it has pleased the Lord, Heb. 2.10.
as the Apostle says, to consecrate the price of our salvation through
afflictions, and he came unto glory no other way then this; we must think it
good for us to go the same way, that we might be like unto him, and so by our
practice show, that we acknowledge him to be the prince of our salvation, and
our eldest brother. Therefore as he is the most chief and principal in the
commonwealth, or in the Church, or in a private family, or in any place else,
whom all the rest desire to be like unto: So when we are contented to be like
unto Christ in any thing, even in the cross, then shall we declare indeed
that we hold him not in word only, but in true faith and hearty affection to
be chief and principal above all others, and as was said before, to be the
Prince of our salvation; or as it is said in this text that we have in hand,
Romans 8.29.
The first begotten among many brethren.

For indeed howsoever there is great difference between the head and the rest
of the members, and all of them are far inferior unto it: yet there is and
must be a certain conformity between the one and the other; that is, a
certain likelihood and agreement between the members of the same body and the
head: So howsoever there is no comparison between Christ and us, yet we must
thus far agree with him, that we must not think to be above him, and
therefore we must not refuse any condition, that he has undergone before:
unless we would most disorderly prefer our selves the members, before him
our head: which thing to do, were to darken the glory of him that is the
first borne, and to stain the honor of him that is truly called, The Prince
of our salvation.

For what a confusion were it in the commonwealth, if the Nobles, yea the
meanest of the subjects would refuse to do that, which the King and Prince had
done before? or what disorder would there be in a family, if the younger brethren
should think much and disdain to be brought up that way, that the heir of the
house had been before: Even so when we shall refuse to bear the cross, which
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus by the appointment of his father has born in
greater measure, then we shall or can: it is nothing else but pride and self
love to lift up our selves above him, and to say by our deeds, that we will
not in this thing be conformable unto him, as to our Prince or eldest brother.

And then consider I pray you, what an intolerable thing this were, that we
being worse then dust and ashes, and worms meat, yea nothing else but a lump
of sin, should desire to be spared above the only son of God, whom he
has made heir of all things; Heb. 1.2.
by whom also he made the worlds; who is the brightness of the glory, and the
engraven form of his person, bearing up all things by his mighty power: and
is made so much the more excellent then the Angels, in as much as he has
obtained a more excellent name the^ they: for of him he says, Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee: and of the other, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, as the Apostle does most excellently show at large in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. Therefore let us not so love our selves that the estate of
Christ Jesus should seem unmeet for us: as if he being thorough all
afflictions and temptations brought unto glory, we should dream of a more easy
way for our selves, and think to come to it after a more peaceable and quiet
manner, we know not what.

But rather let this comfort and uphold us in all trouble and adversity, that
we can never be pressed down so low with it, but that Christ Jesus our Lord
and Prince has been more deeply plunged in it before: and therefore the more
that we suffer, the more like we are unto him. In so much that if it were
possible for us to have the afflictions of Job doubled upon us, yea if we could
go down into hell, and so suffer all the torments of a damned and desperate
creature both in soul and body; having the worm of our conscience knawing in
us continually; even in them we should be most like unto Christ in his
fearful agonies, and deadly sorrow that he fell into, complaining that his
soul was heavy even unto the death: Math 26.3^.
and in his bloody sweat, by which all the parts of this body were strained
to the full: yea in the lamentable outcries that he made upon the cross, when
as he finding no comfort in heaven nor in earth for a while he cried with a
loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and 27.46.
and so gave up the ghost.

But if all this do not suffice us, and we further demand, why the Lord
should appoint so hard a way for us unto salvation, and why he should ordain
the gate to be so strait, and 7.14.
and the way so narrow, whereby we should enter into life: and so should
foolishly wish, as many do, that he had appointed some easier way then this.
First of all I must say, as the Apostle does, Romans 9.20.
O man, who art thou, which pleadest against God? shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it; why have thou appointed me to do so and so? we must not
prescribe any thing unto the Lord in the course and manner of our salvation: no
more then children must prescribe unto their parents after what manner they
should come to their inheritances and portions. But seeing that the joys of
the kingdom of heaven are so great, even such, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as the eye has not seen, nor the ear has heard, neither have they entered
into the heart of man; and that we are altogether so unworthy of the^, we must
think our selves happy, if we come to enjoy them any way at the last, be it
never so hard; yea, if we should go to heaven thorough the midst of hell.

For when we are come thither, in the presence of God is the fulness of joy,
Psalm. 16.11.
and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, we shall find them so far
to exceed all that ever we heard, read, or thought of them: so that we shall
say of them, as the Queen of Sheba said of the wisdom and honor of king
Solomon, when she saw it: It was a true word, 2. Chr. 9.5.
which I heard in mine own land of thy acts, and of thy wisdom: howbeit I
believed not their report, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and
behold not the one half of thy great wisdom was told me: for thou exceedest
the fame that I heard: happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants,
which stand before thee always, etc. So we shall find all things there to
surpass all that ever we heard, and so shall count our selves and other happy
and thrice happy, that may stand in the presence of God for ever.

At what time we shall find the happiness of that life in many degrees to
surmount all the troubles and adversities that we have suffered in this life,
to surmount them I say both in greatness, and in continuance without any
interruption. As the Apostle says, who had so great experience of all kind of
afflictions, that he says of himself, 2. Cor. 4.8.
We are afflicted on every side; and every where we bear about in our body
the dying of the Lord Jesus: for we are always delivered unto death for Jesus
sake: yet he says, he did not faint under them: for when he considered of the
joys of heaven, and compared the afflictions of this world with them, he
accounted the afflictions to be but short, even for a moment of time, and very
light and easy, in respect of the eternal glory, and the great weight of it,
that was prepared for him, and for others: when he says, 17.
for our light affliction, which is but for a moment causes unto us a far
more excellent and eternal weight of glory: and as he delivers it in an
other place more plainly and confidently in these words: I count, Romans 8.18.
or all things being well considered, I gather, that the afflictions of this
present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

And then we shall never repent us of the hardness of the way, by which we came
through manifold afflictions unto so great and eternal glory; no more then
the sick patient is sorry that by enduring so many hard things under the
physicians hands, he attained unto perfect health at the last. But rather as it
was a great comfort unto Joseph, Genesis 49.5.
to see what great honor he was come unto in Egypt, so that he was made lord
of all the country, though he had suffered many hard things before: according
to that, that is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 105.17
Joseph was sold for a slave; they held his feet in the stocks, and he was
laid in irons, until his appointed time came, and the counsel of the Lord had
tried him. Then the King sent, and loosed him, even the ruler of the people
delivered him: he made him Lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance.
So it shall be a comfort unto us for ever and ever, that by walking in the
strait way of godliness, and enduring many grievous things in the same, we are
come to that place where we are made Kings and Queens to reign with Christ in
glory world without end.

And as Jacob was not sorry, that he came to inherit his fathers blessing at
the last by enduring a long exile from his fathers house by the space of
twenty years, and a tedious kind of service under his cruel master Laban,
who did often change his wages, and caused him to be pinched with the frost in
the night, and to be scorched with the heat of the sun in the day. So it
shall be no grief of heart at all unto us then, that by patience under many
crosses here, we are come to inherit the blessing of our heavenly father in the
kingdom of heaven, which was prepared for us before the foundation of the
world. But as the Israelites when they were quietly possessed of the land of
Canaan, that good land that flowed with milk and honey, for joy thereof never
remembered their long journey travailing by the space of forty years through a
vast desert and forlorn wilderness, in which sometimes they wanted water,
sometimes food, sometimes were in danger of their enemies, sometimes were
stung with fiery serpents, and sometimes were put in great fear of other
calamities: So we when we are come to that land of promise, whereof this was
out a type and figure; where is the tree of life indeed, Revel. 12.2.
bearing fruit continually, whose fruit are for meat, and whose leaves are for
medicine: where shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the lamb
shall be in it, where his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their foreheads: and there shall be no night
there, and they shall need no candle, neither light of the sun: for the Lord
God shall give them light, and they shall reign for evermore. Then all things
that we have suffered in these days of our pilgrimage shall be clean
forgotten, and remembered no more.

To conclude, as David did not repent him, that he came to the kingdom of
Israel at the end of many years, in which he suffered so many hard things
under the tyranny of Saul, as he did; when as sometimes he would have smit him
through with his spear unto the wall, 1. Sam. 18.^2.
and at an other time he would have slain him in his bed: and continually he
hunted after his life, and 26.20.
as one would hunt a partridge in the wilderness: So we shall not repent us,
that we are come to the kingdom of heaven after many years, in which
sometimes we have been pursued of one affliction, and sometimes of an other:
so that all our life long has been nothing else but a continual warrefare
with our own corruptions, and with the temptations of the world, and of the
devil. Therefore to uphold our selves in a good course, and that in all
trialls we might possess our souls in patience unto the end, we must
consider and seriously meditate upon the happiness of the life to come: which
shall so sweeten the bitterness of all afflictions, that either we shall not
feel it in comparison, or it shall seem nothing unto us: and so let us put
that exhortation of the Apostle in practice, Let (...) not be weary of well
doing, Gal. 6.9.
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Where to persuade the Galatians and us to go on constantly in all good courses
unto the end, he makes a promise of great reward which God will bestow upon all
them that shall so do, not so much in this life, as the life to come, when
every man shall receive the things that are done in his body, 2. Cor. 5.10.
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil: and this he does
by a familiar and plain comparison; That as the husbandman though the
seede-time be very painful and costly unto him; so that both he buies his
corn at a great price, and has many an hard journey at the plow, and meets
with many a boisterous storm, yet he gives not over in the midst, but comforts
himself with the hope of harvest, which in due time will come, though long
after: and is persuaded, that that will fully quite all his cost, and
recompense all his labor to the full: and when he has gathered his corn into
his barn, he repents himself not one whit of his cost, or travel, but rather
is glad that by neither of them he was discouraged from following of that good
course, which now he seeeth to be so gainful unto himself.

So we in all afflictions and in all difficulties continuing in well doing,
must comfort our selves with the hope of that reward, that God has promised in
the kingdom of heaven: according to that, that is said in the Psalm, they that
sow in tears, Psalm. 126.5.
shall reap in joy; they went out weeping, and carried precious seed, but they
shall return with joy, and bring their sheaues. Where the time of affliction is
compared unto a seede-time in a dear year, when poor men because of the
scarsitie and price of corn sow it with tears: but the reward in heaven is
likened unto the harvest, when the increase is so great, that they reap and
carry in their corn with great joy. This is that then, which we must set
before our eyes, that we might patiently undergo the hardness of affliction, it
being the ready way to bring us to glory.

And this Paul applies unto servants, whose condition of life, especially of
bondseruants, and under heathen and unchristian masters in those days was very
hard: and wills the^ to do their duties conscionably, as serving the Lord,
knowing that of him, they shall receive their reward: when he says, Coloss
3.23.
Servants be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh,
in all things, not with eye service, as men pleasers, but in singlenes of
heart, pleasing God: whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and
not to men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. Thus he would have them to go on in
their callings chearefully, though they were very base and painful, in hope of
that inheritance that was prepared for the^ in the kingdom of heaven. And
truly if not only servants, but all other men did believe that in all things
they had to deal with God, and that he would reward them if they did well,
though all other should neglect them, the hope of that might comfort them in
all difficulties.

And this made Moses the man of God to refuse all the riches and pleasures,
that he might have inioyed in Egypt, as being the reputed son of Pharaohs
daughter, and to choose rather to join himself with the people of God though
in great affliction, Heb. 11.26.
because he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. Which reward could
not then be seen, and therefore the Apostle says, that he did it by faith:
and truly if we did believe that great reward that is laid up in heaven for
them that serve God, and is offered unto us in his word, if all the pleasures
of the world were laid before us on the one hand, and all the afflictions of
the same on the other hand, we should be of Moses his mind; to choose rather
to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to endure the pleasures of
sin for a season: esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then all the
treasures of the world, because by faith we have respect unto the recompense of
that reward.

And so I may conclude with that most excellent exhortation of the Apostle in
the chapter following: Wherefore let us also, chap. 12.1.
seeing that we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast
away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on:
let us run with patience the race, that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our faith: who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the
throne of God. Where he sets before our eyes the example of our Savior Christ,
who in those grievous agonies he was in, to sweeten the bitterness of his
cross, did earnestly consider of the joy and glory, which a little after he
was to enter into: that we might also in our sufferings hold our thoughts
seriously unto the meditation of the joys of heaven, and for them endure them,
and tread under our feet for them all the shame, reproach, and contempt of
the world, that shall be cast upon us.

Where also that we might not faint under the burden, we are to consider of the
circumstance of time, when we shall reap the fruit of our labors, Gal. 6.^.
that is, In due season, if we faint not. Which is partly in this life, for
godliness has the promises of this life, 2. Tim. 4.^.
as well as of the life to come: and the Lord as he does in this life give to
his children the first fruits of his Spirit: Romans 8.23.
so he does give them the first fruits of their labors, as a taste of their
happiness, which they shall enjoy more fully hereafter: and therefore Christ
says in the Gospel, Mark. 10.^0.
that he will reward those that are his an hundred fold in this life. But this
due time is meant principally of the life to come, when they shall receive
their reward fully: not only in the hour of death, when the soul enters
into happiness, as it is said of Lazarus, that when he died, the Angels carried
his soul into Abraham's bosom: Luke 16.22.
but especially at the day of judgment, when soul and body being joined
together, they shall be in full possession of eternal glory and felicity for
ever.

And seeing the Lord has of his wisdom and goodness set down the time, when
we shall be comforted and receive our reward; we must in faith and patience
wait upon him for it. And as the husbandman that has sown his field, does
not look for his croppe the next day, or the next week, but tarieth till the
harvest come; so must we sow the seed of obedience unto God, even under the
cross, though with tears, and look for the fruit of it at the great day of
harvest, when we shall reap it with joy, eue^ with that joy that is
unspeakable and most glorious: when he shall separate the sheep from the
goats, and give them their reward, saying, Come ye blessed of my father, Math.
^
take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of
the world.

And seeing the Lord has been patient in waiting for our amendment from day
to day: let us patiently expect the accomplishment of this his gracious promise
from day to day, and from year to year. Setting before our eyes the example
of the dumb creatures, which expect with a fervent desire to be delivered from
that bondage and corruption, ^^m. 8.19.
that now they are in, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: and
this they do with stretching forth their heads, as the Apostle says, like
unto the poor prisoner, that is condemned, and puts out his head at the prison
window, looking for the gracious pardon of the Prince. And if we can thus do,
as we shall not be frustrate of our hope, (...). 6.1^.
so it shall maruelously uphold us, as an ankor fixed in heaven, and not in
earth, in all the waves and tempests of this troublesome world, till we ariue
happily at the haven of heaven, we shall find the joys so to exceed all the
miseries that we have endured here, that we shall not be grieved one whit, that
we are come to such a place of rest, by so long and tedious a journey: Which
grace God grant unto us, for his son Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

