A PARAENESIS to the Prince

By WILLIAM ALEXANDER of Menstrie.

printer's device of Richard Field (McKerrow 192) ANCHORA SPEI

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1604.

A PARAENESIS to the Prince.
1
LO here (brave Youth) as zeal and duty move,
I labor (though in vain) to find some gift
That Is worthy of thy greatness, and my love:
But whilst my self above my self I lift,
And would the best of mine inventions prove,
I stand to study what should be my drift:
Yet this the greatest approbation brings,
Still to a Prince to speak of princely things.
2
When those of the first age, that erst did live
In shadowie woods, or in a humide cave;
And taking that which the earth vnforc'd did give,
Would pay but that which Natures need did crave;
Then beasts such numbers did of breath deprive:
They following Amphion those retires did leave;
Who with harmonious sounds brought them together,
That each in danger might assist another.
3
Then building walls, they barbarous rites disdained,
The sweetness of society to find,
And all t'attaine that th'vnion entertained,
As peace, religion, and a virtuous mind:
That so they might have restless humors rained,
Their liberties with laws they straight confined:
And of the better sort the best preferred,
To chastise those, against the laws that erred.
4
I wot not if the ambitious that aspired,
Ore many realms to make themselves a right,
Or if the worlds disorders so required,
That then had put Astraea to the flight;
Or if it was some whose virtues were admired,
And eminent in all the peoples sight,
That moved peace-louers for to rear a throne,
And give the keys of life and death to one.
5
When as that dignity did first begin,
It Was proper to each province and t'each town;
And as when Forth does from Benlowmond rin,
She Is poor of waters, naked of renown:
But taking Teath, Allon, and Douen in,
Does grow the greater still, the further down,
Till that abounding both in power and fame,
She strives with The Ocean, who should brook the name.
6
Even so those soueraignties that once were small,
Still swallowing up the nearest neighbring state,
With a deluge of men did the earth appall:
And thus The Egyptian Pharaohs first grew great;
Thus did the Assyrians make so many thrall;
And thus the Romans reared The Imperial seat;
And thus all those great States to work have gone,
Whose limits and the worlds were all but one.
7
But I Will not plunge in such a stormy deep,
That neither has a bottom, nor a shore;
But in the dust I Will let those ashes sleep,
That clothed with purple once The Earth did adore,
Of them scarce now a monument we keep,
That have so thundered in the world before.
Their states that by a numbers ruin stood,
Were founded and confounded both with blood.
8
If I would call antiquity to mind,
I might me for an endless task prepare.
But what? ambition that was ever blind,
Did get with toil that which was kept with care;
And all those mighty Monarchies we find
Their falls were famous, as their risings rare:
And ever since th'vnconstant world began,
All that by vice was lost, which virtue wan.
9
Yet registers of memorable things,
Would help (great Prince) to make thy judgment sound,
Which to the eye a perfect mirror brings,
Where all should glass themselves that would be crowned:
Seek out a stage where th'actors all are Kings,
The parts heroicke, and the end renowned;
Which whilst thou in thy cabinet do sit,
Is worthy whiles t'amuse thy growing wit.
10
And do not, do not now the means omit
To match the time that comes with it that is by,
Since History may lead thee unto it,
A pillar whereupon good sprites rely;
The table of all times, the nurce of wit,
The square of reason, and the minds clear eye,
That leads th'vndanger'd Reader through huge harms,
Who stands as it were secure amidst th'alarmes.
11
Nor is it good over brave men's lives to wander,
As one that at each corner stands amazed:
No, labor like some one thy self to render,
Who to the height of glory has been raised.
So Scipio Cyrus, Caesar Alexander,
And that great Pince, chos'd him whom Homer praised:
Or make (as which is recent and best known)
Thy fathers life a pattern of thine own.
12
Yet looking great men's lives this much impaires
The profit that that benefit imparts,
While as transported with preposterous cares:
To imitate but superficial parts,
Some for themselves frame of their fancies snares,
And show what folly does ore-sway their hearts:
For counterfeited things do stains embrace;
And all that is affected has no grace.
13
All those that of those outward things take hold,
Do show by that, they can no higher win.
So to resemble Hercules of old,
Mark Antonie would bear the Lions skin;
And th'heire of Alcibiades it is told,
Would such a course (though to his scorn) begin,
Who to seem like his father that was dead,
Would make himself to lispe and bow his head.
14
No, who would rightly follow such as those,
Must of the better parts apply the powers;
And as the industrious Be aduis'dly goes
To seize upon the best, shun baser flowers:
So where thou do the greatest worth disclose,
To compass that be prodigal of hours,
And study not so much to seem, as be:
Nor seem not for to know that which we see.
15
And to resemble thy renowned Sire,
Thou have not to affect no slender things:
But matchless virtues that all minds admire,
Whose treasure to to his realms great comfort brings:
T'attaine to those (thou Race of kings) aspire,
That they may yield thy fame immortal wings:
And like the Eaglets proving thus thy kind,
Thou art both his of body and of mind.
16
Ah, be not those most miserable souls,
That for to fine their judgments never strive,
Nor will not look upon the learned scroules,
That do experience to th'vnpractis'd give;
But, whilst base sloth each better care controules,
Are dead in ignorance, entombed alive?
Twixt such and beasts the difference is but small:
They use not reason, beasts have none at all.
17
O divine treasure, that the best sort loves,
Life of the soul, reformer of the will,
Clear light, that from the mind, each cloud remoues;
Pure source of virtue, physic for each ill;
That in prosperity a bridle proves,
And in adversity a pillar still:
Of thee the more men get, the more they crave;
And think the more they get, the less they have.
18
But if that knowledge be required of all,
What should they do this treasure to obtain,
Whom time does promise in a throne t'enstall,
Where they by it of all things must ordain?
If it make those who by their birth were thrall,
As little kings, whilst ore themselves they reign;
Then it must make, when it has thoroughly graced them,
Kings more then kings, and like to him that placed them.
19
This is a grief that all the world bemones,
Whilst those lack judgment that are borne to judge,
And like to painted tombs, or gilded stones,
Are for the afflicted people no refuge.
Kings are their kingdoms hearts, which tainted once,
The bodies straight must die, in which they lodge:
And those, by whose example many fall,
Are guilty of the murder of them all.
20
The means that best make majesty to stand,
Are laws observed, good counsels brought to effect:
The Crown the head, the Scepter deckes the hand:
But only knowledge does the thoughts erect.
Kings should excel all them that they command,
In all the parts that do procure respect:
And this a way, to what they would, prepares,
Not only that it is good, but that it is theirs.
21
Nor should they seek respect for, to procure
With loathed tyrannicke deeds, and guards most lewd.
So Nero did, yet could not so assure
The brangling Diadem with blood imbrude;
Nor as the Persian kings, that lived obscure,
And of their subjects rarely would be viewed.
So one of them was secretly orethrowne,
And in his place the murthrer reigned unknown.
22
No, only goodness does beget regard,
And equity does greatest glory win;
To plague for vice, and virtue to reward;
That which they would have done, for to begin:
This is t'authoritie a powerful guard,
And makes a Princes praise ore all to rin;
Whose life his subjects law, cleared with his deeds,
More then Justinians toiles, good order breeds.
23
All those that ore th'vnbaptiz'd nations reigned,
By barbarous customs sought t'engender fear,
And with a thousand tyrranies constrained
All them that they subdude their yoke to bear:
But those whom great Iehoua has ordained,
Above the Christians lawful thrones to rear,
Must seek by worth to be obeyed by love,
So having reigned below to reign above.
24
O happy Henry, that art highly borne,
Yet beautifiest thy birth with signs of worth,
And though a child, all childish toys do scorn,
To show the world thy virtues budding forth,
Which may by time this glorious isle adorn,
And bring eternal Trophies to the North:
While as thou do thy fathers forces lead,
And art the hand, while as he is the head.
25
Thou like that gallant thunderbolt of war,
Third Edwards son, that was so much renowned,
Shall shine in valor as the morning star,
And plenish with thy praise the peopled round.
But like to his, let naught thy fortune mar,
Who in his fathers time did die vncrown'd.
Long live thy Sire, so all the world desires;
But longer thou; so natures course requires.
26
Although time once thee by thy birthright owes,
Those sacred honors that men most esteem,
Yet flatter not thy self with those fair shows,
Which are not altogether as they seem;
Whose burd'nous weight the bearer but orethrowes,
That could before of no such danger deem.
Then if not armed in time thou make thee strong,
Thou do thy self and many a thousand wrong.
27
Since thou must manage such a mighty state,
Now bordered but with The Ocean and the skies;
Then even as he, who justly was called Great,
Did (prodigal of pains to fame t'arise)
With both the parts of worth, his worth dilate,
As learned as valiant, and as stout as wise:
So now let Aristotle lay the ground,
Whereon thou after may thy greatness found.
28
For if addicted to a base repose,
Thou did (as thou do not) mis-spend thy prime;
O what a fair occasion would thou lose,
Which after would be rued, though out of time?
Now to a virtuous course thy thoughts dispose,
While fancies are not glu'de with pleasures lime.
Those that their youth t'a little pains engage,
Acquire great ease unto their perfect age.
29
Now is it time with magnanimious parts,
To show the world what thou pretend'st to be,
And for t'imprint in all the peoples hearts,
That which thou would they should expect of thee;
That so preoccupied with such deserts,
They after may applaud the heavens decree:
When that day comes, which if it come too soon,
Then thou and all this Isle would be undone.
30
And otherwise what trouble should thou find,
If first not seized of all thy subjects love?
To deal with diverse humors, and to bind
Perchance some mal-contents thy course t'approue?
For then a number would suspend their mind,
As doubting what thou afterward might prove.
And when a Realms affections thus are cold,
Of that advantage forreiners take hold.
31
I grant in this thy fortune to be good,
That art t'inherit such a glorious Crown,
As once descended from th'annointed blood,
That often has filled the world with true renown;
The which still on the top of glory stood,
And not so much as once seemed to look down:
For who thy branches to remembrance brings,
Count what he list, he cannot but count kings.
32
And pardon me, for I must pause a while,
And at a thing that is worthy to b'admir'd:
Since those from whom thou come reigned in this isle,
Lo now of years even thousands are expired;
Yet none could there them thrall, nor thence exile,
Nor never failed the line so much desired.
The hundredth and seventh parent living free,
May leave a neuer-conquer'd crown to thee.
33
Nor has this only fortuned but by chance,
Of alterations then there had been some:
But that great Progeny, which still did glance,
Would so presage the thing that was to come,
That this united isle should once advance,
And by the Lion led, all Realms overcome:
For if it kept a little free before,
Now having much no doubt it must do more.
34
And though our nations long, I must confess,
Did roughly woo before that they could wed,
That but endeeres the union we possess,
Whom Neptune both combines within one bed:
All the ancient injuries this does redress,
And buries that which many a battle bred.
A discord reconciled (if wrath expire)
Does breed the greatest love and most entire.
35
Of Englands Marie had it been the chance
To Have made King Philip father of a son,
The haughtie-minded Spaniards pride t'aduance,
All Albions beauty had been quite orerunne;
Or yet if Scotlands Marie had heir'd France,
This isle to live in thraldom had begun:
Of which, if that a stranger brookt a part,
That would to take the other means impart.
36
Thus were we from two dangers twice preserved,
When as we seemed without recovery lost,
As those that from their freedom freely sweru'd,
And suffered strangers of our bounds to bost:
Yet were we for this happy time preserved,
And but to hold it dear a little crossed,
That of the Stuarts might th'vndanted race,
Dominions equal with their minds embrace,
37
Of that blessed progeny th'experienc'd worth,
Has of the people a conceit procured,
That from the race it never can go forth,
But as hereditary is thought affur'd:
Thus (son of that great monarke of the North)
They are t'obedience happily inured,
Ore whom thou art expected for to reign,
To have good ancestors it is a great gain.
38
He that by tyranny his throne does rear,
And dispossess another of his right,
Whose panting heart dare never trust his ear;
For being odious in the peoples sight,
Whilst he both has and gives great cause of fear,
Is spoiling all, at last spoiled of the light:
And those that are descended of his blood,
Ere that they be believed, must long be good.
39
Yet though we see it is an easy thing,
For such a one his state for to maintain,
Who being by his birthright borne a King,
Does with the countries love the crown obtain,
The same does many to confusion bring,
Whilst for that cause they care not how they reign.
O, never throne estabish'd was so sure,
Whose fall a vicious Prince might not procure.
40
Thus do a number to destruction run:
And so did Tarquin once abuse his place,
Who for th'infamous life he had begun,
Was barred from Rome, and ruined all his race.
So he whose father of no King was son,
Was father to no King, but in disgrace
From Sicile banished with the peoples hate,
Did die in Corinth in a base estate.
41
And as that Monarke merits endless praise,
Who has first founded some renowned Empire;
So all the world with scornful eyes may gaze
On their degener'd stemmes that might aspire,
As having greater power their power to raise,
Yet of their race the ruin do conspire,
And for their wrong-spent life with shame do end:
Kings chastis'd once, they get no time t'amend.
42
Those that reposing on their princely name,
Can never give themselves to care for ought,
But for their pleasures every thing would frame,
As all were made for them, and they for naught,
Once the earth will spoil their bodies, men their fame,
Though whilst they live, all for their ease be wrought;
And those conceits on which they do depend,
Do but betray their fortunes in the end.
43
This self conceit, does so the judgment smoke,
That when ought well succeeds with some through it,
They on the same with great affection look,
And scorn th'aduise of others to admit.
Thus did brave Charles the last Burgundian Duke,
Dear buy a battle purchased by his wit,
Who ever after trusting to the same,
Was brought unto confusion and to shame.
44
O sacred counsel, quintessence of souls;
Strength of the commonwealth, that chains the fates,
And every danger, ere it come, controules;
The anchor of all realms, staff of all states,
O sure foundation that no tempest fowls,
On which are builded glorious works, great seats:
If ought with those succeed that scorn thy care,
It Is but by chance, and draws them in a snare.
45
Thrice happy is the King, that has the grace
To choose a counsel whereon to rely,
That loves his person, and respects his place,
And like Aristides can whiles cast by
All private grudge, the public cares to embrace,
Void of ambition, hatred or envy;
And that they be not to betray their seats,
The partial Pensioners of foreign states.
46
None should but those of that grave number bost,
Whose lives have long with many virtues glaunc'd,
As Rome respected the Patritians most,
The Nobles (if themselves) should first b'aduanc'd;
Yet in such sort that others have not lost,
All hope to rise, then worth would not b'enhaunc'd:
For painful virtue in her course would tire,
Were not she hopes to have honor for her hire.
47
But such as those a Prince should most eschew,
That dignities do curiously affect;
Who does for any public charge pursue,
He must have some particular respect.
They should be godly, prudent, secret, true,
Of whom a King his Council should erect;
And he, whilst they advise of zeal and love,
Should not the maniest, but the best approve.
48
There needs a great discretion for to know,
To balance each opinion in his mind:
But ah this does the judgment often orethrow,
While as he comes within himself confined,
And of the Senate would but make a show,
For to confirm that which he has designed;
As one that only has whereon to rest,
For counselors his thoughts, their seat his breast.
49
But what auailes a Senate in this sort,
Whose power within the Capitol is pent?
A blast of breath that does for naught import,
But mocks the world with th'vnperform'd intent:
Those are the councels that great states support,
Which never are made known but by the event,
Not those where wise men matters do propose,
And fools thereafter as they please dispose.
50
Nor is this all that ought to be required
In this assembly, that is the kingdoms soul,
That with a knowledge more then rare inspired,
A common wealth like Platoes in a scroule
They can paint forth; means must by them b'acquird,
The torrent of disorder to control,
And arming with authority their lines,
To act with justice that which wit designs.
51
Great Empress of this universal frame,
The Atlas on whose shoulders States are staid,
That swayst the raines that all the world do tame,
And makes men good by force with red arraid,
Disorders enemy, virgin without blame,
Within whose balance good and bad are weighed;
O sovereign of all virtues, without thee
Nor peace, nor war can entertained be.
52
Thou from confusion all things have redeemed:
The Assembly of th'Amphictions had been vain,
And all those Senates that were most esteemed,
Were not by thee their councels crowned remain;
And all those laws had but dead letters seemed,
Which Solon or Lycurgus did ordain.
Were not thy sword made all alike to die;
And not the weak, while as the strong escaped by.
53
O not without great cause all th'Ancients did
Paint Magistrates, that were t'explane the laws,
Not having hands, so briberie to forbid,
Which them from doing right too often withdrawes:
And with a veil the Judges eyes were hid,
Who should not see the party, but the cause.
Gods Deputies that his tribunal rear,
Should have a patent, not a partial ear.
54
The lack of Justice has huge evils begun,
That by no means could be repaired again.
The famous Sire of that more famous son,
For whom, while as he sleeping did remain,
One did appeal, till that his sleep was done:
And whom a widow did discharge to reign,
Because he had not time on plaints to attend,
Did lose his life for such a fault in the end.
55
This Justice is the virtue most divine,
Which shows kings like the King of kings inclined,
Whose sure foundations naught can undermine,
If once within a constant breast confined:
For otherwise she cannot clearly shine,
While as the Magistrate often changing mind,
Does whiles advance, and whiles is slow to strike,
And being suggested, is not still alike.
56
Use mercy freely, Justice as constrained:
The One must be done, though the other be more dear:
And whiles the form may make the deed disdained,
Whilst Justice tastes of Tyrrannie too near:
One may be justly, yet in rage arraigned,
Whilst reason ruled by passions does appear.
Once Socrates, because ore-com'd with ire,
Did from correcting one (till calmed) retire.
57
Those that want means their anger to assuage,
Do others often, whiles rob themselves of breath.
Fierce Valentinian surfeiting in rage,
By bursting of a vein did bleed to death:
And Theodosius still, but then thought sage,
Caused murder thousands being drunk with wrath,
Who to prevent the like opprobrious crime,
Caused still suspend his edicts for a time.
58
All th'actions of a virtuous king proceed
Forth from the source of a paternall love,
To chastise or cherish as Realms have need,
For which he more then for himself does move;
Who many a millions ease that way to breed,
Makes sometime some his indignation prove;
And like to Codrus, cares not death to embrace,
If for the countries good, and peoples peace.
59
This Lady, that so long unarmed has strayed,
Now holds the balance, and does draw the sword,
And never was more gloriously arrayed,
Nor in short time did greater good afford.
The state that to confusion seemed betrayed,
And could of naught but blood and wrongs record,
Now freed from trouble and intestine rage,
Does boast for to restore the golden age.
60
Thus does thy father (generous Prince) prepare
A way for thee t'attaine t'immortall fame,
And lays the grounds of greatness with such care,
That thou may build great works upon the same.
Then since thou art to have a field so fair,
Whereas thou once may eternize thy name,
Begin, while as a greater light thine smothers,
And learn to rule thy self, ere thou rul'st others.
61
For still true magnanimity we find,
Does harbor soon in an Heroicke breast.
To match Miltiades, whose glory shined,
Themistocles (a child) was robbed of rest.
Yet strive to be a Monarke of thy mind:
For as t'attempt great things, all else detest,
A generous emulation spurs the sprite;
So vain ambition blinds the courage quite.
62
Whilst of the illustrious lives thou look the story,
Abhor those Tyrants that still swim'd in blood;
And follow those, that to their endless glory,
High in their subjects love by virtue stood.
O! be like him, who on a time was sorry,
Because, while as he chanced to do no good,
There happened but one day for to expire:
That was the worlds delight, the heavens desire.
63
But as some gain great states by being human,
Some through their lenity lose what they have.
Englands sixth Henry could not live and reign,
But being simple, did huge foiles receive:
And Scipioes army mutined in Spain,
That through his gentleness their charge did leave.
O! to the state it brings great profit often,
For to be whiles severe, and not still soft.
64
To guide his Coursers warely through the sky,
Erst Phoebus did his Phaeton require,
Saying, from the straight way if he swaru'd by,
The heavens would burn, or the earth would be on fire.
So does twixt two Extremes each virtue lie,
To which the purest sprites ought to aspire:
He lives most sure that no extreme does touch,
Nothing would be too little, nor too much.
65
Some kings, whom all men did in hatred hold,
Whose breasts with auaritious thoughts were torn,
As wretch'd Vespasian sought to gather gold
By base and abject means, that brave minds scorn.
Such whilst they seek not to have their greed controlled,
But how they may their treasuries adorn,
Are, though like Croesus rich, whilst wealth them blinds,
Yet still as poor as Irus in their minds.
66
And some again as foolish fancies move,
That praise without discretion do pursue,
In stead of liberal, prodigal do prove;
Then whilst their treasures they exhausted view,
With Subsidies their subjects do commoue,
And spoil whole realms for to enrich a few,
Whilst with authority their pride they cloak,
That ought to die by smoke for selling smoke.
67
But o the Prince most loathed in every land,
It Is one that is given to lust, who hardly can
Free from some great mischief a long time stand;
For all the world his deeds with hatred scan.
Should he that has the honor to command
The noblest creature (great Gods image) man,
Be to the vilest vice, the bafest slave,
The bodies plague, souls death, and honors grave?
68
Th'vnnaturall monster, that retired apart,
Amongst his concubines began to spinne,
Took with the habit too a woman's heart,
And ended that which Ninus did begin.
Faint-hearted Xerxes, that did gifts impart
To them that could devise new ways to sin,
Though backed with worlds of men in the enemies sight,
Had not the courage for to see them fight.
69
Thus does soft pleasure but abase the mind,
And making one to servile thoughts descend,
Does make the body weak, the judgment blind,
A hateful life, an ignominious end:
Where those that did this raging tyrant bind
With virtues chains, their triumphs to attend,
Have by that means a greater glory gained,
Then all the victories that they attained.
70
The valorous Persian that refused to have gazed
Upon Pantheas beauties, t'ease his toiles,
His glory by that continency raised,
More then by Babylons and Lidiaes spoils:
The Macedonian Monarke was more praised,
Then for triumphing ore so many soiles,
That of his greatest foe (though beauteous seen)
He chastely entertained the captived Queen.
71
Thus have stil-gas'd-at Monarkes much a do,
That all the worlds disorders to redress,
Should shine like to the Sun, the which still lo
The more it mounts aloft, does seem the less:
They should with confidence go freely to,
And trusting to their worth, their will express:
Not like French Lewis th'eleuenth, that did maintain,
That who could not dissemble, could not reign.
72
But for to guard their state, the strongest bar,
And best refuge in every dangerous storm,
It is, to be a gallant man of war,
And to have a heart t'attempt, hands to perform;
Not that they hazard should their state too far,
And to each soldiers course their course conform.
The skillful Pilots at the rudder sit:
Let others use their strength, and them their wit.
73
In Mars-his mysteries t'acquire renown,
It gives Kings glory, and assures their place:
It breeds them a respect amongst their own,
And makes their neighbors fear to lose their grace.
Still all those should, that love to keep their crown,
In peace prepare for war, in war for peace:
For as all fear a Prince that dare attempt,
The want of courage brings one in contempt.
74
And (royal Offspring) that have cause t'aspire,
As one to whom thy birth high hopes assigned,
This well becomes the courage of thy Sire,
That trains thee up according to thy kind.
He, though the world his prosperous reign admire,
In which his subjects such a comfort find,
Has (if once moved the bloody art t'imbrace)
That wit for to make war, which now keeps peace.
75
And o how this (dear Prince) the people charms,
That flock about thee whiles in ravished bands,
To see thee young, yet manage so thine arms,
And have Mineruaes mind, Bellonaes hands.
This exercise thy tender courage warmes;
And still true greatness but by virtue stands:
Agesilaus said, no King could be
More great, unless more virtuous, then he.
76
Although that all of thee great things expect,
Thou as too little make their hopes ashamed:
As he that on Olympus did detect
The famous Thebans foot, his body framed:
By thy beginnings so we may collect,
How great thy worth by time may be proclaimed:
For who thy actions does remarke, may see,
That there be many Caesar's within thee.
77
Though many a realm by long experience finds,
That all the greatest blessings peace imparts,
As that which to good order all men binds;
Yet breeds this Isle, still populous in all parts,
Such vigorous bodies, and such restless minds,
That they disdain t'imbrace Mechanicke arts;
And being haughty cannot live in rest:
Yea, t'hold such idle, it is a dangerous pest.
78
Erst prudent Cato told in some few hours,
What danger to the Romans did redound,
While as they razed the Carthaginian towers;
By which, while as they stood, still means were found
With others harms to exercise their powers;
The want whereof their greatness did confound.
For when no more with foreign foes imbroil'd,
Straight with intestine wars the state was spoiled.
79
No, since this soil that in great sprites abounds,
Can hardly nurce her nurcelings all in peace,
Then let us keep her bosom free from wounds,
And spend our fury in some foreign place.
There is no wall can limite now our bounds,
But all the world will need walls in short space,
T'hold back our troops from seizing on new thrones:
The marble chair must pass the Ocean once.
80
What furour ore my judgment does prevail?
Me thinks I see all the earth glaunce with our arms,
And groaning Neptune charged with many a sail:
I hear the thundering trumpet found th'alarmes,
Whilst all the neighbring nations do look pale;
Such sudden fear each panting heart disarmes,
To see those martial minds together gone,
The Lion and the Leopard in one.
81
I (Henry) hope with this mine eyes to feed,
Whilst, ere thou wearst a crown, thou wear'st a shield,
And when thou making thousands for to bleed,
That dare behold thy countenance and not yield,
Sturres through the bloody dust a foaming steed,
An interested witness in the field,
I may amongst those bands thy Grace attend,
And be thy Homer, when the wars do end.
82
But stay, where fliest thou (Muse) so far astray?
And whilst affection does thy course command,
Dares thus above thy reach attempt a way,
To sing to th'Heire of Albions warlike land,
Who gotten has, his generous thoughts t'array
A Royal gift out of a Royal hand;
And has before his eyes, that type of worth,
That star of state, that Pole that guides the North.
83
Yet ore thy father lo (such is thy fate)
Thou have this vantage, that may profit thee,
An orphan'd Infant settled in his seat,
He greater then himself could never see:
Where thou may learn by him the art of State,
And by another what thy self should be:
Whilst that which he had only but heard told,
Thou may practiced in all his course behold.
84
And this advantage long might thou retain,
By which to make thee blessed the heavens conspire;
And labor of his worth to make thy gain,
To whose perfections thou may once aspire;
When as thou show thy self, whilst thou do reign,
A Son that is worthy of so great a Sire,
And with his Scepters, and the peoples hearts,
Do still inherit his Heroicke parts.
W. A.

FINIS.

