THE RAINEBOW, OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS THE tenth day of June.
1617. By IMMANVEL BOVRNE Master of Arts and Preacher of Gods Word.

ECCLESIASTICVS 43.11, 12. Look upon the Rainebowe, and praise him that made
it, etc.

printer's device of Thomas Adams, featuring a mask with rings (McKerrow 379)

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Adams. 1617.

SAINT PAUL'S
engraving of Saint Paul's Cathedral

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVLY NOBLE LORD, ROBERT LORD SPENCER, BARON of
Wormelayton, Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied in Christ Jesus.
Right Honorable,
Remembering that proverb, (...) know thy self, I was not without much
unwillingness drawn to preach this Sermon at the Cross, not being ignorant
either of mine own weakness, or of the weightinesse of so great a task, and
with much more unwillingness was I overcome to commit it to the press, for my
resolution was that as my subject is of the Rainebowe, so my Sermon should have
been like the Rainebowe, not a permament but a vanishing Bow, appearing to
the eyes of some few, not remaining to be scanned by the judgments of all; for
comes calami calumnia, as there are many colors of that Rainebowe in the
clouds, so I am sure there will be many censurers of this my Rainebowe at the
Cross; that of the Apostle may be applied, vnus sic, alter autem sic, one
judging after this manner, another after that, one speaking well, another ill.
But as commanding Authority was the cause of the former so ouerruling
importunity, has effected the latter, and now like an infant newborn, my
Bow is come naked into the world, and without a case. It was the saying of the
spouse in the Canticles, we have a little sister and she has no breasts; and
I may say the like of this; I have a little bird and she wants wings; yet
fly she must into the open air, and shift for her self: But alas what can
she do, before her wings be grown, or her sick feathers come to
ripeness? It is impossible that she should escape, and not be torn in pieces
by the sharp eied vultures, (the Time-consuming critickes) of our time, except
some princely Eagle shall in pity to so poor a wanderer, shadow her with the
wings of protection; Your Honorable disposition Right Noble Lord, in giving
encouragement to the Ministers of Christ, has emboldened this little bird to
shroud her self under the roof of your Honorable favor, and my self to
dedicate this firstlinge of my studies unto your Lordshippe, whom (with a most
thankful heart) I must ever acknowledge, my first incourager in my work,
since I have been a poor and unworthy labourer in the vineyard of Christ. And
if at this time I may obtain your Honorable love in accepting this small token
of my thankfulness, for those many and undeserved favors, conferred upon me
by your Honor, and by that most Noble Knight (your Right worthy Son) Sir
William Spencer, I shall receive a most comfortable incitement to go one
forwards in my studies, and be for ever bound to pray for a blessed increase
of all graces spiritual and temporal, both for this life and the life to
come, unto your Lordshippe, your Honorable Son, with his Right Noble Lady,
all your Honorable progeny, and their posterity for ever: Resting until
Death.

Your Honors most ready in all respective service to my power. IMMANVEL
BOVRNE.

A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross the tenth day of June. 1617.
GENESIS 9.13. I have set my Bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of
the covenant between me and the earth.


IT is the rule of the Preacher, Preface.
Ecclesiastes 3.1. To every thing there is set time, yea, an appointed time to
every purpose under heaven. And therefore the same divine and heavenly
Penne-man, (wise and understanding Solomon) fitly compares a word fitly
spoken, to apples of gold, in pictures of silver, Prou. 25.11. according to
which, that I might not at this time have broken this golden thread of
beautiful order; I should fitly have spoken, (...), in the time of Pentecost,
concerning Pentecost. Yet because I doubt not, but you have oftentimes heard
this learnedly and religiously handled already; I have thought it not much out
of order, (I am sure not unprofitable) to let pass the time in particular, and
to apply my self to the time in general, (and yet the time present also) and
to speak fitly of this, and of those things that pertain to the same, I have
chosen this portion of Scripture which I have now read unto you; I have set my
bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the Covenant, between me and
the earth.

Almighty God, who is wise in counsel, Occasion.
wonderful in judgment, and adminble in the execution of his unsearchable
will, having manifested his great and terrible judgments unto the old world,
in destroying them with a fearful deluge of waters, for their abominable
impiety, and wilful impenitencie, and declared his gracious favors unto
righteous Noah, in saving him and his family in the Arc, from that most
direful destruction; he does for the further manifestation, of his
unspeakable goodness, and most infinite grace, make a compact, promise, and
covenant, between himself, Noah, and every living creature, upon the face of
the earth, and withal gives them a sign, and seal, of the covenant, the
admirable and beautiful Rainebow, for the more full and perfect confirmation
of their faith; Both which sign, and significate, the Rainebow, and the
Covenant; Moses that great Prophet of God that valiant Captain of the host of
Israel, that meek man above all the men in the earth, does briefly express in
the words of my text, I have set my Bow in the cloud, and it sall be for a
sign of the Covenant, Division.
between me and the earth.

In which not to dazell the eyes of your understandings, with any quainte or
curious divisions, (for my better direction, and your better instruction) I do
briefly and plainly, observe these particulars.

First the Author, of this external sign the Rainebow, and of the internal
significate the Covenant, the omnipotent, The first part. Isaiah. 42.8. Ego sum
Jehovah illud est nomen meum. Genes. 3.2. Spiritus ELOHIM. a. us. 1. ELOHIM
Bara, fortes creauit. Genesis 7.1 Ezod. 3.14. EHEIE ASCHER EHEIE. I am that I am.
ANY EL-SCHADDAI. ego sum Deus fortis etc. Isaiah 45.12. Isaiah 43.16.
and eternal God; in the first words, I have set.

Secondly, the sign it self the Bow.

Thirdly, the situation of it, in the Cloud.

Fourthly, the use of it, it shall be a for a sign.

Fifthly and lastly, the intimation of the internal significate, in the last
words: of the covenant, between me and the earth.

Of these in their order, by the assistance of Gods gracious Spirit, your
christian patience, and permission of the time.

And first of the first the Author; I have set: that is, I who am JEHOVAH
ELOHIM, the strong one, the mighty Lord of heaven, and earth, who am EHEIE; I
am, always the same, immutable, from all eternity, to all eternity: I who am
EL-SCHADDAI, the strong, powerful, omnipotent, and all-sufficient God: I who
have created the heavens and the earth, and established them by the word of my
power, who have made a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters, Iam.
1.17. Psallam nomini tuo Excelse.
who have spread out the firmament like a curtain, and given the Sea her
bounds, and Stars and Planets their several influences, who am (...) the
Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, Psalm. 9.2.
neither shadow of turning; who am HELION the highest over all the earth the
only Lord and gracious deliverer, besides whom there is no Savior, in a word,
I who have destroyed the old world, with abundance of waters, and have saved
thee my servant Noah, Genesis 7.23.
and thy family in the multitude of my mercies, I even I have set my Bow in
the cloud, and appointed it for a sign of the Covenant between me and the
earth.

Here then it is evident that, Doctrine. God the fountain of all grace.
Non a nobis sed a Deo est principium soederis and omnis gratiae; Not of our
selves, but of God, is the beginning of the covenant, of the sign of the
covenant, and of all grace, favor, and mercy: for fons gratiae, in Deo est,
he it is that is the fountain of all grace, and the well spring of mercy:
from the happy smile, of whose favorable countenance, all true joy, Romans 9.16.
Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. 1. Pet. 1.3.
and happiness does proceed, whether we respect the grace of Election, or the
grace of effectual vocation, the grace of justification, or the grace of
Sanctification, whether we respect temporal deliverance, Genesis 7.13, 16.
as of Noah from the destruction of the old world, of Lot from the desolation
of Sodom, Genesis 19.16. Exodus 15.30. Numb. 16. 32, 33, 34. Ephesians. 2.8.
and of the children of Israel from the overthrow of Pharaoh, and devouring of
Corah; or the eternal deliverance of Gods elect, from the pains and torments
of hell fire, all proceeds and flows, from this wellspring of living
water, from this everlasting fountain, of the free grace, mercy, bounty, and
goodness of God; all these are (...), the free gifts of grace, Romans 5.8. 1.
John 4.10.19.
and love tokens of a favorable God; and therefore St. John tells us in this
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be
the propitiation for our sins, and we love him because he loved us first, S.
August. Tom. 7. lib. de bono perseuerantiae. cap. 21.
of this love S. August. speaks excellently, Deum non diligeremus, nisi prius
dilexisset nos, and fecisset dilectores suos, we should not have loved God,
except he had loved us first, and made us to be lovers of him and he gives the
reason, quoniam charitas ex ipso est, because the fluent streams of love and
charity do flow from him, and not from us. S. Bernard. lib. de amore c. 4.
Que^ admodum Nilus fluuius, Egyptum inundam vbertate compl^t, ita diuinae
miseric^rdia flam^n, orbem velu^i in^^d^tus C^^stibus. l^nis impleuit.
Barradius Tom 1. lib. 8. cap. 18 Plutins. lib. 5. cap. 9. No merit in man.
And S. Bernard sweetly, Cum nos amas, non nisi propter te nos am^s. When thou
love us, O God, thou love us not, but for thy self, the abounding Sea of
divine love it is in thee, and not in us, from whence the rivers of heavenly
graces do flow forth most plentifully, and water all creatures upon the face
of the earth; but his elect and chosen Angels, and men, after a special
manner, making them fruitful with his blessings, like the land of Egypt with
the ouerflowing of Nilus, or the pleasant Paradises of the earth, with the
first, and latter rain of his favors.

1. From this therefore it must necessarily follow, that whatsoever grace is
granted unto us, (and much less that especial grace of eternal happiness)
it is not given us (as the papists affirm and teach) for any merit, or desert
of ours, but for the free grace, and mercy, and bounty of God, in Christ, For
if as our Savior commands, Luk 17.10. Luke 17.10.
when we have done all that we can, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
we must say we are unprofitable servants, how then can we attribute any thing
to our own merits? if as the Apostle witnesses. Ephesians. 2.9. we are saved by
grace not of works, S. August. lib. Hom. Hom. 14. et in Psalm. 144. Merita tua
nusquam iactes quia et ipsa merita tua dei dona sunt. Psalm. 103.4. S Aust. de
predect. Sanct. Humana merita hic conticescant que. Periere per Adam and regnet
Dei gratia per Iesum Christum. S August. Epist 105.
least any man should boast, how then can we rightly boast of our merits?
Lastly, if that good Centurion, whose faith was so much commended, that there
was not the like to be found in all Israel, Matthew. 8.10. Mat. 8.10.
answered our Savior so humbly, with a Domine non sum dignus; Lord I am not
worthy, that thou should come under my roof, with what pride think you,
are those possessed, who dare so audaciously answer God, with a Domine dignus
sum, Lord I am worthy that thou should give unto me eternal life. S.
Augustine he was of this good Centurions mind, and therefore he often in his
works, repeateth this one golden sentence, Deus coronat dona sua, non merita
nostra, God crowns his own gifts, and not our deseruings, like unto that of
the Prophet David, he crowns us with compassion, and loving kindness; and
the same Father speaking concerning the predestination of the Saints, let
humane merits (says he) here be silent, which have perished by Adam, and let
the grace of God reign through Jesus Christ. Stella in Luc. c. 7. Non me
aspicias, sed vnigenitum tuum prius intuere, colloca Deus meus inter me and te
tuum vnigenitum filium, crucem eius, sanguinem and passion^m, and merita ita vt
cum tua iustitia per sanguinem and merita tui filii pertranseat, cum tandem ad
me perueniat iam mans^ueta and misericordia plena sit. Ansel in m^dit Lyran. in
Expos. Epist. ad Rom c. 6. 23. Bell. l. 5 de Just. c. 7 propter incertitudol^m
propriae iustitiae and periculum manis gloriae tutissimu^ est fiduciam tota^ in
sola Dei mis^recordia and benignitate reponere. S. Bern. Se^ 68. Hoc totu^ est
hominis meritum si totam^h^m suam pinat in eo qui totum saluum fecit.
And in his 105. Epistle, he concludes, Haec est gratia gratis data, non
meritis operantis, sed miseratione donantis, This is a grace and favor which
is freely given, not for the merit of the worker, but for the mercy of the
giver, To which accords that sweet and heavenly petition of Stella, upon the
7. of Luke. God my protector, look not upon me, but first look upon thine
only son, place between me and thee, his Cross, his blood, his passion, his
merits, that so thy justice passing through his blood, when it comes at the
last to me, it may be gentle, and full of mercy. And Anselmus, who was
sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, confesses often in his Meditations, that
all his life was either unprofitable, or damnable, whereupon at the last he
concludes, Quid restat, O peccator, nisi vt in tota vita tua, deplores totam
vitam tuam; O wretched sinner, what remains now to be done, but that in thy
whole life thou should deplore and bewail the sins of thy whole life. To
be short, Lyranus an Interpreter, approved by the Papists themselves, says
plainly in his exposition upon that sixth Chapter to the Romans, and the 23.
verse, That eternal salvation does totally exceed the power of humane nature,
and therefore it cannot attain unto it, but by the bounty of divine mercy.
And last of all, Cardinal Bellarmine himself, that mighty Atlas of the
Papal See, in his fifth Book De Iustificatione, and the seventh Chapter, after
a long time he has traveled and wearied himself in the questions of
Justification, at the last he holds it the only Tutissimum, the safest way
of all, to repose our whole trust and confidence, in the sole mercy and favor
of God. To these I might add many more testimonies, both of Scriptures and
Fathers, to confute this Romish assertion; but I leave it to the Schools, and
conclude with that of S. Bernard, Meritum meum miserationes Domini, etc. my
merit is the mercy of the Lord, I am not poor of merit, so long as he is not
poor of mercy; if his mercy be great, then am I great in merit; for this is
the whole merit of man, if he put his whole confidence in the Lord.

2. Wherefore Beloved, we must not imitate the abominable arrogance, All
praise and glory to God. Allexander 3. papa, Frederico Emperat. Acts and monum.
volum. 1. page 263.
of that proud prelate of Rome, who when he set his foot upon the Emperors
neck, defended, or rather cloaked his pride, with a mihi and petro, to me and
to Peter, must be yielded subjection, when by his action it was evident, that
he rather respected his own pompouse pride, then any honor that he would
attribute unto Peter, and therefore he would not sing, with that religious
King David, Non nobis Domine, Psalm. 115.1. Feling. Comment. in Can. de iure
iurando. Ego. N. Episcopus papatum Sanct. Romanae Ecclesiae and regulas
Sanctoru^ patru^ adiutor ero ad defendendum and retinendu^. mutat. per P. Greg.
13. in balla ad mauritiu^ episc. Imelacensem.
non nobis. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise,
but changes his note, and sings after another fashion (like many of his
adherents, and too too many in the world) mihi and tibi da gloriam domine, to
me O Lord and to thee give the praise, first to himself, and after to God,
first respecting his own profit, and pleasure, and after the service, and
glory of God.

Changing his note I say, as his successors have since changed, that ancient
form of the oath in the Canon law, given to the Bishops at their consecration,
to defend Regulas sanctorum patrum, the rules of the holy Fathers, and have put
in stead thereof, regalia sancti Petri, the royalties of Saint Peter, all to
maintain their own pompose pride, and hateful arrogance.

Humility the duty of Gods children.
3 But whatsoever grace, is bestowed upon us, we must not be like this proud
Antichrist, or his ambitious train, to attribute any thing to our own worth
or dignity, but confess rather with that good, and humble Saint Basile, in
his tract of humility. S. Basil. Tract. de humilitate.
This is our full and perfect rejoicing in God, when we acknowlede our selves,
to be void of any our own righteousness, and to be justified only by faith
in Christ. S. Austin. in Psalm. 94.
And with profound Saint August. upon the 64. Psalm, If God should deal with
us according to our deseruings he should find nothing but that he might
condemn, S. Hieron in Isa. cap. 64.
And lastly with S Heirom upon Isai. 64. chapter. If we consider our own
merits, we must be driven to desperation; S August. de Ciuit. dei lib. 14. cap.
1.
For S. Au. says excellently in his 14. book of the City of God, and first
chapter, Omnes in mortem paena debita pracipites ageret, nisi inde quosdam in
debita dei gratia liberaret, deserved punishment, would cast all men headlong
into hell, unless the undeserved grace of God, delivered some men from it;
This is the resolution that becomes the true servants of Christ, that
humbling our selves, we may be exalted, and confessing our own unworthiness,
we may be made worthy by the mercy of God, in Jesus Christ.

4. To conclude this part; Alstedius in Theologia not. part. 2. Albert. magn.
comment. in metor. Arist. Dictus est Deus facundiae quod hominibus eloquentiam
praestare putabatur
God is the Author of this Bow, which is speculum Solis, the glass of the
Sun, and (as Possidonius calls it) and vexillum Mercurii, the banner of
Mercury, but not of that fained God, who amongst the Pagans was accounted the
God of eloquence, but of that great and mighty God of wisdom, of that
glorious Monarch of heaven and earth, and of this it is said, that of all those
things, which are generated in the middle region of the air, there is nothing
more beautiful to behold, or more worthy to be observed, then this
Caelestiall Bow. But God is the Author of it, and therefore when we behold
the Bow, and consider the excellent beauty, and admirable color thereof, we
must not with Cicero, Cicero de natura Deor.
demand the question, why this Bow was not accounted in the number of those
heathen gods; for God is Invisible, Eternal, and Infinite, but in the
Rainebowe, there is no such thing. And therefore we must neither make it a
god, nor fixing our minds upon the creature, stay there, The creature not to
be de^fied. Eccles. 43.11, 12.
but remember the Creator, and praise continually his glorious name, we must
follow the counsel of the son of Syrac, look upon the Rainebowe, and praise
him that made it: very beautiful is it in the brightness thereof, it
compasses the heaven about with a glorious circle, and the hands of the most
High have bended it. Psalm. 19.1.
We should sing with the Prophet David, The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the Firmament shows his handie work: The Sun, the Moon, the glorious
Stars, and beautiful Rainebowe, do all set forth the excellent dignity of
this most glorious, and wonderful GOD: and therefore we may end as the
Prophet David begins, Psalm 8. Psalm. 8.1.
the first verse. O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the
earth, who have set thy glory above the heavens, who have divided the channels
for the ouerflowings of waters, and made a way for the thunder, who can
number the clouds in wisdom, and at thy pleasure stay the bottles of heaven,
Job 38.
who can bind the sweet influences, of the Pleiades, and lose the bands of
Orion, who can bring forth Mazaroth in his season, and guide Arcturus with
his sons, in a word who have created the light, and the darkness, the
evening, and the morning, to praise thee, who have made the mighty Behemoth,
the great Leuiathan, and the princely Lions for thy power, who have spread out
the christ all heavens like a glorious Canopie, and bedecked them with
glistering stars, more resplendent then the sparkling Diamonds; and last of
all, who have set thy Bow in the cloud, the beautiful Rainebow, for thy
glory, and appointed it for a sign of the covenant between thee and the
earth, which is the second part of my text, the sign it self, the beautiful
Bow.

The second part.

The sign it self the Bow.


I have set my Bow in the cloud, and appointed it for a sign of the Covenant
between and the earth.

1. This Bow without question is the Rrainebowe, for first that is called a
Bow metaphorically, because it is in form like unto a Bow; secondly, there
is no other Bow placed of God in the clouds, besides the Rainebow; yet some
there has bin who have made question of this, affirming that by this Bow is
understood, not that heavenly Bow, which we call the Rainebow, but some other
thing, denotated by a metaphor, of which company Saint Ambrose was one. S.
Ambrose de Noe et arca. cap. 27.
But the reasons of this opinion are so weak, that they deserve neither to be
recited, nor refuted, and therefore with a learned divine, I will answer this
question, with the demand of another, Pererius in Genes.
Quis est arcus qui in nubibus apparet, and cernitur ab hominibus nisi Iris?
what Bow is there that does appear in the clouds, or is seen of men besides
the Rainebow? or what else could be meant literally, but the Rainebow, which is
mystically a sign of that covenant, which God did then enter with mankind?

The cause of the Bow.
2. The efficient cause of this Bow, is primarily the almighty God, who is
primus motor, and causa, causarum, the first moouer, and cause of all second
causes whatsoever; but secondarily the light, or beams of the Sun, in a hollow
and deawie cloud, of a different proportion, right opposite to the Sunbeams,
by the reflection of which beams, and by the diverse mixture of the light, and
the shade, there is expressed as it were in a glass, the admirable Rainebow,
and the beautiful colors thereof.

In this Bow I do note, first the form of it, Subdiuision. 1. Circumstance.

The form of the Bow.

1. Doctrine God is most prone to mercy.

Raban. Percrius. S. Ambrose in Gen^s. non dixit deus ponam in nubibus sagittam
sed ponam arcum.


and secondly the beautiful colors that appear in it; The form of the
Rainebow, is the figure of a semicircle, or a Bow, with the back toward
heaven, and the two ends toward the earth, And this is signum misericordiae,
a sign that God is more prone to mercy, then to judgment, (as interpreters
well observe,) and to signify the same, S. Ambrose notes, that God did not
say, I will put my arrow in the cloud, but my Bow, and the Bow does not wound
but the arrow, since then it is arcus sine sagittis, a Bow without arrows, it
shows the Bow of Gods justice, which is called a Bow metaphorically, and is
placed like the Rainebow, with the back toward heaven, and the two ends
toward the earth; To teach us that God delights more in mercy then in
judgment, and therefore has made his Bow to want arrows, 2. God delights
most in mercy.
and he never turns this Bow, to shoot the arrows of his judgments against
us, but when we first shoot up the darts of our sins, against heaven, and
against him. But then as God turned the ashes, which Moses cast up toward
heaven, Exodus 9.10.
into a fearful plague of boyles, and blaines, to the terror of the
Egiptians, so does he turn the darts of our sins, into the darts of his
judgments, and then he turns his Bow and shoots down his arrows, to the
destruction of the wicked and impenitent. If a man will not turn, he will whet
his sword, he has bent his Bow and made it ready, Psalm. 7.11.
he has prepared for him the instruments of death, he ordains his arrows
against the persecutors; If men add drunkenness to thirst and provoke the
Lords anger against them. If they move him to what his glittering sword, and
his hand take h^ld on judgment, he will render vengeance to his enemies, and
plague them that hate him: Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42.
he will make his arrows drunk with blood, and his sword shall devour the
flesh of his adversaries; Thus did God with our first parents, in Paradise, he
held the bow of his justice, with the back toward heaven, and the two ends
signs of his mercy toward the earth, and there was no token of his justice
toward them, until Adam and Eve, by breaking the covenant in fasting of the
forbidden tree had darted the arrows of their sins, pride, disobedience, and
contempt of the Commandment, against God their Creator, and then the Lord
turns his bow and proceeds in justice against them, punishes the earth
for man's sake, Genesis 3 24.
punishes man with labor and pain to get his living, punishes the woman
with sorrow in bringing forth children, and lastly th^usteth Adam and Eve, out
of paradise. And for ever had they and their posterity, been thrust out of the
Paradise of heaven, had not God of his unspeakable mercy, given them a
Savior, the seed of the woman to break the head of the Serpent. Genesis 3.15.
Genesis 4.11, 12 Genesis 7.21, 22 Genesis 11.8. Genesis 19.24. Ezec. 4.15, 17, 19. A motive
to repentance.
Thus did God with Cain, with the old world, with the builders or Babell, the
wicked Sodomites, and diverse others, and thus will he do with all impenitent
sinners whatsoever.

3. And therefore if men will not be drawn with the bands of love, and cords
of amity, yet let the consideration of Gods terrible judgments, the turning
of the Bow of his justice, Joel. 2.12. H^b. S^huna and S^hina: in^^rsio and
c^nuersi^^. Grace, (...).
and shooting down the arrows of his vengeance upon wicked and impenitent
sinners, be an invincible argument to move and enforce them, to a true and
unfeigned repentance, to auert from their sins, and convert unto God, and
that not in part only but totally, as the Sun is totaliter luminosus, wholly
enlightened.

Half repentance is no true repentance.

Sicut enim interpositio tereae est causa Eclipsis solis ita interpositio
peccati est causa ecclipsis bonae conuersionis.


4. But alas, how many in the world, are rather like unto the Moon, seldom or
never without some spot of darkness, with in the center of their hearts
evermore lodging one mountain of sin or other, within the chambers of their
breasts, to eclipse the glorious light of a sincere and holy conversion, and so
of a sacred life, and heavenly conversation; how many are there that can be
contented like Sampson, to destroy some of the uncircumcised Philistims, some
notorious and hateful impieties. But yet they will be sure to keep in their
bosoms their beloved Dalilah, their sweet sin, Judges 16.17, 21.
in which their soul delights, and in which they take pleasure above the
rest, and that they will not forsake, though they lose both their eyes for it,
as Sampson did his, though they loose both bodies and souls, and be
constrained to grind for ever, like milhorses in the prison of iniquity, and
to be made scoffs and laughing stocks, unto their enemies, the uncircumcised
Philistims, the world, the flesh, and the devil, who both night and day, still
seek their destruction; But the estate of these men is miserable fearful,
and damnable, except they repent.

For as Saint Augustine concludes, S. August. Tractat. in. I^han.
in his tractate upon John. Because they give part unto God, and part unto the
devil, iratus deus quiasit ibi pars diabolo, discedit, and totum diabolus
possidet. 1. Sam. 15.36 1. Sam. 18.10
God being angry because there is part given to the devil, he departs away
as he did from Saul, and the devil possesses the whole man; and therefore
that we may escape the arrows of Gods vengeance, let us cast down the darts
of our sins, and bury them in the grave of repentance, that they may never
ascend toward heaven, to pull down Gods judgments upon us.

And that in this life while we have time, for all though the Bow be signum
pacis, a sign of peace, yet further it is to be noted from the form and
figure of it, That this Bow is not a round circle, but a Hemisphere, and
shines in one only hemisphere above the earth and not under the earth.

5 And so likewise pacis faederisque signa, the sign of peace, This life only
a time of mercy.
and of the covenant, the sign of grace, and mercy, they shine only in one
hemisphere that is dum super terram viuimus, while we live upon the earth, in
the other they shall not shine to the impenitent at the day of judgment, these
will not appear unto them, for they shall behold them non iridem signum pacis
sed summae irae diuinae signa, not the Rainbow the sign of peace, but the
fearful signs of Gods anger, to the horror and terror of their accusing
consciences, now they may behold this heavenly Bow, without arrows, and
bended toward heaven, not threatening the earth, but then they shall behold it
full of arrows, and turned not toward heaven, but toward the earth, bent in
vengence against the wicked. O then beloved, let us labor to bend him now
with prayers, whom then tears will not move, and to pacify him now with a
sanctified life: in whom otherwise at the day of judgment we shall find
inexorable, and let us so enjoy this world, that we may have joy in the world
to come. No perfection in the things of this life.
For this Bow is not a perfect circle, although it be beautiful, and after the
same manner all humane things, learning, wisdom, honors, riches, beauty, and
strength, allthough they be fair and specious endowments, yet are they not
perfect in themselves, and therefore we must not labor for them, as if by
them we thought to obtain perfection; but strive rather for that perfection,
which is from God, who is the author and giver of them all; we must strive for
that glorious perfection, which the Saints shall receive at the glorious
resurrection.

The Saints need not doubt of their glorious resurrection.
7. Of which glory the children of God need not to stand in doubt; For if the
form of this bow be so glorious that amongst all the meteors, there is none
more illustrious, none more admirable, none more beautiful then it, then as
often as we look into the admirable splendor thereof, it may confirm us
concerning our glorious resurrection, for if God can make such a glorious
meteor, by virtue of the beams of the Sun shining in the clouds, much more
can he at the day of resurrection, as the Son of righteousness, shining upon
our bodies, beget an admirable splendor, and excellent glory in them. 1. Cor.
15.53.
And if this mortal, must put on immortality, if God will make us glorious
then, in the time of judgment, how should we labor to magnify his glory
now, in the time of mercy.

The form of the Bow a figure of Christ's kingdom.
8. Again this bow does never obtain the compass of a circle, or exceed the
magnitude of a semicircle; And here lies a mystery. The kingdom of Christ is
as it were a sphere, or round circle, descending from heaven upon the earth,
and ascending from the earth toward heaven; This does consist of a double
hemisphere, the Church militant, and the Church triumphant, the first visible,
and the second invisible; and to the perfection of this there is required the
twofold coming of Christ, the first in humility to save; and this has his
power and effectual operation, til the day of judgment; The second in
majesty, to reward those that are saved, (and render vengeance to the
reprobate) and the effect of this, shall continue to all eternity, In coelis
complebitur hic circulus, putae regnum Christi dominans omnibus in omnem
aeternitaiem, Cornelius cornelii a lapide, Comment. in Genes. The perfection of
Christ's kingdom a comfort to the godly.
since then till the day of judgment, the efficacy of his first coming
florisheth upon the earth, and not of his second, hence arises the figure of a
semicircle, (like to the Rainebow) neither can this circle be perfected, till
the time of his second coming, but then it shall receive his full complement,
when he shall reign over his whole Church, united in the fullness of glory
for evermore.

O most joyful comfort to every faithful subject of this heavenly King, do
thou in fear, and love, to this blessed God, labor to fulfill thy circle, to
finish thy course in the hemisphere of this life; then may thou assure thy
self, that the time shall come when this most glorious King, will compass the
about, with the sphere of his glory, with the circle of his love, with the
double Rainebow of joy, comfort, and happiness, for evermore.

10. To be short the form of the Rainebow is glorious, The wisdom of man is
blind in the knowledge of God.
yea it is so intricate, that we cannot fully understand the nature of it, nor
search into the secrets of the glory thereof. And therefore here we may learn
to acknowledge our own imperfection, and reason thus with our selves, If his
works be so glorious, that we cannot comprehend the excellency of them, it is
no marvel then, that our minds are so dark, and our understandings so
blind, in the knowledge of God, of his nature, of his essence, of his glory,
and of his most wonderful properties.

11. Last of all S. Ambrose observes, that the form of this bow, does note
mystically the clemency of God, Afflictions for the good of Gods children.
for being a bow bent, but wanting arrows, it shows that God gives us a
sight of afflictions, rather to affright us from our sins, then to smite us
to our hurt.

How then should we take heed, that we provoke not by our sins this loving
God, who is so full of clemency and mercy toward us.

A threefold analoy between the Bow and the mercy of God.
And of this mystical signification of the Bow, there is a threefold reason,
taken from a threefold analogy between the Bow and the mercy of God: the
first because this Bow was in the time of Noah a sign of peace, of
reconciliation, and of the Covenant between God and men, and therefore may
well note the mercy of God, Ticonius Hom. 2 in Apocal. Rupertus and Mercerus in
Genes.
for which cause, of some interpreters, Iris is called (...) that is peace,
because it did testify that God was at peace with men.

Secondly, this three colored Bow, with her diverse colors, and sweet
showers, does recreate, and refresh the earth and so does the mercy of God.

Thirdly, as the semicircle does appear only in our hemisphere, in this life,
so does the mercy of God. And therefore how dangerouse is the estate of those
whom the Papist shut up in purgatory; (for they themselves know not how many
years) after this life: since there is no mercy then to be granted unto them.
O unmerciful and terrible doctrine to frye men's souls so long in the flames
of purgatory: before they shall receive any part in the joys of Paradise. The
doctrine of Purgatory against the glory of Gods mercy, and derogatory to the
passion of our Savior.


But this is impious against the glory of Gods mercy, and derogatory to the
passion of our Savior; for it is evident by the Scripture, that our blessed
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus by his one oblation by himself once offered,
has made a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, and satisfaction for the
sins of the whole world, and this the godly are made partakers of in this
life, by a true and a lively faith, and therefore we need not Purgatory to
purge us after our death, since the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin, 1. John 1.7. 1. John 1.7.
And if from all sin, then certainly Popish purgatory must needs be excluded.
For the Arc, and Dagon, Christ, and Beliall, the passion of our Savior, and
Popish purgatory, can in no wise agree together.

And thus from the form, cast your eyes upon the beautiful colors, 2.
Circumstance the colors of the Bow.
which are the second thing I observed in the Bow, I have set my Bow in the
cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the covenant, between me and the
earth.

This Bow is called of the Greek poets (...), (...), ab admiratione Garcaeus.
Doct. de meteor. Plato in Theoeteto Iridem Thaumantis filiam propter
admirationem dictam censuit. Arist. lib. 3. cap. 4. meteor. Aquinas in Arist.
meteor.
or Thaumantis sieve admirationis filia, the daughter of Thaumantes, or of
Admiration, because of all the meteors, it worthy of admiration, in respect of
the admirable, and beautiful colors that do appear in it; These colors that
appear in the Rainebowe, they are principally three.

The first (...), the Coerulean, or waterie color.

The second (...), the yellow, or fiery color.

The third (...), the grassie, or green color.

And the reason why three colors only, do principally appear in the Bow, is
(as Philosophers teach) because there are only three places in the cloud, from
which there is a diverse refraction of the light, and the shade, namely,
supremus, medius, and infimus, the highest, the midst, and the lowest, and
therefore there can be but three principal colors.

The Watery color, does note the first general judgment, wherein the whole
world was destroyed with water.

The Fiery color the second, in which the whole world shall be destroyed with
fire.

The Green color which is a flourishing, and gracious color, the present
estate of grace, and mercy; by which God does preserve the world, from that
future destruction; And this observation agrees well, both with the nature,
and order of these colors; the nature is evident, and the order is
correspondent; Aquinas loco citat.
For in the Rainebowe there is first the Watery color; secondly, the Green
color, and last of all the Fiery color.

To show first, the judgment of water past, next the state of grace present,
and last of all the judgment of fire to come; But I will speak first of the
Judgment, and after of mercy, and first of the first judgment, noted in the
first color of the Bow, the color of water.

Admoniat Iris primo horrendi illius iudicii, quod in diluuio ostensum fuit;
(says a good Interpreter) The Rainbowe does put us in mind, The waterie
color noting the first judgment.
Ferus in Genes. first of that horrible judgment past, which was manifested in
the flood: and of this the same writer does set down this profitable use,
Hinc veniemus ad cognitionem peccatorum, hinc discemus timere iudicium; Hence
let us come to the knowledge of our sins, hence let us learn to fear
judgment.

Subdiuision.
In this judgment I find two things remarkable: First, their Sin. And
secondly, their punishment.

The sin of the old world intolerable.
1. First, their sin was intolerable; for it was universally spread over all
kind of people, over all parts of the world; It had continued almost a
thousand, or at least seven hundred years, from the translation of Enoch, when
especially it began to increase, (as interpreters well observe) they were
possessed with a deadness of heart, Parreus in Genes.
and careless security, with contempt of Religion, with contempt of Noah the
Preacher of righteousness, and with contempt and despising of God himself: To
conclude, so hateful was their sin in the sight of God, that it repented the
Lord, that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. 2.
No repentance properly in God. Theodoret in Genes. cap. 7. Numb. 23.19 Malac.
3.6. Lyra and Glossa in Genes.
Not that there is any repentance properly to be found in God: For as
Theodoret demands the question, Quomodo poenitentia cadat in eum, qui sua
praescientia regit vniuersa: How should repentance be found in him, who by his
eternal prescience, and foreknowledge, does govern all things. But (...),
figuratively, (...), speaking after the manner of men; Non secundum rem, sed
secundum modum, not according to the thing, but according to the manner of the
thing, as Lyra, and the ordinary Gloss interpret, according to that golden
rule of Athanasius, (...). These things are spoken humanely, but they are to
be understood divinely, that is, as they are agreeable, and answerable to the
nature of God. Greg. magnus in Job, lib. 20. cap. 24.
And therefore Gregory the great does wittily, and pithily conclude,
concerning God, in his moral exposition upon Job, quia ipse immutabilis, id
quod voluerit mutat, paenitere dicitur, quamuis rem mut^t, consilium non mutet:
Because God himself being immutable, does change that which he has willed,
he is said to repent, although indeed he does change the thing, but does
never change his counsel, and eternal Decree. And thus it repented the Lord,
(that is, as Moses does express the hatred of sin in the sight of God, The
punishment of the old world grievous.
according to the capacity of men) and therefore their sin was intolerable.
And their punishment (which is the next circumstance) was likewise grievous:
First, in respect of the Author of it, a mighty, powerful, Hebr. 12.29.
and a lake of brimstone to the workers of iniquity. Secondly, S. Ambros. in
Genes. Secundu^ mensem verni temporis fuisse non ambigitur.
as the most and best Expositours do judge, to the greater grief of the
wicked, because they were taken away in their pleasure, and the world was
drowned when the earth was filled in great abundance. Thirdly, in respect of
the manner of it: for then were the fountains of the

To conclude, it was grievous and terrible, in respect of Noah, and the rest in
the Arc) all flesh died, that were on the earth, there was none that was
saved, no not one: the husband and the wife, the father and the son, the
mother and the daughter, the master and the servant, the old and the young,
they were all drowned together.

O then beloved, what heart can there be in the world so hard and slonie, what
eyes so flintie, that cannot melt into brinish tears, and break in pieces
with grief and sorrow, at the consideration of so lamentable a spectacle: Good
GOD, Man's degeneration lamentable.
that ever man should so far degenerate from his first integrity, and fall
into such vile impieties, which could provoke so gracious a God, to plague him
with so terrible a destruction. But man is fallen, man is degenerated from his
first integrity, who can but lament with a doleful lamentation, God is
angry, he has smitten, he has plagued, he has drowned the old world,
with a doleful judgment, who can but quake with fearful tremblings? What
man is there under the cope of heaven, that cannot by this be moved to remove
his hateful sins, the causes of Gods direful punishments, since for them God
is moved to destroy, not only man, but the brute creatures together with
man, the souls of the air, the beasts of the field, and the creeping things
of the earth.

Objection.
Sed quid hi fecerunt? But what have these done, may some man object? will the
Lord destroy the righteous with the wicked? shall not the Judge of all the world
do right? is there the same condition of him that sins, and him that sins
not? what had the beasts of the field offended? wherein had the creeping things
of the earth sinned, or what iniquity had the fowls of the heaven committed,
that they also must be destroyed with man? Solution. The creatures destroyed in
the flood for a threefold reason.
To which I answer, that as all these were created in the beginning for man,
and for the good of man, so they were all again destroyed with man, for the
sin and punishment of man, by the just judgment of God: First, because man
was become a rebellious traitor Genes. 3.17.

If then thou will not be moved for thine own sake to refrain from thy
sins, and remove thy impieties; The destruction of the beasts should move
us to remove our sins.
yet take pity upon the brute beasts, upon the creeping things, upon the
fowls of the air, lest by thy sins thou pull down Gods terrible
judgments, and they also perish with thee. If thou will not be moved for any
of these, yet take pity upon thy servants, upon thy little children, upon thy
wife that lies in thy bosom, lest thou provoke Gods anger against thee, and
they also perish with thee.

But, O corda saxis duriora! Men's hearts more hard then adama^ts.
O hearts more hard then adamants! how many are there in the world, that cannot
be moved for any of these, nor for all these, nor for greater motives then
these, to remove their sins, and forsake their impieties? For although they
have often heard of that inestimable love of God toward mankind, in that he
spared not his own Son, but gave him to the death for us miserable sinners;
yet are they nothing hereby moved to repentance, although they have often
heard of that unspeakable love of Christ, in that he spared not his own
life, but offered up his body upon the Altar of the Cross, a sweet smelling
incense of reconciliation to God his Father for our redemption: yet are they
nothing hereby moved to repentance. In a word, they can neither be moved by
threatenings, nor by promises, by judgments, nor by mercies, by the terrible
destruction of the old world, nor by the bitter passion of Christ.

And this is common in this age of the world, The common disposition of this
age of the world.
as it was common in the days of Noah: yea, if we make a parallel, and
comparison between the sins of this age, and the impieties of the old world,
we shall find that the iniquity of these days, is as great, if not greater,
then ever were the sins of the old world. And therefore I may say to the men
of this age, as our Savior said to those Jews (who demanded the question
concerning the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices: and of those eighteen, upon whom the tower of Siloe fell, Luke 13.5.
and slew them) except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: For if God
spared not the Angels which sinned, 2. Pet. 2.4, 5, 6
but cast them down to hell, and kept them in chains of darkness, reserved
to judgment. If he spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eight
person, a Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of
the ungodly: If he spared not the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, but turned
them into ashes, and condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example
to those which afterward should live ungodly. Then certainly, neither will he
spare this age of the world, except in time they turn from their sins: and
therefore I may justly say with our Savior, Except they repent, they shall all
likewise perish; the reason is, because the sins of this age, do parallel the
impieties of the old world, which will evidently appear, if we make our
comparison.

For first, the sin of the old world was exceeding great, being universally
spread over all parts of the world, over all sorts of men. And is it not so in
this age of the world? Who can say, Munda est vita mea; my life is clean, and
I am free from iniquity: there is none I am sure: for all flesh have corrupted
their ways; yea, the greater sort of men continue in their sins, and go on
forward in their wickedness, metamorphizing themselves into brutish
creatures, by their unreasonable impieties, and beastly iniquities.

1. Parallel. Plat. (...) l^^ibus Crudel^^as in ba^ath (...) t^nta^^ ^^^cit,
v^de nu^^^ ^^^am eg^t ^iui^^tu^. S. Aug. in Ser. Auarus veluti inf rn^s omnia
deuorant villet nullum homine^ esse, vt omnia solus possideret. S. Aug. de
verbis Dom. Inuidia ^st silia superbiae. sed ista matter superbia n^scit esse
sterilis vbi fuerit, continuo parit, suffoca matre^, and non erit silia 2. Sam.
20.9. S. Greg. lib. 8. moral. Quid est vita hypocrita nisi quaedam visio
phantasmatis qua hic ostendit in imagine quod non habet in veritate.
Some are like Lions, in their abominable cruelty, eating up the earth with
opp^ssion, and sacrilege, without any mercy, pity, or compassion. Some are
like Tygars, in their raging violence, devouring all that comes to their
hands, without any respect either of God, or of men. Some are like unto Foxes,
in their craft and subtlety, delighting in nothing but guile, and deceit.
Some are like Serpents in their malice and hatred, as if they were composed of
envy and gall. Some are like Sirens in their wicked hypocrisy, they will
speak fair to a man's face, till they have him in their compass, and then
they will devour him in their blood-sucking tyranny. Some are like Apes in
their apish imitation, Proteus like, changing themselves into all shapes, that
they may be fitted for all companies. Lastly, some are like Asses in their
sottish ignorance, and senseless security, being nothing affrighted, with
the fear of Gods judgments, nor moved with his mercy, But as if their
consciences were seared; in despite of reprehension, will continue impenitent,
and conclude, some are like dogs, 2. Peter 2.32.
that return to their vomit of sin, and like the Sow that was washed, to the
filthy puddle, of their hateful impieties. And therefore I may say with our
Savior, except they repent, they shall all likewise perish.

Secondly, 2. Parallel.
the sin of the old world was exceeding great, for it was come to the height
of impiety, And is it not so in this age? was their ever more shamelessenesse
in sinning, then in these days? was their ever less conscience of iniquity,
then in these times?

It would be too late for me, to tell you, what a flood of ungodliness, has
now ouerspread the face of the earth, the time would not suffer me, to relate
unto you, what drunkenness, and adultery, what sacrilege, and simonie, what
oppression, and cruelty, what extortion, and bribery, what usury, and
perjury, and what abominable impiety, is every where to be found in the
actions of men, yea such iniquities as were never to be found in the old
world. And therefore except they repent, they shall all likewise perish.

Thirdly, the sin of the old world, was exceeding great, 3. Parallel.
for not only the wicked, but the sons of God, fell to folly and iniquity,
And is it not so in this age of the world? Do not those that are the children
of God, oftentimes yield to the temptation of Satan, and intisements of the
world to the dishonor of God, and grief of his spirit? Gods children not
without imperfections.
Do not too too many of those, that make a show, and profession of religion,
cause the name of God to be evil spoken of, and give occasion to the world;
to brand their names, with the note of hypocrisy, because their conversation
is not answerable to their profession? it is evident they do and therefore
except they repent, they shall all likewise perish. 4. Parallel.


Fourthly, the sin of the old world was exceeding great, for it was not short
but had continued a long time, all most a thousand, or at the least seven
hundred years, so that they were grown to an habit in iniquity, and is it
not so in this age? are not men grown to a habit in sin? has not the
wickedness of the world continued, not seven hundred or a thousand, but above
three thousand years? and yet does it not remain, as strong as ever it did
before? it is evident it does, and therefore except they repent, they shall all
likewise perish.

5. Parallel.
Fifthly, the sin of the old world was exceeding great, for they were possessed
with deadness of heart, and careless security, so that neither by threatening,
nor particular judgments, they could be drawn to repentance; and is it not so
in this age of the world? was there ever more deadness of heart, and careless
security, then in these days? Has not God sent down many terrible and
fearful judgments upon the world? The hardness of men's hearts cannot be
removed by Gods judgments.
yea upon this land, within this few years? and yet notwithstanding, the
hearts of men remain hardened, and they continue still in their sins? It is
true indeed, God has promised, that he will never again destroy the whole
world with water; yet he did never promise, that he would not destroy, this or
that particular kingdom, country, city, for then we might have some shows,
to presume of safety. But how many warnings have we had, either to put us in
mind, of that general judgment past, in which the whole world (except Noah
and his family) were drowned, to move us to repentance, or to put us in mind,
of some fearful judgment to come, because of our impenitency, In Devonshire
by breach of the sea and other places.
what inundations, what flowings, and ouerflowings of waters: within this few
years, in diverse parts of this kingdom, to the destroying of towns, and
fields of men, women, and children; of beasts, cattle, and creeping things; and
yet notwithstanding, the hearts of men remain hardened, and they continue
still in their sins. Again God has threatened (we know it all) to bring one
general judgment more, and to destroy the world with fire, (as I shall show
you fully in the next circumstance.) And what alarums, and dreadful warning
pieces have we had, of this terrible judgment? what lamentations, Harbingers
of that terrible fire.
and doleful cryings, have we daily heard in our streets? of fire, fire, and
desolation by fire, al most from every part of the kingdom; to put us in mind
of that dreadful fire, which shall destroy the whole world, we know not how
soon; besides many other particular judgments, the sword, the famine, and the
fearful pestilence, so oftentimes threatened against us, and yet
notwithstanding the hearts of men remain hardened; and they continue still in
their sins. And therefore I may justly say with our Savior, except they repent
they shall all likewise perish.

Lastly, the sin of the old world was exceeding great, 6. Parallel.
for they were possessed with contempt of religion, with contempt of Noah the
preacher of righteousness, and with contempt and despising of God himself.
And is it not so in this age of the world? was there evermore contempt of
religion, then in these days? was there ever more contempt of the preachers of
righteousness, then in these times? Nay, was there ever more contempt,
despising of God himself, then is extant in the world at this very hour?
Certainly no, for men's wicked lives will plainly testify, that the contempt of
these days, is as great, if not greater, then ever was the contempt, of the
old world; In the old world they had but one Noah, whom especially they
contemned, and for the contempt of whom, they are especially branded, but in
this age of the world, how many hundreds of Noah's are there, preachers of
righteousness, whose exhortations, and threatenings, are daily contemned, to
the dishonor of God, and grief of good men; How many churlish Nabals, that
are ready rather to rob them of their necessary maintenance, then to reward
them for their pains and care in watching, Joel 2.12. Matthew. 5.4. S. Bern. in
Cant. The tears of the penitent are the wine of Angels, etc.
and defending, not their sheep, but their souls, from those spiritual wild
beasts, that seek their destruction.

But O beloved, let us all turn unto the Lord with fasting, with weeping, and
with mourning, that the Lord may turn in mercy unto us, and keep away his
fierce wrath from us, even for the merits of Christ our Savior, and let every
faithful Christian say, Amen.

S. August. infest. Natiuit. the tears of the penitent fall in the sight of
the Lord. The fiery color noting the judgment of fire.
That so making a true use of this first general judgment, noted in the first
color of the Rainebowe, the color of water, we may be sure to escape with
joy, and rejoicing, from that second general, but more terrible judgment,
noted in the second color, the color of fire, which comes in the next
place, to be spoken of, I have set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be as a
covenant, between me and the earth.

In this I will pass through three passages, and handle three particulars.

Subdiuision. Mat. 25.34.
First, the time, Secondly, the manner, and Thirdly, the end, and use (to us) of
this fiery judgment, or judgment by fire. The time is the first in order, and
for the time of the sentence; our Savior sets it down Math. 25.34. (...) then
shall the King say to them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you, (...), from the foundation of the world:
this must be after the Son of man is come with his glorious Angels, and has
made a separation between the sheep, and the goatet, the wheat, and the
tares, the idle loyterers, and the painful laborers in the vineyard of
Christ. But for the time when this separation shall be, or when this Son of
man shall come, nihil certi ex sacris literis habetur, Nazianzen: orat. 36.
Horam cognitam habet vt Deus ignorant vt homo. Ambrose in Luke 17. Christus
hora^ nouit, sed nouit sibi mihi nescit. S. August. lib. 1 de Trinit. c. 12.
Greg. epist. 42. Hilar. de Trin. Greg lib 8. epist. 42. ad eulog.
there is no certainty to be found in holy Scripture, for of that day and
hour, knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, (...), but the Father only,
Math. 24.36. no not the Son himself, Mark. 13.32. The Son knows not the
day of judgment, that is, not as he is man, although he knows it as he is
God: or he knows not the day of judgment, that is, as S. Ambrose notes he
knows for himself, although he will not reveal it unto us: to whom S.
Augustine, Gregory, and Hilary accord. And therefore S. Chrysostom well
observes, in that Christ Jesus said, neque Angeli, neither the Angels know
this day, he repressed his disciples, that they should not desire to know, that
which the Angels themselves were ignorant of; but in that he says, neither
the Son himself, he does forbid them not only from learning, but also from
desiring to learn so secret a mystery. Christus nouit diem iudicij in natura
humanitatis non ex natura humaenitatis.
And for this cause he tells his disciples plainly, Acts 1.7. Non est
vestrum nosce tempora, it is not for you to know the times and the seasons,
which God the Father has put, (...), in his own hand.

But contrary to this has been the practice of those, S. Aug. li. 8. de
ciuit. Dei ca. 53 Frustra annos qui huic seculo r^manent co^putare ac destaire
conamur cunt hoc scire non esse nostrum ex ore veritatis audiamus. Gene. 19.26.
The day of judgment not to be searched into. Oraculum e schola Eliae. Pet.
Mart. loc. Com. Three opinions concerning the day of judgment.
who daring to outface the Sun, in beholding the bright shining of his
glorious beams, and searching into secrets, not to be looked into, have
dazelled their eyes, and left their erroneous opinions, testimonies of their
vile presumption. Some like Lots wife, have not been afraid to look back
toward Sodom, and to pry into Gods secret judgments, contrary to the
admonition of the Angel; yea, to the doctrine of Christ himself, setting
down, and defining a determinate time to the day of judgment, producing an
oracle (as they feign) from the school of one Elia a Jew, by which they
affirm, that the world should continue six thousand years, which they
account thus; two thousand before the Law, two thousand under the Law, and two
thousand in the kingdom of Christ. But for this prescription of time, we have
no warrant from the word of God, and therefore we may justly refuse it. Others
there are, who differ but little from the former, teaching, that as God was
six days in creating the world, so he shall be six days in governing of
it, accounting to every day a thousand years, and alleging for their ground,
that of the Prophet David, in the 90. Psalm. Psalm. 90.4.
are but as yesterday, Prius, nor Posterius; no difference of time, for he
remains always the same, throughout all generations, and his years have no
end, Psa. 102.27. And I am God, Psalm. 102.^7. Malac. 3.6.
I change not, and ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, Malac. 3.6. we cannot
therefore approve of this neither, because it cannot be proved out of the
word of God.

Leuit. 25.11
which did consist of fifty years, Leuit. 25 11. So that by this account, it
should be from the birth of Christ, unto the end of the world, one thousand
six hundred and fifty years; and therefore not above thirty four years to
the day of judgment. But all these are figmenta hominum, the devises of men,
and therefore not to be believed. S. A^gust. ad H^sich^^n.
Excellent is that answer of S. Augustine unto Hesichius, to whom enquiring
curiously of the end of the world, S. Augustine answers, Se non audere spacia
seculorum, vsqu^ ad finem mundi, aut metiri, aut enumerare, that he durst not
either number, or measure the times of the ages unto the end of the world,
because it is written, Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels
in heaven, Math. 24.36. Math. 24.36.


These are the last times. S August in Genes lib. 1. Six ages of the world.
and end of the world. For as S. Augustine observes in his first book upon
Genesis, there are six ages of the world; the first, from Adam unto Noah: the
second, from Noah unto A raham: the third, from Abraham to David: the fourth,
from David to the captivity of Babylon: the fifth, from the captivity of
Babylon unto Christ: and the sixth and last, from Christ unto the end of the
world. And of these ages, five are wholly passed already; and of the sixth and
last, there are 1616. years expired: 1. Cor. 10.11.
and therefore if S. Paul in his days affirmed unto the Corinthians, that the
ends of the world were come upon them. 1. Peter 4.7.
and S. Peter in his time, that the end of all things was at hand, which is
above fifteen hundred years since, 1. John 2.18.
then may we justly verify with S. John, that it is the last time, and with
S. James, that the Judge stands before the door. James 5.9. Signs of the
day of judgment of two sorts.


Seeing almost all the signs that were to come before the day of Judgment,
are already past and expired, or else now manifest in the world: for these
signs are of two sorts, the first, Signa praecedentia, precedent signs: the
second, coniuncta, (or rather concomitantia, as the Logicians speak) signs
accompanying the day of judgment. Of the first sort, there are diverse noted in
the Scripture, as the preaching of the Gospel throughout all nations: Mat.
24.14. 2. These. 2.3. 2. Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Math. 24.6, 7. Romans 11.25, 26.
the coming of Antichrist: the departing away from the faith: the general
corruption of the world, and universality of iniquity, wars, and rumors of
war, deadness of heart, with careless security: and last of all, the
calling of the Jews. But of time, and manner, and where, it is not yet
concluded amongst learned Divines. Howsoever, the most of these signs are
fulfilled already.

And for the second sort, they are set down by our Savior, Matthew 2^. Math.
24.
^here shall be signs in the Sun, in the Moon, and in the Stars, and
then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and all the Tribes
of the earth shall mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the
clouds of heaven, Revel. 1.7.
with power and great glory. Fearful and terrible shall these signs be: And
therefore while the Son of righteousness CHRIST JESUS, is in the signs of
mercy, Sol Christus luna est ^^cles^a.
and the Moon in the fullness of grace, before the Sun be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood; while God does with patience expect our
conversion, Conuers^on nec^ss^ry in the time of me^^y. Hebr. 12.29. Greg in
Him. 13 in Euang.
let us turn unto him, lest when he shall pass to the signs of justice, he
punish with the severity of his judgments. For our God is a consuming fire,
says the Apostle. And S. Gregory, Hom. 13. upon the Evangelists, Deus quos
diu vt conuertantur t^lerat, non conuersos, durius damnat: those whom a long
time God does suffer, expecting their conversion, not being converted he
condemns them with the greater severity. Dulcis and rectus, dicitur Dominus,
the Lord is said to be gracious and righteous, Psalm. 25.7. Psalm. 25.7
He is now gracious, because he does offer the sweetness of his mercy unto
the wicked, that they might not perish: but in the day of judgment, he shall
be found just and righteous, because he will justly condemn those then, who
have contemned the grace and mercy that he offers them now.

S. Barnard. sermon. 2. de aduent. dom.
Saint Bernard in this respect compares God unto a Be, which has not only
sweet and pleasant honey, but also a sharp and terrible sting, nunc mel
offert, in iudicio figet aculeum. Now he offers honey, but at the day of
judgment he shall put forth his sting, and wound the wicked: Christ at his
first coming brought honey, Christus venie^^ mel attulit n^n acculeum. Idem
eod. S. August. in Psalm. 74. Non est quo fugias a deo ^^ato nisi ad placatum.
That there shall be a time judgment of it is certain.
and not a sting, Sed nolite peccare in spe, (says Saint Bernard) but sin
not in hope, whosoever ye be that delight in sin, for this our Be has a
time also, when he will take his stinge, and fix it into the bones and
marrow, of the reprobate? what should we do then beloved, but fly unto him
now, while we have time, least one day we labor to fly from him, when we
shall have neither time nor place.

6. But certain it is that there shall be a time of judgment, as there is and
has been a time of mercy, since it is figured by so many signs, proved by
so many testimonies, and foretold by so many prophecies in the holy Scriptures.

And therefore those are justly confuted, who have presumed to object, that
because there is a private judgment of every particular man, An Objection.
at the day of his death therefore there shall be no general judgment at the
day of resurrection: for res semel iudicata, bis non iudicatur (say they) that
which is once judged, should not be judged again: since the Lord himself
testifies by his Prophet, Nahum 1.9. Nahum 1.9.
Non consurget duplex tribulatio, affliction shall not arise the second time,
and therefore judgment shall not twice be executed.

I answer with that Angelical Doctor Aquinas, in 4. sententiarum distinct. 47.
An answer. Aquinas 4. sent. distinct. 47.
iudicari primo illo animam potiorem hominis partem, tandem altero hominem
totum, that in that first judgment the soul of man, only is judged, which is
his better part, but in the second the whole man shall be judged, both in body
and soul, and receive either that blessed sentence of absolutio^, or that
fearful sentence of condemnation.

And concerning that place of the Prophet, I Answer, that the Prophet Nahum
speaks not there, Nahum 1.9.
either of the general or particular judgment, to eternal life, or death but
of a temporal judgment, for declaring the destruction of the Assyrians, he
shows only that their overthrow should be final, that God should not need
to smite them again the second time, as Abisha said to David, when he found
Saul asleep, let me smite him, and I will not smite him again, 1. Samuel 26.
verse. 9. 1. Sam. 26.9.
for he would have slain him at the first blow. And thus Theophilact and
Theodoret expound that place, so that we may still hold the conclusion, that as
the day of judgment is figured, proved, and prophesied, so it shall
certainly come at the day appointed.

To conclude, The day of judgment draws nigh at hand. Heb. 10.27.
it is likewise certain that the time of this coming to judgment is not
far off, but draws nigh at hand to be fulfilled, for as the Apostle
speaks, Hebrews 10. and the 37. verse. Yet a very little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry, and if this were true in the morning
of this age, it must needs be much more true in the evening, which is so many
hundred years after, and therefore here is an answer to that common objection,
of wicked and irreligious Atheists, which abound in the world, who are not
ashamed to affirm, if not in their words, yet in their lives and
conuersations, that let the Ambassadors of God, say what they will they need
not be so careful to forsake their profitable, or pleasurable sins; for the
day of Doom (as they call it) that is far off, God knows when that will
be, (ever or never) and therefore they may live yet as they list, and repent
hereafter when they can be at leisure.

But to these raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, (unless
they repent in time) is reserved the blackenesse of darkness for ever, Jude
13.
as Saint Jude speaks in the 13. verse of his Epistle.

And know this whosoever thou art that fosterest thy self in this opinion,
Profane Athiests in a dangerous estate.
that though the day of judgment may be further of, then thou shall live to
see, yet the day of thy death, may be nearer then thou art aware of, and as
death leaves thee, so shall judgment find thee, Ecclesi. 11.3. Heb. 9.24.
for as the tree falls so shall shall it lie, Ecclesiast. 11. verse. 3. after
death next comes judgment, Hebrews 9.27. and when a wicked man dies his hope
perishes, Prou. 11.7.
Proverbs 11. If thou die in thy sins, thou shall be found in thy sins,
at the day of judgment; Impenitent Cain died long since, and yet the day of
judgment when it comes, shall find him impenitent still, the like may be
said of Saul, of Achitephel, of Judas, they dyed desperately, and impenitent,
and the Lord shall find them so at his coming: and so will it be with thee
whosoever thou art, that goes on in thy sins without ^^pentance: S. Greg.
Dialog. lib 4. cap. 39.
for as Saint Gregory testifies qualis hu^c qui^que egreditur, tal^s in
iudicio presentatur, In what estate soever a man does d^part out of this life,
in the same he shall be found at the day of judgment. And S. Amb. de bono
mortis, S. Ambros. de bono mortis.
He that ^n this life, does not receive remission of sins, shall not have
part there, to wit in the communion of Saints, S. Hierom. cap. 6. in Epist. ad
Galat.
in the life to come; And S. Hierome, Tempus sementis tempus est presens, the
time of sowing is the time present, and he that will not sow the seed of
good works, in the seed time of grace here, he shall never reap the fruit
of reward in the harvest of glory hereafter.

I will close this point with that religious exhortation of Saint August. let
every man while he has time, S. Aust. lib. 3. de symbolo. Hic dum tempus
habet agat anima prose poenitentia^ qua^ diu locus est miscricordiae quia ibi
erit locus iustitiae. The Second ci^cumstance, the manner of this judgment.
Luke 17.24. 2. Pet. 3.10.
repent truly of his sins, while he is in the place of mercy, because then
there shall be a time of justice, the foolish virgins that would not repent,
and prepare themselves in time, shall then receive no other comfort, but that
doleful sentence non noui vos, I know you not depart from me ye workers of
iniquity.

And thus from the time, I proceed to the manner of this judgment by fire,
which is the second circumstance, I observed in the fiery color of the Bow.

1. As the lightening comes from the East and shines unto the West, so shall
the coming of the Son of man be, Luke 17. verse 24. He shall come ex
improuiso, like a thief in the night, suddenly; He shall come like
lightening, visibly, for every eye shall see him; he shall come (...), Revel.
1 7. Mark 13.26 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
with power, and great glory, magnificently; to be short, the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven, with the voice of the Archangell and the trumpe of
God, But Quid sibi vult tubarum sonus? S. Chrysostom. Hom. 77. in Mat. Ad
exuscitationem, ad gaudum, ad exprim^ndum rerum stuporem, ad dolorem little qui
relinquuntur. 2. No imperfection in the Saints at the day of judgment. S
August de ciuit dei lib 2^. cap. 15. S. Aust lib. de ciuit. 22. c. 16. Magist
sent. lib. 4. did 44. 3. Mat. 3 13. Locus sic explicatur a Lyca permundabit i.
e. quotidie a varus tentationibus munlat in Mat. 4. A question. S. August. lib.
20 de ciuit. dei cap 20 Ex^ ^ mo tamen co quo a me cummemorata sunt ordin^ esse
venti^ia.
to what end is this sound of the trumpet? says Saint Chrysostom, in his 77.
homil. upon Matthew and he answers the question himself. The Trumpet shall
then sound, (and the voice of the Archangel, shall then be heard, for the
raising up of the dead, for the joy of the godly, to express the stupor and
terror of Christ's coming, and for the grief, and dolor, of many that shall
hear it: The dead shall then be raised, and the bodies of Gods Saints shall
then be glorified, they shall rise in the fullness of the measure of Christ, in
a full and a perfect age, in a fitting and convenient stature, that which is
less then is fitting shall thence be supplied, from whence the creator
knows, and that which is more, shall be detracted, The integrity and
perfection being retained, as Saint August. speaks in lib. 22. of the city
of God, cap. 19.

3. To conclude, Christ shall come to this firey judgment, with his fan in
his hand, the fan of his judgment, (as before he came with the fan of his
mercy) and he will thoroughly purge his floor, the floor of his Church, and
separate the wheat from the chafe, the Elect from the reprobate, gathering
his wheat, into the blessed garner of heaven; but burning the chafe, with the
unquenchable fire of hell.

4. Fire is the color of the Rainebowe, of which I am now to speak, and fire
is the judgment of which I am now speaking; But concerning this fire the
question is demanded, whether it shall be before the day of judgment or
after. Saint August. seems to be of opinion that it should be after, for
speaking of those things which should come about the time of judgment, he
sets the conflagration of the world, and the renouation thereof in the last
place, and he adds, quo ordine haec veniant, magis tu o docebit experientia;
in what order these shall come, experience will then teach more perfectly, but,
I think says he, that they will come in that order, in which I have rehearsed
them, and in his 18. c^p, S. August de ciuit. lib. 20. cap. ^8.
of the same book he says plainly post factum iudicium mundus ardebit, after
the judge is done, Answer. Aquinas add. quaest. 74. artic. 7
the world shall burn. But we may rather answer with Aquinas, and with our
later Divines, that this fire shall be before the execution of judgment: for
behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his charets like a whirlewind,
to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire, Isaiah
66.15. Isaiah 66.15.
There shall go a fire before him, Psalm. 97.2.
and burn up his enemies on every side, Psalm. 67 2 He shall come with flames
of fire, rendering vengeance to them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8
This shall be the true manner of his coming, and therefore this fire shall
appear at the day of judgment, 2. Pet. 3.10
before the full execution of that final sentence: Or otherwise we may
reconcile S. Augustine with Aquinas, and our later Divines, and answer thus:
True it is, there shall be fire before the judgment, that is, ignis
conflagrationis, the fire of burning and consuming: and there shall be fire
after the execution of judgment, that is, Ignis condemnationis, the fire of
hell, in which the Devils and damned spirits shall be tormented for ever.

2. Answer. The fire of hell more horrible then that which shall burn the
world. S. Aug. de ciuit Dei. l. 20. c. 16. S. Ambr. lib. 7. in Luc cap. 4,
Damascen lib. 4. fides, cap. 28 Ignis non est materialis qualis is apud nos,
sed qualem Deus nouit. Greg. in Job 2^ Aug. lib. de ciuit. cap. 21 Magist.
Sent. lib. 4. did. 44. Aquinas add. quaest. 77. artic. 5. Anselmus in
Elucidorio. Gregor. in Job cap. 10.
And this likewise is prefigured in the fiery color of the Bow. But this is
more terrible then the former, and that diverse ways. First, in respect of the
nature of it, which is so strange, that it is known perfectly of no man, as
Saint Augustine affirms. Some have thought this fire to be incorporeall, and
wanting corporal flames, but tormenting the damned after a wonderful manner:
so S. Ambrose, Damascen, Gregory, and others. And some have thought it
corporeal, as S. Aug. lib. 21. de ciuit. Dei. Gehenna corporeus ignis erit and
cruciabit corpora damn^torum: Hell fire (says he) shall be corporal, and
shall torment the bodies of the damned; so the Master of the sentences,
Aquinas, and others: yet this fire is infinitely more terrible then our common
fire, and more tormenting, for ardet and non lucet, it burns and shines not,
says Anselmus, that revenging flame has burning in abundance, but it has no
light, (says Gregory: yet Aquinas thinks there shall be light sufficient for
the damned to behold those things which shall torment them, (either in respect
of the sight of the body, vltrix isla flamma concremationem habet, lumen vero
non habet. Aquinas ad quest 97. arti, 4.

Hell fire needs not the fodder of wood Isaiah. 30.33.


or the fearful visions of the mind.) But howsoever, whether it shall be
always dark, with Gregory, or have some times a glimmering light, with
Aquinas, it is of a strange, and terrible nature, for it needs not the fodder
of wood to continue it in hell, since the breath of the Lord, like a river of
brimstone shall kindle it, Isaiah 30.33. But some will object that place of the
Prophet, Tophet is prepared of old, the nourishment thereof is fire and much
wood, and therefore it seems there is much wood in hell: to which I answer,
that much wood is attributed to unto hell, not that there is any there, but to
show that the fire of hell is unquenchable, being once kindled, by the breath
of Gods anger, which adds to the terror thereof. S. Greg. lib. 4. dialog.
cap. 42.


2. Again it is fearful in respect of the place of it, which is in hell,
with the devils and damned spirits, Where hell is thought to be.

S. Hieronymus in Iona. 2. Sicut cor in medio est animalis ita infernus in
medio terrae perhibetur.

T^rtull. lib. de anima cap. 55. Damasc. lib. 3. cap. 29.

Aquinas ad quest, 97. a^^i. 7.

Luk 16.24. S. August. de ciuitater, lib. 21 cap. 10. verissed naris modis.

The fire of hell eternal.


where is utter darkness, weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth, where
they are far remote from the company of the blessed Saints, and holy Angels;
from all joy, and happiness for ever: Saint Gregory in his fourth book of
dialogues, and 42. chapter, being demanded of one, where he should believe
this place of torments was: answers, de hac retemere d^finire non audeo, I
dare not rashly define of this matter, some have thought it in some part of the
earth, some under the earth, about the center, or in the hollowes of the earth,
which is the most common opinion: so Saint Hierome, as the (heart says he) is
in the midst of a living creature, so hell is said to be in the midst of
the earth, and of the same opinion was Turtullian, Damascen, Aquinas, and other
divines, but wheresoever it is, certain it is, that it is a fearful fire,
both in it self: and the torments thereof: for it shall torment both the
bodies and souls of the damned, crucior in hac fl^mma, I am tormented in this
flame, was the song of rich Dives in hell, and Saint Augustine affirms that
the spirits are tormented with that corporeal flame, after a wonderful
manner, but unutterable and unknown unto us: last of all it is most terrible
in respect of the continuance of it: for as the worm never dies, so the fire
never goes out, S. August. de ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 13.
Mark 9.48. Mark 9 48.
and paria paribus rela^^^^nt, like are referred to like, says S. Augustine:
on the one side eternal punishment, on the other eternal life, according to
our Savior, Matthew. 25.46. And to conclude, it was the judgment of the
devil, to be cast into that lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and
false prophet are and shall be tormented day and night for evermore, Reu. 20.10
Revel. 20.1^


And thus having showed the time, and manner of this fiery judgment, I will
speak somewhat of the end, and use of it (to us) and so proceed unto that
which follows.

First then, seeing all these thing must be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation, and godliness, looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire,
shall be dissolved, 2. Pet. 3.11, 12 The fire of sin must be quenched.
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the consideration of these
things should move us to quench in our hearts the fire of sin, (whose flames
do abundantly burn in the world) that so we may be free from this fire of
punishment. But how many neglect this consideration, and therefore they burn
in the fire of sin, and are scorched in the flames of iniquity. The whole
world lies in evil (says S. John) in maligno, 1 John 5.19.
quasi in maloigne: in evil, that is as it were, in an evil fire, by which
they are stirred up to all kind of impieties. They are like to those of whom
the wise man speaks, Wisd. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. The common practice of the
world.
Wisdom the second, that call one to another in their security, Come, let us
fill our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let no flower of the Spring
pass by us; let us crown our selves with rose buds before they be withered,
let none of us go without his part of voluptuousness, let us oppress the
poor righteous man, and not spare the widow, nor reverence the ancient gray
hairs of the aged. Let our strength be the Law of justice; for that which is
feeble, is said so be nothing worth. Thus do they encourage themselves in
their wickedness, and go on forwards in their sins, A description of the
damneds complaint in hell.
but what shall be in the end thereof? The time will come when this devouring
fire shall appear, that their joy shall be turned into sorrow, and their mirth
into mourning, their Comicall prologue, into a Tragical Catastrophe, when they
shall cry out with a doleful lame^tation, what has pride profited us? Wisd.
5.8, 9.
or what good has riches with our vaunting brought us? for all those things
are passed away as a shadow, and as a post that hasted by. They shall cry out
with terror and amazedness, woe and alas, what a fearful change do we
behold, A fearful change for the wicked.
our pleasures are turned into torments, our riches into extreme poverty, our
delights into woeful punishments, our pleasant singing, into grievous sighing:
we have run blindfolded into this scorching lake of fire and brimstone, our
eyes, which our abundance of pleasures had shut up, are now opened by our
abundance of punishments. Alas, what do we behold? there is nothing that can
bring us comfort, but all things that may torment us; there is no way to
escape, our case is desperate. O death, Death desired of the damned, but never
obtained.
whom sometimes we did tremble to think of, come now, and deliver us from
these miseries: thou, who wast sometimes a horror unto our guilty
consciences, be now a comfort in seazing upon us. O ye furies of hell, pull
ye, rend ye, tear ye in pieces our unhappy carkeises, and free us from
these intolerable dolours. O miserable wretches that we are, for how
momentarie pleasures, have we procured these everlasting miseries? In this
manner shall the wicked lament their follies, but all in vain, it will be too
late for them then to repent: for it is a time of judgment, and not of mercy.
O beloved, that men would lay lay these things to their hearts, and set them
continually before their eyes, that they might forsake their sins, and escape
these grievous and doleful lamentations.

Again, shall the King of heaven and earth Christ Jesus, The glorious manner
of Christ's coming to judgment.
come to execute this fiery judgment, with power and great glory? shall he come
with excellent splendour, with admirable beauty? shall he come with the bright
shining weapons of war, to fight with his enemies? shall he take to him his
jealousy for complete armor; put on righteousness for a breast plate, and true
judgment instead of a helmet? shall be sharpen his severe wrath for a sword?
and send out his right aiming thunderbolts against his adversaries? A good
conscience comfortable.
O then how happy shall that man be, that has a peaceable and quiet
conscience; it shall be better unto him, then thousands of gold and silver,
yea, then all the riches that are in the world: because be shall meet his
Judge with joy, and his King with comfort: For idem erit Iudex, qui Patronus,
qui Mediator, qui Pontifex, S. Ambros. lib. 1. de Jacob. cap 6.
says S. Ambrose; the same shall be our Judge, who is our Redeemer, our
Patron, our Mediator, our chief Priest, who has offered a sweet smelling
incense of reconciliation to God his Father for our redemption, and therefore we
need not to fear.

An accusing conscience terrible.
But how woeful shall be the state of accusing consciences of the wicked and
damned reprobates? O unhappy wretches! which of you can be able to meet this
devouring fire, these everlasting burnings? which of you can dare to encounter
this invincible warrior? O miserable miscreants! prepare yourselues, for you
must combat with this commanding Emperor: Nazianzen in Apologetico.
Did you never dream of this bitter conflict in your life time? Woe therefore
unto you now, for ye can neither avoid, nor be able to endure the violence of
his wrath; ye are overcome already, and bound, and delivered to eternal
captivity. For as Nazianzen speaks, Solus Deus nec faga vitari, nec bello
sustiner^ potest, only God this mighty Judge, can neither be escaped by
flight, nor endured in war, Extrema illa die, nullum erit effugium, aut
perfugium; in that last day there shall be no evasion or running away. True it
is, the wicked hypocrites, damned Atheists, Reave. 6.15, 16
and secure formalists, shall call and cry to the mountains to fall on them,
and to the hills to hide them from him that sits upon the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, but it will not profit them; they shall try all ways
to escape, Greg. Decret. part. 2. causa 11. quast. 3.
but there is none will help them. For although it be too often seen in the
world, (as S. Gregory observes) that humane judgment is perverted, either
timore, for fear of greatness, by which corrupt judges are moved, to smoother
the truth, absolve the rich, and condemn the poor, or amore, for love and
friendship, by which the bands of equity are broken in pieces, or odio, for
hatred and malice, when envy possesses the soul to destruction, Chrysostom. in
hom. inuidia pestiferum malum hominem in diaboli conditionem ac indaemonem
immitissimum conuertit. Boskier. definibus neque amore neque odio neque timore
neque cupiditae te capiendus qua caeteri solent. S. August. de fide ad monach.
In Christi iudicio sine acceptione personarum sine ambitu potestatum aqualiter
iudicabuntur domini and serui reges and milites, diuites and pauperes humiles
and sublimes. S. Bern. cap. 11. ac Rob monarch. A good conscience shall be
better then a full purse. 1. Kings 13.33. Judges 17.10 Malac. 3.8.
or last of all and worst of all Cupiditate, for covetousness, when bribes
pervert the eyes of the wise, and move them to subvert the way of wisdom, to
hearken to the voice of tempting Angels, rather then to the voice of equity
and right, to the voice of a corrupted servant, or bribing oppressor, then to
the pitiful cry of a poor distressed plaintiue.

But this Judge is incorrupt in his affections, he can neither be moved by
love, nor by hatred, by fear, nor by bribes, to pervert judgment, by which
the corrupt judges of the world, are too often moved, And S. August.
excellently de fide ad monachum; In the judgment of Christ, without acception
of persons, or receiving of bribes) there shall be equally judged, the king and
the subject, the master and the servant, the rich and the poor, the humble and
the proud, every one shall be judged according to the straight rule of justice,
and balance of equity; And S. Bernard sweetly illic plus valebunt pura corda
quam astuta verba, and conscientia bona quam marsupia plena, at that day of
judgment, pure hearts, shall be better then crafty words, and a good
conscience, better then a full purse, But in this age of the world it is not
so, for a full purse will do more, then either a pure heart, a good
conscience, or a good cause; it will make the corrupt Lawyer, to deceive his
client, the corrupt patron to sell the livings of the Church (with which he is
only put in trust) and to place in them Ieroboams Priests, of the basest of the
people, or Michas hirelings, that will be content with a few shekels of silver
and a suit of apparel, to place ignorance, simonie, and impiety, where he
should place learning, honesty, and religion, to be brief, it will make the
corrupt magistrate, to wink at offenses with partiality, where he should
punish with severity; it causes the sacrilegious Church robber, to rob
Christ Jesus, in robbing his ministers, the oppressing Landlord, to suck the
blood of his tenants, the bribing usurer, to eat the flesh of his creditours,
the sophisticating Tradesman, to use the balance of deceit and false measure
of iniquity; And last of all it makes unconscionable iuror, to sell his soul
to the devil, to forswear himself for a bribe, and ouerturne witnesses,
judges, justice and all. But let all these know, that the time shall come when
this just judge will find them out, Revel. 22.12.
who will render to every man according to his work, and give them their
portion with hypocrites, bind them in bonds of darkness, Mat. 24.51.
and chains of misery for evermore: And this he will do when he shall come to
pronounce that just judgment both to the righteous, and the wicked, that
twofold judgment, iudicium approbationis and iudicium reprobationis, the
judgment of approbation, and the judgment of reprobation, The first in which
the righteous are approved, and rewarded with joy, the second in which the
wicked are reproved, and rewarded with punishment, the first in which that
blessed sentence shall be pronounced to the godly, venite benedicti come ye
blessed of my Father; receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. O most blessed and joyful word: Venite; come ye, Come from the
troublesome sea of this world, wherein ye have been tossed, into the quiet
Haven of peace; A blessed change for Gods children.
Come from your sorrowful war, unto joyful triumph; Come from exile unto
your country: from your earthly cabbins, unto caelestiall and stately palaces;
from your poor cotages unto a kingdom: To conclude, come ye from labor unto
rest, from misery unto joy, from earth unto heaven, where ye shall enjoy
pleasures, without end, treasures without measure, and unspeakable glory for
evermore, Better is poverty with a good conscience then all the pomp and
pelf of the world without S. August. in Psalm. 110. The day of judgment a joy
to the godly, but terror to the wicked.
O terque quaterque beati. O thrice and four times, nay thousand times ten
thousand times happy shall they be, whom this blessed sentence shall embrace,
who would not for a little space in this life, endure any misery, and undergo
any torments, to keep faith and a good conscience, that he may enjoy this
blessed sentence? with what joy, and comfort, may the godly expect this joyful
time, although the wicked cannot think of it but with terror? For as S.
Augustine speaks. Iudicum formidandum malis propter paenam, amandum bonis
propter coronam, This divine judgment, it is to be feared of the wicked,
because of their punishment; but to be loved of the godly, because of that
blessed crown they shall then enjoy, it should therefore be joy unto Gods
children, as it is terror unto the wicked. Terror unto them because of that
fearful sentence which shall be pronounced against them, in that second
judgment, when Christ Jesus shall speak unto them, not with a veni, come thou
blessed, but with an Abi, A fearful separation.
go thou cursed, not with an euge, well done thou good and faithful servant,
but with an apage, away thou wicked and sloathfull servant, depart into
everlasting torments, prepared for the devil and his angels: O most horrible
sounding thunderclap! O fearful lightening! woe unto them, A horrible
thunderclap for the wicked.
whose heads and hearts, shall be smitten with thy terror, thou sendest the
wicked into tormenting flames, but how many hours, or days, or months, or
years, shall they remain in that scorching fire? their hours cannot be
numbered, their months measured, nor their years determined, their hours are
eternal, their years eternal, and their fire eternal, for that fire has no
end, into fire they are sent, and in fire they shall be tormented for
evermore. For as the ship being oppressed, with bellowing waves, The soul
of man like a ship.
sinketh down to the bottom of the sea, so the damned, being laden with the
fearful billows of Gods anger, sink down to the bottom of hell; from
whence they shall never arise.

The Mariners that carried Jonah, Jonah 1.5.
fearing the danger of the sea, call forth their goods and lightened their
ship, now the soul of man, is as it were a little ship, tossed too and
fro, in the troublesome sea of this world, and being heavy laden, with the
grievous weight of sin, is almost every moment, ready to suffer shipwreck;
Beware of shipwreck.
O beloved seeing then the everlasting floods of Gods anger, which shall
ouerflow the damned in hell, are so horrible and insufferable; how willingly
should we cast out all things that may endanger this weak, crasie, and
leaking ship of our souls; (be they never so dear unto us,) rather then
incur this eternal, and most fearful shipwreck, how willingly should we
cast out the in^^llerable burden of our sins, and drown them in the sea of
repentance, that our ship may be lightened, and made free from this terrible
danger. Thus we should do, and thus if we do, happy and blessed shall we be,
we shall be safe from the floods of Gods anger, and flames of his vengeance,
and be embraced in the arms of his mercies. Which mercies, having now passed
these two great and terrible judgments of water, and of fire, noted in the two
first colors of the Rainebowe, the color of water, and the color of fire
comes in the next place to be spoken of.

The grace and mercy of God, by which he preserves the world from that
future destruction, noted in the green and gracious color, signifying the
spring of Gods favors, and the summer of his mercies; I have set my Bow in the
cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and the earth.
The green color noting the mercy of God, by which he preserves the world
from destruction. Ferus in Genesis cap. 9.

Paraeus in Genesis cap. 9.

Iustitiae quide^ quod olim mu^dus propter impietatem, aquarum diluuio just
deletus sit vt Deum simili profanitate offendere metuamus misericordiae vero
quod etc vt ad amorem and gratitudinem erga Deum excitemur.

Lament. 3.22


Discamus ex Iride non iustitiae nostrae esse quod mundus non iterum deletus
fuit, aut deleatur, sed diuinae misericordiae, says a good Interpreter; We may
learn from the Rainebow, that it is not of our righteousness, that the world
has not been destroyed, or is not now brought to destruction, but of the grace
and mercy of God, figured in the green and gracious color of the Bow: and a
later writer agreeing with the former, observes the same point after this
manner, Ex signo foederis diuinitus nobis proposito, iustitiae pariter, and
misericordiae recordemur; from the sign of the Covenant, proposed unto us from
God, we are put in mind, both of his justice and mercy; of his justice, in
that he destroyed the world with a deluge of waters, to teach us that we
should fear to offend him with the like profaneness.

But of his mercy in that he does not destroy the world again, to move us to
show our love and thankfulness toward him for the same. It is of the Lords
mercy, that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not, Lamen.
3.22. For the mercy of the Lord is like a river of water, flowing throughout
all nations, watering all generations, and abounding throughout all ages: the
mercy of the Lord is like the sea, compassing the earth, on every part, the
mercy of the Lord is like the Sun, shinning both upon the good and bad, upon
the just, and unjust, it hides it self from none, but gives preservation
unto all: it lifts the wicked from the mire of iniquity, and directs the
godly in the ways of piety, it gives all good things both temporal and
eternal: health, beauty, honors, riches, and strength; and therefore I may
conclude with the Prophet David, Psalm. 103. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting, to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17.19.
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children, the
Lord has prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdoms rules over all,
governing all things by his mighty power, and conseruing them by his continual
presence, And therefore for this end, according to that old rule in divinity,
Enter, praesenter, Polan syntag.
Deus hic and vbique potenter, God is here, and God is every where by his
essence, by his presence, and by his power: and S. Augustine pithily upon the
6. of Matthew, God is in himself, S. August super illua Mat. 6 pater noster.
etc Deus est in seipso sicut a and o in mundo sicut rector and author, Angelis
sicut sapor and decor, in ecclesiae sicut pater familias in domo, in animo
sicut sponsus in thaelamo, in justice sicut adiutor and protector, in r^probis
sicut pauor et terror
as the Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and the ending, he is in the world, as
the rector, and author, he is in the angels, as the sweet savor and
splendor; he is in the Church, as the Father of the Family in the house; he
is in the soul, as the bridegroom in the bride-chamber; he is in the godly,
as their helper, and protector; and in the wicked, as their fear, and terror.
But by his merciful providence, he is gracious unto all, he lays the
beams of his chambers, in the waters, and makes the clouds his charriots, and
walks upon the wings of the wind; he waters the hills from his chambers,
and the earth is filled with the fruit of his works, he causes the grass to
grow for the cattle, and green herbs, for the service of men; he has
appointed the Moon for certain seasons, and the Sun knows his going
down. O Lord our God how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made
them all, the earth is full of thy riches: thus does God daily manifest his
favors to the whole world, in keeping it from destruction, and giving all good
things for the preservation of the same. But the cause of this love, is the
free grace and mercy of God, gratia dei dat homini vitam and motum, (says a
learned writer) the grace of God does give to man, both life and motion:
Barrardius Tom. 2. lib. 6. cap. 13.
and what is this world without the water of grace? truly nothing but a dead
sea, or sodomicall lake, in which nothing can live.

Christ the Arc of grace John 1.14. Coloss. 2.3.
Of this grace Christ Jesus is the Arc wherein it is kept for us, who was
figured by the Arc of the testament, who is full of grace and truth, and in
whom are hidden all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God. This
grace is aqua Christi, the water of Christ, with which is his love, he does
sprinkle the souls of his servants: it is aqua A^^elorum, the water of Angels,
with the taste of which they are refreshed, as with the rivers of the waters of
life, it is aqua Hominum, the water of men, by which they are cherished, as
with the living fountain of Gods favors: it is ^qua omnium, the water of all
things, by which they are preserved in the love and favor of their gracious
Creator: to be short, this water of grace flows from God, flows unto God,
and ascends toward heaven, yea it brings men unto God, and into heaven.

Thus have I showed you the grace of God in general, let me speak somewhat of
it in particular: he has been gracious unto the whole world, in preserving
it, A description of the grace of God toward England
and has been gracious unto this land, in preserving us. O England thou have
tasted in abundance, of the rivers of Gods gracious favors, thou have been
made rich with his love tokens; thou have been decked with the ornaments of his
graces, he has put a chain about thy neck, bracelets on thy hands, and
frontlets on thy brows; he has clothed thee with broydered work, and shed
thee with Badgers skins, he has girded thee about with fine linen, and
covered thee with ^ilke, he has made thee glorious with silver, and gold, thou
do eat fine flower, honey, and oil, thou art exceeding beautiful, and art
prospered into a kingdom, thy renown is gone forth amongst the nations, for
thy beauty, for thou art made perfect, through the comeliness which thy God
has put upon thee: his mercies are great unto thee, for he delivered thee
from thy enemies on every side, both at home and abroad, both civil and
foreign: from the terrible Armado of the Spaniard, in eighty eight, from that
horrible powder plot of the Papists, with many other villainous treasons in
latter days; of which thou may say with the land of Israel, if the Lord
himself had not been on our side, Psalm. 134.2, 3, 4.
(may England now say) when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us, the waters had drowned
us, and the stream had gone over our souls: but blessed be the Lord, who has
not given us over as a prey unto their teeth; the Lord has delivered thee from
the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; peace is within thy
walls, and plenteousnesse within thy palaces, he has filled thee with the
flower of wheat, and embraced thee with mercy and loving kindness. O beloved
unspeakable are the blessings, The blessings of God toward England are
unspeakable.
and infinite are the graces which he has manifested unto us; he has given
us a gracious King, a wise, learned, and understanding Solomon, whom God of his
mercy long preserve amongst us, he has given us a royal Queen, and a
hopeful progeny, for the continuance of his favors, whom God of his mercy
long preserve amongst us; he has given us a worthy, careful, and vigilant
Counsel, with a wise Nobility, a reverend Clergy, learned and religious
Archbishops, and Bishops, conscionable, grave and worthy Judges: all which,
God of his mercy, long preserve amongst us; to be short, he has given us
famous universities for the supply of our wants, either in Church or
commonwealth, and for the increase of learning, and religion, which God to the
increase of his glory long preserve amongst us. And last of all, which paralels
all the rest, (for had we not that, we had nothing) he has given us the rich
treasures of his glorious Gospel for the salvation of our souls: which God of
his unspeakable mercy long continue amongst us, and let every true hearted
Christian say Amen.

Thus has God manifested his mercy to our whole land: But once again let me
turn unto you, ye religious and worthy Citizens, and tell you what God has
done for your souls: Infinite are the graces that God in his mercy has
bestowed upon you, I cannot number them; he has given you religious, zealous,
and worthy Senators, discreet and wise Magistrates, under our Royal Moses, to
carry the sword, and to go in and out before you with comfort; and this grace
be continues unto you still; The Preachers appointed from all p^^ts of the
kingdom, their incourageme^t prep^red by wo^thy Benefacto^s. Anno 1603. there
died within and with out London of all diseases, 38244. of the plague, 30578
he has given you riches, and treasures in great abundance, he has given you
that most precious jewel of his blessed word, after an excellent manner: what
country, what nation, what city in the world does enjoy a more joyful supply
of learned, zealous, and worthy Preachers continued unto them after a more
worthy order, then this famous Auditorie?

God did look upon you with an angry countenance, whipping you with a rod of
correction for your sins, when of late days, there died in one year above
thirty thousand amongst you, in that great and general plague. But now he
looks upon you with a favorable eye, and has freed you from that fearful
judgment, which freedom God of his infinite mercy long preserve amongst you.
And I may say of all these mercies, to the whole world, The grace of God the
cause of all graces toward us.
to this land, and to this city, that Gratia Dei est causa, author, and
^ffector omnis gratiae: the grace of God (figured in this gracious color of
the Bow) is the cause, author, and effect of all grace, favor, and mercy
toward us. For if we demand the question, what is the cause that God did
create all things for our good, before he created us? The Answer must be
Gratia Dei, the free grace and mercy of God. What is the cause that he has
not spared his own Son, but given him to the death for our redemption?
Gratia Dei, the free grace and mercy of God. What is the cause that he has
given us a gracious King, under whom we enjoy the peace of the Gospel, the
means of our salvation? Gratia Dei, the free grace and mercy of God. In a
word, go throughout all the graces that God has bestowed upon us, and demand
the question of every one, why has God done thus? And the answer must be,
Quia bonus, Thankfulness, that which God requires for h^s blessings.
Because he is good and gracious, and because his mercy endures for ever.

Quid retribuemus Domino? What then shall we render unto the Lord, for his this
unspeakable mercy, and most infinite grace? Wherewith shall we come before
the Lord, and bow our selves before the most high God? Shall we come before
him with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall we
give our first borne for our transgressions, the fruit of our bodies for the
sins of our souls, to pay for our ingratitude, and to recompense that love
which God in his mercy has showed unto us? No, no, Beloved; this is not that
which God requires at our hands: it is Thankfulness, to love mercy, to do
justly, and to humble our selves, to walk with our God; Micah 6.6, 7.8.
we should take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord; we
should pay our vows now in the presence of all his people; we should offer
unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and tell out his works with gladness.
Divinely says S. Bernard, Happy is that man, S. Bern. Sermon. contra
ingratitudinem. Foelix quid ad singula dona gratiae redit ad ad eum in quo est
plentitudo omnium gratiarum.
who for every gift of grace, returns unto God, in whom is the fullness of
all graces whatsoever. O then let us give thanks unto the Lord, because he is
gracious, and his mercy endures for ever: Let Israel now confess, that he
is gracious, and that his mercy endures for ever: Let the house of Aaron now
confess, that his mercy endures for ever: Let the people of England now
confess, that his mercy endures for ever. And last of all, let all they that
fear the Lord, continually confess, that his mercy endures for ever.

This thankfulness God requires at our hands, and this we are bound to render
unto him; But do we thus?

Surely, the vineyard of the Lord of hosts, Isaiah 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
is the house of England, and the men of England are his pleasant plant, he
has manifested his love unto them, he has taken care for them, he has
fenced them with a wall of peace, he has gathered the stones from them, so
that nothing might hinder their fruitfulness, he has planted them with the
choicest vine, the vine of his word, he has built a tower in the midst of
them, the tower of his graces, he has made a winepresse therein, prepared all
things for their good; what could he have done more unto his vineyard, that he
has not done unto it? now he looked that we should bring forth grapes, but
have we not brought forth wild grapes? he looked for thankfulness, may I not
say behold ingratitude? he looked for judgment, may I not say behold
oppression? he looked for righteousness, may I not say behold a cry? If I
should say it of all, I should condemn the innocent, but I may say it soon of
too many, and justly reprove the nocent. There is a cry that is heard in our
land, but it is not a cry of those that shout for the mastery, nor of those
that lament for being overcome, nor of those that sing and make melody, these
might be passed over: but it is a cry of sin, a cry of iniquity, that
ascends up into the ears of the Lord, from the several and secret corners
of the land. The crying tinnes of our sime.
Should I bring you a Catalogue of these sins, it would weary me to speak
them, and weary you to hear them, or at least to hear of them: I will
therefore but touch some of the principal, I know not where to begin, but
Pride, steps forth and challenges the first place.

1. Pride.
There is a cry of Pride, of horrible Pride, men are transformed into women,
and women into men, such is their strange Metamorphosis and preposterous order
that one strives to go before the other in Pride. It seems some of them
have searched the Scripture, be it but to search out sins, that they may
immitate them: for whereas the Lord by the Prophet reprooueth the abominable
pride of the daughters of Sion, Isaiah 3. their haughtiness, their stretched
out necks, Esaias. 3.16.
their wanton eyes, their walking and mincing as they go, making a tinckling
with their feet, their tinckling ornaments, their caules the round tyres like
the Moon, and the like, the sons and daughters of our Sion have learned to
go beyond them, and to outstrip them in pride, painting their faces, and
painting their clothes, in such a deformed manner, defacing their natural
forms, that at the day of judgment God will not know them to be his. But
against these, the Lord threatens a fearful punishment, Isaiah 3.24. It
shall come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell, there shall be stink, in
stead of a girdle, a rent, in stead of well set hair, baldness, and burning,
in stead of beauty. And I would to God this City were free from this sin,
that it might be free from this punishment.

After this, a second iniquity rides post, and now whoredom walks hand in
hand with pride, and sometimes iustles for the wall, there is a cry of
whoredom, 2. Whordome
yea it is grown to such a height, that now many of our gallants, account it
but recreation, 3. Drunkenness. Isaiah ^8.1. 3. Mothers. 3. Daughters 4
Oppression Isaiah 5.8. Isaiah 3.15. 5. Simony. Quatuor ecclesias ports intra
tur in omnes, C^saris and Simoni, sanguinis atque dei. Prima patet magnis numis
paetet altera, charis Tertia. sed paucis quarta patere solet. S Greg in
Registr^^ab. 1. quest 1. cum ^mn^s au ^^^tia id ^^rum sit seruitus, quisquis
h^n^ (and man ^^in dan^^ (...)) r^g^^^ter ^n (...) infideli^^^^is
petitionisubijcit^r etia^si ^enere ^tdum verbis ^u^d neque fa^ijs vid^atur
and our profane Atheists will boast of their bawdery.

Drunkenness begins to quarrel, and is angry that her daughter whoredom is
preferred before her; but I answer her greeting, railing with the Prophet, Woe
to the crown of pride and drunkenness of Ephraim, and woe unto them that rise
up early to follow drunkenness, and continue until night, till the wine do
inflame them. And (ob) that this City were free from these sins, that it
might be free from these woes: but these are three vicious mothers, that bring
forth three venomous daughters oppression, simmony, and sacrilege; which like
the lean Kine of Egypt, denoure all they meet with.

Hence comes the cry oppression, worse then the cry of the children of
Israel, against their Taske-masters in Egypt, the poor labourer cries for
vengeance against the Depopulator, and the hunger starued tennant, against the
rent-racking landlord. But woe be unto them that join house to house, and lay
field to field, till there be no place that they may be placed by themselves
in the midst of the earth: and woe unto them that grind the faces of the poor
(says the Lord or hoasts.

Simony is sister to Oppression, for when the field is depopulated, corn
grows scarce and therefore the oppressing Patron must part stakes with the
Simonicall incumbant, for ease of charge, hence it comes to pass that of
those four ordinary gates of entrance into the Church, Caesaris and Simon^
sanguinis atque dei, By favor of Caesar, of Simony, of Friends, and of God,
three of them are almost stopped up, and their passages grown over with grass,
but the path of Simony is made a high way, because she has played the
ingrosser, and bought the Monopoly of the rest.

Sacrilege is fellow heir with Simony, and goes to law with religion, Non
vndecu^que tollere hoc est sacrilegium committere, sed de Ecclesia qui aliquid
futatur Iudae proditori, comparatur.
for the right of the Church, and it is to be feared without the mercy of God,
and favor of the King, that in many places they will be quite overthrown,
witness that abominable cry of horrible Sacrilege, that foundeth in the
world, where the godless depopulators have enclosed fields, towns, Churches
and all, pulling those down, which their religious forefathers did build up,
stopping their doors with thorns, and their windows with bushes, yea
covering their roofes with thatch, nay leaving them naked, or else turning these
holy places into barnes, or sheep coats, or other profane uses, so that for
lack of people, the earth and brute beasts may complain to the Lord, Psalm.
79.1.
in the words of the Prophet, O God, the heathen are come into thine
inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of
stones: many more are the crying sins of these days, but two especially had
deed to be spoken of, the first is Hypocrisy and dissimulation, the second
Schism and division.

7. Hypocrisy.
There is a cry of hypocrisy every where to be heard, for how many are there
that profess themselves to be the servants of Christ, and yet when occasion
serves, will have concord with Beliall, and serve the devil; that will make a
show of offering sacrifice unto God, in the temple of the Lord, and yet join
themselves with Idolatours in the temple of idols, that will serve the Lord at
Jerusalem, and yet offer oblations to the golden calves in Bethel, and in Dan:
that will besure to verify the proverb, Run with the Hare, and yet hold with
the Hound; profess simplicity with the Sheep, and yet practice their
subtlety with the Foxes, play on both hands, like Ambo-dexters, fit, and
frame, and fashion themselves for all companies, with the religious, they will
seem religious, and with the profane they will follow profaneness; with the
godly they will seem to be godly, and with the wicked they will practice
iniquity; with the sober they will commend sobriety, but yet they will not
cease to be drunk with the drunken; with the continent they will extol
chastity, they will not refrain the harlots houses to commit adultery. To be
short, they are like Ferrie-men, looking one way, but rowing another way,
bearing men in hand, that they are traveling forwards, in the narrow way that
leads unto life, when indeed they are walking forwards in that broad path
that leads to destruction: for what kind of wickedness, will they not
commit, being intized unto it, by the deceitful baits of profit, and pleasure,
sabbath breaking, sacrilege, simonie, usury, perjury, vilanie, Stony ground
Math. 13.21.
and what not; making shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience, as the
Apostle speaks. But such as those are, receive their seed amongst stones,
and therefore hindering the root of the word, by their stony hearts, they
obtain only the leaves of profession, and are altogether deprived of the good
fruit, of a true religion, their faith is resisted, by the stones of error,
their hope resisted, by the waves of fear, and their charity resisted, by the
blustering winds of malice and envy, they are composed of inconstancy, and
therefore wanting the firm and stable pillars of faith, hope, and charity,
their house of hypocrisy, is suddenly ouerturned, by that strong man, the
devil, (more mighty then Sampson) and they themselves, with their outside
profession, beaten to pieces in a moment.

The last sin is schism, and division in the Church, 8. Schism.
and the cry of this is so grievous, that it grieves me to think of it, much
more to speak of it, most of all to behold it amongst our selves, In the
primitive Church, Acts 2 46.
they were all of one mind, and all of one heart, O happy union! O blessed
time! but now how many minds, how many schisms? how many divisions in the
Church? and that many times about shadows, about ceremonies, about
circumstances, while let the substance go, one says I am of Paul, another I
am of Ap^llo, another I am of Cephas, another I am of Christ, is Christ
divided? did Paul die for you? or was Apollo crucified? certain it is, that
you cannot divide Christ, though you may divide our selves from Christ; O then
take heed, of rending Christ's seamelesse coat, of making Schism, Christ
seamelesse co^te must not be rent.
and division in the Church, labor to keep unity, with verity, and verity,
with unity, least Christ cast ye forth of the Church, take his coat of
protection from you, and so being found naked, in the storms of misery, ye
perish in the day of vengeance.

Thus (right Honorable, and beloved,) from this green and gracious color of
the Bow, I have showed you the mercy of God, by which he preserves the world
from destruction, I have showed you the infinite graces, which he has bestowed
upon this land, upon this city, I have showed you the unthankfulness of many
in the world, manifested in the crying sins of the time, S. Ch^^sost. Him 2.
ad p^pulum Antioch. sic incipit.
of which I may conclude as S. Chrysostom begins his second Homily to the
people of Antioch, Quid dicam? aut quid loquar? lachrymaru^ presens tempus, non
verborum, etc. What should I say? or what should I speak? it is a time of
tears, and not of words, of mourning, and not of speaking, of prayer, and not
of preaching such is the mag^it^de of sin, the incurable wound of iniquity,
and universal plague of impiety, that it is impossible to be healed without
the powerful hand of a mighty God. That of S. August. now verified; S. Aug
lib. 4. d^ Baptism. con^^a Donat. Infidelis disputat contra fide^, sed improbus
Ch^^stianus vivit contra fi^e^, un le cum vt^rque aducesetur fi^ei neuter per
illam potest habere salute^.
The unbelieving Pagan, disputes against faith, and the wicked Christian
lives against faith, from whence it comes to pass, that since both of them
are adversaries unto faith, neither of them can have salvation by faith. True
it is, beloved, that the Lord has freed us from h^s judgments, and given us
peace, by which we enjoy the comfort of the Gospel; but let us take heed, lest
by our sins we move him to remove our candlestick, to deprive us of our
peace, and send his terrible plagues amongst us. O that these crying sins
were banished our land, then happy and blessed should we be! I know there is
not wanting religious and zealous Bishops, grave and worthy Judges, who are
careful and vigilant, to banish these hateful cries both from Church and
Common wealth. But such is the subtilty of the serpent, and corruptions of the
times, that this cry is either stopped before it comes to their ears, or
else the sins themselves (like painted harlots) are so masked, and gilded
over with the colors of deceit, that their ugly countenances cannot be seen,
Potestetiam appluarie illud S. B^^n. Oportet humiliter de se sentire nitente^
ad altiora, etc. in Cant. ser. 24.
and by this means they escape unpunished.

If I my self were in place, to speak unto those which are in authority, I
should consider my own unworthiness, and confess with S. Bernard, non est
meae humilitatis dictare vobis, It is not for my humility (Right honorable
lords) to dictate unto you, or to tell you what you should do, I know ye are
wise, ye are zealous, ye are religious. But yet my duty to my great Lord, and
master, my love, to his Church my mother, and my earnest desire, for the good,
and welfare of my King, and country, binds me as it binds all, continually to
pray unto that great Lord Keeper of Israel, to defend his glory, his Church,
our King, and country, and to beat down these crying sins, that so we may
enjoy our gracious peace, with his blessed graces for evermore; and I hope
there is none but will say, Amen.

Thus you have heard these three principal colors of the Rainebowe, the
color of water, the color of fire, The three colors note the Trinity. S.
Basilius mag. in Epist. Personatu^ proprietates velut flos quidam ex illis qui
apparent in I^de in vnoquoque fulgeam, nec vllu^ esse ipsorum inter se
differentiam secundu^ naturae propietatem. sed in communitate substantiae
discriminis proprietates in vnoquoque r^lucere.
and the green color, the sign of grace, (with their three principal
morals) at large declared unto you; yet once again, S. Basil. the great who
was magni nominis in Ecclesia, of great name in the Church of God, excellently
observes further, that this heavenly Bow, does by a fit similitude, in his
threefold color, resemble unto us that holy and blessed Trinity; For as in
the Bow there is a threefold color, and yet but one Bow, so in the glorious
Trinity, there are three persons, and yet but one and the same essence: And as
these colors are so mingled, and knit together in the Bow, that we cannot
discern, where one is separated, or distinguished from the other; so is it in
the divine essence, the persons be distinct in themselves, yet can we not
find out (by our humane wisdom) in the proprieties of their natures, the
separation of one from the other; for as in the Rainebow all the colors are
one, in community of the same substance; so in the Trinity, all the persons
and the glory of them, is one, in the indivisible community of the same
essence; Hugo de Prato Florido. Dimin. Sanct. Trinitat. Sermon. 1. Nihil est in
vniuerso mun^otam inuisibile and incomprehensibile, sicut vnitas, and Trinitas.
And this reason by the creature, does teach us, that we should take heed
that we conceive not any vain opinion of this heavenly doctrine, when being
drawn into any difficult place, we do diversely turn our selves, to
reconcile those things which are spoken; for as in these things which are
expressed to the eye, experience is better to teach the^ the cause it self; so
likewise in those high points, and mysteries of divinity, faith is better, and
more available, then all the comprehensions of reason, in the world.

Last of all Tropologically, these three colors of the Bow, may signify those
three Theological graces, The three colors note, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
V^^gas Ribeta, Per^rius in Apocal.
Faith, Hope, and Charity: the caerulean color, Faith, the green color,
Hope, and the red, Charity: which graces, the divine Rainbowe, that is the
grace of God, does shower down in abundance upon his servants, as diverse
Interpreters well observe. These are the three principal colors of the Bow:
and from these and diverse others, arising from the reflection of these there
does appear an excellent beauty, in the admirable Rainbow. I mean not now to
dispute those many questions, Diverse questions about the colors.
concerning these colors, which are discussed by ancient and modern
Philosopbers, as whether these colors of the Rainbow be colors according to
the verity of the matter or in appearance only? whether that which lies
between the lesser periferie, or circumference of the Bow, and the greater, be
a thing colored or not? whether that which is seen between the two Rainbowes
(the principal and that which is caused by refl^xe of the principal) be
colored with the purple, carnation, and fiery color? whether the light in the
middle be any quality? and in a word, whether it be possible that a third
Rainbowe should appear, and for what cause? with diverse others of the like
curiosity. I will not now stand to dispute the causes of these several
colors, or the diverse reasons of each one in particular, because it does more
pertain to Philosophy, then divinity, neither will I now prosecute any
further the diverse morals of these different colors. The third part. The
situation of the Rainebow in the cloud. M^rcer. in Genesis
But rather hasten to the next part of my text, the situation of the Bow, in
the cloud (of which with the rest) I will speak but briefly, and so draw toward
a conclusion. I have set, etc.

Mercerus in his Commentary upon Genesis has noted out of Rasian Hebrew, that
when God spoke unto Noah, he made the Rainbow then to appear in the cloud, and
as pointing unto it with his finger, says thus, Ecce, hoc est signu^ soederis
and arcus qeum vides; behold, this is the sign of the covenant, and the bow
which thou see, we have no certain warrant for this opinion. Ferus in Genesis
But certain it is, that hoc signum non in terra, sed in coelo constituit, God
did not place this Bow in the earth, or in the sea, but in the heaven, that it
might be seen of all, and he causes it to appear tempore plunioso, God
offers grace to all.
in the time of rain: To teach us first, that God offers the signs of his
grace unto all, and therefore al should take notice of them, and remember his
love; if they neglect this, they are made without excuse. 2. That God is more
powerful then his creatures, God more powerful the^ his creatures. In misery
God remembers mercy.
he can keep them from hurting his servants, seem they never so prepared, and
therefore we need not be afraid of the signs of heaven, or terror of the
clouds. Thirdly, and lastly, to teach us, that in midst of misery, God
remembers mercy, for when the clouds shower down rain, as if they would
drown the world, even then God shows his Bow, the sign of his favor, for
the comfort of his servants. Again, Allegory 1.
the situation this Bow is in the clouds: but yet the ends of it do reach
down to the earth; Arist. Sect. 13. Problem. 3.
and in the time of Arist. it was the common opinion, that the Rainbow lighting
with her two ends upon the herbs and flowers, did make them much more sweet
and odoriferous: concerning which, how and when it is done, he disputes at
large in his Problems. Plinius lib. 13.
But Pliny does constantly affirm, that the tree Aspalathus, the rose of
Jerusalem, or our Ladies rose, by the touching of the rainebow, is made much
more delectable. And as the rainbow does give an excellent odor to all herbs,
Plinius lib. 17. cap. 5.
so specially it does give to this an unutterable sweetness, for when the earth
is watered, and the Rainbow does cst down her seed upon it, she does the^ send
forth that divine and heavenly breath, to which no sweetness can be compared.
Which notable effect of the rainbow, Aristale hist. animal lib. 5. cap. 22.
Arist. describes further, teaching, that to the generation of that melaeris,
that honey of the air (which our Philosophers called mel roris, the honey of
deaw, and we the honey fall) the Rainbow does give a principal furtherance. But
I fail too long in this Philosophical sea; yet of this there is not wanting a
Theological use. Allegory 2. As the ^ainebow do^^h make sw et the flowe^ of the
earth, so Christ makes acceptable in the sight of God. Math. 3.17.
For as the rainebow with her heavenly deaw, distilling from the clouds, does
give an excellent odor, to the flowers of the earth upon which it does light;
so likewise Christ Jesus, who is that mystical Rainbow and eternal sign of
Gods favor, with the caelestiall dew of his spiritual graces distilling from
the throne of his mercy, (which is perfumed with the sweet smelling incense of
his meritorious sacrifice) does sweeten with melliferous odours, the hearts,
and souls and consciences of his children, making them acceptable in the
nostrils of their heavenly Father.

And therefore at the sight of this beautiful Bow, we may remember with
unspeakable joy, that most blessed, and joyful Bainebowe, the Son of God.

Allegory 3. Arist. lib. 3. Meteorolog. visade long apparent minoranigriora.
The further we are from Christ, the less of his glory can we behold. Isa.
59.2.
Thirdly, the situation of this Bow is in the clouds, and the further we are
from it, the less beautiful glorious, and delectable, it does appear; and so
likewise the further we are from Christ Jesus, by our natural corruption,
impenitency, and continuance in sin, the less glorious, beautiful, and
excellent does he appear unto us; but the nearer we approach unto him, by
faith, holiness, and newness of life, the more glorious shall we behold him,
and more earnestly long to enjoy him; O then beloved! how should we labor,
with the bright flames of zeal, to banish the dark clouds of our sins,
which do make a separation between Christ and us; and obscure the light of our
eyes, that we cannot behold, the brightness of his glory; How earnestly should
we strive, to draw near unto him; that being refreshed at the sight of his
beauty, we may behold with joy, and comfort, so glorious a Rainebowe, and being
confirmed in faith, we may one day enjoy his blessed glory for evermore.

Allegory 4.
Fourthly, the Rainebowe is placed in the clouds, but by how much the Sun is
higher, by so much this Bow is lesser: for at the middle of the day, The more
grace bestowed upon us, the more humility required of us.
it is thinner, smaller, and narrower (although of a greater circle:) And so
likewise by how much higher Christ Jesus, who is the Sun of righteousness, is
in our hearts, that is, by how much the more he does confer his gifts and
graces upon us; by so much the more should we labor to beat down our
natural pride, and be lesser in our own conceits: for by this means it will
come to pass, that howsoever we may seem vile in the sight of the world, yet
shall we be accounted honorable in the sight of God.

Allegory 5.
Fifthly, the Rainebowe being in the cloud, seems greater then the sun,
which men may marvel at, because it is but the glass of the Sun, showing
the image thereof, the Sun being the object, and cause of the Bow; But the
reason is, because the Bow is a glass of this nature, that it does make the
object much greater, and does increase the forms into a wonderful magnitude.

And herein those do parallel the Bow, Vile ingratitude. Mindful of their own
honor, but forgetful of Gods.
who receiving all that they have from God, as the Rainebow does receive her
light and glory from the beams of the Sun; yet labor to extol their owns
glory, above the glory of their maker: taking greater care, for their own
honor, then for the glory and honor of God, who in this will be like the
Rainebow, though not in any thing they should: like those who as the Bow
appears only in the day, and not in the night, so likewise immitating the
Bow, Dissembling Christians.
they will make profession of Christ in the day time of prosperity, but when
the night of adversity approaches, they forsake their profession, and leave
Christ to himself, rather then they will endure the least misery for his
sake; or like those who as the Bow has both ends downwards, Os homini
sublime dedit. But couerous wordlings like brute beasts look ever downwards.
so they bend all their affections downwards, casting their eyes upon the
ground, searching greedily for the mucke and pelf, and vain honors of the
world, but seldom or never lifting up their hearts or eyes toward heaven, to
seek for the riches and treasures thereof. But we must not so immitate the
Bow, but as (according to the opinion of the ancient) the Rainebow letting
down her horns upon the earth, Virgil. 1. Greg. Plaut. Curcul. and Propertius
lib. 3. cleg 4. Vitrunius lib. 9. cap. 4. Look downward upon Gods blessings,
and send upward thy thankfulness, then will God send down his graces upon thee.
does draw up the water from the fountains to the clouds, which being turned
into showers, do return and water the fruits of the earth, for which cause
this phrase was used of them arcus bibit aquas the Bow does drink up the
waters, (which opinion Vitrunius defends, calling the Bow a notable
instrument by which God does draw up the waters from the earth, into the air,
by this means to make the ground more fruitful: so likewise being
enlightened with the heavenly brightness of Gods gracious Spirit, and casting
down both our eyes to behold the infinite blessings of God upon the earth; we
should be moved by divine contemplation, to send up the sweet smelling
vapors of thankful hearts, toward the clouds of heaven, that being
converted into the divine showers of Gods merciful favors, we may be made
fruitful, with all spiritual graces whatsoever.

To conclude the Rainebow does appear in the cloud, How long the Rainbow
shall continue
But there is a question demanded, concerning the continuance of it, how long
shall it remain and be seen in the clouds? It is reported that some holy men
were of opinion, Author Histor. Scholast. in lib. Genes. cap. 38.
that for forty years, before the day of judgment, and general burning of
the world, there should be neither Rain, nor Rainebowe to be seen: But what
these holy men were, I cannot read, for I can find none of the ancient
Fathers upon my Text, to be of this judgment, yet it seems the ground, and
foundation, of this opinion was, that they supposed that general burning of
the world, could not be effected without an unspeakable precedent dryness of
the air, and an unmeasurable abundance, of dry exhalations, and so much of
this dry matter, as they dreamed necessary, for the burning of the world,
could not be gathered but in a long continuance of time, not possibly in less
then in forty years, and therefore for that time, there should be neither
Rain nor Rainebowe; But in this reason, that which is taken for certain, is
not only uncertain, but most plainly false, for that burning of the world,
shall not be effected by natural causes, but by the supernatural work, and
divine power of almighty God, as the first judgment was, when the whole world
(except Noah and his family) was destroyed with the flood; And therefore there
it no reason, why there should not be both Rain, Petitio principii
and Rainebowe, till the day of judgment, for both these shall pass away with
the clouds, and not before. And thus from the clouds the situation, I pass
to the use of the Bow, It shall be for a sign: I have set my Bow in the cloud,
4. Part. it shall be for a sign. Authore Socrat. apud Platonem.
and it shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and the earth.

This Iris or Rainebow, is derived (...), of the greek verb, which signifies
to speak, because it is a speaking sign or visible word, for it is signum
pluuiae tum praeteritae, tum instantis, a sign both of rain that is past, and
of rain that is at hand; and therefore it was feigned of the heathen poets, to
be nuncius Iunonis, the messenger of Juno, and of others it was called Daemonis
(hoc est sapientis) arcus the Bow of God, or of a wise Creator, because it is a
sign of the divine wisdom, certain it is that it is nuncius dei, the
messenger of God, by which he does testify that he will no more bring a
general flood to destroy the world. Two significations of the Bow.


This Rainebow has two principal significations. In the first one Physical
or natural, the second metaphisicall or supernatural. In the first it is
signum pluniae, a sign of rain, in the second it is signum serenitatis, a
sign of fair weather, and this is above nature, for all natural Philosophy
is ignorant of it, only the Church does understand it by faith, out of the
reueiled will of God, that as often as the Bow does appear in the cloud, we
remember the covenant and promise of God, that the world should never again be
destroyed with water.

But how can this be, may some man object? Whether the Rainbow was before the
flood.
how is it possible that the Rainebow should be a sign, that there should not
follow a general flood, to destroy the world, seeing the Rainebow was before
the flood, and then was no true sign of this, as the event did plainly
testify; To this some have answered, that the Rainebowe was not before the
flood, so Saint Chrysostom, Alcuinus, and the interlinearie Gloss.

But without question this Rainebowe was before the flood, although after the
flood, it was appointed for a sign. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. Genesis
First because God did cease from all the works of creation the seventh day,
Genesis 2.2.
so that he did not after create any new species, or kinds of creatures: and
therefore, it must needs follow, that the Rainebow was created before the
flood. Pererius in Genesis Quarsum enim Deus hunc e^^inem toto eo tempere
impediu^ser? quorsum ^a diuturno miraculo naturale^ Iri^is ac pluuiae
generatione^ prohibuisset. Certe nulla ratio reddipotest, cur Deus omissa
naturali via refrigerandi terras, pec imb^es tanto miraculo exunda^tium
terrestrium aquarum tandiu vti voluit.


Secondly, God created the causes of the Bow before the flood, for there was
not wanting the clouds, nor the Sun, nor a place where the clouds might be
set against the Sun, upon which the Sun shining, the Rainebowe does appear,
And therefore since the causes of the Bow were before the flood; it must needs
follow, that the effect of these causes, the Rainebow, was before the flood
also, (except it can be showed, that the generation of the Bow, was hindered
by some other impediment, which cannot be) for it is a rule in Philosophy,
Posita causa ponitur effectus, the cause being placed and perfected, the effect
must of necessity follow; as when the Sun draws toward our Horison, the
light and day begins to appear; when the fire is kindled, the heat does
suddenly increase, or when as a man beholds his natural face in a glass,
his image is presently represented to his sight, so likewise a soon as the
sun did cast his bright beams, upon the glass of the waterie clouds, the
effect thereof, did presently manifest it self unto the world, but this was
before the flood, and therefore the Rainebowe before the flood also.

Yet against this those of the contrary opinion, object the words of my Text,
that God speaks here unto Noah in the future tense, I will set my Bow in the
cloud, and therefore it should seem rather, Cornelius cornelii a lapide in
Comment in Genes.
that the Rainebow was created after the flood, then before, To which I answer,
that howsoever in the Septuagint translation it is (...), pono, I do put, and
in the common Latin, ponam, I will put, yet (as a learned interpreter well
observes) in the Hebrew text, it is in the preterperfect tense, NATATTI, dedi,
posui, I have given, I have set, and God might well have said, I do give, I
do set, or I will set, but not that it was not there before, but that it
should now be for a sign, of that covenant, between me and the earth, for
after the same manner the water in Baptism, was instituted by Christ our
Savior, to be a sign in the sacrament, and yet water was an element created
at the beginning, as the Rainbow was created before the flood, so that I may
thus answer the 1. Objection, Almighty God, not naturally, but by his divine
institution, has appointed the Rainebow for a sign, that there should not any
more come, a general flood, to destroy the world.

Again, if the Rainebowe be not a natural sign, of a following flood, of
what then is it a natural sign of Rain? or of fair weather? of winds? or
of the tranquillity of the heavens? Pliny in his second book of natural
history, seems to be of opinion, Plinius lib 2. natural. hist. cap. 59. Plin
lib. 18. cap. 59.
that it is no certain sign of of any of these; yet in his eighteenth book
he affirms, that when two Rainebowes appear, it is a sign of Rain, and if
a Rainbowe appear after showers, it is a sign of fair whether, although not
always certain, But Seneca teaches, that as the Rainbow does appear,
Seneca. lib. 1. naturel. quest. cap. 6.
in a diverse region of the air, or in a diverse time of the day, so it does
portend, diverse things: If in the morning, it shows Rain that is past, and
some small showers to come; If at noone, or there abouts, it is a sign of
greater showers; Scaliger. contra cardanum exercitat.
but if it appear at night, it signifies fair weather, to whom Scaliger,
others accord. And the reason of this, is given by Philsophers, because a
morning Bow, being full of the moist vapors of the night, is as it were a
vessel, of some following showers, by reason of the thick mistes that
remain. A meridian Bow, does carry greater store of waters, and portendeth
more Rain, because the waters gathered, cannot be dried up, with the most
vehement heat of the Sun, such is the greatness of their force, And an
evening Bow, having the greatest part of the moist and vapoury miste dried up
in the former part of the day, promises fair weather, and therefore seldom or
never does any store of Rain follow im^ediately after. But I proceed
forwards, God has appointed it for a sign.

And a sign as S. Augustine describes it, S. August. l. 2. de Doct. Christ.
cap. 1. Signum vero est res praeter speciem quam ingerit sensibus aliud aliquid
ex sefaciens in cogitationem venire. 2. King. 20.11 Joel. 2.31. Genesis 2.9.
Judges 6.37, 38, 39. Isaiah 7.14. Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.3. Math. 28.19. Luke
22.19.
is a thing which does cause, another matter to be remembered, besides that
external figure, which it does show to the outward senses: And signs are
commonly of 3. sorts, the first, signastuporis, signs of wonder and amazement,
as the Sun, when it went ten degrees back at the prayer of Ezechia. The second
signaterroris, signs of terror and affrightment, as those signs which shall
be before the day of judgment, when the Sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, The third are signa amoris signs of love and
contentment, As the particular signs of Gods love to his elect, and these
either to certain persons, as the tree of life to our first parents in
Paradise, Gene. 2. The wet and dry fleece to Gidion, or the conception of the
virgin to king Achas, or to the whole Church either before Christ, as
Circumcision, the Passover, and Sacrifices; or since Christ, as Baptism, and
the Supper, or last of all that universal sign of Gods love, to the whole
world, the admirable Rainebowe, which he has appointed for a sign of the
covenant, between him and the earth.

Ecce post policitationem verbo factam and hoc signum addo (says S. Chrysostom.)
as speaking of God, Behold, after my promise, 1. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in
Genes.
I do give you a seal of my promise, to confirm the same. So that God does
not only manifest his love by Oracles, and bind himself by promise, and
covenant, but he proceeds further, and adds sacraments, and seals to his
covenant, Gods omits nothing that may confirm the faith of his chosen.
that he might seem to omit nothing, which might serve to confirm the faith
of his chosen, Thus did he in the Spiritual covenant, he gave to our first
parents in paradise, the sacrament of the tree of life, and of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, he gave to the Patriarchs the sacrament of
circumcision, and the passover, he has given to his church since, the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Supper: and thus he does in the corporal
covenant, he gives unto Noah the admirable Rainebow, for the confirmation of
his faith, and to be a seal of the covenant between him and the earth: to
teach us to banish incredulity, Incredulity must be banished.
and to believe his promises. For as the use of the Rainebow on the part of
God, is to testify his grace and mercy unto men, so the use of the Rainebow
one the part men, is to confirm their faith, Mercelus in Genes.
and love toward God, the Jews are exceeding religious in this matter, for
when they see the Rainbow, they go forth, fall down, and confess their sins,
acknowledging themselves worthy to be drowned with a flood of Gods vengeance;
though we are not bound to be superstitious, yet fitting it is, that we should
not forget Gods infinite love, and mercy toward us.

Allegory 1. The rainbow a sign of the Gospel.
Again it shall be for a sign, Allegorically this Rainebow is a sign of the
evangelical Law, for as the Rainebow being set for a sign, did show forth
peace, pardon, and glory, so the evangelical law, brought with it, grace,
remission of sins, and promise and assurance, of eternal glory in the
heavens. Secondly this Rainebow does signify the incarnate word of God,
Allegory 2.
God in the flesh, or the humanity of Christ, and that after a manifold
analogy, A manifold Analogy between Christ and the Bow.
and similitude between them For first as the Sun shining in the Cloud, does
beget a glorious and beautiful Bow, so the eternal word of God, that most
powerful Sun of righteousness shining in, and upon our humane nature, did
as it were beget a glorious and blessed Redeemer, after a divine and wonderful
manner. Secondly, as the rainbow was a Symbol of peace in the time of Noah; so
the incarnation of Christ was the reconciliation of the world. Thirdly, the two
horns or ends of the Bow, may signify the two natures of Christ, his divine,
and humane, of which the hidden and invisible string, is like unto the secret
and admirable hypostaticall union of his twofold nature. Fourthly, in the
Rainebowe there is a three-folde color, and so likewise in Christ; for Christ
was Caerulean, or Caelestiall by prayer, he was green and flourishing, by the
flowers of spiritual graces, and heavenly virtues, of which he was full, as
Saint John speaks. John 1. verse 14. Ioh. 1.14.
And he was read by his blood, shed upon the Altar of the cross, by
treading the winepresse of Gods wrath alone, by which his raiment was stained,
as the Prophet speaks. Isaiah. 63.3.
Fifthly as from this Bow are sent forth, diverse secret, sweet, and
comfortable virtues, amiable to the flowers of the earth, so likewise, from
that mystical, and heavenly Rainebow Christ Jesus, are sent down many sweet,
comfortable, and hidden arrows of divine love, with which his blessed spouse,
being wounded to the heart, sings in her passionate love to Christ her husband,
stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. Sixthly,
as this Bow is imbrifera, a Rainie-bowe, Cant. 2.4.
so likewise was that divine Rainebow Christ Jesus, when one the day of
Pentecost, he did shower down in abundance, the sweet rain of heavenly
grace, and caelestiall doctrine, into the hearts of his Apostles, and does
continually shower down, his infinite blessings upon his servants. In a word
this Rainebow being a semicircle descending toward the earth, and ascending
toward heaven, may fitly show Christ descending toward the earth to take our
nature upon him, to free us by his passion from the wrath of his father, and
his ascension to prepares a place for us, where we shall one day live, and
rejoice with him, in glory and happiness, for evermore. And thus does the
Rainebowe figure that heavenly Bow Christ Jesus.

Or otherwise this Rainebow is a figure of Christ, In another manner the
Rainebow is a figure of Christ.
the clouds may signify his body, the threefold color, his threefold
substance, his flesh, his soul, and his divinity, or his threefold supreme
dignity, spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, of King, of Judge, and of Lawgiuer,
or last of all, his threefold spiritual office, of King, Priest, and of
Prophet. Per^rius in Genes.
To be short the Philosophers teach that the Rainebow does consist of a
threefold substance, the earth, the water, and the air, from whence does arise
the threefold variety, of his color, of green, read and watery; And by this
is insinuated the greatness, of divine mercy, Gods mercy in a threefold
respect.
manifested unto men in a threefold respect, in the state of nature, of the law
of Moses, and of the Gospel: in the state of creation, of natural corruption,
and spiritual grace: in the grace of predestination, from all eternity, of
justification in time, and of glorification, beyond all time. But I dwell too
long in these Allegories; yet once again.

It shall be for a sign. We read in the Scripture of diverse apparitions of this
glorious Bow, in the vision of the divine majesty, Ezekiel. 1.28.
which was showed to Ezekiel, the brightness of the glory of God was like unto
the Bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain. In the Revelation to that
Evangelical Prophet S. John, Revel. 4.3. Polan. de Sacramento faderis.
there was a rainbowe round about the throne, in sight like unto an Emerald: A
Rainebowe, to signify that God was mindful of his covenant with Noah, and
with his posterity. In sight like unto an Emerald, to show the mercy of God
toward the penitent, whom God does refresh with a gracious countenance.
Pererius in Genes.
A Rainbow compassing a throne: the Rainebow signifies the mercy of God, and
the throne his Church, to show, that God does protect and defend his Church
with perpetual mercy, as the Rainbow did compass the throne.

Lastly, in another vision, S. John beholds a mighty Angel come down from
heaven, Revel. 10.1. Angel. Christ, Cloud, Humanity, Rainbowe, Covenant.
clothed with a cloud, and a rainebow upon his head, his face shining like the
Sun, and his feet as pillars of brass. A mighty Angel, that is Christ Jesus
clothed with a cloud, that is, his humanity; and having a Rainebow about his
head, to show that he is the Author of the covenant, and of our reconciliation
with God, figured likewise by the Rainbow in my text. But I pass to the last
part of my text, the intimation of the internal significate, in the last
words, Of the covenant between me and the earth: Of which I will give a touch,
and so conclude.

The fifth part. Covenant.
Erit signum foederis, it shall be for a sign of the covenant; that is, a sign
which shall seal, and confirm that covenant which I have entered with mankind,
as the seal of a King confirms the Charter granted to his subjects, nay much
more firm, for that may altar, because it is from man, but this is
unchangeable, A twofold Covenant.
because it is from God. This Covenant which God has entered with mankind, is
twofold, a spiritual covenant, and a corporal covenant: The spiritual
covenant does consist of two branches, the first, the covenant of works, and
the second, the covenant of grace. Covenant of works.
The covenant of works, is that which God made with our first parents, before
their fall, promising unto them eternal happiness, if they continued obedient
unto his commandments, which were dictated unto them, as by word of mouth, and
written in their hearts, by the power of his Spirit. The current of this was,
Hoc fac, and viues, do this, and thou shall live.

The covenant of grace Covenant of grace.
was that which God made with our first parents, after their fall, promising
them eternal life, and freedom from wrath in Christ Jesus, the seed of the
woman shall break the head of the serpents. Genes. 3. Genes. 3.15.
The current of this is, hoc creed and viues, Believe this and thou shall live.

The corporal covenant, Corporal covenant.
concerns temporal benefits; and this is that which God made with Noah, and
his sons, and their posterity for ever, and with every living creature, upon
the face of the earth, especially aimed at by Moses, in the words of my text,
It shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and the earth.

1. This covenant was made between God and the earth, that is the inhabitants
of the earth, with Noah and with his seed after him. God then was mindful of
us, before we were borne, God mindful of us before we were borne.
mindful of us not in anger, but in grace, much more will be not be
forgetful now, while we walk in the path of faith, and ways of
righteousness. 2. The mercy of God far exceeds his justice.
Again this covenant was an everlasting covenant, not to continue for a short
time, but to the end of the world, to show that the mercy of God does far
exceed his justice, for the rigor of his justice, was but for a little space,
in once destroying the world by water, but his mercy is perpetual, in the
continual preservation thereof. For a moment in mine anger, have I hid my face
from thee, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, (says the
Lord of hoasts) Isaiah 54 8. Isaiah 4.8.
To move us to rely on Gods mercy, in the depth of misery, and to sing with
the Prophet David, Sorrow may endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
but joy comes in the morning.

To conclude, The spiritual covenant, the fountain of the corporal.
it shall be for a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. Of this
covenant the Rainbow was a seal, and as it seals this covenant, so it signs
in this that eternal covenant of God with his Church, Ferus in Genes.
which is the fountain and foundation of this; Pactum hoc cum Noe
praefigurauit faedus Christi cum Ecclesia, says one: This covenant with Noah
did prefigure that covenant of Christ with his Church, spoken of Isaiah 54.10.
Isaiah 54.10.
Iris designat Christum, qui est signum reconciliationis perfectae. The Rainbow
does figure Christ, who is a figure of our perfect reconciliation, a sign of
our eternal friendship with God the Father, and an everlasting memorial of
our peace: Christ the mystical rainbow an everlasting memorial of our peace.
For although the Rainebowe, the outward sign, shall pass away with clouds;
yet notwithstanding, the covenant, of which it is a sign, the memorial of our
redemption, that shall remain for ever in the sight of God the Father, and be
visible in the flesh of his Son, in the charactars of the wounds of his
hands, of his feet, and of his side, by which he procured our most happy and
endless peace; Romans 5.1. Acts 10.36. Ephesians. 1.6. Hebr. 1.14. Isaiah 11.6.
Acts 4.32. Luke 2.29. Phil. 4.7. Ecclus. 2.14.
peace with God the Father, yea with the blessed Trinity, peace with the
blessed and glorious Angels, blessed and happy peace one Christian with
another. And last of all, but not least of all, peace of conscience, which
passes all understanding. Which happy and endless peace with God the Father,
with the blessed Trinity, the glorious Angels, the blessed Saints, and our
own consciences, with everlasting blessedness for ever, God of thy endless
mercy, and most infinite grace grant unto us, to thy whole Church, to every
one of thy faithful servants, for the unspeakable love, and inestimable
merits of thy dear Son, our blessed Savior: To whom with thee and the holy
and most blessed Spirit, one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, be
ascribed all honor, glory, and power, all might, majesty, and dominion, this
day, and for evermore. Amen.

(...).

