REMAINS OF THAT REVEREND AND FAMOVS POSTILLER, JOHN BOYS, Doctor in
Divinity, and late Deane of CANTERBVRIE.

Containing sundry Sermons; partly, on some Proper Lessons used in our English
Liturgy: And partly, on other select portions of holy Scripture.

Uivit post Funera.

HEBR 11. Being dead he yet speaks. LONDON:

Printed by AV^: MATH: for HVMPHREY ROBI^ and are to be sold at the three
Pigeons in Paule's Churchyard. 1631.

A BRIEF VIEW OF the s^fe, and virtues of the Author.
CHRISTIAN READER,
GIve me leave to put thee in mind, (because I know thou art not ignorant of
it,) that Man, notwithstanding he has but a doleful Ingresse into the world,
and a miserable Progress in this world, yet can scarce brook (if natures
Statute could be repealed) a willing Egresse, out of the world. And I think it
a reason sufficient, because while we are alive; we think, A living dog
better then a dead Lion; Eccles. 9. 4.
From whence this inbred desire of Man proceeds to labor so much, for the
continuance of this (...), Oh sp^ me a Psalm., 9. 13.
little, says David, before I go hen^, being loath to loose an hairs breadth
of tha^ little Spanne, allotted unto him; And that being, which nature denies
in our selves, we desire may be continued in those that spring from our loins,
from whence Plato called Marriage, (...), A device to bring Immortality into
the world; thus good 1. Sam 1.
Hann^h seeks for a Samuel, with tears, Genesis ^0. 4.
and impatient Ra^el was earnest for children, whose birth afterward cost her
her own life; And yet though we in our selves, and in our children, which are
our Images, pay Nature her Tribute; Yet still we draw on the line of life, by a
continued Succession, and when we cannot be thus much beholding to Nature; but
that there must be some Barren Mount, 2. Sam. 1 21.
like that of Gilboa^, upon which the Deaw of Heaven falls not, Yet then we
devise other Artificial means, for the preservation ^. Sam. 18. 1^.
of our memories; Thus Absalom will have his Pillar reared in the Kings dale;
Dixerat enim non est mihi filius, It being the curse of the wicked man, that
his name shall be as rottennes, and dung upon the earth, and his memory clean
put out, But for the righteous, they shall be h^d in Everlasting remembrance:
Of such men Psalm. 112. 6.
speaks the son of Syrach, Their bodies ecclus. 44 14.
are buried in peace, but their name lives for ever, The people spea^e of
their wisdom, and the congregation talk of their praise.

Amongst which men, I may (without prejudice to any) rank a worthy and famous
Divine of our age, Mr. John Boyse, Dr. in Divinity, and sometimes Deane of the
Metropolitical Church of Canterbury, who being dead, yet speaks; And why term
I him dead? Numquid enim non vivitur? utique et beat; visus est oculis
insipientium mori, ille autem vivit in pace: One indeed that has discharged
natures debt; Et non est illi filius, He has no child to continue his name
here among us, yet he reared him else, while he was alive, A Pillar in the
Kings dale, He that was ^lumna spirans (as Theodoret called (...)) a breathing
Pillar, has left behind him a monument of his fame, which Time cannot deface,
nor the rotten tooth of Envy ever obliterate; At whose death some Polished
Stones were found, which now the Press has fitted, for the enlarging of his
former building.

And has he had all this care for us? A thankful heart will be desiring
with 2 King. 4. 13.
Elisha, what we shall do for him? The women the^ that followed our Savior
from Ga^le, will be a good pattern, who (though the good Arimathean had
decently Luke. 23 35.
enterred the body of our Savior) could not be content till they had prepared,
and brought their odours to the Sepulcher; In like manner, though his loving
wife has done as much for him, as Iaacob dif for Gen 35. 20.
his Rachel, set a Pillar upon his grave; Yet would I, who had no small share
in his love, present some Odours, and I would be as willing to beg, as I am
unable to buy some of the son of Syrachs Perfume, made by the hand of a
skillful Apothecary, If this Alabaster box of spikenard, had not been so
lately broken, so that the smell is not yet gone; It shall suffice then for my
part, to rub a little the spices, that grew in this pleasant garden, and leave
the sequel to your Christian discretion, considering both the custom, and use
of such like Panegyricks, quibus ipsi grati sumus erga mortuos, et ipsi de vita
nostra cautiores, The first commanded by the son of Syrach, Ecclus. 7.
Mortuo non negabis gratiam, the other commended by him, as profitable for the
living, 44* 16.
saying, that Enoch was translated for an example of repentance, to the
generations; Concerning whose life, we may the better set it down, by
answering the Prophet David's three interrogatories, What am I? and what is my
life? and what is the family of my father in Israel? The resolution of these
three Quaeres, concerning this party, shall end this discourse; beginning with
the last.

He was borne at Eythorne, a village in East-kent, a place wherein, as he
sucked his first breath, so there he vented his last gasp; A place for air,
(if the pureness of it add any help to ingenuitie,) that sure the pleasant
temperature of it yielded some furthera^ce to his sweet and witty disposition,
whose fathers house, was not lik the Prophet Isayes Casula in deserto; Nor was
he taken with David from the sheepfolds, But he sprang from a worthy and
ancient family, and who knows not that Gemma in Auro, when the precious Gemms
of Grace, are set and placed in a golden nature, they must needs give a goodly
luster? (...)* said Euripides in Hecuba, and the tree may easily be discerned
by the fruit; as S Basil speaks well, (...), The Parents worth best known,
by their care, in bringing up their children, and therefore Plato in his
Theage, professed, that he knew not upon what any one thing a wise man could
better bestow his best endeauours; (...), then that his son should grow up to
the height of virtue and goodness, hence was this and another Olive branch,
springing from the same root, transplanted into the famous Nursery of good
literature, the University of Cambridge, wherein they grew to that Maturity and
ripeness, that the one was fit for any honor in the Church, the other for any
imploiment in the Commonwealth; so that I may truly say of them, as the
Hystorian of Anthemus, (...).

The second Question is, What am I? If any had asked so much while he was
alive, I know his modest soul, would have replied with the Prophet David, I
Psalm* 22 6.
am a worm, and no man; his humility and meekness of mind, did witness no
less: Those two virtues which St. Bernard Sermon. de assumpt.
tells us, are Collactaneae* like the poor man, and his one only sheep in
Nathans 2. Sam 12.
Parable, they are nourished up together, they eat of the same morsels, and
drink of the same cup, both which manifest themselves by the same means, so
that we may easily guess where they dwell, if we find in any man these three
properties, that there is; In vultu serenitas, in opere gratia, in cord ad
omnes dulcedo. (As the same father speaks) there is true humility, and
lowliness of mind; which, whosoever knew him, knew well to be in him, which
made him not an ordinary man; (Though Trismegistus boasts much of that
privilege of nature, making man no less then a miracle) but as Melancthon
esteemed Luther, Miraculum inter homines, having as many virtues couched
together, in that little house of clay, as was almost possible for that frail
vessel to contain: Neither was he Angusti oris Uasculum, a straight mouthd
vessel, as vvilling to retain to himself, what was due to others, we know
the contrary, that the streams of his goodness, flowed abroad plentifully, to
the refreshing of many a dry and barren land, where no water was, so that there
were in his time, and yet are few souls in our Mother Church, that taste not
of his brooks that ru^ne in the way. He needed not in a fearful jealousy,
have asked them about him, Whom, or what men do say that I am? Loquatur
invidia; I dare trust this Daniel amongst such lions, whose mouths sure his
goodness would stop, being truly such a man, as Dyon reports of Mark Anthony,
(...), a constant man, no changeling, and his constancy was grounded upon a
good foundation, (...) such a man he was of whom that Noble Elogie which
Trithemius gave to Leo the Great, may with some moderation, I d^re say truly,
in part be applied to him, Fuit Ecclesiasticae Dictionis Tullius, Sacrae
Theologiae Homerus, Rationum Fidei Aristotle's, Authoritatis Apostolicae Petrus,
et in Christiano Pulpito Paulus. Only for mine own sake, and for my Brethrens
sake, of the Linen Ephod, I must take up S. Bernards wish upon the death of
Malachy, the Irish Bishop, Vtinam sic nos post trahat, vt pertrahat in tam
recenti virtutum eius adore avidius, alacriusque currentes.

And now the last Q^uaere comes in, which cannot well be distinguished from
the second; What is my life? It is easily answered, being nothing else, but
(...), And I will make it as briefly a compendium of so large a Volume as I
can.

His parents as they gave him (...), and (...), so they were not wanting for
the chief, and last thing which the Philosopher requires at Parents hands,
which is (...) a care to bring him up in instruction, and information of the
Lord; So that after h^e had sucked the milk, which the lesser schools
afford; for imitating of youth in the country, he was sent to the University,
where in due time by his pains and proficiency, he was made Candidate, and Mr
of Arts, After which honor, he thinks not presently, (as many do) that
he was come, ad (...), to his perfection; nor stays he there long
deliberating, what profession he should take upon him, (as many University men
do, whose distracted studies, hinders their proficiency,) but betakes himself
to the study of Divinity, for the attaining of which heavenly knowledge, he
used the best means both for his entrance into his course of study, as also for
his proceeding therein; procuring the acquaintance, and after gaining the heart
of a famous Professor in Divinity, then, and after a most worthy and eminent
Prelate of this land, Dr. Ouerall, Who like a good Palinure, taught him the way
how to become a skillful Steeres-man, in the little bark of Gods Church.

And having once tasted the sweetness of this honey, as Jonathan did, but with
the typpe of his rod; he would not give over, till he had gotten Saint Paul's
2. Tim. 1 13.
(...), that plat-forme of sound Doctrine, which after made him famous; Which
well did witness his pains in reading Sacred Scripture, in pervsing the
Fathers, Schoolmen, and what else might make him, (...), more serious he was
at his book, then Diogenes, of whom Aelian reports, that he did De v^r. hist.
lib. 13.
but (...), extremit^tes foliorum comeder^, For he was rather Hell^o Librorum,
eating whole r^ules (with the Prophet of Sacred learning; When he had gathered
his Omer full of Manna^, at the Schools of the Prophets, then he leaves the
University, thinking it high time to distribute that honey, which like a
laborious Be, he had gathered in the garden of the Prophets; So that his
countrymen, at his return, needed not to have asked that question, for the
time past, which the Spouse does for the present Tell me, O thou whom our
souls love, where Cant. 1* 6.
have thou f^dde? Because they might easily discern; both where, and how he
had fed; for as Ep^ctetus tells us, how we may know by two infallible
tokens, Quantum ov^s comed^rint, viz Lana^t Lacte, So might they easily guess,
Quantum hic Gregis Aries, (as Augustine calls such as Epistola 89.
he wa^) (...) (...), Lana and Lacte, by his skarlet ^eece, a robe of the
greatest honor, that his Mother University could bestow upon him; and that
plenteousnesse of milk* which he ^ad gotten by his choice and of^n feeding, in
David's Psalm. 3 ^.
g^eene Pastures, by the still waters; which he as freely distributed to
others, as ever he received, for having a private charge of his own in the
country, there he spent much time, feeding his own flock at home, by his
continual preaching unto them, and others also, when he began Fauos facere, to
make his ho^y comb, that sweet book of his Postill^, whose sweetness as it
gives repast to many painful Bees, so contrary to his intention feeds some
idle droanes in our Mother Church.

And here (if the bounds of a preface would permit) I might set forth a
Catalogue of his virtues, seeing by this time he was come to his full
Maturity, and ripeness; reckoning his virtues Natural as a Man, or Moral as
a Good man, or Theological, as a Religious man, or Pastoral as a Sacred and
Ministerial man, commending him for them, as Melancthon does Luther, for his
learning, Pomeranus est Gra^maticus, ego sum Logicus, Iustus Jonas et Orator,
sed Lutherus est omnia in omnibus; So was he for his virtues, All the fresh
springs they were in him, He had purposed to spend himself, and end his days
in private, had not his countries love, especially the Gentries care, drawn
him out of this private course of life, not leaving him till they see him at
the stern of Christ's Church in Canterbury, whereof he lived and died a
loving, and careful Deane; The greatest part of which worthy society, can yet
witness his pains in preaching every week* if not at his own charge, yet
there where was more need, his devotion in frequenting public prayers, his
constancy in his studies; his studious vigilance for the public affairs, both
of the Church and the Common wealth; So that he might with as little
Ostentation, have spoken of himself, as Luther did of himself, Ego sum
oneratiss^mus, psalterium exigit ^ntegrum hominem, totum eundem Concio ad
Populum, totum preculae and instituti m^i cultus, totum negotio^um alienorum
occupatio; I am burdened more then any man my pains in my Pesth^ls* require a
whole man, My Preaching to the people, a whole man, My private and public
devotions, a whole man; common affairs belonging to my place in the Church, in
the common wealth, a whole man: So that I may compare his life to such an one
as S Augustine wished Eudoxius the Abbot to lead, Inter ignem et Aquam, Inter
Apicem, Superbiae Epistola. ^1.
et voraginem Desidiae, Neither inclining to Pride on the right hand, nor
idleness on the left; Wheresoever he lived, leaving some remarkable token of
his goodness; Witness his mother Camebridge, who will still remember him as
truly for his learning as Trithemius did for Algerus: Vir fuit in sanctis
Scripturis jug^ studio exercitatus, veterum quoque Lectione Dives, atque in
Secularibus literis magnifice doctus, ingenio cautus et disertus eloquio* And
for his life, the like Testimony may be easily procured, that there was none in
the University more obseruant of Order, Habit, ^xercises, both public and
private; I have heard it from his own mouth, (and he had, (...)) that he
never missed public Sermon at St. Mary's, during all the time of his abode
there, save twice; I am loath to defile mine own nest, Yet I fear, Aetas
Parentum, peior Avis tulit nos nequiores: Witness likewise the Church in
general, for whom willingly he would have spent himself; so that few are
left behind, but are loosers by his death, Heaven only a gainer, in whose
blessed mansions he now rests, fully satisfied with the melodious harmony of
that Supernall Quire, Part of which music I think he heard before he
departed this life, for the night before he dyed, all his discourse was of
music, and being demanded whether he heard any, or what music he meant, his
answer was; O Gabriel, Gabriel, Sure the blessed Choristers of Heaven, were
ready to carry his soul with joy into his Masters joy.

I will conclude with him, as S* August* concerning his dear beloved,
Nebridius* Nunc vivit in sinu Abrahae Boysius meus, dulcis amicus meus, nam
quis alius tali animae Locus? My dear friend now rests in Abraham's bosom, for
sure there is no oath place for so Divine a soul.

Thus gentle Reader have I given thee a short survey of the life of him, whom
perhaps thou knew (though not in his person) yet in his works; If I have
come short of what his desert might justly challenge, (as the relation of
Solomon did to the Queen of Saba) I must crave crave pardon for my weakness
in this kind, it being thank worthy for him that has no better (...), or if I
have shot my few arrows over the mark with Jonathan, I shall be well content
with S. Augustines censure upon Tully, for his large commendations of Caesar
(So it may be with his gloss) Dicebat hoc tam Magnus Laudator, aut tam Magnus
Adulator sed si Laudator talem noverit, si autem adulator talem esse debere
ostendebat.

To conclude, if this last work of his, find but that acceptance with thee,
which uttered Viva Voce, it gave to the auditors, or if this, Prol s Posthuma
have but some resemblance with his former offspring, that it be not thought
altogether Spurious, I doubt not but thou will be easily induced together with
me, and others that have been bettered by the godly example, and heavenly
labors of this holy man, to glorify the Author of every good and perfect gift,
who will not cease to raise up such excellent instruments for his own glory,
and the Churches good: To whose blessed Protection I commit thee, Ever Resting*

Thine in what he may R. P.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
Sermons on Proper Lessons.
1 The first Lesson at Morning Prayer on the second Sunday in Aduent. ESAIAS 5.
18. Woe unto them that draw inquitie with cords of vinitie, and sin as it
were with a cartrope. Page 1 2 The first Lesson at Morning Prayer on the first
Sunday after Epiphany. ESAIAS 41. 14. Fear not worm Jacob, etc.16 3 The first
Lesson at Evensong on the fourth Sunday after Epiphanie. ESAIAS 58. 7. Break thy
bread to the hungry. 31 4 The first Lesson at Morning Prayer on Sep^ Sunday.
(...) 1. 26. And God said, let us make man in our image after our likeness. 50
5 The first Lesson at Morning Prayer on the seventh Sunday after Trinity. 2 SAMUEL 24. 14. Let us fall now into the hands of the Lord (for his mercies are
great) and let me not fall into the hand of man. 70 6 The first Lesson at
Morning Prayer on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. 2 KING. 19. 36. So
Sennacherib King of Ashur departed, and went his way* and returned and dwelt in
Niniue: and as he was in the Temple worshipping Nisroch his God* Ad^amelech and
Sharezar his sons slew him with the sword 89 7 The first Lesson at Morning
Prayer on the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. DAN. 13* 16. Shadrach, Mesech,
and Abednago, answered and said unto the King, etc. 106 8 The first Lesson at
Morning Prayer on the one and twentieth Sunday after Trinity. ABACVCK. 2. 9.
Woe be to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house 121
Other Sermons upon several Occasions.
1 On Rogation Sunday. PROVE. 22 28. Remove not the ancient bounds which thy
Fathers have made. 135 2 At the Sessions. ROMANS 13. 4. He is the Minister of God
for thy good. 160 3 A Funeral Sermon. PSALM. 42. 9. One deep calls another.
197 4 Before the King at Christchurch. PSALM. 84. 10. One day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand. 211 5 On PSALM. 105. 4. Seek the Lord and his
strength, seek his face evermore. 228 6 JOHN 8. 6. Jesus stopped down, and
with his singer wrote on the ground. 254 7 JAMES 5. 16. Confess your faults
one to another. 27^
SERMONS ON Proper Lessons.
ESAIAS 5. 18. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as it were with a Cart rope.
IN this Text two points are to beediscussed especially.

First, the goodness of God who soundes a woe, before he sendes a woe.

Secondly, the wickedness of man, in drawing iniquity.

Touching the first, in holy writ we find two kinds of woes: a woe of
Condoling, and a woe of Condemning. Condoling, as Psalm. 1^0. Woe is me that I
am constrained to dwell with Misery. Mica. 7. 1. Woe is me for I am as the
Grape gleaning of the Vintage. And in this Prophecy Chap. 6. verse. 5. Woe is
me for I am undone. This kind of woe nothing at al, or very little concerns our
present Text: that other is two fold, to wit, a woe of instruction, and a woe
of destruction: or in plainer terms a woe denounced, and a woe executed.

The woe whereof I am now to treat, and many more both after and before these
words. As woe to them that join house to house, and field to field: Till there
be no place for others in the Land. Woe to them who rise up early to follow
drunkenness: Woe to them who speak good of evil, and evil of good: are but
warnings, and so, by consequent, armings against that heavy woe of destruction,
which in the end of the Chapter is threatened by a nation that shall come from
far with arrows that are sharp, and all their bows bent, with horses
having hoofes like flint, and with Chariots having wheels like whirlwinds,
roaring as the Lion, or as the roaring Seas; Executing the judgments of God
upon the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, in such sort that none
shall deliver them.

In the days of security, to sound out the woes of severity is not welcome,
though it be wholesome: it is harsh unto flesh and blood, unto such as are at
A^. 6. 1.
ease in Sion: unto such as have made a E^. ^8. 15.
league with death, and with hell agreement, unto such as dream of Ezech. 13.
10
peace when there is no peace; Saying to the seers see not, and to the Prophets
prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering things, Esaias* 30. 10.
But the Thundering of woe is wholesome to such as have hearts and ears to Heb.
13. 22.
suffer the words of exhortation. It is so far from either bringing or
hastening of woe, as that (if it work true repentance) it does often defer,
and sometime deliver us from a woe hanging over our heads: Howsoever the wicked
had rather once feel, then ever fear destruction and woe: yet it is an
argument of Gods infinite rich mercy (who Ezech. 18. 32
desires not the death of a sinner) first, to become a Preacher, and then a
punisher; First to sound a woe, before he send a woe: First to speak to us in
his wrath, before he vex us in his sore displeasure. Psalm. 2. 5.

So we read that he did inioyne his Prophets to Esaias. 58 1.
cry aloud, and to lift up their voice like a Trumpet in showing his people
their trangressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins: And Christ albeit
he were the Prince of peace Esaias. 9. 6. did choose some for his Apostles who
were the Mark. 3. 17.
Sons of Thunder, so well as others who were the Sons of Consolation, and
after ascending up on high and giving gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8. He bestowed
upon his Apostles not only cloven, but all so fiery tongues, Acts. 2. 3. That
they might not only direct, but also correct: as 2 Timothy 4 2.
St. Paul speaks improve rebuke, etc. As Nazianzen wrote of Basil, that they
might lighten in their doings, and thunder in their doctrines. In this Chapter
at the 6. verse the preachers are compared unto clouds, I will command the
clouds that they rain no more rain upon my Vineyard, That is, the pastors
and teachers that they preach no more. When the Lord (says ^in Ps 35. at
Chrysostom. homil. 20. in Math
Augustine) by the mouths of his ministers denounces a woe, then he thunders
in the clouds: But when they bring the glad tidings of salvation, he
distilleth as it were drops of his mercy, sending a joyful rain tha^
refreshes his inheritance; God as an exquisite musician twines the strings of
our hearts every way, that he may put us in tune, he has a longing desire that
the tears of our repentance may quench utterly the Coals of his displeasure,
for albeit the Math. 3. 10.
Axe be laid unto the root of the tree: yet shall it not be hewn down so
long as there remains any hope for fruits of amendment. It is true that God
(if men will not turn) Psalm. ^. 13.
has his Bow bent and ready, but as he that shootes to hit another, has the
string of his Bow upon his own breast: Even so God in drawing the Bow to
shoot the bitter arrows of his wrath against us, has his hand on his heart
and in the midst of his anger he remembers mercy, Abacuc. 3. 2. Denouncing a
great many woes, before he will execute as much as one woe.

This exceeding kindness and long suffering in God, commendat et emendat, as
Augustine speaks, it recommends God as a pattern teaching us to be (...). 3^.
merciful as our Father in heaven is merciful. Is the Psalm. 145. 8.
Lord gracious, full of pity, long suffering and of great goodness: Then I
beseech you, be followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5. 1. As God said
unto Moses, Exodus 25. 40. So I say to thee, fac secundum exemplar, perform
that which is good according to the pattern. Do not rashly judge, much less
condemn any man ^ Cor. 4. 5.
before the time, but expect amendment in thy greatest enemy, hope the best
even of the worst, although he draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as it were with cart-ropes.

Secondly, the bountifulnes and long suffering of God lead us to repentance,
Romans 2. 4. For that which is counted of man slackenesse, is in God patience,
desiring that no man should perish, but all should amend and be saved, 2. Pet.
3. 9. If we shall harden our hearts and neglect the woes of instruction,
undoubtedly the woes of destruction will one day come upon us. If we continue
not only to sin, but to delight in sin: and not only to delight in sin,
but to boast of sin: and not only to boast of sin, but also to justify
sin; As to make good evil, and evil good, drawing iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with a carte rope: What do we but Romans 2. 5.
heap upon our selves wrath, against the day of wrath: and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God.

The diseases of our age through a long peace, grow for the most part by riot
and excess, and consequently have not so much use of restoratiues, as need of
launcing and corrasiues: when the wounds of the people, says Ser de (...)
Cyprian, are tumentia, then the preachers as good Chirurgions must open the
swelling veins of pride, and lance the puffed-vp impostumes of greedy
desires, then it is their duty to cry, woe be to those that are mighty to drink
wine; woe be to those that are wise in their own sight: woe be to those who
justify the wicked for reward. In a word, the best music for our times is
that of the Angel, Apocalypse. 8. 13. Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the
earth.

And because men have despised the Prophets and Math* 23. 37.
stoned, (if not with hard flint, Aug. contra aduers. leg^ lib. 2. cap. 4.
yet with hard speeches and usage) such as have been sent unto them early and
late: Therefore God makes the very dumb creatures to Preach and sound out his
woes in the midst of a perverse generation. The foundations of the earth
quaking and shaking under our feet, have denounced a woe: the roaring waves,
and raging floods ouerwhelming some parts of the dry land, have denounced a
woe. The great frosts, and great snowes, and great storms have denounced a
woe: unseasonable weathers turning our Winters into Summers, and Summers into
Winters have denounced a woe. Many strange signs and wonders in Heaven have
denounced a woe. The blazing star the last year was (as Ser. 3. in Epiph.
Augustine said of the star directing the wise men to the place where the
blessed Babe lay) magnifica lingua coeli the stately tongue of heaven. And as
we have heard, so have we seen what great wonders it has prognosticated in
the City of God. (...) 206. i^ lib Sapient.
Holcott makes mention of certain strange flies in Norfolk, devouring about
the beginning of harvest almost all the blades of corn, the which had
imprinted on their painted wings these two words IRA DEI, upon the one wing
IRA, upon the other DEI. Beloved he that runs may read in all the woes
denounced against our Land IRA DEI: the wrath of God, inuiting us to break off
our sins: and by true repentance to cease from drawing iniquity with cords
of vanity, and wickedness as it were with a carte rope.

That draw sin: To hale sin Calvin in loc.
is to use all allurements, occasions and excuses to harden the conscience in
sin: for the wicked hunt after sin Ephe. 4. 19.
ene^ with such a greedines that Tremel* in ^oc.
iniquity draw^ not them so much as they draw iniquity, mak^ sin strong by
their wickedness. To draw wickedness with cords, is nothing else but to Aug
in Psa. 130 et Hier on. in loc.
heap sin upon sin, binding sins together, as the wiseman speaks, adding
to bad thoughts bad words, and to bad words bad deeds: until the threeds of
iniquity by wrething grow to be Cords, and the cords in fine become so great
as Cart-ropes. It is reported in the Gospels history that Christ raised from
the dead Math. 9. 25.
Iayrus daughter newly dead, the Luke 7 15.
Widows son dead and wound up, and lying on the hearse, and Ioh. 11. ^4.
Lazarus dead and buried and stinking in the Grave. Now these three sorts of
Coarses (as Ser 44 de verbis Domini.
Augustine notes) are three sorts of sinners* sayrus daughter lying dead in her
Fathers house resembles all those that sin by inward consent; the widows
son being carried out of the gates of the City those that sin by outward
act: Lazarus dead and buried four days, those that sin by continual
habit; being dead says Augustine, the first day by conceiving sin, the
second by consenting to sin; the third by committing sin: the fourth by
continuing in sin. The bands that tied his hands and feet were his sins,
according to that of Solomon, Eccles. 5. 22 The wicked is taken in his own
iniquity, and holden with Cords of his own sin. Consenting to sin is one
cord, acting of sin another, continuing in sin a third, and a threefold cord
is not easily broken, Eccles. (...). 12. If we writhe these cords of vanity
big^er and bigger, adding to custom in sin, boasting in sin, to boasting
defense, to defense presumption: At the last they will grow so great as cables
and cart-ropes, and so become fetters in this world, and eternal chains in
the next: Whips on earth and boults in hell, and therefore woe to them that
draw, etc.

Christ in the 2. Chapter of St John at the 15. verse, made a scourge of cords
and whipped out of the Temple such as bought and sold therein, the strings of
this whip, as Prooem in Psalm. 130.
Augustine and in loc.
Hierom note, were made of the cords of their vanity. For all evil which we
suffer in goods or good name, either outwardly in our bodies, or inwardly in
our souls, proceeds altogether from that evil which we do, Senec Ep 97.
sceleris in scelere supplicium, sin like a penitent friar scourges it self;
As the worm devouring the nutt is bred in the nutt: so the punishment of sin
is bred in sin, Lipsius de consolat. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Cognatum, imo innatum omni sceleri sceleris supplicium.

Sickness is a scourge, but it is made of the Cords of our own vanity. So St
Paul. 1. Cor. 11. 30. Hence many are weak and sick. etc. So Christ in the 5.
Saint John at the 14. verse, behold thou art made whole, sin no more.
Insinuating that the sores of the body come from the sins of the soul, all
weakness from wickedness, all infirmity from iniquity* woe therefore.

Dearth and Barrennes of ground is a main string of Gods whip against sin, but
it is made of the Cords of our own vanity. Ezekiel. 14. 13.
When the Land (says the Lord) sins against me by committing a trespass,
then will I stretch out mine and upon it, and will break the staff of the
bread thereof, and will send famine upon it. Leu. 26. 18. and Deuteronomy. 18. 23
If ye will not obey me and hearken to my commandments: I will make your
Heaven as Iron: And your Earth as Brass: Your strength shall be spent in
vain, neither shall your Land give her increase, neither shall the trees of
the Land give their fruit, woe therefore.

Extreme poverty is a scourge too, but the wicked draw his heavy burden upon
them especially with the Cart-ropes of their own iniquity. For while they
waste their estates in riot, and spend their days in idleness, no wonder if
Pro. 6. 11.
poverty come upon them as a trauailour, and necessity like an armed man. A
trauailour knocks at our doors before we look for him, and an armed man is so
strong that we cannot easily resist him, and therefore woe to them, etc.

Dishonor and ignominy is a scourge likewise, but it is made of the cords of
our own vanity. For good deeds are the very Matrix of a good name, honest and
honorable report is the shadow that follows the body of virtue, so that the
Psalm. 12. 6.
righteous are had in an everlasting remembrance, their memorial is blessed
Eccles. 49. 1.
sweet as honey in all mouths, and pleasant in all ears, as music at a
banquet of wine; But the name of the wicked shall rott, Pro. 10. 7. Their
memory shall perish with them, Psalm. 9. 6. And therefore woe to them, etc.

Beside these and infinite other outward scourges, there is an inward whip of
the soul made of the cords of vanity; To wit, horror and hell of
conscience: for albeit the wicked be Psalm. 73.
fatt and lusty, though he come to no misfortune like other men: though he
flourish like a green baytree: though his sheep bring forth thousands, and ten
thousands in his ground, though his oxen be strong to labor and no decay in
his cattle: Yet intra est quod contra est, howsoever it be without him, he has
that within him, which is against him; so that he can neither delight in
company, nor solace himself alone, neither sport in the fields, nor rest in
his bed, ut every where his manyfold foul sins are so many foul fiends unto
him. As when Gain had slain his brother Abel, albeit there were no Justices or
Constables to make hue and cry after him, as Luther and Calvin expound the
place; Yet he said Ca^. 4. 14.
whosoever finds me shall slay me, alas who could see! and yet he was
affrayd of every bush, of every bird in the bush, of every feather in the bird;
For his guilty conscience was as a thousand witnesses to accuse him, as a
thousand Judges to condemn him, and as a thousand hang-men to torture him,
therefore woe to them, etc.

Behold yet a greater woe, for the cords of vanity do not only make scourges
to whip the wicked in this world: but they be Bolts and fetters of hell also.
For as we read Math. 13. 30 When almighty God shall come to judgment he will
command his angels to bind the tares and burn them, and in the 22. Chap. of
Saint Math. 13. To bind him hand and foot which had not on the wedding garment,
and to cast him into utter darkness. Now these bands and fetters are nothing
else but the sins of the reprobate, the cords of their vanity, the
cart-ropes of their iniquity. Wherewith they shall be so fast bound, as that
they shall never be loosed again. For as the darkness of hell is an
everlasting night, and the fire of hell Esaias. 33. 14.
everlasting burnings, the Mark. 9. 44.
worm never dying, the woe never ending; So the bands of hell, as Saint Jude
ter^es them, are everlasting chains, and therefore woe to them.

The word Vanity, has a great many significations, it is used for inutile,
that is a thing without any profit or use. So sin is a vanity, 1 Timothy 6. 6.
godliness is great gain, not only gain, but great gain in comparison
whereof the winning of the whole world is loss. But sins are unfruitful
works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 6. 21.
What profit had ye, quoth Saint Paul unto the Romans, in those things whereof
ye are now ashamed. and the Wis. 5 8.
wiseman brings in the reprobate complaining at the last day. What has
pride now profited us, and the pomp of riches brought us.

Secondly, vanum is used for falsum, a lying and a false thing opposed to
verum. And so sin is a vanity, Pro. 11. 18. The wicked works a deceitful and
false work. In sinning he deceives as much as he can, almighty God: Honoring
him with his lips, but his heart is far from him, Esaias. 29. 13. He deceives
his neighbor also Psalm. 12. 2.
talking of vanity with his neighbor and ^sal 4. 2.
seeking after lies, using Prou. 11. 1.
false balances and light weights, but in conclusion he deceives him elfe
most. He that sows righteousness shall receive a sure reward; but the
wicked works a deceitful work, for whatsoever he propounds for his end,
Rom 6. 23.
the wages of sin is death, and he that follows evil seeks his own
death, Pro. 11. 19.

Thirdly, Vanitas is used for imperitia, that is, vnskilfullnesse and
ignorance. So the Grammarian who contended in Lib. 18. cap. 4
Aulus Gellius with Apollinarius the Philosopher about the sign fication of
words, maintained confidently that vanus and stolidus are all one; The vain
man is the foolish man, Ste^h in dict. (...).
Vanus est mente vacuus. And according to this acception also, sin is vanity:
for goodness in the Scripture is termed wisdom, and vice folly: Sinners and
fools in the language of Canaan are Synonima, Pro. 1. 7. The fear of God is
the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and instruction. And
Solomon in the same Chapter afterward speaking of sinners and sinful courses,
says, O ye foolish? how long will ye love foolishness. In the dialect of
the wiseman it is plain, that the greatest sinner is the greatest fool; To
look no further then that which is before our eyes in this present Chap. The
proud man and covetous who (...) field to field, and house to house: that he
may be placed in the midst of the earth alone, shows himself a vain fool.
Calvin in loc.
For nothing could befall him worse then to have his own wish: How could he
till his ground alone? How could he reap the fruits thereof alone? How could
he Domineere in his houses alone? How could he vain man enjoy his glory, were
there none to magnify him and to humor him in his grea^nes?

So he that is mighty to pour in strong drink, shows himself a vain man in
overthrowing his own body: being only strong to make himself weak; he
should eat and drink to be strong: but not strong to eat and drink. Is not
he reputed a very fool that will strike none but him that is next him, and who
so near thy self, as thine own self?

So he that is wise in his own eyes, and prudent in his own sight, is a
vain fool: For there can be no greater argument of See Chrysostom. ser. 2^ in
Epist ad Romans
folly then to be so conceited of our own wit, that we scorn to learn of
others. Heretics are therefore the masters of error, quoth Idem Fu^bertus Ep.
1.
Augustine, because they never were the Scholars of truth; And that which Lib.
1.
Opt^tus reports of Victor, may be well affirmed of all Heretics, namely
that they be Sons without Fathers, Soldiers without Captains, and
Scholars without Masters.

So he that does justify the wicked for a reward, is a very fool, for that
one bribe may prove 2. Kings 4. 40
mors in oll^, like Colloquintida that marrs the whole pott of pottage: a
Canker that will fret the rest of his esta^e good it may seem for the present
purchase (as it is said of Chauking of Land in the Country proverb) but ill in
fine for his heirs, Ex male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.

So he that speaks good of evil, and evil of good is a very fool: For by
telling so many lies, he gains only this credit that none will believe him
when he speaks a truth.

It is objected out of Saint Luke. Chap. 16. verse. 8. That the children of
this world, are wiser then the children of light. Answer is made by the
Origin. (...). Mald^nat.
Doctors upon the place, that Christ accounts them wiser, not absolutely, but
only, secundum quid, in some case more crafty; They be not wis^r in genere,
but in genere suo: for as Apud Fox Martyr^l.
one said of Sr. Thomas More, that he was either a foolish wiseman, or a wise
foolish-man: Even so the wicked are wisemen in foolish things, and foolish men
in wise things: wise to do evil (as the Ier. 4. 2.
Prophet speaks) but to do well they have no knowledge. All their slye
tricks like the needless curiosities of Schoolmen, are but Cobwebs of
learning, all the fine threeds of their subtilty nothing else but cords of
vanity.

Thus I have plainly delivered how sin is a Vanity, and how sinful acts are
cords of vanity: Whipping the wicked on earth, and binding the^ hand and foot
in hell; and so consequently that a woe hangs over their head, who draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with Cart^opes.

This should teach us to fly from sin as a Serpent, and to fly to Christ as our
sole Savior, who dyed for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification; If we be truly grafted unto him, all our sin is his, and all
his righteousness ours. And so though happily we may be full of Condoling
woe, and shall be free from Condemning: though our spiritual enemies are
stronger, and our greiuous sins are greater then we; yet as God said to
Rebecca, the greater shall serve the lesser. In Christ all things are ours, and
all things quoth Paul, even Sin it self quoth Augustine, even the Devil
himself quoth Luther, work together for our good, yea for the best, if we
love God in his Christ. Heal us theno Lord and we shall be healed: save us
and we shall be saved: Deliver us from eternal woe that we may be blessed
with everlasting happiness in thy kingdom of glory: where we shall ever be
sure to be free from sorrow, because free from sin; Ceasing to draw iniquity
with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes.

ESAIAS 41. 14. Fear not worm Jacob, etc.
CHrist is Alpha and Omega, Reu. 1. 8. As Esaias speaks in this Chap. at the 4.
verse, the first and the last: and that unto us, as well as in himself, being
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13. 8. And therefore the
Church allots a proper Scripture for every Sunday throughout the whole year;
begins and ends her devout service with the coming of Christ. For the first
sentence declared in the Gospel appointed for the first Sunday, is, behold thy
King comes unto thee. And the conclusion of the last Gospel on the last
Sunday, this of a truth is the same Prophet that should come into the world:
which occasioned (...) est expositio (...) in Ecclesia* proposi^ ab (...) in
(...), (...). (...). 1608.
Petrus Machado to term this order, annulus Christianus, as it were the
Christians round or ring.

So the Church in observing this high and holy time, makes the birth of our
Lord, and appurtenances of the same, the first and the last object of all her
solemn devotions, other holy days in deed come between the feasts of his
Nativity, Circumcision, and Epiphany, but all of them are called Christmas,
dedicated only to Christ's honor, and the reason (as Ioh Raulin. Ser 2. ^e
beatis Innocentibus.
some conjecture) why Saint Stephen, and Saint John, and the blessed Innocents
are mentioned above the rest of the Saints, is to show that Christ came into
the world to save men of all sorts, of whatsoever degree; the Chivalry
represented by Saint Stephen a resolute Knight and warrior in the Lords
battle: The Clergy represented by S. John styled the Divine: The Commonaltie
or Infantrie, represented by the children Herod slew. Or intimating that Christ
was borne for men of every several age, for men of perfect strength, as Saint
Stephen: For old men on their Crouches, as Saint John, who lived after Christ
was dead, as Hierom reports in his life, 68. years, being (as Annal. ^om. 1.
An. 99 fol. 749.
Baronius avoweth) at his dying hour 106. years old: Lastly, for Infants in
their Cradles, as the blessed Innocents. Pet. de palud Ser. a^ B. Innocentibus.
idem Feru^ ser. de Ioh. Euang.
Or it may be these Saints are honorably remembered at Christmas rather then
other, because Christ says, if any will follow me, let him forsake himself
and take up his Cross, Mat. 16. 24. The servant is not greater then his
Master; if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also, Ioh. 15. 20.
Now Ser. de Innocent. idem Ian^ vt alii in Math. 2.
Bernard and other Doctors say there be 3. kinds of suffering or martyrdom
in Christ's cause; The 1. In will and in act, as that of Saint Stephen, the 2.
In will, but not in act, as that of Saint John: the third in act but not in
will, as that of the Bethelemitish Innocents. And so Christ, as it is said,
Cant. 5. 10. Is white* and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand: as one
Ludolphus de vita Christ's. part. 1. cap. 13
featly, but I censure not how featly, Candidus in Iohanne, rubicundus in
Stephano, electus ex millibus in Innocentibus.

This Scripture then is chosen aptly for a Christmas Sunday, promising that in
type, which we now see performed in truth, namely that Christ our Lord is the
deliverer of Sion out of her Captivity, the Comforter, abettor, strength,
helper, in a word, the redeemer of his people, from the hands of all their
enemies, and from the bands of all her sins. In this verse (which is
Capitulum Capitis, as it were the Chapters abridgment) two points are to be
considered especially.

1. The weakness of the Church in respect of her self, as being a worm, and
as a dead man. 2. The strength of the Church in respect of her Savior, saying,
fear not, I will help thee: this I have said, and this I will have done,
being powerful and able; because the Lord, pitiful and willing, because thy
redeemer, faithful and true, because the holy one of Israel.
The Lord calls elsewhere Jacob Psalm. 35. 4.
his chosen, Israel his possession, Psalm. 114. 2.
Judah his Sanctuary, Israel his dominion, an Exodus 19. 6.
holy Nation, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy tree, springing of an holy root, a
people peculiar to himself, enclosed as it were from the Commons of the whole
world. But here considering their present affection and miserable condition
under Captivity, he takes a Calvin in loc.
better course with them in omitting these glorious titles, and comparing them
unto worms and men that are dead: for this he shows more;

That he greatly cares for them, although they seem most abject in the worlds
eye. Fear not I am with thee, be not affrayd: I am thy God, I will strengthen
thee, and help thee, and sustain thee, with the right hand of my justice.
Howsoever now thou be nothing, yet I will so succor thee, that all the men
of thy strife shall be confounded, ashamed, perish, and come themselves to
nothing. Behold I will make thee a roller, and a new threshing instrument
having teeth, and so thou shall thresh the mountains, and grind them to
powder, and make the hills as chafe.

A word spoken in his place, says Solomon, is like aples of gold, with
pictures of silver: He therefore which is set apart for the gathering together
of the Saints, and the work of the ministry, must (as St. Paul exhorts)
divide the word of truth aright. He must, as the Baptist in preparing way for
his Lord, Luke. 3. 5.
exalt the vallyes and make the mountains low. Men are made mountains two
ways, either assuming too much unto themselves out of their own merit, or
else presuming too much upon Gods mercy: and on the contrary men are vallyes,
in contemplating their great faults, and little faith, humbled in their sin,
and in their suffering for sin; And therefore the man of God ought to digg
down Mountains by denouncing Judgments, and to raise vallyes by pronouncing
mercy. He must, as Ambrose said, be like a Be, applying the I awes sting to
the proud in heart, but the Gospells honey to the poor in Spirit.

It is written in the Deuteronomy. 19 4.
Law, that if a man goes unto the wood with his neighbor to hew wood, and his
hand strikes with the axe to cut down the tree: If the head slip from the
helm and hit his neighbor that he dye, the same shall fly to one of the
Cities appointed for refuge and live; Such as handle the word indiscreetly
without any distinction of times, or places, or persons, or circumstances of
sin: makes the head of the axe (says Pastoral. part. ^. cap. 10.
Gregory the great) to fly from the helm, and so they kill unadvisedly their
brethren. And these Luther. in Call. 6. 2.
ghostly Fathers use Christians, as the Jews did Christ hanging on the Cross,
when his thirsty soul called for some comfortable potion, they gave him gall
and vinegar to drink. The word of God must dwell in us plenteously, but in all
wisdom, Col. 3. 16. We must hear it in all wisdom, read it in all wisdom,
meditate on it in all wisdom, speak of it in all wisdom, especially preach
of it in all wisdom, not only in some but in all wisdom. For all is little
enough, considering the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name
in vain.

By Jacob (ye which are verst in the Bible know well) is meant the Nic de Lyra
in loc.
seed of Jacob, all Gods people descended from his loins, here called a
worm: And as Tremellius and our old English translations, a little worm, in
respect of their Hyperi^. Calvin. Michael. de Palati^.
abject estate first in Egypt, and afterward in Babylon, a silly worm. In quo
(says Gaspar San^ in loc.
one*) nihil est quod quis aut amet aut metuat. So the next clause does expound
this in the judgment of in loc.
Calvin, ye dead men of Israel, in such a wretched and base slavery, that ye
resemble men which are dead: even past all hope to be restored and raised
again to your former glory. Gods people were not dead indeed, but as it were
dead to many purposes under their Captivity: They did not lead vitam vitalem, a
lively life, being as Socrates and u Plato said of mariners, neither among the
dead v in Axiocho.
nor yet among the living; And (as Saint Paul of a Widow spending her days in
pleasure) dead while they live. For so the Scripture speaking Hyperbolically
calls those dead who live in extreme perils, and deep dangers: as Psalm. 116.
3. The snares of death compassed me round about, and the pains of hell gat
hold upon me: and Psalm. 86. 13. Thou Lord have delivered my Soul, that is, my
person and life, from the nethermost hell, even the pit of the dead, or the
grave. So the Prophet Ezechiel entreating of this argument in his 37. Chapter
compares the men of Israel under bondage, to dry bones in the mids of a field.
These bones are of the house of Israel, behold they say, our bones are dried,
and our hope is gone, and we are cut off a^ branches from the tree. Therefore
Prophecy unto them, and say: Thus says the Lord God, behold my people, I will
open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your Sepulchers and bring you
into the Land of Israel again. As there is a spiritual resurrection from sin,
and an eternal resurrection a^ the last day from the grave: So likewise a
temporal resurrection from affliction in this world. So the Lawyers term
those ciuilly dead, which are banished out of their Country. There is between
Exilium and Exitium so little difference, that it sounds well enouge in a
Latin ear, to call such as are condemned to perpetual Exile, Sancti^ in loc.
Capite damnatos, men appointed to dye.

Other, instead of dead men, of Israel, read few men of Israel, as our new
Bibles in the margin, so the Septuagints and their translator, Israel
parvulus, little Israel, and Procopius in his commentary, Perpaucus Israel, as
being in this adversity, little for number, and less in account, despised
Israel as the translation, Hen. 8.

Thus I have delivered unto you the plain story, but for as much as all the
faithful are the Sons of Abraham, and true Iacobins, as Augustine said, more
Israel then Israel it self, the Hieron Haymo. Hugo Cardinal Dionys. and
arthus. Glossa Ordinaria. Calvin. Pelican.
most and best expositors, as well ancient as modern, extend this not only to
the sons of Jacob according to the flesh, but also to the seed of Jacob
according to the spirit, that is, to the Church of Christ afflicted and
persecuted under Antichrist in Borrhaius in loc.
in spiritual Babylon:

And so these times have made a large Commentary upon this text: For Jacob is
a worm trodden under foot in Italy, trodden under foot in Spain, trodden under
foot in France, trodden under foot in Austria, trodden under foot in Poland,
trodden under foot in Germany, Persecuted by the red Dragons might and malice
throughout the Wilderness of the whole world, and the friends of Jacob are but
loving worms, a few men, and they by the designs of Antichrist, and his
bloody ministers the Jesuits, appointed to dye, for Christ's sake killed all the
day long.

This Scripture then is a parallel unto that, Cant. 2. 2. Like a Lilly among
the thorns, so is my love among the Daughters: and to that Ecclesiastes. 9.
14. There was a little City and few men in it, and a great King came against,
and compassed it about, and built forts against it. And to that of our blessed
Savior in the Gospel, affirming that his Church is a little flock in the
mids of Wolves.

Now that which is said in general of Christ's whole body mystical, is
verified in particular of every member, as every sliuer of a bone is bone: So
every son of Jacob, every true believer baptized into Christ is a worm, and
as a man that is dead. A worm not in respect of his humane condition only,
John. 23. 6. Man is a worm, even the Son of man but a worm, Job. 17. 14.
saying to corruption thou art my Father, and to the worm thou art my Mother
and my Sister. But in respect of his Christian estate much more being vilified
and accounted in the worlds esteem, Psalm. 22. 6.
a worm and no man, a scorn of men, and outcast of the people: yea the filth
of the world, and offscouring of all things, 1. Cor. 4. 13. His soul quoth
David is filled with the contemptuous reproof of the rich. To good Men and
Angels an object of pity: To bad Men and Angels an object of envy: To both a
gazing stock. Bernard. Ser. ^1. Inter paruos sermones. And with the
despightfullnesse of the proud, a gazing stock to Men and Angels,
infaelicitatis tabula, Calamitatis fabula, the Map of misery, the table talk,
yea tabret, as Job speaks unto the wicked. Ye believe this, I know, because
ye daily see this; not in the tents of Kedar only, but in the high streets of
Jerusalem also: the greater doubt is how the Christian is said here to be
Dead.

For the better understanding whereof, observe that spiritual death in Jacob,
is threefold; to wit.

A Death, of Sin; For how shall we that are dead to sin, live therein, Romans
6. 2. The Law; Through the Law, I am dead to the law, Gal. 2. 19. That is,
says Luther, against that accusing and condemning Law, I have an other law
which is Grace, and Liberty: which accuses the accusing, and condemns the
condemning Law. The world, Active; Whereby the world is dead unto Jacob,
renou^cing the pompes thereof, and accounting all things loss to win Christ.
Passive; Whereby Jacob is dead to the world, which hates and persecuteth him
for Christ's sake.



The sum of all is, that a Christian is dead to sin, and alive to God. Dead
to sin, (as Judicious Melancthon) in respect of sins imputation and
efficacy. In respect of imputation, for albeit some relics of old Adam
remain in the new man, yet as the Scripture speaks, all his Psalm. 85. 2.
offenses are covered, Rom 8. 1.
there is no condemnation unto them which are in Christ. God sees none iniquity
in Jacob* no transgression in Israel, Number. 23. 21. As for sins efficacy,
whereas the motions of sin in an unregenerate man, have force to bring forth
fruit unto death, Romans 7. 5. He that is borne of God sins not, 1 John. 3. 9.
As being a patient, rather then an agent in sin, says Bernard* or as in Romans 6.
Primasius, he does not live to sin, but to Christ who dyed for his sin. Thus I
live quoth Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Yet not I now, but Christ lives in me; Christ
himself is the life which I now live: In this regard he and I are both one
quoth Luther upon that place; this seems a very strange manner of speaking, I
live, I live not: I am dead, I am not dead: I am a sinner, I am not a sinner: I
live not now as* Paul, but Paul is dead; who is it then that does live? the
Christian; our corrupt estate subject to sin, and concupiscence, is called the
old man: But our person reformed in and by Christ is the new man: Augustine
pithily, Christianus est quod ammodo duplex, every single Christian susteyneth
a double person, as Hector Pintus upon our text, duplex est in me ego, one I
that lives according to the flesh, and another I that lives according to the
spirit. As the penitent wanton in St. Ambrose, (who courted by his old love,
Cur non respicis, ego sum?) answered, sed ego non sum ego: Though you be still
the same woman, I am become another man: I live indeed in the flesh, but not
through the flesh, or according to the flesh, for I am Crucified unto the
world, and the world is Crucified unto me; The truth, is I live by faith in
the Son of God, I am grafted into Christ, and Calvin. institut lib. 4. c. 15.
sect. 5. Idem Caietan et Melanct. in B^m* 65.
the graft does live not of it self by the sap of the stock. We are twigges,
and Christ is the tree, without him we can do nothing, John. 15. 5. But in
him, and through him all things, Philip. 4. 13.

Thus a Christian is dead to sin, dead to the law, dead to the world
actiuely: the which exposition is entertained of many learned interpreters: but
that Jacob is passiuely dead unto the world, as being hated and persecuted of
the world, (as the blessed Apostle speaks of himself) for Christ's glory dying
daily, is the fitter, and as I think the fuller gloss, coming nearer home to
the point, and to the pith of the matter, intended here by the spirit. And so,
by this place you may learn the meaning of another hard phrase, 1. Cor. 15. 2^
Baptized for dead, that is, afflicted and reputed as dead. I know there be
diverse readings and interpretations of that text, but upon an exact inquiry
ye shall understand this to be most agreeable to the words, and to the scope
of Saint Paul's argument* To the words because Baptism is used elsewhere for
affliction, as Luke 12. 50. I must be Baptized with a Baptism, and how am I
grieved till it be ended, and Math. 20. 22 Mark. 10. 38. Ye know not what ye
ask (quoth our blessed Savior) to his ambitious Disciples harkening after
earthly preferment in his Kingdom. Ye must first drink of the Cup, that I
must drink of: and be baptized with the Baptism, that I am baptized with;
that is, in the judgment of Theophilact, Euthymius, Ardens, and many more
learned Divines; Ye must of necessity bear the Cross, before ye can wear the
Crown: ye must enter into my Kingdom through many tribulations.

As for the scope Saint Paul in the words immediately following, shows that by
baptized he meant afflicted, why are we Christians in Ieopardie every hour?
If I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what
aduantageth it me, if the Dead rise not again. Wherefore should Jacob and
Israel endure so many losses and crosses, fightings without, and terrors
within, trodden under foot like worms, and reputed as dead men in this world,
were there not another world where they shall have fullness of Joys, and
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore?

So have ye the first part of our Text explained, concerning the weakness of
the Church in respect of her self: the second is the consideration of her
strength in respect of her Savior: Who says, fear not, I will help thee.
The which is repeated often in this one Chapter, and that within the compass
of a few lines, not only to show the dullness of our frail flesh, needing in
adversity, promise upon promise, so well as in prosperity, precept upon
precept: But to set forth also the fullness of Gods infinite rich mercy,
toward us vile Worms. It is reported, Apo. 7. 2. That four bad Angels had
power to hurt the Earth and the Sea, when we hear of their number, Four, we
may fear; and when we hear of their nature, bad Angels, we may fear more.
When we do read of a datum est, power and authority given unto them of God to
hurt, we may fear most of all: But when we find their power limited that
they must not hurt Gods servants, we need not fear at all.

I says the Lord, whose power is I am, and style, I will. Alas, man of
himself is not able to do any thing, he lives and moves, and has all his
being in me: my grace sustaineth him, by which he is whatsoever is his: He
speaks optatiuely would to God, I will if God will; But I the Lord
Indicatiuely, Imperatiuely, Math. 8 3.
I will, be thou clean, I will ease you, I will strengthen thee, I will help
thee. I the Lord who make the Psalm. 114. 4.
mountains to skip like Rams, and the little hills like young sheep: I who
measure the Waters with my So Aquila translat apud Hieron.
little finger, and the Earth with three of my fingers, and the Heavens with my
spanne, Esaias. 40. 12. Before whom all the Nations of the world are but as a
drop of the morning dew that falls upon the ground, Wis. 11. 19. I that am 1
Cor. 15 28
all in all, Heb* 1 3.
upholding all things by my power. I the Lord against whom there is no
wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel, Pro. 21. 30. No Wisdom of men,
or Understanding of devils, or counsel of Angels is able to prevail. No
Wisdom in Heavenly things, or understanding in Earthly things, or counsel in
any thing against me. Neither is my will inferior to my power, for I am thy
Redeemer. I was borne for thee, I was circumcised for thee, I fulfilled all
righteousness for thee; I dyed for thee, I rose again for thee, what could I
have done more for thee, which I have not done? I have so loved thee that I
gave my self for thee, to be both an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God for thee. I am Heb. 1. 2.
heir of all things, and I am thine Esaias. 9* 6.
a child borne unto thee, a Son-giuer unto thee. Fear not Jacob I am with
thee, and with me thou shall have all things also.

Doubt not of my promise, seeing I am the holy one of Israel. It is true that
God is holy formaliter and effectiue, Borrhaius in loc.
holy in himself, and making other holy: see my Book, Fol. 782.

But I Subscribe to their conceit: who by Sanctus, understand verax et firmus
in promissis, I am holy, that is, firm and faithful in my promise: I am not
as man that I should lie, neither as the Son of man that I should repent.
Hark O Israel I have made a covenant with thee, that I will be thy God, and
thou my people. I will not alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth, I will
not shrink from it, I can not deny my self, I keep my promise for ever.

I began this feast as you may remember here with a Christmas carroll: and I
purpose to conclude with a Christmas close. If God be with us, who can be
against us: The world will be against us, and the flesh against us, and the
Devil against us. St Bern.
The world cries, Ego deficiam; the flesh, Ego inficiam; the devil, Ego
interficiam. But it makes no matter so long as thy Redeemer cries, Ego
reficiam. I am the beginning and the ending, which is, and which was, and which
is to come. Was in thy Creation: Is in thy preservation: and will boe in thy
glorification. I who am always the same in my power, pleasure, promise, will
be with thee till the Worlds end: and then thou shall be with me world without
end: Fear not worm Jacob. I can do this because the Lord, I will do this
because thy Redeemer, I shall do this because the holy one of Israel.

ESAIAS 58. 7. Frange esurienti panem tuum. Break thy bread to the Hungry.
IT was our blessed Saviors apophthegme, recorded by Saint Luke, Acts. 20. 35.
Beatius est dare quam accipere: More blessed is it to give, then to receive:
more blessed in respect of the life present, because giving binds others unto
us, whereas receiving binds us unto others; and more blessed in respect of
the life to come. Because he that gives unto the Poor lends unto the Lord,
and he will in due time recompense him, Pro. 19. 17. and that Math. 19* 29.
an hundred fold more, the which is termed by Saint Augustine the best and
greatest usury.

Or more Blessed, in making us like to the most blessed, who Iam. 1. 5.
gives unto all men abundantly, being indeed (as Laurent, Pisanus. Euang.
Paradox.
one said) solus liberalis, only liberal, and the reason hereof is very
plain, because God which is Mat. 19. 17.
only good of himself, and absolutely good in himself, gives that which is
his own; whereas men in giving all that they have, yea all that they are, give
that which is another, even his in due right, from whom alone comes Iam. 1.
17.
every good and perfect gift. Or in one word more blessed because Lorin in
Acts. 20. 35.
to do good, is better a great deal then to suffer good; Now therefore that
we may be blessed in doing happily: so blessed a work (which is never
unseasonable, the poor being with us always) These four words in our text
recommend Gorran in fundamento aurio ser 1 de Epist* feria 6. post Gineres.
four rules especially, concerning the giving of Alms.

First, Quo modo dandum? the manner how we may deal them: and that is noted in
the word, Frange, break thy Bread.

Secondly, Cui dandum? the party to whom our dole should be given, and that is
expressed in the word, Esurienti, to the Hungry.

Thirdly, Quid dandum? what is to be given, and that is delivered in the word,
Panem, deal Bread.

Fourthly, De quo dandum? upon whose cost, and that is joined in the word,
Tuum, thy Bread.

There be two parts of equity, the first is, that we wrong no man, and the
second is, that we do good unto all men: especially unto such as are in want,
and adversity. The first is taught in the verse going before: Is not this the
feasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off
the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke? The second is enjoined in our text now, read, deal thy bread to
the Hungry: And Calvin in loc.
these two must always go together, for it is not enough to refrain from
oppression and violence, unless therewith we show bowels of compassion, and
works of mercy toward our poor brethren in distress. Iam 1. 27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the Fatherless and
Widows: and that thou bring the poor which are cast out, unto thine house:
when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from
thine own flesh.

The Hugo Cardin. in loc.
word break, shows the manner how bread ought to be dealt, the whole loaf
may not be lauishly spent upon others, or wretchedly hourded up only for thy
self, but it ought to be broken and imparted: First, to thy self, and then
unto others. Math 5 42.
It is Christ's iniunction indeed that we should give omni petenti to all that
ask, but as Augustine glosseth it acutely, non omnia petenti, not all they
will ask. We may not give so much at one time, that we leave nothing for
another time: this indiscreet liberality, does overthrow liberality,
liberalitas liberalitate perit. As Epist. ad Paulinum de institut. Monach.
Hierom told Paulinus, they that precipitate themselves to pleasure their poor
neighbors, are like powder in festival days, which to rejoice others
spends it self. And therefore Solomon advises us to give frugally, so well
as frankly, Pro. 5. 15. Drink waters out of thine own Cesterne, and running
waters out of thine own Well. And then that others may drink of thy Cup, and
taste of thy bounty, let thy fountains slow forth, and rivers of waters in the
street, but let them be thine, even thine only, and not the strangers with
thee. Let the Cock run abroad, but keep thy Cesterne to thy self, let the
waters flow forth in the street, but let the Wellspring be thine still, and
not the strangers with thee. The moral of Acteons fable devoured by his Dogs,
is nothing else but that open handed Gentle men are many times undone by
fauning parasites, who, like Pondes, are full in Winter, but in Summer when
need is of them are dry: or like to Swallows creeping under the roofes of
our houses in the spring, but when once cold weather is come, they be gone,
flowen away, leaving (as you know) nothing behind them but dung, foul
speeches: And therefore be not so cruel unto thy self as to give thine
Honor (quoth Solomon) unto others, Pro. 5. 9. Where Melancthon and L^ in* in
Act. 13 50. et 20. 10.
other Divines observe, that riches are called Honor, because they give
reputation and Honor in this world. Whereupon as I conjecture in our common
law, some Lordshippes are termed Honors. And great persons in unthrifty
courses are said to loose so much of their Honor, as they sell of their Lands:
Riches among worldlings are so honorable, Sr. Walt-Rawleigh.
that it is exceeding hard to distinguish fortune and virtue. The most impious
(if prosperous) have ever been applauded, and the most virtuous (if
unprosperous) have ever been despised: Or riches are called Honor, because
being well employed they keep men in honest and Honorable courses; whereas a
man in extreme beggerie must do, not as he should, or as he would, but as
he may, pauperies inimica bonis est moribus, omne labitur in vitium. As it is
in the proverb, necessity has no law, poverty parts all good fellowship:
An Ingenious man does often that in his need, which is contrary to his own
position, and disposition.

Virgil. Aenead. 2.
Si miserum fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.
Be provident then in thy diuident, so break thy bread, that thou break not
the staff of thy store, whereby the largess, which is unto other a dole, may
turn to thy self a dolor. 2 Cor. 9. 7.
The Lord loves a cheerful giver, and therefore that thou may ever give,
give frugally, starve not thy self to feed others, though hungry: let not
the left hand of thy misery, know what the right hand of thy pity does. If
thou have plenty, give much, if thou have but a little be not affrayd (said
old Tobit. 4. 8.
Tobie) to give of that little. Beneuolentia liberalitate potior, quia ditior
haec moribus, quam illa muneribus. Ambros: offic: lib. 1. c. 23.

Secondly, the word break, teaches us not to give the whole loaf of our
alms unto some on, but that we should impart it to diverse. So Munster and
Tremelius here translate, vt partiaris es^rienti panem, and Castalio.
other vt impertias, and our old translation, Ezech. 18. 7. Part thy bread to
the Hungry. So the Scriptures teach and the Fathers, the Psalm ^ 12. 9
Psalmographer says of the godly man, dispersit, dedit pauperibus. He
dispersed abroad giving rather a little to many, then much unto few: so Saint
Paul advises the Romans 12. 13.
Romans to distribute to the necessity of the Saints. Almighty God is termed,
Luke. 16. 1. A rich man, as being infinitely Romans 10. 12.
rich in goodness and mercy. toward all, and every man is there called his
Steward: as having much of Gods rich treasure committed to his charge, which
he may not expend as he will in idle prodigallity, but as his Lord will in
works of piety and pity. Now then (as 1 Cor 42.
Saint Paul tells us) it is required of a Steward that he be found
faithful; He must therefore deal his Lords bread, like 3 Ioh. 5.
Caius, faithfully, not only to some few whom he most affects; but he must
in due season, and in due proportion also, feed the whole family. To break
Bread is to give every one his due portion of meat, and potion of drink.

Christ and his Apostles have taught this Lesson also by their practice. Christ
in the 8. of Saint Mark feeding a great many with a few loaves, after he had
given thanks brake the bread, and so all did eat and were sufficed: and it is
reported of the blessed Apostles, Acts. 2. 45. That they parted the Churches
stock: to all men as every one had need.

Offi^. lib. 1. cap. 30.
Saint Ambrose to the same purpose pithily, non sunt profundendae opes, sed
dispensandae, to break bread lauishly without discretion and order, is not*
(as Bernard said in another case) dispensatio but dissipatio. The Stewards of
God ought to have great care, says Pastor part. 3. see Them* 102 quae. 32.
Art. 10.
Gregory the great, how they distribute to the necessities of the Saints. Vt
ne quaedam quibus nulla, ne nulla quibus quaedam, ne multa quibus pauca, ne
pauca praebeant quibus impendere multa debucrunt.

For it is Lawful and expedient too, sometime to confer much upon one
person, or upon one work, as to prefer a poor Maiden in marriage, to
redeem a Captive, to repair high ways, or to build a Synagogue. Wherein
every good Christian is a learned schoole-man and a speaking Law to himself;
In his private distributions he may deal his bread when he will, and where
he will, as his own Charity, directed by Gods holy word, moves him. But in
our public contributions every man is to be sessed by his neighbors: and in
such a case not to be ruled by the best and most is a breach undoubtedly both
of Law and Love. How Christ has a long time been taught among you brethren, I
well understand, but how you have learned him, I know not, I hope the best,
only this I wish, that some whom it concerns as an act of Justice, or other
to whom it appertains as a matter of mercy, would (as occasion is offered)
ouersee those which are appointed overseers for the poor: Whereby the common
loaf may be so parted, that our ears may not hear the lamentation of Lam.
4. 4.
Jeremy, the young Children ask bread, but no man breaks it unto them.

The second point to be discussed is, Cui dandum, and that is here said
indefinitely to the Hungry; Whether he be good or bad, of whatsoever
Condition or Country, Nation or Fashion. It is an Gal. 6. 10.
apostolical precept, that we should do good unto all, especially to those
which are of the Household of faith. Humanity binds us to perform the one,
Christianity to the other. cap. 12.
Ecclesiasticus in saying, give not to the ungodly, seems to confront our
text; But his meaning is plain, Lomb. Aqu. in Gal 6.
that we should not help him as wicked but as a man. His naughtiness ought
to be declined, but his nature cherished, his proper iniquity to be
persecuted, but his common condition to be pitied, as being our own flesh,
says our Prophet in the latter end of this verse, Created according to Gods
own Image, and happily (for any thing we know) hereafter to be sanctified,
and in fine to be saved.

In the battle fought against Cinna at Ianiculum, one of Pompeys soldiers
slew his own brother, and when he saw what he had done, instantly slew
himself. Whereupon Hist. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Tacitus observed that our ancestors exceeded us, not only in glory of their
virtue, but in grief also for their faults: In sapient 1.
Holcott makes mention of a certain savage beast that has a face like a man,
and yet in his hunger he kills men, and feeds on their flesh, but afterward
going into the water to drink, and there beholding his own face, and so
remembering that he had killed one like himself, presently forbeares his
meat, and for very sorrow pineth, until he perishes. All men are our
brethren as being lineally descended from our great Grandfather Adam; He
therefore that denies any man his helping hand in extremity, murthereth a
brother: according to that of Saint Ambrose, si non pavisti, occidisti; in such
a case not to fill him, is to kill him. Solomon in the 11. of Ecclesiastes,
compares a wight in distress, to the water, cast thy bread, says he, upon
the waters: And why so? because as in the water brooks, so in the watrie
looks of a poor Lazare thou may clearly see thine own fashion and face.
Turn not away thine eye from beholding his countenance, though he seem never
so despicable: but consider, and that seriously, this unhappy wretch is a man
as well as I, and if our good God bless me not, I may become such a man as
he: Blind as he: Naked as he: Forsaken of friends as he: Lamed in limbs as
he: Maimed in mind as he. Mat. 7. 12*
Whatsoever then I would that men should do unto me, let me, while I have
time, do to them. I would that all men in such an agony should do good unto
me, why then I am bound to do good unto all men.

Now for our direction in breaking bread to men of all sorts, two things are to
be considered especially.

Their Worth; Their Want;
All men are to be releiued in adversity, *yet more specially the Household of
Faith: and among the faithful also the better man is to have the better
maundie; for other things being alike, the nearer unto Christ, ought ever to
be deerer unto us. He that believes in him is our Mark. 3. 35.
Brother and Sister and Mother: The soul of every man is next to himself, or
rather (as divine Plato said) his own flesh; They therefore which are allied in
good unto the soul* are more near then they which are allied in blood only
to the body. Lo^b sent 3. did. 29.
Sanctior est copula cordium quam corporum, the conjunction of the spirit, is
more high and holy, then any conjunction of the flesh. If the soul be the
better gentleman, then alliance by the soul must of necessity be most
honorable, but when our kinsman is a good man allied each way, both in respect
of his generation and regeneration, undoubtedly two bonds are more strong then
one. Such a man ought to have the prime place, both in our loves and loaves,
John in his 3 Epistle, commending highly Caius his hospitality, says, he did
faithfully to the brethren and strangers, he did entertain both the one, and
other. But first, the Brethren, and then afterward Strangers: as Aretius
expoundes that text, or as Lo^inus especially, strangers if Brethren. As for
the want of our brethren, Esaias says here, deal thy bread to the Hungry: So
Job. 29. 16.
Job, I was a father to the poor, when thou make a feast, inuit the poor,
says our Savior, Luke. 14. 13. Laudent te, quoth Epist. ad Demetriad.
Hierom, Esurientium viscera, non ructantium opulenta conuiuia, the feeding of
the hungry Lazare, comme^ds thee more, then the feasting of the belching
Epicure. It is lawful, I know, to feast our rich acquaintance, for John. 2. 2.
Luke 14. 1. Math. 9. 10.
Christ himself did grace, with his own presence, neighbourly meetings, and
friendly feasts, as opportunity served. The Phoenix of Germany (reverend
Melancthon I mean) was exceeding courteous in this kind, being often invited,
and often inuiting. Loue-feasts, in the judgment of all Orthodoxe divines, are
commendable, when moderation is one dish at the Table: But let us take heed
lest happily we waste so much upon the pampering of great ones, as that we
neglect some of Christ's little ones, lying and crying at our gates for hunger;
It is a kind of sacrilege, quoth Epist. ad Pammachium.
Hierom, rem pauperum dare non pauperibus, to bestow that portion of bread upon
the hautie, which is properly due to the hungry. Woe to them says Amos 6. 6.
Amos, that eat the Lambs of the stock, and the Calves of the stall, and
drink wine in boules, but are not sorry for the affliction of Joseph.

And as in breaking of our bread, we should consider the want of the hungry;
so likewise the true causes of their want, for that which our blessed Savior
said of the Eunuch, Math. 19. 12. may be well applied unto the poor. Some be
borne so, some made so by others, and some have made themselves so: Some borne
poor, namely beggars children, and unregarded fatherless orphants, especially
such as are Creeples or blind. Some made poor by others, and that either by
the cruel oppression of men, as they whose Lands and estates have been
devoured by biting usury, tedious suits in Law, cunning and crafty bargains:
Or by the just hand of God, as the wounded sould^er in the quarrel of his
Country, the banckrout Merchant in suffering shipwreck, the decayed husbandman
by fire consuming his goods, by murreyne consuming his cattle, by Catterpillers
and mildewes consuming his fruits, by grievous plagues and sickness vexing
himself and the rest of his Family: some be made poor by themselves, as the
riotous spend all, and idle get-nothing.

Now they which are made poor by some Ambros of sic lib. 1. cap 30.
great disaster, are to be relieved before those which have made themselves
poor by their own disorder. The very Barbarians used no little kindness to Paul
and his company, who suffered shipwreck, Acts. 28. Epist. 92.
Seneca though he never learned Christ as we, yet he could not but
exceedingly deplore the lamentable destruction of Lions in France, consumed in
one night stick and stone, by fire. Vna tantum nox interfuit inter ciuitatem
maximam et nullam: At night that City was none, which in the morning was
non-such; Quis taliafando temper et a lachymis? what man is so banckrout of
good nature, senseless of misery, but is ready to do good to those of Gods
house, which have suffered insupportable losses, by wind, and water, and fire,
whose very Mercies (as Pro. 12. 10.
Solomon said of the wicked) are Cruelties.

As the Lomb. sent. 2. did. 22.
Schoolmen say that there is ignorantia vincibilis, and inuincibilis: an
ignorance which a man is able to conquer, and an ignorance which he cannot
overcome; So there be 2. kinds of poverty, a vincible poverty which a good
man ouercomes by his industry; and an invincible poverty, that no man is able
to resist, or repair: for (as the Pro. 6. 11.
Scripture speaks) it comes upon him as one that trauaileth, and as an
armed man; So suddenly, so strongly, that no labor, or dolor, is able to
withstand it; As for example, the diligent Merchant runs his Ship into the
furthest end of the world, to get goods and gold.

Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos.
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
So the painful artificer, to provide for his family, rises up early, and
goes to bed lately, eating the bread of carfulness, as the Prophet speaks,
Psalm. 127. 3. So the toyling labourer, to sustain his poor charge, works
until he be ready to sleep for very weariness, and then in his sleep, he
dreams of his work. Yet of ten times it comes to pass, that these diligent,
honest active men, are not able sufficiently to releive their household, without
help from others. And therefore let us in breaking our bread, remember
Solomon's advise: Cast thy bread upon the waters; super aquas transeuntes; as it
is in the vulgar latin, not upon standing waters, upon such as either stand in
the Market, or sit in the Tavern all the day idle: But upon the stirring
waters, upon industrious laborers in a lawful occupation, or office. Let the
prodigal a little while Luke 15. 16.
feed on husks among swine: by the rules of the Gospel, and Laws of our
Land, 2 These 3. 10
he that will not labor ought not to eat, he that will not Pro 6. 8.
learn of the Pismire to prepare his meat in Summer, and to prepare his food
in harvest, he that is a Ludouicus nihil agens, a Lewis Do nothing, should
have nothing of our liberality, but in extreme necessity; to conclude, the
loyterer is to be punished, but the labourer to be cherished. If thou be
neighbor to such an one, break thy bread to his hungry Soul: call him to
thine house, cover him, and comfort him.

There be four strings of Gods whip mentioned, Ezechiel. 14. 21. the Sword,
Famine, Noysom beasts, and Pestilence. Now the most greiuous of the^ all is
Famine: For what noisome beasts, and the Sword, and the Pestilence kill in a
moment, there be many lingering deaths in hunger. Famine, says Ser 3. contr
diuites auares.
Basile, is a disease that does soon torture, yet slowly consume, destroying
by little and little.

Well then if the greater misery, be the better object of mercy, deal thy
bread to the hungry. So God which is the father of mercy, d satisfied the
thirsty souls of Israel in the Wilderness, and filled their hungry souls
with abundance. So Christ (which is our way for example, so well as truth in
doctrine) filled the hungry with good things, Luke. 1. 53. This was Solomon's
precept, Pro. 25. 21. If thine enemy be hungry give him bread, and it was
Tobits practice, I gave my bread to those that were Hungry, Tobit. 1. 16. And
in the last day, the first good deed of the godly remembered by Christ and
rewarded, is: I was hungry, and ye gave me meat. And the first ill objected
unto the damned: I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I thirsted and ye
gave me no drink.

The third point to be further examined is, quid dandum? and that is Bread:
now there be three sorts of bread mentioned in holy Bible Sacramental, 1 Cor.
11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread;
Doctrinall, John. 6. Labor not, says our Savior, for the loaves, and for the
meat which perishes, but for the meat and bread, that endure to life
everlasting; Corporal, Math. 4. 4. Man shall not live by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. The bread here principally
spoken of, is neither mental, nor sacramental; but corporal, and this kind
in a strict acception is the loaf made of wheat, or the like grain, Genesis 14.
18. Melchisedech King of Salem, brought forth bread and wine: but in a more
general and large signification it is used in holy Scripture, pro omni
Comestibili, for all kind of food, as Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face
thou shall eat bread, 2 Samuel 9. 10. King David said to Ziba. Mephibosheth thy
Masters Son, shall eat bread always at my Table; that is, he shall fare so
well as I fare, so well as one of the Kings Sons, as it is said verse the 11.
And in the Pater Noster, give us this day our daily bread; Where Panis is Pan,
every thing fit and necessary for our present life.

Well then if in asking of bread, from God, thou will have it of the largest
extent, take heed how you curtall it in this, and other commandments,
concerning the giving of bread to thy poor brethren. As you beg bread of
God, so break bread to the hungry, deal to him as occasion is offered, more
then either Crust or crumme of thy loaf. Give so much as is necessary for his
relief, bring him to thine house, cover him, and hide not thy face from thy
flesh.

The fourth point is, de quo dandum, and that is expressed in the word Tuum,
not the goods of another, but thy bread, si tuus, alms are a Heb. 13. 16.
sacrifice pleasing unto God; now we may not present an offering to God of
that which cost us nothing, as King David speaks, 2 Samuel 24. 24. Honor the
Lord with thy riches, cast thy bread upon the waters, give thy garments unto
the naked, and of thine abundance to such as have need. It must be thine
first, and that acquired lawfully, not by Bribes, or oppression, or Forgerie:
but thine by descent or purchase, thine by the sweat of thy Brows, in some
honest occupation: or thine by the sweat of thy brains, in some commendable
profession. Alms are not to be given (as apud Fox* Mart f. 705.
one wittily said) except they first have sweat in a man's hand. It is not an
act of Charity to rob Peter and pay Paul, or to build an Hospital for a few,
by the ruins of many, for so you shall have more to curse you, then to bless
you. If thou give, give that which is fit, ont of thine own Cesterne, and
own Well, and own substance, deal thy bread.

Or thy bread that is, such as thou thy self do eat, qui tuus, thy dole may
not be panis lapidosus as Fibius Verucosus speaks in De benefi^. lib. 2. cap.
7.
Seneca, so hard to digest as a stone, no moldy bread, no mustie bread, but
wholesome and sauourie, such as thou would have, were thou to beg thy
bread.

Or thy bread, that is, when it is thine, dum tuus est, as the blessed Apostle,
Gal. 6. 10. While thou have time, make thine own hands executors, and thine
own eyes overseers, and thine own sonns and servants, in thy household,
witnesses of thy will in doing good. Half a loaf broken unto the hungry while
thou live, and have it in thine own power and purse, procures thee more
friends in the court of Heaven, then a whole loaf given after thy death, by
heirs and asignes: If bread be thine, thus as I have told you, si tuus, qui
tuus, dum tuus, deal thy bread to the Hungry.

A good work is in it self a sufficient reward, Pro. 21. 15. It is joy to the
just, to do Justice: much more to show mercy, for he which is full of pity,
rewards his own soul, Pro. 11. 17. Blessed is he that considers the
poor and needy, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed in His Temporal, Civil, Spiritual,
Eternal,
Estate.

Blessed in his temporal estate, both in respect of wealth and health. As for
wealth, Pro. 11. 24. 25
there is that scatters, and yet is increased more, but he that spares more
then his right, shall surely come to poverty: The liberal person shall have
plenty, or as Geneua Margin.
other read, the soul of blessing shall be made fatt, and he that waters,
shall also have rain. God makes an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he has, Job. 1. 10.

As for his health, Psalm 41. 1.
the Lord preserves him, and keeps him alive: that he may be blessed upon
earth, the Lord delivers him in the time of trouble, the Lord comforts him when
he lies sick upon his couch, and makes all his bed in his sickness. To my
remembrance (says Apud Chem. nit. loc. Co^. lib de paupertate.
Hierom) I never read of any that dyed an unhappy death, who lead a merciful
life; concerning both health and wealth, our Prophet says in the next words,
If thou deal thy bread to the hungry, then shall thy light break forth as
the morning, and thy health shall grovve speedily.

For his Civil estate, that is, reputation and honor: Learning and Valor are
the virtues for which a man is most admired; but humbleness and bountifulness
are the virtues, for which a man is best beloved. I b. 31. 20.
The loins of the naked bless him, and the tongues of the poor praise him,
and the hearts of all men honor him; his Psalm 11^* 6.
memorial is blessed, and had in an everlasting remembrance, Eccles. 49 1.
sweet as honey in all mouths, and pleasant in all ears as music at a
banquet of wine.

For this Spiritual estate, the dealing of bread to hungry souls is
acceptable to God, for his alms ascend, and come up in remembrance before God.
Act. 10. 4. Where that he has done faithfully to the least of Christ's little
ones, shall be Construed as done to Christ himself, and it is very comfortable
to himself also; which occasioned the blessed Martyr I^ hi^ lif^ before his
works.
Tyndall to term monday and Saturday which he usually spent in visiting the
sick, and relieuing the poor, his own days of pastime: an happy recreation
as Orat de obit^ Theodos^.
Ambrose speaks, in alieno remedio Vulnera sua curare; To benefit our selves
by helping other.

For his eternal estate, the poor man is the Mercurit* says our Him of
Almesdecdes.
Church, set by God in the way to Jerusalem above, whosoever will go thither
must go by his door, pointing at the path of Paradise directly. He that
Couers the naked shall put on Christ, and be Revel. 7. 9.
Clothed with the long white robes of righteousness Psalm. 32. 1.
covering all his sin: he that bringes the poor Cast-out into his house shall
be received into Luke. 16. 9.
everlasting habitation; he that hides not himself from his own flesh, shall
enjoy the presence of Christ, and 1 Cor. 13. 12.
see God face to face. He that deals bread to the hungry, shall be Psalm. 36. 1.
satisfied with the plenteousnes of Gods house, drinking of heavenly delights
as out of the river, he shall have for a cup of Cold water which is the least
alms, a Crown of glory which is the greatest of rewards, even fullness of
Joys and pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore.

GENESIS 1. 26. And God said, let us make man, in our Image after our own
likeness.
THe Scripture considers man in a fourefold estate, the first of his
confection, as being in his original integrity created according to Gods own
likeness. The 2. of his infection, as having by sin defaced this imprinted
Image.

The 3. of his refection, as being renewed again by Christ which is the
brightness of Gods glory and express Character of his person.

The 4. of his perfection in the Kingdom of glory, when he shall enjoy Gods
presence, seeing him (as the blessed Apostle speaks) even face to face.

Our present text is a brief Chronicle reporting his first estate, namely the
creation of man wherein two points are to be discussed, especially

1. The mystery of the most high and sacred Trinity creating. 2. The dignity of
man Created,
The first is closely couched under these two words faciamus, and Imago, let us
make, in the plural number, Aug. Confess l. 13. c. 22. et Lomb. li. 1. did. ^
Idem Beda in Loc.
noting the Trinity, but in the singular Image, not Images, noting the unity:
the word our imports more then one, the word likeness one and no more: this then
in the Judgment of all orthodoxe Divines is meant of the three in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, which three are one. 1. John. 5. 7.
Hereupon elsewhere termed according to the Hebrew phrase, God our makers. Job.
35. 10. psalm. 149. 2. Esaias. 54* 5. and Eccle. 12. 1. Remember thy Creators in
the days of thy youth.

If this note seem to be forced and unkind, beside the stream of all
antiquity, there be manifest and manifold reasons evidently demonstrating the
same.

1. Man is the workmanship of the whole Trinity, Ergo these words of God, let
us make, concern the whole Trinity, the antecedent is indeniable, because
opera* Trinitatis quoad extra sunt co^municabilia, that is, all the works of
the Trinity without it self are communicable, the works of the Trinity within
it self are incommunicable; So God the father is said only to beget, God the
son to be begotten, and God the holy Ghost to proceed; but all the works of
the Trinity without it self are common unto three persons, and therefore
Moses says in the beginning of this chapter Calvin in loc.
according to the words original, in principio dij creauit intimating the
creation of the world to be the work of the whole Trinity. Creauit dij,
three persons, but one God. It is bad latin yet good divinity, for God the
son did create so well as God the father. John. 1. 3. by him al things were
made, and God the holy Ghost also as well as God the son, for the spirit moved
upon the waters. Genesis 1. 2. where by spirit we neither understand an Angel
which is DiVillet in Loc.
Caietans idle fancy* nor yet the wind as Lib. contr. Hermogenem.
Tertullian and Paul Fagius com in Genesis 1.
David Kimchi conceited: nor the piercing air as Quast. 8. in Genesis
Theodorete imagined: but it was Gods own spirit: whereby the creatures were
fostered and formed. Job. 26. 13. His spirit has garnished the heavens, and so
divines ascribe the work of creation in the mass of the matter, unto God the
father: In the disposition of the form, unto God the son: in the continuance
and conservation of both, unto God the holy spirit: the consultation or rather
agreement in saying, let us make man, is of the whole trinity Gibbins. Qu. 12.
in Genesis
wherein God the father, as the first in order, speaks unto the son and
holy Ghost, and the son and the holy Ghost speak it and order it with the
father, the which because it is written for man's instruction is also spoken
after the manner of men.

2. To whom I pray said God ( let us make man) If not to God the son and holy
Ghost? unto some Demigods, as Apud Paraum com. in lo^ idem. S^xt. Seen us.
(...) lib. 5. annotat. 17.
Philo Iudaus a scholar of Plato most absurdly coniectured? or because the
works and actions of men are partly good, and partly bad, that God he spoke to
some Cacodamon as the Manichees impiously dreamed, refering the making of that
which is good unto God, but the making of that which is bad unto some
badspirit. Ista refer est refellere, the very repetition of these fantasies
is a sufficient confutation of them unto you who know that all which God made
was good, yea very good, and that God in the beginning made man righteous, but
they have sought many inventions. Eccl. 7. 31.

Or did God speak this in the plural after the manner of great Princes, only
for his honor? Nos Radulphus Romanus Imperator mandamus and. As some Jews
have fondly construed it. nb vcb vbi Answer 1. Paraus vbi supra. et in Gen 3.
22. idem Tremellius in loc.
is made that the stately style Nos, is not ancient, at the least not so
gray*headed, and Christian interpreters observe from Aben Ezra who was himself
a Jew; That the Scripture does not afford such an example of any King or
Potentate, who speaks of himself plurally, We will and Command. Again,
Princes in our age use that style, that they might seem to do nothing alone,
but all as it were by the Counsel of their Nobles and other great ministers of
state. Whereas God neither needs nor admits any Counselor, and so
consequently could not speak of himself in this sense, Let us make.

Or did God say this unto the beasts of the field, or unto the birds of the
Heaven, or unto the fish of the Sea? No^: for then the base should have made
the more Noble, and the servants have created their Lord and master, for so the
Scripture does esteem man as Lord of the creatures: Rule (says God) over the
fish of the Sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over every thing that
moves upon the earth. Genesis 1. 28. All things are put in subjection under his
feet. Psalm. 8. 6. Again man was created according to his Image who spoke
this, and according to their Image to whom it was spoken; But he was not framed
to the likeness of any beast. Ergo the conceit is brutish to think that
Almighty God spoke to beasts in saying, Let us make man.

Or did God speak this unto his glorious Angels? No, Because then creatures
should have been creators; For albeit there be some question about the time
when Angels were made, Yet it is without all controversy, that they were
created, as Moses in his entrance, to this Book does intimate, saying, In the
beginning God created heaven and earth. That is (as himself does expound
himself in the 4. Commandment.) The heaven and the earth, and all that is
therein. And the blessed Apostle does construe Moses, all things invisible
as well as visible, Whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or
powers, For the same hand says Soliloq^. cap 9.
Augustine, that made silly worms creeping on the earth, created also the
stately thrones singing in the heavens.

If God then uttered these words neither to the creatures more base, nor yet
to his Angels excelling all earthly beauties; It is certain that they were
addressed to God the Son, and to God the holy Ghost; And so without any
further dispute, we may conclude, that the most ineffable mystery of the
blessed Trinity in Unity, is in them obscurely touched and couched: I say not
that it is here set down clearly, nor in any place of the old Testament, lest
happily Gods people, the Jews, exceedingly given to superstition and Idolatry,
should adore three gods in stead of three persons, and so Tritheisme prove so
bad as Atheism: Nay (beloved) in the new Testament where these mysteries are
revealed more plainly, you may well note; That in the rehearsing of the
Trinity, there is an Item for the Unity, as in the words of our blessed
Savior. Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. He does express three
persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, But Basil. Epist. 64. et Ambros. de s
^to l. c. 14.
saying, In the Name, not names, He notes the unity of essence; For God is Vnus
in Numine, Howsoever Trinus in numero, I and my Father says Christ are all
one. John. 10. 30. Vnum sumus, as Retract. lib. 1 cap. 4.
Augustine pithily, not vnus, all one power, but not all one person. God the
Father is not aliud, but alius, another person albeit not another essence then
is God the Son. For in speaking of the Trinity we must especially take heed
of Thom par. 1. qn. 31. ^ut. 2.
two rocks, of Arrius on the right hand, who together with the Trinity of
persons maintained a Trinity of essences: of Sabellius on the left hand, who
with the unity of essence maintained an unity of persons. These two we must
heedfully shun, lest (as S. Paul speaks) we make shipwreck of faith, even
sailing in the middle way, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the
substance. But leaving this argument which is so high and hard, that a good
Christian ought rather by believing to adore simply, then by disputing explore
subtly, I come to speak of man's dignity more principally intended in our
text, and more naturally gathered out of every word in the same.

1. Out of the word faciamus, When almighty God made light, he said only, Let
there be light, and there was light, and when he made herbs he said only,
let the ground bring forth herbs, and it did so, He spoke the word and it
was done, He commanded, and it was effected. Psalm. 33. 9. But when he made man,
he breathed himself, as Quast. in Genesis
Abbinus is bold to speak, and as P^dag. l. 1. cap. 3.
Clemens Alexandrinus and other of the most ancient Doctors, He held a
Counsel, let us make man, So that whereas all other creatures were made with
his bare word only, man was framed as it were with his own hands, as Lib. de
Prouidentia, vti magdeb. Cent. 5. col. 244.
Prosper has it, hunc manibus, quo plus genitoris haberet, Dignatur formare
suis.

Neither was this in respect of any hardness in the doing, for shall any thing
be hard to the Lord? Genesis 18. 14. If he had said only let man be made, as he
said only, let there be a firmament, Lib. de Prouidentia, vti magdeb. Cent. 5.
col. 244.
he r Para^ in loc.
could have done the one, as well as the other, and as easily; but it was to
show there greatness of the work: For as wise men in managing matters of
importance, use the deeper consultation, and mature care, to perform them:
Even so the scripture speaking after the manner of men, affirms of God, that
he took here deliberation, and so Gibi^ in loc.
commends the wonderful and exquisite workmanship of God in the creating of
man as being a more Hilar. in ps. ^* 19. sect. 10.
noble creature then heaven itself.

2. The dignity of man's creation is much amplified by the circumstance of time
when he was made, to wit, after all other things were created, for as Qu^st. in
Genesis
Albinus and other observe, Deus imprimis parauit domum, et deinde dominum,
Almighty God first created the whole world as an house, then he made man as the
master of this house. God, says Epist 38.
Ambrose, like the feast* maker in the Gospels history, first prepared his
dinner, he provided his oxen and his fatlings, and got all things ready, then
he does inuit his guestes and say, come to the marriage. When he had created
all things for man, he put man in possession of all, and sa^d, Ruleouer the
fish in the sea, and over the fowls in the heaven, and over every thing that
moves upon the earth.

Again Apuleius Florid. lib. 3.
Serum concilium is Serium, and usually the last works of a cunning Artificer,
are most absolute; Hexa^ l. ^. cap. vltim.
S. Ambrose therefore does observe, that God having framed man, instantly
rested himself and made Holy Day. He made birds flying in the air, fish
swimming in the Sea, worms creeping on the ground, and yet he did not rest. He
made lilleys and other flowers of the field which are more beautiful in the
spring, then Solomon in all his Royalty, but yet he did not rest; he made the
goodly lights, and glorious Angels of heaven, and yet he did not rest; But
as soon as he had made man, he rested* hallowed a Sabbath, as having now made
him for whom al other things were made.

3 God made man last, as an abridgement of all his other Creatures, and an
Index, as it were to his great Book in Folio, therefore called of the
Hebrews, Olam Hakaton, and of the Greeks microcosmos, that is, a little
world. When as the Lord had furnished the heaven and earth with all the
Creatures and ornaments thereof, he made man consisting of an heavenly and
earthly nature. Having the beauties of things without life even the chiefest,
as of the Sun and Moon and stars. Eccle. 12. 1. 2. Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, when the Sun is not dark, nor the light,
nor the Moon, nor the stars. He has also growth as plants. Genesis 49. 22.
Joseph shall be a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by the well side. So
David says, our children grow up as the young plants. Psalm. 144. 12. Sense and
sensible properties, as beasts. Genesis 49. 9. Judah as a lions whelpe shall come
up from the spoil. Dan as a serpent by the way, as an adder by the path biting
the horse heels. Reason and wisdom, as Angels. 2. Sam. 14. 20. My Lord is
wise according to the wisdom of an Angel. God added to man's being, life, which
he denied unto stones: to life, sense, which he denied unto plants: to sense,
speech and understanding, which he denied unto bruit beasts: he Homo
receptorium diuin^ bonitatis Iren.
bestowed upon this one creature the perfections of all the rest.

Lastly, man was happily made last, after heaven and earth were created,
because says Epist. 38.
Ambrose, Terra exercitium est homin^, Coelum Corona. Earth is the place where
man is to seek God, heaven the place where man is to see God. Earth is the
place where man is to run his race, heaven is the place where he receives the
price. If any man seriue for mastery says Paul, he is not crowned, except he
strive as he ought to do. 2. Tim. 2. 5.

This world is the Theater where man is to wrestle with flesh and blood, and
with spiritual wickednesses in high places; He must fight with beasts and
birds, and with all the fruits of the earth at his table, he must in his
pilgrimage here fight with a great many dangers, as well by land as sea, he must
in his warfare here fight with the pomps of the world, and with the power of
hell, he must fight with all the creatures, and make them to serve him, that
he may the better serve God. It was therefore fit that the earth should be
created before man, as being the stage whereon he must act his part, and that
heaven should be created before man, as being his reward and Crown.

But the dignity of man's creation appears yet in the next word, Image, more
fully. Let us make man according to our Image.

Some peradu nture will object here, that God will have no likeness or Image of
himself.

The Papists indeed Magdeb. Ep. in Cent. 8.
crucify certain textes in the Bible to prove their idolatrous adoring of
Images; But says Esaias, to whom will ye liken God, or what similitude will ye
set up unto him, He will not, he cannot, he should not be pictured, Aug. de
Ciu. Dei. l. 8 c. 23.
Homo enim dificit ab illo qui eum fecit, quum sibi praeficit ipse quod fecit.
Man is then unlike himself, if he think any thing like to God beside himself.

Thom. part. 1. qu. 93. art. 1.
Answer is made, that God set up his Image himself, who knew best to make it,
Let us make man in our Image. Whosoever therefore defaceth it, commits high
treason, insomuch that whereas it is no sin simply to kill a beast, it is a
fearful o^trage to slay a man, and murder for a man to destroy himself.
Thou shall not kill thy neighbor, Ergo not thy self, because thy self is
nearest unto thy self. If a man sent to ^he goal by lawful authority for
felony break prison, he shall dye for it, although he quit himself of the
fact wherewith he was charged.

And so (beloved) If thy soul break out of thy body before God open the
prison doors, and deliver it out of her bonds, it is in danger of hell fire:
the resolute Romans and other, in killing themselves did magne, but not been,
says De ciu. Dei. l. 1 c. 22.
Augustine, and the reason is plain, Man is Gods Image, and his superscription
is upon him, and so consequently will not suffer his stamp to be battered, or
contemptuously defaced.

In every creature there be certain prints of the deity, for seculum is
speculum, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shewe^h his
handy-worke, Vniuersus mundus ( Cardinal ^usanus.
as one said) nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus, In the creation of ^he
visible world, we may behold ^he inuis^ble things of God. Romans 1. 20. In
omnibus creaturis est aliqualis Dei similitudo per modum vesligij, (says g
Aquin.) Sed in sola rationali creatur q Part 1. qu. ^3. art. 6.
a similitudo Dei per modum Imaginis. In other things we may see Gods power,
and some other express trackes of the Trinity, but man and only man is Gods
Image: all the doubt is, what is meant by this Image, and in what part of man
it is placed?

Com in Genesis l. 2. c. 2.
Rupertus understands here by Image, the second person of the Trinity, God
the son, and by likeness or similitude, the third person of the Trinity, God
the holy Ghost. But in that the Lord said, Let us make man in our Image, He
does intimate that God is the lively representation and Image, not of one or
two persons only, but of the whole Trinity.

Apud Willet in loc.
Other think, that man was created according to the likeness of that humane
nature which our blessed Savior Christ the son of God, was in fullness of
time to assume, but the Scripture teaches evidently the contrary, that Christ
took upon him the likeness of man, and not man his likeness. Phil. 2. 7.

In Cosmopoea. page 104.
Augustinus Eugubinus, and Apud Willet. idam melito Asianus. vti. Sext Senens.
Bibl. l. 5. annot. 18.
Oleaster think that God took upon him an humane shape when he created man,
and therefore said, Let us make man in our Image. But neither did God the
father appear ever in any such shape, neither could it be said to be Gods
Image, being assumed only for a time.

Other (as Exposit in Genesis 1.
Paulus Fagius reports) affirm that the souls immortallity represents Gods
eternity. Therefore man having a soul immortal is like to God eternal.

Hexam. hom. 10.
Basil, Hom. 8. in Genesis et Homil. ad pop Antio.
Chrysostom, and some other refer this likeness to man's dominion over the
creatures, being as it were a God on earth, which occasioned ^lem. Alex. P^dag.
l 3. c. 1.
Heraclitus to term men mortal Gods, and the Gods immortal men.

Other have this conceit, that as there is nothing in heaven or earth like to
God, so God created man that among millions of men there should not be found
one in all features and figures of the body like to another. These Doctors
shoot fair, but far off. It is true which is delivered by them in this
particular, but it comes a great deal short of the mark.

Some of the Fathers and Schoole-Doctours here distinguish between Image and
likeness. Saint Basil in Hexam. Hom. 10. Ambrose lib. De dignitate condition
humanae. Lomb. 1. sent: Did. 16. and Aquin. upon our text refer Image to the
natural gifts of the soul, will, understanding, memory: but likeness to the
supernatural gifts of grace, holiness, and righteousness, which occasioned
Eucherius to say, Imago est omnium, similitudo paucorum.

Part. 1. qu. 93. art. 6.
Aquine does auow that Gods Image may be seen in the most admirable frame of
the body, but the likeness in our minds only. For as Ca. 1. ^editat
Bernard observes, the mind of man is properly Gods similitude, wherein there
be three powers or facul^ies, Memory, Understanding, Will. In our memory we
resemble God the Father, which is the ancient of days. Dan. 7. 9. In our
understanding God the Son, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Colos. 2. 3. in our will, God the holy Ghost, by whom his grace
works all in all. 1. Cor. 12. 6.

The which opinion Augustine favors in his 102. Epistle, and S. s Ambrose in
his Treatise concerning 8 cap. 2.
man's dignity, says, as the Son is begotten of the Father, and the Holy
Spirit proceeds from both, even so the will is begotten, as it were, by the
understanding, and memory proceeds from both.

Now (beloved) howsoever it be true that these natural gifts of reason, and
supernatural gifts of grace, were conferred by God upon man in his creation:
Yet if we compare one Scripture with another, it will appear, that Moses here
makes no difference between likeness and Image. But that (as ^n Loc.
Calvin and u other observe) they do signify the same thing. For in v
Paraeus, Willot. Gibbins.
the next verse without any mention of the word likeness, it is said, that God
created man in his Image, in the Image of God created he him. And in the 5.
Chapter at the 1. verse, without any mention of the word Image, God created
Adam, in the likeness of God made he him. And so the meaning of our text, in
our Image, according to our likeness, is nothing else but in our Image which
is likest us. As if the Lord had said, let us make man in our Image, that he
may be (as a creature may be) like us, and the same his likeness may be our
Image.

But we shall understand more fully what is Gods Image by considering in what
part of man it was placed.

u Audius the founder of the monstrous Anthropomorphite x Epiphanius Hares 70.
et Aug. Hares. 50.
heresy, supposed it was placed in the figure of the body, which (lest happily
there should be raised any wicked error which they would not acknowledge for
their own) the Papists are content to like well and defend, in whose Churches
and other places of devotion, it is every where to find the likeness of God
the Father depictured upon their walls and windows in the figure of a man. As
if they had learned of Cic. de invent. lib. 2.
Zeuxis, to draw his Physiognomy, and they profess it lawful both to have
such Images, and to worship them also, from Consilium. Constant.
our text, that God created Adam in his likeness. But it is a strange
perverseness, quoth Tertullian, aduersus Marcion. Lib. 2. Cap. 27. To think
that there are humane things in God rather then divine things in man, and to
conceive of God to have the Image of a man, rather then a man to have the Image
of God.

Other affirm, that the likeness of God is placed in the mind only; For,
says Hexam. l. 6. cap. 7.
Ambrose, who said, let us make man in our Image? Was it not God? and what is
God? flesh and bones? or a spirit? Christ answers in the 4. of S. John. at
the 24. verse. God is a spirit, Ergo, man is like to God, as being endued with
an understanding spirit.

But because God created the whole man in his Image, consisting of a body made
of the dust of the ground, and of a soul that was the breath o^ life, which
being united by the spirit became a living soul: It is Cave et ^ide (...) of
the world. p^g. 24.
evident (so far as their several nature could contain) that God crea^ed in
that Image, A^g de Tri^ l^b 11. cap. 1 Ca^u. Instit l. (...) c. 15 sec^ 3.
both body and soul. But as wax is more apt then clay to receive a print, So
the soul being a spirit, was much more capable of the impression of the Image
of God. Yet that which the body could receive, it did in very notable sort
express, being so wonderfully framed of such an excellent proportion and
beauty, that no creature in the world may be compared with it, and moreover of
so sound a temperature, Aug. de peccat. meri. it is et remissione. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that had not Adam sinned, it would have continued without corruption for ever.

But the soul being a spirit (as God is a spirit,) it is apter a great deal
to bear Gods Image. For in the very substance of the soul, there is a lively
print thereof, not as though the soul were of the substance of God, for as
Contra Fae^ieem. l. 2. c. 21.
Augustine pithily distinguishes, it is, (...) deo, non de deo.

But first, in that it is a substance spiritual and immortal, as God is the
living God. Heb. 10. 31.

Secondly, for that it is endued with understanding and memory, which are the
very character of Gods wisdom.

Thirdly, in respect of quickness and agility, conceiving at one time so many
matters, so different, so far distant, which is the shadow of Gods vbiquity.

But St. Paul in saying man was in the beginning created after the Image of
God, in knowledge. Colos. 3. 10. And the same in righteousness and holiness.
Ephesians. 4. 24. Shows plainly that this Image consists not so much in the
substance of the soul, or in the natural faculties thereof, as in the
supernatural gifts of grace, knowledge, illumination, holiness, Justice of
the soul. For Adam had an illuminated vnderderstanding, and a rectified will,
loving God above all things, and his neighbor as himself.

The two words of S. Paul, Holiness, and Righteousness contain man's whole
duty; holiness his duty to God, righteousness his duty to man. In this Image
man was created, and so consequently this Image consists in the soul, more
then in the body, and in the supernatural graces of the soul, more then in
the natural powers of the soul.

For 1. If this Image consisted only in the souls spiritual essence; then it
would follow that wicked spirits and wicked men should have Gods Image, because
the substance of the spirit and soul remains in them; but the scripture
teaches expressly, that the wicked have not Gods Image, but the devils stamp.
So Christ affirmed of Judas, have not I chosen you twelve? and one of you is a
devil, and S. Peter when he committed a foul fact, come behind me Satan.
Mat. 16. 23. and of the Pharisees, ye are of your father the devil. John. 8.
44. And the text is plain, 1. of John 3. 8. he that commits sin is of the
devil.

2. God cannot properly be said to damn his own Image, or to send it into
hell fire, but the souls of reprobate sinners are damned, Ergo, this Image is
not altogether in the souls substance, that Image says Operum. fol. 14. 99.
Ambrose wherein thou were created; after the likeness of God, is not
condemned, but crowned.

3. That Image of God, after which Adam was created, is by his fall utterly
lost, and extinguished, for otherwise this Image needed not to be renewed, or
revived in us, as it is by Christ, in whom all true believers are new
creatures, and new men and a new lump, but the substance of the reasonable
soul, with all the natural powers thereof, are not altogether lost in
unregenerate men, ergo, this Image principally consisted in the gifts of grace.
To this purpose S. Contr. Faustin. l. 24. c. 2.
Augustine said that the whole man both in his inward and outward parts
inueterauit is waxen old, and decayed by sin, but the inward man is new
revived by grace, and the outward man hereafter shall be restored in the
resurrection.

Another question is moved here, whether the man only was created after this
image of God, and not the woman, and the reason of this doubt is grounded upon
the words of S. Paul, man is the Image and glory of God, the woman the glory of
man. Answer is made by Moses in the very next verse to my text. God created
man in his Image, male and female created he them. As for the place, man is the
glory of God, woman, the glory of man; Calvin. in loc.
It is to be construed, of the pre-eminence, and authority given unto man,
above the woman, in which one respect, the Image of God is expressed in the
man, more then in the woman. But if we consider the principal part of that
Image, consisting in holiness, and righteousness, the woman was*created,
according to it, as well as the man, in Christ, as the blessed Apostle teaches
us, there is neither male, nor female, but all are one, women are the daughters
of God, so well as men are the sons of God.

Now (beloved) because the day present, is a Sabbath, and the Sabbath in the
beginning, was instituted in honor of the creation, and man, of all the
creatures, is the most excellent; It is our duty, so long as either man or
woman has any being, all the days of our life, but upon the Sunday more
principally to magnify the Lord, for his infinite rich mercy; who created us,
not liuelesse as stones are, nor senseless as the plants are, nor witless as
the beasts are, but according to his own likeness in nature, knowledge,
holiness, righteousness, glory, appointing us to be Lords of this ample
universe, making all things for man, and man for himself.

2. This ought to teach us to take heed of corrupting our selves, by sin, or
our neighbors through our lewd examples, and to hate our sins as a serpent,
by means whereof, the likeness of God is so miserably defaced in us: for man
in his original integrity, created to the likeness of God, is by the
foulness of sin, a devil, and a very vermin; humana sub cute plurimae
latent ferae, said Carolus Bouillus: The Scripture h Dialog. de i^ort. any. ma.
says as much, in calling a subtle dissembler, a fox. Luke. 13. 32. a
soule-murthering prophet, a ravenous wolf. Mat. 7. 15. a vain man, a wild
asses colt. Job. 11. 12. A proud man in honor like horse and mule, without
understanding. Psalm. 32, 10. A voluptuous man, given over to work all
uncleanness, even with greediness, a Sow wallowing in the mire. 2. Pet. 2.
22. In a word the children of men set on fire to do mischief, whelps of
Lions. Psalm. 57. 4. and generations of vipers. Mat. 3. 7.

3. This should make us to labor earnestly, for true faith in Christ Jesus, by
whom this Image shall again be restored, and as newborn babes, do desire
the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow from strength to strength, and
from virtue to virtue, till we be of full growth in Christ, and have
this*Image thoroughly repaired in us.

4. This should incite us to give the God of our salvation humble and hearty
thanks, for redeeming us with his precious blood, when we were thus utterly
lost, and made, by sin, unlike to God, and our selves, as the Fathers in their
devotions use to speak. If we do owe to God our selves, for creating us,
after his Image, then undoubtedly more then our selves, for redeeming us, and
restoring in us his defaced Image through original sin in Adam, and actual
sin in our selves.

2. SAM. 24. 14. Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, (for his mercies
ar^ great,) and let me not fall into the hand of man.
THree Mag de burg. Epist. pr^fix. Centur. 5.
things usually succeed one another, in the Church, great blessings, great
sins, great punishments.

The people mentioned in this History, had received great blessings of the
Lord, He dealt not so with any nation, as the Prophet sings in the 147. Psalm.
verse last. In the ruff of their prosperity, turning the graces of God into
wantonness; They committed many great sins, and now the righteous Judge of
the whole world, threatens to bring great punishments upon them, and Habac. 3.
2.
yet in his wrath, remembering mercy, He gives David their King, by the Prophet
Gad, a free, though hard choice, whether he would have seven years of famine
come upon the land, or flee three months before his enemies, or that there be
three days of pestilence.

Now David being in a great strait, returns in the words read to Gad, and so
consequently, to God, his resolution, and the r^ason of his resolution.

1. His resolution, Let us fall into the hand of the Lord, and not into the
hand of man. 2. The reason of his resolution is, for his mercies are great.
For the better understanding of the whole text, one clause needs
explanation, and that is, what is here meant, by falling into the hand of the
Lord: Because Susanna did wish, and Saint Paul (as it should seem) writ the
quite contrary. Susanna said to the lustful Hist. of Susanna. 1. 23.
Elders, It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not to do it, then
to sin in the sight of the Lord, Hug. Cardi. et Estius in loc.
answer is made, that David makes his comparison here, between diverse kinds
of punishment, but Susannes comparison, is there between the doing of evil,
and the suffering of evil, (as the school speaks) between malum culpae, and
malum poenae. She therefore resolved worthily, that it was better to suffer
reproach and shame before men, then to commit an horrible sin, in the sight
of the Lord. So the renowned 2. Machab. 6. 23.
Eleazar, answered those, who menaced him with exquisite torments. If he would
not break one commandment of Gods law, that he would suffer himself, to be
sent into hell and the grave, that is, that he would rather be killed, and cut
in pieces, and to sink a thousand degrees under the ground, with infinite
dolours, and agonies, then to fall into such a fault. So reverend In similitud.
cap. 190.
Anselme protested, that if he should behold all the pains of hell, deuoyd of
sin on the one side, and on the other the horror but of one deadly sin
only, deuoyd of punishment, and that I must of necessity choose one of these
two, I (quoth he) would choose rather to throw my self into hell, then commit
one foul fact only.

But St. Paul affirms plainly. Heb. 10. 31. That it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God. g Answer is made by distinction,
almighty q Hugo. Card. in loc.
God has marring or destroying hands; Of which hands St. Paul there speaks;
again, making hands; Psalm. 119. 73. Thine hands have made me; protecting
hands. John. 10. 28. no man (says the Shepherd of our souls) shall pluck
my sheep out of my hands, and saving hands. Luke. 23. 46. Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit. Of which David here speaks.

Or as Aquin. Marlor. in Heb. 10. 31.
other in this world, while there remains hope for pardon, it is better to
fall into the hands of God. But in that black day, when once the sentence of
condemnation is past, it is an horrible thing to fall into his hands, for with
the froward, he will be froward, Psalm. 18. 26. David here speaks of a
punishment which is temporal on earth, at the most enduring but three days.
But A^sel in Heb. 10. 31. ^t Tostatus. in loc.
S. Paul there speaks of a pain which is eternal in hell, inflicted by such
an adversary which is everliving, and so consequently, his Judgments, in that
dungeon of torture can never dye.

Or as Aquin. in Heb. 10. 31.
other, it is better for one, who sins against God, and contemnes the riches
of his mercies, esteeming the blood of his Covenant, where-wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, despiting the spirit of grace, crucifying Christ
again, and trampling him under his feet. I say, for such a reprobate, who
dies in his sins, It is better to fall into the hands of man, who can only
kill the body, but has not power to destroy the soul. But for one that
sins, and, as David here, repents of his sin, from the bottom of his heart;
It is better for to fall into the hands of God.

Or in playner terms, (if it be possible,) God has two hands, one of
Justice, another of Mercy; To fall into his hand of Justice, an horrible thing:
Of that hand, Job said Chap. 13. 21. Withdraw thine hand far from me: The
fingers of that hand, wrote terrible things, upon the wall of Belshazers
palace. Dan. 5. But to fall into his hand of mercy, full of comfort, because
his mercies are great. Osi^der. Dr. Willet. in loc.
Now S. Paul in that place, means punishments inflicted by the Lord, as an
angry Judge; But David in this place, means chastisements, imposed by the
Lord, as an indulgent father, in love, for the amendments of his children.

This rub being removed, and the passage made clear, let us proceed in the
ways of our text. And that as the blessed Galat. 2 14.
Apostle speaks, with a right foot.

In the resolution of David, choosing the pestilence, rather then famine, or the
sword, Interpreters observe many notable virtues; as first his Comestor. Hugo
Cardin. Pet. Martyr. Tostatus. Estius. in loc. Idem Josephus Ant^ l 7. c. 10.
vel vt al^. 3^
Justice.

For had he chosen famine, that would have pinched only the poorest, himself
would have fared well: And if he had chosen war, that would have destroyed
only the weakest; Or if the fury thereof, had ouerrunne most of the other, yet
he might have set a safeguard to defend his own person*, and so preserve his
own skin from the dint of the sword, and print of the spear: But having been
partaker with his subjects in their sin, he would not exempt himself from
the punishment: He chose therefore the plague, which is common, Et regt, et
gregi, to Prince, to people, to Peer, to poor.

The hand must be equal, that handles the scale; Princes are sometimes
partial, in distributing Justice between subject and subject* But in a cause
concerning their own particular, so well as the general of their people, not
to show more of the party then of the King, (as David in this answer to Gad,)
is admirable Justice.

Well fare his heart, Author of P^rnassus.
who said, Divines are to blame, who write Cases of conscience for private
persons, and teach exactly, what account shopkeepers are to make for false
wares, and idle words, and in the mean time, neglect exorbitant errors, of
higher powers, and potentates. And it is a good quaere, whether it be not
grosser Idolatry, to prefer reason of states, before the principles of piety,
then to worship the golden calfe, or Nabuchodonosors Image.

K^ Epist. before B^ Dor^.
David understood, that he was obliged to God doubly, first that he made him a
man, Secondly, in that he made him a little God, to rule over other men, a
finger (as it were) of that great hand that gouerns all the world: as then he
stood in Gods place, so did he follow Gods pattern; as God is Psalm. 145. 1^.
righteous in all his ways, so he desires to deal justly with all men, in
all things. He respects the ship of the common weal, more then the cock-boat
of his own fortune, and therefore would not have the whole burden of the
punishment, to be laid upon his people, but with bowed knee, stoupes to bear
his part, saying, Let us fall into the hand of God, showing himself so forward
to suffer, as he was to sin.

Secondly, Divines observe David's humility, laying no fault upon his subjects;
their sins he knew not, his own he knew, for which he had justly deserved
this plague. The text tells us at the 10. verse, That after he numbered the
people, (for which all this tempest arose,) His heart smote him, and he said
unto the Lord, I have greatly sinned, in that I have done, And now I beseech
thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very
foolishly: and at the 17. verse* Lo, I have sinned, and done wickedly, but
these sheep, what have they done? That is, the people being innocent as
Sheep, what have they done, that Hugo. Card. ^t S^. in loc.
they should thus suffer. I pray thee let thine hand be upon me, and against
my fathers house.

Annot elucid in loc.
Hugo de Sancto victore, In loc etal^. ibid.
Tostatus and other auow, that the people did offend, in numbering the
soldiers, as much* if not more then David.

First, because they did not entreat David, to forbear this muster, at this
time, being needless, saying, as Ioab the general of the host, in the 3.
verse. Why does my Lord the King, delight in this thing.

Secondly, because being numbered, they did not offer unto the Lord his due; for
the law says. Exodus 30. 12. When thou take the sum of the children of
Israel, after they be numbered, every man shall give a ransom for his soul, to
the Lord, when thou numbrest them, that there be no plague among them, when
thou numbrest them. It was according to the law, for the magistrate, to number
Israel, as we read. Number. 1. 2. But it was against the Law, for the people being
numbered, to neglect their offerings.

For the better understanding of this hystory, let us (if you please,) renew
that text again.

When thou take the sum, Ainsworth. in Ex. 30. 12.
The word in Hebrew, signifies, Head, because the sum total, howsoever it
be placed, at the foot of our account, yet indeed it is, the head of the
number, or Corn. a Lap. in Exo. 30. 12.
Head, That is, the sum of the heads of the children of Israel, after they
be numbered, and every man shall give a ransom for his soul; Ainsworth.
That is, for his life, which he should now loose, when he was particularly
visited of God, If he redeemed not himself with money; now the reasons of
this law, delivered by divines, are these.

1. Cor^l. ^ Lap.
To put Israel in mind, that this exceeding great multiplication of people,
wa^ only from the Lord, according to his gracious promise, made to their
forefathers, I will make of thee a great nation, I will make thy seed as the
dust of the earth, so that if any can number the dust of the earth, then shall
thy seed also be numbered. Genesis 13. 16.

2. To show the special care he had over his people, Hab^s in numerato.
Cornel a lapid.
numbering them, and as it were noting every person in his book. God cares for
his people, says 1. Epist. 5. 7.
St. Peter, and so cares as a father cares for his child, says Psalm. 103. 13.
David, and so cares for every child, as if he had no more then one to care
for, says Confess. l. 3. c. 11.
Augustine.

3. To Cyril in Ioh. l 2. cap. 92.
signify, that no man is Lord of his own life, but that he depends upon God,
in whom he lives, and moves, and has his being. Acts. 17. 28.

4. This temporal offering, Corn. a lapid.
prefigured the spiritual tribute, which every one that has given up his name
to God, in holy Baptism, ought to pay, the which is to serve God in spirit and
truth. John. 4. 23.

5. Ainsworth.
By this Law, God taught his people, to judge themselves for their sins, that
they might not be judged of him. Ezekiel. 20. 43. 1. Cor. 11. 31.

6. Idem.
This redeeming of their souls, with money, taught them also faith in Christ,
who was to redeem his people, not with silver and gold, but with his own
precious blood. 1. Pet. 1. 19. The people then in omitting this duty, for so
many good ends enjoined, transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and so
provoked his just indignation against them.

But grant, that the people did not offend in this one particular, Yet their
manifold other sins, undoubtedly, were the cause why the Lord permitted David
to fall into this error, according to that of Moral l. 25. c. 20. and. 23.
Gregory the great. Secundummerita subditorum, disponuntur actar^gentium.
Almighty God disposes the hearts of Sovereigns, according to the merrits of
their subjects, If they be not nursing Fathers unto the Church, and the
ministers of God, for our good, It is because we govern our own families ill,
and our own persons worse. It is a common fault, indeed the common fault, when
any Psalm ^1 10.
mischief happens unto them, or plague comes near their dwelling, Instantly
to ^. Pet. 2. 10.
speak ill of those which are in authority.

Now this murmuring against our governors, arises (as Mr. Mor^rai ser at the
Spittle. An. 1602.
one notes) from five defects in our selves.

The first is, want of humility, for when our hearts are sowred with the leaven
of our own pride, conceyting that we could manage state affairs, a great
deal wiser (as Alphonsus the 10. said If he had been with God in the
beginning, he could have better d^sposed of many things in the world,) then
often times a bitterness arises out of the stomach, into the mouth, So that
we cannot forbear to profane sacred majesty.

The second is, want of wisdom, to discern the policies of Princes, for the
disguising of a purpose, with a pretense, is not forbidden in the Bible. 1.
King. 3. 25.
Solomon pretended to divide an infant, to good purpose, But did not, and Act.
16 2.
Paul pretended to Iudaize, but did not, arcana reipublicae mysteria regni,
State plots are not easily digested, of Anthony Perez in his political
Aphorism.
country stomachs, as Father Ser. (...) Sep^. Sund.
Latimer said, they be no meat for mowers.

The 3. is, want of compassion, in not weighing the temptations of Princes,
having al means of misdoing, and nothing to keep them from outrageous sins,
but only the fear of the Lord. A bosom friend, is bold to tell a private
person of his fault, But alas, who dares say to the Pope, of Prince, Domine cur
ita facis? If his domestical chaplain, I mean his conscience chide him not,
his other chaplains are of his closer, and they quoth old Latymer, will keep
his follies close; Daniel in Edw. 5.
a misery fatal unto great potentates, whom flattery will never suffer to
know themselves, in health, or sickness. We should therefore construe Princes
actions ever to the best, according to the laws of the Thames, When two
wherries meet, the bank is theirs by right, that have wind and tide against
them.

The 4. is, want of thankfulness, Princes are Hos. 4. 18.
shieldes, under whose shelter we lead a quiet and a peaceful life, in all
godliness and honesty, Sweet peace is the greatest of all blessings temporal,
and freedom of the Gospel, is the greatest of all blessings spiritual, as
being the Romans 1. 16.
power of God, unto salvation. Yet there be refractorie fling-braines, enjoying
both, under the government of pious princes, which are ready to quarrel their
authority, concerning the tithing of mint, and other small matters of
ceremonies, indifferent enjoined, to preserve the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace.

Hippodamus in ^ Aristotle, was censured for v Politic. ^. 2. c* 6.
writing of common wealths, being but an architect; yet Carpenters and Masons,
among us, are busy builders of new Churches, and framers of new disciplines:
but the greatest of all, is want of equity; when as we blame the King, for our
own faults; as for example, we desire confident proceedings in the business
of religion, and yet we weaken them with our own divisions, and dissentions:
If every man in his place shall examine himself, and lay his hand on his own
heart, he shall understand easily, that the bad ordering of his own self, and
his own things, is part of the cause, why the wrath of the Lord, is kindled
against Israel. If David of himself takes the whole blame to himself, it is
(as I have showed,) his humility. But if we cast it upon him, it argues in us
a great want of meekness, wisdom, piety, thankfulness, equity.

3. In the resolution of David, here Martyr. in loc.
Divines observe his zeal; for in war, the conquering enemy does insult, and
blaspheme, Psalm. 42. 13.
where is now their God; Is not the Lord, in whom they trust, able to defend
his Israel as with a shield? And in famine, good people should be forced to beg
their bread of strange nations, and to receive courtesies of enemies, which the
Grecians aptly term, Dora adora, gifts and no gifts; And the Fabius
Verrucosus apud Sen de benef. l. ^* c. 7.
Latins, panis lapidosus, a loaf so hardly digested as a stone: And that had
been dishonorable not only to their country, heretofore flowing with milk and
honey; But also to God, as if the Psalm. 121 4.
shepherd of Israel, had not means to feed the people of his pasture, and
the sheep of his hands. And therefore David here desires, to depend upon God
only, Let us fall into the hand of God.

Many professors, in these days of relapse, began to be lukewarm, yea, some
were so cold in their devotion, and zeal, that they seemed frozen in the
dregs of their profit, and pleasure, so little regarding the light of Israel,
and honor of this our brave victorious nation, that they resolved upon the
conclusion of the match, not only to be sons of the Pope, but also the
servants of a strange people. Yet (God be thanked) England had her David's, who
did not cease, night and day, to call and cry to the Lord, For thy sons sake,
for thy Sions sake, let not our insulting enemies, a bloody generation, drunken
with the blo^d of the Saints, have their desires over us: For their mercies are
full of cruelty: But let us fall into thy hands, for thy Judgments are full
of mercy.

And it is undoubtedly Gods own work, who brings light out of darkness, and
can do whatsoever he will, and will do whatsoever is best for his people,
sometime by weak means, and sometimes by no means, and sometime by contrary
means, against whom Pro. 21. 30.
there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel: That our David's prayer
is heard, our religion established, our peace settled, good men encouraged, our
open enemies discomfited, and our false friends discovered, and worthily
deluded, To whom I (...) now no more, but only this.

If you be good Christians, and settled Protestants, so remain. If you were
once, an^ (...) now fallen, return: If you never were, rep^ If you never will
be, perish.

Were it not for the honor of God, and glory of his people, the cast happily
might prove measurable, whether it be better to be slain by the sword, in
war, or by the pestilence in peace. But a good man, and a good magistrate,
especially considering, barbarus has segetes; That the Psalm. 74. 5.
blasphemous adversaries of God, roar in the mids of the congregations, and
set up their banners for tokens, Psalm. 79. 1.
breaking into Gods inheritance, defiling the holy Temple, and making
Jerusalem ^n heap of stones; And how they give the dead bodies of his
servants, to be meat unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of his Saints,
unto the beasts of the land; I say, the newborn babe in Christ,
understanding these things, easily resolves, as David here, Let us fall into
the hand of the Lord, and not into the hand of man.

4. Learned Expositours observe, the Martyr. Will^t.
wisdom of David, in choosing, e malis minimum, of three mischiefs, the
lesser. Abule^sis upon the place, notes aptly, That God made these 3.
punishments inequall in time, 7 years of famine, 3 months of war, 3 days
of pestilence, that he might make them equal in magnitude, and so put David
into his doubts, so well as his dumps.

The time being equal, the plague doubtless is more grievous then war, and
war more grievous then famine. But seven years famine, may be so bad as
three months fleeing before cruel enemies, and three months of bloody war,
so bad as three days of plague, Yet David chose the pestilence for these
reasons.

1. In the rebellion of Absolon, he had ^ryall of the sword, for there fell in
that civil war, 2 Samuel 18. 7.
20. thousand of the people. And he had felt ^. Sam. ^1. 1.
3. years famine, for the sin of Saul's house: Martyr in loc.
But he never yet had experience of the plague; as then, Ignoti nulla cupido,
so nulla formid^.

2. The plague is Gods A^lensis. Willet
immediate hand, his sword. 1. Chron. 21. 30. His arrow. Psalm. 91. 5. The
Hypocrates. Mercur^. apud D^. E^des. P^ for the plague.
physicians have termed it, fulmen coeleste, The thunderbolt of heaven; and the
canonists, Bellum Dei contra homines, the war of God against men.

Happily you will object, is there any evil in the city, and the Lord has not
done it. Amos. 3. 6. It is true, that war and famine are from the Lords hand,
but herein he does use other instruments, as the sword of men in war, and
other devouring creatures in famine, and so consequently, whereas in the
pestilence we seek only to the mercies of God, in war and famine, we are
to wrestle with the cruelties of men also, whose heart, says Es. 10. ^. 7.
Esaias, is to destroy, To take the spoil, to tread their enemies down, like
the mire in the streets. (says the Lord,) was a little displeased, but they
helped forward the affliction. Zach. 1. 15. As if he should have said, my
purpose was only to try you, but theirend to destroy you, now we bear more
then patiently the Lords rod, then the hand of man

3. David did choose that punishment, which was most agreeable to his sin; his
Geneu^ note. Cor^el. a Lapid in Exodus 30. 12.
fault in numbering the people, was to try his power, and to put his affiance
therein, and therefore being sorry for his error, he desired the plague, that
he might not trust any more to the arm of flesh, but altogether rely upon the
Lord. Martyr.
For had he chosen war, men of valor would have resisted, and imagined that
their sword should have saved them: And if he had chosen famine, money-men
would have trusted in their purse, making Job. 31. 24.
gold their hope, and saying to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. He
that has silver, may buy bread, and he that has enough bread, need not to
starve for hunger, but a man infected and afflicted wi^h the plague, has no
weapons, or means to relieve his distressed estate, but only prayers, and
tears.

Mysticall^, this numbering of the people, says Ruperius upon the place,
figures carnal Israelites, boasting in the works of the Law; for to think
that a man is justified by works, when as Abraham was justified by faith, is to
trust in chariots and horse.

Lastly, Divines observe David's faith, and affiance in the Lord, as being
assured that Rom 8. 28.
all things work together for the best, unto those that fear him; he well
understood, that God ha^h a left hand of Justice, so well as a right hand of
mercy. But the godly feel each hand gentle, both hands of God are right hands
unto them. Is there dearth in the land? Daniel will thrive with water and
pulse, so well as other with wine and Iunkets. Is there persecution in the
Church? To suffer death in Christ's cause (quoth holy Fox Mart. page 14. 92.
Bradford,) is the high way to heaven on horsbacke. Though Esa^ be stronger
then Jacob, yet the greater shall serve the lesser. The number of Gods elect is
small, the number of reprobate fools, infinite. The Church is a little flock
of lambs, in the mids of wolves, and yet populus mayor seruit minori, many
that are bad, serve those few which are good, non obsequendo (quoth Ser. 78. de
temp.
Augustine,) sed persequendo, not by doing good, but by doing mischief to
them, and so they turn Goldsmiths of God, to make crowns for all such as in
his battles have fought a good fight. If other troubles arise, touching our
goods, or good name, David's resolution is, Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been in trouble. For affliction holds men in,
as having little outlets, or leisure for idleness and luxury* Does sickness,
and of all sickness in many respects the most uncomfortable, the pestilence,
come nigh our dwelling? Yet let us not be afraid for any terror by night, or
the arrow that flies by day; But instantly, and that constantly, resolve with
David here, let us fall into the hand of God and not into the hand of man. As
we feel more sensible comfort of the Suns heat, when we are cold: So the
greater our danger and extremity, the greater is that power and piety that
delivers us.

These virtues are the brightest stars in the sphere of majesty, manifesting
David's duty to God and man; and the reason of all this high and holy resolution
is, because the mercies of the Lord are great, great in their nature, as being
riches of his goodness Romans 2. 4. Exceeding riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2. 7.
Great in their number, as being multitudes of mercies, Psalm. 51. 1. Great in
their continuance, as being for ever and ever. Psalm 103. 17. That is, as the
doctors expound it, from everlasting predestination, to everlasting
glorification: every way so great, that our Prophet says in the 145. Psalm. at
the 9. verse. His mercies are over all his works.

Of which I find a two fold construction, and each of them exceeding
comfortable.

1. His mercies are over, That is, greater then all his works, not in
propriety, for all the virtues of God are equal, as being essential attributes;
But in Genebr. in Ps. 145.
effect and extent greater; For whereas Gods indignation is but upon the 4.
generation of such as hate him, his mercies are upon thousand generations of
those that love him, and keep his Commandments: Among the 13. properties of
God. Exodus 34. Almost all of them appertain to his mercy, whereas one
concerns his might, and only two his lustice.

The 2 construct on is, his mercies are over all, that is, Chrysostom. August.
(...). in loc.
showed in all, and toward all his works, for the latter clause, his mercies,
etc, is nothing else but a repe^ition of the former, The Lord is good unto all,
His goodness is the same with his mercy, and all is all his works.

The mercies of God then are great to the whole universe* more specially to the
reasonable creatures, and among those, principally, to such as love him, and
fear him, and call upon him faithfully, As our Prophet in the before cited
Psalm. verse. 18. 19. 20. His mercies compass them about, on all sides, and
at all seasons, on every side, for he makes an hedge about them, and about
their houses, and about all they have. Job. 1. 10. They be his enclosed
vineyards, of whom he says. Esa. 5. What could I have done more for my
vinyard, which I have not done for it, and his mercies are toward them at al
seasons, as the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat, throughout all generations.

To speak more distinctly, the mercies of God toward us, are seen in two
things especially, donando et condonando, That is, in giving us whatsoever is
good for us, and in forgiving whatsoever is evil, evil of sin, evil of
punishment for sin, pardoning all our offenses against himself, against our
other self, against our own self; lastly his mercies are great, in
Inferendis. Differendis. Auferendis.
supplicijs.

Merciful in inferring punishment, for when as we deserve to be scourged with
Scorpions, he chastises us only with the rod of men, and with the stripes of
the children of men. 2. Sam. 7. 14. We confess, that we sin greatly; So
David, verse. 10. of this chapter. But the Lord says, I was but a little
displeased.

Merciful in deferring punishment, as being Psalm: 103. 8.
full of pity, slow to wrath, long suffering, of great goodness, cito struit,
tarde destruit, making the whole world in six days, and yet was in destroying
one city seven days.

Merciful in removing punishments, as in this present example, For the Apud
Abule^s in loc.
Rabbines have a fable, that the plague threatened here 3 days, continued only
for one hour, Antiq. l. 7. c. 13.
Ioscphus writes that it continued only from morning till noone; others
conceive, that it continued only till the time appointed for evening
sacrifice, that day when it begun. Martyr. Willet Comestor.
They who stand upon the precise letter of the text, say that the time was
shortened, for the Lord repented him, and said to the Angel that destroyed the
people, it is enough. And that was in the beginning of the third day; For had
not the Lord stayed the Angels hand, he would have gone on siniting, till that
day had been expired and finished.

It is reported of one, that having a book of 2 leaves only, he could not in
all his life read it over; one leaf was red, wherein was registered, the
Judgments of God, in consideration whereof, he cried out, enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, etc. The other was white, in which were
written, the mercies of God, in admiration whereof, he cried out, what is man,
that thou art so mindful of him; as being less then the least of thy mercies.
If he could not read them in his whole life, how shall I repeat them in this
munite of time? Give me leave only to conclude in the words of our mother
Church. O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive,
grant us thy grace, that in all time of our tribulation, in all time of our
wealth, in the hour of death and as the day of judgment, we may put our whole
trust and confidence in thee, resolving always as David here, let us fall into
the hand of the Lord, and not into the hands of man, for thy mercies are great.

2. KINGS. 19. 36. 37. So Senacherib King of Ashur, departed and went his way,
and returned and dwelt in Niniue. And as he was in the Temple, worshipping
Nisroth his god, Adramelech and Sharezer his sons slew him with the sword.
THis scripture reports two things specially; to wit, the flight and fall of
Senacherib King of Ashur, a great Monarch, and a great boaster of his
greatness, saying in the pride of his heart, verse 23. By the multitude of my
chariots, I am come up to the top of the mountains, by the sides of Lebanon,
and will cut down the tall Cedars thereof, and the fur trees thereof, and I
will go into the lodging of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel. I
have dug, and drunk the waters of others, and with the plant of my feet,
have dried all the rivers of besieged cities. Affronting Gods people, with
insolent language, Let not Ezechia deceive you, neither let Ezechia make you to
trust in the Lord, saying, the Lord w^ll surely deliver us. Has any of the
gods of the nations, delivered his land out of the hand of the King of Ashur:
Where is the God of Hamath, and of Arphad, where is the God of Sepharuaim,
Hena, and ^ua. How have they delivered Samaria out of mine hand.

Now the Lord, (when this huge Leuiathan, had in his own conceit swallowed up
Judah,) put a hook into his nostrils, and a bit into his mouth, and so brought
him back again, the same way that he came, making him in the mids of his
fury, first to fly, then afterward to fall.

His flight is reported here to be full of Dishonor, he departed, went away,
returned. Despair, he dwelt at Nineue.


His fall is described to be very fearful in respect of three circumstances.
The first is of the persons who slew him, Adramalech and Sharezer, his own
sons. The second is of the place where he was slain, in the temple of his
god Nisroth. The third is of the time, when he was slain, when he was praying
and worshipping.


Calvin in Es. 37. 37.
In that the spirit does express, Sennacheribs recoyling back with so many
words, it is undoubtedly, to cast disgrace upon his cowardly flight; For it is
no superfluous and idle repetition, when he says, he departed, he went his
wa^, he returned. The name of King, is added also to his further shame, as if
he should say, see this King, this great King, whom impudent Rabseketh extolled
so highly, by reason of his power, and pomp. He that came up against all the
cities in Judah, and challenged in his rage, the Lord himself, meant not to
retire with infamy. But God for his truth and mercy sake, drove him out
thence, even as chafe before the wind* the Lord, who cannot lie, said by the
mouth of Es. 37. 7.
Esaias the Prophet, I will send a blast upon him, and accordingly, the Lords
Angel in one night, smote in the camp of Ashur, one hundred fourscore, and
five thousand, So when the remnant rose, early in the morning, behold, they
were all dead coarses.

And whereas it is said, He returned, and dwelt at Niniue, It shows
evidently, that he not only lost his courage, but that his forces also quailed:
For if despair had not been as a chain, to keep him in, who was ambitious,
and insatiable, he would not willingly have stayed at home, and content
himself, with his own kingdom.

This history may comfort us in the peril of war: God which is the Lord of
hosts, and King of glory, can, and (as shall make most for his honor, and our
good,) will protect his Church, as with a shield. And here we may Psalm. 47. ^.
Psalm. 48 7.
sing with David, As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord
of hosts, in the city of our God, God vpholdeth it for ever. For in the year
88. did there not a Spanish Senacherth come up against our English Judah, as
himself fondly conceited, with an invincible Armado: did not the Jesuits, as
foule-mouthed as ever Rabseketh, defy God, and his Gospel openly, triumphing
in pulpit and ^e, before the victory? Did they not cry with a loud voice, from
Rhemes and Rome, from Flanders and France, that our blessed Queen Elizabeth,
was a miserable woman, unable to protect her subjects, and that her Kingdom
was delivered over into the hands of the great king of Ashur? But albeit the
Pope, (such was his holiness,) did bless them in their endeauours; yet the
Lord did curse them in their ends. He sent a blast among them, a tempest in the
mids of them, on the sudden, which in a trice, so disordered their Navy, that
few returned (as Sennacherib into Niniue) the same way they came. Let God
arise, and Psalm. ^8. 1.
let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him, flee before him,
like as the smoke vanishes, even so let them be driven away, and like as wax
melts at the fire; so let the ungodly perish at thy presence, O God.

Hitherto, concerning the flight of Sennacherib; I am now to proceed in his
fall, amplified, First by circumstance of persons, as being slain by his own
sons, Adramelech, and Sharezer, Psalm ^5 1^
David complaining of Genebrard. Bellarmin.
Achitophel; and Christ in the person of David, complaining of Judas cried out,
it is not an open enemy, that has done me this dishonor, for then I could
better have borne it, neither was it mine adversary that did magnify himself
against me, for then peradventure, I could have hid my self from him: But it
was even thou, my companion, my guide, and my familiar, we took sweet counsel
together, and walked in the house of God, as friends.

It is base treachery, to betray a friend, but it is the serpents head, and
height of impiety, to butcher a Father. A son is the fathers living
chronicle, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, an express character of
his person, and walking Image, nearer and deerer then any friend: What greater
indignity then, or injury could fall upon Sennacherib, then thus unfortunately,
to perish by the hands of Adramelech, and Sharezer, his own sons? What greater
unhappiness then thus ignonimiously, to lose his life, by those who should have
preserved him alive, being of all other most obliged unto him, as receiving
from him their being; The Lords Angel smote in his camp, one hundred fourscore
and five thousand, of his soldiers, bu^ God determined to reserve him, for an
heavier judgment; I will send a blast upon him, and he shall fall by the sword
in his own land; verse 7.

God, which is the righteous Judge, does often pass by the wicked, in small
dangers, that he may bring upon them a greater condemnation, as when Sam. 24 5.
Saul's life was in David's hand, he might have cut off his head, but he cuts
off only the lap of his garment, and so lets him go. God here suffered Saul to
be delivered from the sword of David, that afterward he might fall upon his
own 2. Sam. 31. 4.
sword; Gen 9. 22.
Ham, Noah's son escaped the great flood, yet for discovering his fathers
shame, the flood of Gods wrath overwhelmed him.

The cities of Sodom, and Gomorra, had escaped, doubtless many grievous
deserved punishments, but at the length, God rained out of heaven, fire and
brimstone, to consume them, and so they were turned into ashes, and made an
ensample, to those that afterward should live ungodly. 2. Pet. 2. 6. So many
notorious malefactors, who draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin, as
it were with a cart rope, contriuing mischief on their beds, and committing
all uncleanness, even with greediness, often escape great dangers, in their
drunkenness, and other outrages; and yet in fine, they come to some fearful,
and ex^mplarie Judgment, as here Sennacherib, a great tyrant, and a great
blasphemer, escaped the stroke of a glorious Angel, that he might more
dishonorably perish in his own land, and in his own house, not by foreign
foes, or by popular sedition, or by traitors* or by servants, but by the sword
of Adramelech, and Sharezer, his own sons; And as it was in God, great
Borrhaius. in loc.
Justice, that he who did intend to slay so many children of God, should
himself be slain by his own children.

There were secondarie causes undoubtedly, moving these thus unnaturally to
butcher their father. For first Hugo Cardi. et W^lphius in loc.
it is thought, that Sennacherib had assigned over his kingdom, to Esaradon,
his third son, whom he most affected, and so meant to disinherit Adramelech,
and Sharezer, Hereupon these two brethren in iniquity conspired against
Sennacherib, their cruel father, as he was their King, and their natural
father, as he was their parent.

The Apud Calvin in Es ^8. ^8. ide^ resert. Oecolampad.
Rabbis, have coined another devise, saying, that Sennacherib asked his idol,
why he could not vanquish the Jews; and it answered, because Abraham the
father of the Jews, out of faith and obedience, was content, to have
sacrificed his son to God. Whereupon this tyrant following that example,
determined to offer up his sons, to get the favor of his god; But they
having notice thereof, and provoked to wrath by this uncouth, and abominable
cruelty, rushed in upon him as he was worshipping his Idol in his chapel,
and smote him with the sword.

Thus almighty God, who brings light out of darkness, and orders all things
sweetly, disposes of bad men, and of bad means, for the compassing of his
good ends, As Basil ^rat* quod De^s ^on sit author mal^.
a cunning physician, he makes of deadly poison, a wholesome medicine. Facit
been sinendo fieri quaecunq que male, says Enchirid. cap 96.
Augustine; The text is plain: that Christ our blessed Savior, was betrayed
and crucified, Act. 2. 23.
by Gods determinate counsel, and foreknowledge; Judas betrayed Christ, only
for money, the Jews crucified him only for malice. But God gave his Son,
and his Son gave himself for us, only for love: So that in one, and the same
tradition, as Epist. 48.
Augustine notably; God is to be magnified, and man to be condemned. Quia in
re vna quam fecerunt, causa non vna ob quam fecerunt.

Because God and Christ, did that out of mercy which Judas and the Jews did
out of malice, God which is Causa causarum in whom we live, and move, and have
our being, disposes of all things in heaven and earth, and hell, according to
his good will and pleasure. Adramelech and Sharezer did ill in murdering their
father, but God ordered that bloody fact well, in making Sennacherib a
fearful example to barbarous tyrants and blasphemers, as a man hunteth one
beast with another, and catches one bird with another, so God uses one wicked
man for the destruction of another.

Wolphi^ in loc.
Adramelech, and Sharezer, as the Poet said, Nomina suntipso quae metuenda
sono. Adramelech signifies, a great King, and Sharezer, Prince of treasure, the
which names happily, Sennacherib imposed for this end, that they might acquire
great power and riches, or that he might hereby make them a great deal more
terrible to the people? But (oh! the deepnesse of the riches, both of the
wisdom and judgments of God) all the greatness of Adramelech* and Sharezer,
was employed to make Sennacherib little, to bereave him, and that unawares,
both of his kingdom and life, for they slew him with the sword.

Hence we may learn, that impunity for a time is no good argument of
innocence, because Prou. 16 4.
the wicked are reserved for the day of evil, as the fish that plays a great
while with the hook, is caught at the last; even so the wicked, into whose
nostrils (as it is said in this Chapter at the 28. verse) God has put an hook;
rejoice in doing evil, and delight in frowardness, until they perish at the
last, nay some of them are so shameless, and graceless, that howsoever, they
well escape present danger, yet their sins, as Paul speaks, go before unto
Judgment, and so they stand condemned in the conceit of themselves and others.
In their life, their own conscience condemns them, in such sort, that here
they begin to feel the flashes of hell fire. No place (quoth Seneca) will make
a wicked man quiet, for that he thinks; Although I be not as yet taken, I may
nevertheless be taken at the length, and that I have not hitherto been taken,
is come rather of fortune, then of confidence: In their death, other men, and
that justly, condemn them; for a rank Athiest, obstinatly dying an Athiest,
may be said without breach of charity, to be damned. If any be thus openly
known by his fruits, Es. 5 20.
woe to them which speak good of evil, and evil of good, who put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter.

2. The tragical end of this ungodly tyrant murdered by those, who came out
of his own bowels, admonishes us, what a fearful thing it is, to fall into
the hands of the living Lord. His feet are said to be of wool, but his hands
of iron, slow to wrath, and of great patience, before he comes to punish, but
when he comes, he will pay home, he has in his hand a rod of iron to break
his enemies in pieces, like a potters vessel.

3. Here we may note, that the destruction of great blasphemers is usually
sudden, acted not only in such a time, and in such a place, but also by such
persons, as they least suspect. As Job speaks, they spend their days in
wealth, and suddenly go down to hell; and David, oh how suddenly do they
consume, perish and come to a fearful end. As Belshazzar in the mids of his
carousing, Haman in the mids of his malice, Herod in the mids of his pride,
Julian in the mids of his fury, Sennacherib the great King of Assyria, the
terror of nations, (who with the sole of his feet, dried up all the rivers of
besieged places, and turned defenced cities into ruinous heaps) in the mids of
his idolatry, (for as it follows in the next circumstance, to be considered;
He was in his own land, in Nintue, the strongest city of all his land, in his
stately palace, the most invincible fortress of al Niniue, in his Royal
chapel the most secure place of all his palace; Yet) it so came to pass, that
as he was in the temple, worshipping Nisrock his god, Adramelech and Sharezer
slew him with the sword.

Out of this circumstance, we first observe, that when almighty Gods hue and
cry comes after any malefactor, for wickedness committed, that nothing is
able to shelter him: as David in the* 1* 9 Psalm, whither shall I go from thy
spirit, or whith^r shall I go from thy presence, If I climb up into heaven,
thou art there, If down to hell, thou art there also? Aug. Medit.
I^tra omnia s^d non inclusus, extra omnia sed non exclusus, His eyes are
all-seeing, his ears all-hearing* his hands all-doing, when he sent Exodus 8.
frogs into the land of Egypt, Pharohs stately palace was not able to keep
them out, but they crooked in every corner of his house, scrauling in his
bedchamber, and creeping upon his pillowes; a malefactor escapes happily the
magistrates hand by forsaking the parish, or the place where he dwells, or if
that will not serve, by flying out of one liberty into another, or if that
fail, by running out of the country, or if this will not do the feate, by
leaving the country, crossing the seas into foreign lands, and forlorn
Islands, as Adramelech and Sharezar fled into the land of Ararat. But yet the
Lords hand and stretched out arm will (even while he thinks himself secure)
find him out, and give him a deadly blow; The Lords hand found out Ionali. 2.
Jonas on the seas, and committed him close prisoner into the whales belly, the
Lords hand found out the cruel Idumeans, albeit they did Obad 3. 4.
dwell in the clests of the rocks, and said in the pride of their hearts, who
shall bring us down to the ground? Though thou exaltest thy self as an Eagle,
and make thy nest among the stars, Yet thence will I bring thee down, says
the Lord, The Lords hand found out Nabuchadnezzar, being at rest in his own
house, flourishing in his own palace, saying in vain boasting, Dan. 4.
Is not this great Babel, which by the might of my power, I have built for the
honor of my majesty. While the word was in his mouth, a voice came down from
heaven, O King Nabuchadnezzar, to thee be it spoken, Thy kingdom is departed
from thee, and they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
the beasts of the field, and the very same hour was the thing fulfilled upon
Nabuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hayres were grown like
Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws.

(...). L^st.
When Phocas had built a strong wall about his palace, for security, he heard
in the night a voice, O King, though thou build as high as the clouds, yet the
city may be taken easily, for the sin within marres all. The Lords hand found
out Ambros ser. 66 Epithanius here is 21.
Simon Magus, as he was presuming to fly up into heaven, in the public
theater of Rome, and there he gave him such a fall, as that he could never
rise more. The Lords hand found out Platina.
Balau* in ^ius vita.
Siluester the second (who to get the Popedom gave himself to the devil) as
he was in a chapel singing of a mass the Lords hand found out Nitingall, a
blasphemous popish priest, in the very pulpit. No place, be it never so high or
so holy, so deep or so dark, so foul or fair, can exempt the wicked from
the wrath of the Lord* It is true that Gods dwelling is in Sion only, Psalm.
76. 2. as To^ 5 Operu^ p^g. 14 ^*
Hugode S. victor. gloseth it, in mundo est vt imperator in regno, in ecclesia
vt pater familias in domo, in anima fideli vt sponsus in thala^o. He dwells
in the world, as an Emperor in his kingdom for the earth is the Lords, and all
that therein is, Psalm. 24. 1. He dwells in the Church, as a master in his house,
for the house of God, is the Church of God, 1* Tim. 3. 15. In a faithful
soul, as the bridegroom in his chamber, there he suppes and refreshes
himself. apoc. 3. 20. but our iniquities on the contrary, make a separation
between God and us, Esaias 59. 2. And so God is said in the holy scripture to be
fa^re from the wicked, and the wicked to go far from God. The which is
proved in the Luke. 15. 13.
prodigal c^ild, who took his journey into a far country, that is, far from
God, far from goodness. Answer is made by St. Manuel. cap. 1.
Augustine, in one word, Deus non ibi deest, vbi long est, quia vbi non est
per gratiam, adest per vindictam, Although in respect of salvation, and grace,
God be far from the wicked, yet in respect of his power, and punishment,
always so nigh, that his out stretched arm can every where reach and ruin
them. God dwells in Sion only, but is present in Babylon also.

Secondly, we note from this circumstance, Gods exact Justice, who would have
Sennacherib, to perish in the same place, where he had offended most, he was a
great Idolater, and he committed that Idolatry most in the chapel of his
Idol Nisrock. And therefore Gods reuengefull hand did find and confound him in
the right vbi; so the Prophet Elia said to King Ahab, 1 King. 21. 19.
Have thou killed and gotten possession also, thus says the Lord, in the place
where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs even lick thy blood also.

The corpse of Hollinsh. Chron.
Mr Arden, slain by the consent and counsel of his own wife, was laid as a
spectacle to men and Angels, in the very same field which he had unjustly taken
from a poor widow, and it is well ordered in our State, that where men commit
outrageous murders, there they should dye the death for it, The judgments of
God is at all times terrible, but being executed in the same place, where the
malefactor acted the fault, it is more fearful, it puts him in mind of
his offense, with all the circumstances thereof, and so makes his conscience to
denounce his own condemnation.

Every day should be to the good man, a Sabbath, and every corner of his
mansion, a privy chapel, as occasion is offered for devotion* O then I
beseech you, by the mercies of the Lord Jesus, take heed of sin in your secret
closets, and chambers, for nothing is hid from Gods alpiercing eyes, which are
as a flame of fire, who can make your very table a snare to take you withal,
and the things which should have been for your wealth, an occasion of
falling; he can make the Habac. 2. 11.
stone out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber, to cry for Judgment
against you: David afflicted heavily, said, every night wash I my bed, and
water my couch with my tears. He had offended most in his bed, he did act his
repentance therefore most in his couch. Imitate David's example, who was a man
according to Gods own heart, when thou come into the room, defiled with
any filthiness of thine, sin no more, but water the place with tears,
otherwise God may smite thee with a sudden and unhappy death, as he did
Sennacherib in his temple, where he transgressed most.

It was in God also great Justice that he should perish by the sword who had
abused the sword, in shedding innocent blood. It was a just judgment upon the
cruel Egyptians to be drowned in the sea, because they cast all the male
children of the Hebrews, into the river. It was a just judgment upon
Adonibezek, that the thumbes of his hands and feet were cut off, having before
^one the like cruelty to seauenty kings, and constraining them to gather crumbs
under his table. Judge. 1. 6. It was a just judgment upon the tyrant Eusebius.
lib. 8. cap. 9.
Maxentius, that he was overthrown in the same bridge, which he craftily
built, as a snare for the destruction of Constantine; It was a just judgment
upon Pope Pet. Bemb. hist Venet. lib. 6.
Alexander the 6. who was poisoned at supper, with the very same wine, (his
servant mistaking a bottle) which he had prepared as a deadly draught, for his
familiar friend, Cardinal Adrianus; It was a just judgment upon the chief
plotter of the most execrable gunpowder treason; that being pursued he should
himself be first scorched with powder, and afterward killed with a gunne, and
so the mischief fell upon his own head, and his wickedness upon his own
pate. Non est lex aequior vlla, Quam necis artifices art perire s^a; No
judgment more sit, then that they who dig a pit for others, should fall into
the mids of it themselves, as David phraseth it Psalm. 57. 7.

The third circumstance, to be further examined, is the time, when Sennacherib
was slain, and that is said here to be, when he was in praying, and
worshipping his god Nisrock. From whence we may see what an idle thing an idol
is, for we must imagine, that Sennacherib, when he saw Adramelech, and Sharezer
rushing in upon him, and ready to kill him, heartily called upon his god for
help, and doubtless, Nisrock, if he had had any power, would not* have
suffered his prime (...) thus unfortunately to perish in his temple: but an
idol, as 1. Cor 8. 4.
St Paul teaches us, is nothing, and what would you have nothing to do:
Arebius. Aquin. in loc.
Something it is in opinion, and esteem, for so there be many gods, and many
Lords, but nothing in truth and value, something in the mind of an idolater,
but nothing in the world, nothing in worth, or working, every founder is
confounded by the graven Image, Jeremy. 16. 14. So David, Idols are but silver
and gold, the work of men's hands, they have mouths and speak not, eyes have
they but see not, they have ears, but yet they hear not, neither is there any
breath in their nostrils, they that make them are like unto them, and so are
all they that put their trusi in them, and Fzechiah in this present chapter at
the 17. verse. Truth it is, Lord, that the kings of Ashur, have destroyed the
nations, and fired their gods, for they were no gods, but the work of man's
hand, even wood and st^ne, therefore they destroyed them.

The Papists inuocating Saints, in stead of the Savior, and adoring their
images, even with the same kind of worship, which is due to the Prototype,
kneeling, crouching, creeping to stocks and stones* offer in the temple the
sacrifice of fools, calling upon Baal and Bell, who can neither hear them,
nor help them; Deu^* 6* 4.
Hear o Israel* the Lord thy God, is Lord only* and him only shall than serve.
We find in the Bible, precept upon precept, as Es. 2^. ^.
Esaias speaks, and line upon line, for our prayingvnto God in the time of
trouble; but for invocation of Saints in the scripture, neither precept, nor
promise, nor pattern: the pictures of the saints of Christ, of the martyrs of
Christ, of the mother of Christ, adored and worshipped, are not able to save
their servants, more then Nisrocke here did Sennacherib, who notwithstanding
his devotion, in the chapel of his own house, was ignominiously slain in
the sight of his Idol, and that in the very act and hour of prayer, as he was
in the temple, worshipping Nisrocke.

DAN. 13. 16. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said v^o the King,
etc.
NAbuchodonosor, an idolatrous and a proud king, in the words immediately going
before, questioned Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the true servants of the
most high God, whether they would serve his gods, and adore that image, which
he by solemn edict had commanded to be worshipped; threatening them (if they
did not obey) with death, and that imminent death, in the same hour, and that
imminent death, a violent death, and of all violent deaths, the most horrible,
to be cast into the mids of a fiery furnace; To which, answer is made by them
in our text containing their Resolution, Reason of their resolution.


Their resolution appears to be peremptory by the Preface of their speech, O
Nabuchodonosor, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Conclusion
of their speech, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy
gods etc.


The reasons of this resolution are two, 1. Taken from Gods almighty power,
behold our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furn^e. 2. From his holy will, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King.


These three verses then are placed in the mids of the chapter, (as Lesser
english B^ble.
some divide) between 15. verses on each side, like the sun in the mids of
the firmament, and the heart in the mids of (...) body; from whence (...) arise
it he light* and life of the whole story: let v^ follow the light, and proceed
according to the propounded method.

The resolution of these words is Hugo Car. (...). Hier^. in loc.
prudent and pious, reserving unto God, the things which are Gods, and yet
giving unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's; Affording Nabuchodonosor his
due title, King; and yielding obedience to him as to their King* rather
patiently suffering the pain, then obstinatly resisting the power, because the
God of heaven had given him a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory, verse.
37. of the former chapter.

This example should teach every soul to be subject unto* soue^igne authority,
taking up against a ty^ant prince, not a sword, but a buckler, obeying ferrend^
non feriendo* suffering his will, (...) (...) command things according (to the
rules of p^ty) to be done of us* If otherwise, to be done on us, a wicked
governor is a Nabuchadnezzar* that is, as the word is interpreted, the
mourning of the generation and the weapons of the Church, (...) prayers and
tears* Ecclesia* Christi, quoth T^m. 2 page 1^.
Hierome (...) Theophilus, est (...) patiend^* (...) (...) faciend^
contumelias; an hard lesson, I confess, which is not well taught, but in a few
Churches, and well practiced almost in none: for Schismatistes in upholding
their pretended holy discipline, Ep^de di^ before Herod and Pilat reconc^led
sho^e al^e at Caesar's ^rowne* and Iesuited Papists are See Popish positions
and practices. page 20.
right down traitors, and professed King-killers, in maintaining their
Antichristian Hierarchy, both have dangerous positions, and practices in this
kind, the one to beat down the walls of Sion, by disturbing the peace of the
reformed Church, and the other to build up the walls of Babylon, by defending
the abomination of the deformed Synagogue.

The Lord of the vineyard, Mark. 12. sent servants to his farmers, that he
might receive some fruits of the same, but they beat some, and killed others;
the Schismatics are Caedentes* the Papists and Here^ickes accidents, the
villain Sheldons observations of Ignation sperits* page 25.
^auilliack confessed at his death, that he was sorry for that he had committed
mur^her, but not sorry for that he had killed the King.

O God which (...) die King of kings, even the Lord paramont, from whom all
power is deri^d, if thou send good Princes (as thou have out of the riches of
thy great mercy to this land, at this time) give grace ^at w^ may still honor
them as our ^ursing fat^ (...)* (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) come, for the
condign punishment of our sin, that we may receive them as thy rods, with
all humility, patience, piety, resolving as that holy Martyr* Fox. Martyr. pa.
14. 64.
John Bradford; If the Queen will give me life, I will thank her, If she
will banish me, I will thank her, If she will burn she, I will thank her,
If she will condemn me to perpetual imprisonment, I will thank her.

O Nabuchodonosor, we are not careful* as they gave to Nabuchodonosor, the
things of Nabuchodonosor, So they reserved unto God, all honor due to God; as
if they should have said, in an argugument of another nature, we would be
careful, happily curious, in returning a pleasing answer to the King, but in
this matter, all our 1. Pet. 5. 7.
care must be cast upon the Lord, who being a jealous God, will not give his
glory to another* nor his praise to graven images, Esaias. 42. 8. O
Nabuchodonosor, we will show by Hieron. Hug. Card.
deeds, that it is better to obey God, then man; In reason as well as in
religion, a true proposition is to be granted, a false, to be denied* only
the doubtful and probable, to be disputed; humane demonstrations, and divine
testimonies, are without controversy, the laws of the Medes are not
alterable, much less the commandments of God questionable. So Number. 22. 1^.
Balum answered the servants of Balack: If Balack would give me his house full
of silver and gold, I can not g^e beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do
less or more. So Genesis 39. 9.
Joseph answered his want on mistress; How can I do this great wickedness,
and so sin against God. The breach of the ^east commandment in the second
table* concerning our neighbors, is a sin, but a transgression of the first
table, concerning our duty to God, a greater offense: For as Bernard and See*
Martyr loc com part. 1. cap. 17.
other divines observe, God has, in old time, dispensed with some precepts of
the second table, as in bidding Abraham to kill his son Isaac, contrary to
the 6 commandment, and in suffering the Fathers to have many concubines,
contrary to the 7. commandment, and in aduising his people to rob the wicked
Egyptians, of their jewels, contrary to the 8 commandment. Put God, ( who can
not deny himself) never yet dispensed with any commandment of the first
table, touching his true worship, and holiness, and therefore Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, delighting in the law of the Lord, and exercising
themselves in it, day and night, and understanding that it says expressly, thou
shall have no other gods; and thou shall not make to thy self, any graven
Image, resolved instantly, constantly, that they would neither serve the false
gods of Nabuchodonosor, nor yet adore his golden image.

Cyprian, the blessed Martyr, in the like case, gave the like answer, for
being tempted to forsake the truth of religion, he replied, as Apud ^al. in
loc.
Augustine reports, in re tam sancta nulla deliberatto, telling the Proconsull
Paternus to his beard, Baron. Annal a^. 260.
I am a christian, and a Bishop, I know no gods but one, that is the true
living God, who created heaven and earth, and all that is therein. So Loc Com.
(...)* de zel^.
Martyn Luther, in the spirit of Elias; by fire from heaven* used to say, that
the principles of faith, are like a Mathematical point, which admits neither
ademption, nor addition; in such a case, quoth he, God assisting In Gal. 2. 6.
I am, and ever will be, stout and stern, herein I take upon me this title;
Cedonulli. So the good Ignatius of his age, Dr. Fox Martyro^. pa. 13. 81.
Rouland Tailor, (when his friends advised him, as Peter did his master,) Mat.
16. 22.
pity thy self, answered, I shall never be able to do God so good service,
as now. I know that the papacy is the kingdom of Antichrist, and that all the
doctrine thereof, even from Christ's cross be my speed, unto the end of their
apocalypse, is nothing else but idolatry, superstition, errors, hypocrisy,
lies. So the renowned Prelate, Answ* to Hardings preface.
John Jewel, I deny my learning, I deny my Bishopric, I deny my self, only
the faith of Christ, and truth of God, I can not deny, with this faith, or for
this faith, I trust I shall end.

The schismatics, in loosing their livings, and the Papists in loosing their
lives, are both exceeding resolute, but it is not the cross, but the cause
that makes the Martyr; the Romanists are not questioned* for serving the true
God* but for their worshipping their false gods, and for adoring (...) lord god
the Pope* they be not con^* (as they say) because Jesuits, but on the (...)*
because (...) (...)* Our blessed Jesus (...) (...) (...) (...) God* even (...)
(...)* says De ^iu. Dei. lib. 16. cap* 38.
Augustine* (...) (...) (...) (...)* 2^8* Whose foot stood upon (...)* and the
top reached up to heaven. But the papists have (...) this (...) ^ saints, and
angels, at the foot, with the merits of their own works, and so they make
Christ Jesus our only mediator, 1. Tim. 2. 5. but half a mediator, and half
a Savior; half a mediator, because the Saints are joint patrons with him;
and half a Savior, because themselves are joint purchasers with him, in the
work of their salvation. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Irenaus writes of certain humorous fellows, who called themselves,
Emendatores apostolorum, apostle-menders, and so these men are correctors of
the scriptures, accounting Saint Paul a very Lutheran, for teaching
justification by faith only; So likewise Schismatics in our Church, are not
questioned for articles of doctrine, but for points of discipline, for matter
of ceremony, not substance, As then Ael^* hist. lib. 14. cap. 4.
Aristides who dyed of the bite of a weazell, exceedingly lamented, because it
was not a lion; so the brethren of division, and other of their alliance, may
grieve that they do not smart for the lyo^ of Judah, but for a siely weasel,
lately^rept out of the Alps, which at the first crowded in among us, at a
little hole, but since being pampered at the tables of diverse rich men, is
grown so full and pursie, that many will rather forsake Gods pl^gh* and look
back to the world, then acknowledge he came in at so narrow an entrance.
Manners (as it is in the proverb) makes the man, and so it is the matter that
makes the M^rtyr, as the 3 children in our text, O Nabuchodonosor, we are not
careful to answer the^, in this matter.

Yea, but i^ is the King that (...), and the proclamation of a King, is like
the roaring of a lion, and with him, as we find in the forepart of this
chapter, are joined the Nobles, Princes, and Dukes, the Judges, the receivers,
and all the governors of the provinces, why then are Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, recusants, and singular in their opinions, especially, considering on
the one side their danger, and on the other side, their duty. Lawyers and
Divines, and great clearkes, in other professions often are ready to speak
good of evil, and evil of good, prostituting their tongues, and pens, and
wits, and wills, all that they have, goods, honor, bodies, soul, to serve the
times, and turns of Princes. 1 Esd. 4 7.
If the King bid kill, they kill, If he say spare, they spare: If he bid
smite, they smite: If he bid make desolate, they make desolate, beating down
mountains and walls, and towers, amplifying or extenuating every thing for
the pleasing of his humor, and advancing of his honor.

It is thought by In loc.
St. Hierome and See. C^luin. et Hug^ Card.
other, that the golden Image, set up here by Nabuchodonosor, was his own
Statua, so vain was his impiety, that being dust and ashes, as a clod of clay
in the hand of the potter; he did notwithstanding ambitiously desire to be
worshipped as a God, opposing as it were this image, which himself made, to
that image which appeared unto him in a Dan. 2.
dream, by Gods appointment; and immediately his plot took, for as we read in
this chap. at the 7. verse, all the people, nations, and languages, fell down,
and worshipped the golden image: David often said, thou art my king O God, but
a mere Courtier on the contrary, thou art my God, O King. It is court
language, to term the followers and flatterers of Nabuchodonosor his creatures.

But beloved, it is not any person, in any place, who may either prejudice a
truth, or privilege an error: If it be true, do as they say, though a
pharisee be teacher. Mat. 23. 3. If false, hold him accursed, though an Angel
be preacher. Gal. 1. 8. That which is bad in it self, by defending, is made
worse, Chemni^. Exam. part. 3. page 131.
causa patrocinio non bona peior erit, as Contra lit. (...). lib. 3. cap. 50.
Augustine writes of Petilian contradicting the truth, vbi respondere conatus
est, magis ostendit quod non potuit respondere: The more he would answer, the
more he showed he could not answer.

That which is crooked none can make straight, says Cap. 1. v 15.
Ecclesiast. as there be some diseases which are called Dedecus medicorum, a
shame to Physicians, so there are some questions, which are Dedecus
theologorum, a shame to Divines. Al^ancement of learning. lib 2. page 110.
The religion of the Gentiles, has no constant confession, or belief; but
leaves all to the strength of argument; on the contrary, the religion of
Mahumet, interdicteth all argument, and inioynes a strict confession only; but
holy religion does both admit, and reject disputation, with difference. Dubious
Problems may be discussed in (...) schools; and accuratly handled in the
pulpit to; but evident oracles and articles of faith, are simply to be
believed: Litigando, says I^h Serranus apparat. page 14.
one pithily, res non dirimitur, sed perimitur, If Nabuchodonosor as King
command to worship false gods, obey passiuely, not actiuely; suffer his will,
as being in higher power, but do the will of God, as being higher then the
highest: here say with the three children, O king, we are not careful to
answer thee in this matter.

The 1. reason on which they ground their resolution is Gods omnipotency,
behold, the God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery
furnace. Nothing, says Lib. de carne. Christ^.
Tertullian, is impossible to God, but that he will not; for whatsoever
pleases him, he does in heaven and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep
places. Psalm. 135. 6. To compass his designs, he does use sometime weak
means, sometime no means, sometime contrary means; Weak means, for it is
not hard with the Lord to save with many, or with few. 1. Sam. 14. 16. He can
as easily blow down the walls of Iosuah. 6.
Jericho, with the sound of Rams horns, as with the thunder of roaring canons.
Sometime he works without means, as he created all things, of nothing; and
Christ immediately cured many maladies, without any medicines, Matthew. 8.
The Centurions servant, was healed with his bare word; Mat 9. 25.
^ayrus daughter, with the touch of his hand; the woman which had a bloody
flux, twelve years, by touching the hemme of his garment only, Mat. 9. 20.
Sometimes he does use contrary means, as John. 9. 6.
Christ opened the eyes of one that was borne blind, by annoynting them with
clay; and in the work of our redemption, he gave life, not by life, but by
death, and that a most accursed death; Op^imum fecit instrumentum vitae, qu^d
erat p^ssimum mortis genus. And in our effectual vocation, he calls us by
the preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
unto the Jews, a stumbling block, and unto the Grecians, foolishness; In
reason more likely to draw men from God, then to win and woe men to God. Judge.
15. 16.
Sampson, in slaying a thousand Philistines, with the ia^bone of an ass, was a
type hereof, (as Apu Beaux Harm. tom. 1. page 140.
Prosper observes) insinuating that Christ by the foolishness of preaching,
should confound his enemies, and ^aue such as beleene, which occasioned that
blessed Apostle, to call godliness, a great mystery. 1. Tim. 3. 16.

It is true, that God can neither dye, nor lie, because these are not acts of
power, but defects of infirmity* Dicitur enim omnipotens, says De. ci^. Dei.
lib. 5 cap 10.
Augustine, faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult; God is able to do
whatsoever he will, and more then he will too; (...). part* 1 qu. 1^. art. 5.
more by his absolute power, then he will by his actual, and as God can do
what he will have done, so he will do whatsoever is Romans 8. 28.
best, unto those that love him, and therefore, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, further added, he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King.

They speak, concerning his power most absolutely, but concerning his pleasure,
which is secret, with an If, conditionally, but if not, and Vide (...) (...)
(...).
the reason hereof is plain, because God in his infinite wisdom suffers his
people, many times, to be murdered and martyred by the hands of ungodly men.

1. To manifest his providence, who brought light out of darkness, and life
out of death, and orders all Aug. c^ntr. (...). l. 16.
wickedness for his own good ends and glory, making the blood of his Martyrs
the seed of his Church.

2. To show his omnipotency, for if he should never use ordinary means, but
always extraordinary miracles, in delivering his servants out of their
troubles, it would be thought an act of fate, rather then of favor, done, not
by his might or mercy, but ascribed only to nature and necessity.

3. To try his servants obedience, faith, humility, patience, magnanimity,
perseverance; for men undoubtedly show their love to God, in their doings, more
then in their sayings, and in their sufferings, more then in their doings; in
Christ's cause to suffer death, is the F^x. Mar^. page 1492.
way to heaven on horseback, quoth blessed Bradford.

4. For the good of his people, for that he does hereby hasten their
immortality, receiving them into an everlasting habitation, and making them
partakers of a better resurrection. It is sweetly said, that persecutors are
goldsmiths to make crowns for the Martyrs, and Martyrs in the judgment of the
Tertul. lib. ad. Mart. ^t Aug de. ci^ l. 22. cap. 30.
Fathers, shall have greater crowns then other.

And therefore the final determination of these worthles, unto Nabuchodonosor,
is briefly this, If our god will deliver v^ out of thine hand. O King, our
hearts are ready to glorify him in our lives, If not, our hearts are ready to
glorify him in our deaths, If he will accept this our burnt offering, his
shall be the glory, but ours the good. O King, be it (...) unto thee, that we
will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden Image, which thou have set up.

And as they said, they suffered, the which is an actual commentary, upon
Christ's iniunction, Mat. 16 24.
^f any man will follow me, let him forsake himself: They did in the quarrel
of God, not only forsake (...), their houses, and lands, and goods, or su^s,
their father, mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters; but also se
their own selves, even that which was most themselves, their own sou^es and
(...), loosing them here, that they may find them, and save them hereafter, in
a better estate.

Queen Hester in the like case, had the like resolution, M^st 4. 16*
If I perish, I perish, in the like case St. Paul had the like resolution, Act.
21. 13.
I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name
of the Lord Jesus; In the like case blessed Ignatius had the like resolution,
as Lib de Scrip. Eccle in vita Ignati^.
S. Hierome and Fox Martyr. page 36.
diverse other r^late, for being adjudged to be thrown unto the beasts, and
hearing the lions roaring, I am (quoth he) the wheat of Christ, and I shall
be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that I may be made pure manchet for
his own mouth. In the like case S. Vincent had the like resolution, being as
See (...). (...). page 1421.
(...) reports out of ^ ^ ^ (...) vicit (...) vici et (...)* In the like case
Fox Martyr. page 776.
Martin Luther had the like resolution. I am certainly determined to enter
Worms in the Name of our Lord Jesus, although I knew ther^ were so many devils
(...) me, as there be tiles to cover the houses in Worms. All Martyrologies*
as well ancient as modern, abound with examples in this kind* Christians in
old time, says Magdeb. Cent. 4. col. 44.
Sulpitius, desired Martyrdom, more then men in our time do Bishopriches; for
when once the Gospel is at the stake, and Gods glory questioned*

Tormenta, carcer, vngula, ardensque flammis l^mina* atque ipsa (...) (...)*
m^rs, Christianis (...) est. As Prudentius, in Hymno de Vincentio Martyr,
divinely. Carb^. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...). in (...). (...).
Bacon our countryman is termed among the School^en Doctor Resolutu^* in like
manner, all the scholars of Christ ought to be Doctores inconcussibiles, as
Nic: de Clemangris wrote to Gerson in his 9. Epistle. Iuuenal says in his
first Satyr; Stulta est patientia cum tot vbique Votibus occurras, peritur^
parcere chartae. But take heed as Clemang. in the forecited place does advise,
ne sit stulta patientia cum tot vbique Gladibus occurras, Cum tantam Ecclesiae
ruinam et tantam euersionem videas, parcere ^ri, parcere lingu^, parcere stil^;
to which I will add, peritur^ parcere carni.

Brethren, ye have not as yet resisted the man of sin unto blood, exhort one
another, while (...) is called to day, mark those diligently which are ready
to forsake the Gospel, and embrace the present world, who trust almighty God so
little with their lives, as that upon rumors of wars, in foreign parts, and
shadows of fears nearer home, turn back like Jordan, and start aside, like
a broken bow. Aqud Rauli^ ser. ^. in Fest. John. Eua.
It is an obseruable note, touching the writings of S. John; how that in in his
Gospel, he teaches especially faith; in his Epistles, especially love; in his
Apocalypse, especially hope; This book being (as reverend Bullinger censureth)
Euangelicissi^ liber, of all holy scripture, the fullest of consolation; and
the maine point of the whole re^elation, is undoubtedly the certain
destruction of Babylon; and most unspeakable blessedness of Jerusalem above.

1. Cor. 16. 1^.
Wherefore stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like men, be Ephe. 6. 10.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Galat. 6. 9.
be not weary of well doing, but 1. Cor. 1^. 5^.
abundant always in the work of the Lord, Re^. ^. 10.
continue faithful unto death, and the God whom we serve shall deliver us from
the hands of all our enemies, and give us the Crown of life.

ABACVC. 2. 9. Woe be to him that coueteth (...) evil covetousness to his
house, etc.
There be 2. parts of this Prophecy.

1. An expostulation of Abacuc, or a complaint in the 1. and 2 chap. 2. A
postulation of Abacuc, or prayer* in the ^ chap.
THe Prophets expostulatio^ is twofold, the first concerning the licentious and
loose lives of the (...)* compassing above the righteous, either by secret
frauds, or else by spoiling and open violence* Chap. 1. verse. 2. 3. 4. To
which almighty God answers, in the seven next verses, that he will bring
upon the Jews for their iniquities the Chald^ans, a bitter and a furious
people, who shall ^mple upon the breadth of their land, and possess their
(...) teaching the Prophet how to comfort the faithful, and showing by vision,
that he will overthrow the Chaldeans, their enemies, when as their ambition
and pride shall be full, and at the height. For their general and chief
captain, N^buchodonosor, who does enlarge his desires as the hell, and as
death is insatiable, gathering unto him all nations, and heaping unto him all
people, what is he but as one that transgresses by wine; Ribera. et fra^. a
(...)* loc.
for as wine does in the beginning, make the drunkard Iouiall and merry, but in
the conclusion, overthrow him, and expose him to base contempt: even so
Nebuchodonosors prosperity made him exceeding fearful, and terrible to the
nations round about him, in the beginning: but (as the Lord here tells Abacuc,)
in the end these people shall take up a taunting proverb against him, and a
parable of reproach. Hugo. Cardi^ loc.
As he boasted in five things especially, so there be five mocks or worse
against him in this chapter answerable to the same.

1. He glorified in the multitude of his riches, against which it is said,
Verse. ^.
Woe be to him that increases that which is not his, and ladeth* himself with
thick clay.

2. He gloried in the greatness of his kingdom, against which it is said in
our text. Woe be to him that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house, etc.

3. He glorified in the strength of his (...) cities* and towers of defe^*
(...) (...) (...) ^ ^.
town with blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity.

4. He gloried in oppressing of his neighbor Kings, and kingdoms, against
which it is said, Verse. 15.
Woe, be to him that gives his neighbor drink, and makes him drunken that
thou may discover his nakedness.

5. He gloried in the protection of his Idol, and Idol god, against which it
is said Verse. 9.
Woe be to him that says to the wood, awake, to the dumb stone, arise, it
shall teach, behold it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no
breath at all in it.

I am at this time, to treat of the second tract only, the which as it
concerned Nabuchodonosor in Hypothesi; so (beloved) it may be verified of every
covetous insatiable wretch in Thesi, that in spoiling other, he covers an
unprofitable gain, consulting shame to his own house, and sinning against his
own soul.

As Soli^ temporis vsura honesta.
Seneca said, there is a good usury, and a bad; a good of our precious time, a
bad which is the biting interest of money: For the Scripture mentions a good
and a bad covetousness, a good which our blessed Lord calls, hungring and
thirsting after righteousness; And 1. Cor. 1^. 31.
S. Paul h Mat 5. 6.
a coveting of spiritual gifts, and S. Com. in loc.
Hierom, a covetous desire to win souls unto God, an evil covetousness,
termed by Christ. Luke. 16. 9. Unrighteous Mammon, and that in three respects,
as being either ill got, or ill kept, or ill spent.

Ill gotten, as when a cruel oppressor does increase that which is not his
own, verse 6* when he builds a town with blood, and a city with iniquity,
verse 12. Or when he seeks his own, with over great care, setting his whole
heart upon worldly wealth, extending his desires as hell, and as death
insatiable, auare auarus, as Chytraeus upon our text; Such an inordinate
coveting is evil, and goods so gotten are riches of Luke 16. ^. (...) male
(...) Va^ablus (...) loc.
iniquity yea filthy lucre. 1. Tim. 3. 3.

Ill kept, is when a miserable wretch will not let his P^ ^6.
fountain flow forth, and his rivers of waters in the street, when he will
not Rom 12. 13
distribute to the nec^ssity of the Saints, and share his goods among those
which are of the C^lat 6* ^0.
household of faith, according to the rules of charity, Justice, mercy.

Ill spent, as when a penny-father does a good work for temporal interest, or
to be seen of men, Mat. 6. 1. or when he does expend his riches upon bad
works, as in giving his neighbor drink, that he may make him drunken, and so
discover his priuities, verse. 15. Or when he drinks so much himself, that
he is filled with shame for glory, verse 16. All these kinds of covetousness
are evil, and, as the blessed ^. Tim. 6. 10
Apostle tells us expressly, the root of all evil, whether it be malum
culpae, that evil a man does, or malum poenae, that evil a man suffers, it
is the root of all sin, and of all punishment for sin; the terms of our text
point at both, at the sin* in pronouncing it evil, at the punishment, in
denouncing upon it a woe.

For the first, If the fear of God be the Psalm. 118. 10.
beginning of wisdom, the Matrix of goodness, and seed of virtue, then on the
contrary, the love of the world, which is James 4. 4.
enmity with God, is the root of all offenses against God, our neighbors, and
our selves; for Thom. 1. 2ae. quaest. 84. art. 1.
as the root gives nourishment to the whole tree, so the disordinate love of
money, does administer occasions and means for every sin, according to that of
Chap. 10. 19.
Ecclesiastes, silver answers to all, or as it is in the vulgar Latin, and
old English, all things obey money.

The most abominable sin committed against God, is idolatry, forbidden in the
1. commandment of the Law, thou shall have none other Gods, etc. And in the 1*
article of the creed, I believe in God, not in gods, but as the Nicene creed,
in one God almighty, maker of heaven and earth; and in the first words of the
Pater noster, our Father which art in heaven: God is our Father, Ergo, we must
have none other Gods; in heaven, Ergo, we may not worship any graven Image; But
covetousness, as S. Paul teaches, is worshipping of Idols, Ephe. 5. 5. for as
cursed Idolaters either have strange gods, and not the true, as the Pagans, or
else strange gods with the true, as the Papists; So the covetous person adores
gold, in stead of God, or else God and Mammon together; Nay, coveting of an
evil covetousness, is so great a rebellion and disobedience to Gods holy law,
that as the scripture speaks, it is like the sin ofx witchcraft; a very wretch
is to himself a very witch, and that is they height of Idola try. For whereas
Advancement of learning page (...).
Heretics serve the true God, with a false worship, and Idolaters serve false
gods imagining them to be true: wi ches adore most impiously false gods,
knowing them to be false, for the ground of that black art, is either an open,
or a secret league with the devil.

To speak more particularly the covetous person is an idolater, in respect of
his inward and outward adoring of Mammon; for his inward worship, he sets his
heart upon riches, as Psalm. 62. 10.
David speaks, he puts his trust in uncertain riches, as Mar. 10 24.
Christ and 1. Tim 6 17.
Paul speaks, he sacrifices unto his net, as our Chap. 1. 16.
Prophet speaks, and as Job. 31. 24.
Job speaks, he makes gold his hope, and says unto the wedge of gold, thou
art my confidence. Now then as he is our master, to whom we submit our
obedience. Romans 6. 16. So that is our God to which we commit our selves,
trusting it most, and loving it best

As for an outward worship, the miserable wretch is more gross* then either
Popish, or heathenish Idolaters, for they worship aurum in imagine, but he does
worship aurum in ^rugine So S. Iam. 5. ^.
James in plain terms, Your gold and silver are cankered, and the rust of
them shall be a witness against you; The Romanists hold that Images are the
laye-mens Gospel, and so Sculpture, says In Ephesians. 5.
Zanchius, is the covetous man's Scriptura, his pictures are his scriptures, his
bills are his Bibles, and the bonds of other, his security.

As for other offenses against God, what is the cause why Acts. ^.
Simon Magus is desirous first to buy, that after he may sell the gifts of
the holy Ghost, is it not evil covetousness? What is the cause, why
sacreligious persons Mala^ 3 8.
spoil God of his tithes, a rent which is due to him, and his, for blessing
the other nine parts of their goods* Is it not evil covetousness? What is the
cause why Dan. 5. 2.
Belshazzar carrowseth in consecrated vessels, and takes delight Pro 20. 25.
in devouring holy things, is it not evil cou^tousnesse? What is the cause why
some take to themselves, and their heirs Psalm 83. 12.
the houses of God in possession, not only playing Matthew. 21.
the merchan^s in the temple, but also making merchandise of the Temple, Psalm
79. 1.
defi^ing holy places, and making Jerusalem an heap of stone^, is it not
evil covetousness? What is the cause why some Divines in some parts of the
land, ly* ing non-resident, from their b^nefices, allow their curates, and
fellow laborers, in the Lords work, so mean means to live, that (as one
said) while they pray against other, for taking ten in the hundred, themselves
every year make an hundred for ten, is ^t not evil covetousness? What is the
cause, why Neutralists, and Hermophrodites* in the business of religion, are
so cold, like to 2. Tim* 4. 10.
Demas, ready to forsake the Gospel, and embrace the present world, is it not
evil covetousness? It is said in the proverb, show me a liar, and I will
show thee a thief, So show me a man given over unto the world, and I will*
easily show you a man that 1. Tim. 1. 19.
turns his back to Gods altar, and is readyr to make shipwreck of faith, and
a go^d conscience. The man of God, who flees these things, uses the world, as
if he used it not, using it only that he may the better enjoy God: But he that
coueteth an evil covetousness on the contrary, does use God, that he may the
better enjoy the world: the penny-father is not Gods child.

For it is observed, that the dear Saints and children of God, have been
least branded with this of all other sins; Noe was drunk; Lot committed
incest; David adultery; Aron idolatry; Peter perjury; but we do not read,
that any holy Patriarch, or Prophet, or Apostle, was ouermastered, or infected
notoriously with the base sin of evil coveting; among all Christ's company,
Judas only, the son of perdition, is blotted for covetousness, but all the
rest who were heirs of salvation, are said to Mat. 19. 27.
leave all things, even all they had, and all they could desire to have, to
follow Christ in his poverty, when he professed openly, the Mat. 8. ^0.
foxes* have holes, and the birds of heaven have nestes, but the son of man
has not whereon to rest his head. And Martin Luther, a second* Elias, (who by
fire from heaven, descried and* described that abomination of desolation, in
Gods temple,) writes of himself, that of all sins, he was ever least
subject to covetousness; The Papists object often that professors of the
reformed religion, are Lutherans; but I would to God, both we and they were
true Lutherans in this point. I have The Christians task* page ^86.
read that Cardinal Burbonius, should say, he would not leave his part in
Paris, for his part in Paradise: But a man of God on the contrary, must account
all things Phil 3. 8.
loss, that he may win Christ: If every sin be less or more deformed, ex
part boni cui inordinate subditur (as the Thom* 2. 2. ^ qu. 18. art. 5.
school speaks) then undoubtedly covetousness is a most abject sin, because
goods of the world, are worse then either goods of the body, or goods of the
mind, it is but a dirty sin, to love thick clay. Gualter in loc.
If we may not too solicitously care for to morrow. Mat. 6. 34. Then it is the
serpents head, and height of impiety to carke for many morrowes, building our
nest on high, that we may escape the power of evil to come, hording up secret
treasure, not only for our children, but also for our childrens children (as
the Lawyers speak) settling inheritances, and making uncertain riches, (which
according to Gods book, have Pro 23. 5.
wings as an Eagle) perpetuities for ever; This insatiable, both intent, and
extent, is an evil covetousness in Gods eye.

Now concerning our neighbors, auarous increasing of wealth is often reported,
and repeated in this Prophecy, to be spoiling of other, which are either
superiors, equals, or inferiors; as for superiors* evil covetousness
denies unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. It withholds tribute to whom
tribute; custom, to whom custom; honor, to whom honor belongs. It renders
not to minister and master and magistrate that which is due by the laws of God
and man.

As for equals, it is evil covetousness that occasioneth so many quarrels in
law, and makes so many breaches in love.

As for inferiors, it is evil covetousness that makes a man hard hearted,
and fast handed toward the poor, the true character of Nabal is to get much,
and keep much, but to spend little, and give nothing. Not to run in the field
of this common place, beyond the bounds of our text, he that inlargeth his
desires as the hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers
unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people, he that builds his
nest on high, erecting it with blood, and iniquity, he that increases that
which is not his own, and leaves so much Psalm. 17. 14.
hid treasure to his babes, that all of them may live like gentlemen, and Idle
men, is an enemy to the Church, and common weal, Gualter. in loc.
loosing the one many good Pastors, and the other many good professors and
tradesmen. If gallant vpstarts like nettles today, peeping out of the ground,
to morrow, perking to the top of the hedge, had not been left an opulent
fortune, they would have got their living either by the sweat of their
brains, or else by the sweat of their brows, whereas now the state both
Ecclesiastical, and Civil, is deprived of their industry.

Lastly, this sin is the root of evil unto our selves, Seneca.
auarus nemini bonus, sibi vero pessimus, A muck worm does no good unto any,
much hurt unto himself, he coueteth an evil covetousness (says our Prophet)
to his own house, he sins against his own soul, and consulteth shame to
his own posterity. It is evil unto his house, for the building of it so high,
upon so bad a foundation, will be the ruin thereof, and make it even with the
ground; so Cyrillus Alexandrinus upon the place, Posuisti nidum in alto, sed
miser eris et repent sub pedibus inimicorum; Thy stately towers and towns,
ouertopping the heads of thy friends* shall upon the sudden be trampled under
the feet of thy foes; for Christ. Castr. parap ^r. in loc.
although all men should hold their peace, yet says our Prophet, the stone
shall cry out of the wall and the beam out of the timber shall answer it;
Chy^raus. Gualter.
the dumb creatures answer one another, as voices in the quire, and their
cries, as S. Cap. 5 4.
James tells us, enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts, and the *Lord
cries, although thou exaltest thy self, as an Eagle, and make thy nest among
the stars, yet thence will I bring thee down, for as thou have done, so
shall it be done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thy head, Obadia. 4.
and 15 verse.

It is evil to his posterity, for unconscionable gain will occasion his
children to be lazy, laziness will occasion lewdness, and lewdness will
occasion utter ruin; for them that honor me, will I honor, and they that
despise me, shall be despised, says the Lord God of Israel. 1. Samuel 2. 30,

It is evil to his own self, for as the liberal and merciful man rewards
his own soul. Proverbs 11. 17. So the cruel and covetous, sins against
his own soul, says our Prophet, and this evil is the worse, for that it
grows stronger and stronger, as he grows weaker and weaker, omnia vitia,
says In Ephe. c. 5 loc. de auaritia.
Zanchius, Cum senectute s^nescunt, auaritia sola iuuen^scit; other sins, as
we grow in years, are lesser, and lesser; only covetousness, which Chapter 2. 5.
Abacuc tells us, is a kind of drunkenness, reigns in old men especially:
an apprentise having served certain years, is a freeman; and a scholar,
having studied at the university seven, is a master: but the covetous person,
is never a freeman, or a master, but always a servant, and a slave to Satan
and sin, deficient in every good office, See, notes upon Ephesians. 3. S^n. ^n Lent.
concerning his natural life, civil life, spiritual life, eternal life, all
which is included in this one word, Woe, whereby the Prophet does intimate, that
covetousness is the root of all evil, which a man suffers; Woe to him that
coueteth an evil covetousness.

An Angel cried, Apoc. 8. 13. Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth,
inhabitantibus non accolis, as ^b 2 d^ Abrah c 7.
S. Ambrose distinguishes, unto such as are not only soiourners, but settled
inhabitants, who so dwell on earth, as that they make it their mansion and
heaven, and never look for another city, which is above; Woe to such in their
life, woe to such in their death, woe to such after death, as the godly man
whose conversation is in heaven, has the 1. Tim. 4 8*
promises of the life present, and of that which is to come; so the worldly
man, who coueteth an evil covetousness, whose mind is Colos. 3. 2.
set on earthly things, has the punishments of the life present, and of that
which is to come: Woe, woe, woe to such a one, Hug^* Card^. in Ap^c. 8. 13.
woe to his body, which is a temporal woe, woe to his soul, which is a
spiritual woe, woe to both body and soul, which is an eternal woe.

Concerning the first, Iosu. 7. 25.
Achan for his evil covetousness was by Gods commandment stoned to death,
and his wealth consumed with fire: 2. Kin. 5. ^7.
Geezi for his evil covetousness, was stricken with a leprosy that cleaued to
him and his seed for ever: Act. 5.
Ananias and Saphira, for their evil covetousness, dyed disastrously: Mat.
27. 5.
Judas for his evil covetousness first despaired, and afterward hanged
himself: Nabuchodonosor whom our text points at chiefly, for his evil
covetousness, was filled with shame for glory.

Concerning the second, which is the woe spiritual of the soul, Peter de
Palatio. in loc.
If they who will be rich by common and commendable means, 1. Tim. 6. 8.
fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, that
1. Pet. 2. 11.
fight against the soul: then how much mo^e do they sin, that covet an
evil covetousness, that build a town with blood, and erect a city with the
wages of iniquity; The spiritual life, consists in faith and repentance, now
the covetous being drowned in his mucke, makes 1. Tim. 1. 19.
shipwreck of his faith, and a good conscience; For faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17. Bu^ the deceitfulness of riches, as
our Lord shows, Man. 13 choakes the word, and hinders the passage thereof; he
that coueteth an evil couetonsnesse, is like the deaf adder mentioned in the
58. Psalm. that stops her ears, and refuses to hear the charmers voice,
though he charm never so sweetly. S. Augustine expounding that place, writes
that this venomous serpent, delights in darkness, clappeth one of her,
ears very hard to the ground, and with her tail, stops the other, least
hearing the Marso, she should be brought to light; and so the serpentine
worldling which has his mind in his chest, while his body is at Church, stops
one ear with earth, that is, with insatiable desires of riches, and the other
with his tail, that is, with his heirs and posterity, building his nest on
high, that they may escape the evil to come, and so little regard the Gospels
harmony, though the preacher should speak with the tongues of men and Angels.

As for repentance, the covetous is scarce brought to confess his fault,
seldom to be sorry, never to restore: So that having neither true faith in God,
nor due love toward men, he cannot be but spiritually dead, and as the Ephe.
2. 12.
scripture speaks, without God in this world.

As for eternal woe, torturing both body and soul, you have Dives an example,
Luke. 16. who for evil coveting, and for building his nest on high, suffers in
hell fire, woes of loss, and woes of sense: Hugo. Card. in Apoc 8. 13.
woes in respect of his pains variety, woes in respect of his pains
inseparability, woes in respect of his pains universality, for the righteous
Lord, reigns upon the ungodly Psalm. 11. 17.
snares, fire, and brimstone, storm, and tempest; against their evil avarice,
catching, and spoiling other, snares; against their hot lust, and luxury* fire,
and brimstone; against their putting up ambition, and pride, storm, and
tempest.

PROVE. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient bounds, which thy fathers have made.
THe word of God, is termed by St. Paul, a two edged sword, as being a Heb. 4.
12.
sharp; (say the Doctors) in a litteral exposition; and sharp, in a sense
which is mystical also.

This our text is literally construed of markestones and bounders of
inheritance, between man and man, but allegorically, Hugo. Card. Lauater. in
loc.
Divines expound it, of the limits of reason, and religion, and so by
consequent of things appertaining to policy and piety.

According to the litterall and plain sense, this Scripture teaches us
especially 3. lessons,

1. That we may possess lands. 2. That we may possess them in private, bounded
and enclosed. 3. That we may maintain lawfully, these seuerals and
enclosures.
For the first, Psalm. 24* 1.
the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, and the earth he has given
unto the sons of men. Psalm* 115. 16. He made all things for man, and man for
himself, the Creator is Lord of man, and man is lord of the creatures, all
things are in subjection under his feet. Psalm. 8. 6.

Again, Christ is heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. and in Christ all things are
ours, as the blessed 1. Co^. 3. 22.
Apostle sweetly, whether they be things present, or things to come, all are
yours, and you Christ's, and Christ Gods, and Luke. 15. 31. All that I have, is
thine, said the good father to his good son.

Every man then before men, In foro civilly, may claim the things of this
world, by right of his birth, or creation, as a man: but every Christian before
God, In foro conscientiae, has an interest in them, by right of his second
birth or regeneration, as a Christian, as some distinguish acutely, the wicked,
as men, have Ius ad rem, but good men, as Christians, have Ius in re. We may
possess lands, and houses, and riches, and yet remove no bounds of Gods law:
But our care must be that they do not possess us. Ita tenete, ne teneamin^
quoth Gregory the great, if we command them and honor god with them,
according to their name they be goods in deed, wherewith we may Gal. 6. 10.
do good unto all men, and be 1. Tim. 6. 18.
rich in good works, but if once they command us, then, as the poet said, they
become irritamenta malorum even the minsters of mischief and (as the scripture
speaks) the root of all evil.

The Church is described Apoc. 12. to be clothed with the Sun, and to have
the Moon under her feet, that is, all earthly things which are changeable
like the Moon; and the churches treasure was laid down at the Apostles feet;
Act. 4. 35. Hereby signifiing, as Tom. 1. page 103.
Hierom told Paulinus, that when riches increase, we should not set our hearts
on them, as David does advise, but rather that we should trample them under
our feet, Mat. 6. 35.
first and most, seeking the kingdom of God, and then 1. Cor. 7. 31.
using the world as if we used it not, having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. 2. From hence we learn, that we may have lands in private, bounded and
enclosed, so that every one may say, this is mine, that is thine: as God in the
beginning, bounded the raging Sea, saying, Job. 38. 11.
hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall it stop thy proud
waves: So Gods law prescribes certain limits and bounds, in every man's
inheritance, which he may not transgress and remove, hitherto shall thou go,
and no further; for the Melanct in expos. 8. Prac. tom 1 fol 17. et tom. 2.
fol. 369.
distinction of possessions is founded, not upon the civil laws of Emperors
only, but upon the Divine laws of God also, commanding, thou shall not remove
thy neighbors mark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance.
Deuteronomy. 19. 14. and Deuteronomy. 27. 17. Cursed be he that remooueth his neighbors
mark, and in our text, remove not the bounds etc. Melanct. Lauat in loc. idem
Illyricus in Claus Scrip verb. Terminus
All which appertain to the commandment, thou shall not steal, the which in
one word does overthrow Platonicall and Anabaptisticall community, for if all
things ought to be common, and nothing proper in possession; how can one man
steal from another, and why should ^sa. 5. 8.
Esaias denounce woe to such as join house to house, and lay field to field,
till there be no place for other upon the earth, and why should the removing
of land-markes, be numbered among the notorious faults of the wicked. Job. 24. 2.

It is objected out of Acts 2. 43. and Acts 4. 32. that the primitive
Christians had all things common; Answer is made, that those dear servants,
and Saints of God, in that extreme persecution, had all things common, In
cresi, that is, in use, but not in Thesi, that is, in occupation, and
possession. It is said, that the rich did sell their possessions, and lands,
but Aratius in Act 2 44. idem C^inet Marlorat.
not all their possessions and lands. 2. This sale was not forced, but
voluntary; so St. Peter told Ananias. Acts. 5. 4. Whiles it remained,
appertained it not unto thee? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? 3. Such as did sell and communicate, did not give to all men alike, but
as every one had need; The poor did not confusedly snatch unto themselves, as
much as they would, but the price of the things that were sold, was laid down
at the Apostles feet, and distribution of the same was made unto every man,
according to his necessity. 4. The blessed Apostles themselves, had not all
things common in possession; for St. John took the blessed Virgin recommended
unto him by Christ; into his own home. John 19. 27. And St. Paul had books,
and apparel of his own; for thus he writes 2. Tim. 4. 13.
to Timothy, the cloak that I left at Troas, with Carpus, when thou come,
bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.

Lastly, if all things ought to be common, as our modern Platonists, and
ancient Heritikes, called Au. ^arg. 40.
Apostolici, contend, why did Matthew. 6. 1. mark 10. 21.
Christ and his Apostles, exhort rich men of the world to be rich in good
works, aduising that their 2. Cor. 8. 14.
abundance should supply the lack of other, and that they should Galat. 6. 10.
do good unto all men, especially unto those which are of the household of
faith, Romans 12. 13.
distributing to the necessities of the Saints, and giving themselves to
hospitality; To make things common, is to take away the subject and occasions
of bountifulness, and liberality, which are so highly commended in a christian.

3 As we may possess lands, and possess them in private, bounded, and
enclosed; So we may maintain lawfully, these bounds against all oppressors,
and intruders whatsoever. 1. Sovereign Princes, may defend their marches, and
limits of their states and kingdoms, against inuading neighbor kings, and
that by dint of sword, and force of arms; If one private man offend another,
the Judge (says old 1. Sam. 2 25.
Eli) shall judge it, If one subject remove the land-markes of another,
appeal may be made to superior authority; But if one King incroach upon the
Dominions of another, they have no common seat of Justice, where to complain
of wrongs, and therefore they may revenge public quarrels, and make the sword
their Judge, and in such a case, says Quast. 10. in Iosuah t^m. 4. fol 203.
Augustine, the captains and soldiers are the ministers of God, and they
fight his battle with his sword, to take vengeance on such as do ill, and
herein, as Ser. ad ^ilites. Templ. c. 3.
Bernard speaks, they be not homicidae sed malicidae.

2. It is the part of every parishioner and party, to preserve, so much as
lies in him, all the liberties, franchises, bounds, and privileges of the
town where he dwells. St Act. 12. 28.
Paul in a great extremity, pleaded that he was a citizen of Rome, and the
chief captain, who had the charge of him, answered, with a great sum
obtained I this freedom; the Church of England in the fourth part of the
Sermon, for Rogation week, does advise parishoners, in walking their
perambulation, seriously to consider the bounds of their own Towne-ship, and
of all other neighbor parishes, bordering upon them on every side, that every
town may be content with his own, and claim no more, then that, in ancient
right and custom, our forefathers have peaceably laid out for our comfort, and
commodity: in the tides of contention, between neighbor incorporations once
up, there want not commonly stirring winds, to make them more rough: I
remember In his Prologue desc^ption of the Sergeant at Law.
Chaucer in his time, gave this character of a Sergeant at the law, no where so
busy a man as he there was, and yet he seemed busier then he was; to be
Causidicus, a Barrister, advocate, counselor, is an honest, a worshipful,
and a worthy calling, but to be Causificus, a barretour, a setter of suites, a
copie-cut as it were to bring in gain, to the court christian, or civil, is a
base trade, that becomes not a man, a gentleman less, a christian least of
all: I beseech you therefore brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and a^oyd them, and the
way to shun their courses is exactly to mark the markestones, and to stand in
the old way, for the proverb is true, fast bind, fast find; even reckoning,
makes long friends; when bounds are certain, possessors are not uncertain.

3. As the sovereign Prince, which is the head, and incorporations and towns,
which are bodies politic: so in particular, every man, and member of the
same, may defend his own right, and maintain the bounds of his proper
inheritance, by wager of law, before competent judges; We must, as S. Paul
exhorts, follow peace with all men; and have peace with all, if it be
possible, so much as lies in our power. But because the wicked are like the
raging sea, whose waters cast up dirt and mire, having no peace within
themselves, and always stirring with other: It is our duty, to be so simple as
doves in offending them, and yet so wise as serpents, in defending our selves.
It stands well enough with charity, for a christian to stand upon his just
title, yea, because charity begins with it self, he that prouides not for his
own, denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

Against this doctrine, the fond Anabaptists object the word of Christ, Mat. 5
40. If any man will take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also, Tom. 4
^l. ^02. ^t ^om 6. f^l. 2^9.
S. Augustine answers in lib. 1. de. ser: dom. in monte, That this iniunction
ought to be construed, de preparatione cordis, and not de ostensione operis, of
our hearts intention, and readiness to forgive an injury, rather then of our
works extension and actual enduring the spoiling of our goods; or as Aretius.
Call Piscator
other more plainly, these words are spoken of private retaliation and revenge,
not of that remedy which we may have by public justice. The meaning of
Christ is, that we should be so far from auenging one wrong with another,
as that we should rather have patience, to suffer more; as the Prophets expound
the law, so the Apostles expound the Gospel: hear then how S. Paul interprets
this precept. Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your selves (says he,) but give place
to wrath, for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord; A
private person ought not to render evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke: But a
magistrate may punish a malefactor, and so See Aug. contra literas petiliani*
c^. 4.
pro malo culpae render malum poenae; But that is not to requite evil for
evil, but good for evil, because corrections, are directions, as well to the
seers, as sufferer. He therefore that commits his cause to the Magistrate,
gives place to divine judgment, he speaks, as David in the 35. Psalm. 1.
verse, Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me, and fight
thou against them that fight against me; for all higher powers are Gods
ordinance, his lieutenants on earth, as it were fingers of the hand that
gouernes all the world, and they execute the judgments, not of men but, of God.

Yea, but you will object happily, that S. 1 Cor. 6. 5.
Paul elsewhere does argue the Corinthi^ns of folly, for going to law one with
another; Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not one that is
able to judge between his brethren? See. Martyr in loc. Com. part 4. cap. 16.
Answer is made, that Paul in that place, forbids not simply the commencing of
any suit, before the lawful and competent Judge: but that he taxed only three
faults, reigning among the Corinthians at that time; the first, that being
christians, and so consequently brethren, they quarrelled one with another, and
that under infidels, and unbelieving magistrates, unto the scandal of the
Gospel. The second, that they were so transported, with heat, and hate, that
they would not suffer any little wrong. The 3. that the plaintiues also did
wrong, and defraud their brethren; remove these faults, and their causes may be
pleaded between two faithful men, and determined also by wise Judges.

And so S. Paul elsewhere, proves by his own precept and practice, by his
precept, exhorting every soul, to be subject to the higher powers, for there
is no power, but of God. If there must be laws, then Judges, and if Judges,
actions, and pleading of causes, and if pleadings, it is necessary that we
should obey the Judges sentence, for we then implore Gods help, when we sue
to the power ordained by him, and unless we should do this, we might seem
to tempt God, in neglecting his ordinance. Secondly S. Paul proves this by his
own practice, who for the defense of his life, did appeal to Caesar. Acts.
25. 21. and Acts 23. 17. He sent his sisters son unto the Tribune, to declare
the conspiracy the Jews plotted against him.

It must needs be (quoth our blessed Mat 18 ^.
Savior,) that offenses come; I demand then of Anabaptists, and other opposits
to Christian Magistracy, whether they will have these scandalous offenses
unpunished, or punished? If they will answer, unpunished, How shall we lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, when as impunity is
the mother of impiety; Better it is, says one, to live in a place, where
nothing is lawful, then in a place, where al things are lawful: Sp^inx The^.
page. 873.
Gens sine Iustitia, sine remige nauis in vnda est. If they will have faults to
be punished, by whom I p^ay shall Judgment be given, or executed; If every man
according to his own humor, punish and revenge, what he lust, all orders of
men, in all things, will be so much out of order, as that in stead of
perfection, we shall undoubtedly, be brought into desperate confusion:
Wherefore, we may in all our wrongs, (as we have heard David did) Come unto
God, who will either immediately, by himself, or else mediatly, by his
magistrates plead our cause with them that strive with us.

But in going to law, we must observe these cautions especially.

1. That we so put our trust in Judges, and Princes, that we distrust not God,
who cares for us, says St. Peter, and so cares for us, as a father cares
for his child, says David, and so cares for every one of his children, as if
there were no more to care for, says Augustine: Men of earthly minds, and
base conceits, make gold their God, and the minions of the time their mediators
in all affairs; If they can corrupt the Judge, and pack a Jury, they little
think on God, Psalm. 82. 1.
who stands in the congregation of Princes, and sits a Judge among gods, Pro.
21. 30.
against whom there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel; no wisdom
of men, understanding of Angels, counsel of devils, able to prevail. O put
not then your trust in Princes, or in any child of man, for thus says the
Lord; Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord. Iere. 17. 5.

2. We must inuiolably keep charity, putting a great difference between an
adversary, and an enemy: we may commence an action, against a brother, in love;
but we may not so maliciously prosecute the matter, as that we break the bond
of peace. Viscount S Alban ^n Hen. 7 page 85.
Charles the French King, made war against Henry 7. King of England, rather
with an olive branch, then a laurel branch in his hand, more desiring peace,
then victory. 1. Kin. 2. 5.
Ioab shed the blood of war, in peace: but he kept, as it should seem, the
bond of peace, in war, and as he did war in love, so we much more may jar
in love, so contend with our adversary, before the lawful Judge, that the
party cast in the suit, may be bettered; If not in his money, yet in his
manners, and Satan only conquered. Baron. An^al. tom. ^ fol. 5.
Vt qui vincitur simul vincat, et v^us tantummodo vincatur diabolus.

3. We must take good ^eed, that our suits in law, lead us not into
distraction, and distemper of mind, some men are so much affected, and
afflicted with troubles in law, that they loose their wits, in not having their
wills, and so while they would gain their suits, they loose themselves, and
make wrack of christian gentleness, sobriety, patience. Laorti^ in ^us vita.
Bias being asked, what man he thought most unfortunate, answered, he that is
most impatient; the world reputes a patient man, an ass, but Solomon accounts
it an high point of wisdom, to pass by wrath, and an honor to cease from
strife.

Melanct. tom* 2 fol. 979.
Qui placide sortem far scit, ille sapit. Lastly, we must appeal to the
tribunal of the Magistrate, rather to increase the glory of God, and good of
our neighbors, then to increase our own revenues, and patrimony. To
conclude this argument in a word, If thou go to law, make Conscience thy
Chancery. Charity thy Judge. Patience thy Counselor. Truth thine Attorney.
Peace thy Solicitour.


St. Paul, Ioynes together in one verse, faith, love, r Galat. ^. 22.
patience; By faith, we are linked unto God; by love, linked unto our
neighbors; by patience, linked unto our selves; If then any remove the bounds
of thy land, have faith toward God, love toward thy neighbor, and patience
toward thy self, and thou shall be sure to find two sound friends in thy suit,
God and thy conscience. God who being chief Justice of the whole world, can
do for thee, whatsoever he will, and will do for thee whatsoever is be^; thy
conscience, which is in stead of a thousand good witnesses, a thousand good
advocates, a thousand good iuries, a thousand clearkes of the peace, guardians
of the peace, to plead, procure, (...), record, assure to thee that peace,
which p^ (...) understanding. Hitherto concerning (...) (...) exposition of our
text, showing, that eu^ry man, and every christian, much more, may (...) land^
and so possess, as that he may hau^ them in p^iuat, bounded, and so bounded,
as he may defend the right of his proper inheritance, by wager of law, before
competent Indges, against all intruders, and disturbers of his estate,
whatsoever; I come now to the mystical, as it concerns the bounds of reason
and religion, and so consequently matters of policy, and piety.

Discourse of State, quoth Praef. Theatr. Politic.
Antonio Perez, in his political Aphorisms, is no food for weak stomack^; in
the words of Father Latymer, no meat for mowers: a man considered as a civil
man only, cannot err in any thing, more dangerously, then in the Danaeus in
Prooem. Polit.
politics. I purpose therefore, to walk in the Kings high way, and to contain
my self within the verge of our text, Lauater in loc.
teaching us to keep the laudable customs and laws of the country, where
we dwell. He that breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. Eccle. 10. 8.
Every common wealth, is hedged in, as it were, with ancient laws: he therefore
that is an hedgebreaker, lets in the wild boar out of the wood, to root the
vineyard, and wild beasts out of the field, to devour it, and all that go by
to pluck of her grapes; It is reported by Orat contr. Timocr.
Demosthenes, that if any man among the Locrenses, did endeavor to bring in a
new Law, he should treat of it in Parliament, with an halter about his neck,
that if his motion were dis^asted, he might instantly be strangled. In the
days of Hen. the 3. a question being moved in the Parliament, concerning
bastardy, the Barons and Earls, al with one common voice gave this shoute,
Mag^a. Char^ page 13.
Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, We will not alter the laws of England, so long
used, and approved. Laertius. in ^us vita.
Heraclitus Ephesinus was wont to say, that we should fight for our laws, as
for our walls; for a city may stand without walls, when it cannot subsist
without wholesome laws. If any shall ask, Vir bonus est quis? Answer is
made, Qui consulta patrum, qui l^ges iuraque seruat. We may not unadvisedly
remove bounds, either of our present fathers, or of our forefathers; Touching
the first, it is truly said, Consilia senum, hastae iuuenum, The heads of old
men, and hands of young men, are most useful unto the state. Young men are best
for company, but old men for counsel, old men are for the plot at home, young
men for execu^ion abroad, the rejecting of old-mens advise, was 1. King. 12.
Rehoboams oversight, and Romes overthrow.

Concerning the second, ancient laws, and customs, are to be preserved
inuiolably, so long as they be convenient, and commendable, but if upon aged
experience, they be found unprofitable. to the state, then albeit thou may
not remove, that is, one person out of a singularity, yet they, that is, Prince
and Parliament, may remove these bounds, as having power, not only to recall
old customs, but also to repeal old laws, thus says the Lord, Ser. 6. 16.
State super v^as antiquas, stand in the ways, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein. Aduanc* of (...) lib. 1. fol. 33.
Antiquity deserves this reverence, that we should make a stand thereupon, and
discover what is the best way, but when once the discovery is plain, then to
make progress; so S. 1. These. 5. 21.
Paul expressly, prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Antiquitas
saecul, iuuentus mundi, these times, are the most ancient times, and not those
which we count ancient, ordine retrogrado; Wisdom is the daughter of
experience; the state then upon long experience, finding a custom of old time,
to be most unfit for our time, may by the rules even of antiquity, remove
such a bound, and cancel such a bond: it is pithily said, Leges nouis legibus
non recreatae ac^scunt, old laws, if they be not sometime refreshed with new
laws, wax sour.

Christians have the same morals indeed, that the Jews, Gods ancient people,
had, but not the same Cerem^nials, and Judicials; and Rome, the most renowned
common wealth, in humane history, did often change her form of government,
described, Apoc. 17. to be a city seated upon seven hills, and having seven
kings, that is, seven kinds of government, as our See. Brightman.
divines upon that place, Lib. 1. page 1.
Cornelius Tacitus. in lib. 1. Annalium. makes mention of six; Reges,
Consules, Dictatores, Decemuiri, Tribuni Militum, Imperatores, and now Popes,
are the seventh order: S. John says, in his age, five are fallen; one is, and
the other is not yet come: Five were fallen, as Kings, Consuls, Dictators,
Decemuiri, Tribunes; one was, that is, the government of Emperors, and the
other, that is, the government of Popes, in his days, as yet to come.

Lib 2 contra Symmachum.
Prudentius to the same purpose, notably.

Roma antiqua sibi non constat, versa per aeuum, Et mutata sacris, ornatu,
legibus, armis. England has abrogated many British and Saxon customs, and all
states alter their institutions, according to their occasions. The word of God
is a Psalm 19 7.
perfect law, perfect in respect of all times, and perfect in respect of all
turns, perfect in respect of all places, and perfect in respect of all persons,
apt and able to make the man of God fit for every good work; but the laws of
men, albeit they fill many large volumes, are imperfit, some statutes are added
daily, which were not thought upon before, many rep^aled, which after
experience were thought inconvenient.

But for as much as Reusner. Symbol class. 2. page 196.
custom is another law; yea another nature, a great Tyrant, whose commands are
heavy, we must move, before we remove ancient bounds; it is Ser de idoni^. S.
S.
Bernards advice, soluenda non rumpenda consu^tudo, customs are not to be
broken suddenly, rashly, rudely; but by little, and little, to be loosed
tenderly, charily, Monendo magis quam minando, says Epist. 64.
Augustine, lest happily, the Aug. Epis. 118. cap. 5.
change do hurt more with the novelty, then help with the utility.

This also shall suffice, concerning matters of policy, so far forth as our
text touches upon them in my conceit. Now for matters of piety, this scripture
teaches us, not to forsake the received terms, and ancient conclusions in
Divinity; for it goes not with religion, as it does with the statutes of the
realm, and judgments at the common law, where the latter is thought the
better: But on the contrary, the first is the best, and that undoubtedly most
true, which is most old. The Gospel was preached in Paradise, by God himself;
The seed of the woman; shall break the sepents head, the writing of Moses is
older then any writing of the Gentiles, as Lib cont^r. Appionem.
Josephus, De curand. Graec. affect. lib. 2.
Theodorete, In Protrepti^.
Clement Alex: and other Doctors, have proved the doctrine of the Apostles is
older then Popery, or any other Heresy.

Avoid, says S. Paul, vain bablings, Kenophonias. 1. Tim. 6. 20. But Eras. in
loc.
Ambrose and some other read, Kainophonias, as in the vulgar Latin, vocum
nouitates; new doctrines, upon which place, Vincentius Lyrenensis has this
gloss, non dixit antiquitates, sed nouitates, nam si v^tanda nouitas, tenenda
est antiquitas; prophana nouitas, sancta vetustas. He says not avoid old
bounds, but new bablings; antiquity is to be reverenced, nouelty to be
rejected: a wise man, as Ep page 195.
Gueuara writes, is a friend to old hooks, and an enemy to new opinions. It
is plain says Tertullian against Marcion, that that is truest which is first;
that first, which is from the beginning; that from the beginning, which was
delivered by the Apostles. An Rhe^ in. 1. Tim. 1. 3.
Heretic is nothing else, but an after teacher, a new master, one that
teaches otherwise, as the word signifies, 1. Tim 1. 3. Heterodidascaltin: that
which Lib. 1.
Optatus reports of Victor, is verified of all Heretics, that they be sons
without fathers, soldiers without Captains, and scholars, without masters. In
the days of Pope Leo, the 1: there were certain Heretics, called Acephali, so
termed (as In vita Leonis.
Platina conjectures) quia sine cerebro, et authore habebantur, Because they
were both heedlesse and headless, a proper name for all such as have neither
grounds, nor bounds of their assertions: Ismael is a lively type of an
Heretic, says De h^res. lib. 1. cap. ^1.
Alphonsus de Castro, His hand is against every man, and every man's hand is
against him: Err^, as a vi^er, must break the mothers belly to g^ out* and
when it is out, (as Esd. 19. 2.
Esaias speake^ Egyptians are set against Egyptians, and they (...) one against
his brother, and every (...) (...) (...) n^ighbour, city against city, kingdom
(...) kingdom, one schismaticke against another, Apoc. 12. 7
Micha^l, and his Angels, that is, Christ, and his church, which is the pillar
of truth, against them all.

Upon these premises, I will infer this conclusion, in despite of all black
devils, and white devils, Here^ikes, and hypocrites* that the reformed, and
conformed Protestants, in the Church of England, do justly condemn both
Papists and Puritans, as vpstarts and nouelists, in removing the most ancient
bounds of our forefathers. I know the Papists are great boasters of antiquity,
but they deal with us, as Tertullian in his Apology speaks of the Gentiles,
Laudatis antiquitatem, et noue de die vivitis, Ye magnify much antiquity,
yet shape your religion, after a new cut; as Dr. Morton Epistle to his Appeal.
Scaliger acutely to Serranus, Nos non sumus nouatores, sed vos estis
veteratores. It is not we, but you and your fathers house that trouble Israel;
It is not we, but you, which have removed ancient bounds.

First, if by Fathers, here we shall understand the Prophets, and Apostles, as
Lauater, upon the place, then it will appear clearly, that the Papists have
removed ancient bounds. 1. In accounting their unwritten traditions, equal to
the written word. 2. In preferring the Churches authority, before the
Scriptures, and in making the Pope Baronius prafat. Annal. Tom 11.
lawgiuer unto the Church. 3. In discarding upon the point, the second Command:
and in dispensing with other, as Pope Anton^. Sum. part. 3. art. 1. cap. ^1.
Martine the 5. gave dispensation unto one, to marry his own sister, and a
learned Bishop of our Church, in his Apology. lib. 2. Chap 13. shows that the
Church of Rome, deludeth every precept in the whole law. 4. In their malicious
mistranslating the sayings of the Prophets and Apostles, against their own
knowledge, witness, that one place. Genesis 3 15. Which is Medulla Scripturarum;
(as Dr. Whatakar.
one said of the creed,) even the pith of the whole Bible, The seed of the
woman, shall bruise the serpents head, where they do not read, ipsum, or ipse,
but ipsa conteret, ascribing that to Mary; which is proper only to the Blessed
seed her Son, our Savior Christ Jesus.

5. In rauishing, or as ( Luther speaks,) in crucifying the sayings of the
Prophets, and Apostles, and so making the sacred text, a ship-mans hose, to
serve their ow^e turns, as for example, Gen 1. 16.
God made two great lights, this is, says And (...) de potest. Rom Po^tif.
lib. 2 cap. 2.
Innocentius the 3. Two great dignities, the Papal and Imperial; and as the
Sun is far greater then the Moon: so the Pope, forsooth, exceeds the
Emperors in greatness. Luke. 22. 38.
Peter said unto Christ, Ecce duo gladij, Behold, here be two swords, and
Christ answered, it is enough; henc^ In extrauag. et refer^ Mo^ Iesuita de
Iure. lib 1. tract ^ disp. 29 see. Protestants appeal lib 5. cap. 16. sect. 1.
Boniface the 8. argued thus, Christ said, it is enough; He said not, it is
too much, Ergo, the Pope which is Peter's successor, may manage both the
swords, and become a temporal Prince, so well as a spiritual Pastor; a voice
from heaven, Acts. 10. 13. said to Peter, macta et manduca, kill, and eat,
Ergo the Pope may depose Princes, and dispose of their scepters; Caesar
Baronius his application in his advice to Pope Paulus Quintus, concerning the
excommunication of the Venetians.

John. 3 10.
Light is come into the world, that is, History counsel of Trent page 132.
Popery, but men loved darkness, that is, Luthers doctrine, more then the
light, as the Archbishop of Bitonto, declaymed in the counsel of Trent. Esday
hist of the Gospel.
Luther was wont to say, that the Pater noster, is made by them a great Martyr,
Esday vbi supra.
another said, Aue Maria, was a greater Martyr, but in my conceit, the text,
thou art Peter, is the greatest Martyr of all. 6. They remove the bounds of
the Prophets, and Apostles, in opposing the tenor, and tenet of their
writings, and that in many points; I will at this present only name two. 1.
The Prophets and Apostles ascribe the whole work of our salvation, only to
Christ, who alone is the Gen 3. 15.
seed of the woman, that brake the serpents head; who alone is the seed of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Gen 18. 18.
in whom all the nations of the world, are blessed, who alone was Es. 53. 5.
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, who has ^s.
63. 3.
trodden the wine press alone, and of all the people, there was none with him,
Who alone Ephesians. 5 2.
g^ue himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling
savor, and lieb. 9. 12.
obtained eternal redemption for us. But the Papists attribute some part of
our salvation to the worthiness of our selves, other to the merits of Saints,
to the works of supererogation, and to the sufferings of Martyrs, laid up in
the Popes treasure house, contradicting herein apparently the tenet of our
Church, in the 11. 18. 31. articles of our confession. Secondly, the Prophets
and Apostles affirm, that God who made all things, is not made himself, for
if he could be made, he were not God; But the Papists auowe that a miserable
Mass Priest in a corner, is able to make the maker of all, for in God say In
their Legerd of Sts. added to Lombardica. hist refert. Dr. Hutton ser at York.
page 24.
they, there be 3. kinds of power, Magna, mayor, maxima, Great, greater,
greatest of all. As for example, the great power of God appeared when he made
one thing of another; as man of the earth, and woman of the rib of man: The
greater power of God, appeared, when he made heaven, and earth, of nothing:
but the greatest of all is, that one creature of another creature, should make
the Creator; and his power is given neither to Angel, nor Archangell, but
only to the holy Priests; A doctrine says our Church. Art. 28. Repugnant to
the plain words of Scripture, overthrowing the nature of a Sacrament, and
giving occasion to many superstitions; out of doubt (as S. Heb. 7. 7.
Paul tells us) the lesser is blessed of the greater. I demand then of a
Romanist, how the Priest can bless the bread after consecration, when it is
actually transubstantiated, and so consequently made Christ. Answer is made,
that this Priest also represents Christ, in that action; and so Christ
consecrating, may be considered, as greater then Christ consecrated; If this be
so, then either Christ must be in the bread, as in the Priest, only
representatiuely; or else they must make a new transubstantiation of the
Priest, into Christ; otherwise, the bread must be greater then the Priest, the
bread being the true body of Christ, the Priest only representative Christ:
(thus as we speak in the schools) one absurdity being granted, a thousand
follow.

Lastly, (for though I were so strong as Hercules, I could not at one blow, cut
off all the heads of this hissing Hydra,) they remove the bounds of the
Prophets, and Apostles, in suppressing their writings, forbidding Gods people
to read them in a known tongue, wherein (as one said,) they deal like cunning
thieves, who coming to rob an house, will be sure first of all, to put out the
candle, lest the light discover them: as the Philistines having put out Samsons
eyes, made sport with him: Even so the Popish Priests, having blindfolded the
people, prohibiting them to read the Scripture, which is a lantern to their
feet, and a guide to their paths, and suffering them in the business of
religion, to see nothing, but only through spectacles, have made themselves
exceeding merry; the scripture, says Romans 15 4.
Paul, is the peoples instruction; the scripture, say the Bellar. de verbo Dei.
lib. 2. cap. 1^.
Papists in a vulgar translation, is the peoples destruction; the scripture,
says 2. Tim. 3. 17.
Paul, does make the man of God absolute; the scripture, say the papists, in a
known tongue makes men heretical and dissolute: but the bible makes men
Heretics, as the sun makes men blind, and therefore In his wicket.
Wickliffe said truly, To condemn the word of God in any language, for
Heresy, is to make God an Heretic.

They well understand, that the Scripture would show their Relat. of Relig.
tract. 34.
praying in a strange tongue, by tale, to be most idle, their traffic for
souls very sacrilege, their miracles to be mere iuglings, their indulgences
to be blasphemies, their incontroleable Lord of Rome, to be that Imperious
bewitching Lady of Babylon, and their worshipping of Images, and Saints, is
flat Idolatry; The Princes of Judah says Hosea, were like those that remove the
bounds. Hosea. 5. 10. In loc.
Ribera the Jesuit, construeth it from Theodorete and Theophilact, they
forsake the laws of God, and embrace traditions of men; or as Theodorus
Antiochenus, they transpose the honor of the living God, and give it to dead
Idols, from which observation, I will argue thus, they who remove the Bible,
may be said, to remove the bounds, but the Papists have removed from the
hands of Gods people, the Bible, forsaking the fountains of living water, and
digging pits, that can hold no water, Ergo, the Papists are they that remove
the bounds, as they give you too much Sacrament, and too little, too much
Christ's transubstantiated body, taking away the cup, even so they give you too
much Scripture, and too little, too much adding to the Canon, Apocrypha; too
little, clapsing it up that ye may not read it, and what is this, but to thrust
you from the path of Paradise? for as In Ier. 6. 16.
Hierome sweetly, the Prophets are the way to Christ, and Christ is the way to
God. As the Lord then once said to the Jews, If I be your Father, where is
mine honor? So the Prophets and Apostles may well object against the Papists,
If ye repu^e us Fathers, why do ye remove the bounds which we have set.

If our modern Papists, admit the Primitive Bishops of Rome, for the Fathers
here mentioned, our plea still is the same, that they have removed the ancient
bounds, and not we. Trial of truth written by an Hungarian translat. into
English. Anno. 109 ^. idem Earl of Northampt at Garnets arraignement.
30. Popes at the first planting of the Church, laid down their heads upon the
block, successively, to seal the bond of conscience, with the blood of
innocence* The Martyrd Popes laying down their necks, at the persecuting
Emperors feet; but afterward the Mitred antechristian Popes, set their feet
upon the good Emperors necks. The late learned Earl of Northampton, openly
delivered at Garnets arraignment, that the Church of Rome, in the beginning,
agreed with Daniels Image, in the head of gold, for godly government, in the
breasts of silver, for unspotted conscience, and in the legs of brass, for
incessant industry; But in succeeding ages, the heads of Popes (says he,)
grew humorous, their breasts auaritious, and their legs idle. Epist. l. 4. Ep.
34. at 39.
Gregrory the great, did account him the forerunner of Antichrist, that should
call himself universal Bishop, auowing that none of his ancestors ever
usurped that insolent style, censuring it for a title of Ep* 32. 34. 38. 39.
Nouelty, error, impiety, blasphemy, the poison of the Church; But every Pope
now does exalt himself above all that is called God, his Sovereign supremacy
is the supreme difference, unto which all other points between them, and us,
are subordinate; that is, the very soul of Popery. The Pope forsooth, is now
the vicar of Christ, and vicegod. Complaint of the ploughman fol. 79.
Christ was the Lord of Lords, but he behaved himself as a servant: the Pope
calls himself a servant, but carries himself as the Lord of Lords: Christ,
the word was made flesh, but now flesh is made the word, so the Papists, our
Lord God the Pope; To conclude this argument, we profess ingeniously, with our
Judicious and gracious Sovereign, that we do not further depart from Rome,
then Rome departs from herself, in her flourishing estate. We do not remove
the bounds of old Rome, but only shake off the bonds of new Rome; We confess
the faith of ancient Rome, but we renounce the faction of Antichristian Rome,
the one being so unlike the other, that we may well exclay me with Metamorph.
lib. 6.
Ovid.

Hen quantum haec Nobie, Nobie distabat ab illa. If the Papists understand here
by Fathers, those whom usually we call Fathers; the most ancient doctors of
the Western and Eastern Churches, in life spotless, in learning matchless;
yet our plea still is the same, that they, not we, remove the bounds.

Not we, for it is a Canon of our Church, Tit. de coneionat oribus.
An. 1571. That no preacher shall vent any doctrine, but such as is agreeable
to the scriptures, according to the collections and expositions of the
Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops; but they contrariwise, for

First, we prove that in stead of true Fathers, they cite feigned doctors, as
A^philochius, Abdias, Hipolitus, Jewel ans. to Hardings preface.
authors altogether void of authority, Fathers lately found out, long looked,
but never missed.

2. We demonstrate by their own purging Indices, that the old writers are now
no Fathers, but their children; no doctors, but their scholars; as Vbi supra.
reverend Jewel objected against his adversary, Dr Harding: You have sent them
to school, you make them speak your mind, and not their own.

3. Defense of his Apology.
B Jewel, Melancton, and other of our most accuratly learned Divines, evidently
show, that Popish opinions, are novel, unknown to the Rathers, for the space
of six hundred years after Christ; Yea, but say the Dr. Bishop Epistle to the
King. sect. 13.
Papists, if our doctrine be so new; tell us I pray, when, and where, these
tares were sown among the wheat, in Gods field; tell us in what age,
Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Indulgences, Auricular confession, and other
assertions of Popery, crept into the Church.

Answer is made by Christ, Mat. 13. 25. While men slept, the malicious enemy,
sowed tares among the wheat; and it was not discerned, until the blade was
sprung up, and had brought forth fruit: Answer is made, by S. Apoc. 7. 15.
John. In the forehead of the Whore of Babylon is written, a Mystery. So S. 2.
These. 2. 7*
Paul calls the working of Antichrist, a Mystery of iniquity, because the man
of sin does covertly, and cunningly, wind his abominations into the Church of
Christ.

Answer is made, by Politicians, observing that corruptions are bred in civil
bodies, as diseases in natural bodies: at the first, they be not discerned
easily, but in their growth insensible, they proceed till it come to pass
which Decad. 1. lib. 1.
Liuie said of the Roman State, Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia far possumus,
We can neither endure the malady nor the medicine: Dr. Abbot answ to Bish.
Epist page 111.
Was it not so in the Empire of Rome; and might it not be so in the Church of
Rome, S. 2. Tim. 2. 7.
Paul says, Heresy frets as a Gangrene, the which is not curable, till it be
known, and when it is known, hardly curable.

Answer is made, by common experience, when I see the finger of a Dyall,
remove from one to two, shall I be so mad, as to think it stands still where
it was, because I could not perceive the stirring of it, or when I behold the
Lillies of the field in their glory; shall I say, they did not grow to the
height of this beauty, because I did not sensibly see how they did grow.

Answer is made by themselves; the Preface to Reader. sect. 12
Rhemists acknowledge many barbarismes, and incongruities, in the vulgar latin
text: Ep Lectori prafix. Bibl. Venet. An. 15^7.
Issidorus Clarius, a Spanish Monk, professed he found in it 8000 faults; it
is plain, they were so manifest, and so manifold, as that the council of
Trent, and after it, Pope Sixtus Quintus, and Clement the 8. took order for
the correcting of it: I would know then of a Papist, in what year this and
that absurdity crept into their text, as Rather Matthew. 10. 32.
Mark 8. 33. Confusus est, in stead of Confisus est, and Luke 15. 8. Domum
euertit, for Domum euerrit; Again, Dr. Hutton ser. page 26.
Gabriel Biel, a great Doctor, does acknowledge, that he can not tell when the
receiving of the communion in one kind began to be first used, nor how;
Alphonsus de Castro, confesses also, that albeit he had taken great pains,
to know, when, and how the people began to receive first in one kind, yet could
not find it out: Lib* de ^charistia ca 10 vti. Morton Apolog. lib. 1. 6. 10
page ^5.
Gregory Valent a Jesuit of eminent note, writes plainly, quando caeperit
minime constat; and therefore what need we tell them, at what time this Popish
error was first sown? It is not enough, that we now discern the tares among
Gods wheat, and prove that there was no such darnell in Gods field, for many
hundred years after Christ, I say, no such stinking weeds, as the single
Communion of the priests, half Communion of the people, worshipping of the
bread, creeping to the Cross, kissing of Images, exemption of Clergy men from
secular obedience, supremacy of the Pope, the which are the most essential
points of all the Romish Catholic belief.

If by Fathers, there they mean the reverend Doctors, assembled in the first
Orthodoxall, and holy Councels, our plea still is the same, that not we, but
they remove the bounds: For albeit we do not with Alphons de Castr. de h^res.
lib. 1. fol. 1^.
Gregory, conceive the first four general Councels, as the four Gospels:
Yet we reverence them, and acknowledge that they contain wholesome, and godly
doctrine; and Eliensis resp. ad Apol Bell. page 331.
we think of other Councels honorably, that write thus, It Act. 15. 28.
seemed good unto the holy Ghost, and us: But not so well of those that write;
It seemed good to us, and to the holy Ghost; Our opinion is, Councels gathered
together, by the Art. 21 conf.
commandment of Princes, are so Dr. Barlow ser. at Hampton Court.
necessary for Christ's mystical body, the Church, as Physic is for a man's
natuturall body, the same two ends, being of them both, either to prevent, or
to cure maladies.

But the Papists (as their champion Bellarmine does auow de sacrament: lib. 2.
cap. 25.) Hold a contrary Tenet, namely, that the firmness of all ancient
Counsels, and of all Canons in the same, depend only upon the present Churches
authothority, that is, in plainer terms; upon the doctrine, delivered in the
Council of Trent, the which as In Exam. conc. Trid. 1.
Chemnitius, Dr. Ans. to Rhem. praef. and in his notes on Tit 3 10.
Fulke, In Exam. conc. Trid lib. 5 page 316.
Gentiletus, and other profound divines account, rather a conuenticle, then a
council, in respect of a great many remarkable nullities, especially for this
one, that it was not free.

1. The place was not free, nor yet so much as fit, according to the Gentiletus
vbi suprae.
canon law.

2, The party, who called the Council, was not free, being contrary to reason,
and all the rules of equity, both Accuser and Judge.

3. The President of the Council, was not free, being a sworn vassal of the
Pope.

4. The Prelates assembled in that Conuenticle, were not free, but most of them,
such as had not only the mark of the beast, in their foreheads; but also the
marks of the beast, in their purses, vpstart titular Bishops, and were
pentioners of the Pope, created only for this service.

5. The Spirit that governed the council, was not free, for that it was upon
occasions, ever and anon, sent in a Cloakebag from Rome; the time will not
serve me to report how the Papists have not only corrupted, but also corrected
diverse good canons of ancient Councels. I refer the learned to the word
Council, in the table which is annexed to that exquisite work, called the
Protestants appeal; I will at this time, name but one Morton Appeal. lib. 2.
cap. 12 sect. 2.
Bartholomeus Caranza, their abbreuiator of their Council, relating the Canon
in the Council of Laodicea, forbidding the worship of Angels, changed angelos,
into angulos, that is, Angels, into Corners, which according to the proverb,
are no shelter for truth: and this is a truth, that if no Angels, then no
Saints are properly to be worshipped and inuocated.

Will our adversaries admit for the Fathers, here mentioned, the meddling
Divines, I mean such as flourished between the old doctors, and new writers?
Answer is made, by them in their In Censura Bertram^.
Index expurgatorius, no; for say they, we are feign to bear with many errors
in Catholic Writers, we lessen and extenuate them, and make the least of them
by some devised shift, we set a good meaning on them, when they are in
disputation, opposed against us.

It may be Friars and Jesuits, are their Fathers, for both in Babylon, are
persons of very reverend esteem: And I remember (...) John Oldcastle had a
saying as said Baleus in Chr. of Oldcastle. page 35.
one said tartly, that the Pope is the head of Antichrist, his Prol^ts and
Priests the body, his Friars and Jesuits the ^ayles, because they cover the
filthiness of all the rest of their subtly But for as much as the Friars
oppose the Jesuits, and the Jesuits oppose the Friars, and each have removed
the limits of other, it cannot be well auowed, that the Doctrinals, or Morals,
are the settled boundaries of Popery.

To resolve the doubt then, and not to keep you any longer in suspense, the
Church of Rome does acknowledge no Father, but the Pope, no bound but his
definitive sentence. The Roman round is this, briefly, the people must believe
as the Priests, and the Priests as the Pope, and the Pope may believe what he
list, he remoueth all bounds and blocks, in the Churches way, but his Hist
Coun. of Trent. 396.
Holiness cannot be bound by other, much less by himself.

We may say with the servants of the king of Aram, let us fight against them
in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger then they; Let us fight against
them, either with express Texts of Holy Scriptures, or with express Canons of
Orthodox Counsels, or with express constitutions, of Primitive Popes, or with
express sayings of old doctors, in one word, let us fight with them, in the
plain of all Antiquity, and we shall undoubtedly get the victory, because,
not we, but they have removed the bounds, which the Fathers have set.

Now concerning Schismatics, and Separatists, as they be worthily surnamed,
nouelists, even so their B Bilson Ep. to the Reader before his book of
Church-goue^.
plat-forme of government, is a new devise, which no Fathers ever witnessed, no
Council ever favored, no Church ever followed, until within these few
years, it was unhappily dug out of the Alps, and as yet never entertained
in England, but rather forsaken of her best and most entire favorites; on the
contrary, not only the doctrines, but also the ceremonies of our Church, are
decent, and ancient, even the Sun of the Conference.
Cross in baptism, which they so much abhor, was used in the days of
Constantine; within less then four hundred years after Christ, and one of
their own side, writes in his discourse, touching the troubles in Frankford;
that it continued in the Church, 113 years, and therefore whatsoever they
talk of Apostolical times, and old terms, all their endeavor is, terminos
antiquos; to remove the bounds of our Fathers, and to bring they care not what
novelties, so these old rites be left. Apud. Fox-Martyrol. fol. 1326.
Hillary writes of certain light-heads in his age, that they made annuas et
menstruas fides de Deo: So these fling-braines, make yearly, and monthly
fashions, and faces of discipline; They that forsake the Church of England, to
suck the breasts of Rome, or Amsterdam, may cry with Ruth. 1. 21.
Naomi; I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to return empty.

To conclude my sermon, I say to those which are affected Popishly, with
reverend Answ. to Harding Conclus.
Jewel, touching the substance of religion, Our Church believes that the
ancient Catholic Fathers believed, we do that they did, and say, that they
said* and it is our great comfort, that their faith, and our faith agree in
one: For that is the true faith, (quoth Vigelius,) which the Apostls wrote, the
Martyrs sealed, and the faithful have delivered unto the Church, from the
beginning until this day; And to the Schismatics, I wish with the wise man,
to Eccl. 39. 1.
seek out the wisdom of the ancient, and with Jeremy, to stand in the ways,
and behold, and ask for the old way; and here with Solomon, howsoever, bounds
are bounds; yet not to remove them away Praef. to Harm Conf.
with these speeches, I am of Paul, I am of Cephas, and let the contrary
saying, be held, I am Christ's, I am the Churches; Say not with the wicked, in
the second Psalm: Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their
cords from us: But rather as St. 1. Ephesians. 2. 13.
Peter does advise, submit your selves, for the Lords sake, whether it be to
the King, as to the supreme head, or to such as are under him in authority,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of those that do well:
for magistrates are the ministers of God, for our good, for our temporal good,
in the life of nature, for our spiritual good, in the life of grace, and so
for our eternal good in the life of glory.

ROMANS 15. 4. He is the Minister of God for thy good.
SAint Paul, in the beginning of this chapter, exhorts every soul to submit
himself, unto the Higher power, urging this one duty with a three fold reason,
arguing.

1. In the first verse, abHonesto, from the commendablenesse, and comeliness,
of his Office, Gerran in loc.
both in respect, first of the Person ordeining, there is no power but of God,
Secondly, of the thing ordained, the powers are ordered. 2. Ab Vtili, From the
profit that comes thereby.

For to resist, is evil: as he shows in the 2. and 3. verse. Malum culpae,
whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God.

Malum poenae, they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

For to submit our selves, is good, in the words now read, the Magistrate is
the Minister of God, for thy good.

3. A I^cundo, from the pleasure which good men have, by doing good, we must
obey for conscience sake, verse 5. the which unto the disobedient* is a daily
hell, but unto such as obey Gods ordinance, a continual feast.
This our present Text, is part of that argument which is drawn, ab vtili,
wherein two points are to be considered, especially the Magistrates Authority,
as being the Minister of God. Vtility, as being ordained for our good.


Concerning the first, some men ascribe too much unto the Magistrate,
preferring him above God; other on the contrary, too little, not obeying him as
the Minister of God.

The Parasites of Princes, attribute too much unto their authority, regarding
their ordinances more then the Commandments of God; in this respect, a mere
Courtier is a strange creature, loosing himself in following other: He lives
a great deal by the bread of other, a good deal by the breath of other,
oftentimes his clothes are not his own, his hair not his own, his
complexion and very skin not his own; nay, that which is worst of all, his
soul, (which as Plato said is most himself) is not his own, while he lives
at the devotion of other. But if it be true, that Magistrates are the Ministers
of God, then undoubtedly, subordinate to God; and so consequently, when higher
powers inioyne things against him, which is higher then the highest, it is
better to obey God than man. Act. 4. 19. Hic, says Ser. 6. de verbis. Dom.
secund Matthew.
Augustine, contemn potestatem, timendo potestatem, In that thou fear Gods
power, fear not man's power; obey the Lord temporal, in the Lord eternal: as
all power is from God, so for God, and therefore when an earthly Prince
commands against an heavenly truth, it is a Christians duty to be patient, and
not agent.

This humouring of the Chief Magistrate is a court sin, properly called,
adulatio quasi adaulatio, but countrymen offend also sometimes in giving too
much unto the subordinate magistrate: give me leave to reprehend one fault in
this kind, which I have noted in diverse congregations among us, and that is
your rising up in the mids of your religious prayers unto God, to perform
civil obeisance to men of worth, and worship; beloved, there is a time for all
things, and a season appointed for every purpose under heaven, a time for your
devotions unto God, and a time for reverence unto men, a time to fall down
before your maker, and a time to bend unto the magistrate. Now what manners is
it to neglect Gods own business in Gods own house, to worship his Minister,
in our parts, especially where gentlemen have so learned Christ, as that they
neither expect, nor respect any such unseasonable duty from you.

To leave those, who give too much unto the Magistrate, there be three sorts
of people, who give too little.

1. Anabaptists, who deny the very calling of civil Magistrates. 2. Papists,
who maintain their calling, but mangle their Jurisdiction. 3. Traitors, in
actual rebellion, who both acknowledge their calling, and Jurisdiction over al
persons, and in all causes, and yet under pretense to reform the Common weal,
withold their obedience.
Tumultuous Ser Mel^nct. loc. com. tit. de Magistrat^ et Bell^r. lib. d^ laici^
cap ^.
Anabaptists affirm most absurdly, that the Calling of Magistrates is
unlawful, and this they seem to prove by Scriptures, and by reasons: The
Scriptures wrested by them, are chiefly two; The first is, Mat. 17. 25. Christ
asked Peter, of whom do^ the Kings of the earth take tribute or polle money? of
their children, or of strangers? Peter said unto him, of strangers; then said
Jesus unto him; the sons are free. The second is, Luke 22. 25, The Kings of
the Gentiles reign over them, but it shall not be so among you.

To the first, Cryso. Aretius. Marlorat.
Orthodoxe Divines answer, that Christ in that place, speaks of himself, and
so proves directly, that he needed not to pay tribute, for that he was the
Son of a King, yea, the Son of God, which is the King of Kings; He was not
bound by the Law: yet out of his obedience, and love, that he might not offend
the receivers of poll-money, He commanded Peter, to fish for a piece of
twenty-pence, saying, that take, and give unto them, for me and thee: And it
is well observed, Advancement of learning. lib. 2. page 41.
that Christ never did any miracle about honor, or moneys, except this one, in
giving tribute to Caesar, and Mat 22. 21. He commands expressly, to render unto
Caesar, the things of Caesar's: and his Apostle, S. Paul, in this Chapter,
exhorts us to pay tribute, to whom tribute; custom, to whom custom; honor,
to whom honor is due.

To the second place, the Kings of the nations reign, but ye not so, we say
that Christ in saying so, prohibited neither titles of honor, nor ruling, but
only so ruling, that is, such a tyrannous kind of government, as the Gentile
Kings used, and that ambitious desiring of the same, which reigned in them; and
that Christ ought to be so construed, is plain by three reasons, collected
out of the context it self.

1. He says, Matthew. 20. 25. and Matthew. 10. 42. Ye know that the Kings of the
Gentiles, speaking of these Rulers, they knew, and they were Tyrants, and
oppressors, as Ioh. 19. 4. 16.
Pontius Pilat, who condemned Christ an innocent, in whom he found no fault,
and Mar. 6. 20. 27.
Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the Baptist, (a lust, and holy man, whom he
reverenced, and in many things heard willingly,) at the request of his Minion;
and Herod the great, who had butchered all the male children in Matthew. 2. 16.
Bethlehem: and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old, and under, and
out of a pretense, to worship, eagerly, sought to worry Christ in his cradle,
Ye know that these kings now reign, but ye not so, that is, I would not have
you so to reign.

2. Catecurienemi, used in Mat. ind Mark signifies, not simply to govern, but
to tirannize; so Musculus, Erasmus, Aretius, Beza* in their annotations, and so
the word is used in other places, of the new Testament, as namely, 1. Pet. 5.
3. and Acts 19. 16.

3. Christ expounds himself thus, in the words immediately following, Let the
greatest among you be as the least, and the chief, as he that serves, Ard^
Muscul. Bucer.
As if he should say, the Kings of the natious, are Tyrants in their
government, making mischief their Minister, and Lust their law: But I would
have you to bear rule, so moderatly, that even the Sovereign may behave
himself, as a servant, and the master, as a Minister, I would have Princes
among you, to be ^s 49. 23.
nursing Fathers, unto the Church; and Prelates among you, to be Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors of my people.

Secondly, the fond Anabaptists, impugning the Magistrates authority, that they
might insanire cum ratione, be mad as it were with reason, argue,

1 From examples, affirming, that most Princes abuse their authority to the
dishonor of God, and hurt of the common wealth, as Nimrod, Pharao,
Nabuchodonosor, Saul, Rehoboam, and that after the division of the kingdom,
nothing of Israel was good.

Answer is made. 1. That Princes are not generally bad, Adam, Noe,
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses; I^sua, were men of God, and
good governors; So were most of the Judges of Israel, and many Kings of Judah:
Now Christ in the new Testament, (who 1. Cor. 1. 27
chose the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the mighty things, and things that were no^* to
bring to naught things that are) suuffered his dear people to be persecuted
by cruel Emperors, for the space of 300 years, that his Church might appear
to be Isay. 5. 7.
the plant of his own hand, and not the work of man, in the Primitive times,
( as Epist. 50.
Augustine notes,) Christ would have that part of the second Psalm to*be
fulfilled, The Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the Lord, and against his anointed: But in succeeding ages,
another part of the same Psalm, to be verified, Be wis^ now, O ye Kings, be
learned, ye that be Judges of the earth; for he raised up Constantine,
Gratian, Theodosius, Charles the great, Ludouicus pius, and many more, (among
which I may not forget, Blessed Queen Elizabeth, and our renowned King James,)
to be nurses unto his Church, by which he defended his servants, as it were
with a shield, Psalm 47. 9.

2. Though it should be granted, that most abuse their authority, yet that
abuse proves not their calling, either unlawful, or ungodly; gluttons and
drunkards, abuse daily, meat and drink; yet both are the good creatures of
God: Heretics abuse daily the Scriptures, unto their condemnation; and yet the
Gospel is the power of God unto salvation; adulterers abuse marriage daily,
yet wedlock is Gods institution and worthy to be honored among all men: and
though ungodly Princes abuse their Empire, Yet the powers that be, are
ordained of God; And in this case, let us always remember the saying of
Gregory; secundum merita subditorum, disponit Deus corda praepositorum*
Almighty God, (in whose hand the hearts of all Kings are,) disposes of them,
according to the merits of their people, so that if higher powers be not good,
it is for our sins, and for our saks, who govern our own families ill, and
our persons worse.

3. Bad Princes often benefit the State, more then hurt; for many good Laws,
have been by them enacted, and many good deeds acted, in the days of usurpers,
and impious governors.

Finally, it is better to have a bad King, then none; according to that of
Solomon, Vbi non est gubernator, corruit populus: Where no governor is, the
people perish; For whereas in a corrupt Monarchy, there is one Tyrant; in an
Oligarchie, some few Tyrants: In a Democratie, many Tyrants; In an Anarchie,
all are Tyrants: And it is undoubtedly, more safe, to live in a place, where
nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful; a bad husband, is better
then none; the worst Emperor, is the Minister of God, and if thou be wise, for
thy good.

Their second reason is, ab efficiente, from the founder and author of
authority; for they maintain, that Magistracy is not ordained, and given of
God, but only usurped by men; so we read, that Nimrod, and Nabuchodonosor, and
Caesar, by vexing, and oppressing their country, became Kings; as a Pirat told
Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 4. cap. 4.
Alexander the great, I am called a robber on the Sea; because I sail in a
little boat: but you are called Emperors, because you infest, and spoil the
whole world, with a great Na^ie; the difference is not in our fault, but in our
fortune.

To this objection, answer is made, Proverb. 8. 15. By me Kings reign. Dan.
2. 37. The God of heaven has given thee a kingdom power, and strength, and
glory: And St. Paul in this present Chap. at the 1. verse, There is no power,
but of God; The manner of getting kingdoms, is not always of God, for R^lam
in E^ vita.
Alexander the 6 obtained the Pope-dome, by giving himself to the devil;
T^leman in Romans ^3.
Phocas, by sedition; got his Empire; Richard the third, came to the Crown of
England by butchering his Nephews, and other of the blood Royal; Yet the
power of it self, is ever from God, as Christ told Pilate, thou could have
no power, except it were given thee from above; So some kingdoms, in respect
of their wicked ends, which usurp them, are most unjust, as Vbi Supr^.
Augustine writes, Latrocinia; Yet in respect of Gods purpose, and providence,
(who brings light out of darkness, and disposes of wicked men, and
wickedness it self, to his good ends) They be just and necessary,
Salmanazer, Senacherib, Nabuchodonosor, and other Tyrants; oppressing Gods
Israel, and leading them into captivity, did herein offend with an high hand:
and yet almighty God, ordered their ambition, and cruelty, to the setting
forth of his greatness* and to the good of his chosen. And therefore, God
said of Iere 2^. 6.
Nabuchodonosor, that he was his servant, and of Esd. 4 5. 1.
Cyrus, that he was his anointed* whose right he did uphold, to subdue nations
before him; and of Ashur, that he was the rod of his wrath. Esaias 10* ^.

Their third reason is taken, ab* origin, that one man should have dominion
over another, was not so from the beginning, in the state of innocence, but
after the fall of man, in the state of sin: God said at the first unto man,
rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the souls of the Heaven, and over
every beast, that moves upon the earth: He said not, exercise government one
over another; Answer is made, that if Adam had continued in his innocence, yet
notwithstanding, there should have been higher powers, and that is plain by
these three reasons.

1. There should have been generation, increase and multiply. Genesis 1. 28.
Ergo, Disparity of sex, necessarily preceding generation, and Disparity of
age, necessarily following generation; If disparity of sex, the woman is
subject unto the man, in Bell. l ^b de laic^ cap. 7.
Gubernatione, though his mate, in generatione, the husband is the wives head*
as Christ is head of the Church. Ephesians. 5. 23. If Disparity of age following
generation necessarily, then also Disparity of wit and goodness, for even in
that estate, men undoubtedly, should have been wiser then children; and some
men excelling other in grace: Now the light of nature teaches us, that the
young is to be governed by his elder, and he which is less good, by those
which are more good; and he which is a little wise, by those which are a good
deal wise: See Thom: sum: 1. part, quaest 96. art 3.

Secondly, we say there be certain distinctions and degrees of Angels, in
the quire of heaven: as reading in Holy Scriptures, of principalities and
powers, and thrones, and dominations, and Seraphins, and Cherubins; and
Beelzebub, is termed Prince of devils; Matthew. 12. 24. Which authority he did not
obtain by sin, but had in the beginning over those spirits that fell with
him. If then there be subjection, and Sovereignty, between the blessed Angels
in heaven, why should there not have been the like among men; in the state of
inocency?

Thirdly, politic government, is so neessary for mankind; that without it his
nature would be destroyed, because man is by nature a Arist. pol. lib. cap. 2.
sociable creature, and what society can there be, without order. Beasts are
both armed, and clothed by nature, by nature they build their nestes, and by
nature they be Physicians unto themselves, and by nature, they can live alone
without others company; But man is borne naked, full of woe, full of wants not
able to help himself, to cloth himself, or feed himself, or arm himself,
so that it is impossible for him to live alone; the which, his very speech
bewrayes: for had he bin borne to live solitarily, he should not have needed
any language. Well then if man's nature require society, doubtless society
requires government, for what is society, but a multitude well ordered,
consisting of some that command, and others that obey.

Thus I have showed against Anabaptists, and Libertines, that the Magistrate is
the Minister of God, instituted by him in the beginning, and to be continued
in his Church, unto the worlds end. I come now to the Papists, who although
they well allow the calling of the Civil Magistrate; yet do they curtall his
power: exempting from his censure, both Ecclesiastical persons, and
Ecclesiastical causes.

As for the Persons of the Clergy, we say, with our Apostle, Let every soul
be subject unto the authority of the higher powers: Every soul, Aquin. Gorran.
that is, every man, putting the principal part for the whole. So Genesis 46. 27.
All the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, are seventy, that
is, as Moses expounds himself, Deuteronomy. 10. 22. Seventy persons, and Epist 42.
ad frat Sever.
Bernard out of that text, reasoned thus with an Archbishop in France, Let
every soul be subject, Ergo, yours: I pray, who does exempt you Bishops, ^i
qui^ tentat excipere, conatur decipere; So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumen,
Theophilact, upon the place: Clergy men are not excepted, Ergo, not exempted.

Concerning causes Ecclesiastical, it is auowed and proved, by Melanct loc.
Co^ tit. de civil* Magistr*
Protestant Divines, that a King, and every other supreme governor, is Custos
vtriusque tabulae, the Lord Keeper of both tables of Gods Law, that we may
lead under him a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. B.
Billso^ against the Jesuits. page 12^.
We do not imagine this of our own heads, we find it annexed unto the Crown,
by God himself, who when he first gave his people leave, to choose them a King,
withal appointed, that the Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.
Law, truly coppied out* of the Levites original, (which was keptin the
Tabernacle;) should be delivered unto the King, sitting on his Royal seat, with
this Charge, that book shall remain with the King, he shall read in it all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and
observe all the words of the Law, written therein, and these statutes to do
them. This was not done, till he was placed in his throne; so says the text,
therefore this touched not the Kings private conversation, as a man, but his
Princely function, as a Magistrate; which stands in commanding other, and not
in guiding his own person; as a man, he serves God one way, says Epist. 50.
Augustine, as a King another way; as a man in ordering well his own life, but
as a King, in seeing that other live soberly toward themselves, righteously
toward their neighbors, holily toward God.

So that Kings, as Kings, serve God in doing that for his service, which none
but Kings can do; Well then, if the whole Law were committed to the King, as
King, at his Coronation: It is plain, that the publishing, preserving, and
executing of the first table, touching the sincere worship of God, is the
chief part of the Princes Charge.

And according to this commission, and authority, the godly Kings of Israel,
and Judah, 2 Kin. 23 4
removed Idols, 2 Kin. 28 4
razed hill alters, slew false Prophets, purged the land from all abominations;
not sparing the brazen serpent, made by Moses, when they saw it abused, and by
the same power, they caused the 2 Chronicles. 3. 4 8
Temple to be cleansed, the Law to be read, the Passover to be kept, the
Levites to Minister ^ 2 Chronicles. 35 1.
in their courses, invented by David, and by the same power, 1. Kin. 2. 35.
Solomon deposed Abiather the chief Priest, and set Zadock in his room.

And of the Christian Church, it is said, Esaias 49. 23. Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers. And it is apparent, that
Constantine, Justinian, Charles the great, and many more religious Princes,
enacted Ecclesiastical laws, and were super-visors of the Bishops, in their
several Empires: For although a King may not administer the Sacraments, or
preach the word, or execute the Ministers office, de facto; Yet as Confess.
Anglican. art. 37. and Admonit. to simple men. annexed to Qu. Eliz Iniunc.
our divines have determined, it belongs to the Kings cure, de iure, to see
that all things concerning Gods holy worship, should be done in the Church
orderly, vos intra, said Eusob. in eius vita lib. 4. cap. 24.
Constantine the great, to his Bishops, ego autem extra ecclesiam, a Deo
Episcopus constitutus sum.

The last enemies unto civil Magistrates, are such as arm themselves, and
stand in actual rebellion against authority; For whatsoever fair pretense, of
doing good, traitors may seem to have, the State, doubtless, is in a
miserable case, when as commotioners are become commissioners, and common woe
named common wealth, and a Ket obeyed more then a King: Rebels are like a Bile
in a body, or like a sink in a rowne, gathering together all the nastie
vagabonds, and idle loyterers, to war with almighty God, and his lieurenants,
and so being a beast of many heads, they place treason above reason, and make
might to rule right; If thy governor be good use him as thy nursing Father,
If bad, commanding as a Tyrant, that which is evil simply, take up against him
a buckler, and not a sword, obey ferendo non feriendo, suffering the pain, not
resisting the power, impetere or competere, are both unlawful; albeit Kings
deface in themselves, Gods first Image, in their own souls, yet no man has
leave to deface Gods second Image, imprinted in their name iudelibly; Hitherto
touching the Magistrates authority, now for his utility.

For thy good, Higher powers are protectours of Gods Church, ordained for our
temporal good, and spiritual good, and so consequently, for our eternal
good, all which our Apostle shows in his 1. Epist to Timothy. Chap. 2.
verse. 2. Pray for Kings, and for all in authority, that we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: our temporal good consists
in a quiet and a peaceable life; our spiritual good in godliness and honesty,
so that Magistrates are called of God, to be Justices of the peace, for our
temporal good; and defenders of the faith, for our spiritual good.

Concerning the first, holy writ mentions a twofold peace: to wit, an inward
peace, which is the peace of conscience, proper only to the Church, and not
commonicable to the world, for there is no peace to the wicked, says my God;
and an outward peace, which is common unto both: and therefore the Lord said to
his people, whom Nabuchodonosor had carried away captive from Jerusalem, to
Babel, seek the prosperity of the city, whither I have caused you to be
carried away captive, and pray for it, for in the peace thereof, you shall have
peace.

This owtward peace may be disturbed, either by Domestical enemies, or by
foreign foes, as our Apostle said, in another case, 2. Cor. 7. 5.
fighting without, and terrors within: In respect of Aquin in 1. Tim. 2. l^ct.
1. Idem. Aretius.
intestine iarres, under the government of Princes, we lead a life, a life
which is quiet, and in respect of foreign wars, under the government of
Princes, we lead a life, which is peaceable; a Prince protects the persons of
his subjects, from murderers, and the goods of his subjects from thieves, and
the good name of his subjects from li^ellers, and slanderers, he bears not
the sword for naught, but is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on such as
are disturbers of his subjects quiet, aagainst his Crown and Dignity.

Now that a Christian Magistrate, may put to death a traitor, a murderer, and
other notorious offenders; we prove, first by the Scriptures, secondly by the
Fathers, and thirdly by reason.

The Scriptures afford precepts, and examples hereof before the Law, under the
Law, and after the Law: before the Law, Gen, 9. 6. Who so sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed. The which is not a mere Prophecy, that every
murderer should come to mischief, but a Hugo Card Dionys. Carthusian.
Vatablus. Tre^lius. S^. in loc vide Gibbons in Genesis 9. disp. 4.
plain precept; that the Magistrate, being armed by Gods authority, must
execute such a bloody malefactor; And we read a pattern hereof, in the 38. of
Gen: verse 24. Judah said, bring her forth, and let her be burnt. Where Judah
as Bellarm de l^is. c. 13. et Rabbi P^lus apud Carthu in loc.
some conceive, being a Patriarch, and head of his family, did adiudge that
Thamar his daughter in law, which had played the whore, should be burnt for her
fault: or Aqu^n Call. Tremelius.
(as other) he required that she should be brought before the Judges, sitting
in the gates of the city, that they might condemn her to die.

Under the Law, there be many precepts in this kind, recorded in one chapter,
as Exodus 21. He that smites a man, and he dye, shall dye the death; he that
smites his father, or his mother, shall dye the death; he that kills a
woman with child, shall pay life for life. Now Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, and
other good governors, executed these laws upon their delinquent subjects, and
ye know that Naboth accused by two false witnesses of blasphemy, was by Queen
Iesabels art, and King Ahabs authority stoned to death; and the Scribes and
Pharisees, having taken a woman in adultery, brought her unto Christ, and said,
that she should be stoned to death, according to the Law.

When Christ himself was come, which is the end of the Law, he gave this
absolute determination, Mat. 6 52.
All that smite with the sword, shall perish with the sword. The which cannot
be so well expounded, as thus, See Ma^lorat and Maldonat in loc.
he that strikes with the private sword of revenge, shall be punished with the
public sword of Justice, for the public sword of the Magistrate, was at
that time drawn out against Christ; and therefore Peter ought to Aretius in
loc.
put up his private sword of revenge, and obey the higher powers.

2. We prove this doctrine, by the judgment of the most ancient, and Orthodoxe
fathers, Augustine writes. Lib. de Ciuitate Dei, chap. 21. That public
persons in authority, (when as according to the Just courses of law, they
sentence malefactors to death,) offend not against the precept, thou shall not
kill, and in Lib. 22 contra Faustum. cap. 70.
another place, repeating the words of Christ ( all that strike with the sword,
shall perish with the sword.) He does explain them thus: Such as upon their
own authority, strike with the sword, shall perish with the sword; But if God
put a sword into their hand, then they may, yea then they must strike; for
Princes punish malefactors with death, not as masters of their lives, but as
Ministers of God, and it is not in them any murder, but an act of Justice.

Ca^ 32. in Matthew.
Hilary writing upon the same words of Christ, maintains also that it is
lawful to kill, in two cases especially.

1 In our own Just necessary defense. 2 When we are called to Magistracy.
S. Hierome in his commentary upon the words of Jeremy, Chap. 22. 3. Execute
ye judgment and righteousness, do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in
this place; says expressly, that the putting to death of homicids, witches,
sacrilegious persons, is not effusion of blood, but execution of right.

Lastly, we prove this assertion, by reason and common experience; for an
husbandman pruneth idle twigs, and luxurious branches, which hinder the growth
of his vine; and the surgeon cutteth off a rotten member, which otherwise
would infect the whole body: So the Magistrate being the great husband and
Physician of the State, may destroy some corrupt part, for the preservation of
the whole: Ber^ Epist 102.
Melius est vt pereat vnus quam vnitas, in the words of our common law, better
it is to suffer a mischief, then an inconvenience; More safe, that one should
be ruinated in his particular, then the whole kingdom in conue^ienced in the
general: And the sword of an officer thus used, is not (as Contr literas
Petiliani* lib. 3. cap. 4.
Augustine speaks,) Ferrum inimici vulnerantis, sed medici sanantis.

Yea, but if Christ will have mercy, Mat 9. 13. How may Christians execute
Justice? Answer is made, that Christ in that place, speaks not of public
Justice, but of private behavior, now then, albeit a Magistrate be never so
merciful in his own cause, yet is he in his office, the Minister of God, to
take vengeance on him that does evil, and there is a pity, which is cruel,
and a Justice, which is merciful, Balbi^ vti. R^sner. in Symbol.
optimum miserecordiae genus, nocentes occidere, It is in a Prince, the best
kind of mercy, to put a few notorious offenders to death, that all the rest
under him may lead a quiet life.

Concerning a peaceable life, Princes are protectours of their Realms, against
all foreign forces, Muscul. Loc. Co^. (...) a^ Magistr* let. 7. et Cal^.
Iust^t. lib. 4. cap. 20.
as they bear the sword of Justice to defend their people, from all
domestical desturbers of the peace: So likewise the sword of war to defend
their people from all foreign foes, inuading their lands, and encroching upon
the liberties, of their kingdoms. For albeit the Aug. Contr. Faustum. lib. 2^.
cap. 74
Manichees in old time, and Apud Melancton loc. Com. t^t. de Magistratu.
Anabaptists in our time, have thought it unlawful, for Christians to be
warriors, yet all Orthodox divines, hold the calling of soldiers, to be both
honest, and honorable, and this they prove, by concluding arguments, out of
the Scriptures, and Fathers.

God in his word, gives unto soldiers, not a Commission only, but a
commendation also, bidding them to fight, and blessing them in lawful wars,
a Commission is granted. Judge. 3. 1. These are the nations which the Lord left,
that he might prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel, as have not known
the wars of Canaan, only to make the generations of the children of Israel*
to know, and to teach them war: and 1. Sam. 15. verse 2. 3. Thus says the
Lord of hosts, I remember what Amalek did unto Israel, now therefore go, and
smite Amalek, and destroy ye all that apperteineth unto them, have no
compassion on them, but slay both man and woman, both infant and suckling* both
ox, and sheep, both Camel, and Ass. But a more general, and express
Commission, is delivered, Ecclesiast* 3. 8. There is a time of war, and a
time of peace, there is no season allotted, for any wicked act, because we must
serve God, in holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life, war
then ha^ing an appointed time, must of necessity be good, and so Just wars,
are styled often in holy ^cripture, the 1. Sam. 25. 28. 2. Chro. 20. 15.
battles of the Lord: And God pre^bed in his law, diverse Military rules, as
Deuteronomy. ^0. 1. When thou shall go forth to war against th^e ^mies, and shall
see horses, and charets; and people* (...) then thou, be not afraid of them:
for the Lord thy (...)* is with thee, who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt and Numbers 10. 9. When ye go to war, ye shall blow an alarm with
the trumpet: and Number. ^1. 2. Harness some of you to war, that ye may execute
the vengeance of the Lord, against Midian, and verse 27. Divide the prey
between the soldiers, that went to war, and all the congregation. And David
in the 144. Psalm. verse 1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, who teaches my
hands to war, and my fingers to fight. Loc. Com. Class. 4 1. cap. ^6.
Peter Martyr, bids us observe the great Emphasis, in the pronoune, my,
manus meas, my hands and my fingers, because David was a man according to Gods
own heart.

The Apud Mart. et Melanct. vbi supra.
foolish Anabaptists, object here, that God indeed granted that license to the
Jews, but he denied it unto Christians, and answer is made, that John the
Baptist, who prepared the way for Christ, allowed the calling of soldiers, for
when they did ask him. Luke 3, 4. What shall we do, he did answer, Do
violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages:
Where Aretius, Calu^, Martyr, Mala^t
Divines observe generally, that John approved the vocation of soldiers, and
condemned only three foul abuses in war, Violence, Calumny, Covetousness, as
Ser ad ^sletes Templ^. cap. 3.
Bernard sweetly; contentos fore suis stipendijs indixit, non omnem militiam
interdixit, He said in his exhortation, a little before, bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life; Now then, either he was a deceiuer, or else soldiers
continuing in their calling may bring forth good fruits, and escape the wrath
to come.

According to this Commission, the Saints of God have warred, and obtained
praise for the same* being renowned, because valiant in battle, Heb. 11. 34.
As Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Samson, David; and Naaman the Syrian is
Chronicled, for his fortune, and fortitude in war; Fortune, because he was
the deliverer of his country, Fortitude, because he was a mighty man in
valor. 2. Kings 5. 1.

And in the New Testament, when the Centurion said unto Christ, I have
soldiers under me: Christ Highly commended his great faith, but in no sort
condemned his fashion of living; and act* 10. We read of Cornelius a Captain,
who was a devout man, and one that feared God, with all his household, who gave
much alms, and prayed unto God continually: neither did St. Peter, who showed
him the way to salvation, in Christ, any way dislike his office, but, on the
contrary, protested that he was accepted of God.

It does not follow, which is objected by Machiauel.
some Politicians, that because the religion of Christ teaches peace,
therefore it is unfit for war, and because it persuades patience, therefore
it makes men cowards; for howsoever the first building of the Temple, was
without the noise of any iron tool; to signify that it should be the house
of peace: Yet in the second, (as it is reported, Neh^miah 4. 17.) They built
with one hand and held their swords in the other, to show, that in a good
cause, it should not be unlawful for to fight, and war.

Nay, the Lord of hosts, usually gives a blessing to Just wars, as when
Abraham returned from the slaughter of the four Kings, Melchisedec King of
Salem, and a Priest of the most High God, blessed him and said, Blessed be the
most High God, possessour of heaven and earth, which has delivered thine
enemies into thine hands. At the prayer of Moses, Israel prevailed against
Amalek, when Duke Joshua, fought at Beth-oren, the Lord cast down great stones,
from heaven, upon his enemies, and they were more, who dyed with the
hailestones, then they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword, and
when he was about to sack Jericho, an Angel appeared unto him, as a Captain,
with a drawn sword, to fight for him Joshua. 5.

In Ecclesiastical history, we find that God, by miracles, evidently shown
in the heavens, encouraged Eus^b. l. ^. c. 9.
Constantine the great, to fight; and that the Angels fought for Secrat lib. 7.
cap. 18.
Theodosius the younger, against the Sa^acens; and that Honorius army was so
blessed by the Lord of hosts, against Rhadagaisus, King of the Goths, that
not so much as one Roman was killed, or wounded, whereas Aug de ci^. Des. l^b.
5. c. 23.
one hundred thousand of the Goths, were discomfited.

To the Testimonies of holy Scripture, we might add the sayings of the most
ancient, and learned Fathers, Tertullian in his Cap 4^.
Apology, told the Gentiles, Nauigamus et nos vobis^um, et militatamus, etc. We
Christians are Seamen, and soldiers, and husbandmen, and merchant, as well as
ye: Lib. de offi^. cap. 40. et. 41.
St. Ambrose numbreth among other virtues, Warlike fortitude, and in his
oration upon the death of Theodosius: He c^mmends him exceedingly, for his
skill, in exercising of arms. Chrysostom in an Homily, concerning their
excuses who came not to the wedding dinner, you pretend says he, that you are
a soldier; the Centurion in the Gospels history, was a good souldidiour, and
yet a good Saint: Epist. 5. et 207* in contr. Faustum lib. 2^. cap 74. et lib.
Quast. in Iobu qu. 10.
St. Augustine in diverse places of his works, both allows and commends
highly, the calling of warriors. Bernard in his ser: ad militis Templi, Chap.
3. Miles Christi says he securus interimit, securior interit; A soldier
bears not the sword for naught, but is the Minister of God, to take vengeance
on him that does evil, and so when he kills a malefactor, Non homicida, sed
malecida.

Anabaptists object, it is written, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Romans 12. 19.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord; Answer is made, that the
vengeance which is exercised by public persons, is not private grudge, but the
vengeance of God, because Magistrates are the lieutenants and Ministers of God.

And whereas they further urge the word of Es* 2. 4.
Esaias, they shall break their swords into matroks, and their spears into
sithes, nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they
learn to fight any more. In loc. et in Mic. 4.
S. Hierome answers, that this Prophecy concerned only the very time, when our
blessed Savior the Prince of peace was borne; For then (as hystory reports,)
there was an universal peace throughout the whole world, or (as Calvin in loc
other) it shows that the Gospel of Christ, sets not only God, and man at
peace, but also man with man; The summarie pith is briefly this, that Christ's
people shall be meek, and having trodden under their feet cruelty, shall
endeavor to live peaceably, but because part of Christ's Kingdom is in this
world, and that part has here but a beginning, the good being mingled with the
bad, and the good not absolutely good, but imperfitly perfect, therefore Christ
enjoined, Luke 22. 36. He that has none, let him sell his coat, and buy a
sword: for albeit Christians may not offend other, yet they may defend
themselves; in offending others, so simple as doves; in defending themselves,
so wise as serpents: and therefore Vb^ supra.
Calvin calls them braine-sicke Bedlams, who by this place take from the
Church, the use of the sword, and condemn all manner of war.

Yea, but Christ himself said, Mat. 25. 52.
All that take the sword, shall perish by the sword; Thom. 2. ^. ^ qu. 40 art
1. see Melanct. ^om. ^, fol. 190. et Bu^an. Loc. Com tit. de Magist. 43.
Divines answer, that a Prince takes not the sword of himself, but he
receives it from God, and he gives it to his Captains, and the Captains to
the soldiers, and so by consequent, all fighting in a lawful war, put on
Gods armor; and are said expressly to fight the battles of the Lord.

Erasm. in Luc. 3. 14 see Sixth. Seneus. Ribl lob 6. annot. 156.
Other object; the weapons of the Church, are the shield of faith, sword of the
spirit; breastplate of righteousness, helmet of salvation, as S. Paul arms a
Christian. Ephesians. 6,

Answer is made, that S. Paul in that place, describes not any war with men,
but a spiritual warfare, which is against the devil; We wrestle (quoth he)
not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickednesses, and therefore
put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil.

Secondly, though it be true, that faith and prayer are the chief weapons of
Christians in this world; See Martyr loc. Com. Class. 4 cap. 16.
yet other arms are not to be cast away; for we read, that the Lord of
hosts, gave victory to his Israel, against Amalek, Orante Mose et Joshua
pugnante, by the prayer of Moses, and fighting of Joshua: and Epist. 194.
S. Augustine gives this advise to Bonifacius, arripe manibus arma, oration
pulset aures authoris; and in another place; some pray for you against
invisible foes, and you fight for them, against visible Barbarians.

Now there be Thom. 2. 2. a qu. 40. art. 1. et Martyr loc. com. Class. 4 cap.
16.
three conditions in an honest, and honorable war: 1. Authoritas legitima, 2.
Causa Iusta. 3. Intentio bona* That it be undertaken upon lawful authority;
for a just cause; with a good intent.

For the first, it is determined by Lib 22. cont. Faust. c. 75.
S. Augustine and Thomas vbi suprae Buc^. Loc Com (...). de ^agistr quaest. 46
Bell. de ^icis. c. 15.
other Divines, that Sovereign Princes only have power to proclaim was, for
the protection of their Realms; as the Kings of England, France, Spain, the
common wealth of Venice, the Dukes and Princes of Germany, which are of
themselves, absolute Lords; but Earls, and Barons, and other great Persons,
immediately subject to superior command, may not of their own heads and
authority, make war; and the reason hereof is very plain; for if one man sin
against another, the Judge shall Judge it; (quoth old Elt) If one subject
offend another, appeal may be made to superior authority: but if a King
trespass another, they have no common seat of Justice where to complain of
injuries, and therefore they must revenge public quarrels, and make the sword
their Judge; But Pet. Martyr vb^ supra*
here divines put a difference between offensive wars, and defensive, we may
not assault our foreign foes, without the Princes express command; but in a
defensive war, it is otherwise: Because, when any part of the land is
invaded, and besieged upon the sudden; it may be dangerous to stay for
instructions from above, as a private man assaulted on the high way, by a
thief, having no means at that instant to complain unto the magistrate,
becomes himself a magistrate, and may strike with his own sword, in his own
Just and necessary defense; so good subjects oppressed by foreign force,
desperately unawares, (I speak rather as a School-man, then a Statesman;)
having the Princes tacit consent, need not expect his explicit direction. I
conclude therefore this point, with Apud Mart. vbi supra.
Hostiensis, and Peter Martyr, bella sunt iniusta, quae suscipiuntur, aut non
mandante, aut non tacit approbante magistratu.

The second condition in honest and honorable wars, is a just cause. War is
full of inconveniences; Natural hist lib* 8. cap 12.
Pliny reports that a Dragon sucking the blood of an Elephant, kills both it
self, and the beast. Even so (says John Da^ Com^ de Bello*
one,) many times it falls out in war, Pars vtraque perimit et perit; Both
parties receive hurt, for Pol^bius host. lob. 10.
as he that sets a wood on fire, knows not how long it will burn, and how
far the rage of the flame will reach* even so he that begins a war, knows
neither where, nor when it will end: A King therefore may not fight against
another Prince, for every trifle, but only to repel a notorious wrong, done to
his honor, or state, Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicable vulnus Ense
recidendum: There be many most abominable sins, and impieries in Rome,
Venice, Florence; the which are not to be reformed by the King of Spain, for
that he is not their competent, and ordinary Judge, but every King being the
protector of his liege people, may correct such offenses of other nations, as
damnifie his subjects. It is a just cause for a King, says Quaest. 10. in
Iosuam.
Augustine, to war with any state, that insolently refuses to right a
public wrong, as not to restore goods, taken by Pirates, or not to punish a
notorious libellou^, dishonouring the persons, and disabling the titles of
Sovereign Princes, in such a case says Augustine, both the Captains, and the
soldier, are the Ministers of God, and they fight with his sword, to take
vengeance on such as do evil.

But here Princes ought to consider, that they should not fight upon any
doubtful, or little cause, but only for some great and certain.

Again, we must here distinguish, between the King and the subject; It is a
fault in a King, to fight in a quarrel, which is uncertain, because war is
an act of Justice; but it is injustice, to punish a man before he suffer a
sufficient trial; and his cause be well examined: But it is not a fault in a
subject, to fight, unless the cause be notoriously known unjust: It is our
duty rather to presume of the Kings Justice, then in any sort to question his
authority, Bucan. Loc. Co^* (...). de Magistr quaest. 50.
tene certum et relinque incertum, is a good precept in this case, Howsoever
the title be most uncertain, yet that every soul, should obey higher power,
is certain; The Aug. contr. Faustum lib. 22 cap 75. Idem (...) Aphorismis
verb. Bellum.
King then in proclaiming war, may sin; but the subject in executing his
command, offend not; as a Judge in a dubious case sins, when he condemns an
innocent, and yet the hangman may not examine the Judges sentence, but is
bound to do his duty.

The third condition required in war, is a good intention, for seeing
public tranquillity, and peace is the end of war, neither Sovereign nor
subject ought to fight for other designs, as to shed blood, or to enrich
themselves, or to try their valor, or the like: Militia, may not be, quoth
S^r. ad Milites Templi. cap* 2.
Bernard, Malitia; so S. Augustine lib. 22. Contra Faustum* Chap. 74. Nocendi
Cupiditas, Vlciscendi Crudelitas, impacatus et implacabilis animus, feritas
rebellandi, libido dominandi, et si quae similia, haec sunt quae in bello Iure
culpantur.

To these 3 conditions, Bellar lib de (...) cap 15.
other add a fourth, and that is modus debitus, the commendable manner of
fighting in an honorable war, that we hurt not any person, which is
innocent, according to the rules of S. John the Baptist, in his charge to
soldiers; Do violence to no man, accuse not any falsely, be content with your
wages; Where he forbids all injury done by soldiers, to parties
innocent, either by force, or fraud; in their persons* or goods, in saying do
no violence, he forbids open injury done to poor peasants, in beating them,
or robbing them: in saying* accuse not any man falsely, He forbids injuries
by fraud, as when soldiers accuse a rich man for a traitor, or secret
intelligencer, though they know the contrary: In saying, be content with your
wages, he forbids all unjust exactions, and pillage, which is contrary to
the law.

Now there be three sorts of men exempted from the cruelties of war, which a
soldier ought not to damnifie: The first are such as apperteine not to the
common wealth of the enemy, and therefore free-booters are too blame, who rob
their own friends, and spoil their allies country, through which they martch.

The second sort, are Priests, and Ambassadors, and Messengers, all which
enjoy free liberty by the laws of nations.

The third are they, which are unfit to fight, as women, and children. Deuteronomy.
20. 14. And among children, old men may be numbered, according to the Proverb,
bis pueri senes; It is true, that Moses sometime commanded women, and children,
to be slain, but he had a special revelation for it from God; and so he
might not dispute with his maker; but we must ever follow, not the singular
example, but the general rule, to the Law, to the Testimony, Esaias 8. 20,

Thus I have showed, how Magistrates are the Ministers of God, for our
temporal good, consisting in a quiet and a peaceable life. Now the God of all
goodness has appointed them also Ministers for our spiritual good, that we
may lead this quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; they
be defendors of the faith, and Lord-Keepers of both the tables of the Law,
Keepers of the first table, that we may live in all godliness, and keepers of
the second table, that we may live in all honesty.

PSALM. 42. 9. One deep calls another.
AS the Scriptures excel other writings in verity, so the Psalms, other
Scriptures in variety; and in the whole book, you shall hardly find any one
sentence, that admits so many sweet constructions, as this our present text;
The which is so profound, that as one deep surge, (says In loc.
Augustine) so one deep sense, calls another, according to my shallow
judgment, I have diued into the most of them, and the best of them, evermore
desirous, in an argument of this nature, rather to follow, then lead; for as
the spiders web is not the better, because wouen out of her own breast, so the
bees honey, never the worse, for that gathered out of many flowers; It was one
of the wishes of Augustine, that he might have seen S. Paul in the Pulpit: If
you will have but a little patience, you may hear diverse of the most ancient
Fathers, and other great lights, in the Churches firmament, matchless for
their learning, and spotless for their life, preach unto you this day.

First, Abyss, or gulf, signifies in holy language, great afflictions, as
Ezechiel. 26. 19. and Jonas 2. 5. The plainest exposition then in the judgment
of Bucer, Calvin, Agellius, Acer^ensis, Estius, and A insworth. Fabritius. Dr.
Incognitus Musculus Omnes in loc.
other interpreters, as well Pontifician, as Protestant, is briefly this; The
troubles of David, were so many for their number, and so grievous for their
nature, that as in swelling seas, one wave walloweth and tumbleth upon another:
even so one tentation, and affliction followed and occasioned another, without
intermission, until all kinds of storms, had gone over his head: in this
Hymn* at the third verse he does auow, that his tears were his meat day and
night, and Psalm 69. 1. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in, even unto
my soul, I stick fast in the mire, where no ground is; and Psalm. 130. 1. Out
of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord.

Now then, in that David, a good man, and a good Magistrate, had Psalm. 40. 15.
et 1^4 4.
innumerable crosses, which had almost drowned and overwhelmed his soul, we
learn, that Job. 5. 17.
Blessed is the man whom God corrects, for whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6. As some simples are made, by art, medicinable; which
are by nature poysonable: so the fiery trials of Peter, 1. Pet. 4. 12. and the
watrie troubles of David, here mentioned, in nature destructive, by grace
become preservative; For the God of our gladness, and comfort says, Esaias 43.
2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and when thou
walk in the mids of the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee, whatsoever storm does arise, fear not, I am as an
Esaias. 32. 2.
hiding place from the winds, and a refuge for the tempest; O warm Jacob,
fear not, I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy redeemer the Holy one of
Israel. Esaias 41. 14. I can do this, because the Lord; I will do this, because
thy redeemer; I shall do this, because the Holy one of Israel. And so God
being with us, affliction is good for us, and as Loc. ^om. de Cruce.
Martin Luther, Crux est theologia nostra sincerissima: When all is done,
tribulation is the plainest, and most sincere divinity;

It is an observation in Court, that a Prince learnes no Gentleman like
quality so well, as good horseman ship; and the reason hereof, is evident,
because, when he comes into the fence-schoole, his master will spare him,
and when he comes into the dancing-schoole, his teacher will humor him, and
when he comes into the Tennis-court, his play-fellow will favor him; And
when he comes into the Chapel, his divines also will often flatter him,
and Eze. 13 1^.
sow pillowes under his elbowes* But in riding, If he look not unto himself,
and sit fast, his horse will not forbear him: and so (beloved) albeit, our
friends, our children, and servants use to dissemble, speaking good of evil,
and evil of good; Yet honest Dr. Cross, will ever deal plainly with us, and
make us understand our selves, and our sins.

One writes of Venice, feated in the Sea, that it is, impossible in
impossibili: So God embrodereth one blessing upon another, and above all, that
we can Imagine, sweetly disposes of trouble, for our comfort* Saepe facit
opus, quod non est suum, vt ita faciat opus quod est suum, He chideth us a
little, which is not his property; that in Fine, he may show mercy, which is
most agreeable to his nature. Do we profess our selves patients, under our
earthly Physicians, and shall we hinder the working of bitter pills, given by
our heavenly, who knows what is best for us? As pride does breed sores of
salues: So God on the contrary, makes salues of sores; and therefore let us
fing with our Prophet, in this Psalm, Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within me; O put thy trust in God, for I will yet
thank him, which is the help of my countenance, and my God; Hitherto
concerning the plain construction of our text, I come now to the mystical
interpretation* which are many.

Hierome upon the place, and Leo the great, Ser. 9. de pass. dom: Understand
this of the profound mysteries, in the Bible; saying, the depth of the old
Testament, calls up the depth of the new Testament; the old calls to the new,
says Hugo Cardinalis, ad sui complementum For Christ came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it. Mat. 5. 17. and the new calls unto the old, ad
testimoniu^, to witness for it, according to that of Christ. John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for they bear witness of me* The old Testament, is the
grave, wherein as In Matthew.
Origin said, the new Testament is buried, the old being, as Zeno said of
Logic, like the fist shut, and ^e new, like Rhetoric, as the hand open; the
old being nothing else, but a type of the new, and the new nothing else but a
truth of the old. The whole, says Prolog. in Psalm. tract. 1.
Iacobus de Valentia, consists of one Syllogism; the Law and the Prophets, are
the Mayor; all that Christ did, and said, the Minor; the writings of the
blessed Evangelists, and Apostles, infer the conclusion; or the Idem. ibid.
Gospel is hidden in the Law, like the conclusion in the premises. But albeit
the Scriptures be deep, yet (as Praf in lib. moral cap. 4.
Gregory speaks) it is a river, wherein the little lamb may wade, so well as
the great Elephant swim; it is the roll of a book, spread abroad and
written within and without Ezec. 2. 9. 10. In some places it is rolled up, from
the most searching wits; in other spread abroad, to the capacities of the most
simple, Testamentum est testatio mentis. Gods word therefore being his
Testament, reueales as much of his will, as is to be known. Church of Eng:
Hom reading of Script. part 1.
In it we may find the Father from whom, and the Son by whom, and the holy
Ghost, in whom are all things, and therefore should be much in our hands, in
our eyes, in our ears, in our mouths, but most of all in our hearts, as Hom.
vbi supra.
Fulgentius says, it affordes enough, abundantly for men to eat, and children
to suck: Mist. Theol. cap 5.
Maximus compares it to a man; The old Testament resembling the body, and the
new Testament the soul, or the letter of the Prophets, is the body, and the
meaning is the soul: and as the mortal part of man is seen, but that which
is immortal unseen; So the letter of the Scriptures is plain, but the spirit
in some places inuolued, and not easily discerned, One deep calling upon
another deep.

Ambo in loc
S. Augustine, and Hugo de S. Vict: understand it thus, the depth of Gods
knowledge, finds out the depth of man's heart, for the Lord searches us out,
he knows our downe-sitting, and our vprising; he is about our paths, and
about our bed, and spieth out all our ways, and understands all our thoughts
long before. Psalm 139.

It is the duty then of every Christian, especially tempted to sin, to
resolve with holy Joseph, Gen 39. 9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God; Is there any
thing so secret, that shall not be disclosed, If I commit it in the wood, shall
not a bird of the air carry the voice, and that which has wings declare the
matter? Ecclesiastes. 10. 20. If I sin in the forest, am I now to learn,
that a beast has spoken? Or if birds and beasts happily should hold their
peace, would not (as Christ said in the like case) the very stones cry? Luke
19. 40. If in my closet or study, shall not my books of devotion, especially
the Bible witness against me? John. 5. 45.
There is one that accuses you (quoth our Savior to the Jews) even Moses,
that is, Moses law, the which as it was once spoken by God, so it daily speaks
in Gods cause, to God; Or if all these be silent, shall not the sin it self,
like the blood of Abel, cry for revenge.

De vtil. ex ^st. capiend.
Plutarch advises us so circumspectly, to demean our selves, as if our
enemies always beheld us. Epist. 11.
Seneca counsels us, to live so well; as if Cato, Laelius, or some reverend
person of great wisdom, and account ouerlooked us. Inter dicta. sapient.
Thales Milesius in the committing of any sin, wished us when we were alone,
to be afraid of our selves, and our own conscience, which is instead of a
thousand witnesses, a thousand Iuries, a thousand Judges, te sine test time,
says Ausonius. 1. Cor. 11. 10.
S. Paul exhorts women to carry themselves in Gods house reverently, because of
the Angels observing their behavior. But our text tells us yet a better way
then all these, which is to remember always that the depth of Gods science,
calls unto the depth of our conscience.

If any be dejected in his mind, for that he cannot remember the good lessons
he daily reads in books, and hears in sermons, let him be comforted again,
because this one precept concerning Gods omni-presence, comprehends Franc Arias
de prasentia Dei. cap. 1.
amnia media et remedia, all means and medicines for the curing of his sick
soul. If he bear still in mind, this one point, that all things are naked to
Gods eye, Heb. 4. 13. Yea hell it self, Job 26. 6. To his eye, which is all
eye, Ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, Ecclesiasticus 23. 19. He has
already commenced Doctor in Israel, and is a living, and a walking library,
knowing so much as may serve for the well ordering of his whole life.

Apud* Estium in loc.
Gregory the great, construeth our text thus, one judgment of God calls up
another, for his judgments are a great depth, Psalm. 36. 6. So deep, that they
be past finding out. Romans 11. 33. When as therefore, for fear of Gods
judgment, we judge our selves; one deep occasioneth another, and that at the
noise of the water pipes, or clouds, which are the preachers, exhorting us as
S. Paul his Corinthians, If ye would judge your selves, ye should not be
judged.

In lo.
Arnobius, expounds it thus, one deep, calls another deep; When Christ on
earth, and in the nethermost hell also, called to God the Father, in the
Highest Heaven: the strong crying of our Blessed Savior, unto God, with
tears: Heb. 5. 7. Was a very deep base; and Gods counter-verse was sung with
an exceeding high voice, from heaven of heaven, This is my beloved son, in
whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3 17. One deep calls another deep, when as
truth flourished out of the earth, and righteousness looked down from heaven:
Psalm. 85. 11.

Ambo in lo.
Hugo Cardinalis, and Lyra thus, Abyssus abyssum inuocat, that is, peccatum
peccatum prouocat; As one deep calls another deep: So one sin provoke
and calls up another sin* Pride to maintain her self, calls up
Nigardise; Gluttony calls up Wantonness; Malice calls up Murder;
Unthriftiness calls up in great ones, Oppression; In the poor theeuery: an
unclean thought calls up unsavory words, and bad words corrupt good
manners, and corruption in manners, breeds a custom in sin, and custom in
sin, brings men to sencelesnesse in sin, such as give themselves over, or
sell themselves to commit iniquity, proceed from evil to worse. Jeremy 9. 3.
and fall from one wickedness to another, Psalm. 69. 28. First there is
walking in the counsel of the ungodly, then standing in the way of sinners,
last of all, sitting in the seat of the scornful; He that blows a feather
into the air, or throws a piece of paper into the river; knows not where it
will settle* So he that begins with a sin, knows not when, or where it will
end.

Luke 3. 20.
Herod happily began with a little dalliance, but afterward, he committed
incest; and that darling sin, caused him to add yet this above all the rest
of his faults, to shut up John in prison. And so 2. Sam. 12.
Dania glutted with a large meal, lusted after Bath saba; and that fire did
rage, till he had committed uncleanness with her, and for the covering of
that foul fact, he murdered his faithful servant, Vriah; and for the
compassing of that murder, he did endanger a great part of his Royal army,
and so by binding many sins together, exceedingly scandalized his people.

This may teach us to fly sin, as a serpent, for sin was a serpent, before
there was any serpent; and of all sin none so dangerous, as that thou art
loath to call a sin; that one deep, calls after it a great many deeps: Other
faults, are like a rebellious multitude, in a State, which wanting an head, do
small hurt; this sin is their head; cut it off, and thou shall see the rest
instantly dispersed, as fearful rebels, hearing their leaders head has
kissed the block.

The Chaldee, translateth here, the higher deep, calls the lower deep: So
great sins, evermore draw with them a multitude of lesser offenses; As for
example; Conetousnesse, a Grandame in Babylon, a mother sin, 1. Tim. 6. 10.
S. Paul terms it, the root of all evil, for as the root gives nourishment
to the whole tree, so disordinate love of money, does administer occasions and
means, for every kind of sin, against God, our neighbors, and our selves,
the Proverb is, Show me a liar, and I will show thee a thief: But show me a
muck-worme, whose heart is set on riches, and I will show thee many villains
in one, such a vermin, as is worse then an Infidel, and but little better then
a Jesuit: Cardinal Cusanus said, the world is Deus explicatus, So the covetous
wretch is Diabolus explicatus, a displayed devil, a devil in his colors,
Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum, He that is nimble to dig and diue for
gold, into the nethermost hell, as occasion offers it self, will ascend as
fast unto the top of Babel, and height of all impiety, for thus, One deep
calls another deep.

Bernard ser: 4. de assumption. B. Mariae, with other, as Bellarmin and Estius,
in their annotations, upon the place, report and expound it thus; the depth of
Gods mercy, calls unto the depth of man's misery, Magna miseria, superbus homo
(quoth De catech (...). cap. 4.
Augustine,) sed mayor misericordia humilis Deus, As sin does abound, so
grace superabounds. Rom: 5. 20.

Our sins are great for their multitude, more then the hairs on our head, or
Manasse^ player.
sand in the sea; great for their magnitude, being injurious to God, our
neighbors, our selves, all other creatures, and that which is more wonderful,
in some respect, offending the very damned in hell fire, whose tortures
increase, as the sins of such increase, which have been corrupted by their
filthy communication, and ungodly conversation; our sins will appear to be
greater, if we consider a little, these five points.

1. The baseness of the Person offending, a thing of nothing, Psalm. 144. 4.
whose bodies original, is dirt. Genesis 2. 7. and end, dust. Genesis 3. 19. Whose
soul by sin, is less then nothing, for it is a lesser evil, not to be,
then to sin; a great deal better for the reprobate, never to have bin, then
to be damned. Mat. 26. 24. 2 The worthiness of the Person offended, infinite
in greatness* infinite in goodness, and so consequently there can be no
greater folly, then for vile man, which is nothing of his own, to displease
God, which is, Being it self. 3 The weakness of the motives, alluring us to
sin, a small interest of wealth, a little wantonness of the flesh, a
Punctilio of honor, see notes upon Psalm. 145. 4 The grieuousnesse of the
punish meant, due to sin, both in the life present, and in that which is to
come, for the torments of hell, in two respects, are termed infinite, to wit;

In respect of their lasting, as being without end.

In respect of their loss, as depriving the damned of an infinite benefit,
which is the sight of God for ever.

5 The greatness of the remedy, which is the precious blood of our Blessed
Savior; who gave himself for us, and with himself al things, Also, the depth
of his mercies, ouerwhelmeth the depth of all our misdeedes and miseries, as
being great for their number, even multitudes of mercies, great for their
quallity, riches of his goodness Romans 2. 4. Exceeding riches of his grace, Ephesians.
2. 17. Abundant kindness. Tit. 3. 4. 6. great for their continuance, being for
ever, and ever. Psalm. 103. 17. That is, as the doctors expound it, from
everlasting predestination, to everlasting glorification, every way so great,
that as S. John says of his fullness, all of us have received grace for grace;
plentiful and abundant grace, blessings heaped one upon another, so freely, so
fully, that if any perish, it is undoubtedly, neglect in his duty, not any
defect in Christ's bounty.
To let pass all other interpretations, as being neither so pertinent, nor so
profitable, let the time give sense to the text, the deep groans of our dear
brethren abroad, and at home, call unto the deep bowels of our compassion, and
pity.

Beloved in the Lord, at this time, while we sit under our vines at rest in
our possessions, eating the fruits of our labors, and reaping that we did
sow, peace being within our walls, and plenteousnesse within our palaces, at
this time, while we refresh our selves; with the lambs of our fold, and calves
of our stall, and sing to the sound of the vial; at this time, when our city
gates are fast barred, and we filled every day with the flower, and fatness
of wheat; in a word, while there is no leading into captivity, no complaining
in our streets at home: Joseph is afflicted, Israel and Judah dwell in tents
abroad; Eccles. 9. 14.
There is a little city besieged, and a few men in it, and a great King is come
against it, and a greater then any King in his swelling title, the German
Emperor, and the Pope, which is the greatest of all, as exalting himself
above all that is called God; and I dare say with In Apoc. 7.
Aretius, that these are three of the bad angels, hurting the earth, and the
sea, mentioned, Apoc. 7. 1.

I beseech you therefore, by the mercies of God, take heed of the crime of
Meroz, that ye may fly the curse of Meroz; fight the battayls of the Lord
valiantly; take his part against the mighty Anakims, a merciless generation,
drunken with blood of the Saints, all ye that are ready, for Psalm. 45. 5.
good luck have ye with your honor, ride on, because of the word of truth,
of meekness, and righteousness; and let us who stay yet at home, fight on
our knees, with push of prayer, One deep calling up another deep.

The grievous sickness of our friends at home, with other inconveniences,
which I know you better conceive, then I can express, together with the crying
sins of our nation, administer occasion of one deepes calling unto another.

If thou have but one tear, shed it, if thy Ie^. 9. 1.
head be full of water, and thine eyes a fountain of tears, power them al
out, yea power out thy soul before the Lord, that his deep mercies in his
good time, may swallow up all the Churches deep miseries.

O Father of mercies, we know that thou can not deny thy self, and nothing
is more thy self, then thy mercy which is above all thy works: it is it we
want most, it is it we crave most, it is it thou do use to give most; have
mercy then upon us, according to the multitudes of thy loving kindnesses of
old, that forth days wherein we have suffered for evil, we may now from thy
fullness receive grace for grace.

PSALM. 84, 10. One day in thy courts is better then a thousand*
THe most excellent thing in the world, is man, and the most excellent thing in
man, is the soul, and the most excellent thing in the soul, is religion, and
the most excellent thing in religion, is to seek Placid^ Parmensi^ in loc.
God here, that we may see him hereafter, in whose most amiable dwellings, one
day, says our Prophet^, is better then a thousand.

For by the Courts of God, in the judgment of most, and best expositors, is
here meant, either the Church militant, which is Apoc 12. 7.
heaven on earth; or the Church t^umphant, which is heaven in heaven; and the
least of time ^pent, in either of them, is better then a thousand days, or
months, or years or ages elsewhere* to wit, as may be supplied, by the verse
following* in the tents of ungodliness.

Concerning the first; it is well observed by In lo^.
Placidus Parmensis, and Ag^llius et Lorinus in loc.
other, that this one day, is Christ's day* which Abraham rejoiced to see, Iob^*
8. 56. The day of sul^ation and acceptable time. 2. Cor. 6. 2. John. 1. 16.
Wherein all of (...) have received from his fullness, and grace for grace, the
day which the Lord has made, and all his Saints are glad in it. Psalm. 118. 24.
One hour, whereof among the faithful in the true worship of God, is better in
respect of profit, then a thousand in the market; better in respect of
pleasure, then a thousand in the theater; better in respect of honor, then a
thousand in the palaces of Princes.

For profit, our evidence is clear. 1. Tim. 6. 6. Godliness is great gain,
that is, gain of great things, as Caietan, or greater gain, so Theophilact,
or the greatest, and enough gain, so Calvin, as if the Blessed Apostle should
have said, gai^e, and more then gain, riches, and better then riches; as when
the Scripture would difference, the true living God, from dumb and dead Idols,
it calls a Psalm. ^5 3. Malac. 1. 11.
great God, and a great King above all gods: So speaking of godliness (which
is the riches of the soul,) terms it great riches, heavenly riches, in^stim
able riches, unchangeable riches, everlasting riches.

For to spend our time well, is the best husbandry, says Seneca; to give to
the poor, the best usury, says Augustine; to co^et spiritual gifts, hereby
to win souls, is the best avarice, says Com. in Abac* 2. 9
Hierome; Pro. 23. 23.
to buy the truth, is the best bargain, says Solomon* to be rich in good
works, is the best opulencie, says Paul 1. Tim. 6. 18. Other gains, are not
without their inconveniences, and incommodities, as having in them, an
emptiness, and never enough, as Bernard told his brethren, nec ver^ s^t, (...)
vestr^ but godliness afforde^ ^way contentation, either in d^ed, or desire.

In deed, as having pr^mia reposita, and pr^posita, 1. Tim. 4. ^.
the promises both of the life present, and of that which is to come, the
blessings of the right hand, and of the left hand, Proverb. 3. 16. Psalm. 34. 10.
The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, says our Prophet: But they that fear
the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good: The covetous that go
about like roaring Lions, seeking whom they may devour, by their oppression,
and cruelty, sometime miss their prey, yea, the more they have, the greater is
their hunger and thirst, after the things of this world; The Dan. Chron page
174.
Chronicle reports of Pierce Gaueston, that the more he was enriched; the
worse was his estate: But they who seek the Lord, (which is unto those that
serve him, all in all things;) have their 1. King. 17.
meal so multiplied in the barrel, and 2. King. 4.
oil in the cruse, that they want no manner of thing that is good, habent
omnia, q^ia habent habentem omnia.

It may be, some good thing is wanting in their estate, but happily not good
for them; it was good for Naaman that he was a leper, good for David, that he
was in trouble; good for Bartimeus, that he was blind, as a nurse knows what
is best for her infant, so God our heavenly Matthew ^* ^.
Father, knows what is best for us his children* If he give the subs^iue
salvation, he will afford like wise the ad^ectiue things* necessary for this
life. Mat. 6 33. Caetera ad jeintur (...), If he give his Son for us, how
shall he not with him give us all things also. Rom 8. ^*

Howsoe^er, godliness affordes contentation in respect of the desire, because
godly men, If they have not estat^ according to their minds, they will have
minds according to their estates, having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. 2. Cor. 6. 10. The covetous is only poor, and the content is only
rich, Laurenti^ Pis^ Euang. Parado^.
omnia famulantur famulanti Deo: The servant of God, is Lord of all; as John 8.
6.
Christ said, If the so^e make you free, then are you free indeed, so (dear
Christians) If godliness make you rich, then are ye rich indeed, a great
deal more rich, then they which of their corn, and wine, and oil, have full
encroase: the Pompous Prelate, who said he would not loose his part in
Christians ta^ke. page. 686.
Paris, for his part in Paradise, nay Leo the 10. who got so much, and in the
Holy sea, spent so much of S. Peter's inheritance, that Hist lib. 14 i
Guicciardine writes in his history* Whereas other were Popes, no longer then
they lived, he was said to be Pope many years after he was dead: was not so
rich as Martine Luther, a poor preacher, who professes of himself, that of
all faults, he was ever least subject to the dirty sin of evil coveting.

If any then ask the question in the third of Malac: 14. what profit is it to
serve God? answer is made by the father of lies in this truly; Job. 1. 9.
does Job serve God, for naught, has he not made an hedge about him and about
all that he has on every side? the like may be said of every man which is
upright and fears God, is he not rich and his godliness gain? being blessed in
his field, blessed in his fold, blessed in his corn, blessed in his cattle,
Psalm 128. 5.
lo thus shall the man be blessed that f^areth the Lord: On the contrary,
sins are termed by Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5. 11.
unprofitable, works of darkness, what fruit had ye (says he to the Romans 6. 21.
Romans) in those things whereof ye are now ashamed, and he does answer
himself in the same place, the wages of sin is death; bad work, sad wages.

But our Saviors question in the 16 of S. Matthew, puts this matter out of all
question; what shall a man gain though he win the whole world and loose his
own soul? put the whole world into one balance, and thy soul into the
other, and thou shall understand that the saying of thy soul is better in it
sefe, and much more better unto thy self, then all the world; yea more worth,
then as many worlds, as there be men in the world, thy soul is better in it
self; for all the things of the world, are vanities of vanities; John. 2. 17.
M^ndus transit, et concupiscentia eius; The pomps of the world, and the world
it self, is mutable, but the soul is an immortal, and heavenly substance,
Gen 2. 7.
breathed into thee by God, and if thou dwell in his Courts, and continue
faithful in his service to death, it shall be blessed everlastingly.

And to thy self, it ought to be more precious then all the treasures of
Empires, for according to the ^ules of charity, that ought to be dearest unto
thee, which is nearest unto thee; but nothing, as divine Plato said, is so much
thy self, as thy soul: The saving whereof, is the principal, and main
business, and all other affairs, are to be respected, or rejected, as they
more or less tend to the furthering of this one most important employment.

If therefore thou love thy profit, desire to dwell in the Courts of the Lord,
for the Church, as John Baptist shows thee, is Christ; and Christ John 1. 6.
is the way to God, and godliness is great gain, by which is obtained, an 1.
Pet 1. 4.
inheritance, which is immortal, undefiled, and never fading away; granted in
our election, promised in our vocation, assured in our justification, actually
possessed of us in our glorification.

2 One day spent in the Courts of the Lord, is better then a thousand in the
tents of ungodliness, in respect of pleasure.

An old disciple of Christ, being asked the cause, why he was ever such a merry
man, answered, When I was a young man, I studied how to live well, and when I
was an old man, I studied how to dye well; and so desiring to seek God in his
kingdom of grace, and hoping to see him in his kingdom of glory, one day to
me was better then a thousand unto those, who Wisd. 5. 7.
weary themselves in the ways of wickedness, and destruction. Do ye desire
to please your ear? no music is comparable to the Gospels harmony, that is,
Luke 2. 10.
news of great joy, that Es. 40. 1.
comforts Jerusalem at the very heart.

Do ye desire to please your taste? Ps. 34. 8.
O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, it is he that feeds, and fills
every living thing, with his plenteousnesse, and his word is sweeter then honey,
or the honey comb. Psalm. 19. 10.

Do ye desire to please your eye? what beauty like to that of Christ, as being
Ps. 45. 3.
fayrer then all the sons of men, or what beauty like to that of the Temple,
for ou^ of Sion has God appeared, in perfect beauty, Psalm. 50. 4.

That which Ovid said of one kind, may be verified of every sort of worldly
delight, breuis est et non vera voluptas, it is short, and not sound, Heb: 11.
25. The pleasures of sins, are but for a season; as the night does overtake
the day, and the day drive away the night, so worldly lusts, run one after
another, and the best of them all, endures not long; it is but a bait, and a
bayt is but a bit, it may stay the stomach for a while, but it is not able to
give full content; the eye, says Eccl 1. 8.
Solomon, is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; the
rejoicing of hypocrites, is but a moment. Job. 20. 5.

Again worldly delights, are no true pleasures, but bitter sweets, having like
the peacocke, fair feathers, but foul feet; or like the Meremayd, quoth
Horace, Mulier formosa superne desinet in turpem piscem; or like a tragedy,
mirthfull in the Prologue, doleful in the Epilogue: and therefore we should
do by pleasures, as great Princes do by banquets, come and look a little
upon them, and turn away.

To speak more particularly, the lips of a strange woman, drop as an honey
comb, (says Prou 5. 4.
Solomon,) and her mouth is more soft then oil, but the end of her is bitter
as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword, her feet go down to death,
and her sleppes take hold on hell.

Lae^a venit Venus, tristis abire solet.

It may be, that the beginnings of ryotus meetings, are good fellowship, and
merriment; but Prou 14. 13.
even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of such mirth, is
heaviness; it is like Ioabs kiss, attended with a secret stab, happily the
gamester is pleased enough at play, but when he has made away all, he is ready
to make away himself also.

As for the pleasures of other sins, an envious man is a murderer to
himself; a prodigal man, is a thief to himself; a proud man, a witch to
himself; a covetous man, a devil unto himself: for as the rivers of sweet
waters, run their course to dye in the salt sea, so the honey of all earthly
pleasures, do end in the gall of grief.

On the contrary, the goodman and godly, Psalm. 1. 2.
delights in the law of the Lord, and exercises himself therein day and
night, he serves God with Psalm. 100. 1.
gladness; other it may be, they have legem in cord, they know the Law; but
he, says Ann^t. Elucid in Ps cap. 2.
Hugo de victor: has Cor in lege, his heart is set on the law to perform the
works thereof, and to him it is Prou. 21. 15.
joy to do well, and his joys are solid, being joys of the soul, joys in
the holy Ghost, whatsoever happens outwardly, his Psalm 112. 8.
heart is established, and his mind settled, intus been.

And his joys are permanent, Prou. 15. 15.
a good conscience, being a continual feast, a daily Christmas, a standing
Holiday; a joy that John 16. ^2.
no man or devil, is able to take away, whatsoever he does, or suffers,
Ro^. 8. 28*
all things work together for his good, he takes 2. Cor. 12. 10.
pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in anguish for Christ's sake, when he
is weak, then is he strong, 2. Cor 4. 8.
afflicted on every side, but not in distress, death it self, which other
account, the worst of all, is to him best of all, ipsa paenarum vltima mors
Christiano, ludus est, as Him 5 de Vincent Martyr.
Prudentius sings of S. Vincent; and a Protestant Martyr being at the stake, in
the midst of furious and outrageous flames, cried out, Fox Martyr. fol. 939.
Behold ye Papists, ye look for miracles, and here now ye may see a
miracle, for in this fire, I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of
down, yea, it is to me, like a bed of roses.

Godliness in every sickness, is a Physician; in every contention, an
advocate in every doubt, a schoole-man; in all heaviness, a Preacher; and a
comforter unto whatsoever estate it comes: it says as the blessed Apostles,
peace be to this house, Peace be to this man, Peace to this heart; which
occasioned Claudi^ Aqu uaeria medit. in Psalm. 118.
one to say, that the life of a good christian, is a perpetual Halleluiah.

In the duel of Essendon, (as we read in our English Dan. Chron. page 16.
Chronicle,) between Canutus, and Edmund Ironside, for the prize of ^he
Kingdom of England, after long and equal combat, finding each others worth,
and valor, they cast away their weapons, embraced and concluded a peace,
putting on each others apparel, and arms, as a ceremony, to express the
atonement of their minds as if they made transaction of their persons, one to
the other, Canutus being Edmund, and Edmund Canutus.

Our iniquities had made a separation between God and us, Esaias 59 2. And in
this war, as the Scripture speaks, God did fight against us, and we were his
enemies; Now Christ our Make-peace, did end this quarrel, and that was by
putting on our clothes, and by giving us his clothes, he took upon him our
flesh, and in his body did 1. Pet. 2. 24.
bear our sins, and we by faithes hand Romans 13. 14.
put on Christ, and the long robe of his righteousness: so the Church sings,
Cant. 6 2.
I am my beloueds, and my well-beloved is mine; Christ and we being married, as
S. Paul teaches. Ephesians. 5. are but one flesh, and as it were but one person in
law; for Christ in taking our nature upon him, is flesh of our flesh, and bone
of our bone, substantially; and we likewise by putting him on us, are flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone, spiritually; so that our sins, are his
sins, and his righteousness, our righteousness, Iere. 23* 6. The Lord our
righteousness. Psalm. 4. 1. O God which art my righteousness.

Romans 5. 1.
Being justified then by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and this peace is a pleasure, that passes all understanding;
Deuteronomy. 28. 65.
sin makes a trembling and heavy heart, but assurance that our sins are
forgiven in Christ, is the rest of our soul, making us like Luke 16. 19.
Dives, every day faring deliciously.

3 One day spent in the courts of the Lord, is better then a thousand in
respect of honor.

Plutarch in vita C^s.
Caesar said, he had rather be the first in a country village, then the second
in Rome, (though it were then esteemed the worlds Epitome,) but our Prophet
desires, rather to be a doore-keeper in Gods house, then to command in the
tents of ungodliness, Wilcox in loc.
of the meanest account in the one, then of highest honor in the other, as
Cruci^ apud Ver^. in loc.
one glosseth it; I had rather be a Clauiger, a subject, yea Ainsworth.
abeict sitting at the very threshold, in the Courts of the Lord, then to be a
steptrifer; Mahumet the great, or Buchanan
Soliman the Magnificent, in the tents of infidelity.

So Heb. 11. 25.
Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to
suffer adversity with Gods people: So Daniel esteemed the Lions den better
then Darius Palace; So the three children adventured to meet heaven, in the
hell of a fiery furnace; so the renowned Emperor Theodosius, more rejoiced in
that he was a member of the Church, then head of the State; So the blessed
Saints, in the days of Queen Mary, desired rather to be pilgrims among the
reformed Churches, abroad, then Prelates in the kingdom of Antichrist at home.
To serve God is perfect freedom, as divine Plato determined iudiciously,
Goodness is not in greatness, but on the contrary, Greatness is in goodness.

A great Lord, convicted of treason against his Sovereign, has his blood
attaynted; himself, and his posterity disgentred, until they be restored in
blood. Adam in Paradise, commi^ted high treason against the King of heaven, and
earth, and in him all of us have sinned, and so by consequent, our blood is
attainted, till it be restored again by Christ, Apoc. 1. 5.
who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood; As good Queen Daniel
in Edward 1.
Elinor sucked the venom out of the wound, given her husband, Edward the
first, by an Assassine, with a poisoned weapon: So Christ our husband, has
expelled the poison out of our wounds, inflicted by the devil, our adversary,
who was a murderer from the beginning; every christian then as having his
wounds healed and his blood purged, is a gentleman, and the best christian, is
the best gentleman; according to the Act. 17. 11.
scripture, teaching us, that the men of Berea, who received the word with all
readiness, were more noble, then they of Thessalonica: The burgesses of Gods
city, be not of base Lineage, but truly Noble; For by their second birth, all
of them are the Romans 8. 14.
sons of God; and the Church is their Gal 4. 26.
Mother, and Christ their Heb. 2. 7.
Brother, and the Holy Ghost, their Ioh 2. 27.
Tntor, Angels their attendants, Heb. 1. 14. all other creatures, their
subjects. Psalm. 8. 6. The whole world their Inn, 1. Pet. 2. 11. and heaven
their Home. John. 14. 2.

Favors of Princes serve sometime, more for the benefit of those that give
them, then for the profit of those that receive them, and the best honor an
earthly Prince can confer upon his chief favorite, is to make him a Viceroy
in some part of his Empire; but Christ which is the Psalm ^4. 7.
King of glory, makes all his followers, Kings unto God his father, Apoc 1. 6.
Kings, because God reigns in us, and because through his sanctifying grace,
we have dominion over our concupiscenses, not suffering sin to Rom 6. 12.
reign in our mortal bodies; and we are not only Viceroyes over one province,
but in this respect, Lords over the whole world, Romans ^. 37.
more then conquerours, a great deal greater then William the Conqueror, or
Alexander the great, or the great Turk: for whereas they conquered, in many
years, a few parts of the world: He that is borne of God, overcomes in one
hour, with one act, all the pomp of the world, and all the power of hell
also. It is but Caesar's Veni, vidi vici, this is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith. 1. John 5. 4.

The difference between the christians honor, and the worldlings honor, is
very plain; The kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 14. But the
worldlings, is all glorious without: now the Ethic. lib. 1.
Philosopher has taught truly, That civil honor, is not in the power of the
person honored, but in the power of the person honoring; and therefore the
worldlings glory, depending upon the breath of vain men, and possession of
vain matters, is altogether uncertain; But the Christians dignity, which is
within, having done 2 Chronicles. 24. 15.
good in Israel, and toward God, and his house, cannot be taken away, but it
flourishes and remains for ever. Psalm. 112. 9.

For conclusion of all: I say to you all in brief, that this Doctrine should
encourage us, diligently to visit the Temple, which is Gods house, the Palace,
where his Holiness more specially resides; Heretofore Hierusalems Temple, was
instar parochiae, says De Orig. Templ cap 4.
Hospinian, as a great parish; So now, every Parochial Church, is instar
templl, where God is to be worshipped, in the public congregation; and
dutifully to honor his anointed Kings, and Princes, which are the chief
governors of his house; and reverently to respect his Clergy, Bishops,
Pastors, and Curates, which are the 1. Cor. 4. 1.
disposers of his secrets, and stewards of his house, and cheerfully to
delight in his Saints; which are the domestical, and ordinary servants of his
house, and eagerly to hunger and thirst after his Sacred word, and blessed
Sacraments, which are the food of his house, and to put on holiness, and
righteousness, which are the hangings, and ornaments of his house; But above
all, even with all our heart, soul, mind; to love the Lord Jesus, which is the
founder and foundation of this house; that after we have soiourned in his
earthly tabernacle, we may rest upon his heavenly mountain, where we shall
be abundantly satisfied with the pleasures of his house: For as Ser. 47. in
Cant.
Bernard sweetly, si sic bonus es sequentibus te, qualis futurus es
consequentibus? If thou Lord be so good unto those that seek thee, what will thou be unto such as find thee? doubtless, one day spent in the kingdom of
glory, surpasses a thousand in the kingdom of grace.

It Is true, the profit, pleasure, honor of a good christian, is better a
thousand times, then all the treasures, and iollities of the wicked; yet so
long as we dwell in houses of clay, clothed with flesh and blood, in this
valley of tears, ever and anon we shall have troubles on every side, 2. Cor
7. ^.
fightings without, and terrors within, and through Acts. 14. 22.
many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God; but when once we
shall arrive there, all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, all cares from our
hearts; as soon as we shall enter into the upper Courts of the Lord, we shall
have Psalm. 16. 12.
fullness of joys, and pleasures at his right hand for evermore. This one day,
In loc. et de liber^ arbitri^ lib. 3 cap. vlt. idem Hugo Cardinal et Dr
Incognitu^, in loc.
says Augustine, is the day of eternity, which is always the same one, and no
more: for the heavenly Jerusalem has no need of the Sun, neither of the
Moon to shine, because God and the Lamb are the light of it. Apoc. 21. 23.
and in his light, all the children of light enjoy that day; which is
everlasting without any night, or end.

And now most gracious Sovereign, upon bowed knees, I beseech your Highness,
by the mercies of God; suffer a few words of exhortation, as you have most
christianly heard a great many points of doctrine.

(...) Kings are styled Gods, and their houses should be like Churches, as Vita
Constant.
Eusebius writes of Constantines Court, every chamber a chapel, every person
a Priest, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
offering up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God.

Above all, I most humbly beg of your Majesty, to continue your studiousnesse
of peace, that howsoever, you mainteyne just and honorable wars abroad, yet
Psalm. 122 7
peace may be within your walls at home, which is the greatest gain,
pleasure, honor, of all Christian Courts, and Kingdoms.

The devil is the author of confusion, and schism, but the Lord is the 1.
Cor. 14. 33.
God of order, and Heb. 7. 2.
King of peace, he united heaven and earth (two diverse divided parts of the
universe) and made them both one world; he united sea and land (two diverse
divided elements,) and made them both one globe, he united soul and body (two
diverse divided substances,) and made both one man; he united Jews, and
Gentiles, (two diverse people) and made them both one Church; he united Adam
and Eua, (two diverse divided sexes,) and made them both in marriage, but one
flesh; and that which is yet more wonderful, he united God and man, (two
diverse divided natures,) and made them both one Christ.

As the Lord therefore said to Exodus 25. 40.
Moses, In the Lords Name, give me leave to speak to you; (Most high and
mighty Prince,) fac secundum exemplar, Imitate God as his dear Son, and
servant; Machiauel.
divide et impera, savors too much of the serpent, Ephesians. 2. 11.
vtraque fecit vnum, is our comfort.

Your great grandfather King Henry the 7* united the Roses; and that was an
happy work: Your renowned Father, united the kingdoms, and that was a more
happy work; But if your self (borne for all greatness) shall unite the
different factions, and fractions, about some points in religion, and make your
people, from Dan to Bershe-ba, speak the same thing, and pronounce the same;
Judge. 12. 6.
Shiboleth, it will undoubtedly prove the most happy work of all.

As your blessed marriage, began with a league of peace, so we pray night and
day, that your issue may be children of peace, your Nobles, and men of
Council, Princes of peace* your Clergy, studients and messengers of peace*
your Judges and Justices, gardians of peace; your Commons and people, followers
of peace; all of us in our several offices, and orders, honoring the God of
peace; and advancing his Gospel, which is glad tidings of peace; we may take
up evermore, the words of my text, One day spent in the Courts, and countries
of our Lord, King Charles, is better then a thousand, else. where.

PSALM. 105. 4. Seek his face evermore.
MAn was elected before there was any time, created in the beginning of time,
redeemed in the fullness of time; for this end, to seek God on earth, and to
see God in heaven. Our text poynteth at both, exhorting the seed of Abraham,
and the children of Jacob; That is, all faithful people, so to seek Gods
face, that in fine, they may see Gods face for evermore.

For the better understanding whereof, I must evidently clear two points,
especially:

1. What is to be sought, and that is expressed to be Gods face. 2. How to be
sought, to wit, by what means, and that is employed to Dr. Incognitus et
Turrecr^mat. in loc
be by contemplation in this world, and by vision in the next.
In what measure, how much, earnestly; seek the Lord, seek his strength,
seek his face, how long, evermore.

For the first, a great many, and a good many Musc^. M^. (...)* Genebrard.
Lori^.
Divines understand here, by Gods face, Gods favor, as if the Prophet should
have said, in all time of wealth, and in all time of woe, call upon the Lord,
seek him, and his strength only; seek not to witches, because they seek to
the devil, and the devil is a murderer from the beginning, an accuser of the
faithful, our adversary, walking about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he
may devour.

Seek not to Bell or Baal, or any false God, for an Idol cannot help it
self, much less other, Wisd. 13. 16. The Apostle says, an Idol is nothing,
and the Philosopher says, of nothing comes nothing; seek not to secular
powers, and potentates; O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of
man, for there is no help in them. Psalm: 146. 2. The king of Egypt is a
broken staff of reed, he that leans on him and trusts in him, is sure to
fall to the ground; alas, man is like a thing that is nothing, when his breath
is gone forth, he returns again to his earth, and then all his thoughts
perish.

Seek not to your own strength, trust not (as Goliath did) in your sword and
shield, for cursed be the man, that makes flesh his arm. Iere. 17. 5.

Seek not to your own wit for the Lord catches the Wizards in their own
craftiness; and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish.

Seek not to your own worth and holiness, (as the Pharisee stood upon his
merit. Luke 18.) For blessed is the man that fears always, but he that
trusts in his own heart, is a fool. Proverbs 28. 26.

Seek not to the strength of your own purse, do not sacrifice to your own
net, make not gold your hope, saying to the wedge of gold; thou art my
confidence, for riches avail not in the day of wrath, no^ help in the time of
vengeance.

Seek not to the Muscul in loc.
blessed spirits of just men in heaven, for Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel knows us not. Esaias 63. 16. They do not understand our wants in
particular, howsoever undoubtedly solicitous for our good in general; grant
they did clearly see what we lack, and that they be so well able, as willing
to help; yet because the Scriptures afford neither precept, nor promise, nor
pattern for invocation in this kind; seeking to the dead saints, is an open
injury to the living God; at the best, it is will worship, at the worst,
adoring of old saints, is an adopting of new saviors.

To sum up all in a word, with our Prophet; in the 73, Psalm, verse 14. Whom
have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire in
comparison of thee; all other hopes and helps are miserable comforters in
respect of thee, which art a present help in trouble; under the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice, my soul hangs upon thee, mine eyes are ever looking
unto thee, to the throne of grace will I go boldly, that I may find mercy,
thou Lord art my strength and only refuge, thy face will I seek evermore

Hugo Cardinalis understands here by Gods face, that happiness which is
everlasting in heaven: They who seek for Gods temperall blessings, only seek
his hinder parts, as it were* but they who first seek the kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof, are said to seek his priora because potiora, the
multitude who followed Christ, in the 6. of S. John, for loaves and not for
love, sought Gods hinder parts only, but the blessed Apostle, who said, I
forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self unto that which is before,
following hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God, in
Christ Jesus, sought Gods face evermore. Temporal goods, as riches and honor,
are the blessings of Gods left hand, but length of days that is everlasting
life, the blessings of his right hand, Prouer. 3, 16. New creatures in Christ,
and new men are like the new Moon; when the Moon decreaseth, it is close
above, open below, but when it increases, it is open above, close beneath,
even so (beloved) if our minds (as nature framed our hearts,) are close
downward, using the world as if we used it not, and enlarged upward, in
seeking the things above, then, as S. Paul speaks, our conversation is in
heaven, and as David here, we seek Gods face for evermore.

I^ lo.
Arnobius and Genebrard in loc idem Dr. Incognitus.
diverse more, by Gods face, do understand Christ Jesus; as being the
brightness of Gods glory, and express character of his person. Heb. 1. 3.
And as our Prophet. Psalm 67. verse 1. The light of his countenance; God is
manifested in his son, as a man is known by his face; for no man (says our
Lord) comes unto the Father, but by me. John 14. 6. I am the way, the truth
and the life, non est qua eas nisi per me, non est quo eas nisi ad me, as Tract
96. in* John.
Augustine sweetly, Christ is the F^rus co^ in Ioh. 14 6.
beginning of blessed and heavenly vision, and therefore the way; the mean,
and therefore the truth; the end, and therefore the life; No man knows the
Father, save the Son, and to whomsoever the Son will open him. It is true,
that we may see Gods hinder parts, by the light of nature, for the power of God
is manifested in the creation of the world, the heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handy work, but we cannot see Gods face,
that is; the most unsearchable riches of his mercy, but in and by his Son only:
none know the Father* Caietan in Matthew. 11. 27.
that is, a distinction of the Persons in the Sacred Trinity, but by the
revelation of God the Son, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge* Coloss. 2. 3. Or none know that God is their Father, but by the
spirit of the Son, crying in our hearts, Abba, Father. Galat. 4. 6. We
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; quoth Paul, which none of the Princes
of this world knew; Hoc magnus Plato nesciuit, eloquens Demosthenes ignorauit,
says Pauli^* tom. 3.
Hierome, deep Plato was altogether ignorant, eloquent Demosthenes was utterly
silent in this argument; they being secretaries of nature, groped after God,
and found out also so much of him, as may serve to condemn them, but we
(blessed are the eyes that see the things which we see) seeking God in his
Son, in whom he is well pleased, unfeignedly believe, that he is our Father,
and that we are his children, and further, his heirs, even heirs annexed with
Christ in his kingdom of glory, Romans 8. verse 16. 17.

The Turk seeks not God aright, for that he seeks him in Mahumet: the Jew
seeks not God aright, for that he seeks him in a Messiah which is yet to
come: the Popeling seeks not aright, for that he seeks him in more Mediators
then one; the Heretic destroying either the natures of Christ, or offices of
Christ, seeks not God aright; the carnal Gospeller and worldling seeks not
God aright; for although he profess Christ in word, yet in his works he
denies him, and the power of his Gospel, as Quaest. ex. Matthew. qu. 11.
Augustine pithily, the difference between an Heretic and a bad Catholic,
is briefly this; the one is an Heretic in his faith, and the other is an
Heretic in his manners. Lord show us the light of thy countenance, that is,
indue us with true knowledge of thy word, and with a li^ely faith in thy Son,
which is thine own Image, that so we may seek thy strength, and see thy face
evermore.

It is evident by the first of the Chronicles. 16. Chap. That David was author
of this Hymn, and that it was indicted for Asaph, to be sung when the Lord's Ark was placed in the mids of the Tabernacle, that David had pitched for it,
and therefore K^mchi. apud Genebrard. Bucer* Calvin. Moller^. Piscator. Wilcox.
Engl. gloss.
most expositours interpret here; Gods face to be God's Ark, by which he
declared his power and presence, favor and goodness toward his people. So we
read 2* Chron 6. 41. Psalm. 63. 3. Psalm. 78. 61. Psalm. 132. 1. Arise O Lord into
thy resting place, the and the Arc of thy strength. The like is said of Gods
holy Temple* that it was his house. Esaias 56. 7. His amiable dwelling place.
Psalm. 84. 1 Yea the very chamber of his presence. Psalm. 95. 2. Let us come
before his presence, with thanksgiving; And Hierome in loc.
they who worshipped in the Courts of the Lord, are said to stand and appear
before him, as Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Three times in the year, shall all the males
appear before the Lord thy God, and Ex^. 23. 15. None shall appear before me
empty.

The meaning then of David is plain, that the seed of Abraham, and the
children of Jacob, should give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name,
tell his wondrous works, make songs of him, and praise him, and seek his
strength in that holy place, which himself has appointed; even where his Arc
rested, and resided, As Agellius in loc.
if he should have said, go not to Baal-Zebub; the God of Ekron, go not to
the calfe in Samaria, seek not to Bethel, enter not into Gilgal, go not to
Beer-sheba, but seek the Lord, and ye shall live, seek him while he may be
found, and where he may be found, run not a whoring after your own inventions,
do not serve him according to your own voluntary religion, and private spirit,
but let his holy word be a lantern to your feet, and a guide to your paths,
evermore seek him, and his strength, in his Tabernacle, where he shows his
favor and face, to Abraham his servant, to Jacob his chosen.

The ceremonies of Moses, in their beginning, were Mortales, as being to
continue but for a time; when once Christ appeared in the fullness of time;
they were Mortu^, being only shadows, (as S. Paul speaks) of good things to
come; but now since the sound of Christ's holy Gospel is gone throughout all
the earth, even unto the ends of the world, they be mortiferae, not only dead,
but also deadly; so buried and abolished, that they must never be raised up
again in the Church of God. Legalia, says Vti. John de Combis Comp. Theolog.
lib. 6. cap. 8. ^
Augustine, ante passionem Christi viua, statim post mortua, hodie sepulta.
Christ is the end of the Law, not only of the moral, in fulfilling all
righteousness, or of the Judicial in satisfying Gods Justice for us, but of
the ceremonial also, giving himself for us, to be both an offering, and a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, of which, all the legal
offerings, and sacrifices were types and figures.

Here then is a question asked, seeing we have neither such an Arc, nor such a
Tabernacle, nor such a Temple, as the Jews had under the Law, where shall we
now seek the strength of the Lord, and his face? Answer is made, that albeit,
the hour is come, foretold by Christ, unto the woman of Samaria, that the seed
of Abraham, according to the Spirit, do not adore God at Jerusalem, or upon
his Holy mountain, yet they worship him in his Church, of which Jerusalem was
a type; the which is called expressly Gods house, wherein his Honor delights to
dwell, and in the Moller^. T^leman. in loc
ministration of his blessed word, and Sacraments, he shows us the light of
his countenance more clearly, then under the ceremonies of Moses, for in our
prayers we confidently speak unto him, and in the word preached, and read, he
plainly speaks unto us; in both, If we seek, we may see his face; frequent
then his house, when it is the hour of prayer, frequent then his house when it
is the hour of preaching, take heed that ye do not neglect so great
salvation, he that rejects these things, reiects not man, but God: I beseech
you, suffer the words of exhortation and doctrine, despise no^ Prophesying,
despise not I say the riches of his bountifulness, and patience; reverence his
blessed ordinances, abhor not his heavenly Manna; quench not his spirit;
turn not, O turn not his graces into contention, and wantonness; lest he
hide his face from us in his sore displeasure, remoouing his golden
Candlesticks from our Church, and giving his Gospel unto some other people,
who will bring forth better fruits of the same.

The Papists have gods of lead, and gods of bread, but the faces of these gods,
as our Prophet tells us, in the 115. Psalm, have mouths and speak not, eyes
and see not, noses and smell not, neither speak they through their throat they
that make them, are like unto them, and so are all such as put their trust in
them.

Images, as they teach, are the Laymens Gospel, and a wodden block is to them,
instead of the written book; they see their makers face, better in a pulpit,
then out of the pulpit; Beloved, be not deceived, God is not mocked, If ye
seek his strength, and his face, go to his Law, and his Testimony; ye may
behold a lively Crucifix in the Scripture; for what is the Center of the whole
Bibles (...) (...), but only this one point; Christ* (...). Ye may behold in
each Sacrament, a lively Crucifix; for the blessed Communion is a commemoration
of Christ's death until his coming. 1. Cor. 11. 26. And sacred baptism says
Part 3 qu. 60. art. 3.
Aquinus, is a Commemoration of Christ's Passion which is past; a Demonstration
of his grace which is present, and a Prognostication of his glory, which is to
come; Ye may likewise behold a lively Crucifix in the Churches Liturgy,
framed according to the tenor of Gods own Spirit, forasmuch as our prayers
contemplate God the Father in his Son; begun in his Name, bounded upon his
nature, concluded with his Merits, as our only Mediator, and Advocate.

When the parents of Christ had lost him at the feast of the Passover, and
sought him in many places, in fine, they found him at Jerusalem, in the
Temple: So when your soul longs after God, and is athirst for his presence;
Come to the Church, and sav with our Prophet, Psalm. 27. 9. Thy face Lord will I
seek; It is reported of Cain: Genesis 4. 16. That he went out from the presence,
or from the face of Iehoua, As Gods face signifies his all seeing providence,
none can fly from it. Jeremy 23. 24 Can any hide himself in secret places,
that I who ^ill heaven and earth, shall not see him, says the Lord: The
meaning of that text then, is happily that Cain went out from the place of Gods
word, and public worship; For Adam his father being a Prophet (as it is
probable) had taught his children how to sacrifice, and serve the Lord: On the
contrary, to come before God, in 1. Chron. 16. 29. is explained Psalm. 96. 8. To
be coming into his courts, and worshipping in his Sanctuary, When our backs
are turned toward the Temple, no wonder, if God turn his face from us, and
absent himself in displeasure. But if we serve the Lord, with gladness, and
enter into his gates with thanksgiving, If our songs are of him* and our
hearts rejoice in his holy Name, when we remember the marvelous works that
he has done his wonders; and the judgments of his mouth, when one day spent
in his Courts, is accounted better then a thousand in the tents of ungodliness,
when we search earnestly for him in the Scriptures, and in the public
Ministry thereof; his ordinary power to salvation, and the strength of his
arm; Then as it is said in our text, we seek him, and his forces, and his
favor, and his face evermore.

There is a fifth exposition of these words, and that is of S. Augustine, and of
Franciscus Arias, in his tract Depraesentia Dei. cap 2. Who by Gods face,
understand Gods presence; So the Scripture by the face of the wind, and by the
face of frost, and fire, means as you know, the presence of these things, as
in Psalm. 68. Like as wax melts, ante faciem ignis, before the fires face;
So let the ungodly perish at the presence of God, So Hagar is said to flee from
the face of her mistress Sara. Genesis 16. 8 So Pharaoh to Moses, Exodus 10. 28.
Get thee from me; Look thou see my face no more. So Adam is said to hide
himself from Gods face* Genesis 3. 8. and Satan, Job 1. 12. Egressus est a facie
Domini, that is, he departed from Gods presence: to seek then evermore Gods
face, is nothing else, but seriously to consider and contemplate, that he is
always present with us in every thought, word, and deed.

Co^ de vtilitate exhostebus caeptenda.
Plutarch advises us so circumspectly, to demean our selves, as if ^r enemies
always beheld us, Epist. 11.
Seneca counsels us to live so well, as if Cato, Laelius or some reverend
Person of great wisdom and account, ouerlooked us; Apud Ausonium refertur
inter dicta Sap^entum, Eras^o interpret.
Thalis Milesius, in the committing of any sin, wished us when we are alone, to
be afraid of our selves, and of our own conscience, which is in stead of a
thousand witnesses; te sine test time, says Ausonius, S. Paul exhorts
women, to carry themselves in Gods house reverently, because of the Angels, as
being assured that the glorious Angels in heaven, observe their behavior.

But our text teaches us, yet a better way then all these, which is to seek
Gods face* to remember that God searches us out, knowing our downe-sitting and
our vprising, and that he stands about our paths, and about our beds, and
spieth out all our ways, A pious exercise, highly commended in the Scriptures,
and in the Fathers, and by the practice of holy men in all ages.

The Scriptures in reporting that Enoch and Noe, walked with God, intimate,
that those holy Patriarchs had set God always before them and that they lived
so religiously, Calui^ in Gen 5. 22.
tanquam sub eius oculis, as under his observing, and all-seeing eye, they
walked, as St. Luke records of Zacharias, and Elizabeth, in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, without reproof, they considered the
ways of God, and turned their feet unto his Testimonies; as our Prophet
speaks of himself, Psalm. 119. 59. They did endeavor and set their hearts to
have, not only good credit before men, but al^ with S. Paul, to keep a clear
conscience before God; In this sense, God said to Father Abraham, walk before
me. Genesis 17. 1. And Abraham again, concerning God, the Lord before whom I
walk, Genesis 24. 40. So the Prophet Elias and Eliseus speak, The Lord God, in
whose sight ^ stand.

The text inioyning us always to pray, points at this duty, that we should
seek Gods face continually, for our desires and thoughts are the voices and
words, by which our soul speaks; If then at any time we lift our hearts
unto the Lord, we may be said, and that truly, to pray, which occasioned
Divines to term prayer, an humble familiarity with God; He that will always
converse with God, must always either read the Scripture, says Apud Taffi^.
tract of the marks of Gods children. cap. 12.
Augustine, or else pray, for as often as we read his word, he talks with us,
and as often as we pray, we talk with him.

When our Prophet sings in 123. Psalm; Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou
that dwell in the heavens; He does understand, not eyes of his flesh only,
but eyes of his faith also, seeing him which is invisible. Heb* 11. 27.

But the spirit, by the mouth of Solomon, as yet speaks more plainly, Prou. 3.
6. In all thy ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy goings, in omnibus
vijs cogita Deum, as the vulgar latin runs, in every thing thou take in
hand, think on God, or as our translation, have respect unto him, as Tobie to
his son, Set God always before thine eyes, Hugo Card. in Pro. 3. 6.
behold him as a Judge, and so shame to sin before the Judges eye; behold him
as thy great reward, and so faint not in doing good; Behold him as author and
finisher of thy faith, and so run with patience, the race which is set before
thee; Behold him as the Donor of every good and perfect gift, and so confess
that he works all thy works for thee, by whose grace thou art whatsoever thou
art.

Meditat. cap. 1.
S. Augustine, begins his heavenly meditations in this style, Domine Deus
meus, da cordi meo te desiderare, desiderando quaerere, quaerendo, inuenire,
inueniendo amare, amando mala mea red^mpta non iterare; O Lord give me grace,
from the very bottom of mine heart, to desire thee, in desiring to seek thee,
in seeking to find thee, in finding to love thee, in loving, utterly to loath
my former wickedness: And in his souls soliloquies or private talk with God, he
prays in like manner, O Lord who know me, give me grace to know thee, O my
comforter show me thy self, let me see thee which art the light of mine eyes,
mirth of my spirit, joy of my heart, life of my soul.

It is a good Motto, think and thank God, there is no moment of time, wherein
God cares not for us, and therefore says a Bernard, no moment of time, wherein
we should not seek him, especially, when we come to his house, to call upon
his Holy Name, for how pray^s he to God, who prates in his heart to the world,
Meditat. cap. 6.
intend (quoth the same Father,) (...) qui intendit tibi; Christ promised to
be with us in our devotions, even in the midst of us, Mat. 18. 20. but as
Ser. de eo vbi duo aut tres.
Eusebius Emisenus observes; how shall God be in the mids of thee, if thou be
not in the mids of thy self; If the advocate sleep, how shall the Judge
awake? No marvel if thou loose thy suit, when as in praying, thou loosest thy
self.

Idem Calvin Bucer. Agellius Genebrard.
Hilary writing upon the words of the Psalmist, ( all my ways are before
thee,) notes, that the Prophet making his course before Gods eye, to whom all
hearts are open, and no secrets hid, walked not in the counsel of the wicked,
nor stood in the way of sinners, his feet did not go down to death, and his
steps take hold of hell, but his whole pilgrimage was a seeking of the Lord,
and as ( S. Paul phraseth it) he did so run, that he did obtain.

Seneca, though he were not a Doctor in Divinity, yet he wrote in his 10
Epistle. lib. 1. Diuine-like to this purpose; Sic viue cum hominibus quast deus
videat, sic loquere cum Deo, quasi homines audiant; So converse with men, as if
God did ever see thee; so confer with God* as if men did ever hear thee: and
in Epist. 41. lib. 1.
another Epistle, God is near to thee, with thee, within thee; so it is,
Lucilius, that a sacred spirit resideth in us, as a custos, and obseruer of all
that we do, whether it be good or bad, A sweet speech, according to Godsowne
heart, for as In 1. Cor 12
S. Ambrose does auow, whosoever speaks a thing which is true, speaks it
from the spirit of truth.

Not to trouble you with any further discourse, the consideration of this one
point, that God is omni-present, contains in it all Fran. Arias de praesentia
Dei. cap. 1.
other rules, for the well ordering of whole life, so that if any be dejected
in his mind, for that he cannot remember the good lessons, he daily reads in
books, and hears in Sermons, let him be con tented again, because this one
prescript comprehends omnia media et remedia, all means and medicines for the
curing of his sick soul; but because Dr. ^all art of divine meditation. cap.
8.
Gershon a great clearke, professes he has sometimes been four hours
together, in working his heart, ere he could frame it to he Divine meditation
of God; I purpose to treat first of the means, how to get it, and then of the
fruits arising from it.

For the first, every good gift is from above, coming down from the Father of
lights, and prayer is like the fiery chariot of Elia, where by we mount up* and
converse with God on high* It is the Church him concerning prayer.
key of Paradise gates, and the hand of a Christian, able to reach from earth
to heaven, and to take forth unsearchable riches ou^ of the Lords treasure;
the Scripture says as much in plain terms, ask and ye shall have, seek
and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, what soever ye
shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Fervent prayer then unto
which almighty God denies nothing,) is a maine means of this holy devotion,
and pious exercise.

Another way to seek Gods face continually, is to have some remarkable
sentences, concerning this argument, written in the rooms we most use, for
example, that of Solomon, Prou. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord in every place,
behold the evil and the good; Or that of David, I have set God always before
me; Or that of Paul, Heb. 4. 13. All things are naked and open to his eyes,
with whom we have to do; Or that of Epist. 111.
Augustine, God is all eye, Totus oculus qui, minime fallitur, quia minime
clauditur, says Lib 5 de consideratione.
Bernard, Or that of Lib. 1 de constant. c. ^7.
Lipsius, eum nulla vis humana elidet, aut acumen eludet.

God commanded in the 15 of Numb. 38. and Deuteronomy, 22. 12. That his people
throughout their generations, should make them fringes upon the borders of
their garments, and put upon the fringes of the borders, a ribband of blew
silk, that when they looked upon them at any time; they might remember all the
commandments of the Lord, and do them: He did inioyne likewise, to bind the
words of his Law for a memorial upon their hands, and as fron^lets between
their eyes; And these Hierom in Matthew. 23. 5
scrolles of paitch^ents, wherein the commandments were written, are termed by
the Ainsworth in Exodus 13. 16.
Hebrew Doctor Tephillim, prayermonuments, and by Christ, Mat. 23. 5. (...),
(as Interpreters conjecture) Beza ^aior ann^r in Mat. 23 5. see (...)
Dictionarie verb. Phylacter^es
quasi conseruatoria; because they kept and preserved men in awful obedience
to the law, and howsoever the Pharisees abused these things unto superstition,
and vainglory; yet God assuredly will be well pleased, if we shall use
sincerely the like monuments, and figures for the like good purposes and ends,
especially to put us in mind of his holy presence.

A third profitable mean, to seek Gods face continually, is a particular
examination of our selves, at our vprising, and downe-sitting; and if we find,
that we have walked all the day long in Gods sight, to make songs of him, and
praise him for his strength, and grace; If otherwise, to be sorry for this
omission, and hereafter to be more studious of this good work.

The last and best help to further this devotion is, our unfeigned love of God,
for as Epist. 89.
S. Augustine said, animus, velut pondere, amore fertur quocunque fertur, ibi
est vbi amat, non vbi animat; A man is where he loves, not where he lives, as
Hom. de Maria Magd.
Origene writes of Mary Magdalene visiting Christ's Sepulcher, ibi non erat vbi
erat, quia tota ibi erat vbi magister erat. So beloved it is with us, al our
mind is where our pleasure is, and our heart is where our treasure is. Matthew.
6. 21. If then we love God above all things, our hearts will likewise rejoice
in his holy Name, more then in all things; If we remember the marvelous
works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgment of his mouth, what do
we but seek his strength, and his face evermore.

The fruits rising from this holy devotion, are manifold; The first, is
pureness of heart, which is such an excellent virtue, that Solomon says He
that loves pureness of heart, the King shall be his friend, That is, the King
of glory, the King of heaven and earth, the King of kings is a lover of him;
Now that pureness is attained by this exercise, as David tells us in the 10.
Psalm, reporting the ways of the wicked man, to be most impure, because God
is not in all his thoughts, and the fathers of our law, put these words into
the enditement of a malefactor, that in committing his foul fact, he had not
God before his eyes; When Christ entered into my soul, says Ser. 74 super Cant.
Bernard, he moved and mollified, and wounded mine hard and stony heart, he
did root out and destroy, throw down, build and plant, he did enlighten that
which was dark, water that which was dry, cool that which was too hot, and
inflame that which was too cold; He did exalt valleys, and depresse mountains,
the crooked ways he made straight, and the rough places plain, and so says
he with our Prophet. Psalm 103. My soul did praise the Lord, and all that is
within me praise his holy Name.

We find in Ecclesiastical history, that Antonin hist. part. 2. cap. 1^.
Paphnutius converted Thais, and that F^ Aria^, lib de praesentia Dei. cap. 3.
Ephram converted another famous strumpet from uncleanness, only with this
argument, that almighty God sees all things in the dark, when all doors are
fast, all windows shut, all curtains close.

And as this exercise causes us to repent sin which is past, so likewise to
prevent sin which is to come, for if once we can contemplate God as present,
we shall instantly consider him as our Father, and so honor him* or as our
Lord, and so fear him; and he that does either of these, will flee sin as a
serpent, as for example, Joseph assaulted by his mistrisle to lie with her,
answered, How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God;
Susanna tempted by the libidi^ous Elders, to the like folly, gave the like
answer, sighing and saying, I am in danger on every side, For if I do this
thing, it is death unto me, and if I do it not, I cannot escape your han^* it
is better for me to fall into your hands, and not to do it, then to sin in
the sight of the Lord; A learned Dr Why before A^* Wh^tgift.
doctor in ^ur time, (questioned for a non conformitant, and entreated by the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, most meekly to subscribe in his private study,
saying, that none were present there, but only God and themselves, and
faithfully promising, that he would keep his counsel) answered stoutly, that
if his Grace could bring him into some room, where God was not present; he
would willingly fulfill his desire, but says he, so long as God sees, I
little regard who sees not; I report not in dis honor of subscription unto
the decent, and commendable ceremonies enjoined by lawful authority, for this
Doctor by seeking Gods face, found in conclusion his own error, and so
reforming himself do henioye great preser meant, in our Church at this day.

Palladius vt^ refe^t Ar^ as vb^ supra. cap. 4.
Diocles the monk, among other instructions which he gave to Palladius, when
he came to visit him, uttered this ^pothegme, that a good man, if he neglect
to see Gods face, becomes either a beast or a devil; a beast, in hunting after
carnal sins, a devil, by rushing into spiritual wickedness* A valiant
soldier fighting in his generals eye, carries himself against all his
enemies undauntedly, for that he knows he shall be worthily rewarded eafter
victory; how much more then ought every Christian, in the spiritual warfare,
beholding (as S. Stephen did) his Captain Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, courageously sight against the world, the flesh, and the ^ill; as being
assured that after his good, fight is finished, a crown of righteousness is
laid up for him, and a most excellent and eternal weight of glory.

Christ pronounces in the 5 of S. Matthew, blessedness, not only to the pure
in heart, but also to the poor in spirit, to those that mourn, to the meek,
to the merciful, to such as hunger and thirst after righteousness, to
peacemakers, to Martyrs enduring persecution in a just cause; all which
blessednesses arise from this one root, the contemplation of Gods holy
presence; by this the faithful are made humble; Lord, says Abraham unto God,
I am dust and ashes; and Paul, as clay in the hand of the potter: By this the
faithful are moved to shed tears, both of denotion and contrition,
understanding that all their righteousness is as filthy cloutes* and that if
God should enter into judgment with them, in his sight, no man living shall be
just fied, Psalm. 143. 2. By this the faithful are meek, as having their copy
still in their eye; Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: By this,
the faithful are merciful, imitating, as children, their father in heaven,
which is merciful; By this the faithful hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for the more they seek Gods face, the more they see; and the
more they see, the more they desire to see; By this the faithful are
peacemakers, as having peace with God, and in God, peace with men, and by both
a peace with themselves; By this the faithful are more constant and
couragious^, in suffering persecution for righteousness sake, because they
believe that the Lord is their strength; and that he is a rewarder of those
that seek him. Heb. 11. 6.

To seek Gods face then, is our greatest happiness, and utterly to neglect this
duty, the greatest unhappiness and folly? it is our chief felicity; so God to
Moses, as concerning his people, My presence shall go with thee, and I will
give thee rest: and David unto God, I will behold thy presence, in
righteousness, and when I awake, after thy likeness I shall be satisfied with
it.

To despise this holy denotion, is extreme folly, for the fear of God, is the
beginning of wisdom; and they that do thereafter, have a good understanding;
But such as have not God in their thoughts, and so run headlong into
grieuo^s sins* in the language of Canaan, are fools and m^d men; so
foolishas the witless Ostrich, which as Job reports in Cap 39. of his book,
leaves his eggs in the earth* and makes them h^ in the dust, and forgets
that the foo^e might scarter them, or that the wild beast might break the
(...); and as Pliny further adds, he thrusts his neck into the stumpe of
a hollow tree, and so woodcocke-like, when he sees no body, thinks no body sees
him; unwise people, when will ye understand he that planted the ear, shall not
he hear, or he that made the eye, shall not he see? Whither then will ye go
from his spirit, and whither can ye flee from his presence; If ye climb up
into heaven, he is there; If ye descend down into hell, he is there also; If
ye say peradventure the darkness shall cover us, instantly the night shall be
turned into day; yea the darkness is no darkness with him, but the night is
as clear as the day, the darkness and light, to him are both alike; The most
impious, cannot but walk with him in respect of his omni-presence, filling
heaven and earth, and searching out their words and actions, and the secret
corners of their hearts, in affectu habent abscondere, says Ser 21. in psalm
118.
Ambrose, non in effectu; Well may they before men play least in sight, but
before God, none dwell at Sp^inx. Theologic^. Philos. cap. 2.
Hide: etiam solus est praesens, his qui long sunt ab ipso; God is nigh unto
those, which are furthest off from him, albeit their hearts seek not his face,
yet his face seeks their hearts evermore. Think on this all ye that forget
God, and tremble to consider what extreme madness it is in the committing of a
filthy sin, to shun the sight of a seely man, a wight, a worm, to shun
I say the dull eyes of a son, of a servant, of a little child, yet not to
fear the face of God our Father in heaven, our Master, our Maker, our Judge,
which is able to destroy both our souls and bodies in hell ^ire.

Thus I have showed at large, what is to be sought, and in part also upon the
by, how to be sought, one point only remains untouched* and that is, in what
measure; to wit, how much and how long, the seed of Abraham ought to seek^
Gods face.

Touching the first, Esaias tells us in a word, si quaeritis quaerite; If ye
seek the Lord, seek him in deed, Lorin in loc
eanrestly, seriously, sedulously; David insinuates as much in repeating here
the word seek, thrice, seek the Lord, seek his strength, seek his face,
quia, says Hugo Cardinalis, Dominus quaerendus est sicut et diligendus; As God
is to be loved; so to be sought with all our heart, and with all our soul,
and with all our mind, that is, says Dr Christian lib 1 cap. 22.
Augustine, with all our understanding, never thinking of him erroniously; with
all our will, never contradicting him obstinatly; with all our memory, never
forgetting him obliuiously.

Again, whereas our Prophet says in the clause going before our text
immediately, let the heart of them rejoice, that seek the Lord, He does Lorin.
in loc.
intimate that God is to be sought not dully, but fully, not heavily, but
joyfully; For as God loves a cheerful giver, so likewise a cherefull
thankesgiuer, one that serves him with gladness, and comes before his presence
with a song; It is a seely thing for a Priest, or people, to dissemble with
God, and to become Hermaphrodites, in the business of religion; A seely thing
to halt between God and Baal; A seely thing to receive the wages of the
Gospel, and to do the work of Antichrist; A seely thing to look up to
Jerusalem, and to go down to Jericho, to gain preferment in the Church of
England, and yet under hand craftily to repair the tottering walls of
Babylon, the Lord knows who are his, and he knows those which have but a
s^cret mark of the beast, as well as we know those which openly worship a
wodden block* magnify the mass, make new saviors; yea for king killers a
new heaven, and for such as please not their confessors well, a purgatory,
which is a new hell; and so withal that is within them, and all that is
without them exalt the man of sin, above all that is called God.

Beloved, if ye desire to seek the Lord happily, seek him heartily, and that
Rasil scol. in loc.
not only once or twice, during the sunshine of prosperity, or in the time of
trouble, in the Hugo. Card. in loc.
hour of death, in the day of Judgment only; But as our Prophet exhor^,
evermore, When a man has done his best, he (...) (...) again, says
Ecclesiasticus, he that (...) he has sought enough, is like to find b^ (...),
says Ser. 9. de Not D^m.
Leo the great, so Bernard, qui dixit suff^t, d ficit. (...) (...) de W^lcox.
in loc.
continually to seek, is constantly (...) seek, never to f^int, in doing this
duty.

Happily some will object, if the Lord be found of such a^ seek him
faithfully, what need is there to seek any more? Are christians in this
respect like to the foolish gossips? of whom St. Paul, ever learning, and yet
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; or like carnal Israel, who
following the law of righteousness, could not attain to the law of
righteousness. Romans 9. 31. Answer is made In loc id^ Bellara^n.
by Augustine, that we seek Gods face by faith, and they seek it more by
hope, Aug de Trin lib 15. cap 22.
Melior fit quaerens tam magnum ^m, quod et inueniendum quaeritur, et
quaerendum inuenitur, nam et quaeratur vt inueniatur dulcius et inuenitur vt
quaeritur auidius. He does always better himself, who seeks so great good,
which is to be sought, that it may be found, and found that it may be sought,
sought that it may be found with greater delight, and found that it may be
sought with greater desire; Now we behold Gods face by faith and hope, through
a glass darkely; but we shall hereafter see him as S. Paul speaks, even face
to face, and then as we shall ever love him, so doubtless, ever seek him,
and as the want of the beautiful vision in the judgment of Divines is the
hell of hell, so the fruition of Gods face, contrarily* the heaven of heaven.

The Father of mercy be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the
light of his countenance, that we may grow, from strength to strength, and go
from grace, to grace, from seeking him in this earthly tabernacle, to seeing
him upon his holy mountain Jerusalem above, where with him, and of him, and
through him, and for him, we shall have fulness of joys, and incomparable
pleasures for evermore.

Amen.
JOHN. 8. 6. Jesus stouped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground.
THere be so many questions upon this text* that the text it self is a little
called into question; it being in the judgment of Annot in loc
Erasmus, Com in loc.
Caietan, Concord. cap 76.
Iansenius, Annot. i^ loc.
Beza, rather a patch then a parcel of the Gospel. If any list to be
contentious, he may read Erasmus answered by Bellarmin de verb^ dei. lib. 1.
Chap. 16. Caietan answered by his Antagonist, Ambros us Catharinus, in his
annotations against the nou ll opinions of Caietan,. de historia adulterae,
Iansenius answered by Com. in loc.
Maldonate: Beza, by Melancton, Calvin, Aretius, Piscator, in their
commentaries upon the place.

For my part, I was ever, and am still, an o^ (...) of the Church, hearing the
Prou 1 8.
inst^uction of my Father, and not forsaking the eaching of my Mother, and
therefore beholding this pecce, with the eyes of all antiquity, to be prot
(...) and altogether authentical, I fo^beare further inquisition, and come
presently to the work of this hour; which is to deliver unto you first an
explication of the words, and then an application of the doctrines arising
from the same.

Our text then is a Judicious answer of Christ, unto a captious question of
the Scribes and Pharisees, in the words immediately going before, Master this
woman was taken in the very act of adultery; now Moses in the law commanded
us, that such should be stoned, but whatsayest thou: hereby tempting him, that
they might have to accuse him, either before the Priests or the people; before
the Priests, Aug tract. 43. in John Ambros Epist. l^. 7. Ep 58. Aretiu,
Caietan. Oecolamp. in loc.
If contrary to the commandment of Moses, he should absolve this adulteress:
before the people, If contrary to the profession of his meekness and mercy,
he should utterly condemn her; and therefore being in a great strait, he does
answer, by not answering, or he gives us his answer by deed, whereas they
did object by word, this action of deed is two fold.

1 He stouped down to the ground. 2 He wrote with his finger on the ground.
In stouping down to the ground, he does intimate Iansenius. Oecolamp.
that if they would set apart their supercilio^s pride, descend into
themselves, and contemplate, that in the beginning they were dust, and in the
end shall again return to dust: If they would consider seriously, that it is
appointed unto men, Heb. 9 ^7.
once to dye, and after death, a judgment follows, in which all receive their
doomes, Rom 2. 6.
according to their deeds; If they would examine their own selves, and
understand their own case, they would not be so foreward in censuring, nor so
malicious in condemning others, Ier. 22. 29.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Bernard Meditat. cap. 3.
thou which art earth by procreation, earth by sustentation, earth by
corruption, in principio sperma faetidum, in medio (...) corumi in fine cibus
vermium, Hear the (...) (...) (...) Lord; what word? even that of (...) (...)
Savior, Mat: 7. 1. Judge not, that ye^ be not judged; Judge not rashly; Judge
(...) (...), Judge not unseasonably, lest (...) (...) (...) (...) of the whole
world, con^ (...) (...): So S. Paul expounds his Lord, ^ (...) (...). ^* If we
would judge our selves, we (...) (...) (...) judged.

I^ is a conclusion in architecture, that the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...). ^g 23
foundation requires the most exact care; for if that happen to dance, it will
mar all the mirth in the house, and it is another rule, he that will build
high, must lay his foundation low; So (beloved) it is in the spiritual
building of Gods house, which are we, Heb. 3. 6. Mat. 23. 12.
(...) ever exalts himself, shall be humbled, and (...) that humbles
himself, shall be exalted; The pro^d Pharisee, standing upon his typtoes in
the Temple, went home less justified, then a poor publican, who stooping
down, would not lift up so much a his eye* into heaven, Luke 18. So Saul when
he stooped down, being 1. Sam. 15 17.
little in his own eyes, became the greatest, even the head of all the tribes
of Israel, appointed and anointed by God to be King, yea the first King of his
own people; On the contrary, Dan. 4.
Nebuchadnezar in the contemplation of his might and Majesty, conceiting
himself to be some divine thing, and thereupon enjoined his people to worship
his golden Image, was in the top of his pride, cast out from the conversation
of men, and his dwelling with the beasts of the field; he did eat grass as
oxen, his body was wet with the dew of heaven, his hairs grown like the
feathers of eagles, and his nails like the claws of birds, until he knew
that the Lord rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; and Antichrist is therefore styled 2. These. 2. 3.
the man of sin, for exalting himself above all that is called God; Whereas
Christ our pattern here, being higher then the highest, humbled himself, and
stooped so low, that he did appear rather a worm then a worthy, the very
scorn of men, and outcast of the people, Psalm. 22. 6. his first instruction
in his first public sermon is, blessed are the poor in spirit, and he did,
as he did, quod iussit, gessit, as Bernard sweetly, his whole life was nothing
else, but an open book, rather a free-schoole of humility: His ingresse into
the world* was so stooping, that he was laid in a cratch, his egresse out of
the world, so stooping, that he died on a cross, intrauit per stabulum, exiuit
per patibulum; his progress into the world, so stooping, that he was at once
Apoc. 1. 8.
the first and the last, Alpha for his Majesty, Omega for his meekness,
ringing (as it were) the bell himself, to his own Sermon, of this argument,
Mat. 11. 29.
learn of me, for I am humble, and meek; Proud Pharisee, seeing I stoop, why
do thou stroute* look down to the ground, consider the rock out of which
thou wast hewn, Et cum sis humillimus, cur non humilimus?

The second action of Christ, here to be considered, is writing with his finger
on the ground; where two questions are to be discussed.

1 Why he wrote on the ground. 2 What he wrote on the ground.
The first has in it (If I may so speak) the three questionets.

1 Why he did write. 2 Why with his finger. 3 Why he wrote on the ground.
He did write, Hugo Card Idem Hugo de Seo. Chara.
to show that he would not be rash, and light in his censure; hereby teaching
all judges to deliberate, and write their sentence, before they deliver and
publish it unto the world. Manlius Loc Com.
Demosthenes used to say, that he would (if it were possible) speak, not only
scripta, but sculpta, licking his phrases, as the bear does her whelps, and
weighing every word, in a prudentiall balance, which he was to vent in the
seats of Justice.

It is observed truly, that Dalington Aphores lib. 2. Aphorism. 4.
virtues are stronger in the aduerbe, then in the adjective; To do that is
well* is better, then to do that is good; for a man may do that is honest,
against his will and knowledge, whereas in all virtuous actions, there is a
free election; and therefore that judge, who does huddle his sentence, before
he chew the c^d, after all parties are fully heard, may judge the right, but
not aright.

2 He wrote, and deliberated a while, before he Hugo Cardin. Are^ Gorran.
spoke, that he might hereby give them an occasion and space, to repent them of
their accusation and question, O the depth of the riches of the mercies of
Christ! he la^ ours to save those who sought to destroy him; Albeit, their
feet were swift to shed his blood, yet is he slow to wrath, and ready to
forgive them: and the same mind should be in us, as 1 Pet 4. 1.
S. Peter exhorts, ever ready to 1. Pet. 2. 21.
follow his steps, who is the John 14. 6.
way, the truth, and the life, Royard. hom. 1. in Ep Dom. 5. Post Pentec.
To render good for good, is the part of a man, to render evil for evil, is
the part of a beast; to render evil for good, is the part of a devil, to
render good for evil, is the part of a Saint, merciful, as our father in
heaven is merciful.

The second questionet, is why he wrote with his finger, and that (as De
consen. su. Euangel. lib 4 cap 10.
Augustine, In loc.
Rupert, and Hugo Cardi. Ca^etan, Aretius.
Other doctors observe) was to show, that he was greater then Moses, and Heb.
3 3.
worthy of more glory, not a subject to the law, but Lord of the law, for that
it was his finger, that wrote it, and his hand that delivered it unto Moses.

Intimating hereby likewise, that the law should be considered in the Gospel,
and Moses consulted, as accompanied with Christ. If we contemplate Moses
alone, that will be terrible. Exodus 34. 30. But if we contemplate Moses in
Christ's company, that will be comfortable. Mat. 17. 4. Domine bonum est nos hic
esse, Master it is good for us to be here, this sight is pleasant and
profitable. Aug de consensu. Euangel. lib. 4. cap. 10.


The third questionet is, why he wrote on the ground, and that was first (as
Aretius observes,) to show the Pharisees, how they trampled the commandments
of Moses, under their feet, they had (as Hugo de S. Vict: writes,) legem in
cord, but they had not cor in loge; they were Doctores Theoretici, but not
practici, they knew the Laws of God, and preached them unto the people; yet
Psalm 50 17.
hated to be reformed by them, Psalm. 119 9.
or ruled after them

2 Christ wrote on the ground, (as Com. in loc. Idem alii non pauci.
Melancton notes) to let the Pharisees understand, that they who depart from
the Lord, shall be written in the earth, Ierem. 17. 13. The names of Gods elect
are registered in the book of life. Philip, 4. 3. recorded in heaven. Luke. 10.
20. But the wicked who make their heaven on earth, are written in the dust, and
so they Psalm. 73. 18.
suddenly consume, perish, and come to a fearful end, Pro. 10 7.
their name rots, and their Psalm. 37 29
seed is rooted out, their stately palaces are no where to be Verse 37.
found, and their memorial is perished with them, Psalm 9. 6. All their hope
is like dust, that is blown away with the wind, like a thin froth that is
driven away with the storm; like the smoke which is dispersed here and there
with a tempest, and passerh, as the remembrance of a guest, that tarryeth but a
day, Wisdom. 5. 14.

3 Christ wrote on the ground, says In loc.
Hugo Cardinalis, insinuating that the senseless and speechless earth, shall
in the day of judgment accuse the wicked, put in articles, and Wisd. 5. 20^*
fight against them, according to that of Job; If my land cry out against me,
or the furrows thereof exclaim, Job 31. 38. God is the Lord of hosts, and
every creature is a soldier in pay with him, having not only defensive
weapons, ad muniendum, to protect his servants, but offensive likewise, ad
puniendum, to punish his enemies; And because the men of sin, have
transgressed most on earth, it will chiefly cry out against them, as having
been pondus inutile terrae, an unworthy burden for mother earth to bear.

4 Christ wrote on the ground, (as BB. Mountacue.
a very learned Bishop of our Church, acutely) to show that he would have
slanderous accusations written in the dust, and trodden under foot of those,
who pass by.

Pro. 22. 1.
Solomon says, A good name, is better then great riches, honor is better then
wealth, and good is better then great; for as In Phaedone.
Plato determined divinely, goodness is not in greatness, but on the
contrary, greatness is in goodness. Put then according to the rules of
Logic, these premises together, and the conclusion of it, own self, will
easily follow, that a good name, is better then great riches; He therefore that
is an unworthy backbiter of his brother, is L^uater in Pr^u 22. 1.
worse then a thief, stealing that away which is more precious, then silver
and gold.

And the rule doubtless is verified in backbiting, so well as in burglary,
there would be no thieves, if there were no receivers; If some men had not
itching ears, to hear false rumors, others would not have scratching
tongues, like the pens of libellors, to make them and move them, it is truly
said by Bernard, the talebearer has the devil in his tongue, the receiver in
his care, the one is the foot-post and messenger of Satan, and the other (lest
happily the devil being now grown an old serpent should fail in his memory)
the recorder and register of hell.

It is reported of Sedulius A^olog. Franc. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Theocritus, that being asked on a time, what beast he thought to be most
hurtful and cruel; answered, on the mountains Lions and bears, in the
cities, catchpolles and slanderers: a thief is said, to send one to the
devil, an adulterer two, but the back-biter hurts at the least three; to
wit, himself, the party of whom, and the party to whom he tells the tale, ter
homicida, quoth Loc Com. t^t de lingua.
Luther, he kills three with one blow; Sermon 24. in ^ant.
Bernard goes further, multitudinis audientium dum aures infecit, animas
interfecit.

And therefore when thou hear a scandalous information against a brother,
against an Elder especially, follow Christ's example, write it in the dust, have
not ears to hear, but express both in word and gesture, that thou hate a
backbiter, even with a perfect hatred.

Hitherto, concerning the first question and the branches thereof, I come now
to the second, what it was our blessed Lord wrote on the ground.

Epist. lib. 9 Epist. 76.
S. Ambrose says, he wrote this sentence. Matthew. 7. 3. Thou beholdest the
mote that is in thy brothers eye, but consid^rest not the beam, that is in
thine own eye; As if he should have said in other terms, ye Scribes and
Pharisees, are ready to condemn this adultres, and yet your selves running a
whoring after your own inventions, adulterating the law, with your corrupt
glosses, and impious interpretations, have committed greater abominations in
the sight of the Lord; her carnal uncleanness, is nothing in comparison of
your spiritual wheredomes, without number.

Dial. 2. contr. Pelag Tom. 2. fol. 288.
Hicrome (...) Ap^d Marlorat.
Bullenger, and Hugo de S. Charo.
some other have this (...)* that he wrote certain characters in the
pauement, which the Pharisees d In loc.
beholding, might as in a glass, see their own wickedness; and so blushing at
it, went their ways, one by one, beginning at the first, even to the last; one
by one, they went not out by twoes, much less by troops, but stole away
Maldonat. in loc.
single, lest it might appear, that Christ had confounded them, and the most
ancient went out first, as being most Em Sa.
guilty; For the true Church is compared to a flock of Lambs, and of Lambs,
it is truly said, the bigger the better: But the wicked are compared to
goats, of whom it is said, the elder the worse, as they be the sons of many
days, so the fathers of many sins; or the eldest went out first, and the
younger imitating their example, followed after, and so none left in the room,
but misera et misericordiae, says Tract 33. in John.
Augustine, the woman a subject of misery, and Christ the Father of mercy,
Pride and Hypocrisy being removed, a Savior and a sinner agree well enough
alone, and yet (by reverend Bezaes leave) they were not alone; for Aretius.
Maldonat. Em. Sa.
although his adversaries, and her accusers went out, as being convicted in
their conscience, yet his own company stayed with him in the Temple; the which
is clear by the words of our Evangelist at the 9. verse, stans in medi^, she
was standing in the midst, in the midst of whom, If Christ only were present
with her?

In loc.
Beda, Thomas of Aquin, and Apud Marlorat. Maldon. in loc.
many more think he wrote that sentence, which afterward he spoke he that is
without sin among you, let (...) cast the first stone at her; The which one
word, crossed their cavil, and answered their question abundantly, Oecolamp.
Ari^s. mont. in loc.
preserving hereby both the laws honor, and his own credit; Non dixit (as
Vbi supra.
Augustine pithily) non lapidetur, ne contra legem; nec lapidetur, ne contra
misericordiam; venit enim quaerere, quod perierat, If he had said, let her not
be stoned, that had been against the law; If he had said, let her be stoned,
that had been against the Gospel, and himself, who came to call sinners to
repentance, to seek and to save that was lost; He therefore frames this
midling answer, that quit himself of both imputations; Here then is verified
that of Solomon, a word fitly spoken, or as the Hebrew has it, a word spoken
upon his wheels, as Castalio translateth, oration r^tunde pronuntiata, round
and sound, is like apples of gold, in pictures of silver, what could have been
said more shortly, yet what more sharply? being (as Paul speaks) a two edged
sword, on the one side, cutting the knot of the proud Pharisees doubt, on the
other side cutting asunder the bonds of a poor dismayed sinner.

The precept it self! teaches all people, that if they contemplate their own
sins, in the glass of the word, they will not rashly censure of others.

It is the Rhetoric, with which all of us were borne, to lessen our own
offenses, and to lay them at the doors of others, Adam in the beginning (as ye
know) laid his fault upon the woman, and she laid it upon the serpent, and the
serpent upon God, it is an old said saw, non videmus id manticae quod intergo
est, the sins of our brethren, are placed in that part of the Wallet, which
is before us always, but our own misdeeds in that part which is behind us, out
of sight: All of us in examining our proper errors, are like Polyphemus,
having but one eye, or like the Popish Priest, who had one that was nequam, and
another nequicquam; yea borne blind, like the man in the ninth of S. John,
having never a seeing eye, but in discovering the manifold transgressions of
other Argus-like, of whom the Poet, Centum luminibus cinctum caput Argus
habebat.

Calvin lustitut lib. 2. cap. 2. 23.
Themistus observed iudiciously, that our understanding seldom errs in
generals, often in particulars, every man almost is a good ludge in Thesi, but
not in Hypothesi, thou will in Thesi say, that murder is a crying sin,
drunkenness a stinking vice, whoredom (as the Pharisees here) worthy to be
punished with death; but in Hypothesi, descend from the general to the
particular, and then the case (quoth Ployden) is altered, the murder committed
by thee was full of honor, and fair, thy drunkenness was but good fellowship,
thy want onnesse, but a trick of youth; example hereof in the 2. of Sam. 12.
David's anger was greatly kindled against the rich man, who took from the poor
man, his only lamb, As the Lord lives the man that has done this thing,
shall surely dye. But when once the Prophet told him to his beard, thou art the
man, his heart instantly smote him, and he said, I have sinned against the Lord.

The refractarie spirits of the town, censure the Church, and the Church has
happily those that censure the town, and the country peradventure does censure
both, and there be Critics in this age, which either out of the bitterness of
spirit, or spirit of bitterness, (as Augustus Caesar) tax all the world, but
I say to you (beloved) as Christ here to the Pharisees, he that is without
sin, let him cast the first stone, Cedat huic sententiae pietas
Christianorum, cui cessitimpietas Iudaeorum; cedat humilitas obsequentium, cui
cessit superbia persequentium, as Augustine exhorts in 54. Epist: which is to
Macedonius.

But the pattern concerns, especially, Ministers of the word, intimating,
that they should be very cautelous in answering their adversaries, and
circumspect in all their ways, toward those that are without, our enemies are
mighty, and many; we need therefore to beg of God (as Solomon did) an
understanding heart, that we may be wise, like serpents, in defending our
selves, albeit simple like doves, in offending others, it is written of
Laurentius Medices, that famous Florentine, that he had two men in him, as
being a plain and pleasant man at home, but a stout man, and a prudent in the
Senate: Christ would have his disciples to be like children, not in
understanding; but (as Paul construeth him) in malitiousnesse. 1. Cor. 14. 20.
It is not said, the kingdom of heaven is of children, but of such is the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 19. 14. Not In loc
(...) but (...), as Chrysostom observes, of such as are children in
meekness, albeit men in ripeness of judgment. Muscul. in loc.


But why should any Doctor have a tongue, to speak, where the spirit has not
a pen to write; quod lego, credo; We build our says upon the scriptures of
God, and not upon the conjectures of men; And therefore seeing the spirit did
not reveal to S. John, nor S. John express to the Church; nor the Church
deliver to us, what it was, our blessed Lord here wrote with his finger* I say
with Lib de praser. hoerat.
Tertullian, in this case, nihil scire, omnia scire est, To know nothing, is to
know all, and with Hexam lib. 3. cap 3.
Ambrose, quod scripturarum authoritate non didici, quasi secretum praetereo;
Confessing with E^. 121. Probae.
Augustine, that there is a learned ignorance, taught by the spirit of
wisdom* and with Lib. 3. de Gubern. Dei.
Salutanus, the desire to know that which Almighty God would have hidden, it is
a kind of sacrilege.

And upon these premises, I conclude with x Euthymius, y Calvin, z Maldonat, a
Gualter, and b many In loc.
more, that Christ here wrote nothing at all, only seemed to write, that he
might express by this gesture, his distaste of their idle question* and that
he did not attend their captious cauilling, as men use, when they disregard
unsavory speeches, and vain prattle, to strike the ground with their staff,
to play with their gloves, or to write with their fingers in the air,
manifesting by these behauiours, and the like, contempt and scorn.

Yet I believe this to be so, not because these Doctors say so, but as the
Samaritane in the fourth of S. John's Gospel, at the 42 verse, because we have
heard himself construe himself so; for says our Evangelist, according to the
last, and best English Translation, herein agreeing with diverse Greek copies,
as Beza reports; He stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as
though he heard them not.

2 Maldonat.
If Christ had written any sentence, concerning the Pharisees, they would
rather have framed a reply, then continued asking.

3 It is not easily granted, that Christ would stoop down again, to write
that which he had written before.

4 Had Christ written any remarkable saying, it is probable, S. John here
would have reported, and repeated it.

But as whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning; So this
not written, is for our instruction also; teaching us by this example, that we
need not answer cauils objected by schismatics and Heretics, in all things,
and at all times; not in all things, for Aristotle tells us, it is absurd,
to reform ridiculous opinions, accuratly: the best answer to words of scorn,
is Isaacks Apology to his brother Ismael, the Apology which patience and
silence makes; our answer (said reverend Eccl. Polit. lib. 5. p. 66.
Hooker,) to their reasons, is no, to their scoffs, nothing.

Not at all times; for there is a season, and an opportunity, for every
purpose; when our blessed Lord was on the Cross, the Jews mocked him, If thou
be the Son of God, and King of Israel, come down from the Cross, and save
thy self; But he did answer nothing, because it was tempus patiendi, non
faciendi, His work was now to suffer, and not to do; to be crucified, and not
magnified; And so when his adversaries here would have him censure this
adultresse, he does intimate that his hour was not yet come to condemn, his
work was now to save sinners, and not to destroy, distingue tempora, et
convenient omnia, Christ has a threefold coming into the world, according to
the threefold distinction of time.

Past, Present, Future;

In time past, as Ser. 3 de ad^. Dom.
Bernard pithily, venit ad homines* He came to men: in the time present, venit
in homines; he comes into men by his spirit: In the time to come, venit
contra homines, He shall come to judge the quick and the dead. His first and
second coming is to convert sinners, his third, only to condemn, he said
therefore to the woman, has no man condemned thee? neither do I condemn
thee; go thy way, and sin no more. And this may serve for the resolution of
the second question also, touching what was written; to fill up the rest of the
time remaining; I might examine how the serpentine brood of Ignatius Loiola,
devoted only to the name of Jesus, imitate the person of Jesus, in nothing.

He was stooping, but it may be said of them, as Dan. Chron. Page 142.
Henry the third, of the hospitallers at Clearken well, their extraordinary
faculties, and privileges have made them rich, their riches proud, their pride
mad, impudently bragging, that the Relation of Religion. Sect. 28.
Church is the soul of the world, the Clergy of the Church, and the Jesuits
of the Clergy.

Jesus in this answer to the Pharisees, expressed equity, truth, piety; but
the Jesuits in their disputes, regard quaestum magis quam quaestionem; All
seeking their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, as S. Paul phraseth it,
Philip. 2. 21. Which occasioned Hist. Ord. Jesuit cap. 2.
a learned Divine to say, that they were Suitae, not Iesuitae, lovers of
themselves, and not followers of Christ.

Jesus here, would have scandalous accusations of our brethren written in the
dust, and trodden under feet, of all that pass by: But their doctrine is
composed of lies, and libels, and all things are fed, and maintained by such
things, of which they are bred and made; the Dr. Feathe.
aliments of Popery, must be correspondent to the elements, of which it
consists; aequiuocation is their Diana, lying their best help, Machiauel
their fifth, if not first Evangelist, as Caesar said, si ius violandum est,
regni causa violandum, and I have heard, that Sambucus, alluding to that
Apoph^egme should say, when he had stolen a manuscript out of a library* si ius
violandum est, eruditionis causa violandum, so these men are resolved, if a man
must lie, he must lie for the good of the catholic religion, and if lie in so
good a cause, lie to some purpose.

Jesus is a Savior of his people, the Prince of Peace, the God of love; but
the Jesuits, are destructive doctors, as Earl of Northamp. at Ga^nets
Arraignment
rash Empiricks; they can cure none, but by letting of blood, no treason
plotted, Hist. meditat lib. 4 cap. 9.
as ( Camerarius observes) in any state, but a Jesuit has a finger, if not his
whole hand in it, either at the beginning, middle, or end; so drunken with the
blood of the Saints, that (as their Watson Q^odlibet. 3.
old acquaintance writes) the very Canibals, and Anthropophages, shall condemn
them at the last day.

Thus have they nothing of Jesus, except only the bare name, and nomen inane,
(says a Father) is Crimen immane, for their nature, they resemble more Christ's
adversaries, the Scribes and Pharisees, as being their offall and offspring,
not so much flesh of their flesh, as spirit of their spirit.

Now beloved (I beseech you) give me leave to say that unto you, which Moses in
the 30. Chap of Deuter. to his auditors, I have set before you this day, life
and death; good and evil, blessing and cursing, choose therefore life; shun the
ways of Antichrist; which are the paths of death, and follow Christ's example,
which is the way, the truth, and the life: that for, both you, and your seed
may live, good subjects, in his kingdom of grace, and blessed Saints in his
kingdom of glory.

JAMES. 5. 16. Confitemini invicem peccata vestra: Confess your faults one to
another.
Our iniquities make a Esaias 59. 2.
separation between God and us, and withhold his good things from us, Ierem.
5. 25. Now then, vt cessante causa cesset effectus, that the cause ceasing, its
effect also may cease; S. James in the closing up of his Epistle, prescribes a
Aquin in loc.
threefold remedy, for the removing of our sins, Eclipsing the Sun of
righteousness, and hiding his face from us.

The first is, confession of our faults, one to another, in our present text.

The second is, prayer one for another, in the words immediately following.

The third is, exhorting one of another, in the 19. and 20 verses.

Concerning confession, he sets down Gorran in fundamento aurec. sermon. 1.
fers. 2. in rogation.
five conditions, especially, to wit; that it be,

1 Non involuta, sed aperta, not inuoluved and intricate, but ingenuous, and
plain, noted in the verb, fatemini. 2 Non diuisa, sed integra, not a partial
acknowledgement, but a Plenarie, noted in the preposition, Con. Confitemini. 3
Non reciproca, sed transitiua, not recoyling toward our selves, but uttered
unto others also, noted in the Aduerbe, Inuicem. 4 Non defensiua, sed
accusatiua, not defensive, but accusative, noted in the Nowne, peccata; faults.
5 Non aliena, sed Propria, not another man's, but our own, noted in the
Pronoune, Vestra, your faults.
Touching prayer, one for another, he shows the great power thereof,
illustrated by the Prophet Elias example, who being a man subject to the like
passions, as we, Aquin.
that is, frail, both in respect of his mind, and body, in respect of his
mind, as fleeing from angry Iesabel, 1. Kings 19. In respect of his body, as
being fed by Raue^s, and by the little cake of a poor widow, dwelling in
Zarepta, 1. Kings 17. Yet with one prayer he shut up the windows of heaven,
and it rained not on the earth, for three years, and six months, And with
another earnest prayer, he did open them again, and the heaven gave rain,
and the earth brought soorth her increase.

As for exhorting one another, he does urge that duty from the most excellent
reward thereof, If any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has
converted him, let him know, that he that has converted the sinner, from
going astray out of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins. It is the work of God, only to save souls See. Ce^in.
Marlorat A (...) in loc.
causally, but occasionally, good men, as Ministers, and Instruments of God,
are said to save souls, in converting sinners from evil courses, unto the
right way, by fruitful instructions and good examples. So the Scripture
speaks, Matthew. 18. 15. If he hear thee, thou have won thy brother, and more
plainly, 1. Tim. 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine,
continue therein; for in so doing, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee.

I am at this time, to treat of confession, and the condition thereof; I
therefore resume my text, Confess your faults, one to another; A Paulin^s
Epist^ lib 1. Epist 4.
sinner unregenerate, is like Judge. 16. 21.
Sampson, grinding in the prison house, corn for his enemies, the greater his
labor, the more his loss; Now the first step out of this unhappy prison, is
the acknowledgement of his faults, as the reverend Father, In Paraenesi.
Nilus, initium salutis est sui ipsius accusatio. The condemning of his
infirmities, is the beginning of his saving health; Adam in covering his
offense, did offend more, then in committing it; all the sons of Adam have
this imbred cunning, to hide their nakedness, with Gen 3. 1.
fig-leaues, that is, their naughtiness with idle cloaks, and excuses, it is
motherwit, to post and pass sin from our selves, unto some other; As when
almighty God, arraigned Adam in Paradise, for transgressing his commandment,
in eating of the forbidden fruit; he presently laid the fault upon Eua, his
wife; she being questioned, laid it upon the serpent; and the serpent upon God:
Albeit, ungodly men (as Aig^ salutis do^ ^ (...) Pente^ost.
our notes) declines their sins, throughout all the cases; in the Nominative,
by their pride, to get them a name; in the Genitive, by their fornication; in
the Dative, by their Bribes; in the Accusative, by their Detracting, and
backbiting; In the Vocative, By their adulation, and flattering; In the
Ablative, By their oppression, and robberies; Yet they will not acknowledge
their sins, in any case, yea when other men's examination has found them out
excuses already, Beynard tract de gra^ ^tatis grad. 8.
non feci; si feci, non mali feci; si mali feci, non multum male; si multum
male, non mala intention; aut si mala intention, tamen aliena suasiene; That
is, either I did not do it, or if I did do it, it was not ill; Or if ill, it
was not much ill; Or if much ill, it was not with an ill intention; Or if with
an ill intention, it was upon another persuasion; I said I will confess my
sins, quoth Psalm. 32. 6.
David; But the Psalm. 14. 1.
fool says in his heart, I will never confess my faults, and if Est. ^. 4.
16.
I perish, I perish. Our sins are termed in the Scripture, Esaias. 1. 6.
sickness, and sores full of corruption; as then a bodily wound cannot be
exactly healed, unless it first be opened, and searched by some cunning
surgeon, unto the very core; So the griefs of a wounded conscience, cannot
be thoroughly cured, unless they be revealed unto some friendly Physician,
apt, and able to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort such as mourn in
sin; If thy confession in this case, be forced, and not free; palliated b
Pro. 28. 13. S^ nos peccati nostri simus memores, deu^ obliuiscitur Divu^.
Chrisost: hom 3^. in Ep^. ad Heb.
and not plain, what do thou but fester a wound, and foster a sore within
thy own bosom * I will end this argument, in the words of ^ Solomon, He that
hides his sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses and for saketh
them, shall have mercy.

The second condition of confession is, that it be Plenarie, and not Partial,
and that is implied in the preposition, Con, as Aquine, upon the place,
Confitemini, id est, simul fatemini, confess one fault with another, as you
confess your faults one to another: Conscience before sin, is fraenum, a
b^idle, but after sin, Flagrum, a whip; If the reverend man, and Martyr of
God, Father As he reports of himself in a sermon preached at Stamford, the
which is among his other sermons fol. 96.
Latymer, took special care to the placing of his words in his examination,
after he heard the pen walking in the chimny, behind the cloth of Arras, how
circumspectly should we look to our ways, seeing conscience records all
our actions in Apoc. 20. 12.
books that are to be showed at the day of judgment, being either a witness
for us or against us, excusing, or accusing, Romans 2. 15. If any grievous crime
then afflict thy soul, confess it, and so confound it, as Luke 23. 26.
Simon of Cyrene did help to bear Christ's Cross; So thou may undoubtedly,
find some good, and discreet friend, who will in such a case, help to bear
thy cross, confess your faults, one to another, says S. James, and so bear
one another burden, says S. Paul* Galat. 6. 2*

(...) in dissembling a part of their debts unto their fathers, and other dear
friends, which are ready to take some good course, for the payment of them,
often utterly ruin their whole temporal estate; For one hundred pound not
confessed, and left vnpa^d, is a brood egg to mul iply new debts, until they
be so dangerous and desperate, as the old sins are debts, as Christ teaches
in his absolute form of prayer, and sinners are ding-thrifts, as Christ
teaches in his parable of the prodigal son, mentioned Luke 15. The
concealing then of one heinous crime, that is a burden to the conscience, from
our Father in heaven, and from our good friends on earth (able to Esaias. 50 4.
Minister words in time, to him that is weary, Like Prou 25. 11.
Apples of gold in pictures of silver,) may prove the mother of many foul
sins, unto the final undoing of our spiritual, and Ghostly welfare. He
which is to take possession of a Church, or a common house, will (according to
the tenor of our law,) be sure to shut out of the doors, man, woman, and
child, that may disturb his quiet taking of seizing; Christ stands at the
doors of our hearts, and knocks, he desires a peaceable possession of our
bodies, and souls, as being his Temples and houses; O then (I beseech you) let
us cast out of our doors, man, woman, and child, every crying crime, that
rebelleth against him; If there remain but one fault, not confessed, it may
keep possession for the devil, and so the King of glory will not enter in,
and sup with us, and dwell in us, but the foul spirit returns again,
bringing seven other spirits, worse then himself, and then alas, our end
shall be worse then our beginning, Luke 11. 26. The 1. Sam. 15. 3.
Lord commanded Saul to smite Amalek, and to destroy all that perteined unto
him, and to slay both man and woman, both infant and sucklings, both oxen, and
sheep, both camels and asses: our sins are Amalekites, that burn our 1 Samuel
30. 1.
Ziklag, and set on fire, the little city, captiuating our senses, and making
them prisoners unto their lusts: If then we spare but one Agag; it may cost us
a kingdom, and such a kingdom, as is far better then the kingdom of Saul*
a kingdom that cannot be Heb. 12. 28.
shaken, an inheritance which is immortal, and never falls away 1. Pet. 1. 4.

The third condition here required, in confession, is, that it be Transitiua,
to wit, a confession unto another; And therefore Cardinal Lib. ^. de
pae^entia. cap 4.
Bellarmin, and other Papists, usually cite this Scripture, to prone their
auricular confession of sins unto the Priest, upon pain of damnation every
year. But Artic de confess. et satis.
Melancton in his Apology, for the confession of Augusta, Calvin, in the third
book of his institutions, Chap. 4. sect. 12. Erasmus* Fulke, Marlorate,
Bullenger, Upon the place, have well observed, that the word Inuicem, intimates
plainly, that this text is to be construed, not of Sacramental confession (as
the Papists use to speak) but of a mutual confession, and so consequently,
the Priest (if he have done any wrong) is enjoined by this Canon, to confess
his faults unto his Parishioners, as well as the Parishioners are bound to
confess their faults unto their Priest, If they have trespassed him.

Nay the In loc.
Rhemists are so modest, as to say, that it is not certain, S. James here
speaks of Sacramental ^fession, and Cardinal Caietan, of all the Doctors
in his age, the most accuratly learned, as ^ Pererius the Jesuit writes of
him, a man addicted so much unto Popery, g that had he lived a little longer,
he had been chosen Pope, confesses ingeniously, Com. in loc.
Non est hic sermo de confessione facramentali, vt patet ex eo quod dicit,
confitemini inuicem, sacramentalis enim confessio non fit inuicem, sed
sacerdotibus tantum.

As for Popish auricular confession, our Divines affirm truly, First, that it
is a nouelty; Annot. in lib. Tertullian. de p^nitentia.
Beatus Rhenanus, a Papisticall author, auowes that it was unknown in the
days of Tertullian, who lived about two hundred years after Christ; and Sent:
lib. 4. destenct: 17.
Peter Lambard says, Happily it was not used in S. Ambrose time, who lived
about four hundred years after Christ; and Apud Hie^. To^. 1. fol 201.
Erasmus in his annotations upon S. Hieroms Epistle to Oceanus, touching the
death of Fabiola, writes peremptorily, that it was not ordained in S. Hieroms
age. The Greek Church (as Melanct. Tom. ^. fol. 101. ^t ^ewel defense of his
apology. fol. 156
Theodorus reports) has no such custom. Mr Jewel vbi supra fol. ^48.
Harding being hardly pursued, is constrained, in despite of his will, and wit,
to grant that the terms of auricular and secret confession, are seldom
mentioned in the Fathers; An^ot: in Act 19.
Erasmus, and Vbi supra.
Rhenanus affirm they were never used in old time* so that as reverend Jewel
said, if Harding had left out the word seldom, and said* never, his tale had
been the truer: The challenge then of Institut. lib. 3. cap. 4 sect. 7.
Calvin is justifiable, that the auricular Popish confession was not practiced
in the Church, until twelve hundred years after Christ, (...) first in the
Laterane council, under (...) the third.

2 We say that auricular confession is not necessary, for that it is an humane
tradition, and not a divine constitution, as their own Melancton ^bi su^ra.
Panormitan, acknowledges, and In su^: quast 18. art. 4. vti. Morton apolog
part. 1. cap. 64.
Maldonate their Jesuit writes expressly, that many Catholics are of the same
opinion, as namely Scotus, among the schoolmen, and the expounders of Gratian,
among the Canonists.

3 We say, that auricular confession of all faults, is impossible; for who can
tell how often he does offend? Psalm. 19. 12. Our sins are more then the
hairs of our heads, quoth Psalm. 40. 15.
David, and (as King Manasses, in his prayer,) more then the sand of the sea,
now, quod sine numero est quomodo numerabo? says Sermon de quadru ^lici de*
bito. see Harmo^ confesis. pect. 8.
Bernard.

4 We say that it is a pernicious practice, by which a great many men are
damnified, if not damned, many doubtless suffer damages in their purses, and
personal estate, because confessions evermore make work for indulgences and
indulgences are agreat support of the Popes triple Crown: Fox Martyr. fol. 35^.
There was a book written, Anno 1343. entitled, Poenitentiarius asini,
Wherein, are brought forth, the Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass* coming to
confession, and doing penance, First the Wolf confessed himself to the Fox,
who does absolve him easily from his faults, and excuse him in the same; Then
the Wolf hearing the Foxes shrift, affordes him the like favor, Lastly, (...)
ass comes to confession, whose (...) was this, that he being hungry, took
a straw from out the sheafe, of one that went in peregrination unto Rome; the
dull ass, though repenting of this fact, yet because he thought it no^ so
heinous, as the faults of the other, had immediately the discipline of the law,
with all severity, neither was he i^dged worthy of any pardon or absolution,
but was apprehended upon the same, slain, and devoured; whosoever was the
penner of this fabulous tale, had a mystical understanding in the same, For by
the Wolf, (no doubt) was meant the Pope; by the Fox, the Prelates, and
Priests, and the rest of the spirituallity; the Pope is soon absolved of the
spirituallity, and the spirituallity, soon absolved of the Pope; By the Ass,
is meant, the poor Laytie, upon whose back, the strict censure of the law is
executed sharply.

Moreover, Popish a^ricular confession is exceeding hurtful unto the sou^s of
ignorant people, Marcus An tonius de domini^ in ser. in Romans 13. 12. page 40.
who being beguiled with this blinding, and benighting doctrine, trust so much
to their external confession, and external absolution, that they neglect
inward, and entire repentance. This opinion assuredly breeds up a sinner, and
makes him (as it were) fat in iniquity; For (as ^yr E^ Sandy* r^lat of relig^:
sect. 7.
one said wittily,) the Papists account of confess sion* as drunkards of
vomiting, and say, When we have s^nned, we must confess, and when we have
confessed, we must s^nne again, that we may confess again; So they stick
fast in their sins, as thinking they have done their parts, when ^hey have
run over the bed-roule of their (...) and so received a formal absolution;
In our Fox Martyr fol. 14 ^. et 1903.
Churches history, we read, that a certain Popish Priest, named Nightingall,
Parson of Crondal in Kent, who preaching upon Shrove-Sunday to his
parishioners, and taking for his theme, the words of S. John, If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; Told them,
he had received the Popes pardon from Cardinal Poole, exhorting them also to
receive the same, seeing that he stood now so free from sin, as he did at the
fontstone, and cared not now if he should die the same hour, in the cleanesse
of his conscience, whereupon, being suddenly stricken by the hand of God, he
immediately shrunk down, into the Pulpit, and so was found dead, speaking not
one word more.

Well then, if S James here meant not auricular confession, upon constraint,
unto the Priest every year, let us examine, what confession it is, of which he
says, acknowledge your faults one to another; Our Church in the second part of
the homily concerning repentance, and Calvin, institutionum. lib. 3. cap. 4
sect 12. affirm that there is a two fold confession of faults, one to another,
enjoined in the holy Scripture, the first is for the satisfaction of our
neighbors, if we have trespassed against them, and the second is, for the
satisfaction of our own selves; If at any time, we feel our consciences
afflicted heavily with any grievous crimes, of both which our text may be
cons^d, as being Christian duties, exceed^y requisite, not only in our
sickness, but in our health also.

LECTVRE. 2.
COncerning the first kind of confession, it is a duty to be performed, in
sickness especially, to which observation I am led with In loc.
Aretius, by the coherence; for S. James in the words a little before, said, If
any man be sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray for him, and then in our text, Confess your faults one to another,
insinuating, that it is at such a time chiefly fit, yea necessary, that we
should unfeignedly forgive others, and earnestly desire that others forgive us,
and so God of his infinite mercy forgive all; When Esaias. 38. 1.
Hezechias was sick unto death, Esaias the Prophet came unto him, and said, Put
thy house in order, for thou shall die; Dispose first of thy soul, which is
ill disposed, if it be not in love, which is the Romans 13. 10.
complement of the law; Secondly, dispose of thy body, which is ill disposed;
If thou command not thy tongue, to confess thy faults, and to do right, to
those it has abused, and slandered; ^irdly, dispose of thy temporal estate,
which is ill disposed, if thou make not restitution, unto such as thou have
oppressed, and injured.

This confession is to be performed, in our health also, that if Romans 12 18.
it be possible, so much as in vsi^, we may have peace with all men, especially
when as we go to the Lords Table, so Christ instructs us. Matthew. 5. 23. If
thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee, leave there thy offering before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled unto thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift; By
which it is apparent, that we must offer in Heb. 13. ^.
love, being reconciled unto our brother, and much more unto the Church, which
is the whole brotherhood of all Christian people; for God expects, and respects
mercy more then sacrifice, Hosea. 6 6.

It is a fashion among mean men, and (for ought I know, commendable) to
provide some new clothes, against the receiving of the communion at Easter, now
S. Colos 3. 12.
Paul exhorts us, to put on under mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
m^ekenesse, long suffering, for bearing one another, and forgiving one another,
which Christ himself terms a n^w sut^. John 13. 34. A new commandment I
give unto you, that you love one another; This undoubtedly, was an old precept
from the beginning, but he calls it new, Calvin in loc.
For that he would have this always fresh in our memory, fresh in our practice,
le^ 1. Cor. 16. 14.
all our things be done in love, that one chiefly, which is called a Communion,
in respect of the common Union among our selves, and as being a sign, and a
seal of our communion with Christ, our Ephesians. 2. 14.
^eace.

The second kind of confession, is for the satisfaction of our own selves, if
at any time we feel our consciences heavily burdened with any grievous
temptation; I know Christ is the Matt 8 4.
Priest, unto whom every sinner infected with a spiritual leprosy, must open,
and show himself, being a Priest for Psalm. 110. 4.
ever after the order of Melc^isedec, an high Priest, that is touched with a
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. So Hom. 41. ad populum ^ntiochen* et.
In Heb hom. 31.
Chrysostom says, I will thee not to bewray thy self, before others openly,
but I counsel thee, to obey the Psalm 37 5.
Prophet saying; Open thy way to the Lord, And Hom. 2 in Psalm. ^0.
again, Confess thy sins unto the Lord, who is able to cure thee, and not
unto thy fellow-seruant; that may upbraid thee with them: And S. Confess lib.
10. cap. 3.
Augustine, what have I to do with men, that they should hear my confession,
as if they could heal my griefs?

Yea, but what if after all my contrition, and confession unto God, I feel not
an absolution, or any comfort, to my poor distressed soul?

What if after I have cried unto the 1. Cor. 1. 3.
Father of mercies, O ^uke 18. 3
God be merciful unto me a sinner; He do not answer my spirit, Psalm 35. 3.
I am thy salvation?

What if for one scandal which I have given, I have such an insupportable
burden in my conscience, as if a millstone were hanged about my neck; S. James
in such a case, does advise here, Confess your faults one to another, and
pray one for another, that ye may be healed; For the prayer of a righteous man
prevails much, if it be fervent. For as a vehement burning fever, is no way
to be cured, but with opening a vein, whereat the infected blood having vent,
may carry away with it, the putrified matter, that did molest the body; So
against strong temptations, and afflictions of the mind, there is no remedy
more secure, then to open the heart, unto a wise friend: and to let out those
raging passions, that did disquiet our soul.

Now because preachers of the word, ought to be more skillful and expert then
others, in applying the good tidings of the Gospel, unto the poor: to bind
up the broken hearted; and to comfort such as mourn in Sion; See Calvin.
institut. lib. 3. cap 4. sect: 12.
It is fit, that we should have recourse to some learned, Pious and discreet
Pastor: who can and will Minister a word of consolation in due season; For
Almighty God has given power, and commandment to his Ministers, to declare
and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of
their sins; Unto them he said, Mat. 18. 18 John 20. 23.
Whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose
in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And upon this ground, there is in the
Church of England, a general Collect after the confession at Mor^ing prayer,
and at the communion
absolution, after a general confession of sins, and a particular absolution,
after a In the visitation of the sick.
particular confession; and Dr Field. lib. ^. of the Church cap. 25.
we teach also, that this act of absoluing, belongs unto the Minister,
ordinarily; Tanquam ex officto: But when none of that order is, or can be
present, another may do it with good effect, according to that old saying;
Magdeburg: E^st; dedicat cent 1. et Luther loc: com^ (...) absolut. ^ Rom 1. 1.
In casu necessario, quilibet Christianus est sacerdos. In one wor^ ^ee may
confess our faults, unto good people, which are power-full in the Scriptures;
apt to teach, admonish and advise, for our comforts; But especially to Godly
Pas^ours, as being (...), 1. 1.
put apart, to preach the Gospel of God, and to 1 Cor ^. 1.
be disposers of his holy secrets.

This I know to be the Tenet of our Hom of re pent* part 2. com. (...) tit:
visitation of the sic^e.
Church, agreeable to the confessions of other reformed Churches, as to the
confession of Heluetia, Cap. 14. of Bohemia, Cap. 5. of Aspurge, art 11. of
Saxone art. 16. As you may read, Harmon: confessionum, Sect 8.

This acknowledgement of our faults, is far different from auricular Popish
confession. First, in that it is not upon constraint, but voluntary.

Secondly, because we are not enjoined to confess unto the Parish Priest, or
to any one confessor, appointed by the Diocesa^, and Ordinary; But wholly left
at our own choice. Thirdly, Because we are not tied to any certain time, but
only when we find our selves in our conscience rightly disposed, and to be in
the state of true repentance; Yet because men are negligent, and careless in
performing of this duty, the Church exhorts us to confess at two times above
the rest: To wit, In sickness, and in Lent; In sickness, every Christian ought
to make a special confession, if he feel his conscience troubled, with any
weighty matter, earnestly desiring the standers by, to pray for him, and the
discreet Pastor if need be, to absolve him: As for Lent, Although Bernard
ser. 3 de ^nio quadragesi.
our whole life should be nothing (...) but a Lent, to prepare our selves
against the Sab^ our death; and Easter of our resurrection; Yet seeing the
corruption of our days, and wickedness of our natures, is so much exorbitant,
as that it is an hard matter to hold the common sort of people within the lists
of Piety, Justice, and Sobriety: It is fit there should be one time, at the
least, in the year, and that of a reasonable continuance for the recalling of
them unto some more stayed courses, and severe cogitations, and Relation of
religion in the W^st sect. 7.
happily these things might have been more fitly restored in the reformed
Churches unto their Primitive sincerity, rather then abolished, as in some
places utterly.

The fourth thing required in confession is, that it be not defensive, bu^
accusative, noted in the word, Peccata Now there be diverse partitions of
sins, as, First, In respect of their beginning, so some sins are called
Original, as being derived from our first parent Adam; other actual as
issuing from our own corrupt will.

Secondly, In respect o^ their object, and so some sins are called carnal,
and other spiritual, according to that of S. 1. Cor. 7. ^4.
Paul, The Virgin cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both
in body and soul, For all things in which al offend, are either felt by the
senses, as meat, drink, lust, and so (...) be carnal sins, or apprehended
by the understanding, as honor, knowledge, power, and ^o called spiritual
wickednesses; the first makes us l^ke beasts, the second like devils.

Thirdly, In respect of the parties iniuried in (...), and so some be called
sins against God, other sins against our neighbors, other sins against our
selves: against all which, S. ^. Tit 12.
Paul exhorts us to live soberly, righteously, and religiously, in this
present world, that is, (as Ser. 2. de re sur^ectione domine.
Bernard and other doctors usually construe it;) Soberly toward our selves,
righteously toward our neighbors, religiously toward God^; And David against
these three kinds of sins, prays in the 51. Psalm; For a clean, right and
holy spirit: A clean spirit, to live so* berly; a right spirit, to live
honestly; a Holy spirit, to live Godly.

Fourthly, In respect of the law; for as Bellarmi^ de amissione (...) statu
(...) (...). lib 1. cap 2.
some commandments are Negative, other (...), so some sins are faults of
commission, and other are faults of omission; Idolatry, Murder, Adultery,
Th^ft, are sins of commission, as being repugnant to the Negative law, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me, Thou shall not k^ll, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not steal* Neglect of due reverence to father, and
mother, are sins of omission, as violating the Affirmative precept, Honor
thy father, and thy mother; sins of commission are called by the Latins*
Pecca^a; sins of omission, Delicta, the which di inction, Quast. 20. (...)
Leuiticum.
Augustine collecteth out of the 7. Chap. of Leu^ticus at the 7. verse, As the
sin offering is, so is the trespass offering.

Fifthly, in respect of our intention and mind in offending, and so there be
sins of infirmity, sins of ignorance, sins of malice; sins of infirmity,
are said to be committed against God the Father, whose special attribute, is
power; sins o^ (...) norance, against God the Son, whose specia^ attribute is
wisdom* sin of malice against God the Holy Ghost, whose special attribute
is love.

Well then, among all these partitions of sin, let us examine, what faults are
to be confessed one to another, In the first kind of confe^sion. which is for
the satisfaction of others, our Apostle does understand only Erasmu^, Aretius.
such offenses, as daily f^ll out between neighbor and neighbor, in our
common conversation and commerce; we need not in this case confess other
sins, committed either against God, or against our selves, but only those
which are committed against them.

But in the second kind of confession, which is for the satisfaction of our
own selves, every sin is to be confessed, that heavily burdeneth our
conscience; whether it be a carnal sin, or a spiritual: a sin of
omission, or a sin of commission: a sin of presumption, or a sin of
ignorance: a sin of weakness, or a sin of wickedness: a sin against other,
or a sin against our selves: Exodus 8. 24.
Egypt was tormented with small flies, as with great plagues, a little fault
that seems unto thee great, and troubles thee much, ought not to be
neglected, but healed by thy confession, and others consolation.

Observe moreover out of this place, that we must acknowledge faults, as
faults, and not as virtues; to be sorry for them, and not to boast in them;
otherwise, Sermon. de S Andra^. ^po ^olo.
Bernard says, it is not confessio sed defen^ the courses of ungodliness, as
David shows in the first Psalm; There is first a consultation of ill, then a
working of ill; and last of all, an impudent maintaining of ill; First, a
walking in ill; Secondly, a standing in ill; Thirdly, a sitting in ill: First,
men are ungodly; Secondly, Sinners. Thirdly, Scornful; disputing and
defending their sin, as it were in a School chair; Sin seems to the
Christian Psalm. 38. 4.
at first, Importabile, too heavy a burden for him to bear.

2. Grave, So bur^en some, as a tallent of l^ad, quoth Zach. 5. 7.
Zachary. or as a great load, quoth our Savior. Matthew. 11. 28.

Thirdly, Leave, So light, that he sins without any resisting before the fall,
or repenting after the fall.

Fourthly, Insensibile, for custom in sin takes away the Sentiment of sin.

Fifthly, Delectabile, For as Abner called fighting a sport, saying, t Let the
young m^n arise and play before us; So some make but a pastime of sin,
Proverbs 14. 9. The fool makes a mock of sin.

Sixthly, Desiderabile, When a man (as the ^. Kings 21. 25.
Scriptures speaks of Ahab)* sells himself to work wickedness, and to
commit uncleanness, (as S. Paul says) even with a greediness. Ephesians. 4. 19.

7 Defensibile, Which is the serpents head, and height of iniquity, when a
sinner is set down in the seat of the scornful, and brag of his faults, so
S. See con^es. lib: 2. cap. 3.
Augustine reports of himself, before his conversion, how he did boast of
much villainy done, yea more then was done. Th^ore let men acknowledge their
faults, one to another not to prate of them, but to pray for them, humbly
confessing them, as vices, and not idly glorying of them, as if they were
virtues.

The last obseruable condition of confession, is, tha it be not an
acknowledgement of other m^ns sins, but of our own: Matthew ^. 3.
Christ would not have us to gaze upon the mote in our brothers eye, but rath^r
to pull out the beam in our own sight: We may nor be busy Bishops in
another man's Dioces, quoth 1 Pet 4* ^5.
S. Peter; but meddle with our own business, quoth S. Paul, 1. Thessa. 4. 11*
S. Confess lib. 10 cap. 3.
Augustine complained of men in his time, that they were curious in examining
the lives of other, but exceeding slout^full in amending their own; And so
there be men in our time, Hooker. lib. ^ (...) (...): page 2* ^
whose ve^tue is nothing else, but to hear gladly the reproof of others vice,
Pra^ace (...) (...).
despising th^se for whom Christ despised himself, and den^ing them for
brothers, whom God takes for sons; But the Scripture teaches otherwise, take
away the evil of your works. Esaias 1. 16. Rend your hearts* (...) 2* 13. Not
another man's spirits, but your own, let every man examine himself, says 1
Cor. (...). 28
Paul* amend your lives, says Acts. 2. 38
Peter, acknowledge your faults says S. James. In a word, we may not break
our neighbors head, with the Pharisee, but sin^te our own breast with the
Publican^. Luke. 18. 13.

Swee^e (...) which art b^h our everlasting P^ ^d all-sufficient sacrifice for
sin, grant us grace to confess our faults humbly; first unto thee, secondly
to our selves, lastly, one to another, that thy Holy Name may be glorified, our
neighbors injuries repaired, our consciences quieted, our lives amended, and
our souls finally saved in the day of thy coming so come sweet Jesus, come
quickly* Amen.

^NIS

