A GODLY SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE RIGHT Worshipful EDWARD COOK Esquier,
Attorney General unto the Queens most excellent Majesty, and others of
Worship, in Tittleshall in Norfolk: by F. B.

Babes, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time.
Ioh. 1. Chap. 2. Verse. 18.

Babes, keep your selves from Idols. Ioh. 1. Chap. 5. Verse. 21.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kingston, for Thomas Man. 1600.

To the Right Worshipful Edward Cook Esquier, Attorney General to the Queens
most excellent Majesty, grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ.
AMong the sins in general (Right Worshipful) possessing our
peruersenature, ingratitude chalengeth to her self a special property in us,
a thing repugnant to reason, disagreeing to humanity, and contrary to the
expectation of man: that it disagreeth with humanity, Nature her self may
best be Judge, who has not dealt so sparing in bestowing of her gifts, but she
will censure him as most unkind whom she takes tardie in this sin of
ingratitude. Which sin (as it is common) so it is contagious, and has
infected many, and yet for my own part I desire to be as much as may be free
from it; which I should hardly be, if I should bury so many favors received
from your worship in the grave of forgetfulness: wherefore (in token of my
duty) I have presumed to publish this my poor talent under your good
acceptance, desiring your favorable pardon for the same. I must confess I
stood long in suspense with my self unto whom I should commit this small
travel; but your wonted affection, and zeal toward the word soon stirred me
up to present it unto you, not being much dismayed having so many reasons to
induce me thereunto: among the rest, this being one of the chiefest, namely,
your patient and godly attention when it was preached; of whom I may say as
Paul says to the Thessalonians, you received it not as it was the word of man,
but as it was indeed the word of God. 1 Thessalonians. chap. 2. verse. 13.
Thus with my hearty prayer unto Almighty God, that it will please his
Majesty to bless you with many prosperous years and days in this life, and
in the end eternal life with eternal joys, I humbly take my leave.

Your worships most bounden to command Francis Bradley.

2. CHRON. 24. CHAP. 17.18. VERSES. And after the death of Ichoiada came the
Princes of Judah, and did reverence to the King, and the King harkened unto
them:

And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served groves
and Idols, and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this their
trespass.


IN this portion of Scripture (Right worshipful and beloved in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ) the spirit of God sets down the lamentable fall of
King Ioash unto Idolatry, which was by the malice of Satan effected by his
Princes; but before we come to speak of the words set down in this Text; it
shall not be amiss to consider diverse circumstances going before, which are
very pertine^t to this place. In which circumstances, first, we may observe
the providence of God in preserving this young king Ioash from the cruel
tyranny of Athalia, who after the death of Ahaziah his father, caused all the
kings lynage to be slain: to the end that she might usurp the kingdom, and
so reign as Queen over Judah and Jerusalem: Which thing she brought to pass
for a time, but the Lord who overthrows the practices of the wicked, when it
pleases him, delivered this young infant out of her bloody hands, by the good
policy of Iehosheba his fathers sister, who did steal the child away, that he
might not be put to death according to the commandment of that blood thirsty
woman, and caused him to be kept secretly in the bedchamber of the house of the
Lord: All which time wicked Athalia reigned over the people. But when the
appointed time was come, and that Ioash being of the age of seven years, that
Grandcaptaine and holy high priest of the Lord Iehoiada, brought forth this
child with great solemnity, and caused him to be crowned king over the people:
and commanded the usurping Queen to be put to death, which thing was
performed accordingly by the just judgment of God; she being troaden under the
feet of horses. And Iehoiada made a covenant between him and the people, 2.
Chro. 23.16.
and the king, that they should be the Lords people, all which time the land
inioyed her peace. And Iehoiada was protector to the king from time to time,
teaching him the fear of the Lord, insomuch that the young king grew to be
more forward in the Law of God given by Moses, as also in repairing of the
Temple, then any of the Priests or Levites, which zeal and forwardnes of his,
continued all the lifetime of Iehoiada: which forwardnes of King Ioash in
religion and repairing of the Temple, as also the bloody Tragedy of Athalia,
with the courage and boldness of Iehoiada, I will refer you to the chapter
going before, as also this, out of which I have chosen my Text, with the 11.
and 12. chapters of the 2. book of the Kings, where the holy Ghost has most
largely and amply set down this history unto us.

Now let us come to the words as they lie in order to be handled, and after the
death of Iehoiada, etc. In these words I observe, five special circumstances,
the three first are contained in the 17. verse, the other two in the 18. verse.
In the first there is offered unto our considerations by the holy Ghost, the
time when these princes came to seduce Ioash, and that is set down in these
words, After the death of Iehoiada came the princes of Judah, etc. In the
second, we are to consider the manner of their coming in these words: And they
did reverence unto the King. In the third, the willing and ready consent of
the King unto their counsel in these words: And the King hearkened unto them.
In the fourth is set down the matter, wherein the king obeyed them, in these
words. And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served
groves and Idols: In the fifth and last is set down the just judgment of God,
against the king, Princes and people, for their rebellion and disobedience, in
these words. And wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this their
trespass.

Concerning the first which is the time, wherein Satan stirred up his
instruments, to wit, these princes of Judah to alienate and withdraw the heart
of this young king, from the true fear and service of God, wherein he was
trained up by Gods high Priest, it is said to be after yt death of Iehoiada. By
which practice of Satan we may see that to be verified in this king, which
Peter speaks of in his first Epistle and last chapter, The Devil our
adversary walks about like a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.
seeking about whom he may denoure: And therefore the Apostle wills us to
watch and be sober, a very necessary admonition for us, seeing the nature of
man is so inclinable unto that which is evil. But if it be demanded why these
Princes did not go about to put this matter in practice before; I answer
according to the proverb, there was a hatch before the door, that is,
Iehoiada was living; and therefore they knew, that Gods high Priest would not
suffer so vild a thing to be attempted, but rather would resist their
enterprise; And therefore they watched their time, when there was a door
opened unto them, by the death of Iehoiada. Thus for the most part the enemies
of the Gospel waits their seasons, when they may do most hurt: using also
the means by the which they may best prevail against the truth. The which
practice of theirs. I mean their forwardness in wickedness, should teach us
to be the more watchful over our selves and others, then we are. For if Satan
and his instruments, to wit, the adversaries of the grace of God, will use the
benefit of the time, against the Truth; how much more ought we, that are
Christians to take heed, that we suffer not so precious a thing as time, to be
pretermitted, but rather we should stir up our selves, while it is called to
day, to make our salvation sure, least we be shut out of the Lords rest, and
the door of his mercy bolted up against us, and we knocking to be let in, it
shall be said unto us, Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Again, Matthew.
7.23.
let us consider when it was that the children of Israel fell away to gross
Idolatry, and worshipped the golden calfe, which they constrained Aaron to
make, and we shall find it was even in the absence of Moses, Exodus 32.
he being upon Mount Sina with the Lord, to receive the two Tables of the
Testimony: a fit opportunity for Satan to bring them to Idolatry. When was
it that the tempter came to our Savior Christ and willed him to command
stones to be made bread, Matthew. 4.2.3.
even when our Savior had fasted forty days and fortienights, and was at the
last hungry? When was it that David committed adultery with Bethshaba, not
when he followed Gods enemies and his in battle, 2. Sam. 11.2.
but even then when he took his ease at home, in his palace, and walked upon
the roof thereof? So long as Sampson fought with the uncircumcised
Philistines, Judge. 16.2.
and employed his time against his enemies, he could not be taken of them, but
after he gave himself to idleness, and slept in the lap of Dalilah his
harlot, he was taken and made blind by the Philistines. King Solomon, 1. King.
19.
after he had left off to build the Temple, he was seduced and brought to
Idolatry by women. When was it that Simon Peter denied and forsware his
Master, not so long as he was in his company, Mat. 16. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
but after our Savior Christ was taken by the high Priests, and he bathing
and warming himself in the high Priests hall, he had soon forgot his promise
unto Christ, and before the cock crew he denied him thrice? And therefore let
us watch over our selves, and keep good watch and ward at all times, and in
all places, least we be found of our Arch-enemy unarmed, and let us buckle on
our armor of proof, that the dangerous blows of Satan, do not pearce it:
for as I have said before, he watches his time when he may best take us, at an
advantage, like a cunning master of Fence, who will be sure to give a venie, if
at any time we lie open unto him. These examples which we have showed of the
fall of good men, may be looking glasses for us all, wherein we may see what
flesh and blood is, without Gods spirit assisting us. For who is more holier
then was David, of whom the Lord said, he was a man after his own heart: or who
more stronger then Sampson, or who more wiser then Solomon: or who loved Christ
more then Peter: and yet all these slipped and troad awrie? So that there is
not any man that can assure himself of standing no, not the holy father the
Pope himself. And therefore truly is it said, from hence comes all
mischief, even when men slept, Mat. 13.25.
the enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way: when men
run not forward in the race of their salvation, the devil labors to work
their destruction, as afterward it may appear, by the fall of this King, which
by Gods just judgment was slain by his own servants, and the Princes
destroyed, and the people delivered up into the hands of the Aramites, and so
the land was deprived of their governors, and peaceable government.

Thus beloved we shall hear, that the taking away of governors, and the want
of godly government, is one of the greatest punishments that the Lord uses to
inflict upon the land, Esaias. 3.4.
as it appears in Esaias, where the Lord threatens, that for the sin of the
people, he will appoint children to be their Princes, and babes to reign over
them, and the people shall be oppressed one of another, which punishment the
Lord in his mercy has kept from us, until this day.

For the which we have just cause to give laud and praise unto God, who has
so myraculously defended our gracious Queen, from the hands of all her
enemies, in despite of their beards, whom the Lord still continue amongst us,
that she may be an old noursing mother in Israel, for his Christ his sake. God
(we must needs confess) has taken away many good Iehoiadaes out of this land,
I mean godly and sage Counselors, which no doubt, is an argument of his
displeasure against us for sin, and yet what people or nation under the
heavens, have enjoyed that peaceable and christian government so long time, as
we have done, and at this present do enjoy, by the means of our blessed
Debora.

Thus we have seen what has fallen out in their times, which may be
sufficient motives unto us, not to detract the time any longer, but as we are
forward, in the observation of the times and seasons, in our outward travail
and labors; so let us make benefit of this precious time of the Gospel, that
thereby we may be made fit for Gods kingdom, when we shall be called hence.
Thus I will conclude this circumstance in a word, observing this, that as the
Angels of God could do nothing in punishing of Sodom, Genesis 19.2^.
until Lot was gone out unto little Zoar: no more could these Princes seduce
Ioash, until Iehoiada was gone to God, after which time, they prevailed with
the King, and brought him to Idolatry: as we shall afterward hear. And thus
much for the first circumstance, concerning the time, wherein these Princes are
said to come unto the King.

Now follows the second, which is the manner of their coming, and they did
reverence unto the King: which is a certain outward obedience, which they
showed, under the color of submission, which humility and obeisance of
theirs, was used partly, after an hypocritical manner, to steal away the
heart of the King unto Idolatry: which has bin a perilous practice in all
ages, and therefore the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians
admonishes them to take heed of those false brethren, Col. cap. 2.4.
who under the color and pretense of humility, labor to estrange and draw
them back from Christ. But I will give you the words, as they are set down in
the Epistle, which are these.

And this I say, Col. 2.4.
least any man should beguile you, with enticing words: and again, Let no man
at his pleasure, bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind. If you read the
whole Chapter, you may see, how careful the Apostle is, least they should be
corrupted by false brethren, and so deprived of their Crown, by the subtlety
and counterfeit humility of some, who labored to draw them to the worshipping
of Angels, or to tie them to ceremonies and types in the Law, which were
abrogated and ended in Christ, and were but shadows of things to come. If the
Apostle had this care, that he would not have them to receive any thing, seem
it never so little contrary to the Analogy of faith, in the profession of the
Gospel and the true worship of God, how much more ought we to have a special
care, that we fall not away from grace in Christ Jesus. Well, let us now see
further, how dangerous these flattering hypocrites be, in the Church of God,
and in the common wealth: surely it many times falls out, that the very
conceit and good opinion, that we take of some, does much blind our eyes, that
we seldom or never examine their peevish counsel given unto us, whether it
be of God or no: but their speeches they are as authentical with us almost, as
the articles of our faith. 1. John 4.1.
This is not to try the spirits whether they be of God or not. Thus was King
Darius circumuented by the flattery of his nobles, in making and sealing a
decree against his subject Daniel, they no doubt persuading him, that it would
be a matter of great policy, for the trying of the obedience of his new
subjects, and that by that means he should find out those that were
disobedient, which would tend greatly to his good; when as indeed, their
purpose was nothing else, but to destroy Daniel. The Prophet David complains
of those flatterers which were in his time, as appears in the twelueth
Psalm, saying: They speak deceitfully every one unto his neighbor, Psalm. 12.
flattering with their lips, and speaking with a double heart: but in the
next verse he says, The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue
that speaks proud things. Ier. 9.
Also Jeremy the Prophet cries out against these deceivers, Let every one
take heed of his neighbor, and trust you not in any brother, for every brother
will use deceit, and every friend will deal deceitfully, and every one will
deceive his friend, and will not speak the truth, for they have taught their
tongues to speak lies, and take great pains to do wickedly. By which place of
Scripture we may see, how common a thing it is, for men to work wickedness,
and how hard a matter it is for men to deal faithfully one with another. This
was not only the sin of the Jews, which were then the people of God, and
whom the Lord had chosen unto himself, from amongst all the nations of the
earth; but it is now as common amongst us that are Gentiles, who have taken
upon us the profession of the Gospel. Also we read that our Savior Christ
was betrayed by the flattery of Judas, for the Evangelist says, that he came
unto his Master with these words: Mat. 26.49. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
God save thee master, and kissed him. We may read also how David that holy
man was seduced by the flattery and deceivable speeches of Ziba, who accused
Mephibosheth his good subject, 2. Sam. 16.4.
and by him he was moved to give away the lands of Mephibosheth unto that
fawning and flattering sycophant Ziba. And surely, if we will take a little
pains in reading the Scriptures, we shall find how these flatterers crept into
Princes Courts, as into the Court of King Saul, who was the first King that
reigned over Israel; 1. Reg. 12.
who had Doeg and others ready to accuse David unto the King. Also king Roboam
had his flatterers, who caused him to speak roughly unto his people: and so
Darius as we have heard before, had many about him, that sought the death of
Daniel. Amos. 7.10.
We read also of Jeroboam, who had Amaziah at his elbow to accuse Amos the
Prophet. Ezra. 4.8.
Also we read in Ezra of Rehum the Chancellor and Shimshay the Scribe with
the rest of their companions, who writ unto Artahshashte the king, accusing the
inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem of rebellion, against the King and Princes
of the land. But what should we speak of more examples out of the Scripture,
when we have daily experience that teaches us, that there is nothing more
common at this day then flattery and deceit, which men carry under the cloak
of humility, and use it as the chiefest weapon to fight against the children
of God. The old proverb being verified in them, that under green leanes lies
hidden the viperous Serpent, of whom if we take not heed, and be very wary we
may be stung unto death. So if we take not heed of these flattering Sycophants,
which are the devils instruments, we may be brought to confusion of body and
soul, which many times comes to pass by their smooth persuasions and sweet
in chantments. And yet they are such as bear the world in hand ye they are
friends to religion, when as their purpose is no thing else but the overthrow
of the same. These men they shroud themselves in the very bosom of the Church,
so that they may well be compared to these false brethren which seduced the
Galathians, after that they had received the Gospel from the Apostle Saint
Paul, which false teachers corrupted the pure doctrine of the holy Ghost, and
joined with it, the observing of diverse ceremonies, Gal. 1.
which they taught as necessary to salvation. Wherefore the Apostle Saint Paul
seems to wonder at their sudden change, and therefore in his Epistle to
them, after his salutation he reprehendeth them after this manner. I marvel,
says he, that you are so soon removed away unto another Gospel from him that
has called you in the grace of Christ, which is not another Gospel, save that
there be some that trouble you, and intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ.
Therefore if we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Thus we have heard what flatterers have been in the Church of God from time to
time, laboring to seduce and draw Gods children from true religion and his
service: which may be a sufficient warning unto us as we have showed before,
lest we be carried away unto falsehood, and become irreligious and profane,
embracing the doctrine of devils, for the doctrine of Christ. Which many times
falls out amongst us for want of due care had over our selves: and therefore
it will not be amiss for us, to avoid, as much as may be, the company of the
wicked, least by our society with them, we be drawn to join with them in
their corrupt religion, as also in a profane conversation. Let us take heed
that we lend not our ears to the enchanted melody of those Sytens, whose
songs may breed a sweet delight in us, and yet our destruction may be at hand.
Thus we will conclude this second point, that as Absolon by the courteous
carriage of himself stale away the hearts of his fathers subjects, so these
Princes by their reverent behavior, stole away the heart of this king from his
God. And so much for the second circumstance.

Now follows the three circumstance in these words, And the King harkened unto
the^. Which is as much as if the holy Ghost had said, he accepted of their
counsel, and being deluded by them, he declined from the true service of God,
wherein he had been trained up all his life time by Iehoiada the high Priest,
and was now fallen away. We must not think that it was unlawful for the King
to hear them, for in that he heard their counsel he sinned not, but in that he
obeyed them, and was contented to be led by them unto Idolatry, thereby he
incurred the wrath of God, and brought a heavy judgment upon himself and his
subjects: And therefore it is the part of all good christians and loving
subjects to pray unto God, and that continually, that it would please his
Majesty so to inlighten all christian kings and princes of the earth, with the
spirit of wisdom and discerning, that they may avoid and sly the dangerous
allurements of the wicked, whom the Lord sometime suffers to sit in the place
of Magistracy, enen to be a rod for the people. For Solomon says, I have seen
servants on horses, and Princes walk as seruats on the ground, which saying of
Solomon may be thus understood, Prou. 10.7.
yt sometime both in the Church and Commonwealth, the unworthy and unfit ones
are preferred before the worthy: and being set at the stern of the ship, they
like unskillful Pylots, suffer the ship to go to wrack. But in this thing we
must not think the hand of God to be wanting, but that he by his providence,
uses them as a scourge to correct his people, as he used Nabucadnezer and
Senacherib and diverse others, to afflict and persecute the stubborn and
disobedient Jews: and therefore David his counsel is to be listened unto,
whereas he exhorts all kings and rulers of the earth to submit themselves
under the hand of God, in these words. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be
learned ye Judges of the earth, Psalm. 2.10.
serve the Lord in fear.

And therefore if there be any that will learn true wisdom, and be truly
wise, they must be Gods scholars, they must be contented to he are him,
speaking unto them out of his word. And so soon as they know, that it is the
voice of God, their answer must be obedience, and must say with Samuel, speak
on Lord, 1. Sam. 3.10.
thy servant hears. Thus we must bend our ears unto God when he speaks
unto us by his ministers whom he has placed over us, for our instruction. When
the people of Israel were to enjoy that good land which the Lord had promised
them by the right of inheritance, and had destroyed many nations and kings for
their sakes, what did the Lord require of them in lieu of his wondrous works.
which he wrought upon Pharao and the Egyptians, and Sheon king of the Amorits
which dwelt at Heshbon, and Og the king of Basan, and took their Cities, and
divided them among the tribes of Israel as we may read in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 3.
Truly he requires this, that they would harken unto his laws, ordinances,
and statutes which he gave them by the hand of Moses his servant whom he had
placed over them in authority, as appears further in the next chapter of
this book, where he thus speaks unto the people from the Lord. Now
therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the ordinances, Deuteronomy. 4.
and to the laws which I teach you, to do them, that ye may live and go in
and possess that land which the Lord God of your fathers gives you: And again
he says, Keep them therefore and do them, for that is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the people, which shall hear of all these
ordinances, and shall say only this people is wise, and of understanding, and
a great nation, etc. Thus every one from the highest to the lowest, must
hearken to the laws of God set down unto them in his word to do them, for
this is true wisdom, and true understanding both before God and men. Yea
other nations shall be constrained to acknowledge and confess that this our
people and nation is a wise people, and of understanding: yea further the Lord
makes most sweet promises unto the^, if they will hearken unto his laws to do
them, Deuteronomy. 28.
as we may read in the same book, where also he does denounce and threaten to
lay his curses upon them which do the contrary. And again in the fifth of
this book, when Moses was to deliver the law written in Tables of stone, which
he had received of the Lord to deliver unto Israel, he called all the people
together, and said unto them. Deuteronomy. 5.
Hear, O Israel, the ordinances and laws which I propose to you this day. And
again in the next chapter he has the like words saying. Hear therefore, O
Israel, and take heed to do it. And again he says, Deuteronomy. 6.
hear O Israel, the Lordour God is Lord only. And thus as Moses labored yt
the people of Israel should apply their ears and hearts to hear and to do
that which he taught them from the Lord: even so should we apply the same, and
lay them up in our hearts with blessed Marie, Luke ^.
and ponder them to our further comfort. But it is the nature of man, to have
his ears open, to hear the counsel of men many times before the counsel of
God, and according to the affection we bear unto them, we are contented to
suffer our selves to be led by them, whether it be with or against the truth:
whereby many times it falls out to our overthrow and destruction as we shall
hereafter hear.

Now let us consider the manifold dangers, which we make our selves subject
unto, by lending our ears to the counsel of wicked men. Solomon says, Can a
man carry fire in his bosom, and not be burnt? Prou. 6.27.
No more can we embrace wicked counsel, but we bring damage unto our selves.
As appears by the example of Roboam the king of Israel, who refused the
counsel of the grave and wise ancients, who willed him to speak kindly, and
deal lovingly with those that came unto him; but not regarding their counsel,
he took the advice of wicked and desperate youths, who advised him to speak
roughly or churlishly unto them, saying, My least part shall be heavier then my
fathers loins: if my father did chastise you with rods, 1. Reg. 12.
I will correct you with scourges or scorpions. But what followed? a lamentable
sequel; The kingdom of David was rent a sunder, and the Tribes of Israel
divided. Also we read of the young Prophet, being persuaded to eat bread by
the old Prophet, where the Lord had commanded the contrary, and by that means
he procured to himself a fearful death, 1. King. 13.
being slain with a Lio^. So Michaiah was persuaded by the kings Chamberlain
to speak unto the king like unto all the rest of the Prophets, who said unto
him by these words, let thy words be like unto theirs: and surely he had many
reasons to move him thereunto, among the which, this might be one special
reason, 1. King. 22.
that there was 400. Prophets that consented and joined together, to speak
good unto the king. 2. Another reason was this, that he was advised by a great
courtier, and a man of account, but this above all, might be a sufficient
motive to induce him, that to contradict the counsel of so many prophets might
cost him his life. Exodus 13.2.
But Michah had learned this lesion, that he must not follow a multitude to do
evil, and therefore he returned this answer, as the Lord lives, what the
Lord speaks unto me, that will I speak: And therefore we are not to follow
high nor low, young nor old, friend nor kinsman, any further, then is agreeable
to the word of our eternal God. Nay we are not to follow the godly any further
then they follow Christ. Phil. 3.17.
For Paul bids us to follow him, as he was a follower of Christ. Then much
less may we follow the counsel of wicked and profane men. Further let us
hear what yt Lord says by Moses unto Israel: If thy brother, Deuteronomy. 13.
the son of thy mother, or thine own son, or thy daughter, or thy wife
that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend that is unto thee as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods etc. thou shall
not consent unto him, nor hear him, neither shall thine eye pity him, thy
hand shall be first upon him, meaning to see him punished: So that we see, that
wicked counsel, specially in the service and worship of God, must not go
scot-free or unpunished: how much less are we to suffer our selves, to be
led as captives by them, howsoever they seem to affect us: for it is the
policy of Satan many times, to use those that are near unto us to alienate
and draw our hearts from God, and that we should not perform those things
which the Lord has commanded us, as it appears by the practice of Satan,
who used Peter the Apostle to stay our Savior Christ from Jerusalem, as the
Evangelist records, that when our Savior began to tell his Disciples of his
going to Jerusalem, and of his suffering there: Peter took him aside, and
began to rebuke him, saying: Master, pity thy self, this shall not be unto
thee, then our Savior looked back and said unto him, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me, Mat. 16.12.23.
because thou understand not the things that are of God, but the things that
are of men. Again, we may read in Amos of politic Amazia, who gave counsel
unto the Prophet Amos, to flee into the land of Judah, and there to eat his
bread, and to prophecy, using these words as a reason to persuade him, that it
was the Kings chapel and the Kings court: Amazia fearing that his prophesying
there, might be a means to turn the King, but the Prophet was so far from
hearkening unto him, that he thundered Gods judgments against him, Amos
7.12.13.
saying: Thus says the Lord, thy wife shall be a harlot in the city, and thy
sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided
by line, and thou shall die in a polluted land, and Israel shall surely go into
captivity forth out this land. Thus if we will be Christ's soldiers, and
stand for him and the glory of our God, let us set our selves against Satan
and his instruments, putting upon us our spiritual armor, and not fearing
them, but as Christ commanded us to learn of him humility, Matthew. 11.
so let us also learn of him courage and boldness, to resist and reprehend
(as he did Peter) their wicked counsel, who speak unto us from Satan, that
sent them, or else their counsel is carnal; 1. Pet. 2.
but as Peter says, that fleshly lusts fight against the soul: so fleshly
counsel fights against the soul: and as Solomon says, An angry countenance
drives away a slaundering tongue: Pro. 25.
so an angry rebuke and a sharp reprehension drives away a worldly, fleshly
and devilish counselor. What gained Ahab by following the counsel of
Iesabel, 1. Reg 22.
in taking away the vineyard of Naboth? surely his reward was death, the Lord
meets with his wickedness, that he, being in his chariot, notwithstanding
his armor, he was slain with an arrow, which pierced the joints of his
brigandyne: the like judgment the Lord inflicted upon Iehoram his son by
Iehu, 2. Reg. 17.
whom the Lord used further in the punishing of Iesabel Ahabs counselor, whom
he commanded to be cast out of the window, and the bellies of hungry dogs
became the sepulcher of her corpse.

And as the Lord recorded the wickedness of Amelech for opposing himself
against Israel, Exodus 27.
so the Lord has recorded the wickedness of Ahab, Ioram and Iesabel, 1. Reg.
21.
and sent his Prophet to foretell the judgments that should ensue. What
success had Absolon in following the counsel of Achitophel? notwithstanding
the scripture reports of him to be a man of singular beauty and loveliness,
and yet the earth refused any longer to bear him, and the heavens would not
receive him, and therefore he hanged betwixt heaven and earth by the hair of
the head, whose example may be a looking glass for all such monsters, 1. Reg.
18.
who are so in love with their locks, that they bestow more time in trimming of
them, then in any exercise of religion: 2. Sam. 17.
and Achitophel his counselor hanged himself; a just reward for rebels and
traitors. The Prophet David foreseeing the manifold dangers, and mischiefs
that men fall into by walking in the counsel of wicked men, begins thus.
Psalm. 1.
Blessed is that man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly: which
blessedness the Lord grant unto all them that fear him.

Now as we have heard how dangerous outward enemies are unto us, and how they
labor by all ways and means to overthrow religion both generally and
particularly, so we must also be very watchful, over our homebred enemies,
which is our own concupiscence, and the untowardness of our corrupt nature,
which makes continual war against the spirit: and therefore it is very
necessary, that we should labor to expel those traitors out of us, or else it
will little boot us to fight against the enemies abroad. Gregory in moral.
And therefore one says, it is in vain to fight against the enemy in the
field, if we harbor a traitor within the walls. There is no worse counselor,
then that which we carry about with us, which are as dangerous unto us, as the
counselors of Ahab and Herod, which is our corrupt affections, which is well
called of one, a domestical traitor, and a seditious counselor, for that it
walks, stands, sits, sleeps and dwells with us. The Apostle S. Gal.
5.
Paul wills the Galathians to walk in the spirit, and then you shall not
(says he) fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. But the holy Apostle in his Epistle
to the Romans does most notably handle at large this combat between the
spirit and the flesh, Romans 7.
where the Apostle brings in his own deeds, to be contrary to the will of
the spirit. Now if this blessed Apostle and elect servant of God, who was
regenerate by the power of the spirit, did find in himself this imbecillitie
and weakness, how much more may we behold in our selves our gross impieties
and manifold rebellions against our merciful father, and sweet Savior
Christ, whose sides and heart we newly pearce, crucifying again the Lord of
life. Let us therefore not only croppe the branches of sin, as to abstain
from the outward show of evil, but let us labor rather to pluck up sin by
the roots in our selves, so that we may wholly give over our selves not as
servants to sin, but as servants to righteousness, praying unto God
continually for the assistance of his holy spirit, so that all our thoughts,
words, works and ways, may be ordered by the rule and square of his blessed
and revealed word: and let us bring our actions to the touchstone which is the
word of God, Job. 31.
that we may try them as gold is tried in the furnace: and let us be like unto
Job, that as he made a covenant with his eyes, so let us make a covenant with
our hearts, that we suffer them not to stray from the commandments of the
Lord. For our heart is the fountain from whence springs all our actions,
whether they be good or evil. And this is a general disease among us at this
day, the worser sort are not only infected with it, but many of the better
sort can be content to bear a general good liking toward the word of God and
his commandments, but seldom or never do they labor to approve their hearts
before God, in the performance of their several duties, which they owe unto
God or unto their brethren; but they rather content themselves, with the very
name or title of Professors of the Gospel, when as in the mean time, they
ought to have considered, that the very neglect of any one duty, commanded us
in the word, and known unto us, redoundeth to the contempt of the Lord
himself, who is the Lawgiver, and therefore the right perusing of the several
duties commanded us in his Law, will bring us from our pretended profession, to
an approved practice of such duties as are commanded us of the Lord: for the
Lord beholds not the outward obedience alone, but he looks to the obedience
of the heart, Pro. 23.26. Deuteronomy 6.
and therefore Solomon says in the person of God, My son, give me thy heart:
and the Lord in Deuteronomy. commands the children of Israel, to love him with all
their heart, with all their soul, and all their strength. Thus we have heard
how king loash hearkened with consent unto the counsel of his Princes: also,
how the Lord has punished many other, for following of wicked counsel: and
again, how the godly have refused to be led by it: and again, how we are to
set our selves against homebred counselors, namely our own concupiscence and
fleshly affections, which like traitors and rebels have conspired our
overthrow: and lastly, how we are to approve our hearts before God in the
practice of those several duties, which he has commanded us in his word: and
so much for the third circumstance, where it is said, that he hearkened unto
them.

Now it follows to be considered, wherein the King is said to have followed
their counsel, in these words. They left the house of the Lord God of their
fathers, and served groves and idols.

By which words it appears, that as they left off to serve God, according as
they had bin instructed and taught by ^ehotad^ in the laws and commandments
given by Moses; so also they left the place of Gods worship, namely the house
of God, and the holy temple built by Solomon, and served their Idols in other
places of their own invention. But first let us consider how God is said to be
the God of their fathers. God calls himself. The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac and the God of Jacob, and bound himself by a conenant to be a God unto
them and to their seed for ever: and therefore Jacob when he stood in sear of
his brother Esau, turns himself by prayer unto God; saying, Genesis 32.
O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac etc. As the Lord would
have no other gods joined with him, so he gave commandment for the manner of
his worship, how it should be performed, and also for the place, where the
Jews should assemble themselves to offer their sacrifices, and other rites and
ceremonies, commanded them in the Law by Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.5.
as appears in Deuteronomy. where Moses speaks thus unto them, You shall seek the
place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name
there to dwell, and thither thou shall come. And again he says, Deuteronomy. 13.
Take heed that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou
see, but in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of your tribes. And
therefore the Arc which was made did represent Gods presence, and was placed
in Shilo, where some think it remained more then three hundred years, and
afterward was removed into other places, till the appointed time that God
commanded Solomon to build the Temple: after which time the Israelites were
commanded to resort thither, for the performance of such sacrifices and other
rites and ceremonies, which were required of them by the Lord: all which
service and worship continued till the coming of Christ: although it were
altogether corrupted amongst the Jews, as also amongst the high Priests with
the Scribes and Pharisees, and after that Solomon had builded the Temple, he
made his prayer unto God, that the Lord would have his ears open unto the
prayers of his servants, which should pray unto him in that place, and that if
any should be led into captivity, and return unto the Lord by repentance,
2. Chro. 6 1. King. 7.
with their faces toward the Temple, that he would be ready to hear them:
the Lord answering his prayer, in the next Chapter: Thus they left off to serve
God, and became Idolaters, and hasted Gods judgments against themselves. What
should I speak of our Italian and Romish worshippers, when as every man that
has any sight at all, may see their gross and palpable dealing, in absenting
themselves from our assemblies, and saigning unto themselves a religion of
their own brain. So that as they have forsaken the fellowship of Gods children
in the congregation, so have they forsaken God himself, and set up Idols in
God his stead, casting down themselves before them, and worshipping them: but
if they will say they worship not the Idol or image, but God in them or by
them, this is gross idolatry, befofore God. But blessed be God for that it
has pleased his Majesty to stir up our gracious Queen to tread in the steps
of good Ezechtas and Josias to destroy the Idol groves and temples with those
high places, or rather high Altars which were erected for the sacrifices of
their Mass and other their superstition. Another sort there are that have left
our public assemblies, Brownists.
saying, we have neither Church nor lawful ministry, and yet have some of
them confessed that the knowledge which they have, they first came unto it by
the hearing of the word of God in our congregations, preached by those whom now
they do condemn: they pretend purity in the profession of the Gospel, and see
not that their proceeding cannot be warranted by the word, nay some of them
have confessed that since that they left of to hear the word preached, they
have found themselves very cold in religion. These with others are puffed up
with a certain proud conceit of themselves, and do bear themselves very
stubbornly toward their superiors, either forgetting, or else not having
learned the lesson of meeknes and humility of our Savior Christ, Mat. 11.
I will not speak of the idle life of some of them, how they have neglected
their calling, wandering from place to place, and living by the labors of
others, but it were well if we could approve our humility in some measure
before God and men, with holy David, who says, My beart is not haughty,
neither are my eyes lofty, Psalm. 13.
neither have I walked in great matters and hid from me: by which words the
Prophet approoueth himself before God as one of his, and purges himfelse from
this sin of pride. There are also some which although they leave not of
altogether to hear the word, yet how much time do they spend in reading books
unprofitable and profane, which tends much to the hurt of a good mind, being
stuffed with many lies and tales, as the book of King Arthur, Sir Tristram,
Sir Lancclet, the book of Skogging, Beuis of Southhampton, the hundredth
unsavory tales filled with ribaldry, I say nothing of amorous books, yea,
rather venomous books flowing with lasciuiousnes and uncleanness, and such
other dregs of the like stamp, which were sitter for the fire then the press,
and in these toys while many do spend their time in reading of them they never
complain of wearines, although they spend diverse hours in the forenoone, and
also in the afternoon: but the hearing of the word of God is irksome unto
them, and yet they can be content to drive away the time (as they say) which I
have showed before, should be better employed: yea the long winter nights must
by that means be shortened; and as the ears of many are very attentive, so
their hearts are carried away with a certain delight of such stuff as they
hear out of such profane books, but as for the sacred book of God the holy
Bible, it lies in a corner being seldom used (if there be any). And these
although they do not altogether refuse to hear the word of God, yet it has
not wrought such a relish in them, Act. 17.11
that with the noblemen of Berea they search the scripture and therefore as the
Lord says, Why take thou my wordin thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? So
it may be said to those, why hear thou my word, and hate to be reformed.
Well, for as much as it is the work of God his spirit, both to will and to do
the thing that is good, we must have our recourse unto God (by prayer) to work
those things in us which nature will not afford, that we hearing the word, may
reap such profit as that we may relish and taste it to the building of us up
in Christ. Now as it is the part of all men to labor for a saving knowledge,
so also must this knowledge beget a practice in all those that profess the
Gospel, following the example of the godly in the scripture, who after they had
the tree of says planted in them, they brought forth fruit accordingly, as
appears by Zacheus, Luke 19. Luke. 19
and that we may be the better stirred up to use the means for faith, let us
consider the example of some whom the holy Ghost has set out unto us, and our
savior Christ himself vpbraiding the stubborn Jews brings in that example
worthy of memory, to wit, the Queen of the south, who is said to come from the
uttermost part of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold says
he, a greater then Solomon is here, she is said to have left for a time her
fruitful country Arabia called Saba, when as she might have had sufficient
excuses for her stay at home; Chro. 2. chapter 9 Mat, 12
first the weakness of her sex; with the longues of the journey, the peril of
her own person, insurrections and commotions in her absence, many things of
moment might have stayed her; but she laying aside all excuses whatsoever, came
with a resolute purpose to hear the wisdom of Solomon. We have heard how the
noble men of Berea searched the scripture after they had heard the Doctrine of
the Apostles. Also I remember that famous Lady of Herod's court accompanied
with other godly women, being the wife of Herod's steward, whom the Evangelist
reports that they went to hear our Savior preach out of a ship, they
standing by the Sea side, Luke. 8
there being a throng of many people, it should seem she stood not upon her
disparagement, or discredit which she might reap by her going to the Sermon
of Christ, and that also to the sea side: neither yet did she much respect her
own case, for we do not read of any pewes stools, or cushins that were
prepared for her: No, no she stood not upon any of these things as many of our
tender dames do now a days, who may if they will hear the word of God in our
public assemblies in the Church, and not travel as they did far for it,
but this must be the work of the spitit of God in the^, as no doubt it was in
this Lady, and the other woman who went with an earnest desire to profit
themselves by the doctrine of Christ, which desire if it be wanting, in any
that uses to hear the word, they shall hardly profit by it. And therefore as
it is said, that Simeon came into the Temple by the motion of the fpirit and
found Christ, so if we will find Christ to our salvation, Luke. 2
let us crave at the hands of God the assistance of his holy spirit, when we
frequent the exercises of religion, and thus much for the fourth point. Now it
follows in the last circumstance, And wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem,
because of their trespass. The wrath of God as one says, is not an heat of a
troubled mind, as it is in us poor wretches; but a just revenge and punishment
of our sins, and the scripture does very notably speak unto us according to
our capacity in attributing unto God, wrath, fury, and indignation, and it
is, because that we for the most part are so blockish, as that we cannot
apprehend as we ought, the greatness of his divine Majesty, neither yet sear
his judgments; the wrath of God is so fearful a thing that no consuming
fire, or the most terrible things that are used of the Lord to correct his
people, cannot at the full sufficiently inform us of the great vehemency
thereof, the Prophet says, If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword, he
has bent his bow and made it ready, he has prepared the instruments of
death, Psalm. 7.12.
he has prepared his arrows against the persecutors, etc. The Lord will not
suffer the wicked to go scotfree and unpunished, for so it stands with his
justice, and yet he is slow to anger, and such a one as is sorry for our
offenses. We have many excamples in the scripture how he meets with all
sorts of sinners, yea the Lord spared not our grand parents Adam and Eve, but
for their offenses, he banished then out of Eden, which was a most fruitful
and delightful place, and also inflicted a grievous punishment upon them
first, saying to the woman, I will greatly increase thy sorrows, and thy
conceptions. In sorrow shall thou bring forth thy children, Genesis 3.
and thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
Also unto Adam he said: Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and
have eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee, saying thou shall not eat of
it: cursed is the earth for thy sake, etc. And further he says, In the sweat
of thy face thou shall eat bread till thou return to the earth. Genesis 7.
For sin the old world was destroyed with the flood. Genesis 18.
Sodom was consumed with fire and brimstone. Corah and his company went down
into the bowels of the earth. The Israelites were grievously punished many
times for their disobedience and manifold rebellions, as appears in the books
of Moses and the Prophets. David lost threescore and ton thousand men, Chro. 1.
chap. 21.
whom the Lord destroyed with the pestilence. Saul was deposed from his
kingdom, afflicted and vexed with a devil, and after slain, as also his own
sons, his armor bearer and his men in one day. Roboam the son of Solomon
of 12. tribes lost ten. Sedecias was led captive into Babylon, 2. King. 4.
Exodus 14.27.
and his eyes put out. Pharaoh with his chariots overwhelmed in the red Sea.
Herod came to a horrible end. Senacharib slain by his own servants. Chron. 2.
chap. 32. Iesabell cast out of the window. Jonas cast into the sea. Jonas 1. A
certain Prophet slain by a lion. 1. Kin. 20. The children that mocked the man
of God Elizeus, were torn with Bears. Infinite are the examples of Gods wrath
and heavy displeasure upon the wicked and profane as we may read of Esau,
Absolon, Achitophel, Judas, with many other. Yea the Lord has punished many
Kingdoms for sin: the Romans, the kingdom of the Chaldeans, the kingdom of
the Persians, the kingdom of the Macedonians, the Carthaginians: nay, the Lord
has not spared the famous city of Jerusalem with the holy temple where his
Namedwelt. But as he did often afflict the Jews his chosen people, so at the
last he made Jerusalem eue^ with the ground, never to be reedified again:
which was especially for the contempt of his word which he sent unto them by
his Prophets, and also for rejecting of our Savior Christ with his doctrine,
and miracles which he wrought among them, and therefore our Savior prophecyeth
of their perpetual destruction. Paul preached to the Colossians, Hierapolitans
and Laodiceans, but they contemned his doctrine, and therefore one witnesses,
Oriofius lib. 7. cap. 5.
that the earth opened and swallowed them up, But what should I say, the reward
of sin is death: and the soul that sins shall die: and to draw to an end,
this punishment which the Lord laid upon Ioash, the Princes, and people, may be
sufficient to admonish us to beware of Idolatry or any other sin, least we
pull the like judgments upon our own heads: and let us remember what one
says; the punishment of one is an example for all: then it remains, that as
we have heard that God is just in punishing of sin as well in his children as
in the wicked, that we labor to prevent his wrath, by turning unto him, before
we feel the like judgment: and let us not pass by any affliction or trouble
which he uses to lay upon any, or upon our selves, but rather to lay them to
our hearts, making that use of them, for the which they are sent, which is,
that we may by them he made more fit for God: this use made David of his
troubles, when he said; Psalm. 119. Ecclc. 7.
It was good for me that I was in trouble etc. and Solomon says; It is better
to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting; for the living
will lay it to his heart. So it is better sometime to be inaduersitie, then in
prosperity; for good men will make use of it, but it is the policy of Satan,
that we should never apply God his judgments, which we see to be upon others,
unto our selves, in such sort, as we should thereby profit in repentance.
Sin unrepented, what are the effects following it.
Amongst many good means to draw men to unfeigned repentance of their sins
before God, and in their own heart; this, me thinks, should not be of the
least force, well and deeply to weigh the fearful effects, that finne
unrepented of, brings forth in the sight of God, and men, and in their own
minds, that live so impenitently.

1. First it quenches, yea drives away the power and working of Gods spirit
in us, which being most holy and pure of it self, cannot abide to dwell in,
much less to work effectually in an unclean soul and impenitent heart.

2 Secondly, it hinders us from the right and holy profit that we might
receive by the word of God, which is not profitable nor powerful in any, but
those that tremble thereat, as God speaks in Esaias.

3 Thirdly, it shuts our mouths from invocation, prayer, and calling upon
Gods name, for how can we call upon him, in whom we believe not, or how can we
be said to believe, whilst we continue in our sins.

4 Fourthly it causes God to stop his ears from hearing our prayers, or
granting our requests, for God hears not sinners: and again, the prayers of
the wicked are abominable, as the Scripture says.

5 Lastly, it provoke God, (that of his own nature is most inclinable unto
all mercy) through our sins, to let in upon us all the floods of his
eternal Justice, to our fearful confusion, our sins and nothing else making
a separation betwixt us and God, as the Prophet affirms. Isay. 17.


Amongst many things, Sin to be repressed, because it brings judgment upon
all estates and persons.
that should repress the rage of sin before we fall, or else should move us
to unfeigned repentance, after sin is committed, this, me thinks, should be
one of great force and power, namely, that even some particular men's sins
unrepented of, or wincked at and not punished, may and do justly provoke Gods
heavy indignation, against all estates and persons.

1 As first for example against the Magistrates, because that God having put
the sword of holy authority into their hands, for the punishment of evil, and
maintenance of good, they have not (according to Gods word their duties, and
the haynousnesse of the offense) punished the same.

2 Against Ministers, Malac. 22.
because God having put into their mouths, the word of truth, and appointing
them thereby to cut down sin, they contrary unto Gods express commandment,
and their own conscience and calling, have bin tongue-tied and durst not
speak.

3 Against the people, because that they (keeping themselves notwithstanding in
the compass of their Christia^calling) have not by sharp reproof, either
showed their dislikes of the sins committed or their love laboring the
conversion of the offending party.

4 And against the parties committing it, because they through impenitencie and
hard heartedness continuing in sin, and having few or no means for their
reclaiming, can not but look for fearful indignation, and wrath from the
Lord for the same.

But the wicked do defer their repentance not thinking Gods judgments to be
at hand, when as indeed the Lord has stretched out his arm already to
strike. But it is otherwise with the children of God, who are not drawn by a
slavish fear of punishment unto obedience, but rather of a childlike love they
bear unto God their father, through and by which love, they perform
willingly that which the Lord has commanded: according to that measure of
grace, which God has given them, omitting also the contrary through love,
which obedience is no doubt acceptable to God.

The Lord for his Christ's sake, touch our hearts with such love to his
Majesty, that all our ways may please him, and that as we have inioyed many
years of peace and plenty of temporary blessings, with the preaching of his
glorious Gospel, under the reign of our most dread Sovereign, so let us call
upon his name for the continuance of all his mercies with the preservation of
our gracious Queen: that although our sins have provoked the contrary, yet
that he would grant us these things, for his Christ his sake our only Lord
and Savior, to whom with God the Father and the holy Ghost, we acknowledge to
be due, and desire in our hearts to yield all praise, glory and honor, both now
and evermore. Amen.

What ere thou be, pray God always,
To bless our Queen with happy days:
Whose wisdom under God so long,
Has kept this Realm from foreign wrong.
FINIS.

