GODLY meditations upon THE LORDS PRAYER, THE belief, and ten
commandments, with other comfortable meditations, prayers and exercises.
Whereunto is annexed a defense of the doctrine of gods eternal election and
predestination, gathered by the constant martyr of God John Bradford in the
time of his imprisonment. The contents whereof appear in the page next
following.

POST TENEBRAS LVX
AFTER DARKNESS, LIGHT.



Now first prynted by Rouland Hall, dwelling in gutter lane at the sign of
the half Egle and key, the. 12. of October 1562.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this book.
Instructions concerning praierr A meditation upon the lords prayer. A
meditation upon the belief. A meditation upon the x. commandments. A
meditation concerning prayer. A breife paraphrase upon the lords prayer. A
meditation of the coming of Christ to Judgment etc A meditation of the
sobre usage of the body and pleasures in this life. An other meditation to the
same effect. A meditation for the exercise of mortificatio^s. A meditation of
the providence of god. A meditation of the presence of god. A meditation of
gods power etc. A meditation of death. A meditation upon the passion. A
confession of sins. An other confession of sins. A prayer for the remission
of sins. An other prayer for remission of sins. A prayer for deliverance
from sin etc. A prayer for the obtaining of faith. A prayer for repentance. A
communication between Satan and our consience. A defense of predestination. A
treatise of election and freewill. A su^me of the doctrine of election and
predestination.
TO THE READER.
HEre have thou (good reader) such godly meditations, prayers and other
exercises of that worthy witness of god John Bradford, as god by his singular
providence has betherto preserved and now at the length brought to light for
thy comsort and commodity. Daily and howerlye was this his exercise, to talk
with god by faithful and hartye meditation and prayer with power pearcynge the
heavens, and many such godly exercises did he leave behind him, which either
time has consumed or else such as keep them in store to their own private
use, do little consider what benefit they withold from the church of god,
which if they shall yet brotherly communicate, there shall not lack good will
and diligence to set them abroad. In the mean season, let us with thankfulness
receive, read, and practice these, as means to quicken our spirits, to
stir up our dulle hearts to a more feruenre invocation of gods holy name.
Which how far it is from that it should be in us, and what need we have
thereof, if our dead senses cannot feel, here may we see and perceive. Here
may we learn to flee unto god by prayer, that we run not on still with this
unthankful world, into forgetfulness of his great benefits powered upon us,
especially for the liberty of his gospel, which we (in much mercy restored
now unto us again) so unthankfully receive, so ungodly neglect, so wickedly
abuse. God grant us his good spirit to work in us this good work: to look
about us in time: to consider our state past and present, as in deed we have
great cause to do, and so with hearty prayer flee unto god to prevent the
plagues that are at hand, lest with double woe we find the later end worse
then the beginning.

Instructions to be observed concerning Prayer.
There be nine things that pertayne to the knowledge of true prayer.
First to know what prayer is. Secondlye, how many sorts of prayer there
be. Thirdlye, the necessity of prayer. Fourthlye, to whom we ought to pray. By
whom we must pray. Where to pray, and what to pray. The excellencye of
prayer. What we must do that our prayers may be heard.

What prayer is.
Prayer is a simple, unfeigned, humble and ardent openinge of the heart before
God, wherein we either ask things nedeful, or give thanks for benefits
received. Paull in ye first to timothe and. 2. Chap. calls it by four
so^drie names in one sentence, to wit, prayer, supplication, intercession and
thanks giving. In latin, Deprecatio, Obsecratio, inte recssio, et gratiarum
actio. Whereof the first is for the aduoiding and preventing of evil, the second
is an earnest and faruent calling upon god for any thing, ye third is an
intercession for other, the fourth is a praisinge of God for things received.

There be.ii. manner of ways how we should pray.
2. First publikly, and that is called common prayer: and priuatlie, as when men
pray alone, and that is called private prayer: and how both these two are
allowed before god ye scripture bears testimony by the example of all the
holy men and women before and after Christ.

Of the necessity of prayer.
3. There be.iiii. things ye provoke us to pray, first the commandment of
god, secondly sin in us, which drives us of necessity to god for succor,
life, and mercy, thirdly our weak nature being unable to do any good
requires prayer to strengthen it, even as a house requires principal pillars
for ye upholding of it, fourthlie the sutteltie of the enemy (who privily
lurketh in ye inward parts, waitinge to overthrow us even in those things
which we think to be best done) styreth us vehementlye thereunto.

To whom we ought to pray.
4. Three things pertain to him that must be prayed unto, first that he have
such ears as may hear all the world at ones, secondly that he be in all
places at ones, thirdly that he have such power that he may be able to help,
and such mercy that he will deliver.

By whom we should pray
5. Christ only is the way by whom we have free access unto the father and for
whom our prayers are accepted (our infirmites notwithstanding) without whom al
our prayers are abominable.

Where to pray and what to pray.
6. As touching the place where we should pray, seeing al places are one, there
is none forbidden: only the common prayer must be made in what place so ever
the congregatyon of Christ does assemble.

7. What to pray, lies in the necessity of every man: and for as much as we
need both spiritual and corporal things, we may bouldly ask the^ both. For
as to ask spiritual gifts it is profitable and commanded, so to ask
corporal, it is necessary and allowed.

Of the excellency of prayer.
8. The worthiness of prayer consists in.ii. things: in the dingnitye of the
commander who is god the fountain of all goodness, who also commands only
good things, and in the effect ye follows it, which is the obtaininge of
whatsoever we desire faithfully, according to ye will of God.

What to do that we may be heard
9. First we must put of our own righteousness, pride, and estimation of our
selves, and put on christ with his righteousness: secondlye, an earnest faith
and faruent love, with the putting of all rancnor, malice and envy is
required: finally true repentance knitteth up the knot, for in it are
contained all the virtues aforenamed.

I. Breadford.

A meditation of the lords prayer.
Our father.
THou good lord, which made heaven and earth the sea and all that is therein,
together with Gene. 1.
thy dearelye beloved son Jesus Chrysts, and with thy holy spirit: Thou the
same god, which openedst thy self Genes. 3.
to Adam by thy promise: Thou the Gene. 12. 22 23. 24, 25.
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: Thou which broughtest thy people of Israel
forth of Egypt with a mighty Exodus 13. 14 15. etc.
hand and a stretched out power: Thou which gave thy law upon mount Sinai:
Thou which spakest Exodus 19. 20
by thy prophets, and last of all in these latter days by thy dearlye beloved
Heb. 1.
son Jesus Christ, whom ye would should be made a second Adam, that 1. cor.
15.
as by ye first we are children of wrath, carnal and full of concupiscence: so
Romans 5.
by him we might be made children of grace and spiritual, by communicating with
him ye quality, merits virtues, and grace of his flesh, through the
operation of the holy spirit, as he communicated with us the substance of
our flesh in the Mat. 1. Luck. 1.
womb of ye virgin Marie, by the operation of the same holy spirit, being that
blessed sede which was promised to Adam, Abraham, Isaac Jacob, Gene. 3. 12. 26.
28. Psalm. 89.
David, which should brouse the Serpents head, which should bring the blessing
on all nations, which should reign over thy house for ever, and mightilye
overcome thine and 2. Reg. 7. Luke 1. Psalm. 110.
our enemies, as in deed he did by his incarnation, nativity, circumcision,
erile, baptism, fasting, tentation, doctrine, deeds, mracles, workings,
agonies, bloody prayer, passion, death resurrection, and ascension, and yet he
still does by his mediation and intercession for us, and at the length Romans 8.
he will on al parts fully acco^plishe by his coming to Judgment, which
will be suddenly in ye twinkring Mat. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. Cor. 5.
of an eye, in the blast of a trompete and shoute of an Archangell, when he
shall be seen with thousands of Saints and innumerable thousands of Angels,
all the whole world being on fire, and all people that ever were, are or
shall be then standing before his tribunal or judgment seat to render an
account of that they have done in this body, be it good or bad: Thou I say,
this god which Exodus 32. 33 Psalm, 5. Joel. 2.
art holy, rightuouse, true, wise, pure, chaste, mighty, merciful, good,
graciouse, a hater of sin, an auenger of unrighteous etc, woldeste that I
which am borne in sin and Psalm 51. Ephesians. 2. Genes. 9. 8. Ierem. 17.
conceived in iniquity, which by nature am a child of wrath (for my heart is
so vnsearcheably evil that out of it springs corrupt concupissence, so that
the inclination thereof is prone to evil always even from my youth up: as is
my understanding and mind so darkened, that I cannot perceive those things,
that be 2. Cor. 2. 2. cor. 3.
of god of my self, and all the wisdom which I receive from Adam naturallye
or other wise attain by labor or study before regeneration: I cannot think
a good thought much less wyshe it or consent unto it and least of all do it)
thou I say yet would that I being such a one, in whom dwells continual
Romans (...).
emnitie against thee, that I which am nothing but sin and one that does
euel always before thee, should call thee and believe thee this god and father
of our lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be in very deed my father, that is,
thou would I should be most assured, that thou of thine own good will,
which thou barest to me wards before I was, yea before When and wherefore god
is become our father. Ephe. 1.
the world was, have in Christ chosen me to be thy child, and through him art
become my most louinge father, from who^ I should look for all good things,
and be most certainelye persuaded, that look how much thou art more then man,
so much thy love and fatherlye providence toward me passes the love and
providence of any father toward his child, in loving me, caring how to help
me, providing for me, nourtering We should be certain and without doubt that
god is our father.
me, and helping me in all my needs. So certain ye would have me to be of
this, yt to doubt of it, does most displease thee and dishonor thee, as either

you were not true, or not able to do The great test dishonor to god is to doubt
these things, or else becamest not my father in respect of thine own goodness
i^ christ only, but also in respect of my worthynes and deserts. And yt I
should not waver or doubt Causes to confirm our faith that god is our father.
of this that thou art my dear father and I thy child for ever through Jesus
Christ, it is required in the first commandment, which says I am ye lord
thy god, thou shall have none other gods but me: again, thy son does here
command me to call thee by the name of father: moreover in the first article
of my belefe I profess the same in saying, I believe in god the father
almighty: besides this their are many other things to confirm me herin, as
the creation and gouernemente of the world generally, and of every creature
particularly, for all is made and kept for man and so for me, to serve me for my
commoditye, necessitye and admonition. Again the creation of me, in that thou
have made me after thy Image, having a reaso^able soul, body, shape etc. where
thou might have made mea tode, a Serpent, a swine, deformed fra^tike etc.
moreover thy wonderful co^seruacion, norishing and keeping of me hitherto in my
infancy, childhode, youth etc. Al these I say, should confirm my faith of thy
fatherly love. But of all things the opening of thy self by thy word and
promise of grace, made after man's fall, first to Adam, then to Abraham Isaac,
Jacob, and so to other, being published by the prophets from time to time, and
last of all accomplished by thy dear son Jesus Christ, in 2. Cor. 1.
whom thy promises are yea and Ame^: The opening of thy self thus, I say, in
and by Christ, is the most chief and sure certificat, that thou art my father
for his sake, and I thy dear child, although of my self I am most unworthy.
For thou according to thy promises, have not spared thy dear John. 3.
son Jesus Christ, but given him to ye death of ye cross for my sins. Thou
would he should be made flesh of our flesh, and blood of our blood in the
womb of the virgin Marie, by the operation of the holy Spirit Ephe. 5.
that we by the working of the same spirit, through the merits of his flesh
and blood, might be made flesh of his flesh and blood of his blood, that is,
as he has the substance of our flesh and blood: even so we might have and
forever enjoy in him and through him, the qualities, virtues and gifts of
righteousness, holiness, innocence, immortality, and glory, wherewith he has
endued our nature in his own person for us all; that as now in faith and hope
we have ye same, so in his coming we might fully enjoy them in very deed, for
then shall our bodies now vile, be Phil. 3. 1. John. 3
like to his glorious body. Herein apereth thy love, not yt we loved thee but
that ye love us, and have given thy son for us: herin do you commend
unto us thy love, yt when we were yet sinners, Christ thy der^sonne Romans 5.
died for us, so yt nothing should separate us from thy love in christ Jesus,
Romans 8.
nether death nor hunger etc. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled
Romans ^.
unto thee by the death of thy son, much more we being reconciled shall be
saved by his life. And yt I should not doubt hereof, but certainly be per swaded
all this to pertayne to me, where I might have been borne of Turks, lo you
would I should be borne of Christian parents, brought into thy church by
baptism, which is ye Sacrament of Adoption, and requires What baptism is and
what it requires.
faith as well of remission of my sins, as of sanctification and holiness, to
be wrought of thee in me by thy grace and holy spirit. Where I might have been
borne in an ignorant time and region, you would I I should be borne in this
time and region, wherein is more knowledge reveled, then ever was here or in many
places is. Where I might have been of a corrupt judgment, and entangled with
many errors, lo you of thy goodness, as thou have reformed my Judgment, so
do thou keep it, and now for the same judgments sake do vouchsalfe
somewhat by the cross to try me. By all which things I should confirm my
faith of this, that thou always haste been, art and will be for ever my
dear father: in respect whereof I should, be as certain of salvation and of
these aheritaunce of heaven for ever: what is the effect or fruit that
comes of thy, certteine persuasion that god is our father.
(...): thankful, cast my whole care on thee, trust on thee, and call on thee,
with comfort: and certain hope for all. things that I wants. For in yt thou
ha^st given to me^ this benefit to be thy child undeserved, vndeseced on my
behalf, (...) and only in respect of thine own goodness and grace in Christ,
lest at any time I should doubt of it: how should I but hope certainly that
nothing profitable to me can be denied, in yt thy power is infinite? For as
thy good will is declared in adoptinge me, so nothing can be finally wanting
me, which may make for my weal (for yt should improve thy power to be almighty)
in yt thy will is so bou^teously already declared: whereas my be^e^^e requires
to believe in thee ye father almighty, in consideration whereof I should in
all things behave my self as a child, rejoice in thee, praise thee, trust in
thee, fear thee serve thee, love thee, call upon thee etc.

But alas how heavy hearted am I? How unthankful am I? How full of unbelief,
and doubtinge of this thy rich mercy? How little do I love thee, fear thee,
call upon thee. etc.

Oh be merciful unto me, forgive me good father for thine own sake, and
grant me the spirit of thy children, to reuele thy self unto me, and Jesus
Christ thy dear son our lord, by who^ we are made thy children, that I may
truly know thee, heartily love thee, faithefully hang upon thee in all my
needs, with good hope call upon thee, render faithfully this honor to thee,
that thou art my god and father, and I thy dear child through thy grace in
Christ, and so always be endued with an assured hope of thy goodness, and a
faithful obedient heart in all things to thy holy will. At thy hands and from
thee as I must look for all things, so come I unto thee and pray thee to give
me these things which thy dear children have, and thou requirest of me, that
I might come and ask them of thee, as now I do through Jesus Christ our lord.

As by this word (father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all
that ever thou have (for thou art wholly mine, my lord, my god, my father) so by
this word (Our) I am taught to glory of all the good, that al and every of thy
servants that ever were, are, or shall be, had, have, and shall have. For now I
am taught to believe, yt thou have called me into the communion of thy church
and people, whom hereby I perceive you have commanded, to be careful for me,
as for the^ selves, and in all their prayers to be as mindful of me, as of
themselves. Again as by this word (Father) I am taught to remember and render
my duty I owe to thee wards, faith, love fear, obedience etc: so by thy
word (our) I am taught my duty toward thy people to be careful for them and
to take their sorrow, poverty, and affliction etc as mine own: and therefore to
labor to help them in heart and hand, after my vocation and ability, utterly
abhorring all pride, selfloue arrogancy, and contempt of any. By reason whereof
I have great cause to lament and to rejoice. To lament because I am so far
from consideration, much more from doig my duty to thy people in thoughts,
words, or deeds. To rejoice, because I am called of thee, and placed i^ the
blessed society of thy saints, and made a member and citizen of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and because thou have given in commandment to all thy church to be
as care full for me, as for themselves.

But alas how far am I herefro^? As I am guilty of unthankfulness for this
thy calling me into the blessed communion of thy dear son, and church, yea
of thy self: so am I guilty of selfloue, unmercifulness, pride, arrogantie,
forgetfulness, contempt of thy children: for else I could not but be other wise
affected and otherwise labor then I do. Oh be merciful unto me good father,
forgive me, and grant for christ's sake, that as my tongue sou^deth this word
(our) so I may in heart feel the true loye of thy blessed communion, and the
true love and compassion which thy children have and feel toward their
brethen, that I may rejoice in all trouble, in respect of that ioyefull
communion: that I may deny my self to honor thy children upon earth, and
endeuer my self to do them good for thy sake through Jesus christ our lord. I
come only to thee to give me that which I cannot nor must not else where have,
and thou requirest it of me, yt therefore I should as thy child come and crave
it to thy glory.

Which art in heaven.
AS by these words (Our father) I am taught to glory and rejoice for the
blessed communion which I am called to with thee, dear father, with thy Christ,
and with thy holy church: so also am I hear taught by these words (Which art
in heaven) to rejoice in respect of the place and blessed Joys, whereunto at
the length in thy good time I shall come. For now I may perceive, that as
heaven is thy home, so is it mine also, being (as I am) thy child through
Christ, although hear for a time I am bodily on earth and in misery.

Again by these words (which art in heaven) I am admonished, not only to
discern thee from earthly fathers, and to know how that thou art almighty,
present in all places, and of most purity, to confirm thereby my faith, to be
provoked ye more to fear thee, to reverence thee etc: but also I am admonished
to judge of thy fatherly love by heavenly benefits, and not by corporal
simply and alonely, for often times the wicked prosper more in the world, and
have more worldly benefits, then thy children. So that by this I see thou
would pull up my mind from earth and earthly things, to heaven and heavenly
things; and that I should see further by corporal benefits, thy heavenly
providence for me. For if you place me thus on earth and thus bless me as thou
do and hitherto have done from my youth up, in that thou art nothing so
careful for my body as for my soul, how should I but think much of thy
providence for it in thy home, where is such glory, as yt eye has not seen
etc. of which things, these corporal benefits of thine, given me on earth,
should be as it were inductions, and the taking of them away, admonitions to be
more mindful of permanent things, and less mindful of transitory things.

By reason hereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament
because I am so earthly minded, so little desirous of my home, so unthankful
for thy providence, and fatherly correction here on earth. To rejoice because
of my home, and the great glory thereof, because thou do so provide for me
here, because thou do so correct and chaste^ me etc. but alas I am
altogether a wretch, earthly and unthankful, not only for these corporal
benefits, health, riches, friends, fame, wisdom etc: for thy fatherly
correction, sickness, temptacion etc: but also for thy heavenly benefits, for
Christ Jesus, for the promise of thy spirit, for thy gospel etc. Yea even for
heaven it self and thy whole glory, as the Israelits were for the land of
Canaan, and therefore never enjoyed it but perished in the Psalm. 106.
wilderness. I am proud in prosperity and forget thee, waxing secure and
careless. etc: I am impacient in the cross, and to much consider worldly
discommoditie. Oh dear father forgive me, for thy Christ's sake all mine
unthankfulness, love of this world, contempt and oblivion of thy heavenly
benefits, and grant me thy holy spirit, to illuminate the eyes of my mind
with the light and lively knowledge of thy presence, power wisdom, and goodness
in thy creatures, but specially in christ jesus thy son, and so by the same
spirit inflame mine affections, that I may desire nothing in earth but thee,
and to be present with thee, that my conuersacio^ may be in heaven continually.
From whence grant me still to look for the lord Col. 3. Phil. 3.
Jesus, to make this my vile body like unto his own glorious and immortal
body, according to his own power by which he is able to do all things. As
you have given me to be thy child: so I pray the give me these things which be
ye properties of thy children given from y^ in thy good time.

Hallowed be thy name.
THy name is that whereby thou art known: for names serve to discern, and
know one thing from an other. Now though thou art known by thy creatures,
yet in this our corrupt estate, they serve but to make us excuseles. Therefore
properly, Romans 1.
most lively, and co^fortably you art known by thy holy word, and specially by
thy promise of grace, and freely pardoning and receiuinge us into thy favor
for christ Jesus sake. For the which goodness in Christ, you art praised and
magnified, according to thy name, that is, so much as me^ Psalm. 48. 138
know thee in Christ, they magnifye How gods name is hallowed.
thee, and praise thee, which here thou call halowing or sanctifieng: not
that thou art the more holy in respect of thy self, but in respect of me^:
who the more they know thee, the more they cannot but sanctify thee, that is,
they cannot but as ^n them selves by true faith, love, fear, and spiritual
service, honor thee: so also in their outward behauour and words, they
cannot but live in such sort, as other seeing them, may in and by their
holiness and godly conversation, be occasioned, as to know thee so to sanctify
thy name accordingly. And therefore thou set forth here The chief desire of
gods children.
unto me what is the chief and principal wyshe and desire of thy children and
people, namelye, that thou in Christ might be truly known and honored
both of them selves, and of others inwardlye and outwardly. By reason whereof
easily a man may perceive by the contrary, y^ the greatest sorrow and grief thy
people The greatest grief of gods people.
have, is ignorance of thee, false service or religion, and wicked
conversation. Against the which they pray and labor diligently after their
vocations, as they for the obtaining of the others, both to others and to them
selves, do take no small pain in prayer, study, and godly exercise. By reason
hereof I se that I am far from this desire and lamentation which is in thy
children: I see mine ignorance of the true knowledge Our ignorance.
of thee and thy name, for else it had not neded thee so by thy word to have
reveled thy self: I see also mine ignorance of the excellency of the same.
For else woldst y^ not have told me, that the sanctifinge of thy name is the
chiefest thing, you requirest of every man. Again I se my great want Our great
need.
of holiness, for else thou nedest not to teach me, to seek and pray for y^ I
want not. Moreover I se my great peruersitie, which would not seek at thy
hands for sanctification, although I Our peruersitie.
se my need thereof. For else you would not have commanded me to pray for it,
if I saying my want, would have prayed unto the therefore. Last of al I Gods love
see thy wonderful goodness, which wilt undoubtedly give unto me
sanctification and holiness: for you would not that I should ask for that thing
that you will not give me. So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To
lament, because I am so far from this desire and lamentacion, which thy
children have: also because of my ignorance, poverty peruersitie,
unthankfulness etc. but most of all because thy holy name, word, and religion
is so blasphemed both in doctrine and in living of many, especially in this
Realm. To rejoice I have great cause, for thy exceeding goodness and merry,
which woldeste so disclose thy self by thy works, word, and gospel: which
would open these things thus unto me and also give unto me and others
sanctification in thy sight by says; and in the sight of men by pureness of
life and godly conversation. But alas I do heartily neither the one nor y^
other, that is lame^ or rejoice: as you father which serchest my heart do
right well know, Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me, yea give me, of thin
own pity, thy holy spirit, to reuele and open to my mind effectually my
miserable estate and condition, my ignorance, peruersitie, and my carelesnes
for thy true honor and dishonor in such sort, y^ I may heartily lament these
evils, and have them pardoned and taken from me through jesus christ our lord.
Again good father give me y^ same thy holy spirit to reuele to me thy name,
word, and gospel, y^ I may lively know thee, unfeignedly love thee, heartily
obey thee, and above all things desire and labor by all means lawful that
al godliness in doctrine and conversation may be exercised both in me and in all
others, for whom you would I should pray.

Hear think upon the state of religion, and the life of the professors of
the gospel, that you may lament some, pray for some, and give thanks for some.

Let thy kingdom come.
THy kingdom is in.ii. sorts to be considered, universally and particularly.
Uniuersally according Gods kingdom in respect of his power.
to thy power, wherewith thou gouernest all things every where, in earth,
heaven, hell deuilles, Angels, men, beasts, fowls, fishes, and all creatures
animate and inanimate, sensible and insensible. Of this kingdom spoke David
when he said: thy kingdom rules over al. Particularly thy kingdom is to be
considered Psa. 104.
according to thy grace wherewith thou raignest only in thy church Gods
kingdom in respect of his grace.
and elect people, ruling and governing al and every member of thy church to
thy glory and their eternal comfort: not that out of this church I exclude thy
power (for as therewyth thou defendest thy people, so thou punishest thy
enemies) but because thy grace is specially considered, being (as it were) the
very keeper that keeps and guydeth thy people. The time Gods kingdom in
respect of his glory.
will be when this kingdom of grace and power, now being as distinct, shall be
united and made one kingdom of glory: which will be when Christ shall give up his
ki^gdome into thine hands, that is in the resurrection, when death the last
enemy shall be subdued, and thou shall be all in all. In the mean season this
kingdom of grace is miraculously and mightily How gods kingdom hear is
co^serued and enlarged.
propagated, enlarged, and governed by y^ true ministry of thy word and
Sacraments, through the working of thy holy spirit. And this is the mean and
way, whereby as thou did first plant, so do thou enlarge, amplify and
preserve y^ same. This kingdom of grace begone, continued, and enlarged by the
true preaching of thy gospel and ministratio^ of thy Sacraments, is the
thing which Christ teaches here thy children to pray for, that it might come,
that is to say, that thy gospel might so mightily, purely, and plentuouslye be
preached (maugre the head of all thine enemies) that the number of thine elect
might be brought in, and so the kingdom of thy glory might appear. So that as
I see thy chidren desire, pray, and labor, y^ thy gospel might be truly
preached, hard, and lived in themselves, and in others: so they lament the not
preaching and refusing, the not living and unbelieving thy gospel: yea they
lament the ling ring of the coming of thy christ, for in his coming they know
they shall be like unto him, and having this hope they purify the^selnes as he
is pure.

By reason hereof I see first that I 1. John. 3.
am far from this desire and lamenting, which thy children have, I see my
ignorance of thy kingdom and Our ignorance.
power every where, of thy grace only in thy church, and of thy glory, when all
the enemies of thy grace shall be cast down, and thy glory and power shall
embrace each other. I se my ignorance how acceptable a service to thee is the
true preaching and the hearig of thy gospel: for else you had not neded to
have placed this petition next to the petition of the sanctifiing of thy name.
Again I see here my vnhablenes to enter into thy kingdom, Our need
and to attain to it. For else what need should I have to pray for that to
come from thee, which other wise may be archeiued. Thirdly I our peruersitie
se also my peruersitie, and contempt of thy kingdom and grace. For although I
se my want, yet I would not desire thy kingdom to come, if you did not
command me to pray so: for if I would have prayed for it, you woldst not have
commanded me. Last of all I see gods goodness.
thy goodness, which wilt bring thy kingdom, and that as generally by se^ding
forth ministers to preach truli: so particularly by regenerating me more and
more, and by giving me as grace here, so glory else where: for thou would not
I should pray for that, which thou will deny. So that I have great cause
to lament and rejoice. To lament because of my miserable estate and condition,
because of my sin, ignorance, rebellion, peruersitie, Satan's power, contempt
of thy grace, thy gospel and ministry, here or else where. To rejoice because
of thy goodness and great mercy, which have brought me into thy church, kepest
me in it, and will do so still: also because of the Ministry of thy word
and Sacraments, by which the holy ghost is and will be effectual: and finally
because of y^ great glory, whereunto you have called me, and now wilt give unto
me, asking the same. But alas how unthankful I am and sorowles, lord thou
know for my heart is not hid from thee etc. Oh be merciful unto me and
forgive me, good father, and grant the Spirit of thy children, to reveal
unto me my ignorance of thy kingedome, my poverty and peruersitie, that I
may lament the same, and daily labor for thy help and thy holy spirit, to
suppress the kingdom of sin in my self and in others. Again grant me that
same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy kingdom of power, grace, and glory,
to kindle mine affections, to regenerate me more and more, to reign in me, as
in a piece of thy kingdom, to give to me to desire, to pray, and to labor for
thy kingdom, both to my self and to others effectually, to thy glory, and to
assure my conscience of thy goodness, that thou wylt give me grace, and glory
etc.

Here call to mind the state of the ministry and ministers, the light and life
of gospellers, therrours and heresies which me^ be entangled withal.

Thy will be done.
AS thy power is infinite, so is thy Gods omnipotent will unknown and vnreueled.
wisdom accordingly. Whereby as we may perceive, that nothing is or can be
done against thy power, or otherwise then by it: so is there not nor cannot be
any thing done against, or otherwise, then by thy omnipotent and secret will,
which is always, as thou art, good holy, and just, how far so ever it seem
otherwise to our folishe reason and indgeme^t. And therefore here we are taught
to pray that thy will may be done here without sin on man's behalf, as it is
on the Angels behalf in heaven.

Again for as much as thou art incomprehensible Godds will reveled and known.
of thy self as well concerning thy power as concerning thy wisdom, we may
not according thereto search thee, but rather adore and worship thy majesty,
and tremble at thy Judgments and works, and therefore pray always, that we
may be content with thy will, and be borome thereto. And for as much as thou
have revealed to us so much of thy will in thy word written as is necessary
for us in this life to know, yea as we can attain unto, and a little further:
we ought to take all things done there against as sin and transgressyon,
although thou canste use the same sin to serve thy prouydence. Of the which
providence w^ can not nor may not Judge further then thou have and shalt open
it unto us. So that this peticion (Thy will be done) is not simply to be
understand concerning thy omnipotent will un reveled, against the which nothing
is nor can be done, but rather concerning thy will reveled in thy law and
gospel, the which thou here teach me that we should desire, not only to know
it, but also to do it, and that in such perfection and willingness, as it is
in heaven. The which thing I perceive hereby that thy children do desire
daily in and for themselves and others, and do lament the contrary, in
who^soeuer it be, so that often their eyes gushe out with rivers of tears
because men keep not thy laws. Psa. 119.


By reason hereof I see that I am far from the syghes and tears of thy
people. I see my ignorance Our ignorance.
of thy will if thou hadeste not opened the same by thine own mouth. I see my
ignorance, how acceptable a service obedyence to thy will is, and therefore
do you place this peticion among the first and continual desires of thy
children. Again I se my poverty in godly obedience, which had need to be
taught to pray Our need
for it, thereby to signify unto me my want and vnhabilitie to attain it, but
by thy gift. Thirdly I se my disobedience: Our disobedience.
for else never woldst thou have commanded me to have prayed for the doing of
thy will, if I saying my want, would have prayed so.

Last of all I se thy goodness, which gods goodness.
wilt give to me and others to obey thy will: that is, to love thee with al our
hearts, to love our neighbor as our selfs, to die to our selves, to live to
thee, to take up our cross and to follow thee, to believe, to repent etc: for
else thou would never have bidden us, to pray for a thing which we should not
look for.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable state and condition, because of my sin, ignorance, poverty, and
peruersitie, also because thy will is every where either not known, or
conte^ned, and Satan's will, the will of the world, and of the flesh readily
obeyed. To rejoice I have great cause, for that thou have opened thy self and
will unto mankind, for that also* thou peculiarlye have taught me these things,
and because also thou will grant me grace to do the same. But alas how
unthankful I am, and how hard hearted, thou Lord do know. Oh be merciful
unto me and forgive me. I pray thee graciouse god grant me thy holy spirit, to
reveal to me my ignorance of thy will, my poverty and peruersitie, that I
may heartily bewail it etc, and by thy help and working of the same spirit may
suppress the will of the flesh. Again grant me thy holy spirit, to reuele
to me thy will declared in thy law and gospel, that I may truly know the
same, and inflame so my affections, that I may will and love the same, in such
sort, that it may be my meat and drink to do thy will.

Here call to mind the.x. commandments of god particularly or generally,
what therein he requires, and pray for the same particularlye as you se your
need, and that not only for your self but also for other.

Pray for patience to suffer what cross soever god shall lay upon you, and
pray for the^ that be under y^ cross that they may be pacient: pray for
spiritual wisdom in every cross peculiarlye, or publikelye, that you may
see and love gods will.

Give us this day our daily Bread.
BY Bread the food of the body, is understand all things necessary Bread.
for this corporal life, as meat, drink, health, success in vocatyon etc.
By this word Give, we should understand, that Give.
not only spyrytuall things, but also corporal benefytes are gods free
gifts, and come not for our worthynes, or traueyle taken about the same,
although ours traueyls be often times means, by the which god does give
corporal things.

By dailye is understand the contented Daily.
minds of thy children with that which is sufficient for the present time, as
having hope in thee, y^ they shall not want, but daily shall receive at thy
hands plenty and enough of all things. By this word our, is as well
understand public Our.
benefytes, as peace in the common weall, good Magistrates, seasonable wether,
good laws etc: as particular benefits, as be children, health name, success
in the works of our vocation, etc. And besides this, by it we should se the
care eue^ for corporal things, which thy children have for others as well as for
themselves.

So that here I may learn how far I am from that I should be, and I see thy
children are come unto. I se my ignorance also, how that as spiritual things
do come from thee: so do temporal things: and as they come from thee, so are
they conserved and kept of thee. And therefore thy children are thankful and
look for them as thy meare gifts, notwythestandynge the means which they
use if they have them. How be it they use them but as means, for except you
work therewith, all is in vain. Psalm. 127.


Again here I am taught to be content with sufficient for the present time, as
thy children be which have the shortness of this life always before their eyes,
and therefore they ask but for daily sustenau^ce, knowing this life to be
compared to a day, yea a watch, a sound, a shadow, etc. Moreover I may learn
to se the compassion and brotherly care, thy children have one for an other.
Last of al here I may see thy goodness, which as thou will give me all things
necessary for this life (or else you would not bid me ask etc) so thou
commaundest all men to pray and care for me, and that bodily, much more then
if they be able, they are commanded to help me both in body and soul. By
reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament because I am
not so affected, as thy children be, because of my ignorance my ingratitude,
my peruersitie and contempt of thy goodness, and of the necessity of thy
people, which alas be in great misery, some in exile, some in prison, some
in poverty, sickness. etc. To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy
goodness, in teaching me these things, in commaundinge me to ask what soever I
want, in geuinge me so many things unasked, in keeping the benefits given me,
in commaundinge men to care for me, to pray for me, to help me. etc. But
alas, how far I am from true lamentacion and rejoicing, lord thou know.
Oh be merciful unto me, and help me, forgive me, and grant me thy holy
spirit, to reveal to me my need, ignorance, great ingratitude, and contempt
of thy mercies and thy people, and that in such sort, that I might heartily
lament and bewail my misery, and through thy goodness be altered with thy
people, to mourn for the miseries of thy children, as for mine own.

Again reveal to me thy goodness (dear father) eue^ in corporal things that I
may see thy mercy, thy presence, power, wisdom, and righteousness in every
creature, and corporal benefits, and that in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly affected, truly to reverence, fear, love, obey thee, hang upon
thee, to be thankful to thee, and in all my need to come unto the, not only
when I have ordinary means by the which thou commonly workest, but also when
I have none, yea when al means and helps are clean against me.

Here remember the state of your children, and family, also your parents
neighbors, kinse folks, also your friends, country, and magistrates etc: as
you shall have time thereto and by gods good Spirit shall be provoked.

Forgive us our debtes, as we forgive them that are debtours unto us.
BY our Debtes are understand, Debtes.
not only things we have done, ^ut the omissio^ and leaving undone of the good
things we ought to do.

By our, is not only understand the particular sins of one, but also Our.
generally the sins of al and every one of thy church.

By forgyuenes, is understand free Forgeuenes.
pardon and remission of sins, by the merits and deserts of thy dear son
Jesus Christ, who gave him self a ransom for us.

By our forgeuing of other men's As we forgive etc.
offenses to us ward, is understand thy good will, not only that it pleases
thee that we should live in lone and amytye, but also that thou wouldeste have
us to be certain of thy pardonynge us of our sins. For as certain as we are
that we pardone them that offend us, so certain should we be that thou
doeste pardone us: whereof the forgeuing our trespassers is (as it were) a
sacrament unto us.

So that by this petition I am taught to se that thy children, although by
imputation they be pure from sin yet they acknowledge sin to be and remain
in them, and therefore do they pray for the remission and forgeuenes of the
same.

Again I am taught hereby, to see how thy children do consider and take to
heart, not only the euells they do, but also the good thy leave undone. And
therefore they pray thee heartily for pardon.

Moreover I am here taught, to see that thy children are careful for other
me^, and for their trespases, and therefore pray, that they might be pardoned
in saing, our sins, and not my sins.

Besides this I am taught here to see, how thy children not only forgive all
that offend them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offenses of their
enemies, and such as offend them. So far are they from malicousnes, pride,
reuengeme^t etc. Last of all I am taught to see how merciful thou art, which
wilt have me to ask pardon: whereof thou would that we should i^ no point
doubt, but be most assured, that for Christ's sake thou herest us, and that not
only for our selves, but also for many others, for y^ do not command us
to ask for any thing thou will not give us.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and rejoice. To lament
because of my miserable estate, which am so far from these affections, that
are in thy children: which am so ignorant and careless of sin, not only in
leaving good undone, but also in doing euel, and that daily in thought word
and deed etc. I speak not of my carelesnes for other folks sins, as of my
parents, children, family, magestrats etc neither of the sins of them, to
whom I have given occasion to sin.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy mercy in opening to me these
things, in co^maundinge me to pray for pardon, in promisinge me pardon, and in
co^maundinge others to pray for me. I ought surely to be persuaded of thy
mercy, though my sins be innumerable. For I se not only in this but in
every petition how that every one of thy church prays for me: yea christ
thy son who sits on thy right hand, prays for me etc. Oh dear father be
merciful unto me, and forgive me al my sins, and of thy goodness give me thy
holy spirit to open mine eyes, that I may se sin, y^ better to know it, y^
more truly to hate it, and most earnestly to strive against it, and that
effectually both in my self, and others.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit to reuele unto me the remedy of
sin by christ only, and to work in me faith, to embrace the same thy Christ
and mercies in him, that I may henseforth be endued with thy holy spirit more
and more to begin and obey thy good will continually, and to increase in the
same for ever.

Here call to mind the special sins Pray for the^ to who^ you have given any
occasion of sin.
you have committed heretofore. Remember, if you have occasioned any to sin,
to pray for them by name: remember that gods law should be so dear unto us y^
the breaking thereof in others, should be an occasion to make us to lament
with tears etc.

Lead us not into tentacion.
BEcause of our continual and great infirmities, because of the great
diligence and subtilties of our enemies, and because y^ art wont to punish the
greattest punishment. Remedy against euel is prayer. Our sins should not be
forgotten of us, if we would have them forgotten with god. Commodities comi^g
by remembering our sins, be thankefulnes, vigylancy and ge^tlenes to
offenders.
sin with sin (which of all punishme^tes is y^ greatest and most to be
feared) In this peticion y^ would have thy children to have y^ same in
reme^beraunce, and for a remedy hereof y^ have appointed prayer. So that y^
only cause why any are overcome and led into tentation, is for y^ they forget,
what they desire in y^ peticion going before this: which should be never out of
their memory, to provoke the^ to be more tha^kful to thee, and more vigilant
and heedie herafter for falling into like perils. For which to be avoided, y^
do most graciously set forth a remedy, in co^mau^dinge us to pray after
pardon for our sins past, for thy grace to guide us, so that we be not led
into tentacion, but might be delivered from evil. And because thou wouldeste
have all thy children to hang wholye upon thee, Why we pray not suffer us not
to be led. etc.
to fear thee only, and only to love thee, thou do not teach them to
pray, suffer us not to be led, but lead us not into tentation, that (I say)
they might only fear thee, and certainly know that Satan has no power over
so much as a pigge, but what soever thou geueste unto Mat. 8.
him, and of thy secret but most just judgment do appoint him to use, not
as he will (for then we were all lost) but as thou will, which can will
nothing, but that which is most just. As to give them to the guidi^g of Satan,
which will not be guided by thy grace, as y^ diddst Saul etc.

Occasions to evil are in two sorts. Occasions to evil in ii. sorts.
One by prosperity and success, another by adversity and the cross etc. the
euells coming of success, commonly are unthankfulness, pride, security, and
forgetting our selves, forgetting of others, forgetfulness of god, of our
mortality etc. The euells coming of aduersytie, commonly are impatiencie,
murmuring, grutchi^g dispayring, contemning of god, flattering of men,
stealing, lieng etc, with many other euells, whereto tentations will entise a man
that is left to him self: whereas to one that is guided with gods spirit,
tentacions are but trialls to the glory of god, what temptations are to the
godly, and what they are to the wicded
comfort of the tempted, and edifieng of thy church. But as I said, if a man
be left alone, tentacions entise even to the devil him self. And therefore thy
children pray to be delivered from evil, understanding thereby Satan him
self, the sower and supporter of all evil. And this thy children do as well
for others, as for them selves. So that I may learn hereout many good things.

First to remember often our infirmity and weakness, and the dangerous estate
we stand in in the respect of our flesh, of the world which is full of evil,
of Satan which seeks to sifte us and as a roaring lion to destroy us, and of
our sins, which deserve all kinds of punishements and correction: that I
might with thy children fear thee, watch, pray and desire the day of
redemption from all euells.

Again I may learn here, that to avoid all dangers and evil, is not in y^
power of man, but only thy work. By reason whereof I should consider thy great
goodness, which hither to have kept me from so many euels, both of soul and
body, yea of name, goods etc: as thou have done in my infancy, childhode,
youth, middle age etc.

Thirdly I may learn here, that I should be careful for others, both that they
might be delivered from their euells, and that they might be preserved from
tentatio^, and from being overcome in the same, and therefore y^ teach me to
pray, not deliver me from evil simply, but deliver us from evil.

Last of all I am taught hereby, so see thy goodness toward me which wilt
deliver me from evil, and from being overcome in tentations. For thou woldst
not have me to ask for that, which I should not look for at thy hands
certainly. By reason whereof thou would have me to be in a certainty of
salvation, for ever. For else I cannot believe my prayer to be heard, if that
finallye I should not be delivered from evil.

And therefore thou ioynest hereto Thine is the kingdom. etc.
a geuinge of thanks, which with thy Church I should say (For thine is the
kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory for ever)

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament
because of my corruption, infirmity, weakness, oblivion, and carelesnes for thy
people, ingratitude etc: because of Satan's power, vigilancie, and prudencie,
which has overcome most grave, wise and holy men, whereof some never recovered:
as Cain, Cham, Achitophel, Saul, ^udas etc. To rejoice because of thy goodness,
which teach me this, and she west me the remedy, commaundest all thy
Church to pray for me, (...) wilt at length deliver me from all ^uel, and give
me glory. But alas I ^m all together careless and miserable. Oh be merciful
unto me dear father and for christ's sake forgive me al my ^innes: Grant me thy
holy spirit to reuele to me mine infirmties, weakness, perils, dangers etc: in
such sort, that as I may heartily lamente my miseries, so I may ask and
obtain thy grace to guide me from all evil for ever more.

Again grant me the same thy holy spirit, to reuele to me thy love and
kindness toward me (and that in eternity) in such sort, that I may be
throughlye persuaded of the same, become thankful unto thee, and daily expecte
and look for the reuelacion of thy kingdom, power, and glory, as one that
forever shall have the fruction of the same, through thine own goodness and
mercy in Christ, prepared for me before the beginni^g and foundation of the
world was laid.

Here call to mind our security, Satan's vigilancie, our negligence, his
diligence, our infirmity, his ability, our ignorance, his craft and
subtilitie, etc.

Item call to mind how that he has overthrown for a time many of the dear
Saints of god, to whom we are to be compared in nothing: a^ Adam, Eve, Lot,
Judas, Thamer, Moises, Aaron, Mirtan, Sampson, Gedeon, Clie, David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Josias, Peter, Thomas, and innumerable more.

Item call to mind the goodness of god, and of our Shepeherd Christ, which
has kept us hitherto, keeps us still, and teaches us here to know that he
will keep us for ever. For he would not have us to ask for deliverance from
evil, if that he would not we should certainly look for the same. If thou
doubt of final perseueraunce, y^ dishonourest god. Be certain therefore, rest
in hope, be still in his word. Se also how he has commanded his whole church
and every member thereof, to pray for thee as well as for them selves, in these
and all other things.

Now and then go about to reckon how many and diverse kinds of euells there
be, that thereby, as you may know you are delivered from none, but by gods
great goodness: so you may see that the number of euells that you have, are
nothing to be compared to the multitude of evils wherewith (if your christ were
not) the devil would all to beraye and dawbe you.

But what are all the miseries and euels that can be, to be compared to the
least joy, prepared for us in heaven? Oh think of those joys, and pray that
when the tide of death comes, we may hale forth of the haven of this flesh
and this world ioyefully. In praieng this petition call to mind the euells you
have been in, the euells you are in, and the euells you may fall in, if god
should not preserve you, that you might be stirred up the more to thankfullnes
to prayer, to trust in god, to modesty etc.

For thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory for ever.
AS in the beginni^g of this prayer by these words (our father which art in
heaven) thy children are excited and stirred up to a full confidence of
obtaining the petitions following and al things necessary: So in y^ latter end
you have added for the same purpose, these words (For thine is the kingdom
thin is etc) Wherein I am taught these many things: First that in prayer I should
have such consideration of thy kingdom, power, glory and eternity, that my
mind should be stricken with an admiration of the same. Secondly that I should so
consider them, especially in prayer, that I should not doubt, but that thou
workest, rulest and gouernest all things every where in all persons and
creatures, most wisely, iustelye, and mercifully. Thirdely that in prayer all
my peticions should tend to the setting forth of thy power, of thy kingdom, and
of thy glory. Last of all that in prayer I should in no wise doubt of
being heard but be assured, that thou which have commanded me to pray, and
have promised to here me, do most graciousely for thy mercyes sake and
truths sake hear my peticions, according to thy good will through Jesus
Christ thy dear son our lord and only savior.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament,
because I consider not these things in prayer, in such sort, as should move
me to admiracion and gratitude: because I consider not thy power, and wisdom
generally in all things: because I am so careless, for thy kingdom: and because
I am so full of dubitacion and doubtinge of thy goodness. To rejoice I have
great cause, because thou reuelest these things unto me on this sort:
because of thy power, kingdom and glory, which makes to the hearing of my
prayers, and helping of me: be cause thou will use me as thine instrument to
set forth thy kingdom, power, and glory: and because it pleases thee to here
my prayers and assuredly wilt save me for ever.

But alas how far am I from these lamentacions and reioycinges? by reason
whereof I deserve damnacio^. Oh be merciful unto me* forgive me, and of thy
(...) grant me thy holy spirit (...) reveal to me my blindness, oblivion, and
contempt of thy kingdom, power and glory, with the greatness of my doubtings:
that I may heartily as lament them, so have them pardoned, and taken from me
through the merits of Jesus Christ thy son.

Again give me thy holy spirit, to reueile to me in such sort thy kingdom,
power, glory, and eternity, that I may always have the same before mine
eyes, be moved with thadmiration thereof, labor effectually to set forth y^
same, and finallye as to have the sruic^on thereof after this life: so increase
^an assured, certain and lively expectacion of the same, that I may always
and in all things rejoice in thee through Christ, and give lauds thanks and
praises perpetually unto thy most holy name, oh blessed father, son and
holy ghost, three persons and one god, to whom be all honor and glory world
without end.

Here think, that if the kingdom power, glory and eternity be gods which is
our father, what our dignity is, which be his children: if the power be our
fathers, of who^ should we be affraies? if the deuell be subject to the lords
power and kingdom (as he is) how can the subject have power over us, which be
sons and heirs, in that he has not power over porketts wtoute the
providence and permission of god? Therefore full well should we pray, lead us not
into temptation, rather then let us not be led into tentation. For power is the
lords, and the deuell has none, but that he has of gods gift. No he were
not of capacity, to receive power, if god did not make him of capacity,
although the execution of it, is rather of gods permission.

Give all thanks, praise, and glory, to god our father through Christ our
lord and savior. So be it.
A meditation upon the twelve articles of the Christian faith.
I believe in god the father. etc.
THy people (oh lord god the father of our savior Jesus Christ) do here in
saying this article (I believe in god the father almighty etc) by faith know
that thou together with Jesus Christ and the holy ghost, did create all
things that be in heaven and in earth (for by heaven and earth are understand
all things therein). And as they know this, so they by the same faith do see
thee the same god the father the son and the holy ghost, to govern all
things after thy great wisdom, power, righteousness, and mercy, using every
creature they see as means to put the^ in remembrance of fearing, reueren
cing, trusting, and loving the: for in every creature they behold thy
presence, power, wisdom and mercy,

Again by this word (Father) they declare their belief, how that they are
not only thy creatures, and all that ever they have to be thy graciouse gifts
and blessings, but also how that they are thy children, derely beloved and
cared for of thee through Jesus christ. Where through (notwithstanding their
unworthiness) as they conceive a sure hope of thy goodness and fatherly love
toward them in soul and body for ever: so are they thankful for their
creation, and for that thou have made the^ thy excellent creatures, lords of al.
They are thankful for the creation of all creatures, and use the same with
thankefulnes, as visible tokens of thy invisible love: they are thankful for
thy conseruing and keeping them, and for the governing them and all this world,
lamenting that they are no more thankful, that they believe no deper, that
reason has so great a swing with them in these matters.

But I most gracious good lord and father, though I say, I believe in thee my
father almyghtye maker of heaven and earth, yet thou knoweste that I am full
of much doubtinge, not only of this whether thou art my good, almighty, and
most louinge dear father in christ (because I feel in my self such a
conscience of unworthiness, and so great want of those things which thou
requirest of thy children, and so transfer the cause of my being thy child in
part to myself where it is due only and wholly always to thy mercy and grace
in Christ) but also thou know my doubting of my creation and governance,
and of the creation and governance of all this world (as I declare by my
unthankfulness for my creation, for mine adoption, for my gubernation, for thy
providence for me) or else dear father I could not but heartily with thy
children rejoice and praise thy holy name, and that continually, being hence
forth careful for nothing but how to please thee and profit thy people, and
that they might praise thy name in all things for ouermore, desiringe the
sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy kingdom, the doing of thy will
upon earth as it is in heaven.

Thou might have made me a dog, but of thy goodness have made me a creature
after thine Image: y^ might have made me a Turcke, a Jew, a Sarracen, but
thou have made me a christian, a member of thy Church, thou after my birth
might have left me, and in all need have made no providence for me, as we
sometimes see has happened unto others, but yet thou never did so with me,
and yet I am of all others most unthankful.

Thy creatures I thankefully use not, thy invisible love by thy manifold
visible tokens I consider not, as now, I should by this apparel of my body,
by this corporal health by this light, by this my hearing, saying, feelinge,
memory, understanding, time, place, company, creatures, and benefits,
as well in keeping innumerable evils from me both in soul and body, which else
could not but come to me: as also in gyuinge to me presently so many things
as without thy especial grace and working I never could have had, or presently
could keep them. In thy creatures I see not thy power, for I fear the not, I
see not thy presence for I reverence thee not, I see not thy wisdom, for I
adore the not, I see not thy mercy, for I love the not I praise the not but in
lips and tongue and therefore in that al thy creatures do teach me, cry out
upon me to be thankful to the, to love, fear, serve thee and trust in the
and that continually, in that I do not so, they cannot but cry out upon me
and against me in thy sight, and in the day of Judgment will weapon themselves
against me.

Oh that I did now consider this. Oh that my blind eyes and my deaf ears
were opened: oh that my miserable and folyshe heart were made wise and
converted. This only thou canste do which haste all men's hearts in thy
hands to bow* them as pleases the: bow my heart good Lord into thy
testymonyes, open my eyes make me to here for thy mercies sake, that I may
believe and so love the, be thankful to thee, amend in all things and serve
the, though not as thy dear servants do, yet at the least as other brute
creatures do, that is to obey the and to be profitable to others.

Now for as much as my sins let this and all good things from me, I beseech
the pardon me al my sins according to thy gracious promise for our lord
Jesus Christ sake. Ame^.

I believe in Jesus Christ his only son etc.
THy servants (O Christ Jesus) and people do know by faith, that as thou art
almighty and god with the father by whom all things were made, and are ruled
(for thou art god eternal coequall and consubstanciall with the father and the
holy ghost) so thou art man and haste taken our nature upon thee by the
operation of the holy ghost in the womb of the virgin mary, and art become
the blessed sede which have bruised y^ serpe^ts head, the blessed Gens. 3.
sede in who^ all nations are blessed, the prophet whom Moises did Gens. 23.
Deuteronomy. 18. Exodus, 25.
prophecpe of, the samplare he saw in the mount, the truth and body of all the
types, figures, and shadows of the old law, the Messiah Christ and savior
of thy people, the aduocat and redemer, the pacifier of gods wrath for sins,
the opener of heanen, and geuer of everlasting life.

This they know thou broughtest to pass in thy humane nature, by thy
incarnation and natiuitye, by thy being here on earth, by thy lyning,
teaching, fasting, praieng, especially by thy suffering under Pontius Pilate,
by thy death, burial, resurrection, ascension unto the heavens, and raygning
on the right hand of the father, from whence thou shalt come to judge both
the quick and the dead: and as they know this, so by faith they apply it
also to themselves, that for their sake thou waste made man, did pray,
fast, wast tempted did die, rosest again, and did ascend into heaven,
and there art set their advocate, bishop, and high priest, always
appearinge in gods sight for them, from whence they look for thee, knowige
that (...) wilt not enter into judgment with them to damn them, which
would damn thy self for them.

By this faith they felt these affections in them selves, namely the batred of
sin, the fear of god, the love of god, trust in thee, and love to thy
church. The hatred of sin they felt because it is so foul a thing as would
not be washed away with any other thing then with thy preciouse blood shedinge:
the fear of god, because his anger is so great against sin that no less
price could pacify his wrath then thy most painful death: the love of god,
because he has so loved them that he would not spare thee his dear son for
them, ever wha^ they were his enemies: trust in thee, because thou had no
respect to thy self but most willingly did give thy self wholly to be our
savior and servant: love to thy people and church, because generally and
particularly in every member of the same, they see how dear they are to thee,
and therefore they can not but be so to them. Oh how do they imitate and
follow thy foot steps? how do they rejoice when they are in any thing by
afflection made like to thee? Oh how do they lament their sins,
ingratitude, unbelief, love thee, and wholly yield themselves unto thee? where
as I (o graciouse god and dear savior Jesus Christ) though I say I believe in
thee which was conceived by the holy ghost, yet alas I do but babble this, for
nothing is else in me but unbelief. Of thy power and love, of thine anger and
mercy I have but an opinion, as my insensiblenes and unthankfulness does declare.

If a man should show me friendship but in a trifle, or suffer any thing at
all for me, I could not but be tha^full: and thou besides my creation, have
redeemed me and brought me into the number of gods children (then which thing
nothing is greater) and lo I am unthankful.

Thou have suffered much for me: from heaven thou cammest into earth to fetch
me into heaven, but I regard it not.

Thou barest my sins on thy back suffering a most bitter death, but I am so
far from thankefulnes, that I still more and more loath the.

Thou would enter into a communion with me, taking my nature unto thee
concerning the substance thereof, that I might enter into a co^mnuio^ with thee
concerning the qualities where* in thy self thou have endued it, but I consider
it not.

Thou did die to deliver me from death, but I still more and more geu^ thee
cause to die: so ingrate full am I.

Thou did arise to iustifye me, but I with the Jews would still kept thee
down, because I would not leave my wickedness.

Thou ascendedst to heaven to take possession for me there, to be always in
the sight of thy father for me, to send me down gifts, to pray for me: but I
daielye am pullinge the^ down again, as much as in me ^ieth, I am altogether
earthly, I hide my self out of thy sight by forgetti^g thee, I reiecte and
abuse thy gifts, I neglecte prayer.

Thou art now in a redynesse to come to judge hoth quick and dead, but I
tremble not at this gear, nor beseech thee before thou come, to be merciful
unto me and not to enter into judgment with me, yea I think nothing at al of
thy coming: mali^o^ cogitant iudicium, the wicked consider not the end, they
think not on thy judgment.

Thou woldst bring me to thy father y^ I might find grace, but I put this of,
and therefore am worthi to feel thee a judge, with refuse to feel thee a savior.

Now y^ cause of al these things is unbelief, the which though it be natural
by reason of the corruption of our nature, pet I have augmented the same
maliciously in not labori^g there against, and continuing in all sins and
wickedness: by reason whereof I deserve most iustelye thy anger thereupon,
even reiection from thy face for ever.

Long have thou mourned even with displeasure and anger the incredulity of my
heart, calling me there from, and offering me thy grace, which I have neglected
and rejected, and therefore am never worthi to have it any more offered unto me,
much more then I am unworthy to have grace given me to receive thy mercy.

Alas what shall I do? shall I dispraier or as long as I can, keep me
unmindful of my mysery? o savior Christ Jesus wilt not thou be merciful unto
me? thou did die for me when I deserved it not, and now is thy mercy
shortened? wilt not thou give me thy grace, and take from my heart this horrible
unbelief? Shall I never love the? shall I never has sin? shall I never, as
with my mouth I say: I believe in Jesus Christ, so in heart say the same? shall
Satan possesst me for ever? o christ Jesus which have led captivity
captive, what? wilt not thou help me? though I desire it not as I should, yet
give me to desire when thou will.

Thou did appear to destroy the work of the devil: thou see his work,
in me: good christ destroy his work but not thy work: save me for thy great
mercies sake. Give me to believe in thee, in thy death, resurrection, and
ascension: pardone me my sins, and mortifye now in me my corrupt affections,
reyse me up and justify me, regenerat me daily more and more, give me faith of
immortality, resurrection of this body, give me faith to ascend into heaven,
and to be certain that thou have already taken possession for me there: Give
me to look for thy coming, and to be ready in thy coming to find mercy to
everlasting life etc.

I believe in the holy ghost. etc.
O Holy spirit the third person in trinity, which did descend upon Christ
our savior in his baptism in the likeness of a dove, thy children know that
with the father and the son thou made and rulest all creatures visible and
inuisyble, they know thee in their redemption to be no less willing and
louinge then the father and the son: for y^ did always declare Christ to
be the son of god and gave testimony in wardly in the hearts of thy elect,
to believe and embrace the same, and outwardely by miracles and wonders they
know thee to be the comforter and governor, whom Christ did promise in his
corporal abse^ce should teach, rule, keep, comfort and govern his church and
people.

Again, as in the former part of their belief they consider the works of
creatyon and redemption, so in this part they consider the place where the
same is most effectual and takes place, even thy holy church which is
catholic, that is, exte^ding it self to all times, to all places, to all
kinds of people.

For in this church only they know that as all things were made, so the work
of redemption was taken in hand, that y^ blessed trinitye, might in this
church be praised, magnified, served, and worshipped for ever.

This church is nothing else but a communion and society of saints: that is,
not only a societye of all such as be, have been, or shall be thy people, but
also a societye or partaking of Christ Jesus which is the head of the same:
yea by him of thee (oh blessed father) which art y^ head of Christ, and of thee
(oh holy ghost) which now shadowest and sit upon the same to hatch and
cherishe it as the hen her chekins, by the extending of thy wings, not only
to defend them from their enemies, but also to cover their sins and to
remitte them in this life, beginning also here the resurrection of the flesh
and everlasting life, the which thou will in the end of the world consu^mate,
so that they shall not need to be covered for sin: for then shall they be
pure and have gtoriouse bodies, immortal and spiritual, the which shall have
the fruition of eternal ieye, life everlasting, and glory, such as the eye
has not seen, the ear has heard, nor the heart of man can conceive. For then
christ Jesus shall give up his kingedome to god the father, that god may be al
in all concerning the governance of it by the ministration of his word and
other means whereby now he governs it, that it may be his fathers kingdom,
we beig become like unto him: that is, as to the manhod of 1. john. 3.
Christ the godhead is united and is al in all without any other means, even so
god shall be in us, assuminge then not only in the person of christ the human
nature, but also all the human nature of his church which be members of
Christ, the wicked and reprobate being separate then from this communion and
cast into eternal perdition with Satan, and antichrist, there to be in
torments and horror for ever.

By reason of this their faith, they are thankful to the (o holy spirit)
which have taught them this and given them to believe it.

By reason of this faith they singularly pray love, and help thy church here
milita^t, and labor to be holy (...).

By reason of this faith they confess them selves sinners, they desire and
believe pardone of their sins, they are risen and rise daily concerning the
inwards man, and do feel the life eternal begone in them, more and more
laboringe, praying, wishings and desyringe for the same whollye and perfectly.

Where as (oh lord god and most graciouse holy spirit) thou know that it is
otherwise with me. I do but babble with my lips in saying, I believe in the holy
ghost, for I am unthankful for calling me into thy church, I do not live
holely, I confess not, I lament not my sins, I pray not for remission of
them, I stand in doubt thereof: as I feel not my self risen from a sinful
life as I should be, or as I feel not life begone in me, as it is in thy dear
children, so do I doubt hereof, whether I have pardon of my sins, whether I
am regenerate, whether I feel truly everlasting life (the which thing does
most displease thee) and yet with my tongue I say I believe in the holy ghost. Oh
I beseech thee (good holy spirit) for thy love sake which moved the to agree and
be willinge to patifye and open thy goodness, not only in the work of creation
(for thou dyddest lie upon the waters and as the benne her chickins dyddest, as
it were, hatche the work of creation) but also in the work of redemption, and
therefore did descend and abide not only upon Christ in his baptism, but
also on the apostles and church in fyerye tongues visibly the fyfte day after
Christ's resurrection: as now thou do inuisybly, generally, and particularly
sit upon thy Church and children, being the consolator the co^forter, the
teacher and leader, the guider and governor of us all.

For this thy loves sake (I say) I beseech thee to be merciful unto me, and
forgive me my doubting, unbelief, ingratitude and horrible monstrous uncleanness
and sin; and utterly take them from me. Bring me unto thy church which thou
guidest, that is guide me, make me holy and by faith couple me to christ, by
charity to thy people: that is give me the communion of saints with thy saints,
over shadow my sins, reyse me up to righteousness, begin in me everlasting
life, and now more and more to expert and look for all these great mercies,
and at length to possess eternal felicity with thee, o blessed trenitie the
father the son and the holy ghost, three persons and one almighty, eternal,
most just, wise and good god: to whom be all glory power and dominion now and
for ever.

A meditation upon the ten commandments.
I am the lord thy god which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. etc.
O Good lord and dear father, here y^ would I should know that thou, which
broughtest thy people of Israel out of Egypt with a mighty hand and a
stretched out power, which gave thy law upon mount Sinai in great
thundering, lighting, fire, which spakest by the prophets, and did send
thy dearelye beloved son Jesus Christ coequall and consubstantiall with thee
in power, majesty, and glory, to take upon him our nature by the operation of
the holy ghost in the womb of y^ virgin Marie, of whose substance he was made
and borne man, but pure without sin, that we by birth children of wrath, by
him might be made thy children, children of grace, communicatinge with him
righteousness, bolines, and immortality by the working of the spirit, as he
communicated with us flesh and blood (but not infected with sin, as is ours)
by the working of the same holy spirit: which spirit after his bitter death,
resurrection, and ascension into the heavens, he sent plentifully and by a
visible sign unto his Apostles and Disciples: by whom he published, the
gospel through out the whole world, and so continually has done from age to
age, does, and will do unto the end of the world by the mynysterie of
preaching: Thou would I say that we should know and believe, that thou this
Almightye lord and god, which on this sort have reveled and opened thy self,
art the one alone, very true and eternal almighty god which made and rulest
heaven and earth, and all things visyble and inuisyble, together with this thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, and with the holy spirit, consubstantiall
and coeternall with thee dear father: Not only this, but also thou would
that I should know and believe, that by the same thy dearly beloved son, thou
have brought me from the tirannie and captivity of Satan, and this sinful
world (whereof the captivity of Egypt under pharao, was a figure) and in his
blonde shed upon the cross, y^ have made a covenant with me, which thou will never forget, that thou art and wilt be my lord and my god, that is, thou will forgive me my sins and be wholly mine with all thy power, wisdom,
righteousness, treweth, glory and mercy. Wherefore although I might confirm my
faith by the innumerable mercies hither to powered upon me most abundantly, as
thy children of Israel might have done and did confirm their faith, by the
manifold benefits powered upon them in the desert: yet specially the seal of
thy covenant, I mean thy holy Sacrament of baptism, wherein thy holy name
was not in vain called upon me (O dear father, swet son and savior Jesus
Christ, and most graciouse good holy ghost) should most assuredly confirm, and
even on all sides seal up my faith of this thy covenant that y^ art my lord
and my god: even as Abraham and thy people of Israel did by the Sacrament of
Circumcision, which as the Apostell calls the seal or signacle of
righteousness: so do thou call it being but the sign of thy covenant in
deed, yet thy very covenant, because as thy word is most true and cannot lie,
as thy covenant is a covenant of pear infallible and everlasting: even so
the Sacrament and seal of the same is a most true testimonial and witness
thereof.

In consideracion therefore of this, that thou the almighty god, of thine own
goodness have vouched safe not only to make me a creature after shine own
Image and likeness, which might have made me a beast: to give unto me a
reasonable soul, endewed with memory, judgment etc: which might have made
me an ^^fote without wit or discretion etc: to endue me with a body be
wetifyed with right shape, limbs, health etc, which might have made me a
ceeple, lame blind etc: graciously to enrich me concerning fortune, friends,
living, name etc: which might have made me a slave, destitute of al
friends, and helps for this life: but also have vouchedsafe, that I being a a
miser, borne in sin, conceived in iniquity, to whom nothing is dew (more
then to a Turcke, Jew, or Saracen) but eternal damnation, should be called
into the number of thy people, enroledde in thy book, and now in thy covenant,
so that thou with all that ever thou have art mine: for which causes sake
hitherto thou have kept me cherished, defended, spared, and fatherly chastised
me and now graciously do keep me and care for me, giving me to live, be, and
move in thee, expecting also and waiting how thou might show mercy upon me:
In consideration (I say) Esai. 30.
of this, most justly and reasonably thou requirest that as thou art my lord
god: so I should be thy servant and one of thy people: As thou haste given thy
self wholly unto me, to be mine with all thy power wisdom etc (For he that
gives him self gives all he has) so should I be wholly thine, and give over my
self unto thee to be guided with thy wisdom, defended with thy power, helped,
releiued, and comforted by thy mercy.

First therefore to begin with all, thou commau^dest that I should have none
other gods in thy sight: that is to say, as I should have thee for my lord and
god to look for all good things most assuredly at thy hands, and therefore I
should put all my trust in thee, be thankful unto thee, love thee, fear
thee, obey thee, and call upon thy holy name in all my needs: so should I give
this faith, love, fear obedience, thankfulness and invocation or prayer, to
none other, no not in my heart, but only to thee or for thee where thou
commaundest. All this to do (oh lord god) and that with most ioieful heart, I
have great cause. For what a thing is it that thou Jehovah would uouchesalfe
to make me, as thou haste do^^? to give thy son for me, and to become my ^ode
Oh what am I that thou would I should put my trust in thee? This y^ do
that I might never be confounded, but might be most happy. What am I that y^
would I should fear thee? Where the only cause, why y^ requirest this of
me, is not only because thou haste power to cast both body and soul into
hell fire, and because they that fear thee not, shall perish: but also that y^
might give me thy wisdom, that it might go well with me in the evil day,
that thou might reveal thy son to me, and thy mercy might be upon me
from generation to generation. Oh what am I, that thou would have me to obey
thee, not only that I never perish with the disobedient, but that thou
might give me thy holy spirit, and rewards innumerable? Oh what am I that y^
would I should love thee? y^ which thing thou do to this end that I
might fully and wholly enjoy and possess thee, according to the nature of
love, and therefore do thou require my whole heart, that I might dwell in thee
and thou in me. What am I, that thou would I should call upon thee? verily
because thou will give me whatsoever I shall ask of thee in the name of thy
dear child Jesus Christ: and even so would y^ have me thankful, that y^
might pour out upon me yet more plentifully, al good things. So that great
cause have I to put my trust in thee, to love, fear, and obey thee, to call
upon thee, to be thankful unto thee, not only in respect of the hurt which else
will ensew, but also in respect of the commodity that herby comes unto me:
but most of all yea alonely for thy own sake, for thy goodness, wisdom,
becutie, strength and power, truth and great mercies.

But alas (dear father) what shall I say? As in times paste horribly I have
broken this thy law, in trusting in thy creatures, calling upon them, loving,
fearing, and obeying many things besides thee, and rather then thee: eue^ so
at this present I am a most miserable wreth, blinded I am through unbelief,
and mine own wickedness, so y^ I se not firmly this thy power, wisdom
goodness etc: but waver and doubt of it. I love little or nothing, I fear less,
I obey least of al, thankefulnes and prayer are utterly quenched in me: by
reason whereof I am worthy of eternal damnation. If after thy justice thou
shall deal with me simply, I am (oh lord) damned and lost for ever, for I am
very wicked. But yet in as much as thou bast given thy son Jesus Christ to be
a slain propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, so that he
which be leueth in him shall not perish but be saved (for so thou have
promised) thy truth now requires to save me. No wbeit here thou may say
unto me that I do not believe, and therefore notwithstanding thy truth and
promise, in that I believe it not, thou may most justly after thy Justice,
dampne me. Oh lord god, to this I cannot otherwise answer (my unbelief is so
great) but because thy mercy is above al thy works, and thy goodness and love
is that which all creatures most highly commend and magnify, as the thing
whereof thou art called god: because y^ art right good and lone it self:
because of this thy mercy (gracious god) if thou will look thereon and couple
thy truth therewith, then (good lord) I shall be saved, and praise thy name for
ever more.

Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven etc.
AS the first commandment teaches me, as well that thou art my god, as
what god thou art, and therefore of equity I should have noone other gods but
thee: that is, I should alonely hang on thee, trust in thee, love thee,
serve thee, call upon thee, obey thee, be thankful to thee: so because y^
did reueyle thy self visiblie that thou might visibly be worshipped, this
commandment is concerning thy worship, that in no point I should follow in
worshipping thee, the devise or intent of any man, saint, Angel, or spirit:
but should take al such as Idolatry and Image service, be it never so glorious.
And why: for soth because y^ would I should worship thee as thou have
appointed by thy word. For if service be acceptable, it must needs be according
to the will of him, to whom it is done, and not of him which does it. But in
as much as of man none knows the will and pleasure, but his spirit, except he
reveal by word or sign the same: much more of thee o lord, none does know
thy will, but thy spirit and they to whom thou do reveal the same. And
therefore abominable eue^ in thy sight are al those things, which with men are
in most force and estimation because they are not after thy word. So that the
meaning of this precepte is, that as in the first I should have none other
gods but thee: so I should have no worship of thee, but such as thou
appoitest. Herby therefore I se great cause of thankefulnes for this
commandment, in that thou would have mine outward service, and that after
thy appointment, lest I should busye my brain how best to serve thee. Good
lord thou nedest not my service, perfect thou wast before I was, therefore it
is for mine own commodity that thou commau^dest me, yea even for mine own
wealth. Thou might have lette^ me have stand al day idle, but such is thy
love, that thou would I should go into thy vineyarde, that with thy servants I
might receive the hier of blessedness. And how great a benefit is it, If we
should serve god after ma^s devise, the burden would be in tolerable, for men's
devises are infinite.
to deliver me of so great a burden wherewith I should have been combred, if I
should have served thee in any point after my wit and reason. But halas, I
not considering what a promotion thy service is, nor what an easy service it
is, and simple (for one may well know what to do, and when he pleases thee,
namely when he serves thee as thou have appointed) as I am and always have
been unthankful: so I am and always have been a grievous transgressor of this
thy law. For as in times past, when I did not know this commandment, I was
an Image worshipper of stocks, stones etc: yea bread and wine: so now I am a
worshipper of mine affections, offering to the^ ye service due unto thee, though
not thereby to worship thee, as I thought when I kneled to stocks and stones,
bread and wine etc: yet with no less transgression of thy law: for the which
I have deserved, and do deserve everlasting damnation. Of thy goodness and
great mercy (dear father) I beseech thee forgive me for Christ's sake, whom
thou did give to be the fulfylling of the law to al them that should believe.
Oh father I believe, help mine unbelief. As thou haste of thy goodness hitherto
spared me, tra^sgressing this thy holy precept: so of thy goddnes forgive me,
as well mine Idolatry done in times paste, as that which of late time I have
committed and do comitte. And as you by this commandment have delivered me
from the one, yt is, bowi^g my self to stocks and stones: so (dear father)
deliver me from al other bowi^g my self after mine own will to mine own
affections: that I may have non other god i^ heart but thee, nor do service to
any other but only to thee, and for thee, after thy word as thou co^maundest.
Oh open mine eyes to see thy will in this thy gracious precept. Give me a will
to love it heartily, and an heart to obey it faithfully, for thy dear sons
sake jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

Thou shall not take the name of the lord thy god in vain.
By this commandment I perceive (oh lord) that as in the first thou would
in the exterior service of thee, I should utterly abando^mine own will and
reason, and all the reasons or good ente^tes of man, and wholly give my self to
serve thee after thy will and word: so here do thou begin to tell me, how
thou will have my tongue to be exercised in thy service, and therefore thou
byddest me not to take thy name in vain: as by temeraryouse or vain
swearynge, by cursynge praying without sense, as those boe that pray in a tongue
they know not, praying without faith or attent co^sideracion of the thing
desired, with out hearty desire and certain expectacion of obtaining that which
is to thy glory and my salvation: also by gesting, or folishe abusing, or
negligent readinge or hearing of thy holy word, by the which thou, as by thy
name, art known: and in like manner by deniynge thy truth and word, or
conceiling it when occasion is offered to promote thy glory and confirm thy
truth. By reason whereof I may well see, that y^ would have me to use my
tongue in humble confessing thee and thy word and truth after my vocacion: in
prayinge heartily and calling upon thy name: in readinge and hearing thy
word, and speaking thereof withal reverence, diligence, and attencion: in
thanks giving and praising thee for thy great mercy: in instructinge my brother
and admonishinge him, when he erreth, after my calling and vocation, withal
humblenes, gentleness and love.

Thus would thou have me to exercise my tongue, and not to think that the
exercising of it in this sort, is a vain and and unprofitable thing, but a
thing that pleases thee, and profits my self and other.

And for as much as thou know that our tongue is a slipperie member, and we
very negligent over it, and of the great commodity that might thereby come to
us and other by vsyng it in thy service accordingly: thou have added a
fearful, and most true co^municacio^, that though men will find no fault or
punish us therefore, yet wilt not thou hold him gilt les, that takes thy name
in vain: As by many examples we are taught, Leuit, 23.
as in thy holy word, so by dayelye experience, if we would consider the
same.

And therefore I have great cause to give praise and thanks to thy most holy
name, for many great benefits which by this commandment I receive and ought
with thankefulnes to consider. First that it would please thee, not only to
give me a tongue, where thou might have made me speachles: but also that y^
would have it santified to thy service. Again that thou would not only
reuele thy name unto us, but also would give me leave to call up on it, praise
and publishe it: yea thou have commanded me so to do, and not only
commanded, but have promised, that thou will here my prayer and that my
praising of thee and co^fessinge thy word and truth, shall not be in vain.

Thirdly that thou would al men should use their tongue so, that thereby I
might be the better instructed, admonished, and occasyoned to use my self well
and in the obedience of this thy holy precept. But what go I about to reckon
by tale the causes of thanks for this commandment, seeing that they be
innumerable if a man should but look even upon thy very word, by the which
as by thy name thou art most truly known: the which word thou
commaundest unto us in this commandment etc: as thou do preachinge,
pryuate admonishynge, thanks geuynge, and prayer: then the which, nothing is
more profitable to us in this vale of miserye. But gracious good lord, I
acknowledge my self not only to be a most unthankful wretch for this thy
holy precepte, and the great mercyes which here through I perceive thou
haste most gracyouselye powerd upon me, and do yet still offer unto me:
but also that I am a miserable transgressour of this thy most holy, good, and
blessed cammaundemente, as always I have been in times past. Horribly have I
abused thy name in swearynge, cursing and iestyng wyckedlye: I have called
upon other names then thine, as the names of peter, Paul, Mary etc: yea of
some, whose salvation is to be doubted of: I have folishly prayed in such a
tou^ge as I knew not what I prayed and said, with many other tra^sgresiions of
this precept, wherein yet I am co^uersant: as in seldom praying, and when I
pray I am not attent nor very desirous of the thing I ask with my tongue.
After prayer I do not earnestly look for the good things asked and prayed for,
and therefore when I obtain my request, I am most unthankful: thy word I
read little and most negligently, forgetting for with what I read: I admonish
not others when I here them abuse thy holy word: I am affraied, for fear of
loss of friends, name or life, to confess thy truth, gospel and name, which
was called upon me in baptism, and not in vain, if I did not thus make it in
vain. But alas I ca^ in no wise comprehe^d the multitude of my transgressions
co^cerninge this thy law. But this is a sin above other sins, that under
thy name, word, and gospel I play the hipocrite, having more care for min own
name, then for thine. For if my name were euel spoken of, it would grieve me,
and I would defend it: but alas I hear thine daily euel spoken of, and se it
profaned by false doctrine, and evil living, but it greueth me not. After my
vocation I ^^ke not nor do not go about to redress these things in my self
and in others. And why? because (good lord) I love my self better then thee,
and not thee with my whole heart. Thye first commandment has no place with
me as it should have, it possesses not my heart, mind, and will as thou
requirest, most to mine own commodity. By reason where of I am worthy of
eternal damnation. Oh what shall I do (graciouse god) which not only have been
so greuouse and filthy a swerer curs^er etc: so great a callour upon dead
creatures, and so heynouse a transgressor of this law: but also at this
present do so horriblye and hipocriticallye offend thee in taking thy name
in vain, and that so many ways, in praying and not praying, in reading and
not readinge, in speakinge and not speaking, and not co^fessig simply and from
my heart thy doctrine, truth and name, but regardinge mine own name far
above it. Shall I file from thee? then undoubtedly I am more gilty, and more
shall disobey this thy holy precept, adding sin to sin, where as y^ would
I should call upon thy holy name (dear lord) which have given thy dear son
Jesus Christ to be a mediator for us, that through him we might find not
only grace for the pardone of our sins paste: but also for the obtaining of
thy holy spirit, as well the better to under stand, as also the better and
more frankely to obey this thy holy precept for ever. For his sake (therefore
dear god) pardone my sins paste and present, whereof this law does accuse me,
and grant (most graciouse father) that I may be endued with thy holy spirit
to know and love thy holy name, word and truth in Jesus Christ, that I may be
zelouse, wise, and constaunt, and that my tongue may be sanctified henceforth
and guyded with thy holy spirit and grace to publishe, confess and teach,
after my vocation to others as occasion is offered, thy truth and gospel, to
call upon thy name in all my need, to give thanks unto thee, praise thee,
magnifye thee, and to sanctify thy holy name as a vessel of thy mercy for ever
and ever.

Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day etc.
AFter thou have told me how in the external service of thee (graciouse lord)
thou will have my tongue used, so do thou now teach me, how thou will have
min ears and all my whole body occupied, namly in sanctificacion and holiness:
that is, in those things which thou pecularly have appointed to be means
immeditately to help to that end: As in hearing thy word preached, and using
the ceremonies of thee appointed eue^ as y^ have commanded. For the which
things to be exercised of thy people thou at the first dyddest appoint a
certain day, namely the seventh day, which therefore thou calledst thy
Sabbath, that thereby they with their children and family, resting from all
exerior labor, which hinders the meditacio^ of the mind, might not only be
more able to go on through with their travel and labor (for without some
rest nothing can endure, in respect whereof thou would the very beasts
which in labor were exercised, should have the priuelege of this Saboth) but
also and much rather, that thy people might with their family and children, be
instructed and taught: first by the miuistery of thy word in preaching and
catecchising: secondly by the vsyng of thy sacraments appointed after thy
commandment and institution, they might be assured of thy promises: thirdly
by praiyng they might be augmented in all godliness: and last of all by their
metting together and exercisinge all these thy works of sanctification, they
might increase in love and charity: one toward another, as members of one body
and fellows of one inheretaunce, and thus by meeting together, praying and
using thy sacraments, they might be instructed in thy law and of that Saboth,
wherinto thou thy self dyddest enter after thou had made the world, ceasing
from thy works, not of conservation but of creation, into the which as after
this life and the works of this time, they should enter: so now they begin
spiritually to enter in restinge from their own works which the old man
moves thom unto: not that (good lord) thou would these works appointed for
the Saboth day, should not be exersised at any other time but only on the
seventh day: but because you dydst as well ordain the^ for a policy to endure
till the coming of Christ, as also according to the reuelacion or thee in that
time, did open thy self, beginning then in figures and shadows, whose
verifie^s in thy time were to be opened: therefore it pleased thee to appoint
then the seventh day, which seventh day, although by reason of the policy
being by thee be streied, and by reason of Christ the verity and body of all
shadows, if be abrogate from us: yet stands this commandment in force
as well for the works of santificacion, that is for preaching thy word, coming
to hear it, for praying, using thy sacraments, and coming together to that
end: as also for those days which by common order, and on good ground are
ordained and received: howbeit with this liberty, that necessity of our faith
and sanctificacio^ and charity may dispe^se therewith, occasion of wilful and
wittinge offense being aduoided etc.

So that hereby I perceive thy will and pleasure to be, that I should at al
times, as much as charity and necessitye will permytte, give over my self, and
cause all other over who^ I have charge, so to do (especially on the sondaies
and other holy days being received and to that end appointed) to the
resorting to the temple and places appointed to prayer, to here with meknes thy
holy word and use thy sacraments and ceremonies as thou have commanded, and to
exercise all things which might be to the confirmacion and propogacion of thy
holy religion, or make to the increase of love and charity: as giving to the
pore, reconciling such as be in variaunce, visiting theficke, and eue^ (as it
were) beginning that ^abboth whereof Esaias speaks. Esai. 1.


By reason whereof I have great cause to thank thee (most gracious father)
that thou woldst appoint me to be in this time, wherein thou have more
plentifully reueiled thy self then thou dyddest, not only before Christ's
coming, but also since Christ's assensio^. Never since England was England
dyddest thou so manifestlye reueile thy truth, as you have done in these days.
Great cause I have to thank thee that you woldst institute the ministry of thy
word and sacraments as means whereby thy holy spirit is effectual to work
in our hearts sanctification. Great cause have I to thank thee, that thou
would keep the books of the prophets and Apostells until this time. Great
cause have I to praise thee, that thou woldst give me such knowledge in them as
you have done of thy great mercy. Great cause have I to thank thee for the
good and true ministers and preachers of thy word which thou have sent amongs
us, and gene^ me grace to here them. Great cause have I to thank thee that in
this religion thou have given so long quietness, and harboroughe to thy church.
Great cause have I to thank thee, for that thou woldeste make me such a man
in whom thy holy spirit might work. Great cause I have to thank thee
which woldeste call me into thine eteruall Saboth and rest full of all joy,
such as the eye has not seen, the pare has not hard. Great cause have I to
thank thee that so many days are appointed for this end, that we should
meet together to here thy word and receive thy sacraments. Great cause have
I to thank thee for the institution of thy sacraments, which thou have
ordained as thy visible and palpable lords, to the obsignation and
confirmacion of the faith of all such as use the same after thy
commandments. But, infinite are the causes for the which I ought to gene
thee thanks for this commandment.

But alas I am not only unthankful, but also a most miserable transgressour
of it. I will not now speak of my transgressions past concerning this
commandment: presentlye they are so many that I cannot. For you know how
I do not only at convenient times on ye work days keep my self away from
common prayers in the congregation and assemble of thy people and from hearing
of thy word: but also on the Sabbath days to ride or go about this or that
worldely: busynes I am very pressed, to sit down at this tavern, and to go
to that man's table I am ready at the first vydding: but alas to resort to the
table of thy son and receive with thankfulness the sacrament of his body and
blood for confirmation of my faith, that (...) to learn spiritually to taste
Christ's body broken and his blood shed for the remission of my sins: so
do this, oh how vnwillig am I? To go to mass and sacrynges with such like
Idolatrye, I have been a great time more ready then now I am to hear thy
word, and use thy sacraments as I should do, thy ministers I pray not for: thy
church I am not careful for, no not now (good lord) when wicked doctrine most
prevails. Idolatrye, supersticion, and abominacion abounds, the sacrament
and sacrifice of thy dear son Jesus Christ is blasphemiusly corrupted: when
for preaching there is nothing but massing, for catechizing, sensinge, for
reading of the scriptures belleringing, for singing of Psalms and godly
songs to our edificacion, all is don in laten, with such Notes, Tunes,
ditties, and descantes, that utterly the mind is pulled from the consideracion
of the thing (if men did understand it) unto the melody. Al which my
wickedness has brought in, my profaning of this commandment, and my not
praying. Thy ministers are in prison, dispersed in other contries spoiled,
burnt, murdered, many fall for fear of goods, life, name etc, from the truth
they have received unto most manifest Idolatry: false preachers abound
amongeste thy people: thy people dearly bought even with thy blood, are not
fed with the bread of thy word but with swyllings: antichrist wholly
preuailethe, and yet for all this, alas I am to careless, nothing lamenting my
sins which be the cause of all this. O dear father forgive me for christ's sake
and be merciful unto me, and as of thy mercy thou dyddest give me time to
repent, so give me repentance. Grant me thy holy spirit to open to me this
thy law, so that I may know thy will in it, love it, and always obey it: thy
good spirit sanctifye me and work in me a true taste of eternal life and
pleasure in the meditation of it: give me (gracious good father) one little
mouthfull of the bread that you feddest Helye with all, give me that with him I
may 1. Reg. 19.
come into mount horeb. Help thy church, cherishe it and give it harbo routh
here and else where for christ's sake: purge thy ministry from corruption and
false ministers: send out preachers to feed thy people, destroy antichrist and
all his kingdom, give to such as be faulle^ from thy truth repentance, keep
others from falling, and by their falling do you the more confirm us, confirm
the ministers and pore people in prison and exile, strengthen them in thy
truth, deliver them if it be thy good will, give them that with conscience
they may so answer their adversaries, that thy servants may rejoice and the
adversaries be confounded, auenge^ thou thy own cause (Oh thou god of hosts)
and help all thy people, and me especially because I have most need.

Honor thy father and mother that thou may live long etc.
AFter that thou haste told me (good lord) thy will concerning the service
which thou requirest inwardly and outwardly to be given unto the: now do
thou begin to tell me what thy will is that I should do and leave undone for thy
sake unto man. And first you set before min eyes, them who^ you for ordres
sake and the more commodity of man in this life, have set in degree and
authority above me, co^prehending them under the name of father and mother,
that I might know yt as of thee they are commanded to bear toward me a
faithful love and a motherly care in the very names of father and mother,
wherewith you honor them: so am I commanded of thee to do that which is most
equal and just (as the very brute beasts do teach us) that with childly
affection and duetye, I should behave my self toward the^, that is I should
honor the^, which co^prephe^deth in it, love, thankfulness, reverence and
obedience, and that not so much because they be my parents, and in their
offices are careful for me (for it may be they will neglecte the doing of
their duties toward me) but because thou commaundest me so to do, how so
ever they do. So that by this commandment I perceive that thou would I
should consider them who^ thou have placed in auctorite and superior degree: as
parents, maiestrats, masters or such like, and accordingly behave my self
toward them, honor them, that is to say love them, be thankful unto them,
reverence them and obey them for thy sake so long as they pass not their
bounds, that is so long as they require not otherwise then you have given them
commission or permission to do.

And for as much as thou see their care and office is great, and our
corruption to obey is very much, as well to encorage them in their vocation to
be diligent, as to inflame me to humble obedience unto them, therthroughe to
make them more willinge to sustain cares for me: you addeste a promise, that is
long life which so far as it is ablessing from thee you wilt endue us with all.
Whereby we may gather that a ciuel life does much please thee and receives here
rewards, especially if we lead it for conscieunce to thy law. And on the
contrary part, a disobedient life to them that be in auctorite, will bring the
sooner thy wrath and vengeance in this life. All which works much to the
commendation of the state of politic and ciuell maiestrats. By reason hereof
(dear father) I se my self much bounde^ to praise thee, and hartelye to obey
this thy commandment. For in it and by it you declarest thy great love
toward us, which even in this present life our pylgermage and passage to our
home, woldst have us to enjoy the benefit of peace, and most semelye
quietness and order, and by this order so couple us that none should contemn or
despise another, but even high and low to be and account the^ selves as
parents and children. Particularly for my part I cannot but say that I have
most cause to thank thee for my pare^tes, scholemasters, and others under whose
tuitio^ thou have put me. No pen is able to write ye particular benifites, wc I
have her by received in my infancy, childhod youth, middle age, and alwais
hither to. Oh how good a lord have you declared thy self to me, which in them
and by the^ have norrished, fed, instructed, corrected, defended and most
graciously kept me. I could reckon innumerable behind me and but few before
me, so much made of and cared for as I have been hitherto. No small token of
thy love to me ward is it, that thou would engraue in their hearts and
command them under pain of damnation to be careful over me, to do me good
and provide for me, as they have done or rather thou by the^ publicly. Also
for the common wealth and such as thou have placed in aucthorie over me in
both thy regenie^tes, if I considered them that have been, and them that be, I
could not but praise thee good lord. For no less praise worthy art thou for
this chastening us and admonishing us now presently by them that be in
authority, of our ingratitude and unthankfulness, then by such as have been,
for all kinds of good things. But infinite are the causes of thankfulness which
this commandment considered, should stir up in me. But alas (most
merciful father) as I acknowledge my self most unthankful unto thee for all thy
benifites powered upon me in this life by my parents, nources, tutoures,
masters, magistrates, bishops, pastors, and good frindes, even from my
cradell unto this hour: so unto them have I always been and am, in not loving
them, as my coldenes in praiynge for them and to my power in helping them,
declares: and also my not reuerencing them, my co^temning them, and
temerariousnes in my mistrusting or to narrowly and to straightly loking at
them and their duties, shows: and not obeynge them, as by my co^tumacy
appears, not only when any thing to me unpleasant or unprofitable, but also
profitable and convenient is required. And yet I speak not of ye euel and
muttering reports, of ye offenses i^ tra^sgressing ye politilie laws for
apparel and meats and other no small offenses which I have committed and
given. Oh this is a sin dear father that I always have been a private more
then a common weal man, always I seek for mine owen co^meditie, co^temning
that which makes to the conmmoditie of others. As for my disobedience and
wicked behavior toward my own parents and all others whom thou have set
over me (dear father) no tou^ge can express it, and therefore I am worthy of
da^ynation. But (gracious good lord and dear father) I beseech thee for thy
Christ's sake, to have mercy upon me, and pardon me, as of thy goodness it
pleased the to pardone the patriarchs. Thou have given this commandment as
thy holy law to open to us how corrupt we are, and how much we swerve from
the pattern wherafter we were first made and once agreed thereto before Adams
fall, that we might loath our selves and even thereby be driven to seek and set
by thy sweet mercyes in Jesus Christ, whom therefore thou did send to
fullfyll the law in his flesh that we might borowe of him the same, by true
faith: which of thy goodness work in us by thy holy spirit, and open this
law unto us that we may more and more increase in the knowledge, love and
obedience of it to thy glory and our salvation, Amen. Dear father be merciful
to our magestrats, especially ye queen's highness, whose heart with the residue of
her counselors, turn into thy testimonies, give them thy wisdom and a zeal
to the truth according to knowledge, that they may use the power they have
received of thee to the cherishing of thy church, that wc us here thy word may
have free passage and thy true worship may be maintained, and not onclye here
but also every where among those whom thou would we should pray for. Be
merciful to my poor parents (gracious lord) with my brethren, systers,
wife, children, family, servants, kinsfolks, neighbors, as thou know
they have all need. Give unto the hearts of all parents, magestrates and such
as be in aurtherite here or else where that they may according to that you
have put them in trust wtall, be faithful, deligent, careful, and happy.
Grant unto children, servants and subjects, that every one may render
love, obedience, thankfulness and reverence to al such as thou have put in
aucthorite over them: bless the church and send it peace and har borough here
or else where: bless the common weal and send us peace: bless the diocesses
and shieres and send them good bisshops and justices: bless every household
and family, that thy peace may be in the same continually. Finally write this
law and all thy laws in our hearts we be sech thee yt we may keep them Ame^.

Thou shalt do no murder etc.
AS in the commandment goeinge next before, thou settests before me the
personages of all such as thou for the commodytie, order, and peace of man in
this life have placed in authority, accordingly of us for thy sake to be
esteemed: so do thou in this commandment set before us to look on, the
personages of all men generally, high and low, over whom thou geuest us a
charge that we shall not kill or murder the^. In which word thou comprehendest
all kind of hatred or malice, in word thought or deed, as thy dearly beloved
son expoundinge this commandment Mat. 5.
does teach. Yea because thou would all men should be dear unto us, being
all of one substance, of one similitude, coming of the same parents Adam and
Eve, made of one God, redeemed of one Christ, in whom we should be coupled as
members of one body, and live to the aid, succor and comfort one of another,
because of this (I say) easlie we may see that not only you forbiddest here to
beware of all kinds of displeasures, but also thou commau^dest us to bear and
exercise al kind of love and favor in heart word and deed, and that for thy
commandments sake, for else toward our enemies our hearts would arise, and
be great, in that they contemnynge their duties toward us seem to deserve the
like at our hands.

By reason hereof I have great cause to thank thee dear father. For here by I
see how that thou do much love my soul which art so careful over my
body, so that he which hurts it displeases thee and he that does it good
pleases thee, if so be he do it for thy sake. By this commandment now I se
that it is thou that have kept me from doing many euels, which else I should have
outragiously done, and have stirred me up to do good to my brethren if at any
time I have done any: even as thou have also kept and do keep presently
others from doing me hurt, and have and do stir up those that do me good to
do so un to me. Oh how great is ye multitud of thy benifits (good lord)
wherewith thou have overwhelmed me, and the which through this commandment I
perceive my self to have received, presently do receive, and so long as I live
am like to receive, for thou commaundest al men every where to do me good, love
me, defend me, and cherishe me: such is thy love to me in this present life
and that for my body. oh how great is thy love then to me in everlasting life,
and yt for my soul? If in a strau^g country so great is thy protection, how
great is it at home? But alas (dear lord) how unthankful have I ben and am yet
still for these thy fatherli benifits, oh min ingratitud: yea lord horribly have
I tra^sgressed and still do transgress this thy gracious precept in pride,
envy, disdain malice, hardness of heart, unmercifulness and conte^ni^g thy
children, saints and servants: Self love all together reigns in me and desire
of praise, rule and fame: I am so far from love and mercy in heart (good lord)
that no man ca^ here it in my tongue, nor see it in my works, but rather clean
contrary, and yt generally and to the^, to whom I am most bound perticularly.
By reason whereof I have deserved ever lasting damnnation and to be cast away
from thy presence for ever. Oh most gracious father forgive me for Christ's
sake I beseech the. For to this end did thou give this commandment, that
I seeing my corruption and deprauate nature by sin might come to thy mercy
deserved by christ, and through faith in him, might find not only pardone of
that which is paste: but also thy grace and holy spirit to begin in me the
obedience to this and al other thy holy precepts for ever more, so be it. For
this thy Christ's sake (dear father) I beseech thee therefore to take from me
and all other for whom thou would that we should pray, all enupe, pride,
arrogancye dysdaine, hatred and all suspitiousnes: and grant unto us bowels
of mercy, humility, patience, mekenes, long sufferinge, gentillnes, peace,
charity and al kind of brotherly love comfort the feeble, releue the poor,
help the fatherless, heal the sick, bless the afflicted, show thy great
mercy upon all poor prisoners and deliver the^ in thy good time, remember thy
pitye toward strangers, captives, wydowes, and such as be oppressed.

Thou shalt not commytte adulterye.
HEre (good lord) thou ghost about to command unto me as love in the other, so
pureness and chastity in this, and therefore thou say I should not commite
adultrye: in the which word thy son our savior Jesus Christ, does
comprehend al uncleanness, yea the very concupiscence and abusing of the heart
in lusting after any man's wife or otherwise unchastly. By the which, in that
thou would have us to love in our selves and others purite and cleanes, that
we might be holy as thou our god art holy, and our bodies being temples of
thy holy spirit might be kept pure and accordinglye: easelye we may see that
as thou forbiddest all unclean deeds, words, lokes, and thoughts: so do
thou command us to love and exercise all purity, chastity, cleannes,
sobryety temperancye etc.

By reason whereof I have great cause to be thankful unto thee, which not
only for the help and commodity of man, but also for remedy of man's
infirmity, have made woman kind and ordained the state of matrimony, which in
thy sight is so holy and pure that thou accomptest the bed and act of
generacio^ between man and wife in this state of matrimonye to be an undefiled
thing, and such care thou have over the personages married and their
condition, that unto damnation they sin, which not only go about to defyle
that bed, but within there hearts do wish or desire it, yea which do not
indeuer themselves with thought, word and deed to help that purite and cleanes
between married folks be kept. But the great causes thou geuest us to thank
thee for this state and ordinance, and for thy defending us by this
commandment, are innumerable.

Full well I see that it is thou which by this commandment not only
refraynest me, but also kepest my wife from impurytye which else we might
both commyte.

Great is thy lous (Oh good lord) and more then I am able to consider, which
declarest thy self to be thus careful over me concerning the benefyttes
which come unto me both for the mind, body, and goods, by sobryetye and
tem perauncie, which here thou requirest. Only this I cannot but see, that I
have great cause to thank thee which art so careful over me, as by this
commandment I well see.

But alas (good lord) what shall I say, which am and have been so far from
thankefullnesse that I am to be accounted amongst the most unthankful: yea you
know it good lord. Fylthely have I broken this law, and caused other so to
do, of whose repentance I am uncertain: as also my tongue alas has often ben
to shamfully exercised, mynetes and my thoughts to wickedly abused.

All this gear I have increased by mine intemperauncye in catynge, drinkinge,
cherishingemy body etc. I have also hurt my bodyly health, minished that
which I and others should live on, and horribly hindered all good prayers, and
meditations: wherein though I have time and place, yet alas I nothing exercise
my self as I should do.

By reason whereof, I have deserved everlasting damnation. Oh good lord and
gracious father, do thou for thy names sake and in Christ's blood, pardon me
and forgive me I beseech thee, and as thou have most mercifully hitherto spared
me: so of thy mercy put away my trespasses, and the transgressions of those
whom I have caused to sin: let that love which moved thee to pardon Judas
with Thamar, David, Berthsabe, and the great sinner, of whom we read in S.
Luke, move thee to pardone Luk 7.
and forgive me also. Thou gave this commandment to this end that I might
know my sin and sinful nature and so thereby be driven to thy Christ
crucified, for whose sake I ask mercy, and also that thy good spirit may be
given unto me to purify me and work so in me and with me, that I may trewelye
know, hartly love, and faithfully obey this thy holy precept inwardly and
outwardly now and for ever Amen. Gracious good lord, grant to me and my wife
that we may dwell together according to knowledge, and may keep our vessels
in holiness: grant (Oh lord) that we may be pure and vndestled: and grant the
same to all that be married, and to them which be unmarried grant, that they
may live a pure, chaste, and undefiled life, and if they have not the gift of
singlenes of life, grant them such makes with whom they may live holyly to thy
praise. Dear father give me the gift of Sobriety and Temperauncy, and grant
the same to al them whom thou would I should pray for. As in times paste I
have used my tongue and other members evil, so now good lord grant that I
may use them well, chastely and godly. This I prays thee grant through Jesus
Christ, and finally (Oh lord) both in soul and body sanctify me, and as in
thy temple dwell in me now and forever more Amen.

Thou shall not steal.
Now that thou have taught me the service required of thee for me to observe
toward the personages of all men and women of every condition: thou beginnest
to tell me what thou would I should do concerning their goods: and as in
the next commandment before this thou dyddest command unto me sobriety
and pureness, so do thou in this Justice and righteousness, forbydding me to
steal. Under the which word you comprehendest al kinds of desceite. The which
thing you do because you would that I should give my self wholly to the
study and exercise of Justice, as in the precepts next going before, you
would I should give over my self wholly to the keeping of sobriety and
pureness. So that I see thy good pleasure herein is not that I sheuld alonely
abstain from al theft: but also from al fraud and craft in word or deed, yea
yt I should earnestly follow and exercise all equity, truth and Justice.

By reason whereof I see my self much bound to praise thee which art so carful
over mi goods and substance, that if any man should go about to steal from
me, or to defraud me in any thig, yea whosoever goes not about to keep and
care for that I have as he would do for his own, the same displeases the.

Oh lord if thou have such care for my goods, cattle, and such pelf, how
great is thy care for my soul? If this one commandment were not, I perceive
as I for my own part should have done and do much worse then I have done: so
much worse had been done to me and mine then has been. It is you good lord (I
perceive) that have both given me al yt I have, and also still conseruest and
keep the same, and not my own polycye, wisdom and industrye, for in vain
were all this, except you did vouchsafe to use and take it as a mean to
work by. There is nothing therefore that I have but when soever I look upon it,
by this commandment I learn thy goodness, strength and power, for as thou
geuest it of thy mercy, so it speaks to me that presently you still do keep
it for me: so that exceeding great cause have I to thank thee for this precept
dear god and most gracious lord.

But alas I am so far from thankfulness (as always I have been for all thy
care for me and for all that ever thou haste given unto me) that as I have used
subtelty and craft, yea some times theft and briberye: so now (good lord) I
still when occasion is offered, do exercise the same. I live also voluptuously
of yt you have given and lent me, and nothing consider what equity requires,
and what or how great the necessity of the poor is, whom I do thus defraude
by excess and prodigality. That which I borowe, I with unwillingness do
repaye, I use it more negligentlye then I would do mine own. Lack of
excommunication, of Justice, ye great vsery, robbery, oppression and such like
wickedness as is exercised among us I lament not, labor not after my vocation
for the redress of the same, I pray not to thee thereabout, but neglecte
altogether.

Yea even those things wherewith I am put in trust, or am hirid to do, those (I
say) I do with great negligence, so that great is my sin here in and worthy
I am of damnation. But merciful god I beseech thee for Christ's sake, to have
mercy upon me, and to pardon me my unthankfulness, theftes, frauds, deceytes,
avarice, neglegences and great carelesnes for ye lack of Justice and for ye
mo^struouse oppression, vseries, excess, riot, the which be horribly exercised
in ye common weal. For thy mercies sake in Christ Jesus (o lord) whom you haste
given to fullfyll the law for them that do believe, give me true faith and thy
holy spirit, to work in me the knowledge, love and perpetual obedience of
this thy holy precept and all other thy commandments for ever.

Dear lord give unto me and to all whom you would I should pray for, the
hatred of al craft, and love of all Justice, grant to the oppressed thy
comfort, to wrongers repentance, to thieves and deceivers, yt they may make
restitutio^, to justices of peace, land lords and the rich of the world, yt
they may have thee before their eyes, love their poor tenants and brethren, to
laborers and artificers yt they may be diligent in their work and labour^
that wherwt they are put in trust.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
NOw do you (most gracious lord) instruct me in this commandment how I
should use my ton^ toward my neighbor and behave my self concerning his name,
forbidding me to bear false witness: in ye which you forbiddest me all kinds of
slaundering, lying, hipocricy and untruth. And why? because as members of one
body, thou woldeste we should speak^ truth one to another, and be careful
every one to cover others infirmity, and with our tou^ge defend the names of
others, eue^ as we would that other should defend ours. So that in this
commandment, as you forbiddest me all kind of evil, parelous, calumnious, and
untrue speaking: so do thou command to me all kind of godly, honest
and true report and talk.

By reason whereof I have great cause to praise thee, in that I se thee to be
so careful over my name, that all men are by thee commanded to defend ye
same. O precious god, great is thy care over my soul I now perceive. If this
commandment were not, I se, as I should have done and do much worse with my
tou^ge to others then is hapened, so should I have felt of others toward me.

Besides this no small commodity is it to me that thou wouldeste all men
should use treweth in all thire words to me.

Oh how great a good thing is this unto me? If we consider ye hurt ye
comes by untruth and by words, where through many are deceived: easly may
wese a wonderful benifit and care of thee for us in this commandment.

But (gracious lord) like as I acknowledge my unthankfulness to be monstrouse
and great and always has been hitherto: Even so yet continue I in wonderful
hypocrisy in all my conversation, often lying, and speaking as vainly so
offensiuely, fleshly subtelly, calu^niously, and geuig my ears to here such
things as be slau^derously spoken, not repugninge or admonishing other: as the
slaunderer to do as he would be done by, to tell his tale where he should tell it:
neither admonishing the partys slaundered of yt which is reported of him,
thereby to take better heed, but rather I augment it. By reason whereof I have
deserved eternal damnation.

But thou (good lord) be merciful unto me I beseech thee for Christ's sake,
whom you have ordained to be the end of the law to all them that do believe,
as well for pardone of that which is past, as for not imputinge the
imperfection that remains. In his name therefore (good lord) I beseech thee to
pardon me, and give me thy holy spirit to open to me this law and all other
thy precepts, so to understand them, that I may heartily love them and
faithfully give my self to the obedience of them for ever. Grant me thy good
spirit to sanctify my tongue that it may be kept fro^lying, slaundering and al
such vices, and that it may be continually used in thy service, and speakinge
that which may be to edify, to thy glory and praise through Jesus Christ our
lord. Amen.

Through imperfectness of copies his doing upon the tenth commandment is not
yet come to light. Therefore take this in good part till god send the rest.
A meditation concerning prayer, with a breife paraphrase upon the petitions
of the lords prayer.
THe mind of man has so large roumthe to receive good things, that nothing in
deed can fully fill it but only god, who^ then thy mind fully possesses,
when it fully knowethe him, it fully loves him, and in all things is framed
after his will. They therefore (dear lord god) that are thy children and have
tasted somewhat of thy goodness, do perpetually sighe, yt is do pray until they
come thereto: and in yt they love thee also above all things, it wonderfully
wou^deth them that other men do not so, that is love thee and seek for thee
with them. Whereof it comes to pass that they are inflamed with continnall
prayers and desires that thy kingedome might come every where, and thy goodness
might be both known, and in life expressed of every man.

And because there are innumerable many things, which as well in them selves
as in others be against thy glory, they are kindled with continual prayer and
desire, sighing un speakably in thy sight for ye increase of thy spirit: and
some times when they see thy glory more put back then it was wont to be either
in themselves or in any other, then are they much more disquieted and vexed.
But because they know that you do rule all things after thy good will, and
yt none other can help them in their need, they often times do go asideall
businesses laid a part, and give them selves to godly cogitations and talk
with thee, complaininge to thee as to their father, of those things that grieve
them, beggyng thereto and that most earnestly thy help, not only for
themselves, but also for others, especially for those whom singularlye they
embrace in thee, and often do repete and remember thy gracious benifites both
to others and to themselves also, wherthrough they are provoked to re^^er to
thee hearty thanks, thereby being enflamed, as well assuredlye to hope well of
thy good will toward them and patiently to bear al evils, as also to study
and labor to mortifye the affections of the flesh, and to order all their
whole life to the service of their brethren and to the settinge forth of thy
glory.

This they know is that prayer thy son Jesus Christ our lord commanded to
be made to thee in the chamber, ye door being shut. In this kind of prayer he
himself did watch often, even all the whole night: herin was Paul frequent, as
all thy saints be. This kind of prayer is ye true liffting up of ye mind unto
thee, this stands in thaffections in the heart, not in words and in the
mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirit, so frequent they this talk
with thee, the more thy spirit is in them, the more are they i^ talk with thee.
Oh give me plentifully thy spyrite which thou have promised to power out upon
all flesh, that thus I may with thy saints talk with thee night and day, for
thy only beloved sons sake Jesus Christ our lord Amen.

Moreover thy saints, to provoke them to this kind of prayer, do use first
their necessity, which they consider in three sorts, inwardly concerning their
souls, outwardly concerning their bodies, and finally concerning their names
and fame, whereto they add the necessity of those that be committed to them,
the necessity of thy church, and of the common weal.

Secondly they use thy commandments, which require them under pain of sin
to pray to thee in all their need.

Thirdly they use the consideration of thy goodness, which art naturally
merciful to young ravens calling upon thee, much more then to them for whom
ravens and all things ellswere made, for whom thou have not spared thy dear
son, but given him etc.

Fourthly they use thy most sweet and free promises made to hear and help all
them that call upon thee in Christ's name.

Fifthly they use examples, how that you which art the god of al and rich unto
all them yt call upon thee in christ's name, have heard and helped others calling
upon thee.

Sixthly they use the benefits given them before they asked, thereby not only
provoking them to ask more, but also certifieng their faith, that if thou
waste so good to grant them many things unasked, now thou will not deny
them any thing they ask to thy glory and their weal.

Last of al they use the reading and wayinge of psalms and other good prayers,
because they know thereby peculiarly besides ye other scripture, there is no
small help: as may apere by paul Ephesians 5. Col 3. where be will ^eth the
congregation to use psalms hymmes and spiritual songs, but so that in ye heart
we should singe and say them: not that thy children do not use their tongues and
words in praying to thee, for they do use their tongues, speech, and words to
stir up their in ward desire and feruency of the mino, full well knowing that
else it were a plain mocking of thee to pray with lips and tounges only. Oh yt
I might feel now thy spirit so to affecte me, that both with heart and mouth
I might heartily and in faith pray un to thee.

Now concerning the things that are to be prayed for, thy children know that
the prayer taught by thy son, most lyuelye and playnelye does contain the
same. And therefore they often use it, first asking of thee their heavenly
father through Christ, that thy name might every where be had in holiness
and praise: then that thy kingdom by regeneration and the ministry of the
gospel might come.

And so thirdly that willingly perfectly and perpetually they might study to
do, yea do in deed thy will, with thy holy and heavenly angels and spirits.
These things they seek and pray for, namely thy kingedome and thy righteousness
before any worldly benefit. After which petitio^s, because al things, yea even
ye benifits of this present life do come from thee, they do godly desire the
same under the name of daily bread being instructed of thy wisdom, that after
small benefits to ask corporal is not unseemly to thy children, which know
both spiritual and corporal to come from thy mercy. In the other peticions
they pray for things to be taken from them, beginnig with forgeuenes of sins,
which were impudentlye prayed for, if ye their hearts were not so broken that
they could forgive all things to al me^ for their part. They add their
profession, y^ is charity, whereby they profess that they have forgeuen all
offenses done to them. Howbeit because it is not enough to have pardon of y^
which is past, except they be preserved from new offi^ces, they pray thee not
to lead the^ in (...) temptations by permitting them to the perverse suggestio^
of Satan, but rather to deliver them from his importunity and power, by euel
understanding Satan the author of all evil. Oh (dear god) that y^ would
endue me with thy spirit of grace and prayer with thy children accordingly to
make this prayer always whenever I do pray.

As for outward evils so long as they do not (as it were) enforce thy people
to sin, in that christen profession does account them amongst thy benefits:
thy son has not taught thy church to pray for the taking away of the^ in
this prayer, for here he has contained but those things, for ye which al
Christians generally and particularly may of faith pray at all times. It often
comes to pass that exterior euilles, because they be not euells in deed,
that is they are not against gods grace in us, therefore they cannot of faith
be prayed for to be taken away, for thy children y^ have faith, do always
prefer thy Judgment before their own, the which Judgment when they know by
that which happens to them, they submite themselves there to wholly, although
the spirit make his unspeakable gronings to help their infirmities by prayer,
not to have them taken away, but y^ they might have strenght and patience to
bear the burden accordingly, which burden if it be to heavy in the better
sense and feling thereof, they in their prayers do complain some thing, rather
then pray to have it taken away, as our savior did in the garden when he
added to his complainte not my will but thy will be done. So do thy people in all
their complaints add, not as we will but as you will, for they are taught by
thy spirit no otherwise to pray for the taking away of corporal euelles
either from them selves or from others, unless they by the same spirit do
certainly se the same to make to thy glory: as did thine Apostles and
servants, when absolutely and without condition they did ask health or miracle
for any, when they healed or raised the dead by prayer: for they know nothing
can be better than when it is according to thy will. Oh that I might always
know thy will in all things, and for ever apply me self thereto. Hereof it
comes that thy saints and dear children which love their neighbors as
themselves, do yet notwithstanding in their prayers ask vengeance of some, as
we may read in the psalms of David, because in prayinge and talking with thee
they se by thy holy spirit (for without it is no true prayer) sometimes thy
Judgments upon some which they perceive to sin to death, and therefore ought
not to be prayed for, but rather to be prayed against, because thy glory cannot
be set forth as it should be without their destruction: thy will is always best
and the thing whereto they frame all their desires.

Therefore when they perceive it decreed with thee such and such by their
destructyon to set fourth more myghtelye thy glory, how should they but
desire and pray for the same, and write it as David has done, that the godly
in readinge and waying such prayers, might receive comfort, and the ungodly be
afraied: else when that they perceive not so manifestlye the determened
Judgment of god, they in their prayers do most heartily pray for them as
Samuel did for Saul, Moses for the Israelites, Abraham for the Sodomites. Oh
good faher for thy mercyes sake give me the trews love of mankind, but yet so
yt I may love man for thee and in thee, and always prefer thy glory above
al things through Christ our lord.

Now though thy children do know that thy will cannot but be done, and nothing
can be done but that thou of thine own will have determined to do, although no
man should desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in prayer: first
to render obedience to thee, which requyreste prayer as a spiritual service
to thee: secondly because thou have ordained prayer to be as an instrumente and
mean, by the which thou workeste things with thee already decreed and
determined. Thy children do use prayer to offer thee their service, if it
shall please the to use the same. As they do eat and drink, which is a
mean ordained of thee for the co^seruation of their life, not lookynge hereby
to lengthe^ their days above their bounds which already thou have appotnted,
but as becomes them, to use thy means which thou have ordained to serve thy
providence: So do they (herein as men not curiouse to know thy providence
further then thou reuai^est it) use prayer as a mean by y^ which thou art
accustomed to work many of thy chidrens ^e^re, that according to thy good will
thou may use the same: they do not think a mutabilitie in thee (for y^ art
god and art not changed, with thee there is no variableness) and therefore
they pray, not as me^ which would have thy determinations and ordenaunces,
which are in most wisdom and mercy, to be altered, but rather that they might
submit their wills to shine, and make them more able to bear thy will and
pleasure. They know thou haste promised to help them calling upon thee,
wherefore they doubt not but thou so wilt do and therefore pray accordingly.
They love thee heartily, and therefore they cannot but desire much ^s talk with
thee, that is to pray, even as a well manered and lauinge wife will not take
upon her to ask any thing of her husband at all but that, she hops he
would take in good part and do of his own fres will, although she had
spoken nothing thereof. When she knows what her housbands will is in things,
she gladely talks with him thereof, and accordingly as she sees he is
purposed to do, she will often desire him to do it: even so thy children (I
say) which heartily love thet, in that they know thy wisdom and will is best,
hawe can they but often talk with these and desire thee to (...) that which
they know is best, which they know also thou would do (...) none should ask
or pray for y^ same? Thy children use prayer as a mean by which they se
plainly thy power, thy presence, thy providence, mercy (...) goodness toward
them in granntinge their petitions, and by prayer they are confirmed of them
all. Yea thy children use prayer to admonish them how that all things are in
thy hands. In prayer they are as it were of thee put in mind of those things
they have done against thee their good lord. By reason whereof repentance
ensues, and they conceive a purpose to live more purely ever afterward, and
more hartelye to apply themselves to all innocencye and goodness. Who now
considering so many great commodities to come by reason of prayer, would
marvel why thy children are much in prayer and in laboring to provoke others
there unto?

For as none that is a suter to any other wit use any thing which might offend
or hinder his suit, so no man that uses prayer will flatter himself in any
thing that should desplease thee, to whom by prayer he moves suit whenever
he prays: so that nothing is a more prouocacion to al kind of godlynes then
prayer is.

And therefore not without cause we may see thine Apostles and servants to
labor so dilygentlye, and desire that others might use, prayers for
themselves and others.

As concerning outward things which thy children pray for, although they know
thy will and decree is not variable and thy purpose must neds come to pass, yet
do they receive by their prayer no small commodity. For either they obtain
their requests or no. If they do obtain the^, then prove they by experience
that thou doeste the will of them that fear thee, and so they are more kindled
to love and serve thee. And in deed for this purpose (...) art wont, when thou will do good to any, to stir up their minds to desire y^ same good of thee
to the end that both thou and thy gifts may be so much more magnisted and set
by of them, by how much they have been ernest suitors and peticioners for the
same. For how can it but en^ a (...) them with love toward thee, to per ceiue
and feel thee so to care for the^, hear them and love them. If they do not
obtain that they pray for, yet undoubtedly they receive great comfort to
see that the euyls which press them and whereof they complain still, do not
oppress and over come them, and therefore they receive strength to bear y^
same the better. O good father help me that I might heartily love thee,
complain to thee in all my needs and always by prayer to power out my heart
before thee. Amen

AN OTHER paraphrase or meditation upon the lords praser.
O Almighty and eternal god of who^ all fatherhode in heaven and in earth is
named, whose seat is the heaven, whose foot stool is the earth, which of thy
great clemency and unspeakable love have not waighed nor considered our great
unkindness and wilful disobedience, but according to the good pleasure of thy
eternal purpose have in thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ, chosen us out of
the world and do accept us far other wise then we be in deed, to be
called yea and to be in deed thine adopted sons, and do vouchesafe (oh
louinge father) that we as it were heavenly children, should every one of us
confess, declare and call thee our heavenly father: grant (dear father)
that among us thy poor children by pureness of mynds Hallowed be thy name,
and couscience, by singlenes of heart, by vncorrupt and innocent life, and
example of virtue and godliness, thy most holy name may be sanctified, and that
so many of al other nations as thou have there unto chose^ and predestinate,
beholding our godliness and virtuous deeds that thou workest in us, may be the
more styrred to halow and gloryfy thy blessed name.

Oh faithful father we beseech thee that the kingdom of thy holy spirit Thy
kingdom come
of grace and prayer, of thy louinge kindness and mercy, and of all other thy
holy virtues, and of thy holy and most blessed word may continually raygne in
our hearts, so that thou would vouchesafe thereby to make us worthy to be
partakers of the realm and kingdom of thy gloriouse and blessed presence.

Oh dear god and heavenly father we humblye desire thy goodness to bow our
hearts unto thee, to make Thy will be done.
us humble of mind, to make us low in our own fight and obedient, that like as
thy dear son our only savior Jesus Christ counted his meat, works,
praise, and life to be only in obeyng to thy most blessed will, where in for
our sakes he became obedient to the death of the cross: so we may eue^ unto
the very death, in lowlines, in mekenes, patience and thankefulnes, ohey unto
thy holy will and not to murmur and grudge norrefuse whatsoever thy fatherlye
piety shall think good to lay on us, be it poverty, hunger, nakedness,
slcknes, slanders, oppressions, verations, persequutions, yea or death it
self for well doing: but in all things seek and labor to make these our
earthly bodies seruiseable to do thy will, and to refuse that thou will not,
never to strive nor wrastell against thy holy will, but with thy heavenly
citizens and household bull ded upon the foundation of thy holy prophets and
apostelles, thy son Jesus Christ being the head corner stone, all selfwill
and controuersye in opinious secluded, the lusts, desieres and affections of
the flesh mortified, the flatering assaults of the vain world, y^ cruel and
subtyl layings a wait of y^ devil overcome, agreing together quietly, and
united in spirit, we may freely obey unto thy most blessed will, therein to
walk all the days of our life.

Oh dear god give unto our needful Give us this day our daily bread.
bodies necessatie sustenaunce, and take from us all love of worldelye things,
all carefulnes and covetousness, that we may the more freely worship and serve
thee. Oh mercyful father we beseech thee to give unto us that heavenly bread to
strenghte^ our hearts, I mean y^ body of thy dear son Jesus christ y^ very
food and health of our souls, that we may always with thankfulness firmly
feed on him by faith and utterly forsake and abhor al false doctrine and
perswasio^s of me^, and all lying spirits that shall persuade us any other
wise of him then thy holy word does teach and assure us satisfy our hungry
souls (dear father) with y^ mary and fatnes of thy rich mercy promised to us
in y^ same thy son, and of our eternal election, redcmption, justification,
and glorification in him. Make us (Oh gracious god) to contempne and despise
this world with the vain things and pleasures thereof, and inwardly to hunger
for thy blessed kingdom and presence, which do thou satisfy (good god) in
thy good time according to thy good will and pleasure. Oh most loving god, give
us the bread of thy divine precepts and make our hearts perfect, that we may
truly and freely walk and live in them all the days of our life. Oh dear and
merciful father, we beseech thee give us the bread of thy lively and heavenly
word and the true understanding thereof, which is the light of our paths, the
food, strong tower and sure defense of our saules, that we being well sensed
with this munitio^, fed and filled with this food, may be worthy geastes at
thy celestial feast and wedding, where we shall never hunger nor want.

Oh most righteous and merciful And forgive us our trespasies.
god, father and governor of our life, we confess that we have grievously
sinned against thee from our youth up until now in ingratitude, in
unthankfulness, wilfulnes, disobedience, presumption and innumerable our
negligences and sins which we fro^time to time most hainously have
committed, whereby we have deserved not only sore ad greuouse plagues, but even
eternal dampnation, were it not that thou art y^ lord of mercy, and have power
to show mercy on whom you wilt, wherein thou art rich and plentiful to al
them that call by on thee faithfully: wherefore (dear father) we seeing our
manyfold and greuouse sins, which we have committed against thee, and also
thy great mercy, loving kindness, patience, and long suffering toward us, are
compelled not only to bear patiently and suffer our enemies when they rail on
us, slander us, oppress us, vex us, or trouble us, curse, persequute, and
kill us: but also to speak well of them, to enstructe them, to pray for them,
to do them good, to bliss them, to cloth them, feed the^, so heapyng coals
of thy charity and love upon them, and mercyfullye to forgive them even as
thou (dear father) for thy beloved Christ's sake haste forgyuen us. Thus have
thou taught us (good father) not as the hipocrites to look narowlye on our
neighbors faults, but diligently to examine our own consciences wherein we
have offended thee, and also what occasion of offense or falling we have given
to our brethren in eating, drinking, going, apparel, speaking, disolute or
uncomely laghter, in barganing, or by any means, and with all speed seek to
reconcile our selves to them, and to forgive unto other from the bottom of our
hearts, whatsoever they have offended us, and to do none other wise then we
wish and desire in our hearts that other should do to us, y^ so we may find
thee (o lord) in forgeuing us our trespasses, mylde and mer cifull, which
spedily do thou show thy self unto us, for thy dear Christ's sake.

Oh lord, thou god of the righteous, we feel the frailtis of our nature to And
lead us not into tentation.
be so perverse and apt to sin, that when thou by the gifts of thy holy
spirit do move us, and (as it were) call us, yea rather draw us unto thee
then are we drawn away and tempted of our own concupiscence and lust, beside
the great and dangerous assaults of the world and devil: therefore (faithful
father) we thy pore children beseech thee to take from us al those evils and
accasions that may draw us from thee. Oh dear god, protecte, defend, and
strengthen us against all the suggestions and assaults of our enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the devil, that neither in prosperity we were haute or
high minded to say unthankfully what fellow is the lord, nor yet in the
abondaunce of temptations, anguishe, vexation, tribulation, or persequution, to
be oppressed with fear, nor deceived by flaterie, nor yet to fall in despair
and so utterly perish: but in all dangers and perilles of temptacions, and
in the myddeste of the stormy tempests of tribulacion (ders father) make us thy
poor children to feels the co^solacion of the certainty of our eternal
election in Christ Jesus our lord, and to perceive thy fatherly succoure ready
to help us, least that we being overcome with the wicked sleightes and
veceitfull invasions of the enemies, should (as without thy grace and merciful
protection we shall) be drawn into an obstinate mind and so shut up the
cundite y^ should lead thy gracious gifts and benifits unto us, to our
co^moditye and comfort, that thou might lead us forth with the evil doers
and barden our hearts. Therefore (Oh good god) give us these thy good gifts,
namely strength, patience and ioyfulnes of heart, to rejoice in temptacyo^ and
assure us that it is the trial of our faith, that faith in us may have her
perfect work, that when we be well approuyd and purged with the fire of
temptations, we may fynishe our life in in vyctory, and ever more live with thee
in thy heavenly kingdom, where no temptacion shall do us hurt.

Finally (most merciful father) we But deliver us from evil.
humbly beseech thee to deliver us from this present evil world, from all
human and wordly fear, from al infirmities of the flesh and mind, from
false prophets and teachers, from false brethren, from traitors and tyrants
etc: and if it be thy good pleasure and may make most to the glory of thy
name, deliver us from the hands of our enemies and from all other euylls
present and to come both of body and soul, that we being by the great mercy
defended from al hurtful things, may always use those things that be
profitable for us, deuoutiye given to serve thee in good works, that y^ yoke
of our enemies and the bands of sin being shaken of, we may possess the
inheritance of thy heavenly kingdom, which thy dear son Jesus Christ has
with his precious blood purchased for, thine elect from the beginning of the
world: for thine is the kingdom, thou only haste the mayestye, thou only
art the god above all gods, king of all kings, and lord of al lords, thou
only, haste the power and authorytye to set up kings, and to put them
down, thou liftest the poor once of the duste and makesste him to sytte
among the princes of thy people, thou only makeste wars to cease and
geuist victory to whom thou will. Oh dear god, there is neither majesty rule
nor power, honor nor worship, dignity nor office, riches nor poverty,
health nor sickness, plenty nor scar^^tie, presycritie nor adversity, war nor
peace, life nor death, nor any other thing but it is all thine and thou both
have the power and also wilt give it to who^ it pleases thee in thy time and
ceason, that all glory may be given to the alone, for thou art worthy.

O dear father to thee we come therefore for help and succor, for without thee
there is no help at al. Oh good father deliver us from all that is evil in thy
sight, for thy own name sake and for thy dear Christ's sake, that we being
arms with thy holy armor, and weapened with thy blessed word, and instructed
by thy holy spirit, may according to thy holy promise, serve thee without (...)
are all the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness as is
acceptable in thy sight. To thed therefore (our dear father) our creator,
feader, protector, governor, and defendour, and thy beloved son Jesus
christ our only peace, merciseate redemer, iustister, and aduacate, and thy
holy spirit our sanctificato^, our wisdom, teacher, instructor, and comforter,
be all dominion power and glory for ever and ever Amen.

A MEDITATION of the coming of Christ to Judgment and of the reward both of
the faythefull and unfaithful.
OH lord Jesus Christ the son of the everliving god, by who^ al things were
made, are ruled and governed, as of thy love for our redemption thou did
not disdain to be our mediator and to take upon thee our nature in the
womb of a virgyn puerly and with out sin by the operacion of the holy
spirit, that both thou might in thine own person wonderfullye beutifye and
exalte our nature and work the same in us also, first abolishing the giltines
of sin by remissyon, then sin it self by death, and last of al death by
reising up again these our bodies, that they may be like unto thine own
glorious and immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art able to
subject all things unto the: As I say of thy love for our redemption thou
becamest man, and that most poor and afflicted upon earth by the space of
xxxiii. years at the least, in most humility, and paidest the price of our
raunsom by thy most bitter death and passion, for the which I most heartily
give thanks to thee: So of the same thy love toward us in thy good time, thou
will come again in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory, with
flaming fire, with thousands of Saints, with Mat. 25.
Angels of thy power, with a mighty cry, shoute of an Archangell, and blast of
a trompe, suddenlye as the lightning which shines from the east etc when men
think least, even as a thief in y^ night, when me^ be a sleep, y^ wilt so
come (I say) thus suddenlye in the twinkling of an eye, all men that ever have
been, be and shall be, with women and children, appearinge before thy tribunal
Judgment seat, to render an account of all things which they have thought
spoken (...) done against thy law, openly and before all Angels, saints,
and deuilles, and so to receive the Just reward of thy vengeance, if that
they have not repented and obeyed the gospel, and so to depart from thee to
y^ devil and his angels and all the wicked which ever have been, be, or shall be,
into hol^ster, which is unquenchable and of pains intolerable, easeles,
endless, hopeles, even from the face of thy glorious and mighty power: but it
they have repented and believed thy gospel, if they be found watchynge with
their lamps and oil in their hands, if they be found ready appareled with
the wedding garment of innocence, if they have not hardened their hearts, and
hourded up their treasure of thy vengeance in y^ day of wrath to be
reueyled, but have used y^ time of grace, the acceptable time, the time of
saluatyon, that is the time of this life in the which thou stretchest out thy
hand and spreadest thine arms calling and cryinge unto us to come unto thee
which art meek in heart and lowely; for thou will ease all that labor and are
heavy laden, if they have visyted the sick and prisoners, comforted y^
co^ferties, fed y^ hungry, clothed y^ naked, lodged y^ harbourles, if they
have not laden their hearts with glotteny and surfeting and carefulnes of this
life, if they have not dug and hid their talent in the ground doing no good
there with, but have been faithful to occupy thy gifts to thy glory and
hear washen their garments in thy blood by hearty repentinge them: Then shall
thy Angels gather them together, not as the wicked which shall be collected as
fagotts and cast into the fire, but as y^ good wheat that is gathered into thy
barn, then shall they be caught up to meet thee in the clouds, then shall
their corruptible body put on incorruption, then shall they be endued with
immortality and glory, then shall they be with thee and go whether thou
go, then shall they hear, come blessed of my father possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning etc, then shall they be set on seats of
majesty iudgeing y^ whole world, then shall they reign with the^ for ever, then
shall god be al in all with them and to them, then shall they enter and enherete
heavenly Jerusalem and the glorious reastful la^d of Canaa^, where is always
day and never night, where is no manner of weping, tears, infirmity, hunger
cold, sickness, envy, malice, nor sin, but always ioic without sorrow, mirth
without measure, pleasure without pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant
melody, saying and singing holy holy, holy lord god of hoastes etc: Suma
the ^le has not seen the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man that they shall then enherete and most suerly enjoy, although
here they be tormented prisoned, burned, solicited of Satan, tempted of the
flesh, and entangled with y^ world, wherthrough they are enforced to cry, thy
kingdom come: come lord Jesus etc: how Apoc. 22.
amiable are thy tabernacles? Like as y^ heart desires y^ water brokes etc:
Psa. 42.
Now let thy servant depart in peace: I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ: we morn in our selves waiting Romans 8.
for the deliverance of our bodies etc. Oh gracious lord when shall I find
such mercy with thee, that I may repent, believe, hope and look for this gear,
with the full fruition of these heavenly joys which thou have prepared for all
them that fear thee, and so rest with thee for ever more.

A MEDITATION CONCERning the sober usage both of the body and pleasures in
this life.
THIS our body which god has made to be the tabernacle and mansio^ of our
soul for this life if we co^sidred accordingly, we could not but use it
otherwise then we do, that is we would use it for the souls sake being the
geste thereof, and not for the body it self, and so should it be served in things
to help, but not to hinder the soul. A servant it is and therefore it ought to
obey to serve the soul that ye soul might serve god, not as the body will
neither as the soul it self will, but as god will, whose will we should learn
to know and behave our selves thereafter. The which thig to observe, is hard
for us now by reason of sin which has gotten a mansyon house in our
bodies, and dwells in us as does the soul, to y^ which (sin I mean) we are
altogether of our selves inclined, because we naturally are sinners and borne
in sin, by reason whereof we are ready as servants to sin and to use our
bodies accordingly, making the soul to sytte at reward, and pampering up the
servant to our shame. Oh therefore (good lord) that it would please thee to
open this gear unto me, and to give me eyes to consider effectually this my
body what it is, namely a servant lent for the soul to soiorne in and serve
thee i^ this life: yea it is by reason of sin y^ has his dwelling there,
become now to the soul nothing else but a prison and that most strait, vile,
stinking, fylthy, and therefore in danger of miseries, to many in all ages,
times, and places, till death has turned it to duste whereof it came and
whether it shall return, that the soul may return to thee from whence it
came, until the day of Judgment come, in the which you will reise up that
body, that then it may be partaker with the soul and the soul with it
inseparably of weal or woe, according to that is done in and by the same body
here now in earth.

Oh that I could consider often and heartily these things, then should I not
pamper up this body to obey it, but bridle it that it might obey y^ soul, then
should I fly the pain it puts my soul unto by reason of sin and
provocation to al evil, and continually desire the dissolution of it with Paul,
and y^ deliverance from it, as Philip. 1.
much as ever did prisoner his delyueraunce out of prison, for alonelyr by it
the devil has a door to tempt and so to hurt me: in it I am kept from thy
presence, and thou from being so conversant with me as else you wouldeste be: by
it I am restrained from the sense and feeling of all the joys and co^fortes
(in manner) which are to be taken as joys and comfortes in deed. If it were
dissolved and I out of it, then could Satan no more hurt me, then would
thou speak with me face to face, then the conflicting time were at an end, then
sorrow would cease and joy woldencrease, and I should enter into inestimable
rest. Oh that I considered this accordingly

AN OTHER mediation to the same effect
THE beginning of al evil in our kind of lyuinge springs out of the
deprauatyon and corruptnes of our Judgment, because our will always
foloweth-that which reason Judges to be followed. Now that which every man
takes to be friendly and agreing to his nature, the same does he Judge
necessarely to be good for him and to be desired. This is meat, drink,
apparel, riches, favor, dignitye, rule, knowledge, and such like, because
they are thought good and agreing either to the body or to the mind or to
both, for they help either to the co^seruatio^ or to the pleasure of man,
accounted of every one amongst good things.

How beit such is the weakness of our wit on y^ one part, and the blindness
and to much rage of our lusts on the other part: that we being left to our
selves, cannot but in the desire of things which we judge good and agreinge to
our nature, by the Judgment of our senses and reason, we cannot (I say) but
over pass the bounds whereby they might be profitable unto us, and so we make
the^ hurtful to us, which of the themselves are ordained for our health. What
is more necessary then meat and drink, or more agreing to nature? but yet
how few be there which de not hurt themselves by them? In like manner it goes
with riches, estimation, friends, lerning etc. Yea although we be i^ these most.
te^perate, yet when there wants y^ spirit our regeneratour, we are so
drouned. in the^, (...) we utterly neglect to lift up our mi^ds to the good
pleasure of god, to the ends we might imitate and follow god our maker by
yelding our selnes oiuer dulye to use his gifts to y^ common and private
vtility of our neighbors. But now, go^d only is life and cternity, and cannot
but demand of us his. handiworke, y^ we should render ^ure selves and al we
have to the end wherefore we were made, y^ is to resemble for our portion his
goodness, as those which be nothing else but witnesses and instruments of his
m^^^y. So y^ when we wholly do naturally ^^riue against y^ kind of life whereto
he has creat us, by seking always ourselves, what other thing ought to ensue,
but y^ he should again destroy us and take away his notable gifts, where with be
endued us y^ by all kind of well doing we should resemble his image, yea what
other this may ensue but that he should leave us and y^ eternally, y^ we might
feel and by experience prove how bitter a thing it is to leave y^ lord (...)
who^ is al goodness. Oh y^ therefore I might find such favor in thy sight dear
father, y^ you would work in ^^e by thy holy spirit a true knowledge of al
good things and hearty love to the same through. Christ Jesus our lord and only
savior Amen.

A MEDITATION FOR THE exercise of true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own w^ and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom him self to deny
his desires in matters of iesse weight, and to exercise mortification of his
own will in trisles. For if that (...) affections by this daily custom, be not
(as it were) half slain, surely surely when they lunge shall come, we shall find
the more to do, If we cannot watch with christ one hour, as he says to
Peter, we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore that in
great temptacions we may be ready to say with Christ, not my will but thine be
done, in that this commonly comes not to pass but where the rotes of our
lusts by thy grace (dear father) are almost rotten and rooted out by a daily
denial of that they desire: I humbly beseech thee for christ's sake to help me
herein. First pardon me my cherishing, and (as it were) watering of mine
affections, obeyinge them in their deuyses and superfluous desires:
wherthroughe in that they have taken deep root, and are to lively in me, I
secondly do beseech thee to pull them up by the rotes out of my heart, and so
henceforth to order me, that I may continually accustom my self to weaken the
principal rote, that the byrotes and braunthes may lose al their power. Grant
me (I beseech thee) y^ thy grace may daily mortify my co^cupisce^ce of
pleasant things, y^ is of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of me^,
meats, drinks apparel, ease, yea and life it self y^ the horror and impaciencie
of more grievous things, may he weakened, and I made more pacient in aduersytie.
Whereunto I further desire and pray thy goodness (dear father, that thou will
add this, namely that I may for ever become obedient and ready to thy good will
in all things, heartily and willingly to serve thee, and do whatsoever may
please the. For doutles, although we accustom our selves in y^ pleasant
things of this life to a mortificatio^ and denial of our selves, yet we shall
find enough to do when more bitter and weighty crosses come. For if thy son
our savior (ever wo^t to obey thy good will) prayed so heartily and often: not
my will but thy will be don, whereby he declares himself to be very man, how ca^
it be but we whose nature is corrupt not only in nativity but in y^ rest of
our whole life also, shall find both our hands full i^ great and grievous
temptations, wholly to resign our selves unto thee? Grant therefore, dear
father, for thy Christ's sake to me a most miserable wretch, thy grace and holy
spirit to be effectual in me, y^ daily I may accustom my self to deny my will,
in more easy and pleasant things of this life, y^ when need shall be I may come
with christ to thee with a resigned will, always steadfastly expecting thy mercy,
and in the mean season, continually obeyng thee with readiness and willingness,
doing what so ever may most please thee, through christ our lord, which lives
with thee etc.

A GODLY MEDITATION and instruction of the providence of god toward mankind.
THis ought to be unto us most God works all in all maruelously, justly and
holily
certain, y^ nothing is done without thy providence (oh lord) that is, that
not nothing is done be it good or bad, sweet or sower, but by thy knowledge,
that is, by thy will, wisdom, and ordinance (for all these knowledge does
comprehend in it) as by thy holy word we are taught in many places, that eue^
the life of a sparow is not without thy will, nor any Mat. 10. Mat. 8.
liberty or power upon a porket have all the devils in hell, but by thy
appointment and will: with will we always must believe most assuredlye to be al
just and good, how soever otherwise it seem unto us. For you art marvelous and
not comprehensyble in thy ways and holy in all thy works.

But hereunto it is necessary also God works by means, without means, and
against means.
for us to know no less certainly, that though al things be done by thy
providence, yet the same providence has many and diverse means to work by,
which means being contemned thy providence is contemned also. As for example,
meat is a mean to serve thy providence, for y^ preservation of health and
life here, so that he which contemns to eat because thy providence is
certain and infallible, the same contemns thy providence. In deed if y^ it
were so y^ meat could not be had, then should we not tie thy providence to this
mean, but make it free as you art free that is, that without meat you can
help and give health and life, for it is not of any need that thou use any
instrumente or mean to serve thy providence: thy power and wisdom is
infinite and therefore should we hangon thy providence even when all is clean
against us. But for our erudition and infirmities sake, it has pleased thee by
means to work, and deal with us here, to ex exercise us in obedience, and
because we cannot else (so great is our corruption) sustain thy naked and bare
presence. Grant me therefore dear father I humbly beseech thee for Christ's
sake, y^ as I something now know these thigs: so I may use this know ledge to my
comfort and commodity in thee: y^ is, grant yt in what state so ever I be, I
may not dout but y^ same does come to me by thy most just ordinance, yea by thy
merciful ordinance, for as you art just so art you merciful, yea thy mercy is
above al thy works.

And by this knowledge, grant me that I may humble my self to obey thee and
look for thy help in time convenient, not only when I have means, by which
thou may work and art so accustomed to do: but also when I have no means
but am destitute, ryea when that al means be directly and clean against me:
grant I say yet that I may still hang upon the and thy providence, not
doubtinge of a fatherly end in thy good time.

Again, lest I should contempne thy providence or presume upon. it by
vncouplinge those things, which thou have coupled together, preserve me from
negleating thy ordinarye and lawefull means in all my needs, yt so be I may
have them and with good conscience use the^, although I know thy providence be
not tied to them, further then pleases thee: but grant that I may with
diligence, reverence and thankfulness use them, and there to my diligence,
wisdom and industry in all things lawful, to serve thereby thy providence,
if it so please thee: howbeit so that I hang in no part on y^ means or on my
diligence, wisdom, and industry, but only on thy providence, which more and
more persuade me to be altogether father ly and good, how far so ever other
wise it appear and seem, yea is felt^ of me. By this I being preserved from
negligence on my behalf and despair or murmuring toward thee, shall be come
diligent and pacient, through thy mere and alone grace: which give and
increase in me, to praise thy holy name for ever, through Jesus Christ our
lord and only savior, Amen.

A MEDITATION of the presence of god.
THERE is nothing that makes more to true godlynes of life then the
persuasion of thy presence, dear father, and that nothing is hid from thee,
but all to thee is open and naked, eue^ y^ very thoughts, which one day thou will reuele and open either to our praise or punishment in this life: As thou
did David's faults which he did secretly. 2 Reg 12. or in yt life to come Mat
25: For nothing is so hid that shall not be reueiled. Therefore does the prophet
say: woe to them that keep secret their thoughts to hide their counsel from
the lord, and do their works in darkness, saying who sees us? grant to me
therefore (dear god) mercy for all my sins, especially my hid and close sins,
enter not into judgment with me, I humbly beseech the, give me to believe truly
in thy christ that I never come into Judgment for them, that with David I
might so reueile them and confess them unto thee, that you would cover them:
And grant further, that hence forth I always think my self continually
conversant before thee, so that if I do well I pass not of the publishig of it
as hipocrites do, if I do or think any evil, I may forth with know that y^
same shall not always be hid from me^. Grant me that I may always have in
mind that day wherein hid works of darkness shall be illumined, and also y^
sentence of thy son, that nothing is so secret which shall not be reueiled.
So i^ trouble and wrong I shall find comfort, and otherwise be kept through thy
grace from evil, which do you work I humblye beseech thee for Christ's sake,
Amen.

A MEDITATION OF GODS power, beutie, goodness etc.
BEcause thou lord woldst have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promising
thy self unto such as love thee, and threaning us with damp nation if we do
otherwise: whereby we may se both our great corruption and noughtines, and also
thine exceeding great mercy toward us.

First, concerning our corruption and noughtines, what a thing is it, that
power, riches, authority, beutye, goodness, liberality, truth, Justice, which
all thou art good lord, cannot move us to love thee? whatsoever things we see
faier, good, wise, mighty, are but eue^ sparkles of that power, beutie,
goodness, wisdom, which you art. For to the end you might declare thy riches,
beutye, power, wisdom, goodness etc: you have not only made but still do
coserue al creatures to be (as David says of ye beauens) declarers and setters
forth of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know thee.

How faier thou art the beutie of the son, moan, stars, light, flowers,
rivers, fields, hills, birds, beasts, men and al creatures, yea the goodly
shape and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty you art, we are taught by the creation of this world even of
naught, by governing the same, by punishinge the wicked mighty gyaunts thereof,
by overthrowing their devises, by repressinge the rages of the sea within her
bounds, by storms, by tempests, by fires: these and such like declare unto us
thine invisible, almighty and terrible power, whereby thou subduest all things
unto thee. How rich thou art this world, thy great and infinite treasure
house, does well declare. What plenty is there, not only of things, but also of
every kind of things? Yea how do thou yearly and daily multiply these
kinds? How many seeds do thou make of one sede, yea what great increase
do thou bring it unto? These cannot but put us in remembrance of the
exceeding riches that thou haste. For if to thine enemies which love thee not
(as y^ most part in this world be) if to them thou geuest so plentifully thy
riches here, what shall we think that with thy self thou haste laid up for
thy friends? How good thou art, al creatures generally and perticulerly do
teach. What creature is there in y^ world which thou have not made for our
commodity? I will not say how that you might have made us creatures without
sense or reason if thou had would. But amongst al things none does teach
us so thy great love toward us, as does the death of thy most derely beloved
son, who suffered the pains and ^errours thereof, yea and of bell it self,
for our sakes. If this thy love had been but a small love, it would never have
lasted so long nor Christ should never have died.

A MEDITATION OF DEATH and the commodities it brings
WHat other thing do we daily in this present life, then heau sin to sin
and hourd up trespass upon trespass? so y^ this day is worse always then
yesterdaye, by increasing as dais, so sins, and therefore thy indignation good
lord, against us: but when we shall be let go out of the prise^ of yt body, and so
taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be in most safe tie of immortality
and salvation, then shall come unto us no sickness, no need no pain, no kind of
evil to soul or body, but whatsoever good we can wish, y^ shall we have, and
what so ever we loath shall be far from us. O dear father, y^ we had faith to be
hold these things accordingly. Oh y^ our hearts were persuaded thereof, and eure
affections enflamed wc the desire of them. Then should we live in longing for y^
which now we most loath. Oh help us and grant y^ we being ignorant of things to
come, and of y^ time of our death, which to thee is certain, may so live and
finishe our journey here, y^ we may be ready and then depart, wht^ our departi^g
may make most to thy glory and our comfort through christ.

What is this life but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a warfar, a bubble of
water, a word, grass, a flower? Thou shall die is most certain, but of the
time no man ca^ tell when. The longer in this life you do remain, the more you
sinnest, which will turn to thy more pain. By cogitation of death our minds
be often in manner oppressed with darkness, because we do but remember the night of
ye body, forgetting ye light of the mind, and of the resurrection. Thereto
remember ye good things that after this life shall ensue, without wavering, in
certainty of faith, and so shall ye passage of death be more desired. It is like
a sailing over ye sea to thy home and country: it is like a medicine or
purgatio^ to ye health of soul and body: It is ye best phicisio^: It is like to
a womans travail: for as ye child being delivered, comes into a more large
place then the womb wherein it did lie before, so thy soul being delivered out
of the body, comes into a much more large and faier place, even into heaven.

A GODLY MEDITATION upon the passion of our savor Jesus Christ.
OH lord Jesus Christ, the sonue of the everliving and almightye god, by whom
al things were made, and be ruled and governed, thou the lively Image of ye
substance of the father, the eternal wisdom of god, the brightness of his
glory, god of god, light of light, coequall, coeternall, and consubstantial
with the father, thou of y^ love thou had to mankind, that when he was
fallen from the fellowship of god into the society of Satan and all evil,
did vouchsalfe for our redemption to become a mediator between god and man,
taking to the godhead our nature, as concerning the substance of it, and so
becamest man, also the heir of all, and most merciful Messiah, which by the
power of thy godhead, and merits of thy manhood, haste made purgation of our
sins, even by thine own self, whilst thou wast here on earth being now set
on the right hand of thy father for us, even concerning our nature, in
majesty, glory, and power infinite: I beseech and humblye pray thy mercy, to
grant me at this present, to rehearse some of thy passions and sufferinges for
me the last night you wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit might
thereby be effecttuall to work in me faith, as well of the pardone of my sins
by them, as mortification of mine affections, comfort in my crosses, and
patience in afflictions, Amen.

In the middeste of thy last supper with thy dear Apostles, these things cold
not but be before thee, namely that they all would leave thee, the most earnest
would for swear thee, and one of the xii should most traitorously betraye thee,
which were noe small crosses unto thee. Judas was admonished of thee to beware,
but when he took no heed, but wilfully went out to finishe his work,
conte^ning thy admonition and counsel, he could not but vere thy most loving
heart.

After supper there was contention amongs thy disciples who should be greatest
after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kingdom, and having this
affection of pride and ambition busy amongs them, notwithstanding thy diligence
in reproving and teaching them.

After thy admonicio^ to them of the cross y^ would come, thereby to make them
more vigilant, so gross were they, y^ they thought they could with their.ii.
swerds put away al pertis: which was no little grief unto thee. After thy
comi^g to Gethsemane, heuines oppressed thee, and therefore thou would thy
disciples to pray, you did tell to peter and his felows, that thy heart was
heavy to death, you did will them to pray, being careful for them also least
they should fall into tentation. After this you wentest a stones cast from them
and did pray thy self, falling flat and groueli^g upon ye earth, but alas y^
feltst no comfort, and therefore you came to thy disciples, which of all
others were most sweet and dear unto thee, but lo to thy further discomforte,
they pass nether of thy perils nor of their own, and therefore sleep a pace.
After y^ had awaked them, you go again to pray, but you fou^dest no comfort
at al, and therefore did return again for some comfort at thy derest friends
hands. But yet again, alas, they are fast a sleep: whereupon you art enforced to
go again to thy heavenly father for some sparcle of comfort in these thy
wonderful crosses and agonies. Now here you wast so discouraged and so
co^fortlesse, that eue^ streams of blood came running from thine eyes and
cares and other parts of thy body. But who is able to express ye infinitnes
of thy crosses eue^ at thy being in y^ garden? al which y^ sufferdest for my
sake, as well to satisfy thy fathers wrath for my sines, as also to sanctify
all my sufferings the more gladelye to be sustained of me.

After thy bloudye prayer, thou came, and yet again foundeste thy disciples
a sleep, and before you can well awake the^, lo^ Judas comes with a great band
of me^, to apprehe^d thee a these, and so does, leading thee away bound to the
high Bysshopps house Annas, and so from him to Caiaphas. Here now to augment
this thy myserie, behold thy Disciples fle from thee, false witnesses be
brought against thee, thou art accused and condemned of blasphemy, Peter eue^
in thy sight forswereth thee, thou art unjustly stricken for answering
lawfully, thou art blindfelde, stricken and buffeted all the whole night in
the Bishop Caiaphas house of their cruel servants.

In the morning by times thou art condemned again of the prestes of
blasphemy, and therefore they bring thee before y^ secular power to Pilate, by
who^ you art openly arrayned as other thieves and malefauoures were: when he saw
that thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not desmysse thee, but did send
thee to Herod where thou was derided shamefully in coming and goeinge to and
from him all the way wonderfully, especially after Herod had apparelled thee
as a fool.

Before pilate again therefore thou wast brought, and accused falsely, no man did
take thy part or speak a good word for thee.

Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged and to be handeled most
pitifully, to see if any pity might appear with the prelates, but no ma^at al
pitied thee.

Barrabas was preferred before thee, all the people head and tail, was against
thee and cried hang thee up, unjustly to death wast thou judged, you wast
crowned with thorns that pierced thy brains, thou wast made a mocking stock,
thou wast reviled, re^aited, beaten and most miserably handled.

Thou wentest through Jerusalem to the place of execution, even the mount of
Caluarie: A great cross to bange thee on was laid upon thy back to bear and
draw, as long as thou wast able.

Thy body was racked to be nailed to the tree, thy hands were bored through,
and thy fete also, nails were put through them to fasten thee there on, thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth, as one spewed out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth unworthy of any place: y^ high priest laughed thee to
sckorne, the elders blasphemed thee, and said god has no care for thee, the
common people laughed and cried out upon thee, thrist oppressed thee, but
vinegre only and gal was given to thee to drink, heaven shined not on thee,
the son gave thee no light, the earth was afraied to bear thee, Satan
tempted thee, and thine own senses caused thee to cry out: my god my god, why
have thou forsaken me? Oh wonderful passions which you sufferedst. In them you
teach me, in the^ thou comfortest me: for by them god is my father, my
sins are forgeuen: by the^ I should learn to fear god, to love god, to hope
i^ god, to hate sin to be patient, to call upon god, and never to leave him
for any tentatio^s, but with thee still to cry father in to thy hands I
commend my spirit.

A CONFESSION OF SINS, and prayer for the mitigation of gods wrath and
punishment for the same.
O Almighty god, king of al kings and gouerner of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to to punish sinners,
and to be merciful unto them that truly repent: we confess that thou do
most justly punish us, for we have greuouslye sinned against thee, and we
acknowledge that in punishinge us you do declare thy self to be our most
merciful father, as well because you doeste not punish us in any thing as we
have deserved, as also because, by punishing us thou do call us and (as it
were) draw us to increase in repentance, in faith, in prayer, in contemning of
the world and in hearty desiring for everlasting life and thy blessed presence.
Grant us therefore gracious lord thankfully to acknowledge thy great mercy,
which haste thus favorably dealt with us in punishing us, not to our confusion
but to our amendment. And seeing thou have sworn that you wilt not the death of
a sinner but that he turn and live, have mercy upon us and turn us unto
thee for thy derely beloved son Jesus christ's sake, who^ thou would should
be made a slain sacrifice for our sins, thereby declaring thy great and
unspeakable anger against sin, and thine infinite mercy to wards us sinful
wretches.

And for as much as the dulnes of our hearts, blindness, and corruption is such,
that we are not able to arise up unto thee by faithful and hearty prayer,
acording to our great necessity, without thy singular grace and assistance:
grant unto us gracious lord, thy holy and sanctif^inge spirit to work in us
this good work, with a pure and clean mind, with an humble and lowelye
heart, with grace to way and consider the need and greatness of that we do
desire, and with an assured faith and trust that thou will grant us our
requests, because thou art good and gracious even to young ravens catling
upon thee, much more then, to us for whom thou haste made all things, yea
and have not spared thine own dear son: because thou have commanded us to
call upon thee: because thy throne whereunto we come is a throne of grace and
mercy: because thou have given us a mediator Christ to bring us unto thee,
being the way by whom we come, being the door by whom we enter, and being our
head on who^ we hang and hope that our poor petitions shall not be in vain
through and for his names sake.

We beseech thee therefore of thy rich mercy, wherein thou art plentiful to all
them that call upon thee, to forgive us our sins, namelye our
vnthankefullnes, unbelief, self love, neglect of thy word, securitye,
hypocrisy, contempt of thy long suffringe, omissyon of prayer, doubting of thy
power, presence, mercy, and good will toward us, vnsensyblenes of thy grace,
impaciencye etc: and to this thy benefytte of corrcaynge us, add these thy
gracious gifts, repentance, faith, the spirit of prayer, y^ contempt of this
world and hearty desiring for everlasting life: indue us with thy holy spirit
according to thy covenant and mercy, as well to assure us of pardon and that
thou do accept us into thy favor, as thy dear children in Christ and for
his sake, as to write thy law in our hearts and so to work in us, that we may
now begin and go forwards in believing, living, fearing, obeyng, praying,
hoping and seruinge thee as thou do require most fatherly and most justly of
us, acceptinge us as perfect through Christ and by imputation.

And moreoner when it shall be thy good pleasure and most to thy glory, deliner
us we (beseech thee) out of y^ hands of thine adversaries by such means, be it
death or life, as may make to our comfort most in Christ. In the mean season
and for ever, save us and govern us with thy holy spirit and his eternal
consolation.

And concerning thine adversaries which for thy sake are become ours
adversaries, so many of them as are to be converted, we beseech thee to show
thy mercy upon them and to convert the^: but those that are not to be
converted which thou only do know (most mighty god and terrible lord)
confound, and get thy name a glory over them, abate their pride, aswage their
malice, bring to naught their deuelishe devises, and grant that we and al
thine afflicted children, may be arms with thy defense, weaponed with thy
wisdom and gyded with thy grace and holy spirit, to be preserved for ever
from all giving of offenses to thy people, and from all perilles, to glorify
thee which art the only geuer of al victory through the merits of thy only
son Jesus Christ our lord Amen.

AN OTHER CONFESSION of sins.
AS David, seeing thine angel with his sword ready drawn (most righteous
lord) to plague Jerusalem, cried out unto thee, it is I lord that have sinned,
and I that have done wickedly, thine hand lord be on me and not on thy poor
sheep: wherthrough thou waste moved to mercy, and baddest thine Angel put up
his sword, thou had taken punishment enough: Even so we gracious lord,
seeing thy fearful sword of vengeance ready drawn and presentlye strikynge
against this common weal and thy Church in the same, we (I say) are
occasyoned every man now to cast of our eyes from beholdinge and narrowly
spieng out other men's faltes, and to set our own only in fight, that with
the same Dauide thy servant, and with Jonas in the ship we may cry, it is we
(o lord) which have sinned and procured this thy grievous wrath.

And this we now gathered together in Christ's name, do acknowledge,
confessing our selves giltye of horrible ingratitude for our good king, for
thy gospel and pure religion, and for the peace of thy church and quietness of
the commonweal, besides our negligences and many other our grievous sins,
where through we have deserved not only these but much more grievous plages,
if that even presentlye thou did not as thou art wont, remember thy mercy.

Hereupon (that thou in thine anger remembreste thy mercy before we seek and
sue for it) we take bouldnes as thou commaundeste us to do in our trouble, to
come and call upon thee to be mercyefull unto us, and of thy goodness now we
humbly in Christ's name pray thee to hold thy hand and cease thy wrath, or
at y^ least so to mitigate it, that this realm may be quietly governed and the
same eftes^nes to be a harborowe for thy church and true religion, which do
thou restore to us again according to thy great power and mercy, and we
shall praise thy name for ever through Jesus Christ our only mediator and
savior, Amen.

A PRAYER FOR THE REMISsion of finnes
OH lord god and dear father, what shall I say, that feel al things to be in
manner with me as in y^ wicked, blind is my mind, crooked is my will, and
perverse concupiscence is in me as a spring or stinking puddle. Oh how fainte
is faith in me? how little is love to thee or thy people? how great is self
love? how hard is my heart? etc. By the reason whereof I am moved to doubt of
thy goodness toward me whether thou art my father or not, and whether I be
thy child or not. In deed worthily might I dout if that the having of these
were the causes and not the fruits rather of thy children. The cause why thou
art my father is thy mercy, goodness, grace and truth in christ Jesus, the
which cannot but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou have borne me this
good will, to accept me into the number of thy children, that I might be holy,
faithful, obedient, innocent etc. And therefore thou woldst not only make me a
creature after thy Image, enduing me with right limbs, shape, form, memory,
wisdom etc, where thou might have made me a beast, a maimed creature, lame,
blind, fra^tike etc: but also thou would that I should be borne of Christen
parents, brought into thy Church by baptism, and called diverse times by the
ministerye of thy word into thy kingdom, besides the innumerable other
benefits always hither to powered upon me. Al which thou haste done of this
thy good will that you of thine own mercy barest to me in Christ and for Christ
before the world was made. The which thing as you requirest straightly that I
should believe without doubting, so in all my needs that I should come unto thee as
to a father, and make my moan without mistrust of being hard in thy good time, as
most shall make to my co^sort. Lo therefore to thee dear father I come through
thy son our lord, mediator and advocate Jesus christ, who sits on thy
right hand making intercession for me, and pray thee of thy great goodness and
mercy in christ, to be merciful unto me, that I may feel in deed thy sweet
mercy as thy child. The time (oh dear father) I appoint not, but I pray thee
that I may with hope still expect and look for thy help. I hope that as for a
little while you have left me, thou will come and visit me, and that in thy
great mercy whereof I have need by reason of my great misery. Thou art wont
for a little season in thine anger to hyde thy face from them whom thou love,
but suerly (o^ redemer in eternal mercies) you wilt show thy compassions. For
when thou leauest us oh lord, you do not leave us very long, neither do you
leave us to our loss, but to our lucre and advantage: eue^ that thy holy
spirit with bigger portion of thy power and virtue, may lighten and cheer us,
that y^ want of feeling to our sorrow, may be recompensed plentifully with the
lively sense of having thee, to our eternal Joy: and therefore thou swarest,
that in thine everlasting mercy thou will have co^passio^ on us. Of which thing
to the end we might be most assured, thin o^he is to be marked, for you say: as
I have sworn y^ I will not bring any more the waters to drown the world: so
have I sworn y^ I will never Esai. 54.
more be angry with thee nor reprove thee. The mou^tains shall remove and y^
hills shall fall down, but my loving kindness shall not move, and y^ bond of my
peace shall not fail thee: thus say you y^ lord our merciful redemer. Dear
father therefore I pray thee remember, eue^ for thine own truth and mercies
sake, this promise and everlasting covenant, with in thy good time I thee to
write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the only true god, and Jesus
Christ whom thou haste sent: that I may love thee with all my heart for ever:
yt I may love thy people for thy sake: that I may be holy in thy sight through
Christ: that I may always not only strive against sin, but also overcome the
same daily more and more, as thy children do, above all things desiringe the
sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy kingdom, the doing of thy will
here on earth as it is in heaven etc: through Jesus Christ our redemer,
mediator and advocate, Amen.

AN OTHER PRAYER FOR remission of sins.
O Gracious god, which sekest all means possible how to bring thy children
into the feeling and sure sense of thy mercy, and therefore when prosperity
will not serve, then sendeste thou adversity, graciouslye correcting them here
who^ y^ wilt shall with thee else where live for ever: we poor misers give
humble praises and thanks unto thee (dear father) that thou have vouched us
worthy of thy correction at this present, hereby to work that which we in
prosperity and liberty did neglect. For the which neglecting and many other
our grievous sins, whereof we now accuse our selves before thee (most
merciful lord) thou might most justly have given us over and destroyed us
both in souls and bodies. But such is thy goodness toward us in Christ,
that thou semest to forget all our offenses, and as though we were far
otherwise then we be in deed, thou will that we should suffer this cross now
laid upon us for thy truth and gospelles sake, and so be thy witnesses with
the prophets, apostles, martyrs and confessors, yea with thy dearly beloved
son Jesus Christ, to who^ thou do now here begin to fashion us like,
that in his glory we may be like him also.

Oh good god, what are we on who^ thou should she we this great mercy? Oh
loving lord forgive us our unthankfulness and sins. Oh faithful father
give us thine holy spirit now to cry in our hearts, Abba dear father, to assure
us of our eternal elections in Christ, to reueile more and more thy truth unto
us, to confirm, strengthen and stablishe us so in the same, that we may live
and die in it as vessels of thy mercy, to thy glory and to the comoditie of
thy church. Indue us with the spirit of thy wisdom, that with good
conscience, we may always so answer y^ enemies in thy cause, as may turn
to their conversion or confusion and our unspeakable consolation in Jesus
christ: for whose sake we beseech thee hence forth to keep us, to give us
patience, and to will none otherwise for delyneraunce or mitigation of our
miserye, then may stand always with thy good pleasure and mercyful will
toward us.

Grant this dear father not only to us in this place, but also to all other
else where afflicted for thy names sake, through the death and merits of Jesus
Christ our lord Ame^.

A PRAYER FOR DELIVERANCE from sin and to be restored to gods grace and
favor again.
OH almighty and ever lasting lord god which have made heaven earth etc, oh
inco^prebensible unity, oh always to be worshipped most blessed Trinity: I
humbly beseth thee and pray thee, by the assumption and crucified humanity of
our lord Jesus Christ, that thou would enclyne and bow down the great
depth of thy deity to the botomeles pit of my vilitie: drive from me al
kind of vice, wickedness, and sin, and make in me a new and clean heart,
and renew in me a right spirit for thy holy names sake.

Oh lord Jesus I beseech thy goodness for y^ excedig great love which drew thee
out of thy fathers bosom, into the womb of the holy virgin, and for the
assumptio^ of man's nature, wherein it pleased thee to save me and to deliver
me from eternal death, I beseech thee (I say) that thou would draw me out of
my self into thee my lord god, and grant this thy love may recover again
to me thy grace, to increase and make perfect in me that which is wantinge, to
raise up in me that which is fallen, to restore to me that which I have lost,
and to quicken in me that which is dead and should live, that so I may be come
conformable unto thee in all my life and conversation, thou dwelling in me and
I in thee, my heart being soupled with thy grace, and settled in thy faith for
ever.

Oh you my god, lose and set at liberty my spirit from al inferriour things:
govern my soul and so work, that both in soul and body I may be holy and
live to thy glory world with out end Amen.

A PRAYER FOR THE OBTAIning of faith.
O Merciful god and dear father of our lord and savior Jesus christ, In whom
as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him, for as much
as he often bids us to ask of thee, and thereto promises that thou will
hear us and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of thee: lo
gracious father, I am bold to beg of thy mercy through thy son Jesus
Christ, one sparcle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy goodness and
love toward me in Christ, wherthrough I being assured of the pardone of all
my sins by the mercyes of Christ thy son, may be thankful to thee, love
thee and serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life, Amen.

A PRAYER FOR REPENTANCE
MOst gracious god and merciful father of our savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire
of repentance, whereto this long suffering does draw my hard heart: I beseech
thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance in me,
and by thy spirit, power, and grace, to humble, mortifye and fear my
conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort
and quicke^ me through Jesus Christ thy derely beloved senne, So be it.

A DIALOGE OR COMMVNIcation between Satan and our conscience.
Satan. THOU have sinned against god, therefore thou must dye.


Conscience. Why then died Christ?


Sa. For sinners, but how know thou he died for thee?


Con. Because I am a sinner: and he is both able and willinge to forgive me.


Sa. I grant that he is able to forgive thee, but how knoweste thou he will?


Con. He would not surely have dyed if he would not forgive.


Sa. But how know thou that he will forgive thee?


Con. Because I would said be forgeuen.


Sa. So would Judas as well as y^, and prevailed not.


Con. The scriptures went upon Judas fact which must needs be fulfilled,
they never went upon mine.

Again Judas bare a figure of the people of thee Jews, which trybe only
fell from Christ, when all other eleven tribes of the world did styeke fast
unto him. I am a poor sinner of the gentiles, of whom it is written I will be
eraited in the gentiles.


Sa. If thou be a sinner of the gentiles, yet thou must consider thy sin is
great.


Con. I grant, but Christ's passion is greater.


Sa. Oh but y^ have sinned very often


Con. Tell me not Satan what I have done, but what I will do.


Sa. Why what will thou do?


Con. By gods grace my full purpose is here after to take better head and to
amend my former life.


Sa. Is that enough think thou?


Con. What lacks?


Sa. The favor of God, which has clean forsaken thee.


Con. So God favored and loved the world, that he gave his own dear son,
that whosoever sees him as the Israelites did the brazen serpent, they shall
not perysh but have life everlasting.


A short and pithie defense of the doctrine of the holy election and
predestination of God, gathered out of the first Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle
to the Ephesians. By I. bradford.
THere is neither virtue nor vice to be considered All things must be esteemed
after gods will.
according to any outward action, nor according to the will and wisdom of
man: but according to the will of god. Whatsoever is conformable thereto, the
same is virtue, and the action that springs thereof is laudable and good,
howsoever it appaere otherwise to the eyes and reason of man: as was the
lifting up of Abraham's hand to have stain his son. genes. 22.
Whatsoever is not conformable to the will of god, that same is vice, and the
action springing thereof is to be disalowed and taken for evil: and that so
much the more and greater evil, by how much it is not consonaunt and agreeing
to gods will, although it seem fair otherwise to man's wisdom, as was Peter's
wish of making three tabernacles, and the request Math. 17.
of some which would have had fire to have come down from heaven, Luke, 9.
upon a zeal to god etc.

Now, the will of God is not so known as in his word. Therefore Gods will
must be sought for in his word
according to it must vice and virtue, good and evil, be judged: and not
according to the Judgment, wisdom, reason, and collection of any man, or
of all the whole world, if all the Angels in heaven should take their part.

But this word of god which is written in the canonical books of gods word
is written in the bible. In the bible is predestination published.
the bible, does playnelye set surth unto us that god has of his own mercy
and good will, and to the praise (...) his grace and glory, in Christ elected
some and not all, whom he has predestinate unto everlasting life in the same
Christ, and in his time calls them, iustifyeth them, and gloryfyeth them, so
that they shall never perish and err to dampnation finally.

Therefore to affirm, teach, and preach this doctrine has in it no No
enormitye is therefore in it.
hurt, no vice, no evil, much less then has it any enormityes (as some
do affirm) to the eyes and spyryte of them which are guyded and wylbe, by
the word of god.

That god the eternal father of The proposition that shevvethe what is meant by
election and predestination.
mercyes, before the beginning of the world, has of his own mercy and
good will, and to the praise of his grace and glory, elected in Christ some
and not all of the posterytye of Adam, whom he has predestynate unto eternal
life, and callethe them in his time, iustyfyeth them, and gloryfyeth them, so
that they shall never peryshe or err to dampnatiou fynallye: that this
proposytyon is true and according to gods plain and manifest word, by
the help of his holy spyryte (which in the name of Jesus Christ I humbly
beseech his mercy, plenteously to give to me at this present and for ever, to
the sanc tification of his holy name: by the help I say of his holy spirit I
trust so evidently to declare, that no man of god shall be able b^ the word of
god ever to impugn it, much less to confute it.

In the first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, y^ apostle says thus:
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all manner of blessings in heavenly things by Christ, Eph^. 8.
according as he has elect or chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world was laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him through
love: and has predestinat us (or ordained us) thorough Jesus Christ, to be
heirs unto him self, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, where with he has made us accepted in the
beloved, by whom we have received redemption thoroughe his blood, and the
forgeuenes of our sins, according to the riches of his grace, which grace he
has shed on us abundauntly in all wysedom and understanding and has opened
unto us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he
purposed in him self, to have it declared when the time was full come, that he
might gather together all things by (or in) Christ, as well the things that be
in heaven, as the things that be in earth. even in (or by) him: by (or in)
whom we are made heirs, being thereto predestinat according to the purpose of
him which works al things according to the decree (or counsel) of his own
will, that we which hoped before (you) in Christ, should be unto the praise
of his glory: in whom ye also hoped after that ye heard the word of truth,
the gospel of your salvation, wherein ye also believing, were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption (or full fruition) of the purchased possession unto the praise of
his glory.

These be y^ words of Paull, which I have faithefully translated according to
the very text in the greek, as by the judgment of all y^ be learned I desire
herein to be tried: out of the which words of Paul we may well perceive every
thing affirmed in my proposition, as I will give occasion plainly to them that
will, to see it.

First, that y^ cause of gods election is of his good will, the Apostle shows
in sayig that it is through his The cause (...) gods election is his grace and
good will.
love, whereby we are holy and without blame: also, according to y^ good
pleasure of his will: according to his good pleasure purposed in him self:
according to his purpose which works all things after the counsel of his
own will.

Secondly, that election was before The time of gods election was from the
begiuning
the beginning of the world, the apostle plainly shows in saying, that we
were chosen before the foundatios the world was laid: and afterward, in
calling it the misterye of his will purposed with him self, in time to be
declared.

Thridly, that election is in christ, Election is in Christ.
the Apostle does so flatly and plainly set it fourth, that I need not here to
repete it. We (says he) are chosen in him: we are heirs by him: we are
accepted by him: we are gathered together in him etc.

Fourthelye, that electyon is of Election is not of all men.
some of Adams posterytye and not of all, we may playnelye see it, if we
consider that he makethe the true demonstratyon of it beleuinge, hopinge, and
having the earneste of the spyryte. In whom yea hoped (says he) after ye
hard the word etc: in whom ye believed, were sealed up etc. Again in
attrybutynge to the elect, forgiveness of sins, holiness, blameless
living, being in Christ etc. That we should be holy says he etc: we have
received forgiveness of sins etc. Who sees not that these are not common
to all men? All men have not says, says Paulle else where. None believed
2. ^hess. 3.
(says ^ake) but such as were Act 13.
ordained to eiernail life. None believe but such as be borne of god. (...).
John. 1.
None believe treewlye but such as have good hearts, and keep Math. 13.
gooddes seed to bring forth fruits by patience.

So that it is plain (faith being a Faith is a demonstration of election to
such as be of years of discretion. Psa 125.
demonstration of gods election to them that be of years of distretion) that
all men are not elect because all me^ believe not. For he that believes in the
lord, shall be as mount Sion: that is, he shall never be removed. For if he be
removed, that is finally perish, suerly he never truly believed. But what go
I about to lighten a candel in the clear son light, when our savior plainly
says y^ all be not chosen, but few? Many be called (says he) but few be
chosen. And Math. 20.
in the second chapter to the ephesians: the Apostle plainly says that the great
riches of gods mercy through his exceeding great love, has saved them before
their parents and many other gentiles, which were excluded from Christ, and
strangers from the promise, hoples, godles etc. Whertherough we may be
occasioned to cry: Oh the depth of the Judgments of god, which is just in all
his doings Romans 11.
and holy in all his works, exte^ding his mercy after his good pleasure and
Psalm. 144.
will, above al his works.

Fyftly, that god has predeffinate these, thus elect, unto everlasting life
Election to eternal life.
in Christ, the apostle does also in the words before written, declare in
saying: and has predestinate us through Jesus Christ to be heirs unto him
self. Again, by him (says he) ye are made heirs and predestinate to the
praise of his glory. So says the Apostle else where: whom he has
predestinate, Romans 8.
them he has predestinate to be like fashioned unto the shape of his son.
And Christ therefore says, rejoice in this, y^ your names Luke. 10.
are written in heaven.

Sirtly, that the end of election is The end of election is to the praise and
glory of god.
to the praise of gods glory and grace, the Apostle shows here, in saing:
we are predestinate to be holy and without blame before god etc: in saying, we
are predestinate to y^ glory of his grace, and in saying also, unto the praise
of his glory: so that nothing can be more manifest.

Seventhly, that predestination is Election is not without vocation and
justification in time.
not without vocation in gods time, and justification, the Apostle here does
teach in bringing us to the consideration of hearing the word of truth,
believing and receiving the holy spirit, remission of sins etc. In whom
(says he) ye have hoped, after that ye heard the word of truth etc. Again,
by whom ye have redemytion, that is, remission of sins thorough the sheeding
of his blood etc: Also, he has in his full time declared the mystery of his
will etc. Unto the Romans the apostle shewth it most manifestly in saying: whom
he has predestinate them he calls, whom he calls the^ he justifies.
Whereby we may se that predestination or election is not vniuersalle of all, for
all be not justified.

Eyghtly and last of al, that election is so certain, that the elect and
Election is certain for ever.
predestinate to eternal life shall never finally perish or err to
damnation, the apostle does here also very plainly show in saying: that they
are predestinate to the praise of gods grace: he says not to the praise of
has Justice, to the praise of his wisdom, to the praise of his power
(although he might most truly say so) but he says to the praise of his
grace: which were not grace if there were any respect at all of works on our
behalf, for then were Romans 11.
grace not grace. If there should be any condemnation of the elect and
predestinate to eternal life, it must needs be because of their sins: but
where were the praise of gods grace then, which is the end of gods election?
Shall we not by this means make gods election without an end, and so without
a head, and so no election at all, as some would have, further then they elect
themselves? Let such fear they shall not find the benyfyte of gods election,
because they seek it as the Israelites did and not as the elect, which not
only find it but also obtain it. The other are blinded, as it is written: god
has Romans 11. Psalm. 69.
given them the spirit of unquietness, eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear, eeuen to this day etc. Again, he shewethe the
certayntye of salvation to them that be elected, in saying that they be
accepted i^ the beloved. once accepted and beloved, in Christ and ever beloved:
for whom he loves, he loves to the end. And gods (...)
gifts are such that he cannot repent him of the^. And therefore says christ I
know whom I have chosen, attributing to election the cause of final
persenerance. By which thing Judas was seen not to be elected to eternal
life, although he was elected to the office of an Apostle, as Saul was elected
to the office of a king. Which kind of election is to be discerned in readinge
the scriptures, from this kind of election ye which I speaks of now, that is,
from election to eternal life in christ. Thirdly he shows y^ certaintye of
salvation of y^ elect, by calling the^ heirs. For if we be heirs of god,
then are we fellow hei res with Christ, to be afflfcted and rom, 8.
glorified with Christ, and therefore says he, according to the decree of his
own will. Lo he calls it a decree or counsel which shall stand, as Csai
says: the counsel of the lord shall stand. Fourthlye he she weth Esai. 46.
this certainty by saying that they are elect and predestinate to y^ praise
of gods glory, which we should more care for, then for the salvation of all the
world. This glory of y^ lord is set sorth as well in them y^ perish and are
reprobates, as in the elect, and therefore S. John bringing in y^ place of Esai
John. (...)*
speakig of y^ reprobate says, y^ Esai spoke that when he saw the glory of
the lord. This glory of the lord to be set forth by us, is a great mercy and
benefit of god. I am assured that if the very deuyls and reprobates did not
repyne hereat, but were thankful that they might be ministers in any point to
set fourth gods glory: I am assured (I say) that they should find no hell
nor torments. Their hell and tourmentes comes of the love they have to them
selves and of the malice, envy, and hatred they have against God and his
glory. Let them tremble and fear that may not away with the glory of the
lord in election and reprobation.

Let not their eyes be evil because god is good, and does good to whom it
pleases him: wrong he does to no man, nor can do, for then he were Romans 8.
not righteous and so no god. He can not condemn the just, for the^ were be
untrue, because his word is contrary. He cannot condemn the penitent and
beleuer, for that were against his promise. Let us therefore labor, study,
cry and pray for repentance and faith, and then cannot we be damned, because
we are y^ blessed of the father before all worlds, and therefore we believe,
therefore we repent. And for as much as it pertains Math. 25.
to us which be within, to see and to speak of those things which are
(...). Cor. 2.
given unto us of god in Christ: let us labor hereaboutes, and leave them
that be without to the lord, (...). Cor. 5.
which will Judge them in his time. The Apostle prays for the Ephesians, for
none other wisdom and re Ephe. (...).
uelatio^ from god, then whereby they might know god and have their minds
illumined, to see what they should hope for by their vocation, and bow Co^.
(...).
rich the glory of his inheretaunce is upon his saints. Further then this, I
think is vnsemly for us to search, until we have sought out, how rich gods
goodness is and will be to us his children. The which we can never do, but the
more we go theraboutes and the more we taste his goodness, the more we shall
love him and loath al things that displease him. This (I say) let us do, and
not be to busye bodies in searching the majesty and glory of god, or in
norrishing in any wise the doubting of our salvation, whereto we are ready
enoughe, and the devil goes about nothing else so much as that: for by it
we are dulle to do good to other, we are so careful for our selves. By it we
are more dulle to do good to our selves, because we stand in doubt whether it
profits us or no. By it we dishonor god, either in making him as though he
were not true, or else as though our salvation came not only and altogether
from him, but hanged partly on our selves. By it the devil will bring men at
length to despair and hatred of god. Doubt once of thy salvation and continue
therein, and suerly he then will ask no more. It was the first thing wherewith
be tempted Christ: if thou be the son of god etc: It is the first and Math.
4.
principalest darte he casts at gods ele^t. But as he prevailed not against
Christ, no more shall he do against any of his members, for they have y^
shield of faith which quenches his Ephesians. 6.
fiery darts, they praise god night and day, how then should they perish?
Luke 18.
The Angels of the lord pitch their tents round about them, how then Psalm. 34.
should Satan prevail? They are borne in y^ hands of the angels least they
should hurt their feet at any stone: God has given commandment Psalm. 92.
to his Angels ouerthem: The Angels are ministers unto them: Heb. 1.
Their names are written in y^ book of life, and therefore Christ bad them
rejoice: Luke 10.
as paul does y^ philippia^s, for nothig shall separate them from y^ love Ph. 4.
wherwt god loves the^ in Christ Jesus, who says that it is impossible for
Romans 8.
them to err finally to damnation: Math. 24.
for he is their light to illumine their Psalm. 18. John. 610.
darkness: They are given to him to keep, and he is faithful over al gods
children. He says he will keep the^ so that they shall never perish. After
Hebr. 3.
they believe, they are entered already John. 5. 6.
into everlasting life. Christ has set the^ there already: he has committed
John. 17.
the^ into his fathers hands by prayer, which we know is sure, and therefore
Heb. 5.
death, hell, deuilles nor all power, sins nor mischefe, shall never pull Romans
8.
us out of our heads hands whose me^bres we are, and therefore receiving of 1.
Cor. 6.
his spirit as we do, we cannot but bring forth y^ fruits thereof, though 1.
Cor. 1.
now and then the flesh fail us. But the lord, eue^ our lord be praised which
is more strong in us then he which is in y^ world: he always puts 1. John.
under his hand y^ we lie not still nor Psalm. 67. Ose. 6.
shall do as y^ reprobat, whose piety is as y^ mornig dew, soon come and sone
gone: and therefore they cn^not continue to y^ end. Cannot? no they will not if
they cold, because they hate god and his glory and therefore al the^ y^ seek it
or set it forth: whereas y^ elect love al me^ and seek to do al men good in god,
suspendig their judgments of others, y^ they may stand or fall to the lord
and Romans 14.
not to them.

Hitherto out of this one place of Paull to y^ Ephesians, if the matter of
election and predestination be so fully set forth, to gods glory and to the
comfort of his Church: how may we suppose is this matter set fourth in the
whole body and books of y^ canonical scripture? whereto I had rather send thee
good reader, with this candell light which I have now given thee then in a
matter so manifest to make more a do then needs.

An other treatise of election and freewill by 1. bradford.
THat there is and always has been with God, even before the world was made,
an election in christ, of al those yt shall be saved, many places i^ ye
scriptures do teach: as to y^ Ephesians. 1. romans 8. 9. 11. 1. These. 1. Math. 20. 22.
24. Mark. 13. Tit. 1. Act. 13. Philip. 11. Luke. 10 18. Apoe 3. 13. 17. 21. 22.
Ihon. 6. 8. 10. 13. 17. And almost every where in the new test a meant. In no
case therefore it may be denied of any y^ is godly, although be cannot attain
to gods wisdom Justice, and mercy in it, For that Erod. 33.
were to see gods fore parts. We must grant it therefore because the word
of god does not only teach it, but also it stands with the very nature of
god, that to him not only men, but all things also that have been or shall be
for ever, i^ al creatures are not only certain, but so certain, that they
cannot but be accordingly, and serve his providence: for else god were not god,
if any thing were, has been, or could be without his knowledge, yea certain
knowledge: which knowledge in god may not be separated of any man from his
wisdom, and so not from his will, except we would make two gods, as did the
manichees, one the author of al good, and another the author of all euel,
both which (say they) were eternal and without beginning. Which their opinion
is deuelishe and against y^ word of god most manifestly, which affirms in
many places that there is no mo gods but one, or any other that have power to
do good or evil absolutely, or of themselves. But lest some men which are to
curious should hereout gather, that then all things come by fatal necessity,
as the Stoikes thought, or by compulsion and coaction, as other think, and
therefore say they, all gods precepts requiring that which we cannot do,
are in vain: I think it good to speak some thing hereof.

First the Stoikes opynion is to be condemned as concerning fatal Against
the Stoikes fatal necessity.
necessity, for that it tyeth and byndeth god to the second causes, and
makes him, which is a most free agente, bound and tied, so that he cannot
work but as the second cause mouethe him. For they did Imagyne a perpetual
connection and knyttinge together of causses by a perpetual order which is
contained in nature, where as we should certaynelye know that it is God
which is the ruler and arbyter of all things, which of his wisdom has
foresene and determined all things that he will do, and now of his power
does in his time put the same in executyon, according as he has decreed
with him self. Herein to tarry any longer I need not, for that I think there
be none now which be of this opinion, to attrybute things to fortune, a
word vnsemly for Christians.

Secondly, that al things are done by coaction or compulsion, is false and out
of gods providence and predestination cannot be gathered or maintained, for
there must be a difference put between necessity and co^streint. All things
that have been done, be or shall be, in consideration of gods providence, as it
is with god, are of necessity, but yet not of compulsion or co^straint: As for
example you shall see that necessitye is one thing and constrainte is an other
thing. God is good of necessity, but who now will say then that he is so by
coaction or enforced thereto? The devil is naught of necessity, but not by
coaction. Good men do well of necessity, but not by co^pulsion. Wicked men do
evil of necessitye, but not of constraint. A thing y^ is done willi^gly, is
not to be said to be done by constraint. God is good willingly, but not by
compulsio^. The devil is naught willinglye, but not of enforcing. Good men do
good willingly, but not co^strainedly. Wicked me^ do transgress willinglye,
but not compelled. So yt it is plain, though al things be done of necessity,
yet are they not of compulsion and enforcement. By reason whereof, a man that
will be diligent in lookinge hereon, may se matter enough to purge god from being
the author of all evil or of any evil: although he be the author of all
things and of al actions, which are to be construed according to the will of
the doers: and so may we see one Action to be both good and evil in respect
of gods will and Satan's will. For in as much as a thing is done according to
gods will, the same is good, for his will is good. And in as much as a thing is
done according to Satan's will, it is evil because his will is evil.

But now to the third thing, that is, whether gods precepts requiring that
which is not in our powers, be frustrate or no, although al things are done of
necessity and by gods providence. To the understanding hereof.ii. things
are to be considered. First yt we must think of god, not as he is in him
self, but as by his word he teaches us. Secondly, the state of man before his
fall is to be compared with the state of man presently, as he is now brought
into this world. For the first, although it be most true that to god al things
are so certain as before is spoken: yet in that god has opened to us by his
word so much of his will as we should with diligence search and observe, we may
not think otherwise, but that whatsoever is done against that word, y^ same is
sin and evil in him whosoever he be y^ does there against: although the same
transgressio^ god does and can use to serve his providence accordingly. Of
which providence we may not otherwise judge, then his word gives us leave, y^
is, we must do nothing to serve it, but as his word teaches. If Adam had been
ruled hereby, then he had not eaten y^ aple: for in that he obeyed not the word
of god, which he knew, easily we may perceane, that he did not eat the aple
to obey gods providence which he knew not. So that evident it is, Adams fall
to be sin and evil, and he him self with the serpent to be ye author
thereof, god not allowyng or approuinge the evil. which is to be construed
according to the will of the doer, which will in Adam was naught, although the
action god turned to serve his prouydence, thereby setting forth his wonderful
wisdom, power, and goodness: whereat we ought rather with reverence to wonder,
then by wandering further then besemeth us, to call into question, why god did
so. Which why, no man is able to understand, and therefore we should bid our
busye brain sit down, and not to covet again to be like to god as Adam did,
and therefore he fell so foul as he did.

For ye second man's state, I mean before his fall, and his state now, thus let
us think, namely yt god made man after his Image, yt is, endewed man with a soul
immortal, wise, rightuous, and holy: for y^ Image of god is not concerning the
body, which man has common with the beasts of the earth, but it is from
abone and of gods brething. So yt Adam transgressing gods precept, did not
according as he should and might have done, but according as he should not have
done, and might have avoided, if that he had not received the persuasion and
counsel of the Serpente. Which god permitted him to do, thereby to declare,
that perfect Justice, wisdom and holiness, is not nor cannot be in any
creature, which is not god also, and therefore Christ being god was made man,
that in man there might be this perfection and justice, which is in Christ our
lord, and in Adam we could never have had. Which wisdom of god we shall
Ioyefully one day behold, if we will now restrain our busye brain and
curiosity, from serching further then we should do. But to return ageine,
Adam (I say) being made after gods Image, which he received for us al, to have
derived the same unto us all by natural propagation, by transgressing the
commandments, lost and mangled so the same Image of god in himself and in us
all, that for mortality came death, for wisdom came folishenes, for
righteousness came unrighteous, for holiness came corruption, concerning
gods Judgment and in gods sight: although there remained in him,
concerning man's Judgment and the sight of the world, life, wisdom,
righteousness and holiness, yt which all we by propagation do from our mothers
womb receive: so that we may well see our state now to be far from the state,
we had before Adams fall, and therefore gods law requires nothing of us but
that which was in our nature before the fall, which we se is impossible for us
to pay accordingly, and yet god not unjust, in that he asks of us nothing
thereby but the self same thing which he gave us in our creation. The law
then and the precepts of god were given after the fall of man, not that man
should thereby get life, and the thing which was lost by sin (for the
blessed Seed was promised for the recouerig hereof, and to him that partained)
but that man by it might know sin, and what he had lost, thereby to desire
more deeply the promised seed, by whom as we be received, so our evils be
not imputed; and that we being renewed by his holy spirit and new seed, should
as new borne babes desire, and by will begin to do the law of god, which
after our deliverance fourth of this corrupt body and man of sin by death,
we shall without all let fully accomplish, and at the length receive the
body, to be spiritual (as Paull says) and holy, ready to obey and serve
the spirit, as an helper rather then an hynderer. Oh happy day when will thou
appear?

By this which I have already spoken, I think the diligent reader may se,
how that there is election of gods children, and how that gods providence
stretches it self to al things, so that al things in respect there of come of
necessity, but yet nothing thereby to be done by constraint and enforcement:
wherthroughe god is seen to be the author of al things and yet of no evil or
sin.

The state of man before his fall and after, with the cause of gods law and
precepts given to man, I have briefly touched. Now it rests that I should
speak some thing of frewil, what it is, and how far we may grant that
man has free will.

That this may be understand: as I would have the end wherefore god gave his
law to be considered, namely not for man to get thereby eternal life which
apperteined to y^ promised sede, but to show man what sin is and what by syn
he lost, that he might by his vnhabilitie be driven to desire of very
necessity, y^ promised Mesias, and so by him to receive the spirit,
wherethrough being regenerate he might learn to love the law, to take it as a
directorie and rule to live by, and to hedge in his old man from controlinge:
this gear (I say) as I would have it considered, if we will understand man's
frewill, so would I have this marked, namely the difference betwixt the life
which we lost and had in our first creation, and now have by birth before
regeneration. In our first creation we had a life, not only with the creatures,
but also with god, which life utterly Ada^ lost, as he declares by the
runnyng away to hyde him self from god. And this he lost for us also, as well
as for him self: in respect whereof the scripture calls us dead. Concerning
this life therefore that is with god, we have no will at al, much less any
frewil. For how can a dead man have any will? The will therefore we have, is
only for this life and with men, that is, it is not good and free but in
respect of men: and in this life in respect of god and life with him, all our
will is as we are, even dead: yea and the will we have for this present life,
if a man will consider the god of this world, and how we are his slaves by
birth and continually till we be regenerate, and how ready our affections are
to serve his purpose, I think none will say otherwise but that man's will
unregenerate is none otherwise fre, then pleases his master, who must needs
serve spite of his head, our god: and therefore all to be done by gods
providence, as I said before, without any imputation of evil to our good and
most holy father. Yea but (says one) what frewill has man that is regenerat?
This will I briefly show when that I have spoken of Justification, y^ which
precedeth regeneration: from whom we may discern it, but not divide it, no
more then heat from the fire.

Justification in scripture is taken for the forgeuenes of our sins, and
consists in the forgeuenes of our sins. This is only gods work and we
nothing else but patientes and not agentes. After this work, in respect of us
and our sense, comes regeneration, which altogether is gods work also. For
as to our first birth we bring nothing (bring quoth I? yes we bring to let it,
many things but to further it nothing at al) so do we bring nothing that can
help to our justification: as S. Austen full well says: he that made thee
without thee, shall he not justify thee without thee? which the papists
have perverted, reading it affirmatively, without interregation, as though^ we
brought some thing to our justifying: The papists read thus with out
interogation. quifecit te ^ine etc, non Iustificabit etc sine etc. He that made
thee without thee shall not justify thee without thee. That is, without thy
help, thy works, thy worthiness.
where as it (I mean iustifycation) is a much more excellent work then y^
work of our creation, and therefore to arrogant are they, which will not give
al to god in it, as they do in their creation. Good men sly from that pride,
and are content to give no less to god justifying and regenerating them, then
they do to their parents for their first generation. Before we be Justified and
regenerated of god, we are altogether dead to god and to al goodness in his
sight, and therefore we are altogether patients til god have wrought this his
only work, justification and regeneration. Which work in respect of us and
our imperfection and falls, in that it is not so full and perfect but it may be
more and more, therefore by the spirit of santifycation, which we receive in
regeneration as the seed of god, we are quickened to labor with the lord,
and to be more justified, that is, by faith and the fruits of faith, to our
selves and others to declare the same, and so to increase from virtue to
virtue, from glory to glory, hauin^ always need to have our feet washed,
although we be clean not withstanding.

Now to the question. A man regenerate (which we ought to believe o^ our
selves, I mean that we are s^ by our baptism, the sacrament there of requiring
no less faith) a man I say regenerate, that is, borne of god, has the spirit
of god. And as a man borne of flesh and blood has the spirit thereof, whereby
as he ca^ stir up him self to do more and more the deeds of the flesh: so
the other can by the spirit of god in him, stir up in him self the gifts
and graces of god, to glorify god accordinglye. Howbeit hear let us mark,
that as the old man is a perpetual enemy to the new borne man: so
accordinglye to his strength, the works of the new man are let and made
ineffectual. Therefore god has taught us to pray, and promised his help,
which he commonly in manner gives by y^ cross: whereby y^ old man is wekened
and the new receives strength more and more, d^^^ring a dissolution and an
utter destruction of the old man by death, that it might go to god from whence
it came, and to his home eue^ h^auen, where in the last day it shall receive
the old Adam, now so scho^ed, that it will never more be but a most faithful
friend to serve and praise the lord for ever more.

Thus have you now, what freewyll the regenerate children of god have, for
whose sakes the gospel and sweet free promises are given, and to the
regenerate new man they properly do pertain: As does the law, with all
comminations, and the condicionall promises (I mean promises hanging upon
condition on our worthiness) pertain properly to the old and vngenerate man,
so that when he kicketh, he must by them be bridled and kept down: when the
inward man would be comforted, be must have, not the law nor her co^minations
and co^dicional promises, but the gospel and her most sweet free promises.
So shall we walk neither on y^ right nor on the left hand, but keep the right
way to heaven ward, even Christ our lord and captain, as his soldiers,
servants, and lively members, neither dispa^ring nor carnally living, but
fearin^ and reioysinge as is appertaining^ which God grant for his mercyes
sake, Amen.

And thus my dearly beloved, I have sent to you brefly my mind here in
according to your desire. Because I have had little time and many other
lettes, I shall hertely pray you to take this in good part, and with the more
indifferency and attention to read it, for my desire was to writ fully and
spedely, therefore it perchance has the more obscurity and desires a frendely
reader, construinge all to the best, and brotherlye admonyshynge where cause
may appear.

A BREIFE SVMME OF THE doctrine of electon and predestination.
GOds fore sight is not y^ cause of sin or excusable necessity, to him that
sins. The damned therefore have not nor shall have any excuse because god
foreseing their condemnation through their own sin, did not draw them as he
does his elect, unto Christ. But as the elect have cause to thank god for
ever for his great mercies in Christ: so the other have cause to lamente their
own wilfulnes, sin and contemning of christ, which is the cause of their
reprobatio^, and wherein we should look upon reprobation: as the only goodness of
god in Christ is the cause of our election and salvation, wherein we should look
upon gods election. He that will look upon god or any thing in god* simply and
barely as it is in god, the same shall be stark blind. Who can see gods
goodness as it is in god? Who can see his Justice as it is in him? If therefore
thou will look upon his goodness, not only look upon his works, but also upon
his word: even so if thou will look upon his justice do the like. Then shalt
y^ see that election is not to be looked on but in christ, nor reprobation but
in sin. When the second cause is sufficient, should not we think that they are
to curious y^ will run to search the first cause, further then god does give
them leave by his word? The which first cause, because they cannot comprehe^d,
therefore do they deny it. God be merciful unto us for his names sake, and give
us to love and live his truth, to seek peace and pursue it. Because god of his
goodness, for the comfort of his children, and certainty of their salvation,
does open unto them some thing the first cause of their salvation, that is,
his goodness before the beginning of the world, to be looked upon in Christ, a
man may not therefore be so bold as to wade so mark this well and be not to
curious.
in condempnation further then god reueileth it. And for as much as he has
not reueiled it but in sin, therefore let us not look on it otherwise. Seek to
be delivered from sin and fear not reprobation: but if thou will not, thou
shalt find no excuse in the last day. Say not but thou art warned.

To the former meditations and prayers, for your further comfort and godly
exercise, you may join those most godly and comfortable meditations which
are annexed to his book lately imprinted against the fear of death.
Printed at London by Rouland Hall, dwelling in gutter lane at the sign of the
half Egle and Key. 1562.

Faults escaped in the printing.
In A. the 7 leaf second side. 19. line, for thou love, read thou louedst.
C. 3 leaf, second side. 13 line, for is read are. C. 6 leaf second side. 10
line, for thy read they. And in the 15 line, for malicousnes read
maliciousnes. D. 3 leaf, second side. 4. line, for daube read dress. D. 6
leaf second side. 25 line, for swing read swing. E. 2 leaf first side. 8
line, for afflection read affliction, and in the. 15. line, for was, read
wast. E. 3 leaf second side. 12 line, for dispraier, read despair. F. 3
leaf, second side. 6 line, for helps, read helples. F. 4 leaf second side.
14 line, for thy wilt, read the will. G. 6 leaf first side. 12. line for
did give, read have given. G. 7 leaf first side. 9 line, for faithful,
read fatherly. I. 7 leaf first side. 6 line, for profession read perfection.
I. 8 leaf second side. 26 line, for me, read my.
A PRAYER FOR THE faithful afflicted in France for the gospel.
O Merciful father, who never do sorsake such as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren and neighbors in
France, who in their extreme necessitye cry for comfort unto thee: prevent
the cruel devise of Aman, stay the rage of Holophernes, break of the counsel
of Achitophel, Let not the wicked say, where is now their god? Let thy
afflicted flock feel present aid and releife from thee (oh lord): look down
up on them with thy pitiful eye from thy holy habitation: send terror and
tremblyng among their enemies: make an end of their outrageous tyranny: beat
back their boldness in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true servants,
in defacing thy glory, and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly
advance themselves against thee and against thy Christ, but let them
understand and feel that against thee they fight. Preserve and defend the
vine which thy right hand has planted, and let all nations see the glory of
thine anointed, Amen.


