AN EXPOSITION OF THE LAST PSALM: DELIVERED IN A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS
Cross the fifth of November, 1613.

By JOHN BOYS, Doctor of Divinity.

Augustine de lib. Arbit. lib. 3. cap. 15. Qui Deo non reddit faciendo quod
debet, reddet patiendo quod debet.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William Aspley. 1613.

AN EXPOSITION of the last Psalm.
PSALM 150. O praise God in his holiness, etc.
ALL the Psalms of David are comprised in two words, Gueuara.
Halleluiah, and Hosanna, that is, blessed be God, and God bless; as being for
the greater part either prayers unto God for receiving mercies, or else praises
unto God for escaping miseries. This our present Hymn placed as a Lyra in loc.
Conclusion of the whole book, yea the beginning, middle, end, to which all
the rest (as In loc.
Musculus observes are to be referred) inuiteth us in prescript and
postscript, in title, in text, in every verse, and in every Clause of every
verse to praise the Lord. Teaching these two points especially: 1. For what 2.
With what
God is to be magnified.

For what, verse. 1, 2. O praise God in his holiness, praise him in the
firmament of his power, praise him in his noble acts, praise him according to
his excellent greatness.

With what, even with all that is Without us, verse. 3, 4, 5. Praise him in the
sound of the trumpet, etc. Within us, verse. 6. Omnis spiritus, etc. Let every
spirit praise the Lord, praise ye the Lord.


This in brief is the whole texts Epitomie, I come now to the words Anatomy,
cutting up every part and particle severally, beginning first at the first, O
praise God in his holiness. Of which one sentence the Doctors have many
(though not adverse yet diverse) readings, especially three: Praise God in his
saints, praise God in his sanctity, praise God in his sanctuary. S. Hierome,
Augustine, Prosper, and Chrysostom. Basil. Euthym. Arabs apud Muscul. Lyra. Hugo
Card. Turrerecmat. Anonymus.
other as well ancient interpreters as modern translate here praise God in his
saints. For if he must be praised in all his creatures, how much more in his
new creatures: if in the witless worms, and senseless vapors, Psalm. 148.
much more doubtless (as Theodorit here collects) in men, in holy men, in
saints, upon whom he has out of his Ephesians. 3. 8. 16.
unsearchable riches of mercy bestowed the blessings of the 1. Tim. 4. 8.
life present, and of that which is to come.

First, almighty God is to be blessed for giving his saints such eminent
gifts of grace for the good of his Church, and for the setting forth of his
glory. So Chrysostom, Basil, Euthymius, Prosper, Placidus Parmensis expound
it. James 1. 17.
Every good and perfect gift is from above descending from the father of lights,
a good thought in a saint is gratia infusa, a good word in a saint is gratia
effusa, a good deed in a saint is gratia diffusa, through his grace which is
the God of 1. Pet. 5. 10.
all grace saints are 1. Cor. 15. 10.
whatsoever they are. Wherefore praise the Lord in his saints, often remember
their virtues as their true relics, and as it were bequeathed Eusebius. Emisen.
hom. de S. Maximo.
legacies unto Gods people. So the wise man, Ecclesiasticus 44. Let us now
commend the famous men in old time by whom the Lord has gotten great glory,
let the people speak of their wisdom, and the congregation of their praise.
So the Confession of Bohemia, chap. 17. See Harmon. confess. sect. 16. page 486.
We teach that the saints are worshipped truly, when the people on certain
days at a time appointed, do come together to the service of God, and do
call to mind and meditate upon his benefits bestowed upon holy men, and
through them upon his Church, etc. And for as much as it is kindly to consider,
opus diei in die suo, the work of the day Mayor praefat. in Psalm. 22.
in the same day it was wrought; it is well ordered by the Church of England,
that the most illustrious and remarkable qualities of the saints are celebrated
upon their proper festiuals, that on S. Stephens day, we may learn by S.
Stephens example to love our enemies: on S. Matthewes day, to forsake the world
and to follow Christ: on S. John the Baptist his day, to speak the truth
constantly, and to suffer for the same patiently. Thus in stedfastnes of faith
and godliness of life ( non legere modo sed degere sanctorum vitas, as Owin
epigram. lib. 3.
one wittily) to be followers of them as they were followers of Christ; is (as
Ser. on Christmas day preached at Bexterly, and ser* on S. Stephens day at
Grimstorpe.
blessed Latymer was wont to say) the right worshipping of Saints, and of God
in his Saints.

Again, for as much as there is a communion of Saints, as we confess in the
Creed, a knot of fellowship between the dead Saints and the living; it is our
duty to praise God for their good in particular, as they Apocal. 6. 10.
pray to God for our good in general. It is required on our part I say, to
give God most humble thanks for translating the^ out of this Psalm. 84. 6.
valley of tears into Jerusalem above, where they be Apocal. 7. 9.
clothed with long white robes, having palms in their hands, and Apocal. 4. 4.
crowns of gold on their heads, ever living in that happy kingdom without
either dying or crying, Apocal. 21. 4. and this also (in the judgment of
Augustine, Hierome, Hugo, Raynerius, and other) is to praise God in his Saints.

These reasons are the grounds of certain holy days established in England by
law, namely to bless God for his Saints eminent grace while they were living,
and exceeding glory now they be dead. Wherein our Church ascribes not any
divine worship to the Saints, but all due praise to the sanctifier: in
celebrating their memory (says Augustine) we neither adore their honor, nor
implore their help: but (according to the tenor of our text) we praise him
alone, De ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 27.
who made them both men and martyrs. In the words of Tom. 2 fol. 118
Hierome to Riparius: Honoramus reliquias martyrum, vt eum cuius sunt martyrs
adoremus: honoramus seruos, vt honor seruorum redundet ad dominum: If thou
desire to do right unto the Saints, esteem them as paternes, and not as
patrones of thy life; honor them only so far, Philip Mornaeus de missa, lib.
3. cap. 11. See Melanct. resp. ad art. Bauar. art. 25.
that thou may always praise God in them, and praise them in God.

The gunpowder men err very much in this one kind of honoring God, for
either they worship his Saints as himself, or else their own saintlings, and
not his Saints. In praying to the dead, in mingling the blood of their martyrs
with the precious blood of their Maker, in applying their merits, and relying
upon their mercies; it is plain that they make the Saints (as Melancthon tells
them in his Tit. de sanct. inuocat.
Apology for the Confession of Auspurge) quartermasters with God, and half
mediators with Christ, I say joint mediators not of incercession only but of
See D. Fulke in 1. Tim. 2. 5.
redemption also. Nay they make the blessed Virgin upon the point their only
mediatrix and advocate, so they sing, and so they say. They sing in their
public service, Bellar. de sanct. beat. cap. 17.
Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, etc. the which is Gods own style,
1. Pet. 1. 10. and 2. Cor. 1. 3. so they likewise say, Maria consolatio
infirmorum, redemptio captiuorum, liberatio damnatorum, salus vniuersorum. Apud
Magdeburg. Cent. 10. Coll. 275.
Giselbertus in lib. altercationis Synagogae et ecclesiae, cap. 20. Maria quasi
maria, says Augustinus de Leonissa, sermon 5 upon Aue maria, for as all rivers
come from the seas, and return to the seas again, Ecclesiastes 1. 7: See
Gospel Annunciat.
so forsooth (if you will undertake to believe him) all grace is derived from
Mary, and ought to be returned again to Mary. We find so much in Chemnit.
exam. Con. Trident. part. 3. page 151.
Rosario Mariae, reparatrix and saluatrix desperantis animae, etc. That which
is worse, their own Pope (who cannot, as they teach, err in a point of
doctrine as Pope) calls her expressly Deam. Pet. Bembus in his epistles
written in Pope Leo 10. name, lib. 8. epist. 17. printed at Strasburg an. 1609.
that which is worst of all, in their most approved Bible: they translate Genesis
3. 15. ipsa conteret caput tuum: she shall break thine head, although (as
their own Jesuit In Habacuc. cap. 1. number. 32.
Ribera confesses honestly) the Hebrew text, the Chaldee paraphrase, the
translation of the Septuagint, and all good Latin copies read ipse conteret,
he shall bruise the serpents head, applying it to Christ, according to that of
Paul, The God of peace shall tread down Satan under your feet, Romans 16. 20.
by this evidence you may see that the gunpowder crew praise not God in the
saints, nor the saints in God: but on the contrary the saints as God.

Again these S. Peter men (and as I have warrant to term them on this day
Salt Peter men) err from the true meaning of our text, because they do not
praise God in sanctis eius, in his saints: but dishonor God in sanctis eorum,
in saints of their own making, usually praying unto some who were no men, and
to many who were not holy men. It is doubted by the two great lights in their
glorious firmament, Bellarmine and Baronius, whether there were ever any such
man as S. George, or such a woman as S. Catharine. Cardinal Bellarmine lib. de
beatitudine sanct. cap. vlt.. respondeo sanctorum does acknowledge that they
worship certain saints whose stories are uncertain, reputing the legend of S.
George apocryphal according to the censure of Pope Can. sanct. Roman. did. 15.
Gelasius: and Cardinal Baronius ecclesiast. annal. Tom. 2. ad an. 290.
according to the impression at Rome, fol. 650. as also de Martyrologio Romano
cap. 2. confesses as much of Quiriacus and Iulitta, declaring plainly that
their acts are written either by fools or heretics, and in his annotations
upon the Roman Martyrologie 23. April, he takes up Iacobus de Voragine for
his leaden Legend of our English S. George, concluding in fine, that the
picture of Saint George fighting with a Dragon is symbolicall, and not
historical. If the Scripture be true Romans 14. 23.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin: then assuredly these men (as Tit. 3. 11.
Paul speaks) are damned of their own selves in their own conscience, who
(notwithstanding all their doubts) pray still in their public service, Missal.
Roman. ex Con. Triden. decret. restit. in festo Georgij.
Deus, qui nos beati Georgij martyris tui meritis and intercessione laetificas,
Concede propitius, etc. An Idol as Paul affirms, 1. Cor. 8. 4. is nothing,
Ergo, the Papists in worshipping S. George which is nothing, commit (even
themselves being Judges) abominable Idolatry.

As they worship some who were no men, so many who were not Dr. Sutclif examine.
of Romans cap. 7.
holy men, as a reverend Dr. Abbot Antilog. page 3.
Doctor of our Church accutely, Non matyris domini sed mancipes diaboli: the
Soldier who peirced Christ's holy side was a Pagan, Sutclif. vbi sup.
neither does any story which is authentical speak of his conversion, and
yet they worship him under the name of S. Longinus, or Longesse, March 15.
Papias (as Hist. lib. 3. cap. vlt.
Eusebius and Catalog. scrip. in vita pap.
Hierome report) held the heresy of the Millenarians, and yet he is honored
as a saint in the Roman Calender upon the 22. of February. Becket was a bad
subject in his life, and no good Christian at his death, in that he commended
himself and the cause of his Church unto S. Houenden annal part. poster. page
298.
Denis and our Lady. Yet S. Thomas of Canterbury was honored at Canterbury
in the days of popish ignorance more then either the worlds Savior, or the
blessed Virgin his mother: in which relation I appeal to the records of that
Church, as also to the very stones under his shrine worn with the knees and
hands of such as came thither to worship him. Boccace reports how one Sir
Chappelet a notorious Italian Usurer and Cousoner came to be honored as a
Saint in France. Sanders among them is a saint, albeit he lived in plotting,
and dyed in acting rebellion against his gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth
of famous and blessed memory. Nay Dauus is Diuus, Saul is among the Prophets,
pater personatus, father Parsons all the days of his life was a perpetual
Martyr, as his fellow Catalog. scrip. Jesuit. in vita Parsonij.
Ribadeneira terms him: and yet one (who sometime was his inner man, and knew
him as I presume, better then ever did Ribadeneira) transposing the letters of
Robertus Parsonius Iesuita, found this anagramme, Personatus versuti oris abi:
the wit-foundred drunkard, Henry Garnet (who did not according to the Counsel
of 1. Tim. 5. 23.
Paul use vino modico: but as Epist. lib. 3. epist. 6.
Paulinus pretily modio) that lecherous treacherous Archpriest, Archtraitor,
Arch-diuell in concealing, if not in contriuing: in patronizing, if not in
plotting the powder intended massacre, is returned a Saint from beyond the seas
with Sheldon preface before his motives.
a sancte Henrice intercede pro nobis: his action is justified, his life
commended, his death honored, his miracles and memory celebrated by that
Ignatian spirit, ( Eliens. epist. lector. ante resp. ad Bellar. apol.
portentum nominis portentum hominis, having a great deal of name, though a
very little modesty) Andreas Eudaemon Ioannes Cydonius: but notwithstanding
his apology, the saintship of Henry Garnet is so buffeted by the replies and
antilogies of our accuratlie learned divines, as that his straw face will
hereafter hardly be worth a straw. Catesbie, Winter, Rookwood, and the rest of
the Cole-saints and hole-saints (who labored in the devils mine by the Popes
mint) are numbered among the holy ones also: Babylon and Egypt praise God in
them, and for them. I have heard much of roaring gentlemen in London and
Canterbury, but if the Lord himself had not watched over his Church, if the
Lord himself had not written England in the Esaias 49. 16.
palms of his hands, if the Lord himself had not kept King James as the Deuteronomy.
32. 10.
apple of his eye, Psalm. 124.
if the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Gods Israel in England
say) if the Lord himself had not been on our side, when they rose up against
us, if the Lord himself had not (out of his unspeakable goodness toward us
and our posterity) broken their snares, and delivered our souls out of that
horrible gunpowder pit; these bellowing Bulls of Basan, and Canon-mouthed
hell hounds would have made on this day such a roar, that all Christendom
should have felt it, and the whole world have feared it. Judith. 13. 4.
O Lord God of all power, blessed be thy name, which have this day brought to
naught the enemies of thy people, Judges 5. 31.
so let all thine enemies perish O Lord, that our Psalm. 126. 2.
mouths may be filled with laughter and our tongue with joy. Sint diui modo
non viui, let England hang such, although afterward Rome hallow such, he that
has an eye to see without the spectacles of a Jesuit, will afford as good
credit to the register at Tiburne as to the Calender of Tyber: for if these be
Martyrs, I wonder who are Murderers? If these be Saints, I pray you who are
Scythians? If these be Catholics, who are Canibals?

I pass to the second exposition of these words, O praise God in his
sanctity, so Munster, Pagninus, Beza, Tremelius and our old translation here,
Praise God in his holiness: now God is holy formaliter and effectiue, holy in
himself, and making other holy; the Lord is glorious in holiness Exodus 15.
11. Whereas other Gods are famous for their unholiness, Venus was a wanton,
Mercurius a thief, Jupiter a monsterous adulterer, an ingenious man (as Lib.
de legend. libris gentilium.
Basile writes) would blush to report that of beasts, which the Gentiles have
recorded of their Gods. If such imputations are true says De Ciuit. Dei lib.
6. cap. 6.
Augustine, quam mali how wicked are these Gods: if false quam male how
wretched and foolish are these men, adoring the same things in the temple,
which they scoff at in the theater, in turpitudine August. contra faust. man.
li. 12. cap. 40.
nimium liberi, in superstitione nimium serui: so that their Gods are not as
our God, even our enemies being Judges Deuteronomy. 32. 31. there is none holy as the
Lord 1. Sam. 2. 2. called Esaias 1. 4. and 10. 20.
often in holy Scripture the holy one, yea thrice holy; holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of hosts Esaias 6. 3. his Luke 1. 49.
name is holy, his Psalm. 19. 7.
law is holy, his Mark. 12. 36.
spirit is holy, his will holy, his word holy, righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works Psalm. 145. 17. making us also which are his servants an
holy people Deuteronomy. 7. 6. an holy priesthood 1. Pet. 2. 5. his holy temples 1.
Cor. 6. 19. our bodies, our souls, our selves, our whole 1. Pet. 3. 2.
service holy, wherefore praise God in his holiness.

Idem Genebrard et alij.
Luther, Calvin, Vatablus, your English-Geneua bibles, and our new translation
have praise God in his sanctuary, the which in holy scripture signifies
either heaven, or the temple, heaven is often called in sacred writ Gods
sanctuary, for Esaias 57. 15.
thus says he that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth eternity, whose
name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place. Christ in coming to
us is said to break the heavens Esaias 64. 1. and when he went from us unto his
father a cloud took him up into heaven Acts 1. and from heaven he shall come
again to judge the quick and the dead 1. These. 4. 16. That his sanctuary may
be taken here for heaven, is gathered out of the very next clause ( praise him
in the firmament of his power) the which (as In loc.
Calvin and Bellarmine in loc.
other expositors have well observed,) is exegeticall, and expoundes the
former, as if David should have said, praise the Lord in his sanctuary, that is
in the firmament of his power, for the heavens declare the glory of God and the
firmament shows his handy work Psalm. 19. 1. let all people praise God our
father in heaven, especially such as dwell with him Genebrard Agellius
Acernensis epist. in loc.
in heaven, O praise the Lord all ye blessed Angels and Saints inhabiting his
sanctuary which is highest and holiest.

Luther Vatablus chald. apud Genebrard english Com. dedicated to Mr.
Herlakinden.
Other apply the word sanctuary to the Temple, so termed for two respects
especially. 1. because God manifests his holiness toward us in that holy place
more principally, calling it expressly Esaias. 56. 7.
his house. 2. a sanctuary in regard of our holy service toward God, for
albeit every day be to the good man a sabbath, and every place a temple; yet
the God of Order has appointed certain times, and certain places also,
wherein he will be worshipped publicly, saying Leuiticus 19. 30. Ye shall
observe my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. For our holiness toward God
concerns us Hooker eccles. pol. lib. 5.. 24.
one way in that we are men, and another way in that we are joined as parts to
that visible mystical body which is his Church as men, we are at our own
choice both for time, and place, and form, according to the exigence of our
own occasions in private, but the service which is to be done of us as the
members of a public body, must of necessity be public, and so consequently
to be performed on holy days in holy places. and for this doctrine the
scriptures afford both patent and pattern, the patent is reported by the
Prophet Esaias: Chap. 56. verse. 7. and repeated by Christ in Mark 11. 7. Luke 19.
46. Matthew. 21. 13.
three several Evangelists: my house shall be called an house of prayer for
all people. The paterns are manifold, I will enter into thine house in the
multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thine holy
temple, says our Prophet, Psalm. 5. 7. The Publican and the Pharisie went into
the temple to pray, Luke 18. Peter and John went up together into the temple at
the ninth hour of prayer, Acts 3. Anna fasted and prayed in the temple, Luke
2. This one word sanctuary teaches us how we should behave our selves in the
Church as in Gods presence: Do thou come to that holy place to receive the
blessed Supper of our Lord? remember that the temple is sanctuarium, non
promptuarium, a sanctuary, not a buttrie, 1. Cor. 11. 22.
have ye not houses to eat and drink in, despise ye the Church of God? Do
thou come to pray? Ecclesiastes 4. 17.
take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into Gods house, compose thy knees,
and eyes, and hands, and heart after such a devout manner: as that thou may
not only praise God upon the loud cymbals, but (as it is verse. 5.) praise him
upon the well tuned cymbals also. Do thou come to hear the sermon? remember
that the preaching of the Gospel is 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
not the word of a mortal man, but the Romans 1. 6.
power of the immortal God unto salvation, and albeit the Preacher be never so
simple, never so sinful; yet the word is holy, the action holy, the time holy,
the place holy, ordained by the most holy to make thee holy. Upon whatsoever
occasion thou come into the temple, remember always that the ground is holy
whereon thou stand, it is a sanctuary, the habitation of God, and place of
his holiness: and therefore not to be Canon. 88.
profaned with ordinary though lawful worlds business, much less with
unlawful pastimes and enterludes, it is a place for praise, not for plays, O
praise God in his sanctuary.

Or (as In loc.
Martine Luther interprets it) praise God in his sanctuary, that is for his
sanctuary, for Psalm. 147. 19.
showing his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, for his
adoption, and his covenants, and his promises, and his service, Romans 9. 4. O
praise the Lord for his Christ. Corn. in loc.
true Church established for the present among the Jews, and hereafter in the
fulness of time to be constituted among Christians until the worlds end. For
this clause may be construed of the mystical heaven and temple, so well as of
the material heaven and temple. The good man (I mean the true Christian) is
not only Gods Heb. 3. 16.
house, but also Gods 1. Cor. 3. 16.
temple, yea Gods heaven, as Lib. 2. de ser. dom. in mont.
Augustine expounds the words of Christ, Our Father which art in heaven, that
is, in holy men of heavenly conversation, in whose sanctified hearts he
dwells as in his Bellarm. and corn. in loc. vel hoc dicit de populo, vel de
vita sancta Chrysostom. Basil. in loc.
sanctuary. Archimedes in his conference with Hiero said, Give me a place
where I may stand out of the world, and I will move the whole earth: in like
manner he that will be reputed a Saint, and so take upon him to remove men
earthly minded from their worldliness, must himself at the least have one
foot out of the world, seeking (as the blessed Coloss. 3. 1.
Apostle speaks) the things above, that Mat. 5. 16.
other may see his good works, and glorify God which is in heaven, that is
(according to the true soul of our text) praise God in his Saints which are
his sacrarie, his sanctuary, his house, his heaven.

Here then all the three diverse lines ( praise God in his Saints, praise God
in his sanctity, praise God in his sanctuary) meet in one centree; namely,
God is to be praised in his sanctuary for his sanctity conferred upon his
Saints, whereby they shined as Philip. 2. 15.
lights in this heaven on earth, and now shine like Dan. 12. 3.
stars in that heaven of heaven. If I were not (according to the text and the
time) foreward to prosecute the gunpowder men as the more dangerous enemies of
God and his Gospel, I might upon this ground take up the bucklers against idle
Nouelists, utterly condemning the festiuals of holy Saints, established in our
Church by good order of law. Their principal objection is taken out of Paul's
epistle to the Galathians, chap. 4. verse. 10. Ye observe days and months, and
times and years, I am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain. To which answer is made, that there is a Illiric. in Galat. 4.
fourefold observation of days Natural. Political. Ecclesiastical.
Superstitious.
Of all which only the superstitious is condemned, as Aretius and Illiricus,
and See Sir Christo. Heydos answer to Mr. Chambers, page 368. and how the
fathers answer this.
other Protestant Divines upon the place. Bellarmin. de sanct Cultu, cap. 10.
Now the superstitious observation is either Judicial or Idolatricall, it is
apparent that Paul meant the first hereof especially, English gloss.
because the Galathians after they were converted unto Christ, were seduced by
false teachers unto the ceremonies of the Jews, as concerning the Sabbaths and
the new Moons and the like, the which were figures of Christ, and had their
end in him. Galat. 3. 3.
Are ye so foolish that having begun in the spirit, ye would now be made
perfect by the flesh? As for Idolatricall observing of times, it is granted
easily that the Pagans (in dedicating feasts unto false gods, and in making See
Ambrose in Galat 4 and August. epist. 119. cap. 7.
differences of days dismal and fortunate, either by curious arts, or by
particular fancies, or popular observations) are worthily reputed
superstitious. And the Dr. Fulke in Galat. 4. 10.
Papists also (solemnizing holy days of the Saints in their Churches with
idolatrous worshipping of the creatures, and their Images: and out of their
Churches with Epicurelike belly-cheere, reuelling, and idleness) turn again to
the beggarly rudiments and fashions of the world: but the festiuals of England
(celebrated according to the doctrine and Injunctions of our Church) are very
far from these and all other kinds of superstition, See Dr. Whitgift defense
of his answer to the admonit. fol. 538. 539.
for then is God truly worshipped in the public congregation, I say the true
God is truly praised in his true Saints, on our holy days the sacraments are
rightly ministered, the Scriptures are fruitfully read, the Word is faithfully
preached; all which are maine means to withdraw men not only from superstition
and idolatry, but also from all sorts of error and impiety whatsoever.

Yea but the words of the Commandment are, six days shall thou labor: Ergo,
there should be no holy day besides the Lords day. B. Babington in 4. Com.
Caluins Cat. Dr. Whitgift vbi supra fol. 542. and 553. six days thou may
labor.
Protestant Divines answer that the clause ( six days shall thou labor) is
a permission, or a remission of Gods right, who might challenge to himself all
our time for his work, and not a restraint for any man from serving of God on
any day. For the Jews beside the Sabbath had diverse other feasts; as Easter,
the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of first fruits, Whitsuntide, the
feast of blowing trumpets, the feast of Tabernacles; all which (as we read
Leuiticus 23) they kept by Gods appointment holy, notwithstanding these words
of the law, six days shall thou labor. And so the Christian Church in all
ages has upon just occasions separated some week days unto the praising of
the Lord, and rest from labor. Joel 2. 14. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify
a fast, call a solemn assembly. Perkins aur. Cat. cap. 23.
Days of public fasting for some great judgment, days of public rejoicing
for some great benefit, are not unlawful, but exceeding commendable, yea
necessary. Whosoever doubts of the Churches liberty herein, or of the
practice of this liberty, may peruse the ninth chapter of Ester, in which it
will appear that Gods people by the commandment of Mordecai did every year
solemnize and keep holy the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the month Adar,
in remembrance of their great delivery from the treason of Haman. Upon these
grounds the last ever renouned Parliament enacted, that we should for ever
spend the prime part of this present fifth of November in praying and praising
the Lord, for his unspeakable goodness in delivering our King, Queen, Prince,
and states of this realm from that hellish, horrible, bloody, barbarous
intended massacre by Gunpowder. Now that I may for my part execute the will of
the Parliament (sparing the Nouelists, and referring such as desire to be
further satisfied in this argument of holy days, unto the judicious writings
of my most honored and honorable master, Archbishop Whitegift, in the From
page 538 to 555.
defense of his answer to the Admonition) I proceed in the text, praise him
in his noble acts, praise him according to his excellent greatness.

Vulgar Latin Castalio.
Some read laudate eum in Pagnin. In fortitudinibus.
virtutibus eius, praise him in his powers: Vatablus Munster.
other ob fortitudinem eius, praise him in his power; and according to these
two diverse translations, I find two different expositions; one construing it
of Gods glorious Turrecremat. and Raynerius in loc.
Angels, and the other applying it to Gods glorious acts: for the first, it is
evident in holy writ that there be certain distinctions and degrees of Angles
in the quier of heaven, there be Seraphins Esaias 6. 2. Cherubins, Genesis 3. 24.
Thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers, Coloss. 1. 16. in all which and
for all which God is to be praised, as being his Heb. 1. 14.
ministering spirits for the good of such as shall be heirs of salvation; as
long as we serve God, all these serve us, even the Cherubins, and Seraphins,
Angels, and Archangels, I say, so long as we serve the Lord, these pages of his
honor and parts of his courts attend us, and pitch their tents about us: a
doctrine very profitable, very comfortable, yet for as much as I hold it less
pertinent to the present occasion I thus ouerpasse it, and have to that other
exposition interpreting these words (as our Church reads) of Gods noble acts.

Now the works of God are of two sorts, ad intra and ad extra: some be
confined within himself, other extended toward us: works of the sacred
Trinity within it self (as that the Father begets, and the Son is begotten,
and the holy Ghost proceeds from both) are wonderful acts of such an high
nature that it is our duty rather simply to adore, then subtly to explore
them: all his acts extended toward us are summarilie reduced unto two, namely
the works of creation and redemption. Advancement of learning lib. 2. page 116.
The work of creation is attributed in the Mass of the matter to God the
Father, in the disposition of the form to God the Son, in the preservation
of both to God the holy Ghost. So likewise that of redemption, in election unto
God the Father, in the consummation unto God the Son, in the application unto
the holy Ghost, all which are very noble acts* and God is to be praised in them
according to his excellent greatness. The work of creation is so mighty,
that none could bring it to pass but the Father almighty: that God should
have nothing but nothing, whereof, wherewith, whereby to build this high, huge,
goodly, fair frame; is a principle which nature cannot teach, and Philosophy
will not believe. The work of redemption is of far greater might and mercy,
for the making of the world was (if I may so speak) only lip-labor unto God,
he spoke the word and it was done, be commanded and it stoodfast, Psalm. 33. 9.
but Christ in redeeming the world said many words, and did many wonders, and
suffered also many wounds. It is true that the least ache of his least finger is
infiniti meriti, sed non definiti meriti, that is of an infinite merit, yet not
that determined ransom for the sins of the whole world. It cost him more to
redeem souls, Romans 4. 25.
he dyed for our sins and rose again for our justification, he suffered for
us, and that death, and that a violent death, and of all violent deaths the
most accursed death on the Cross.

The work of sanctification is a noble act also, for every man if you rightly
consider his making is a wonder, I am says our Psalm. 139. 13
Prophet fearfully and wonderfully made: but a good man if you consider his new
making is a wonderful wonder, as 1. Cor. 4. 9.
Paul speaks a spectacle to men and Angles, as the vulgar Latin runs in the
68. Psalm, at the last verse, mirabilis deus in sanctis, O God wonderful art
thou in thy Saints.

But David Placid. Parmen. and the english Com. dedicated to M. Herlakinden.
here means especially the valiant acts of God in governing and garding his
people from their enemies, Psalm. 66. 4.
O come hither and behold the works of God, how wonderful he is in his doing
toward the Children of men, he turned the sea into dry land so that his people
went on foot thorough the midst of the sea, the Exodus 14. 29.
waters were a wall unto them on the right hand and on their left; but the
waves of the Sea returned and covered the chariots and horsemen even all the
host of Pharaoh that pursued them. Almighty God reigned hailstones out of
heaven upon the cursed Amorites at Bethoran, and they were more ( Joshua 10.
says the text) that dyed with the hail, then they whom the Children of
Israel slew with the sword. And when Duke Joshua prayed, Sun stay thou in
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valey of Aialon: the Sun abode and the Moon
stood still until the people avenged themselves upon their enemies. When
Zenacherib and his innumerous host came to fight against Hezekiah King of
Judah, Gods Angel in one night flew an hundred eighty and five thousand
Assyrians. 2. Kings. 19.

And undoubtedly (beloved) there is no nation under the cope of Heaven has had
greater occasion to praise God in this kind then England, the preservation of
the most illustrious princess the Lady Elizabeth under the fiery trial of her
unkind sister Queen Marie was a noble act, and the seminary of much happiness
unto this kingdom for many years after, and so much the more noble because
Philip King of Spain has often confessed that he spared her life (when wildy
Winchester and bloody Bonner had brought her into the snare) not out of any
piety or pity, but only out of policy. Her exaltation to the Crown was
another noble act, so noble that some See M. Fox Martyr. in fine.
Popish Prelates in their envy burst a sunder and dyed for very grief of
heart. Well might that good Lady sing and say with the blessed Virgin, He that
is mighty has magnified me, and holy is his name, he has put down the
mighty from their seat and has exalted the humble and meek: her flourishing
in health, wealth, and godliness, more then 44. years (in despite of all her
foes abroad, at home, schismatic, heretical, open, intestine) was another
noble act: for after once the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus had roared, and his fat
Calves had begun to bellow in this Island: there passed never a year, never
a month, never a week (I think I might say) never a day, never an hour, but
some mischief was intended either against her person or her people: the
resisting of the rebellion in the Northern parts of England, was a noble act:
the discovering and so consequently the defeating of Campians treason a noble
act: of Parris treason a noble act: of the Lupus Lopus his treason, a noble
act: of Squires treason, a noble act. Her glorious victories against her fell
and insolent enemies the Spaniards in Ireland, in Flanders, in France, in their
own dominions of Portugal, Indies, and Spain were noble acts. It was a wonder
of wonders, that a Maiden Queen should at one time be both a staff to
Flanders, and a stay to France, a terror to Pope, a mirror to Turk, feared
abroad, loved at home, Mistress of the Sea, wonder of the world. She might
truly be called a Prince of Peace, for she was Crowned in Peace, she lived
in Peace, she dyed in Peace, she was buried in Peace: and when she had slept
with her Fathers, it was another noble act of the Lord to send us in the midst
of all our fear so learned, so meek, so pious a Prince as King James, in such
exceeding sweet peace, that never a sword was drawn, happily never a word
spoken against him. All these were noble acts, and ought to be had in a
perpetual remembrance. But of all other noble preseruations ( Our deliverance
from that intended merciless and matchless Massacre both in fact and fiction,
the fifth of November, in the year 1605. is most nobly noble. King James on
this day might have said with King 2. Sam. 22. 41.
David, O Lord which art my rock and my fortress, thou have given me the
necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me, that I might
break them as small as the dust of the earth, and tread them flat as the clay
of the street. Psalm. 118.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever. Let Israel now confess that he is gracious, and that his mercy endures
for ever. Let the house of Aaron now confess that his mercy endures for ever.
Yea let all such as fear the Lord now confess that his mercy endures for
ever. All the Congregations of the Saints in the whole world, have good cause
to thank God our strength and deliverer. Scotland has good cause, for if
England had been but a Tuesday breakefast, assuredly Scotland should have been
but a Fridaies drinking, one morsel as it were for the greedy deuourer. The
Churches in France relieved often by us, have good cause to rejoice with us.
Our neighbors of Holland have good cause to triumph as they do, for if our
house had been set on fire, their house being the next would have been quickly
pulled down. The Churches in Germany, Denmark, Hungary, Geneua likewise
have good cause to praise God in this noble act according to his excellent
greatness.

More principally the Commonweal of England, and in it all men of all
factions, and all fashions whatsoever. Atheists (if they think there be a God)
have good cause to thank God, acknowledging his mercy toward them in sparing
us, and so saving the bad for the Genesis 18. 26.
righteous sake. Carnal Gospellers have good cause to thank God, confessing
that so long as Genesis 19. 22.
Let is in Sodom, it cannot be destroyed, and so long as Moses stands in the
Psalm. 106. 23.
gap, and Exodus 32. 11.
prays for his people, Gods wrathful indignation cannot devour us. Yea, let
the Gunpowder men themselves (if they have any spark of grace) confess that
God is to be praised in this noble act, for suppose (God be thanked we may
suppose and dispose thus of these matters unto our comfort) I say suppose,
their devilish plot had been acted, I assure my self our cause had been far
better, and our number far greater then theirs, and as for our sins (which
are indeed our greatest enemies) they would have brought into the field so
many as we: so that having so much armor of light, and more armor of proof
then they: Lucan.
Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos.

But suppose the least and the worst part had overcome the bigger and the
better, yet (if they be not hewn out of hard rocks, if these Romanists have
not sucked the milk of wolves (as it is reported of the first founder of Rome)
they would have relented to see their native Country made nothing else but a
very shambles of Italian and lgnatian butchers, When Alexander saw the dead
corpse of Darius, and Julius Caesar, the head of Pompey, and Marcus Marcellus,
Syracuse burn; and Scipio, Numantia spoild, and Titus, Jerusalem made Lue. 19.
44.
even with the ground; they could not abstain from weeping, albeit they were
mortal enemies, But above all other in this kingdom the truly zealous, and
zealously true hearted protestants have greatest occasion of rejoicing, for if
the Lord had not ( according to his excellent greatness, and according to his
excellent goodness too) delivered us out of this gunpowder gulf, our bodies
happily might have been made food for the fowls, or else sewel for the fire,
and that which would have grieved our posterity more, superstition and Idolatry
might in short time have been replanted in this land, I mean that vpstart
Antichristian religion of Rome, wherein many things, especially four (as
judicious Martyr. page 1.
Fox well observed) are most abominable.

1. Unlimited jurisdiction, derogatorie to all Kings and Emperors. 2. Insolent
titles, prejudicial to all Bishops and Prelates. 3. Corrupt doctrine,
injurious to all Christians. 4. Filthy life, detestable to all men.
The greater was our danger, the greater was our deliverance: the greater our
deliverance, the greater our thanks should be, for as it follows in my text,
God is to be praised according to his excellent greatness. It is true that our
most and best praises are few for the number, and little for the measure,
whereas God is infinite for his goodness, and in his greatness incomprehensible,
so that the meaning of Basil. Musculus Placid. parmen. in loc.
David is that we should praise him according to our capacity, and not
according to his immensity: according to the grace bestowed upon us, and not
according to the glory which is in him. Ecclesiasticus 43. 30. praise the Lord,
and magnify him as much as ye can, yet does he far exceed. Exalt him with
all your power and be not weary, yet can ye not attain unto it.

Now where the Lord gives a greater mean, there he requires a greater
measure, where he bestows a greater portion of gifts, he does expect a
greater proportion of glory: wherefore seeing the Lord has out of his abundant
mercy conferred upon this kingdom inestimable blessings in the preaching of
his word for the space of more then fifty years, it is questionles he looks
for no little thanks or small praise, but for great thanks and great praise
according to his excellent greatness manifested in this our deliverance. I come
therefore to the second part of this Psalm, showing with what God is to be
praised, in the sound of the trumpet, etc.

God is to be praised (says In Psalm. 147.
Augustine) totis votis de totis vobis with all your souls, and with all your
selves. That therefore we may manifest our inward affections by such outward
actions as are commendable, where there be trumpets, let them sound: where
there be lutes and harpes, let the^ strike up: where there be loud Cymbals and
well tuned Cymbals, let them ring, let the^ sing the praises of God for this
our most happy deliverance, let trumpet and tongue, viol and voice, lute and
life witness our hearty rejoicing in the Lord: If our true zeal were more fiery
within, it would doubtless break forth into more public works, then it does
against that bloody brood of the gunpowder crew. There have been many
collections in every dioces for the reedifying of the Churches of Saint Albanes
and Arthuret, the which I assure my self were good works: there have bin in
this latter age many gorgeous, I might say glorious buildings erected about and
in this honorable City, to the great ornament of our Country, the which I
think you may number among your good works: there have bin lotteryes to
further Virginean enterprises, and these (for any thing I know) were good
works also: there have bin many new play houses, and one fair Burse lately
built, Paris garden in a flourishing estate makes a great noise still, and as I
hear Charing Cross shall have a new coat too: but in the mean time while so
many monuments are raised either to the honor of the dead, or else for the
profit and pleasure of the living: dic mihi musa virum, I pray muse and show me
the man, who ioynes with that ever zealous, reverend, learned Deane in founding
a College for a society of writers against the superstitious Idolatries of the
Roman Synagogue, the which happily might be like the Cant. 4. 4.
Tower of David, where the strong men of Israel might have sheildes and targets
to fight the Lords battle. Haggai. 1. 4.
Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seiled houses and this houselye
waste?

Remember I beseech you the words of 2. Chron. 15. 2.
Azariah unto King Asa and the men of Judah, The Lord is with you, while you are
with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake
him, he will forsake you. Be not cold in a good cause, fly not out of the
field, play not the cowards in the Lords holy wars, for albeit happily your
selves are like for your time to do well enough in despite of the devil and the
Pope his darling: yet your posterity will assuredly rue it, and have just cause
to curse their dastardly spirits, and worthless progenitors. I say no more
concerning this point, only I pray with our forefathers in the first english
Letany set out in the days of King Henry the 8. from all sedition and privy
conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his detestable
enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy, from hardness of heart, and
contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

Where note by the way that the Popes abominable tyranny is hedged in (as it
were) on the one side with sedition and privy conspiracy, and on the other
side with false doctrine and heresy. I have another prayer, and for as much as
it is in Latin, I must entreat all such (if any such here be present who love
Bonanentures psalter and the Romish service) to join with us in this orison.

Papa noster qui es Romae; maledicetur nomen tuum, intereat regnum tuum,
impediatur volunt as tua, sicut in Coelo sie et in terra, Putum nostrum in
Coena dominicada nobis hodie, and remitte nummos nostr^s quos tibi dedimus ob
indulgentias, sicut and nos remittimus tibi indulgentias, and (...) nos inducas
in haeresin, sed libera nos a miseria, quoniam tuum est infernum, pix and
sulphur in secula seculorum.

The word of God is a Heb. 4. 12.
two edged sword, sharp in a literal, and sharp in an allegorical exposition.
Hitherto you have heard the history, now there remains a mystery, nihil enim
hic ludicrum aut lubricum says In loc.
Augustine, and therefore Prosper Luther Hugo Card.
divines understand here by the sounding of the trumpet, the preaching of the
Gospel, Romans 10. 18.
whose found went out through all the earth unto the ends of the world: at the
seuenfold sounding of this trumpet the walls of Joshua. 6. Strictior est tuba
ex part buccinantis quam ex altera, quia praedicator strictius se debet
examinare. Hugo Card. in loc.
sericho fall, that is all the pompes and powers of this world are conquered and
brought to naught, this trumpet is mighty thorough God to cast down holds,
and Imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God. 2. Cor. 10. 4.

Augustine in loc.
Other say that the Saints are these trumpets, and harpes, and Cymbals, and
that their Chrysostom. Euthym. in loc.
members make this music to the Lord, our eyes praise the Lord, while they be
Psalm. 123.
lifted up unto their maker in heaven, and wait upon his mercy: our tongues
praise the Lord, in singing Colos. 3. 16.
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs unto the Lord: our ears praise the
Lord, while they Mat. 13. 9.
hear the word of God with attention: our hands praise the Lord, while they be
Ecclesi. 7. 32.
stretched out unto the poor, and while they Ephesians. 4. 24.
work the thing that is good: our feet praise the Lord, when they be not
Psalm. 14. 6.
swift to shed blood, but Psalm. 122. 2.
stand in the gates of Gods house, ready to Psalm. 199. 32.
run the ways of his commandments. In Tympaeno sicca and percussa pellis
resonat, in choro autem voces sociatae concordant said Pastoral. part. 3.
admonit. 23.
Gregory the great: wherefore August. Cassiod. Hugo. Card. in loc.
such as mortify the lusts of the flesh praise God in tympano, and they who
keep the Ephesians. 4. 3.
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, praise God in choro: the Brownist in
separating himself from the Church though he seem to praise God in tympano,
yet he does not praise God in choro: and the carnal gospeller albeit he join
with the Church in chere, yet he prayseth not God in tympano they praise God in
well-tuned Cymbals who tune their souls before they preach or pray, whosoever
desires to be a sweet singer in Israel must be learned in the school,
before he be loud in the temple: the heart likewise must be prepared for
praying, as the harp for playing* if our instruments of praise be not in tune,
then our whole devotion is like the 1. Cor. 33. 1.
sounding brass or as the tinckling Cymbal: in Gods quier there is first tune
well, and then sound well, if once we can say with Psalm. 108. 1.
David, O God mine heart is ready, mine heart is ready, then our lute and harp
will awake right early: let thy soul praise the Lord, and then all that is
either without or about thee will instantly do the same.

Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord) that is Agellius* ^atablus.
omne spirans, Hieron. August.
omnis spiritualis, Genebrard and aly plerique.
omnis spiritus, let every creature praise the Lord for his estate of
confection, every Christian praise the Lord for his estate of refection, every
blessed spirit loosed out of the worlds misery praise the Lord for his estate
of perfection, let every creature, man above all the Creatures, and the foul
of man above all that is in man praise the Lord. Omnis spiritus, i. Hugo.
Iunius.
totus spiritus, Luke 10. 27.
all the heart, all the soul, all the mind, as the psalmist Psalm. 86. 12.
elsewhere, I will thank thee O Lord my God with all mine heart, even with my
Psalm. 111. 1.
whole heart, or omnis spiritus the spirit of every man in every place, for
this saying is Calvin. Genebrard. in loc.
prophetical, insinuating that God in time to come, shall not only be
worshipped of the Jews at Jerusalem with outward ceremonies, in the sound of
the trumpet and upon the lute and harp: but in all places, of all persons in
spirit and truth as Christ expounds David in the 4. of Saint John's Gospel at
the 23. verse, whereas unbelieving Jews are the sons of Abraham according to
the flesh only believing Gentiles are the Galat. 3. ^9.
seed of Abraham according to the spirit, and heirs by promise, more Israel
says Psalm. 148.
Augustine then Israel it self. The sons of Abraham (as Christ tells us in
the (...) 8. 39.
Gospel, (...) they who do the works of Abraham, and Abraham's chief work
was faith, Abraham believed (says the Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3.
text) and it was imputed to him for righteousness, Ergo* the true believer is a
right Isralite, blessed with saithfull Abraham. Galat. 3. 9. Genebrard.
some stretch this further, applying it not only to the spirits of men in the
Church militant, but also to the blessed Angels and Saints in the triumphant,
for this Psalm consists of a threefold apostrophe.

1. David inuiteth all the Citizens of heaven, O praise God in his sanctuary,
praise him in the firmament of his power.

2. All the dwellers upon earth, praise him in the sound of the trumpet, praise
him upon the lute and harp, etc.

3. Both and all, let every thing that has breath, every thing which has
either the life of nature, or of grace, or of glory, let every spirit Placidus
parmensis and Bellarmin. in loc.
whether it be terrestrial or celestial, of whatsoever condition, age, sex,
praise the Lord.

It is a Genebrard.
Rabbinical conceit that this hymn consists of 13. Halleluiahs, answering 13.
Properties of God mentioned Exodus 34. 6. 7. verses, and in that our Prophet
after a dozen Halleluiahs has not done, but adds a thirteenth, he does
insinuate that when all our devotion is finished, it is our duty to begin
again with Gods praise, for as Romans 11. 36.
of him, and thorough him, and for him* are all things, even so to him is due
all glory for evermore: as his mercies are from everlasting to everlasting,
from everlasting election, to everlasting glorification: so likewise his
praises are to be sung for ever and ever. In this life we begin this hymn
singing (as musicians speak) in breifs and semibriefs a staff or two, but in
the world to come standing before the throne of the Lamb, clothed in long
white robes, accompanied with all the sweet voices of heavens incomparable
melodious quire: we shall eternally sing; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty,
which was, and which is, and which is to come, Apocalip. 7. 12.
praise, and glory, and wisdom, and power, and might, be unto our God for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

