RECREATIONS WITH THE MUSES

By WILLIAM Earl of STERLINE.

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER. 1637.



A Table of the several Poems contained in the ensuing Volume.
Four Monarchicke Tragedies. Doomes-day, or, the great day of the Lords
judgment, in twelve hours. A Paraenesis to Prince Henry. Jonathan, An
heroicke Poem intended. The first Book.
To his Sacred Majesty.
Disdain not mighty Prince those humble lines,
Though too mean Music for so dainty ears,
Since with thy greatness, learnings glory shines,
So that thy brow a twofold Laurel bears
To thee the Muses, Phoebus now resignes,
And Virtues hight eternal trophies reares;
As Orpheus Harp, heavens may enstall thy pen
A liberal light to guide the minds of Men.
Although my wit be weak, my Vows are strong,
Which consecrate devoutly to thy name
My Muses labors, which ere it be long,
May graft some feathers in the wings of fame,
And with the subject to conform my song,
May in more lofty lines thy worth proclaim,
With gorgeous colors courting glories light,
Till circling Seas do bound her ventrous flight.
Ere thou wast borne, and since, heaven thee endeeres,
Held back, as best to grace these last worst Times;
The World longed for thy birth three hundredth years,
Since first foretold wrapped in Propheticke rimes,
His love to thee, the Lords deliveries cleeres,
From Sea, from Sword, from Fire, from Chance, from Crimes,
And that to him thou only might be bound,
Thy self was still the means foes to confound.
I do not doubt but Albions warlike coast,
(still kept unconquered by the heavens decree)
The Picts expelled, the Danes repelled, did boast
(In spite of all Romes power) a state still free,
As that which was ordained (though long time crossed
In this Herculean birth) to bring forth thee,
Whom many a famous Sceptred Parent brings
From an undaunted race to do great things.
Of this divided I Will the Nurslings brave,
Erst, from intestine wars could not desist,
Yet did in foreign fields their names engrave,
Whilst whom one spoiled the other would assist:
Those now made one, whilst such a head they have,
What world of words were able to resist?
Thus has thy worth (great JAMES) conjoined them now,
Whom battles often did break, but never bow.
And so, most justly thy renowned deeds
Do raise thy fame above the starry round,
Which in world a glad amazement breeds,
To see the virtues (as they merit) crowned,
Whilst thou (great Monarch who in power exceeds,
With virtuous goodness do st vast greatness bound,
Where, if thou lik'dst to be more great, then good,
Thou might soon build a Monarchy with blood.
O! this fair world without the world, no doubt,
Which Neptune strongly guards with liquid bands,
As aptest so to rule the Realms about,
She by her self (as most Majesticke) stands,
Thence (the worlds Mistress) to give judgment out,
With full authority for other Lands,
Which on the Seas would gaze attending still,
By wind-wing'd Messengers their Sovereigns will.
The Southern Regions did all Realms surpass,
And were the first which sent great Armies forth;
Yet Sovereignty that there first founded was,
Still by degrees has drawn unto the North,
To this great Climate which it could not pass,
The fat all period bounding all true worth:
For, it cannot from hence a passage find,
By roaring Rampires still with us confinde.
As Waters which a mass of earth restraines,
(If they be, swelling high begin to vent)
Do rage disdainefully over all the plains,
As with strict borders scorning to be pent:
Even so this mass of earth, that thus remaynes,
Walled in with waves, if (to burst out when bent.)
(The bounding floods o're-flow'd) it rush forth, then
That deluge would o're-run the world with men.
Then since great Prince) the torrent of thy power,
May drown whole Nations in a Scarlet flood,
On Infidels thy indignation power,
And bathe not Christian bounds with Christian blood:
The Tyrant Ottoman (who would devour
All the redeemed souls) may be withstood,
While as thy troops (great Albions Emperor) once
Do comfort Christ's afflicted flock which moanes.
Thy thundering troops might take the stately rounds
Of Constantines great Town renowned in vain,
And bar the barbarous Turks the baptized bounds,
Reconquering Godfreys conquests once again;
O, well spent labors! O illustrious wounds!
Whose trophies should eternal glory gain,
And make the Lion to be feared far more,
Then ever was the Eagle of before.
But, O thrice happy thou that of thy Throne
The boundless power for such an use controuls!
Which if some might command to reign alone,
Of all their life they would be-bloud the scrouls,
And to content the haughty thoughts of one
Would sacrifize a thousand thousand souls,
Which thou do spare, though having sprite and might,
To challenge all the world as thine own right.
Then unto whom more justly could I give
Those famous ruins of extended states
(Which did the world of liberty deprive
By force, or fraud, to rear Tyrannick seats)
Then unto thee, who may and will not live
Like those proud Monarchs borne to stormy fates?
But whilst frank-sprited Prince, thou this would flee,
Crowns come unsought, and Scepters seek to thee.
Unto the Ocean of thy worth I send
Those runnels, rising from a rash attempt;
Not that I to augment that depth pretend,
Which heavens from all necessity exempt,
The Gods small gifts of zealous minds commend,
While Hecatombes are holden in contempt:
So (Sir) I offer at your virtues shrine
This little incense, or this smoke of mine.
To the Author of the Monarchicke TRAGEDIES.
WEll may the programme of thy Tragic stage,
Invite the curious pompe-expecting eyes
To gaze on present shows of passed age,
Which just desert Monarchicke dare baptize.
Crowns thrown from Thrones to Tombs, detomb'd arise
To match thy Muse with a Monarchicke theme,
That whilst her sacred soaring cuts the skies,
A vulger subject may not wrong the same:
And which gives most advantage to thy fame
The worthiest Monarch that the Sun can see,
Does grace thy labors with his glorious Name,
And daignes protector of thy birth to be:
Thus all Monarchicke, Patron, Subject, style,
Make thee, the Monarch-tragicke of this I Will.
S. Robert Ayton.
Jn praise of the Author, and his Tragedy of Darius.
A SONNET.
GIve place all ye to dying Darius wounds,
(While this great Geeek him in his throne enstals,
Who fell before seven-ported Thebes walls,
Or under Ilions old sky-threatning Rounds.
Your sowre-sweet voice not half so sadly sounds,
Though I confess, most famous be your falls,
Slain, sacrificed, transported, and made thrals;
Thrown headlong, burnt, and banished from your bounds:
Whom Sophocles, Euripides have song,
And Aeschylus in stately Tragic tune:
Yet none of all has so divinely done
As matchless Menstrie in his native tongue.
Thus Darius Ghost seems glad now to be so,
Triumphed on twice by Alexanders two.
IO. MURRAY.
THE ARGUMENT.
AT that time when the States of Greece began to grow great, and Philosophy to
be thought precious, Solon the first light of the Athenian commonswealth, like
a provident Be, gathering honey over many fields, learning knowledge over many
Countries, was sent for by Croesus King of Lydia, as famous for his wealth, as
the other was for his wisdom. And not so much for any desire the King had to
profit by the experience of so profound a Philosopher, as to have the report of
his (as he thought it) happiness approved by the testimony of so renowned a
witness. But Solon always like himself, entering the regal Palace, and
seeing the same very gloriously apparrelled, but very incommodiously furnished
with Courtiers, more curious to have their bodies decked with a womanishly
affected form of raiment, and some superficial complements of pretended
courtesies, then to have their minds enriched with the true treasure of
inestimable virtue, he had the same altogether in disdain. Therefore after
some conference had with Croesus concerning the felicity of man, his opinion
not seconding the Kings expectation, he was returned with contempt as one of no
understanding. But yet comforted by Aesop (Author of the witty fables) who for
the time was resident at Courts, and in credit with the King.

Immediately after the departure of Solon, Croesus having two Sounes (whereof
the eldest was dumb, and the other a brave youth) dreamed that the youngest
dyed by the wound of a Dart, wherewith being marvellously troubled, he married
him to a Gentlewoman named Caelia, and for farther disappointing the suspected,
though inevitable destiny, he discharged the using of all such weapons as he
had dreamed of. Yet who could cut away the occasion of the heavens, from
accomplishing that which they had designed. The spiritfull youth ing long
restrained from the fields, was invited by some Countrymen to the chase of a
wild Bore, yet could very hardly impetrate leave of his loving suspicious
Father.

Now in the mean time there arrived at Sardis a youth named Adrastus, Son to
the King of Phrygia, one no less unfortunate then valorous, he having lost his
Mistrisse by a great disaster, and having killed his brother by a far
greater, came to Croesus, by whom he was courteously entertained, and by the
instancy of the King, and the instigation of others against his own will, who
feared the frowardness of his infectious fortune, he got the custody of Atis
(so was the Prince called) whom in time of the sport, thinking to kill the
Bore, by a monstrous mishap he killed. After which disastrous accident standing
above the dead corpse, after the inquiry of the truth, being pardoned by
Croesus, he punished himself by a violent death. There after, Croesus
sorrowing exceedingly this exceeding misfortune, he was comforted by Sandanis,
who labored to dissuade him from his unnecessary journey against the Persians,
yet he reposing on superstitious, and wrong interpreting responses of deceiving
Oracles, went against Cyrus, who having defeated his forces in the field, and
taken himself in the City, tied him to a stake to be burned, where by the
exclayming diverse times on the name of Solon, moving the Conqueror to
compassion, he was set at liberty, and lamenting the death of his Son, and
the loss of his kingdom, gives a ground for this present Tragedy.

The persons names who speak.
CROESUS King of Lydia. ATIS his son. COELIA wife to ATIS. ADRASTUS. SANDANIS
a Counselor. SOLON. AESOPE. CYRUS King of Persia. HARPAGUS Lieutenant to
CYRUS. CHORUS of some Countrymen. CHORUS of all the Lydians.
The Scene in Sardis.

THE TRAGEDY OF CROESVS.
Act 1.
Solon. Lo, how the stormy world does worldlings toss,
Twixt sandy pleasures, and a rocky will,
Whilst them that Court it most, it most does cross,
To vice indulgent, virtues stepdame still:
This mass of thoughts, this animated slime,
This dying substance, and this living shadow,
The sport of Fortune, and the prey of Time,
Soon raised, soon razed, as flowers are in a meadow.
He toils to get (such is his foolish nature)
A constant good in this inconstant ill:
"Unreasonable reasonable creature,
"That makes his reason subject to his will!
Whilst on the height of contemplation placed,
I weigh fond earthlings, earnest idle strife,
"All (though they all have diverse parts embraced)
"Would act a comicke Scene of tragic life:
"The mind (which always at some new things aims)
"To get for what it longs, no travel spares;
"And lothing what it has of better dreams,
"Which (when enjoyed) does procreate but cares:
"Yet to a Sovereign bliss which they surmise,
"By diverse means, all pregnant wits aspire,
"But with strange shapes the same so much disguise,
"That it we scarce can know, much less acquire:
Some place their happiness (unhappy beasts,
Whose minds are drunk with momentary joys)
In gorgeous garments, and in dainty feast,
To pamper breath-toss'd-flesh with pleasures toys;
Some more austere, no such delights allow,
But reyne their passions with advised respects,
And by no fortune moved to brag nor bow,
Would make the world enamored of their sects;
Some bathing still in virtues purest springs,
Do draw Ideas of a heavenly brood,
And search the secrets of mysterious things,
As most undoubted heirs of that high good:
Thus with a dreamed delight, and certain pain,
"All seek by several ways a perfect blisses;
And let none wonder though they toil in vain,
Who cannot well discern what thing it is,
What happiness can be imagined here,
On painted grounds though we our hopes repose,
Who dearly first do gain, what we hold dear,
Then what we once must lose, still fear to lose?
Think (though amongst thousands scarcely one of all,
Can at this point of happiness arrive)
One fortune have (whilst so to fortune thrall)
To get the thing for which a world does strive:
What though he swim in Oceans of delights,
Have none above him, and his equals rare;
Ears joying pleasant sounds, eyes stately sights,
His treasures infinite, his buildings fair?
Yet fortunes course which cannot be contrould,
Must mount some mean men up, throw down the great,
And (still in motion) circularly rould,
From what it is, must alter every state.
"Though of his wealth, the greedy man does boast,
"Whilst treasures vain his drossie wits bewitch,
"What has he gained, but what another lost?
"And once his loss may make another rich.
"But ah, all lose who seek to profit thus,
"To found their trust on trustlesse grounds whilst made:
"We may be robbed from them, they robbed from us,
"Grieved for their loss, as when first purchased, glad:
"Those are but fools, who hope true rest to find
"In this frail world, where for a while we range:
"Which does (like Seas exposed to every wind)
"Ebb, flow, storm, calm, still moving, still in change;
"Each wave we see does drive the first away,
"And still it whitest fomes where rocks are near,
"While as one grows, another does decay,
"The greatest danger often does least appear.
"Their seeming bliss, who trust in frothy shows,
"Whose course with moments fickle fortune dates,
"As to a height, so to confusion grows:
"A secret fate does manage mighty states.
But I scorn fortune, and was ever free
From that dead wealth, depending to her power;
My treasure still I bear about with me,
Which neither time nor tyrants can devour:
That Lady of events, though still she rave,
Scarce can her course to mock my mind advance,
For (if not trusted first) none can deceive,
And I attend no certainty from chance;
Then I have learned to moderate my mind,
Still with contentment crowning my desires.
My garments course, my food such as I find:
"He has enough, who to no more aspires.
What satisfaction does o're-flow my soul,
(The world all weighed) while high accounts I cast,
And in my memories unblotted scroule,
Do match the present time with others past?
Those worldly minds, whose weakness wealth does cloak,
(Though others happy) I them wretched think;
For, whilst that passions base all reason choke,
The bodies slaves, their souls surcharged, do sink;
Yet loath I not the world as loathed by it,
Like those who when disdained, pretend disdain;
No, no, I had (as Athens must admit)
What riches, birth, or reputation gain.
And if that I would vaunt of mine own deeds,
Fair City, where mine eyes first sucked the light,
I challenge might what most thy glory breeds,
For fame or power, as due to me of right:
When Salamina had our yoke removed,
Wit^ follies garments, wisdom to disguise,
What none durst else attempt, I boldly moved,
And seemed a fool to make the people wise.
Then having thus by policy prevailed
My Countries squadrons leading to the field,
Whilst both by strength and stratagems assailed,
I forced that I Will (though walled with waves) to yield;
But when renowned, by that adventurous deed,
And turned victorious, charged with strangers spoils,
"(No perfect bliss below) worse did succeed,
The peace that was abroad, bred civil broils;
"What with more violence does fury lead,
"Then mut'nous commons when they want a head?
The meaner sort could not their minds conform,
Those things to do which great men did command:
And (whilst distracted with a dangerous storm,)
All joined to place the Rudder in my hand;
I reunited that divided state,
And with good success managed matters well,
Which further kindled, had been quenched too late,
That Hydra-headed tumult did so swell.
When I my worth by those two works had proved,
And trod the path of power (as Prince) a space,
The peoples Minion, by the Nobles loved,
None could be great, save such as I would grace.
Thus carried with the force of fortunes stream,
I absolutely acted what I would;
For, the democracy was but a name,
The Cities raines my hand in trust did hold;
I might (a tyrant) still have ruled in state,
But my clear mind could no such clouds conceive,
But gladly left what others urge of late,
"If I may rule my self, no more I crave;
Yet some whose thoughts but for frail glory cared,
Said that my sprite could not aspire to reign,
And that my error could not be repaired,
Since so to err means come not often again.
My soul in this a more contentment finds,
Then if a Diadem adorned my brow,
I chayn'd the affections of undaunted minds,
(Though barbarous erst) which did to order bow,
Yet hardly could rich Citizens advise
To keep the statutes which my laws contained,
Whilst what one praised, another did despise:
Some loved, some loathed, even as they thought they gained.
At last, at least in show, all rest content,
Even those who hate me most, lend their applause:
"A worthy mind needs never to repent,
"The suffering crosses for an honest cause.
Whilst traveling now with a contented mind,
The memory of this my fancy feeds,
Though to great states their periods are assigned:
"Time cannot make a prey of Virtues deeds.
Where seven-mouth'd Nile from a concealed source,
Inunding over the fields, no banks can bind,
I saw their wonders, heard their wise discourse;
Rare sights enriched mine eyes, rare lights my mind.
And if it were but this, yet this delights:
Behold how Craesus here the Lydian King,
To be his guest me earnestly invites,
The which to some would great contentment bring;
But I bemoane that world-bewitched man,
Who makes his gold his god, the earth his heaven;
And I will try by all the means I can,
To make his judgment with his fortune eaven.

Chorus.
What can man's wandering thoughts confine,
Or satisfy his fancies all?
For whilst he wonders does design,
Even great things then do seem but small;
What terror can his sprite appall,
Whilst taking more then it can hold,
He to himself contentment does assign;
His mind which monsters breeds,
Imagination feeds,
And with high thoughts quite headlongs rold,
Whilst seeking here a perfect ease to find,
Would but melt mountains, and embrace the wind.
What wonder though the soul of man,
(A spark of heaven that shines below)
Does labor by all means it can,
Like to it self, it self to show?
The heavenly essence, heaven would know,
But from this mass, (where bound) till free,
With pain both spend life's little span;
The better part would be above:
And the earth from the earth cannot remove;
How can two contraries agree?
"Thus as the best part or the worst does move,
Man of much worth, or of no worth does prove.
O! from what fountain do proceed
These humors of so many kinds?
Each brain does diverse fancies breed,
"As many men, as many minds:
And in the world a man scarce finds
Another of his humor right,
Nor are there two so like indeed,
If we remarke their several graces,
And lineaments of both their faces,
That can abide the proof of sight?
"If the outward forms then differ as they do,
"Of force the affections must be different too.
"Ah! passons spoil our better part,
The soul is vexed with their dissentions;
We make a God of our own heart,
And worship all our vain inventions;
This braine-bred mist of apprehensions
The mind does with confusion fill;
Whilst reason in exile does smart,
And few are free from this infection,
For all are slaves to some affection,
Which does oppress the judgment still:
"Those partial tyrants, not directed right,
"Even of the clearest minds, eclipse the light.
A thousand times, O happy he!
Who does his passions so subdue,
That he may with clear reasons eye,
Their imperfections fountains view,
That so he may himself renew,
Who to his thoughts prescribing laws,
Might set his soul from bondage free,
And never from bright reason swerve,
But making passions it to serve,
Would weigh each thing as there were cause:
O greater were that Monarch of the mind!
Then if he might command from Thule to Inde.
Act 2.
Scene 1.
Croesus, Aesope, Solon. WHat Prince has been so favored by the fates,
As could like me of full contentment boast?
Loved of mine own, and feared of foreign states,
My foes have fallen, my friends were never crossed;
For having that (which thousands seek, at will)
My happiness in all things has been such,
Heavens favorite, and fortunes Minion still,
I know not what to wish, I have so much;
Mine eyes no way did ever grieve my heart
With any object that their sight did draw,
My name applauded is in every part,
My word an Oracle, my will a law:
What breast can well confine this flood of joys?
Whose swelling current does overflow my mind,
Which never dreamed that which the soul annoyes,
But did in all a satisfaction find;
I scorn vain shadows of conceited fears,
As one whose state is built on marble grounds:
In all my horoscope no cloud appears,
My bliss abounds, my pleasures pass all bounds.
Aesope. That Grecian (Sir) is at the Court arrived,
Whole wisdom fame through all the world records.

Croe. And to extol my state, have you not strived,
Whilst bent to sooth his ears with courteous words?

Aesope In all the parts where he has chanced to be,
In foreign bounds, or where he first saw light,
He never did such stately wonders see,
As since this Court enriched has his sight;
When regal shows had ravished first his eye,
As mountains nurslings, little simple swains,
Who used with infant floods them never spy
Sport, portative (like Serpents) through the Plains,
When one of them first comes to view the vailes,
And wanton water-Nymphs there (wondering) sees,
The rareness of the sight so much prevails,
That rillets rivers seem, the rivers Seas:
So all the guards that garnisht Solons way,
Did to his mind a great amazement bring,
The gallants (golden statues) made him stay;
Each Groom a Prince, each Esquire seemed a King,
And now he comes to gain your longed-for sight;
Whom in his mind no doubt he does adore,
He gazed on those who held of you their light,
Sun of this soil, he must admire you more;
Now he over all will spread your praises forth,
A famous witness of your glorious reign:
"The record of one wise man is more worth,
"Then what a world of others would maintain.

Solon. Great Prince, do not the loving zeal reject,
Which a mean man, yet a good mind affords:
And who perchance does more your good affect,
Then those who paint their love with fairer words.

Croe. Thy love (sage Grecian) grateful is to us,
Whom fame long since acquainted with thy worth,
So that we long longed for thy presence thus,
To spy the Spring which sent such treasures forth;
Would God that many such would here resort,
Whose virtues beams would shine in every breast,
Whose countenance grave, would grace so great a Court,
And like a Lamp give light unto the rest.

Solon. Spare (courteous King) that undeserved praise,
I am but one who do the world despise,
And would my thoughts to some perfection raise,
A wisedome-lover, willing to be wise:
Yet all that I have learned (huge toils now past)
By long experience, and in famous Schools,
Is but to know my ignorance at last;
"Who think themselves most wise, are greatest fools.

Croe. "This is the nature of a noble mind,
"It rather would be good, then be so thought,
"As if it had no aim, but fame to find,
"Such as the shadow, not the substance sought:
Yet forced to give that which thou will not take:
The world, what thou hold'st down, does raise more high,
That which thy face thus shunnes, shines on thy back:
"Praise follows them, who what they merit fly:
And how I think, on the earth no creature lives,
Who better can instruct what I would learn,
Then thou to whom frank Nature largely gives
A mind to see, a judgment to discern.

Solon. To satisfy your suit, my dutious care
Shall it, or then my ignorance dis^lose.

Croe. Lo, you have seen my pomp, my treasures rare,
And all the strength on which my thoughts repose.

Solon. "Those be but dreams of bliss which fortune brings,
"To break (by bending) foolish mortals minds,
"I saw but senseless heaps of melting things;
"A waving wealth, exposed to many winds:
"This but the body serving to decore,
"As foolish owners it, it the owners spends,
"Where minds more circumspect seek better store
"Of wealth from danger free that never ends.

Croe. I wot not what you mean, whilst thus in love,
With feigned Ideas of imagined bliss;
By fancies drawn, such portraits do but move
Sick brains to dream, that which indeed they miss;
But more I have then their conceits can show,
Whose rich conjectures breed but poor effects,
And (I beseech you) did you ever know
A man more blessed then I in all respects?

Solon. I, Tellus knew, a man whom Athens loved,
Who to do good, at no occasion failed,
And in my judgment has most happy proved,
Since while he lived, beloved, whilst dead, bewailed;
And last (that he might reap all fruits of bliss)
His Countries beaten bands, near put to flight,
By him encouraged, scorned to be submisse,
Who died victorious in two Armies sight;
More glorious now then when he was alive,
As he in heaven, on earth his happy rest,
To trace his steps, who led by Virtue strive,
Heirs of his worth, and honored by the best.

Croe. Since this first place a private person gains,
Whose fortunes treasure in short time was told,
Now next in rank, who registered remains,
Whose happiness you most accomplished hold?

Solon. Of Cleobis, and Bitons virtuous way,
The prosperous course does to my thoughts approach:
Their mother wanting on a solemn day,
The horses which were used to draw her Coach,
Them to supply the place, love kindly raised,
Who drew her to that place of public mirth,
Whilst both of them abundantly were praised,
They for their piety, she for her birth:
This charitable work, when brought to end,
Both died, whilst offering incenie to the Gods,
Who (favored so) to draw them did intend,
From further danger of afflictions rods:
O happy mother! who (with true delight)
Of labors past such pleasant fruits enjoyed,
And happy children! who did thus acquit
The mothers pain, and dyed whilst well employed.
"Ah, ah, our lives are frail, do what we can,
"And like the brittle glass, break whilst they glance,
"Then often the heavens to curb the pride of man,
"Do inter-sowre our sweets with some sad chance.

Croe. Is there no place appointed then for me?
Or is my state so abject in thine eyes,
That thou do think me blessed in no degree,
As one, whose best in fortunes balance lies?
Or think thou me (of judgment too remiss)
A wretch exposed to want, to scorn, or pains,
The bastard child of fortune, barred from bliss,
Whom heavens do hate, and all the world disdaines?
Are those poor creatures then to be compared,
With one who may consume such in his wrath?
Who (as I please) do punish or reward,
Whose words, nay even whose looks give life or death.

Solon. Let not your judgment thus from reason shrink,
To gloss on that which simply comes from me;
"They who do freely speak, no treason think,
"One cannot both your friend and flatterer be.
To us who Grecians are, the Gods do grant
A moderate measure of an humble wit,
So that our Country yet did never want
Some whom the world for wise men did admit.
And yet amongst us all the greatest number
(Whilst living) look not for a perfect rest,
Though Fortunes minions in her bosom slumber,
And seem to some, whom this world blindes, most blessed:
Yet over all mortal states, change so prevails,
We alterations daily do attend,
And hold this for a ground that never fails,
"None can be thoroughly blessed before the end:
"I may compare our state to table-playes,
"Whilst Judges that are blind, give only light;
"Their many doubt the earnest mind dismayes,
"Which must have happy throws, then use them right:
"So all our days in doubt, what things may chance,
"Time posts away, our breath seems it to chase,
"And when the occasion comes us to advance,
"It of a thousand, one can scarce embrace.
When by a generous indignation moved,
Two fight with danger, for a doubtful praise;
Whilst valor blindely, but by chance is proved,
That ones disgrace, another fame must raise:
O! what a fool his judgment will commit,
To grace the one, with a not gained applause?
Where fortune is but to give sentence yet,
Whilst bloody agents plead a doubtful cause:
"This world a field is, whereas each man fights,
"And armed with reason, resolutely goes
"To war, (till death close up the bodies lights)
"Both with external, and internal foes;
"And how can he the Victors title gain,
"Who yet is busied with a doubtful fight?
"Or he be happy who does still remain
In fortunes danger for a small delight?
"The wind-wing'd course of man, away fast wears,
"Course that consists of hours, hours of a day,
"Day that gives place to night, night full of fears:
"Thus every thing does change, all things decay:
"Those who do stand in peace, may fall in strife,
"And have their fame by infamy suppressed:
"The evening crowns the day, the death the life;
"Many are fortunate, but few are blessed.

Croe. I see this Grecians sprite but base appears,
Which cannot comprehend heroicke things:
The world of him more then he merits hears,
At least he knows not what belongs to Kings:
Yet fame his name so gloriously arrayed,
That long I longed to have him in my house;
But all my expectations are betrayed,
I think a Mountain has brought forth a Mouse.

Act 2. Scene 2.
Solon, Aesope. THis King has put his trust in trustlesse toys,
Whilst courting only temporary things,
And like a hooded Hawk, gorged with vain joye:
At randon flies, born forth on follys wings:
O how this makes my grief exceeding great,
To see ones care, who lives for dead things such,
Whilst shew-transported minds admire his state:
Which I not envy, no, but pity much.
"Thus worms of the earth (whilst low-plac'd thoughts prevail)
"Love melting things, whose show the body fits,
"Where souls of clearer sight do never fail,
"To value most the treasure of good wits.
"Those worldly things do in this world decay,
"Or at the least we leave them with our breath,
"Where to eternity this leads the way,
"So differ they as far as life and death.
Aesope. And yet what wonder though he wander thus,
Whom still by success treacherous fortune blindes?
Though this indeed seem somewhat strange to us,
Who have with learning purified our minds;
Was he not borne heir of a mighty state?
And used with fortunes smiles, not feared for frowns,
Does measure all things by his own conceit?
A great defect, which fatal is to Crowns;
Then from his youth still trusting in a Throne,
With all that pride could crave, or wealth could give,
Used with entreaties, and contrould by none,
He would the tongue of liberty deprive;
Though to his sight I dare not thus appear,
Whose partial judgment, far from reason parts;
I grieve to see your entertainment here
So far inferior to your own deserts;
That matchless wisdom which the world admires,
And (ravished with delight,) amazed hears,
Since not in consort with his vain desires,
Did seem impleasant to distempered ears:
Ears which can entry give to no discourse,
Save that which enters fraughted with his praise;
He can love none but them that love his course,
And thinks all fools who use no flattering phrase:
This with the great ones does the gods displease,
Though spreading all her heavenly treasures forth,
They (if not in their livery them to please)
Do virtue vilify, as of no worth.

Solon. I care not, Aesope, how the King conceived
Those my frank words which I must always use;
I came not here till he my coming craved,
And now when come, will not my name abuse;
Should I his poisonous Sycophants resemble,
Whose silken words their Sovereign do overthrow?
I for his Diadem would not dissemble,
"What hearts do think, the tongues were made to show.
And what if I, his humor to content,
The worlds opinion lost by gaining ones?
He can but give me gifts which may be spent,
But naught can clear my fame if darkened once;
That so he might my reputation raise,
If I soothed him, it would procure my shame;
"Whilst those who vicious are, our virtues praise,
"This in effect is but a secret blame.
"Though as a simple man he me despise,
"Yet better simply good, then doubly ill;
"I not my worth by others praises prize,
"Nor by opinions doc direct my will.
That praise contents me more which one imparts,
Of judgment sound, (though of a mean degree)
Then praise from Princes void of princely parts,
Who have more wealth, but not more wit then he.

Aesope. Who come to Court, must with Kings faults comport.


Solon. Who come to Court, should truth to Kings report.


Aesope. A wise man at their imperfections winkes.


Solon. An honest man will tell them what he thinks.


Aesope. So should you lose your self, and them not save.


Solon. But for their folly* I no blame would have.


Aesope. By this you should their indignation find.


Solon. Yet have the warrant of a worthy mind.


Aesope. It would be long ere you were thus preferred.


Solon. Then it should be the King, (not I) that erred.


Aesope. They guerdon as they love, they love by guess.


Solon. Yet when I merit well, I care the less.


Aesope. It Is good to be still by the Prince approved.


Solon. It Is better to be upright, though not loved.


Aesope. But by this mean, all hope of honor fails.


Solon. Yet honesty in end ever prevails.


Aesope. I think they should excel (for virtue rare)
All men in wit, who unto men give laws;
Kings of their kingdoms, as the centers are,
To which each weighty thing by nature draws:
For as the mighty rivers, little streams,
And all the liquid powers which rise or fall,
Do seek in sundry parts by several seames,
The Oceans bosom that receives them all.
It as a Steward of the tumid deeps
Does send them back by many secret veins,
And (as the earth has need of moisture) keeps
These humid treasures to refresh the Plains.
Thus are Kings breasts the depths where daily flow
Clear streams of knowledge with rare treasures charged,
So that continually their wisdoms grow,
By many helps, which others want, enlarged:
For those who have intelligence over all,
Do commonly communicate to Kings,
All th'accidents of weight that chance to fall;
Which great advantage, Greatness to them brings.
They (jealously disposed) comment on minds,
And these who Arts, or Natures gifts enhaunce,
(Whose value no where else a Merchant finds*)
Do come to Kings, as who may them advance.
No doubt great Jove, since they supply his place,
(So with their charge to make their virtues even)
Does give to them some supernatural grace,
Vice-gods on the earth, great Lievtenants ot heaven.

Solon. As you have shown, Kings good occasion have
To sound the deepes and mysteries of wit,
And those who so their stares from r^i^e save,
Do well deserve upon a Throne to sit,
But ah those rivers are not ever pure,
Through tainted channels which often times convaid,
By flatteries poison rendered are impure;
"Often Princes hearts are by their ears betrayed:
For impudent effronted persons dare
Court with vain words, and detestable lies,
Whilst men of minds more pure must stand afar,
"The light is loath some to diseased eyes.
But with amazement this transports my mind,
Some who are wise gross flattery can digest,
And though they know how all men are inclined,
Yet please the bad, and do but praise the best.
Is It that such men no error can control,
Nor will not cross their appetite in ought,
But (nothing censuring) every thing extol,
Where better wits would argue as they thought;
Or since the world of worth in all esteems,
They never like a pregnant sprite to raise,
So to have none who but to help them seems,
Or may pretend an interest in their praise:
This self-conceit is a most dangerous shelfe,
Where many have made shipwreck unawares,
"He who does trust too much unto himself,
"Can never fail to fall in many snares.
"Of all men else great Monarchs have most need
"To square their actions, and to weigh their words,
"And with advice in all things to proceed;
"A faithful Counsel often great good affords.
"Lo, how the inferior spheres of force do bend
"As the first mover does their courses drive,
"The Commons customs on the Prince depend,
"His manners are the rules by which they lives;
"As for himself none only is brought forth,
"Kings for the use of many are ordained,
"They should like Suns clear Kingdoms with their worth,
"Whose life a pattern must be kept unstained:
"All virtuous Princes have a spacious field
"To show their worth, though even in Fortunes spite,
"Where mean men must to their misfortune yield,
"Whilst want of power does cloud their virtue quite;
"As precious stones are th'ornaments of rings,
"The stone decores the ring, the ring the hand,
"So Countries are conform unto their Kings,
"The King decores the Court, the Court the Land;
"And as a crop of poison spent alone,
"Infected fountains does with venom fill,
"So mighty states may tainted be by one:
"A vicious Prince is a contagious ill.

Aesope. It easy is another faults to spy,
And paint in the air the shadows of our minds,
Whilst apprehending with the inward eye
A high perfection which no practice finds.

Solon. I grant, those grounds which we imagine may,
Will move no charmed man, much less a Prince,
To disenchant himseife, and seek some way
At Reasons Court, his passions to convince;
Ere Croesus can refrain from this his fury,
He must forsake himself (as one renewed)
And in the lethe of oblivion bury
The vanities that have his soul subdew'd;
Those his prerogatives he first must bound,
And be a man, a man to be controlled,
Then all his faults (as in another found)
An arbiter with equal eyes behold;
Could he cast off this veil of fond self-love,
Through which each object Pride too grossly spies,
He would these ravenous Parasites remove,
Vile instruments of shame that live by lies;
The only means to make such people part,
That he might judge more freely of his state,
Were to cast out the Idol of his heart,
Which (when o're-thrown) he must disclaim too late:
For, foreign flatterers could find no access,
If not that weighing his own worth too much,
He first concludes (to sooth himself inclined)
That all their praises should of right be such;
And when those hireling Sycophants have found
A Prince whom too secure opinion makes,
His noblest part they by smooth weapons wound,
"All spoil by pleasing them whom flattery takes:
Ore rulers, rule when such a person bears,
Of virtuous men the rising to prevent,
From wholesome counsel they close up his ears
To cross the better sort in all things bent.

Aesope. If you at Court to credit would arise,
You must not seek by truth to gain renown,
But sometime must applaud what you despise,
And smile in show whilst in effect you frown.

Solon. From hence in haste I will my self retire,
I hate Courts slavery, it my freeness scorns,
Nor am I one whom Croesus does desire,
Since I detest what him (he thinks) adornes;
O how light Fortune does his folly flout,
While as he glories in this flying show!
With greedy harpies hedged in round about,
Which gape to be made rich by his o're-throw.
Not all the wealth that his great kingdom shows,
Can make me from my resolution shrink;
Nor can the terror of a Tyrants blows
Enforce my tongue to speak more then I think;
Nothing so much as doubts does vex the mind,
Whilst anxious thoughts to fix nowhere can come,
Yet every one the way to rest may find,
A resolution all things does o're-come.
"And since my thoughts in Innocence rest,
"No outward war can inward peace surprise,
"What can imagi'd be to brave a breast,
"That both does death, and poverty despise?

Exeunt* Chorus.
OF all the Creatures bred below,
We must call Man most miserable,
Who all his time is never able
To purchase any true repose;
His very birth may well disclose
What miseries his bliss o're-throw:
For, first (when borne) he cannot know,
Who to his state is friend or foe,
Nor how at first he may stand stable,
But even with cries, and tears, does show
What dangers do his life enclose;
Whose griefs are sure, whose joys a fable;
Thus still his days in dolor so
He to huge perils must expose;
And with vexation lives, and dies with woe,
Not knowing whence he came, nor where to go.
Then whilst he holds this lowest place,
O! how uncertain is his state?
The subject of a constant fate,
To figure forth inconstancy,
Which ever changing as we see,
Is still a stranger unto peace:
"For if man prosper but a space,
"With each good success fondly bold,
"And puffed up in his own conceit,
"He but abuses Fortunes grace;
"And when that with adversity
"His pleasures treasures end their date,
"And with disasters are controlled,
"Straight he begins for grief to dye:
"And still the top of some extreme does hold,
"Not suffering Summers heat, nor Winters cold*
"His state does in most danger stand,
"Who most abounds in worldly things,
"And scares too high with Fortunes wings,
"Which carry up aspiring minds,
"To be the object of all winds;
The course of such when rightly scanned,
(Whi^st they cannot themselves command)
Transported with a^ empty name,
Often unexpected ruin brings;
There were examples in this Land,
How worldly bliss the senses blindes,
From which at last often trouble springs,
He who presumes upon the same,
Hid poison in his pleasure finds;
And sailing rashly with the winds of fame,
Does often times sink down in a Sea of shame.
It may be feared our King at last,
Whilst he for nothing is afraid,
Be by prosperity betrayed:
For, growing thus in greatness still,
And having worldly things at will,
He thinks though time should all things waste,
Yet his estate shall ever last
The wonder of this peopled round;
And in his own conceit has said:
No course of heaven his state can cast,
Nor make his fortune to be ill;
But if the gods a way have laid
That he must come to be uncrown'd,
What sudden fears his mind may fill,
And in an instant utterly confound
The state which stands upon so slippery ground?
When such a Monarchs mind is bent
To follow most the most unwise,
Who can their folly well disguise
With sugared speeches, poisnous baits?
The secret canker of great States,
From which at first few disassent
The which at last all do repent,
Then whilst they must to ruin go;
When Kings begin thus to despise
Of honest men the good intent;
Who to assure their Sovereigns seats,
Would feign in time some help devise,
And would cut off all cause of woe,
Yet cannot second their conceits:
These dreadful Comets commonly fore-go
A Kings destruction, when miscarried so.
Act. 3.
Scene 1.
Croesus. Adrastus. WHat fancies strange with terror strike my soul,
The tortured captive of distrustful fears?
Huge cares (suggesting harm) my joys control,
Whose mind some coming cross charactred bears;
And credulous suspicion (too too wise)
To fortify my fears does means invent;
Whilst sudden trouble does my sprite surprise,
A presage sad which boasts some bad event;
"I think the soul (since an immortal brood)
"Has by inheritance an heavenly power,
"Which some foreknowledge gives of ill, and good,
"But not the means to escape a fatal hour;
"Though with this mortal veil, when made half blind,
"Not well foreseeing what each time forth brings,
"Yet it communicates unto the mind
"In cloudy dreams true (though mysterious) things;
"Imagination wonderful in force,
"The judgment often foiles with confusion so,
"That (then they prove things presupposed worse)
"Ere time distressed, man multiplies his woe:
"For as the shadow seems more monstrous still,
"Then does the substance whence the shape it takes,
"So the conjecture of a threatened ill,
"More then it self some to be troubled makes;
This alteration too seems more then strange,
Which suddenly so moved has my mind.
I see (more then I thought) all states may change,
"When heaven pursues, the earth no defense can find;
My soul all pleasure is already loathing,
This has indeed so deep impression left,
A dream, a fancy, froth, a shadow, nothing
Has all my mirth even in a moment reft.
Adrast. Whence (mighty Sovereign) can this change proceed,
Which does obscure the rays of Princely grace?
Those who are schooled in woe, may clearly read
A mighty passion written in your face;
And (if a stranger may presume so far)
What friend is false, or who are feared as foes?
For I imagine in what state you are:
A secret sympathy imparting woes;
Two strings in diverse Lutes set in accord,
(Some say) the one only touched both give a sound,
Even so souls tuned to grief, the like afford,
Whose airie motions mutually do wound.

"Croe. No doubt, it must disburden much the mind,
"A Secretary in distress to have;
"Who by his own, another grief can find,
" Where glad minds scorn what they cannot conceive:
And I (Adrastus) would the cause declare,
With which I so torment my soul in vain,
But yet I blush to tell my foolish care:
The fond illusion of a drowsy brain.

Adrast. As bodies tempered are, or souls inclined,
All dreams by ^ight th'imagination makes,
Or else the impression thoughts work in the mind,
By which (when wakening) one most travel takes.

Croe. By sleep arrested as o're-come by death,
In Natures bosom I embraced true rest,
And in that Mass where nothing moved but breath,
Life's facul^ies sleep for a time suppressed;
Then whilst the sprite most pow'r^ull did remain,
Since least distressed by this terrestrial part.

Adrast. Souls at such times their strength so strongly strain,
That often their burdens as astonished start.

Croe. To rarifie the air from vapors powers,
When first Aurora rose from Tithons bed,
Ere Phoebus blushing stole from Thetis bowres,
This apprehension in my brain was bred:
I only have two sons, and the one (you see)
The sign of Natures indignation bears,
And from his birthday dumb is dead to me,
Since he can give no comfort to mine ears;
The other Atis (all my life's delight)
In whom the treasures of my soul are kept,
I thought (vain be my thought) in the twilight,
(I know not whether yet I wak't or slep't)
Whilst he was sporting, void of worldly cares,
And not in danger, which could threaten death,
A pointed tool of iron fell unawares,
And from his body banish did his breath;
Whilst the pale carkase did upbraid mine eyes,
The horror of the sight my sense re-call'd,
Which when I think of, yet my courage dies,
Such an exceeding fear my sprite appalled;
This touched my state so much, it has me moved
To match my Son in marriage at this time
With virtuous Coelia, whom he dearly loved,
That both might reap the pleasure of their prime;
And if the heavens his over- throw have decreed
By destiny which cannot be revoked,
So may we have behind some of his seed,
Ere in his blossom all our hopes be choked;
Thus, ere his soul lodge in the lightlesse shade,
Some of his offspring may content my mind,
"I cannot hold him altogether dead,
"Who leaves his Image in some one behind;
And though we do what ever seems the best
To disappoint those but surmiz'd annoyes,
Yet for all this my mind has never rest,
Some secret terror does disturb my joys.

Adrast. Ah (Sir) if such a dreamed ill as this,
Has plunged your soul even in the depths of grief,
Unhappie I, who wail a thing that is,
Whilst hope (though racked) dare promise no relief;
Though all those dreadful fancies took effect,
(Which heavy chance the almighty Jove withold)
None can compare them, no, in no respect
With those misfortunes which my state enfold:
For though your Son dye by another hand,
You shall but wail his death, and not your crime;
The heavens of me my brothers blood demand,
His fate, my fault, mourn must I all my time.

Croe. In what strange form could this disaster fall,
From which there flow salt floods of just distress?
Tell on at length the fatal cause of all,
"A greater grief makes one forget the less.

Adrast. My sorrows ground I smothered still till now,
As too offensive food for dainty cares,
But since of such discourse you do allow,
I Will tell a tale that may move stones to tears;
Of Phrygian Princes my great Father come,
Had in my growing age a tender care,
That all my education might become
One whom he might for mighty hopes prepare;
As yet four lustres scarcely had begun
To grace my witnessed sex with blooming cheeks,
When I (fond youth) that lab'rinth could not shun,
Whence back in vain the straying Entrer seeks.
I loved, O fatal love, unlovely fate!
The virtuously fair, yet fairest Dame
That ever was enshrined in souls conceit,
Or ditties gave to grace the sounds of fame;
Straight were my fancies to her beauties tied,
"None can paint passions, but in feeling minds,
I burned, freez'd, doubted, hoped, despaired, lived, died,
With actions changed as often as Autumnes winds;
Yet many conflicts past 'twixt hopes and fears,
To feast, at least to nurce my starved desires;
She granted had a truce unto my tears,
And temper did with equal flames my fires:
For as she was the most esteemed Saint,
Whose image Love erected in my mind,
So when her cares had harbored once my plaint,
It pity first, and then did favor find;
But ah triumphing in mine own conceit
As one whose love his Lady did prefer,
I was corrivall'd (O disastrous fate!)
By one who loved, but was not loved by her,
He looking as I looked, faw what I saw,
Saw Natures wonder, and the worlds delight,
And straight as that blind god (blind guide) did draw,
Still (like a Lizard) lived upon her sight.
Then labored he that Jewel straight to won,
Whose matchless worth he prized above his breath,
And loathed all light which flowed not from that Sun,
As life without her had been worse then death;
Yea, Fortune seemed to favor his desire,
And where to build high hopes did give him ground^:
The Nymph her parents daily did require,
That she might furnish physic for his wounds;
Of my distracted thoughts strange was the strife,
Who threatened thus with eminent mishap,
Was like to lose a thing more dear then life,
Whilst others strived my treasure to entrap;
The man who sought my joys to undermine,
I could not justly wish his state o're-throwne,
Nor blame the sprite that sympathiz'd with mine;
I envied not his lot, but wail'd mine own.
Now in my beast a mighty rage did reign,
Which forced my soul with inward wounds to bleed,
Some fancies feared what once his love might gain,
Since it was possible that he might speed,
Then others called her constancy to mind,
Which would not yield by such assaults though proved,
Yet forced to fear the frailty of her kind,
"A hearing woman may in time be moved;
Thus tossed with doubts amidst a deep of woe,
Which with suspicion did my joys supplant,
I blamed the thoughts that durst accuse her so,
As virtues pattern could one virtue want;
And, ^or I hoped, his toils no further wrought,
"(Affliction often affection does inflame)
She of her sex who was the wonder thought,
Would thus not wrong the glory of her name,
Though in my absence they had often assai'd,
That from her mind they might have me removed,
(The Sun burns hotest when his beams are stayed)
The more they crossed her love, the more she loved;
For finding that delay no end affords,
And how fair Generals only flowed from Art,
She did upbraid him with disdainefull words,
To raze those hopes that had abused his heart;
"Love is a joy which upon pain depends,
"A drop of sweet, drowned in a sea of sowres;
"What folly does begin, often fury ends,
"They hate for ever, who have loved for hours:
When all his arguments proved of no force,
Straight with disdain his soul in secret burned,
And what he thought was ill, to make far worse,
That Apostate to fury favor turned;
Through love preposterous procreating hate,
His thoughts amongst themselves could not agree,
Whilst what was best he deeply did debate,
To see her dead, or then enjoyed by me:
What (said he) when he first had mused a space,
(So hard it is to quench affections fires)
Shall I disfigure that Angelike face,
And cloud those beauties which the world admires?
Shall she by me be to confusion brought,
To whom I vows, and prayers did impart?
To whom I sacrifiz'd each secret thought,
And on her beauties altar burned my heart?
Or shall I see her in another power,
And in his bosom laid, upbraid my loss,
Whilst both with scornful smiles; then death more sour,
To point me out for sport, report my cross?
That sight which sometime did me sweetly charm,
Should it become a cause of grief to me?
No, none who live shall glory in my harm,
Since she will not be mine, she shall not be.
The hateful love having vowed her death,
Did with a cup of poison drown my joys;
The fairest body from the sweetest breath
Was parted thus (O ocean of annoyes!)
That Monster Fame, whose many mouths and ears
Must know, but not conceal a rare thing long,
And prodigal of ill, most chiefly bears
The worst news first, informed me of this wrong:
For neighboring near the most unhappy part,
That had been spoiled of such a noble guest,
As death had hers, the furies seized my heart,
Whose pain did spring from that which bred her rest;
How huge a weight did first confound my soul
No tongue can tell; it still my mind torments,
Rage did of grief the outward signs control:
"When great winds blow the fire, the smoke worst vents;
Whilst generous fury did disguise my grief,
I ran transported with a mighty rage,
Bent (by revenge, or death to get relife)
A tragic actor for a bloody stage:
For I was come no sooner to the place,
Whereas I thought the Murderer to have found,
But I did meet (O ruin and disgrace!)
Too dear a friend to catch and enemies wound;
Ah! passions dimn'd mine eyes, wrath led my hand,
I was no more my self, Grief had me killed;
The first by Night, who did before me stand,
(As one whose breast with rage Alecto filled)
By chance encount'ring, ere he spoke a word,
I bathed his bosom with a crimson flood,
And in his breast did drown the cruel sword,
That in another body drank my blood;
But when a Torch had partly robbed the night,
Proud of supposed revenge (ah bitter gain)
I saw, I knew, black knowledge, cruel sight,
My brother was the man, whom I had slain;
O bitter loss, which nothing can repair!
My soul with tow such monstrous deeds annoyed,
Grief, rage, spite, shame, amazement, and despair,
Galled, tossed, burned, dashed, astonished, and destroyed;
The thought of my offense does grieve me most,
Yet am I sometime by loves verdict cleans'd;
And straight my brothers violated ghost,
By dreadful dreams does brag to be revenged.

Croe. Now whilst this great disaster did occur,
What had the author of your anguish done?

Adrast. He having heard this lamentable stir,
Who self-accusing thoughts convicted soon,
Straight (wounded by a wonderful remorse)
Led by mad love, or desperate fear to death,
He bent to follow her, or dreading worse,
(Stabbed by himself) died to defraud my wrath.

Croe. Those strange mishaps your enemies eyes must weet,
And force compassion from your greatest foe,
Since many monstrous circumstances meet
To make a horrid harmony in woe;
"But what does touch ones self, most force does find,
"For ills when felt, then heard, grief more abounds;
This ecstasy has so o're-whelm'd my mind,
A melancholy huge all mirth confounds;
"Yet such disasters past, we must omit,
"At least no more immoderately lament,
"And as for those which are but coming yet,
Use ordinary means them to prevent.

Adrast. No wonder (Sir) though by all means you strive,
From dangerous actions Atis to restrain.

Croe. I will unto his youth attendance give,
Which in my age may guerdon'd be again,
If it be possible for mortal states
To strive against the Stars, and be more strong;
I Fortune must unarme, and cross the fates,
By barring both all means to do me wrong:
I have commanded under pain of death,
That no such weapon be within my walls,
As I supposed extinguish might his breath,
To escape a storm which often by Fortune falls;
He to frequent the field must often defer;
And without guards his lodging never leave;
Lo where with Contrymen he does confer,
We will go try what they of him would have.

Act. 3. Scene 2.
Chorus of Countrymen, Croesus, Atis, Adrastus, Coelia. LEnd (Sir) a willing
ear to humble words,
Let not our baseness bar us from your grace,
Which still it self alike to all affords,
Who bless their sight with that Majesticke face;
"For simple subjects Monarchs must take care,
"Though this our state be thought but abject now,
"You are our head, and we your members are,
"And you must care for us, we care for you;
"Our poverty to us is no reproach,
"Which innocent integrity adornes,
"On others states we never do encoach,
"But live by labors, pricked with many thorns;
"And ever busied for the Countries good,
"We have no time to must of vain conceits,
"But (earning with continual toil our food)
"Must entertain the pomp of prouder states;
"And (Sir, though plain) think not our meaning ill,
"Who thus dare speak so freely as we do,
"Whilst Mediators do dilate our will,
"They wrest it as they will, and spoil us too;
"To countenance such as us, you need not shun:
"A great man too well graced may do more harm;
"And it stains not the glory of the Sun,
"Though often his beams an abject object warm.
Croe. Be not discouraged by your base estate,
Ye are my people, and I Will hear your plaint,
"A King must care for all, both small and great,
"And to do good (like God) should never faint;
"The Scepter such as those should chiefly shroud,
"Not Cotages, but Castles spoil the Land,
"To spare the humble, and to plague the proud,
"A virtue is that does make Kings to stand.

Cho. Sir, our estate some hasty help requires:
In Misia near the celebarted rounds
Of great Olympus which the world admires,
There haunts a Boar the horror of these bounds:
His body big, and hideous is his form,
Whose foamie jaw with tusks like javelins strikes,
And in deformity all parts conform,
His back has bristles like to iron pikes.
This Natures Monster, wondered at by men,
The forests Tyrant, and the Countries terror,
Does murder all, and draws them to his den,
Who chance to cross his way by fatal error;
In tears whilst melting, tender mothers wail,
(The goared infants tumbling in their blood;)
This beast to be abhorred does them assail,
And in his bowels buries both for food;
Then when we fly the field where he does haunt,
To have his hunger, or his rage allayed,
He all our labors quickly does supplant,
And poor men's hopes are strangely thus betrayed;
Ere this, of true repose we were the types,
And pasturing on each plain our fleecie flocks,
Did make a consort of our warbling pypes
With moving Crystals, playing on the rocks;
And often to ease our toils (all ranged in bands)
With garlands guarded from Apollo's beams,
We gazed upon Pactolus golden sands,
Glass'd, bathed, and quenched our thirst, with his pure streams;
Whilst we preferred, the river seemed amazed,
Even to his golden bed his grassie bank,
And lay and looked whereas our cattle grazed,
Far from all envy of a greater rank;
That to repress oppression you take care,
Though we were dumb, the public rest may speak:
Your Laws, like Spiders webs are not a snare
For little flies, that them the big may break;
Mean men by them from great men's pride are saved,
The heavens continue long your prosperous reign,
And let us not by such a beast be braved,
Which by our ruin would your Scepter stain.

Croe. What would you then that should be done by me,
That may repay your loss, repair this wrong?

Cho. We crave none of your wealth, but wish to see
This Boar be-bloud the staff of the most strong:
Let valorous Atis worth ily your Son,
With Lydian youth incapable of fears,
Go to the fields before the rising Sun,
To quench his thirst have drunk Sun,
To quench his thirst have drunk the mornings tears,
And we shall lead them crowned with laurel forth,
Where in strict bounds, yet a theater large
For men to make a trial of their worth,
They with advantage may this Monster charge;
So shall we reap repose, and they delight,
Whilst that prodigious body justly smarts,
Though fearful once, then made a pleasant sight,
When like a wood it planted is with darts.

Croe. I may not spare my Son for a respect,
Which is not needful now to be made known,
But others shall be sent for that effect,
That this out-ragious beast may be o're-thrown;
The stately gallants who attend our grace
(That by the world their valor may be viewed)
This enterprise will willingly embrace,
And not return, till with his blood imbrued;
I swear, this monster shall when he is dead,
A memorable monument remain;
IN Phebes church men shall admire his head,
As Pythons spoils, when by her brother slain.

Atis. Ah! wherein Father did I thus offend?
Or what vile sign of a degener'd mind
Have you but marked in me, whose course may tend
To the reproach of our imperial kind?
And abject dastard, who for naught availes,
Whose worth the world must trust, but never trie^
As one whose strength, or then his Courage fails*
Must I in vile repose inglorious lie!
Lie like a wanton by vain thoughts bewicth'd!
Who spoild of force, effeminately lives,
A Peacok poor, with painted pens enriched*
Yet bare of every thing that glory gives;
What glory give those titles unto me,
Which by succession fall, not by desert?
Should but my fame with borrowed feathers fly?
For, come of kings a kingdom is my part;
"Who honor as hereditary claims,
"Like bastards base, does but his birthright blote,
I scorn to beg my worth from dead men's names,
Or to gain credit only by my Coat;
What comfort's this to have the highest seat,
And all the bliss that Majesty imparts,
If those whom only we exceed in State,
Be our Superiors in far better parts?
"More then a Crown true worth should be esteemed*
"The One fortunes gift, the other is our own,
"By which the mind from anguish is redeemed,
When fortunes goods are by her self overthrown.

Croe. I see what brave desires boil in thy soul,
And make thee thus magnanimous to be,
This high-bent courage nothing can control,
All Lydia is not large enough for thee:
Go, seek an Empire equal with thy mind,
Of which a Crown is due to every thought;
But Glories love whilst courting in this kind,
I fear by thine, our ruin may be wrought:
And pardon me (dear Son) great is the love
Which makes me watch so warily thy ways;
A Fathers care what kind of thing can move,
Whom such a danger not in time dismayes?
The Heaven of late advertised me by dreams,
That some sad fortune threatened thee too soon,
Each day some ominous sign attendance claims,
Which out of time are marked, when all is done:
This was the cause that hastened us so much,
To have thee bound to Hymen's, sacred law,
This was the cause that all our care was such,
Out of our sight all weapons to withdraw:
Scorn not those Comets which amazement notes,
"The stars to mortal states a bounds design,
And do not think it is but my love that dotes,
For if thou fall, my fate depends on thine.

Atis. Would God I had some means once ere my death,
To satisfy that infinite desert,
Which I shall hold, so long as I have breath,
Deep registered with reverence in my heart;
"Yet (sir) we see this is a natural thing,
"That too excessive love engenders fears:
A sport like this can no great peril bring,
Where either all delights the eyes, or the ears.
If from my former deeds I now should shrink,
(As void of virtue) to soft pleasure thrall,
Of your two Sons what might your Subjects think,
The One wanting but one sense, the other all?
What fancies might my late spous'd love possess,
To see her husband hateful in men's sights,
And honors bounds thus basely to transgress,
As womaniz'd still wallowing in delights?
"Though women would have men at their devotion,
"They hate base minds that hatch no noble notion.

Croe. Well, well, my Son, I see thou must prevail:
Go, follow forth the chase, use thine own form,
Yet stay, or let my words this much avail,
Walk with more care to escape this threatened storm;
Thy hawtie sprite to tempt all hazards bent,
I fear transports thee to a fatal strife,
I wish to err, yet the event prevent,
Lest that thy courage but betray thy life;
And (dear Adrastus) I must let him know,
What benefits I have bestowed on thee,
Not to upbraid thee, no, but so to show
How I may trust thee best thus bound to me;
When thou from Phrygia came defiled with blood,
And a fraternall violated love,
When desperate quite thou as distracted stood,
Fled from thy Fathers face, cursed from above,
Thou foundst me friendly, and my Court thy rest,
A Sanctuary which thy life did save;
And dangers escaped (when one has been distressed)
A wary wisdom by experience leave;
Yet all that favor past, was but a sign
Of generous greatenesse, which would gracious prove;
But in thy hands my soul I Will now consigne,
And give the greatest pledge that can bind love.
Behold how Atis of our age the shield,
Whose harm as you have heard, I feared ere now,
Is for his pastime to go range the field,
And with his custody I will trust you;
I must (my friend) even fervently exhort,
Wait on my Son, remember of my dream.
This dangerously delectable sport,
Does make me fear the grief exceeds the game.

Adrast. I never shall those courtesies neglect:
It grieves me not to think, nor hear the same,
For whilst this sprite those members does direct,
All shall concur to celebrate your fame;
Yet were you pleased, I would not hence depart,
Who do all things that mirth may move abhor,
But with my passions here (retired a part)
Woe past would wail, and shun all cause of more;
If to converse where not one cross annoies,
I fear my fellowship infect with woe,
Those who themselves would recreate with Joys*
Still strange mishaps attend me where I go,
But since you will commit this charge to me,
Your Majesty I Will study to content,
At least my faith shall from defects be free,
And all my pains shall as you please be spent.

Atis. Now bent to see this monsters ougly shape,
With an inflamed desire my thought do burn,
And Father fear not, dream of no mishap,
I hope with speed victorious to return.

Coelia. Return? from whence dear love? O deadly word*
That does import thy parting from my sight,
I heard the name mishap, Ah! (my dear Lord)
Should such strict limits bound so large delight?
O cruel to thy self, unkind to me!
And can thou condescend to leave me so?
If (ere in doubt) abandoned thus I be,
It may defer, but not defraud my woe;
This might indeed to thee yield some relief,
To have thy ears not wounded by my moan,
But would wound me with a continual grief,
To fear all things, where I should fear but one;
Desist in time from this intended strife,
A course too rash, and not approved, by me,
Remember I have interest in thy life,
Which thus to venture I do not agree;
Have thou not given a proof in thy green prime,
That may content the most ambitious heaps?
Whilst Atis was his own, then was it time
To follow fancies unconfined Scopes;
Thy self then only camp'd in fortunes bounds,
Thou do endanger Coelia likewise now;
You sigh her breath, she suffers in your wounds,
You live in her, and she must die in you.

Atis. Life of my soul, how do such broken speeches,
From troubled passions thus abruptly rise?
I know (my love) thy love my mind o're-reaches:
"Affection (Schoold with fears) is too too wise;
I go along the fields, for sport to range;
Thy sighs do but my soul with sorrow fill;
And pardon (dear) I find this wondrous strange,
That thou beginst now to resist my will;
If I trespass in ought against my duty,
Which makes thee thus my constancy mistrust;
Mistrust not yet the Chains of thine own beauty,
Which bind all my desires, and so they must;
Are we not now made one? such fears overcome,
Though I would fly, my self my self do fetter,
And if that I would fly, from whom? to whom?
I can love none so well, none loves me better;
Have pity of those pearls, (sweet eyes, souls pleasures)
Least they presage what thou would not have done;
The Heavens had not give me those precious treasures,
Of such perfections to be spoiled so soon.

Chorus.
THose who command above,
High presidents of Heaven,
By whom all things do move,
As they have order given,
What worldling can arise,
Against them to repine?
Whilst castell'd in the skies,
With providence divine;
They force this peopled round,
Their judgments to confess,
And in their wrath confound
Proud mortals who transgress
The bounds to them assigned
By Nature in their mind.
Base brood of the earth, vain man,
Why brag'st thou of thy might?
The Heavens thy courses scan,
Thou walk'st still in their sight;
Ere thou wast borne, thy deeds
Their registers dilate,
And think that none exceedes
The bounds ordained by fate;
What Heavens would have thee to,
"Though they thy Ways abhor,
"That thou of force must do,
"And thou can do no more:
This reason would fulfill,
Their work should serve their will.
Are we not heirs of death,
In whom there is no trust?
Who tossed with restless breath,
Are but a dram of dust;
Yet fools when as we err,
And heavens do wrath contract,
If they a space defer
Just vengeance to exact,
Pride in our bosom creepes,
And misinformes us thus,
That Jove in pleasure sleeps,
Or take no care of us:
"The eye of heaven beholdes,
"What every heart enfoldes.
The Gods digest no crime,
Though they (delaying long)
In the offenders time,
Seem to neglect a wrong,
Till others of their Race,
Fill up the cup of wrath,
Whom Ruin and disgrace,
Long time attended has;
And Gyges fault we fear,
To Croesus charge be laid,
Which Jove will not forbear,
Though it be long delayed:
"For, O! sometimes the Gods
"Must plague sin with sharp Rods.
And lo how Croesus still,
Tormented in his mind,
Like to Reeds on a hill,
Does quake at every wind!
Each step a terror brings;
Dreams do by Night afflict him;
And by day many things;
All his Thoughts do convict him;
He his Star would control,
This makes ill not the worst,
Whilst he wounds his own soul^,
With apprehensions first:
"Man may his fate foresee,
"But not shun heavens decree.
Act. 4.
Scene I.
Adrastus, Croesus, Chorus. CAN Heaven behold one stand to stain these times,
Yet to the Stygian streams not headlong hurld?
And can th'arth bear one burdened with such crimes,
As may provoke the wrath of all the world?
Why sends not Jove, to have my course confined,
A death-denouncing flash of rumbling Thunder?
Else (roaring terror) clouds of circling wind,
By violence to tear me all a sunder?
What corner yet unknown from men remoov'd,
Both burned with rage, and freezing in despair,
Shall I go now possess, to be approved,
Where none but monsters like my self repair?
I Will go indeed whom all the world detests,
Who have no intrest in the fields of bliss,
And barbarize amongst the brutish beasts,
Where Tigers rage, Toades spue, and Serpents hiss:
But though in some vast Zone, I find a field,
Where melancholy might a monarch be,
Whilst silent deserts not one person yield
To shrink for horror, when beholding me;
Yet of my deeds which all the world do tell,
This cannot raze the still proclaimed Scroule,
Since in my breast I bear about my hell,
And cannot escape the terrors of my soul.
Those fearful Monsters of confused aspects,
Chimaera, G^rgon, Hydra, Pluto's Apes,
Which in the world wrought wonderful effects,
And borrowed from the infernal shades their shapes,
Their devilish forms which did the world amaze,
Not half so monstrous as my self I find,
When on mine own deformities I gaze,
Amid'st black depths of a polluted mind;
No, but my mind untainted still remains,
My thoughts in this delict have had no part,
Which but by accident this foul fact stains,
My hands had no commission from my heart;
Yet, whether it was fortune, or my fate,
Or some Hel-hag, that did direct my arm,
The Lydians plague, I have undone this State,
And am the instrument of all their harm:
Then mountains fall, and bruise me by your rounds,
Your heights may hide me from the wrath of Heaven;
But this not needs, since me my fault confounds:
With my offense no torment can be eaven.
Ah! of what desert shall I now make choice,
To fly the countenance of an angry King?
I know the venging sword of Croesus voice,
To wound my soul, hosts of rebukes does bring;
The pattern of distress, I Will stand alone,
A memorable monster of mishap;
For, though Pandora's plagues were all in one,
All were too few, so vile a wretch to trap.
Cho. O how the king is moved at Atis death!
His face the portrait of a passion bears,
With bended eyes, crossed arms, and quivering breath,
His Princely robe he desperately tears;
Lo, with a silent pittie-pleading look,
Which shows with sorrow mixed a high disdain,
He (whilst his soul seems to dissolve in smoke)
Straies twixt the corpse, and him who has it slain.

Croe. Thou ruthlesse tyrant ruin of my bliss,
And did thou so disguise thy devilish nature,
To recompense my courtesies with this*
Ah cruel wretch, abominable creature!
Thy Tigrish mind what wit could well detect,
Inmortall breasts so great barbarity?
What froward Sprite could but such spite suspect,
In hospitality hostility?
Did I revive thee when thy hopes were dead,
When as thy life thy parents had not spared?
And having heaped such favors on thy head,
Is this? Is this?

Chor. He would say the reward.


Adrast. I grant what you allege and more is true;
I have unto the height of hatred run:
A blood-stained wretch, who merit not to view
The rolling Circles, nor the Rayie Sun;
No kind of art I purpose now to use,
To color this my crime, which might seem less,
Whilst painted with a pitiful excuse:
No, it is worse then words can well express;
Nor go I thus to aggravate my crime,
And damn my self to be absolved by others,
No, no, such Rhetoric comes out of time.
I Will not survive his death, as erst my brothers.
O! had that high disaster killed me straight,
(As then indeed I di'd from all delight)
I had not groaned, charged with this inward weight,
But slept with shadows in eternal night:
Yet must I die, at last (though late) grown wise*
This in my mind most coffeehouse breeds,
A thousand torturing deaths cannot suffice,
To plague condignely for so hay nous deeds.
If that revenge th'Elysian Guests delights,
The tomb of Atis shall exhaust my blood:
No fitter offering for infernal sprites,
Then one in whom they reigned, while as he stood:
The furies often in me infused their Rage,
And in my bosom did their Serpents place,
Whose indignation laboring to assuage,
Huge hellish horrors spoiled my thoughts of peace.

Croe. I find (poor wretch!) when I have searched, and seen
The fatal means which did inflict this wound,
That not thy malice, but my fault has been,
Of that which grieves us both the real ground.
"Whilst barely with a superficial wit,
"We weigh the outside of such strange events,
"If but the mediate means our judgments hit,
"We seek not the first cause, that much contents:
"But when prodigious accidents fall out,
"Though they amaze our minds, and so they must,
"The cause of all comes from our self no doubt:
"Ah! man has erred; the Heavens are always Just:
In judgment now whilst entering with my soul,
(Those partial thoughts which flatterd me declined)
Lo, marking of past wrongs the burd'nous scroule,
Free from false colors, which did mock my mind:
O! then I see how heaven in plagues exceedes,
Whilst vengeance due save ruin naught can end;
Thus once the Gods must balance worldlings deeds,
Both what we did, and what we did intend:
Son, Son, my faults procured have thy fall,
For, guilty of thy blood, I gave the wound
Which gave thee death, and whose remembrance shall
My life each day with many deaths confound.
Of Jove injust the Statutes I contemn,
And if I were confronted with the Gods,
Their providence (as partial) would condemn,
Who in such sort do exercise their rods.
He thus now killed, with life to let me go,
May breed reproach to all the powers divine:
But ah! they knew no death could grieve me so,
As that, which through his heart was aimed at mine;
Now all the world those deities may despise,
Which strike the guiltless, and the guilty spare;
Cease hapless man to plague thy self thus wise,
I pardon thee, and pity thy despair.

Adrast. O rigorous judgment! O outrageous fate!
Must I suruive the funerals of my fame?
All things which I behold, vpbraide my state,
Too many monuments of one man's shame;
All (and none more then I) my deeds detest,
Yet some wail want of friends, and I of f^es,
To purge the world of such a dangerons pest,
(Which still contagious) must taint hearts with woes;
To wound this breast where all hells hosts do reign,
Seized with just fear none dare a hand forth stretch,
Else this base charge (as odious) do disdain,
To deal with Death in favor of a wretch;
Or must I yet (till more detested) stand,
And fill the world with horror of my name?
What further mischief can require my hand?
Must it ingrave on others graves my shame?
Or would some bastard thought life's cause debate,
Which in the blasted field of comfort gleanes?
No, no, in spite of Heaven I Will force my fate,
"One, when resolved to die, cannot want means:
Proud Tyrant Death, and must thou make it strange,
To wrap my wearied soul in further strife?
Unless my courage with my fortune change,
(Though nothing else) I can command my life;
But this (ay me!) all hope of help devowres;
What gains my soul by death in those sad times,
If potent still in all her wonted powers,
She must remember of my odious crimes?
What though un-bodied she the world forsake,
Yet from her knowledge cannot be divorced?
This will but vex her at the shadowie lake,
Till even to groan the God of Ghosts be forced;
But welcome death, and would the Gods I had
Less famous, or more fortunately lived;
Then known if good, and kept obscure if bad;
Of comfort quite I had not been deprived;
Ah! have I lived (unnatural I) to be
My brothers murderer, who me dearly loved?
Ah! have I lived with my own hands to kill
A gallant Prince committed to my charge?
And do I gaze on the dead body still,
And in his fathers sight my shame enlarge?
Ah! have I lived whilst men my deeds do scan,
To be the object of contempt and hate?
Of all abhorred as a most monstrous man,
Since thought a Traitouror (far worse) ingrate?
Yet with my blood I Will wash away this stain,
Which grief to you, to me disgrace has brought,
Would God my name from minds ^ight ^a^'d remain,
To make my life as an unacted thought;
Brave Atis now I come to plead for grace,
Although thou frown'st on my affrighted Ghost,
And to revenge thy wrong this wound embrace;
Thus, thus, I toil to gain the Stygian coast.

Cho. Lo, how he wounds himself despising pain,
With leaden lights, weak legs, and head declined,
The body beats the ground, as in disdain,
That of her members one has proved unkind;
The fainting hand falls trembling from the Sword,
With his self slaughtering blow for shame grown red,
Which straight the blood pursues, with vengeance stored,
To drown the same with the same floods it shed;
Who of those parties can the combat show,
Where both but one, one both struck and sustained?
Or who triumphs for this most strange overthrow,
Where as the victor lost, the vanquished gained?

Croe Cursed eyes, what sudden change has drowned your lights,
And made your mirthfull objects mournful now?
Ye that were still inured to stately sights,
Since seated under an imperial brow,
Ah! clouded now with vapors drawn from cares,
Are low thrown down amid'st a hell of grief,
And have no prospect, but my souls despaires,
Of all the furies which afflict me, chief.
O dead Adrastus, I absolve thy Ghost,
Whose hand (I see) some destiny did charm,
Thou (hated by the heavens) wast to thy cost
A casual actour, not intending harm;
No doubt some angry God has laid this snare,
And whilst thy purpose was the Boar to kill,
Did intercept thy shaft* amidst the Air,
And threw it at my Son, against thy will,
Ah! Son, must I be witness of thy death,
Who view thee thus by violence to bleed,
And yet want one on whom to pour my wrath,
To take just vengeance. for so vile a deed?
This wretch, whose guiltless mind has cleared his hand,
Lo* for his error grieved, unforced does fall,
And not as one who did in danger stand:
For still he lived till I forgave him all.
Thus have I but the heavens on whom I may
Blast forth the tempest of a troubled mind;
And in my souls distress I grieve to say,
That greater favor I deserved to find.

Act 4. Scene 1.
Sandanis, Croesus. WHy spend you (Sir) with sighs that Princely breath,
Whence Sovereignty authority should take?
O weak revenge for one when wronged by death,
To yield him homage prostrated in black!
That Tyrant pale (so hateful unto us)
Whose fatal shaft so great a grief has bred,
Where he triumphs should you rear trophies thus,
And wear his livery, as his captive led?
No, though he might this outward bliss overthrow,
And you (save you) of all things else might spoil,
Yet whilst of one, who yields, no sign you show,
You are victorious, and he gets the foil;
Those floods of sorrow, which would drown your soul*
In breasts more base might better be excused,
Since wanting sprite their passions to control,
As from their birth still to subjection used.
But you, in whom high thoughts by nature grow,
To this decay, how is your virtue come?
I blush to see my Sovereign brought so low,
And Majesty by misery overcome,
Nor do I thus to make you stupid strive,
As one unnatural, wanting sense to smart,
No, none a Prince of kindness can deprive,
The honored badge of an Heroicke heart.
That power supreme, by which great States do stand,
Affections order should, but not undo;
And I could wish you might your self command,
Which though you may not well, yet seem to do*
Croe. I will not here rehearse, enlarging woes,
On what just reasons now my grief I ground,
But still will entertain my comforts foes,
Whilst many a thousand thoughts my soul do wound;
What pensive pensill ever limm'd aright
The sad conceits of soule-consuming grief?
Ah! words are weak to show the swelling height
Of the inward anguish desperate of relief,
"Though many monarchs jealously despise
"The rising Sun that their declining stains,
And hate the Heir who by their fall must rise,
As grieved to hear of death, or others reigns;
My love to Atis otherwise appeared,
Whom, whilst for him I did my cares engage,
I as a Father loved, as king not feared,
The comfort not th'encombrance of mine age;
And had he me (as reason would) survived,
Who glanced, and vanished like to lightning flashes,
Then death could me not have of life deprived,
Whilst such a Phoenix had revived my ashes.

San. Let not those woes eclipse your virtues light.


Croe. Ah! Rage and grief must once be at a height.


San. Strive of your sorrows (Sir) to stop the source.


Croe. These salt eye-floods must flow, and have their course.


San. That is not kingly.


Croe. And yet it is kindly,
"^here passions domineere, they govern blindly.

San Such woeful plaints cannot repair your state.


Croe. "Unhappy souls at least may wail their fa^e
"The meanest comfort that you can return,
"Is in calamity a leave to mourn.

San. what Stoicke strange, who most precise appears,
Could that youths death with tearelesse eyes behold,
In all perfections ripe, though green in years,
A hoarie judgment under locks of gold?
No, no man lives, but must lament to see
The worlds chief hope even in the blossom choked,
"But men cannot control the Heavens decree,
"And what is done, can never be revoked.
Let not this loss with grief torment you more;
Of which a part with you your Country bears:
If wailing could your ruined state restore,
Souls charged with grief should sail in Seas of tears;
Lest all our comfort dash against one shelfe,
And his untimely death but hasten yours.
Have pity of your people, spare your self,
If not to your own use, yet unto ours.

Croe. When Sandanis I first thy faith did find,
Thou dived so deeply in my bosom then,
That since* thou still (entrusted with my mind)
Did know what I concealed from other men:
Behold I go to open up to you,
(Chief treasurer of all my secrets still)
What high design my Thoughts are hatching now,
A physic in some sort to ease my ill;
This may unto my soul yield some relief,
And for displeasures past may much content,
Or else must purchase partners in my grief,
If not for me, yet with me to lament.

San. This benefit must bind me with the rest
To serve your Majesty, and hold you dear,
And I Will be free with you, yet I protest,
That what I friendly speak, you freely hear.

Croe. Since that it has not pleased the heavenly powers,
That of my offspring I might comfort claim,
Yet lest the ravenous course of flying how'rs
Should make a prey of my respected name,
I would engender such a generous brood,
That the un-borne might know how I have lived,
And this no doubt would do my Ghost great good,
By famous victories to be revived:
I hope to soar with fames Immortal wings,
Unless my high-bent thoughts themselves deceave,
That having acted admirable things,
I death may scorn, triumphing over the grave;
Yet have I not so settled my conceit,
That all opinions are to be despised;
"A good advice can never come too late;
This is the purpose that I have devised:
Some Scythian Shepherds in a high disdain,
As trusted fame yet constantly relates,
To plague some Medes with horror and with pain,
Did entertain them with prodigious meats,
And to content their more then Tigrish wishes,
They with the Infants flesh, the Parents fed,
Who not suspecting such polluted dishes,
Did in their bowels bury whom they bred.
Then after this abominable crime,
They fled with hasted unto my fathers Court,
And (first informers courting trust in time)
Did as they pleased, of what was past report;
Whilst they (save what them helped) all things suppressed,
Mild pity pleading for afflictions part,
His generaous mind still tend'ring the distressed,
Was won to them by this deceiving Art.

"San. Often men of Judges thence have parties gone,
"Where both their ears were patent but to one.

Croe. Then Cyaxare, Monarch of the Medes,
To prosecute those fugitives to death,
In indignation of my fathers deeds,
Did brag them both with all the words of wrath;
My father thinking that his Court should be
A Sanctuary supplicants to save,
Did levy men to make the world then see,
In spite of power that weakness help should have.
Thus mortal wars on every side proclaimed,
With mutual trouble did continue long,
Till both the Armies by Bellona ^aa^'d,
Did irke to venge, or to maintain a wrong:
It chanced whilst peace was at the highest dearth,
That all their forces did with fury fight,
A sudden darkness curtain'd up the earth,
And did by violence displace the light.
I think the Sun for Phaeton looked sad,
Else blushed (reflecting blood) like them he saw:
For (as when wronged of old) with grief gone mad,
He from the world his chariot did withdraw;
Yet Ignorance, which does confusion breed,
By wresting natures course, found cause of fears,
Which error did so happily succeed,
That it a concord wrought, and truce from tears;
Then straight there was a perfect peace begun,
And that it might more constantly endure,
Astyages the King of Media's son,
To be his Queen my sister did procure.

" San. A deadly rancor reconciled again,
"With consanguinity would sealed remain.

Croe. He, since his fathers age-worne course expired,
Has ruled his people free from blood or strife,
Till now a Viper has his death conspired,
Who from his loins extracted had his life;
I mean this Cyrus, (base Cambyses brood,)
Who by a Bitch, nursed with the Country swains,
(No sign observed importing Princely blood:)
The doggish nature of his Nurse retains.
He came against his Grandfather to field,
And unexpected with a mighty power,
His forces forced, did force himself to yield,
Who (captive kept) now waits for death each hour.
That you may mark how great my int' rest is,
This ruthful story I did largely touch;
Those circumstances show that shame of his
Does from our glory derogate too much;
Dare any Prince presume to trouble thus
One whom our kingdoms favor should defend?
In strict affinity combined with us,
Yet not regarded for* so great a friend.
This with some joy does smooth my stormy mind,
Whilst I for Medes against the Persians go,
I hope that both by brave effects shall find
How kind a friend I prove, how fierce a foe.

" San. Though natures law you cared not to transgress,
"Nor this your wronged ally would not repair;
"Yet the regard to Monarchs in distress,
"Should move the mighty with a mutual care;
"Those terrors too which thunder in your ear,
"I think the Lydians will not well allow:
"For when the Cedar falls, the Oak may fear,
"That which o'rethrowes the Medes may trouble you.
"And when a neighbors house they burning view,
"Then their own dangers men may apprehend;
"It better is with others to pursue,
"Then be when but alone, forced to defend.
"Ah! this is but the outside of your course,
"A dangerous ambush which ambition plants:
"There may come Rivers raging from this source,
"To drown your state, whilst such high thoughts naught daunts;
"I know those newborn monsters of vour mind
"Have armed your ravished heart with fair conceits,
"Yet may those wonders which you have divined,
"Prove traitorous projects, painted for deceits;
"And (pardon Sir) it is not good to be
"Too rashly stout, nor curiously wise,
"Lest that you leave that which we certain see,
"And not attain to that which you devise.

Croe. I grant indeed (this very few shall know)
Though I profess but to relieve my friend,
My thoughts conceive, as success best may show,
And not without great cause, a greater end:
You see how fortune naught but change affects,
Some are reproached, that others may be praised,
And every age brings forth some strange effects,
"Some men must fall, that others may be raised:
I doubt not, you have heard who was the first,
For warring with the world, whom fame revives,
Who had of sovereignty, so great a thirst,
That it could not be quenched with thousands lives
Even he who first obtained the name of Jove,
And rests reputed for his glorious acts,
The most imperious of the powers above,
Who vows and offerings of the world exacts;
He all his time in state did terror breath,
Borne to acquaint the world with war and dearth,
Whilst fertile still in misery and death,
Two fatal furies that afflict the earth;
Yet since his course (the worlds first plague) was past,
When his proud race had many ages reigned,
That Empire too did perish at the last,
And what it lost, by martial Medes was gained;
This was the cause of that great kingdoms fall;
A Prince who could not judge of Princely parts,
With loss of Scepter, honor, life, and all,
To buy base joys, sold all his Subjects hearts;
To that disastred Monarchies decay,
The aspiring Persians purpose to succeed:
But I intend their lofty course to stay,
And that in time, ere that it thoroughly speed;
The Persians once the Lydians force must prove,
And O! who knows but that it is ordained
At the tribunal of the States above,
That I should reign where famous Ninus reigned?
This all the host of heaven oft-times foretells,
To this the Gods of Greece my mind have moved,
And he that in Arabia's desert dwells,
By his response this enterprise approved.

" San. Thus still in love with what we mind to do,
"What we affect, we fairest still conceive,
"This feeds our humor, whilst (selfe-flatterers) lo,
"To show our wit, we would our selves deceive;
"Vain hopes so mask all doubts, you cannot spy
"What secret danger this design does bear;
"But whilst well viewed with an indifferent eye,
"There want not grounds, where foresight may find fear:
"You unadvis'dly purpose to pursue
"A barbarous people opposite to peace,
"Who but by robbery to their greatness grew,
"And would for each light cause, the wars embrace;
"No dainty silks, dipped in Assyrian dye,
"Do deck their bodies, to abase their minds:
"Skins reft from beasts them cloth, who danger ply,
"Not moved by flattering Suns, nor bragging winds;
"They simply feed, and are not grieved each day,
"With stomachs clody, decocting diverse meats,
"They fare not as they would, but as they may,
"Of judgment sound, not carried with conceits.
"Those ancient customs which they strictly hold,
"Make all things easy, that they feel no pain,
"This cooles the summers heat, kills winters cold:
"This makes the Rivers dry, the Mountains plain.
"They whose ambition poverty did bound,
"Of Lydia's dainties if they once do taste,
"Will have in hatred straight their barren ground,
"And all our treasures insolently waste;
"To govern such, although that we prevail,
"You shall but buy vexation with your blood,
"And do your self, and yours, if fortune fail,
"From Sovereignty (by time secured) seclude;
Yea, though this rash desire your judgment blindes,
I for my part must praise the Gods for you,
Who have not yet inspired the Persians minds,
To waste with war all Lydia long ere now.

Croe. Those flames, which burn my breast, must once burst out,
Your counsel for more quiet minds I leave,
And be you still thought wise, so I prove stout,
I Will conquer more, or lose the thing I have.

Coelia. AH! am I forced out of afflictions store,
For my minds ease a few sad words to strain?
But yet unlode it now, to lode it more,
I empty but mine eyes to fill again;
My soul must sound even as my passions strike,
Whilst sighs and tears would feign afford relief;
My breast and eyes are both accursed alike,
The Cabinet of care, the Springs of grief;
O cruel heaven, fierce star, unhappy fate,
Too foul injustice of celestial powers!
Whose high disdain to me with partial hate
The comfort of the world (poor world) devoures:
Cursed be the day in which I first was borne,
When lying tongues affirmed I came to light,
A monstroues blasphemy, a mighty scorn,
Since where dark sorrow breeds an endless night;
Would God I then had chanced this life to leave,
The tomb straight taking what the womb did give,
Then always buried, changing but the grave,
I had not lived to dye, but died to live.
What profited to me my Parents joys,
Who with such pomp did solemnize my birth,
Since sti^l my soul must flote amidst annoyes,
So to defray one dram of tasted mirth?
And it did only serve to make me know
The height of horror, threatening to succeed;
I was but raised up high, to be brought low,
That short lived joys might endless anguish breed;
Whilst nothing did for my confusion lack,
All my best deeds did but betray my State,
My virtues too were guilty of my wrack,
And warred against me, banded with my fate;
For whilst my Virgin-yeares with praise I past,
Which did (ah that it did) too much import,
My modest eye told that my mind was chaste,
Which gained the warrant of the worlds report:
"And all should have a great respect to fame,
"No greater dowry then a spotless name.
Fair beauties God desse, thou can bear record,
My offering never made thine Altar rich;
Lascivious fancies highly I abhorred,
Whose freeborn thoughts no folly could bewitch;
Till happily (ah so it seemed to some)
O but unhappily the end has proved,
All this, and more, to Atis ears did come,
Who straight did like, and after liking loved;
He to our ears, his purpose did impart,
Not lip-sicke-lover-like, with words far sought,
Whose tongue was but an agent for his heart,
Yet could not tell the tenth part that it thougth;
And lest his travels should have seemed to tend
My honors fame by fancies to betray,
He brought his wishes to a lawful end,
And in effect, affection did bewray;
There Juno, president of wedlockes vow,
And Hymen with his odoriferous cote,
With sacred customs did our love allow,
Whilst th'ominous Owls no crosses did devote;
The blessing that this marriage did procure,
It was too great to have continued long:
"A thing too vehement cannot endure,
Our joys far past the reach of any tongue;
We ever did full satisfaction find,
Yet with satiety were never cloyd,
But seemed two bodies, managed by one mind,
Such was the happiness that I enjoyed;
He loved me dearly, I obeyed his will,
Proud of my self, because that I was his,
A harmony remained betwixt us still,
Who each in the other placed their souls chief bliss:
This moved the immortals to a high disdain,
That thus two worldlings, who of death were heirs,
Should in a Paradise of joys remain,
Which did exceed, at least did equal theirs;
But chiefly Juno did despite it most,
Who through a jealousy still jarres with Jove,
That body-prison'd souls of that could boast,
Which she (although heavens Queen) had not above;
Thus even for envy of our rare delights,
The fatal Sisters (by the heavens suborned)
Of my souls treasure closed the lovely lights,
By which they thought the earth too much adorned.
O but he is not dead, he lives in me.
Ah, but I live not: for I died in him:
How can the one without the other be?
If death have set his eyes, mine must look dim;
Since to my sight that Sun no more appeared,
From whom my beauties borrowed all their rays:
A long eclipse, that never shall be cleared,
Has darkened all the points of my sad days;
Aye me, I live too long, he died too soon,
Thus still the worst remain, the best depart,
Of him who told how this cursed deed was done,
The words (like swords) shall ever wound my heart.
Fierce tyrant death, who in thy wrath did take
One half of me, and left one half behind:
Take this to thee, or give me the other back,
Be wholly cruel, or be no way kind;
But whilst I live (believe) thou can not dye,
O! even in spite of death, yet still my choice,
Often with the inward al-beholding eye,
I think I see thee, and I hear thy voice;
And to content my languishing desire,
To ease my mind, each thing some help affords;
Thy fancied form does often such faith acquire,
That in all sounds I apprehend thy words:
Then with such thoughts my memory to wound,
I call to mind thy looks, thy words, thy grace,
Where thou did haunt, yet I adore the ground,
And where thou stepped, O sacred seems that place!
My solitary walks, my widowed bed,
My driry sighs, my sheets often bathed with tears,
These shall record what life by me is led,
Since first sad news breathed death into mine ears.
Though for more pain, yet spared a space by death,
Thee first I loved, with thee all love I leave:
For my chaste flames, which quenched were with thy breath,
Can kindle now no more but in thy grave.
By night I wish for day, by day for night,
Yet wish far more, that none of both might be;
But most of all, that banished from the light
I were no more, their constant change to see.
At night whilst deeply musing of my State,
I go to sum with sighs my wonted joys,
An agony then (in a sad conceit)
Does blot the blubred count with new annoyes;
When Sleep, the brother most resembling death,
Of darkness child, and father unto rest,
Does bound (though not restrain) confused breath,
That it may vent, but not with words expressed;
Then with my sprite thou do begin to speak,
With sugared speeches to appease my grief;
And my bruised heart which labored long to break;
Does in this comfort feigned, find some relief;
Yea, if our souls remained united so,
This late divorce would no way vex my mind,
But when awaking, it augments my woe*
Whilst this a dream, and me a wretch I find.
If never happy, O thrice happy I!
But happy more had happiness remained,
Yet then excessive joy had made me dye;
Since such delights, what heart could have sustained?
Why waste I thus, whilst vainly I lament,
The precious treasure of that swift past-time?
Ah, pardon me (dear love) for I repent
My lingering here, my fate, and not my crime:
Since first thy body did enrich the Tomb,
In this spoiled world, my eye no pleasure sees,
And Atis, Atis, Lo I come, I come,
To be thy mate, amongst the Myrtle trees.

Chorus.
"Lo all our time even from our birth,
"In misery almost exceeds:
"For, where we find a moments mirth,
"A month of mourning still succeeds;
"Besides the evils that Nature breeds,
"Whose pains do us each day appall,
"Infirmaties which frailty sends,
"The loss of that which fortune lends;
"And such disasters as often fall,
"Yet to far worse our states are thrall,
"Whilst wretched man with man contends,
"And every one his whole force bends,
"How to procure another losses,
"But this torments us most of all:
"The mind of man, which many a fancy tosses,
"Does forge unto it self a thousand crosses.
O how the soul with all her might,
Does her celestial forces strain,
That so she may attain the light
Of natures wonders, which remain
Hid from our eyes! we strive in vain
"To seek out things that are unsure:
"In Sciences to seem profound,
"We dive so deep, we find no ground;
"And the more knowledge we procure,
"The more it does our minds allure,
"Of mysteries the depth to sound;
"Thus our desire we never bound;
"Which by degrees thus drawn on still,
"The memory may not endure;
"But like the Tubs which Danaus daughters fill,
"Does drink no oftener then constrained to spill.
Yet how comes this? and O how can
Clear knowledge thus (the souls chief treasure)
Because of such a cross to man,
Which should afford him greatest pleasure?
This is, because we cannot measure
The limits that to it belong,
But (bent to tempt forbidden things)
Do soar too high with Natures wings,
Still weakest whilst we think us strong;
The heavens which hold, we do them wrong
To try their grounds, and what thence springs,
This cross upon us justly brings:
With knowledge, knowledge is confused,
And grows a grief ere it be long;
"That which a blessing is when rightly used,
"Does grow the greatest cross when once abused.
Ah! what avaiels this unto us,
Who in this veil of woes abide,
With endless toils to study thus
To learn the thing that heaven would hide?
And trusting to too blind a guide,
To spy the Planets how they move,
And too (transgressing common Bars)
The constellation of the stars,
And all that is decreed above,
Whereof (as often the end does prove)
A secret sight our welfare marres,
And in our breasts breeds endless wars,
Whilst what our horoscopes foretell,
Our expectations do disprove:
Those apprehended plagues prove such a hell,
That then we would unknow them till they fell.
This is the pest of great estates,
They by a thousand means devise
How to foreknow their doubtful fates;
And like new Giants, scale the skies,
Heavens secret storehouse to surprise;
Which sacrilegious skill we see
With what great pain they apprehend it,
And then how foolishly they spend it.
To learn the thing that once must be;
Why should we seek our destiny?
If it be good, we long attend it;
If it be ill, none may amend it:
Such knowledge but torments the mind;
Let us attend the heavens decree:
For those whom this ambiguous Art does blind,
May what they seek to fly, the rather find.
And lo of late, what has our King
By his preposterous travels gained,
In searching out each threatened thing,
Which Atis horoscope contained?
For what the heavens had once ordained,
That by no means he could prevent;
And yet he labors to find out
Through all the Oracles about,
Of future things the hid event.
This does his raging mind torment:
(Now in his age unwisely stout)
To fight with Cyrus, but no doubt
The heavens are grieved thus to hear told
Long ere the time their dark intent.
Let such of Tantalus the state behold,
Who dare the secrets of great Jove unfold.
Act 5.
Scene 1.
Cyrus, Harpagus. LEt us triumph over them (though proud of late)
Whose glory now does with their greatness fail:
Since with their fortune forfeiting their state:
No warre's approved unless that it prevail:
The world, that whilst we fought, did doubtful stand,
As for the one, ordained to be a prey,
Saw how the heavens placed lightning in my hand,
Those thundering down, who would not us obey:
Go pay our vows, ere enterprising more;
The Gods detest a mind that is ingrate;
And who delight their Deities to adore,
Are always bent to stablish their estate;
Cause burden Altars, smoke each sacred place
With Bullockes, Incense, Odours of all kinds;
"But none can give the Gods (still great in grace)
"A sacrifice more sweet, than thankful minds.
Harp. Though all who partners are of the earth and air,
Still whilst tapestred with this azure pale,
If for naught else, yet for those gifts least rare,
To serve the all-pow'rfull powers, should never fail;
Yet there are some whom success has designed,
Whose names are written in respected scroules,
WHom benefits (not ordinary) bind
To love them more then life, yea, then their souls:
Of those that you are one, your deeds declare,
Of whom amid'st innumerable broiles,
Even from your cradle they have had a care,
And led you safe through many dangerous toiles;
Though of the troubles of your youth I see,
You have not heard the wonderful discourse,
I them remember, who did chance to be
An actor in your Tragicke-Comicke course.

Cyrus. The accidents which in our nonage chance,
A ripened age not to remembrance brings,
Like fabulous dreams which darkness does advance,
That are by day disdained as frivolous things:
For, our conceptions are not then so strong
That they can leave impressions long behind,
Yet mix (dear friend) old griefs new joys among,
And call afflicted infancy to mind.

Harp. Who would not wonder at thy wondrous fate,
Whom (even or borne) destruction did attend,
Whilst ere thou could offend, pursued by hate,
Even then to end what now shall never end?
Your mother first her fathers mind did sting,
Whilst once he dreamed, which yet his soul confounds,
That of a tree which from her womb did spring,
Th'umbragious branches, darkened Asias bounds;
Then to the Magies straight he gave in charge
To try what this strange vision did presage,
Who having studied their dark Art at large,
Gave this response with a propheticke rage:
That once his daughter should a son bring forth,
Who should (by valor gaining great renown)
Make vanquished Asia witness of his worth;
But from his grandfather first reave the Crown.
This to Astyages a terror bred,
Who (vainly bent to scorn the heavens decree)
His daughter (out of policy) would wed,
To some weak stranger of no great degree.
And to Cambyses, who of her made choice,
He, for his Country (then contemned) gave ear,
Whom by your birth the Princess did rejoice,
And gave her father further cause of fear,
"Thus tyranny (their brood whose courage fails)
"Does force the Parents in despair to fall,
"To fight a dastard, proud when it prevails,
"But yet (as feared of all,) does still fear all;
"And tyrants no security can find,
"For every shadow frights a guilty mind.
This Monarch then who could not dream of harms,
Whose guards did glance all still with steel arrayed,
Then whilst he lived secure from foreign Arms,
A babe, scarce borne, and his, did make afraid.
And whilst Lucina the last help did make,
As if some ugly monster had been borne,
A Minotaure, a Centaure, or a Snake,
The peoples terror, and the Mothers scorn;
The Grand-childes birth, which justly should impart,
To grandfathers the greatest cause of joys,
Did (long ere wounded, making him to smart)
Involve him in a maze of sad annoyes;
And to prevent what did him fondly fright,
By giving cause of a deserved hate,
He sought by robbing you the newfound light,
To make your birth and burial of one date.
Soon after this he sent for me in haste,
Whom at that time (and not in vain) he loved,
And told the sum of all things that were past,
By which his marble-minde seemed nothing moved;
Yet in the same, as he would let me know,
Though pity none, some horror did remain,
Whilst damned in substance, to seem clear in show,
Your blood his heart, but not his hand should stain.
"Thus having lulled asleep their judgment still,
"The wicked would extenuate their crimes,
"Not knowing those who but allow of ill,
"As actors guilty, differ but in times.
With his vile fault he would have burdened me,
Whom straight he charged an Innocent to slay;
I promised to perform his rash decree,
Well weighing whom, not what I should obey;
When I had parted from his Highness face,
And carried you (then swadled) with me too,
Whilst horror did congeale my blood, a space
I stood perplexed, not knowing what to do,
And as to purge my part) even shedding tears,
By troops of passions grief, my soul assailed,
Thus (when distressed for easing others fears,)
Th'intended death of you, your murd'rers wail'd;
For him I sent a servant of mine own,
Who for the time was heards-man to the King,
To whom I made all my Commission known,
But as enjoined to him, showed every thing;
Delivering you with an unwilling breath,
WHom of pure gold, a glistring robe arrayed,
I threatened him with many a cruel death,
If that your death were any way delayed;
Straight then to execute the Tyrants doom,
He from my sight did all astonished go,
Too great a charge for such a simple Groom,
The show of Majesty amazed him so;
What man (not wondering) can by deeds behold
The providence of all-commanding Jove,
Whose brazen edicts cannot be contrould:
"Firm are the Statutes of the States above:
"That mortal whom a Deities favor shields,
"No worldly force is able to confound,
"He may securely walk through dangers fields,
"Times and occasions are to serve him bound:
For lo, before the heards-man was come home,
His wife had chanced a breath-lesse child to bear,
Who wondered so to see her husband come,
While by his conscience crushed, he quaked for fear;
And straight she curious grew to know the form,
How he a babe so beautiful obtained;
Who her of all did suddenly inform,
And to what cruelty he was constrained;
She quickly then the occasion to embrace,
(No doubt inspired by some celestial power)
Prayed that her infant might supply your place,
Yet where no beasts his body might devo^re,
So shall we have (says she) a double gain,
Since our own child shall get a stately tomb,
And we a Princely brood, which may remain,
Still nursed with us as the issue of my womb.
The husband liked so well his wives design,
That he performed all what she did require,
And when I had directed one of mine,
This Tragedies last act, who might enquire:
My man who spied a babe there breathless lie,
With that rich funeral furniture arrayed,
Told what the fellow told, (a generous lie)
So that thus tried, I trusted what they said.
I end, Time (posting with houre-feather'd wings)
Had given you strength, with others of your years
You haunted games, not nephews unto Kings,
But for that time admitted for your Peers,
They fail call fortune blind, she sight bewrayed,
And your authority by lot enlarged,
In pastoral sport, who still the Scepter swayed,
And as but borne for that, that best discharged:
With other children then, as once it chanced,
A Nobleman of Medeas Son remained,
Who swollen with envy to see you advanced,
Your childish charge with scornful words disdained;
You raging at that proud attempt of his,
Did punish him, as it became a Prince,
I doubt now (Sir) if that you think of this:
The rest of rashness did your deed convince.

Cyrus. Though now my breast does greater thoughts embrace,
Of youthful sport, yet do not spare to speak;
"Let cares alternatly give pleasure place:
"That which is bended still, must sometime break.

Harp. The childs great Father did inform the King,
How that so base a boy his Son abused,
And of the guard one hasted you to bring,
As for an odious crime to be accused;
But when the King (expostulating long)
By terrors strived to cast your courage down:
You boldly said, that you had done no wrong,
To punish one who had contemned your Crown;
You so magnanimous amazed to find,
Whilst pausing long with an attentive Eye,
That speech imperious told the King your kind:
Whose brood but th'Eagles durst have soared so high?
The fained Father to the King was brought,
Who (feared for torture) telling truth in time,
Where he reward deserved, but pardon sought,
As if the saving you had been a crime.
Then (as it seemed) delighted with the rest,
The King did cause a sumptuous feast prepare,
And me desired as his most special guest,
That with my Son I would to Court repair;
When I was come, the King great joy disclosed,
And soothed my words which did his chance applaud,
But for another end then I supposed:
"What fairer cloak then courtesy for fraud?
When th'absence of the Sun did darkness breed,
The Candles light inheriting his place,
On my Sons flesh they caused my self to feed,
Then did upbraid me with his bloudlesse face;
What anguish, or what rage o're-flow'd my soul,
A loving Father may imagine best,
Yet at that time I did my rage controull,
But laid it high up in a stormy breast.

Cyrus. Some of the wisemen then I heard remained,
Who from their former sentence did recoyle,
And said* no danger was, since I had reigned,
Then did dismiss me for my native soil;
Where when I had my blooming season spent,
To weakened wrath your lines did strength afford,
Informing us that many Medes were bent
For his great cruelty to leave their Lord;
And wished (if to their Scepter I aspired)
That I should move the Persians to rebel,
Which did succeed even as my soul desired:
For they disdained in bondage base to dwell;
When my encouraged troops all armed did stand,
Ere they from Strangers could attend relief,
I quickly marched, encountering with that band,
Of which the King had chanced to make you chief.

Harp. "Lo how those wretches whom the heavens would wrack,
"(To plagues expos^^) of judgment are unarmed:
"The King of me his Captain straight did make,
"And looked for help of him whom he had harmed;
"Yet was the old wrong so rooted in my heart,
"My Countries thraldom, and mine own disgrace,
"That all the horrors mischief could impart
"Seemed naught to me, so my disdain took place.

Cyr. "On those whom they have wronged, none should rely:
"Just rancour unrevenged, can never dye.

Harp. This enterprise at first so well did speed,
That since, your Greatness still began to rise,
Which may by time to brave a story breed,
As may be precious in all Princes eyes.

Cyr. Behold how Craesus with his riches blind,
Durst even encounter with my warre-like band;
And whilst a prosperous course betrayed his mind,
Did not suspect what power was in my hand;
But he and his confederates have seen
How victory does still my troops attend,
And Persia must be once all Asia's Queen,
On whom for servants Princes shall depend;
Now Croesus is overcome, this Town surprised,
And Lydia charged with gold, does yield rich spoils;
The League unprosp'rous, Egypt has despised,
This is the happy end of all our toiles.
But ah! one sour unseasons all my sweets,
Whose praise through all the peopled circuit fleets,
And with his love each generous courage warmes;
Then when (though weak in troops) in courage strong,
The Egyptian Chariots desperately he charged
There (whilst he fought infortunately long)
Mars from terrestrial bands his soul enlarged.

Harp. No doubt that Dame this trouble hardly bears,
Who only seemed for him to like of life,
I heard him (whilst she bathed his breast with tears)
Often wish by proof to merit such a wife.
When their farewell was sealed, last speeches spent,
She kissed the Coach that did contain her trust,
And with eyes big with pearl, gazed where he went,
Still till her sight was choked with clods of dust.

Cyrus. And have you then not heard, his death but proved
The black beginning of a bloody Scene?
His wife Panthea at the first not moved,
Seemed as she had some marble image been;
The body that had often her fancies fired,
She caused bear out of sight, still dear, though dead;
But where the River ran, when once retired,
She 'twixt her bosoms Rounds entombed his head;
And then from Rage she borrowed some relief:
For sorrow by degrees, a passage seeks,
Vapouring forth sighs, which made a cloud of grief,
A mighty storm of tears rained down her cheeks;
Then, whilst her Eyes the wonted object missed,
With heavy looks resolving fatal haste,
Pale senseless lips she prodigally kissed,
With as great ardour then as in times past.
I posted thither, bent to have releev'd
This Lady of a portion of her woes.
Heaven bear me witness! I was greatly grieved,
Who would to save one friend, spare hosts of foes,
She first a space me passionately eyed,
Then with those words, her lips did slowly move,
My husband, lo, has valorously died,
As of your friendship, worthy of my love.
"My coming but increased griefs starving store:
"For, till that passion of it self expire,
"All kind of comfort but augments it more,
"Like drops of oil thrown on a mighty fire.
A constant countenance though I strived to make,
And what her woes diminish might, did tell;
That comfort which I gave, I could not take,
And scarcely could throw forth my last farewell;
When I had left her but a little space,
She did discharge the Eunuchs from her sight,
Then prayed her Nurse to bury in one place
Her and her Lord, as they deserved of right;
Last, looking on his corpse, she drew a sword,
And even as if her soul had flown in him,
(Pure snows in Crimson died) embraced her Lord,
Whilst beauties blubbred Stars were waxing dim;
Then bent to fall, when her they could not raise,
(As scorning to survive their prosperous state)
In emulation of their Ladies praise,
The Eunuchs did precipitate their fate.
O sweet Panthea, rich in rarest parts,
I must admire thy ghost though thou be gone!
Who might have made a Monarchy of hearts,
Yet loathed unlawful loves, and loved but one;
O wondrous wonders, wonders wondrous rare!
A woman constant, such a beauty chaste,
A mind so pure, joined with a face so fair,
With virtue beauty in one person placed;
Both were well matched as any could devise,
Whose death confirms the union of their life;
He valorous, she virtuous, both wise,
She worthy such a Mate, he such a wife.
And Harpagus, lest that it should be thought,
That of brave minds the memory may dye,
Cause build a stately Tomb with Statues wrought,
Where both their bodies with respect may lie.

Harp. I Will raise a Pyramide of Croesus spoils,
Where of their worth each part shall be comprised,
But how to do in these tumultuous broils,
Now time requires that you were well advised:
Your adversary does attend your will;
This hauty Town for fear to fall does bow,
And therefore pardon, ransom, quite, or kill,
Do what you please, none can control us now.

Cry. As for old Croesus, I am else resolved,
He with some captives whom I keep in store
Shall have their bodies by the fire dissolved,
As offerings to the Gods whom I adore.
My Soldiers pains this City shall defray,
Since by their means it has been gained for us,
I yield it unto them, as their just prey,
Who taste the sweetness of their travels thus;
Of other things we shall so well dispose
That our renown through all the world shall shine,
Till Cyrus name give terror to all those,
Who dare against his Sovereignty repine.

Act. 5. Scene 2.
Nuntius. Chorus. AH! to what part shall I my steps address,
Of bondage base the burden to eschew?
Lo, desolation, ruin, and distress
With horror do my native home pursue;
And now poor Country, take my last farewell,
Farewell all joy, all comfort, all delight.
Cho. What heavy tidings have thou now to tell,
Who tear'st thy garments thus? what forced thy flight?

Nunt. I tell the wrack of us, and all who live
Within the circuit of this wretched soil.

Cho. A hideous shout we heard the City give,
Have foes prevailed, do they her beauty spoil?

Nunt. They may it spoil.


Cho. And is our Sovereign slain?


Nunt. No, but scarce escaped does live in danger still.

Chor. Then let our minds no more in doubt remain,

And must we yield to that proud Strangers will?

Nunt. You know how Croesus at advantage lay,
Still seeking means to curb the Persians pride,
And how the Assyrians had assigned a day
When led by him, they battle would abide;
But Cyrus having heard how that they would
Against his State so great an army bring,
Straight raising forces, providently bold,
Prevents, invades, o're-comes, and takes our King.

"Cho. This shows a Captain both expert and brave,
"Who wisely does advise, perform with speed,
No circumstance (friend) unrelated leave,
Which with our Kings did our confusion breed.

Nunt. When Croesus saw that Cyrus came so soon,
He stood a while with a distracted mind,
Yet what time would permit, left naught undone,
But made his musters, marched his foe to find.
Our stately troops that for rich arms excelled,
And with umbragious feathers fanned the air,
With insolency, not with courage swelled,
A triumph dreamed, scarce how to fight took care.
The Lydian horsemen never stained, but true,
And for their worth, through all the world renowned,
Them chiefly Cyrus labored to subdue,
And this device for that effect was found:
Untrussing all their baggage by the way
Each of the Camels for his charge did bear
A grim-fac'd Groom, who did himself array
With what in Persia horsemen use to wear;
To them th'infantery did follow next,
A solid squadron like a brazen wall;
But those in whom all confidence was fixed,
The brave Cavallery came last of all,
Then Cyrus by the raines his Courser took,
And bravely mounted, holding out his hands
With an assured, and imperious look
Went kindling courage through the flaming bands?
He them desired, who at deaths game would strive
To spare none of their foes in any form;
But as for Croesus to take him alive,
And keep him captive for a greater storm:
Where famous Hellus does to Hermus post,
To give another both his strength, and name;
Our army ran against a greater host,
To grace it likewise with our force and same.
Each troop a time with equal valor stood,
Till giving place at length we took the chase,
While as the River ran to hide our blood,
But still his borders blushed at our disgrace;
For when the Camels to the field were come,
Our horses all affrighted at their sight,
Ran raging back again, and of them some
Disordering ranks, put many to the flight;
Yet some who had been used with martial trains
The stratagem (though out of time) perceived,
And lighting down (red heights raised from green plains)
Did vengeance urge of those who them deceived;
There whilst the world proved prodigal of breath,
The headless tronks lay prostrated in heaps;
This field of funerals sacred unto death,
Did paint out horror in most hideous shapes:
Whilst men unhors'd, horses unmastred, strayed,
Some called on those whom they most dearly loved,
Some raged, some groaned, some sighed, roared, promised, prayed,
As blows, falls, faintness, pain, hope, anguish moved.
Those who then escaped (like beasts unto a den)
A fortress took where valor none renownes,
"Walls are for women, and the fields for men,
"No Town can keep a man, but men keep Towns;
And we were scarcely entered at the Ports,
When straight the Enemies did the Town enclose,
And quickly reared huge artificial Forts,
Which did to the besieged more pain impose:
All martial Engines were for battery found,
At like encounters, which had ear'st prevailed,
Whilst both they used the vantage of the ground,
And borrowed help from Art, where Nature failed;
They always compassing our Trench about,
Still where the walls were weak, did make a breach,
Which (straight repairing) darts were hurled out,
To kill all those who came where we might reach;
There all the bolts of death, edged by disdain,
Which many curious wits inclined to ill,
Whilst kindled by revenge, or hope of gain,
Had skill to make, were put in practice still;
Yet as we see it oft-times has occurred,
That in Fames rolls our fall might be comprised:
That side of Sardis, far from all regard,
Which does next Tmolus lie, thought most secure,
Through this presumption, whilst without a guard,
All Lydia's overthrow did with speed procure:
As one of ours (unhappily it chanced)
To reach his helmet, that had escaped his hand,
A longst that steepie part his steps advanced,
And was returning back unto his band;
He was well marked by one, who had not spared
To tempt all dangers which might make us thralls:
For Cyrus had proclaimed a great reward
To him whose steps first trod the conquered walls;
And this companion seeing without stay
One in his sight that craggie passage clime,
Straight on his footsteps followed all the way,
And many a thousand hasted after him;
Then all that durst resist, were quickly killed,
The rest who fled, no where secure could be:
For every street was with confusion filled;
There was no corner from some mischief free.
O what a piteous clamor did arise
Of ravished virgins, and of widowed wives!
Who pierced the heavens with lamentable cries,
And having lost all comfort, loathed their lives.
Whilst those proud Victors would themselves have stained
With all the wrongs that Pride, or power could use,
They by a charge from Cyrus were restrained,
And durst no more their captives thus abuse.

Chor. No doubt but high mishaps did then abound,
Whilst with disdain the Conqu'rours bosom boyld,
As some the sword, disgrace did some confound,
Not only houses, Temples too were spoyld.
"What misery more great can be devised,
"Then is a Cities when by force surprised?
But whilst that stately Town was thus distressed,
What did become of our unhappy King?

Nunt. Then when the Enemy had his state possessed,
And that confusion seaz'd on every thing:
He scarcely first could trust his troubled sight,
(The Fortune past transported had him so)
Yet having eyes who can deny the light?
He saw himself inferior to his foe;
And apprehending there whilst left alone,
How that his judgment long had been betrayed,
(As metamorphos'd in a marble stone)
His ravished thoughts in admiration strayed;
But such a weight of woes not used to bear,
He first was grieved, then raged, and last despaired,
Till through excessive fear, quite freed from fear,
He for his safety then no further cared;
And never wishd he so to have long life,
But death far further was affected now,
Still feeking danger in the bounds of strife,
So he were sure to dye, he cared not how;
Whilst furies thus were fostred in his breast,
Him suddenly a Soldier chanced to meet,
As insolent as any of the rest,
Who drunk with blood, ran raging through the street;
And wanting but an object to his ire,
He sought to him, and he to him again;
I know not which of them did most desire,
The one to slay, the other to be slain;
But whilst so base a hand towering aloft,
Did to so great a Monarch threaten death,
His eldest Son, who (as you have heard often)
Was barred from making benefit of breath:
I cannot tell you well, nor in what form,
If that the destinies had so ordained,
Or if of passions an impetuous storm
Did raze the strings that had his tongue restrained;
But when he saw his Sire in danger stand,
He with those words a mighty shout did give:
Thou furious Stranger stay, hold, hold thy hand,
Kill not King Croesus, let my Father live;
The other hearing this, his hand retired,
And called his Kings commandment to mind;
High were those aims to which his thoughts aspired,
Whom for great fortunes this rare chance designed;
Now when that Croesus, who for death long longed,
Was quite undone, by being thus preserved,
As both by life, and death, then doubly wronged,
Whilst but by fates for further harm reserved;
He with sad sighs those accents did accord:
Now let the heavens do all the ill they can,
Which would not unto me the grace afford,
That I might perish like a private man,
Ah, must I live to sigh that I was borne,
Charactring shame in a dejected face?
Ah, must I live, to my perpetual scorn,
The abject object, pointed for disgrace?
Yet this unto his soul more sorrow bred,
He (scorn pretending state) as King arrayed,
Was with great shouts ridiculously led
Back to the Tent, whereas their Emperor stayed:
Then that he might his misery conceive,
Those robes so rich, were all exchanged with chains,
And prisons strictness bragged him with the grave,
So soon as death could make a choice of pains;
They caused in haste a pile of wood to make,
And in the midst where all men might him spy,
Caused bind the captive King unto a stake,
With fourteen others of the Lydians by;
There (as if offerings fit to purge the state)
Foes sought with flames their ruin to procure,
Though Jove prepostrous piety does hate:
"No sacrifice is sweet, which is not pure.
Now whilst the fire was kindling round about,
As to some powerful God, who prayed, or vowed,
With eyes bent up, and with his hands stretched out:
O! Solon, Solon, Croesus cried aloud;
Some hearing him to utter such a voice,
Who said that Cyrus curious was to know
(When dying now) what deity was his choice,
Did him request his last intent to show:
His exclamation was (said he) on one,
With whom he wished (their frailty so to see)
That all who ever trusted in a Throne,
Had but conferred a space as well as he;
Then there he told what Solon had him shown,
Whilst at his Court (which flourished then) arrived;
How worldly bliss might quickly be o're-throwne,
And not accomplished was, while as one lived;
Whilst forth salt floods attending troops did power;
He show how much the wiseman did disdain
Those who presumed of wealth, or worldly power,
By which none could a perfect bliss obtain;
This speech did Cyrus move to ponder much
The great uncertainty of worldly things,
As thinking that himself might once be such,
Since thrall'd to Fortunes throne, like other Kings;
Then such a pattern standing him before,
Whom envy once, then pity did attend,
He to our King did liberty restore,
And with his life did Solons fame extend;
Yet him the fire still threatened to devour,
Which (rising high) could hardly be controlled,
But O devotion! then appeared thy power,
Which to subdue the heavens makes worldlings bold!
To quench the flames, whilst diverse toild in vain,
( Jove moved by prayer) as Croesus did require,
The azure Cisterns opened did remain,
And clouds fell down in floods to quench the fire.
Then whilst the Soldiers did the City sack,
To save the same (as to his Country kind)
The hopeless Croesus thus to Cyrus spoke,
With words which pity melted from his mind:
Great Prince, to whom all Nations now succumbe,
And do thy yoke so willingly embrace,
That it some comfort gives to be o're-come
By one whose glory graces our disgrace;
Since now I am constrained your thrall to be,
I must conform my self unto my fate,
And cannot hold my peace, whereas I see,
That which may wrong the greatness of your state;
Your state is spoiled by not suspected powers,
If this rich City thus do rest ore-throwne,
Which now no more is mine, but is made yours:
And therefore (Sir) have pity of your own;
Yea, though the loss of such a populous Town,
Both rich, and yours, your mind could nothing move,
Yet think of this, which may import your Crown,
A piece of policy which time will prove:
The haughty Persians borne with stubborn minds,
Who but for poverty first followed you,
Their matchless worth in arms large Asia finds,
Their fear is fallen upon all Nations now;
But if you suffer them in such a sort
To be made rich with plenteous Lydia's spoils,
Not able then their conquest to support,
The vanquished by their fall the victor foils;
Let not vain pleasures entertain their sights:
"Rest wealth, wealth pride, pride war, war ruin breeds,
Whilst (faint through pleasures, weakened with delights)
No thought of honor from base breasts proceeds.
Then Cyrus straight approving what he spoke,
His soldiers were from precious spoils restrained,
Whilst he the tenth part did pretend to take,
A fatal offering for the Gods ordained;
This is the sum of our disastrous state,
We must a Stranger serve, as thrall'd long since;
With loss of all which he possessed of late
Our King bought breath, a poor thing for a Prince,

Chor. O wretched people! O unhappy King!
Our joys are spoiled, his happiness expired,
And no new chance can any comfort bring,
Where destinies to ruin have conspired,
Go woeful messenger, hold on thy course,
For, to have heard too much, it irks our ears;
And we shall note of this thy sad discourse,
With sighs each accent, and each point with tears.

Croesus. Lo! I who late did thunder from a Throne,
Am now a wretch whom every one disdaines;
My treasure, honor, state, and freedom gone;
No kind of comfort, no, nor hope remains,
And after me, let none whom greatness shrouds,
Trust tumid titles, nor ostentive shows:
"Sails swollen with winds, whilst emulating clouds,
That which puffes up, often at the last o're-throws.
O! had this precious wit enriched my mind,
Which by experience I have dearly bought,
Whilst fortune was within my Court confined,
And that I could not think a bitter thought;
Then satisfied with Sovereignty ear'st proved,
I had disdained new dangers to embrace,
And clothed with majesty, admired, and loved,
Had lived with pleasure, and had died in peace.
"But what more wonderful in any State,
"Then power (when courted) that is free from pride?
"But chiefly those who live securely great,
"They often may err, since Fortune is their guide,
What could the world afford, or man affect,
Which did not smooth my soul, whilst I was such?
Whom now the changing world does quite neglect,
By prospr'ing plagued, starved only with too much;
Long lulled asleep with scornful Fortunes lies,
A slave to pleasure, drowned in base delights,
I made a covenant with my wandering eyes,
To entertain them still with pleasant sights;
My heart enjoyed all that was wished of late,
Whilst it the height of happiness did cloy,
Still served with dainty, but suspected meat,
My soul with pleasure sick, was faint for joy;
All, which much care what might procure mine ease:
(My will divined) obsequiously devised,
And who my fancy any way could please,
As praised by me, was by all others pris'd.
Save serving me none else could have deserved,
Of whom what ever came, was held of weight,
My words and looks were carefully observed,
And whom I graced, were had in honor straight;
For pomp and power, far passing other Kings,
Whilst too secure with drowsy thoughts I slumbred,
My coffers still were full of precious things,
Of which (as wealth least weighed) gold scarce was numbered;
I reared rare buildings, all embost with gold;
Made ponds for fishes, forests for wild beasts;
And with vain thoughts which could not be controlled,
Often spent the day in sport, the night in feasts.
I tossed the Elements with power like Jove's,
Driv'd water up, air down, a pleasant change;
For, stately fountains, artificial groves,
As common things were not accounted strange.
With me (what more could any Monarch crave?)
In all the parts of pomp, none could compare:
My Minions gallant, Counselors were grave,
My guards were strong, my Concubines were fair;
Yea, whilst light Fortune my defects supplied,
I had all that could breed (as now I find)
In others wonder, in the owner pride,
So puffing up the flesh to spoil the mind.
Thus with delight (long pressing pleasures grapes)
With Fortune I carrows'd what men dear hold,
But ah! from misery none always scapes,
"One must be wretched once, or young, or old;
Then weary to be well, and tired of rest,
To waken trouble, I the occasion sought;
And yet to cloak the passions of my breast,
Did with devotion long cloud what I thought:
Of all the Oracles I did enquire
What was to come of this intended war,
Who said (as seemed to second my desire)
That I a mighty Monarchy should mar.
Those doubtful words I wresting to my will,
In hope to break the hauty Persians powers,
Did ruin quite (whilst all succeeded ill)
What many a age had gained, even in few hours,
And this may be admired as more then strange,
I who disdained an equal of before,
(What cannot Fortune do, when bent to change?)
Then servants less, must dream content no more;
What eye not big with scorn my state surveyes,
Whom all do pity now; or worse, do blame,
And bound even to my foe for some few days,
Which borrowed are with th'intrest of my fame.
Though this sweet gale of life-bestowing winds
Would seem a favor (so it seems to some)
Who by the baseness of their muddie minds
Show from what vulgar stock their kind does come;
I scorn unlike my self thus to be seen,
Though to my comfort this appeared to tend,
As if misfortunes past had only been
A Tragic entry to a Comic end.
Of all that plague my State, what greater pest
Then servile life, which faints from the earth to part?
And has in one united all the rest
To make me dye each day, yet live to smart;
Life in my breast no comfort can infuse:
"An Enemies gift could never come for good,
It but gives time of misery to muse,
And bathe my sorrows in a bitter flood:
Ah! had my breath straight vanished with my bliss,
And closed the windows that gave light to life,
I had not borne (to misery submisse)
The height of those mishaps, which now are rife:
Whilst with a thousand sighs I call to mind
The death of Atis, and mine own disgrace,
In such an a^ony my soul I find,
That life to death would willingly give place;
But since I see reserved for further spite,
I with sad thoughts must bur^en yet my soul,
My memory to my distracted spright
Of all my troubles shall present a scroule,
Of which, while as th'accounts I go to cast,
When numbering my misfortunes all of late,
I will look back upon my pleasures past,
And by them balance my (now) hapless state.

Chorus.
"Is It not a wonder thus to see
"How by experience each man reeds
"In practiced volumes penned by deeds,
"How things below inconstant be;
"Yet whilst our selves continue free,
"We ponder often, but not apply
"That precious oil, which we might buy,
"Best with the price of others pains,
"Which (as what not to us pertaines)
"To use we will not condescend,
"As if we might the fates defy,
Still whilst untouched our state reamines;
But soon the heavens a change may send
"No perfect bliss before the end.
When first we fill with fruitful seed,
The apt conceiving womb of the earth,
And seem to banish fear of dearth,
With that which it by time may breed,
Still dangers do our hopes exceed:
The frosts may first with cold confound
The tender greenes which deck the ground,
Whose wrath though Aprils smiles assuage,
It must abide the Eolian rage,
Which too over com'd, whilst we attend
All Ceres wandering tresses bound,
The reins let from their cloudy cage
May spoil what we expect to spend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
Lee, whilst the Vine-tree great with Grapes,
With nectar'd liquor strives to kiss
Embracing Elmes not loved d amiss,
Those clusters lose their comely shapes,
Whilst by the thunder burned, in heaps
All Bacchus hopes fall down and perish
Thus many things do fairly flourish,
Which no perfection can attain,
And yet we worldlings are so vain,
That our conceits too high we bend,
If fortune but our Spring time cherish,
Though diverse storms we must sustain,
To harvest ere our years ascend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
By all who in this world have place,
There is a course which must be run,
And let none think that he has won,
Till first he finished has his race;
The Forests through the which we trace,
Breed ravenous beasts, which do abhor us,
And lie in wait still to devour us,
Whilst brambles do our steps beguile,
The fear of which though we exile,
And to our mark with gladness tend,
Then balls of gold are laid before us,
To entertain our thoughts a while,
And our good meaning to suspend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
Behold how Croesus long has lived,
Throughout this spacious world admired,
And having all that he desired,
A thousand means of joy contrived;
Yet suddenly is now deprived
Of all that wealth; and strangely falls:
For every thing his sprite appalles,
His sons decease, his countries loss,
And his own state, which storms do toss:
Thus he who could not apprehend,
Then whilst he slept in marble walls,
No, nor imagine any cross,
To bear all those his breast must lend:
No perfect bliss before the end.
And we the Lydians who designed
To reign over all who were about us,
Behold how fortune too does flout us,
And utterly has us resigned;
For, to our selves we that assigned
A Monarchy, but knew not how,
Yet thought to make the world to bow,
Which at our forces stood afraid,
We, we by whom these plots were laid,
To think of bondage must descend,
And bear the yoke of others now,
O, it is true that Solon said!
While as he yet does breath extend,
No man is blessed; behold the end.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF DARIUS.
THE ARGUMENT.
DARIUS, the fourteenth from Cyrus King of Persia, being after the death of
Occhus, for his singular valor, from the government of Armenia, advanced to
the Persian Empire, became so arrogant (a good success as it were, s^t^ing him
forward to confusion) as he sent to demand tribute of Philip then King of
Macedonia who being of a hauty nature (and inferior to none of that age in
courage, or for melitary discipline) requited this contumelious message, with
as disdainefull an answer; threatening that he would come and deliver it in
Persepolis. But being prevented by death, he left the execution of his design
to his son Alexander, who for the great victories which thereafter he
obtained, was surnamed the great: He inher^ting the hatred of hi^ Father
toward Darius, and far surmounting h m in ambition, past in person to Asia,
with an army of thirty thousand men only.

After his arr vall, Darius wrote to him in a proud and contemptible manner,
ascribing to himself the title of the King of Kings, and kinsman of the Gods,
and nam^ng Alexander his servant; He also in vaunting manner, bragged that he
would have the mad boy, the son of Philip (for so in derision be t^armed him)
bound, and beat^n with rods, and after brought to his presence apparelled
like a Prince. For performance whereof he directed one of his Minions, with
forty thousand men to make impediment to his passage at the River of Granick,
where by the wonderful valor of Alexander, they were overthrown.

Darius being advertised of this, came himself in proper person, accomp^nied
with infinite (but evil ordered) numbers, and encountered Alexander beside
Isso, in the strait of Cili^^a where having fought doubtful and ^loudy
battle, in end by the invincible valor and never-failing forture of Alexander
his Army was defeated, himself put to fight, and his mother, wife, and
children made captives. Who were most courteously entertained by Alexander, who
notwithstanding their exceeding great beauty, yet would not abuse them, nor
suffer them to be abused by others: nor ves^ed he them more then once (and
that to comfort them) all the time of their imprisonment.

Darius notwithstanding of all his losses (his courage being in the full,
whilst his fortune was in the waine) wrote very proudly to Alexander, taking
still the title of a King to himself, but not giving (...) gold, as Macecon
could contain, for ransom of the captives. Which being very disdainfully
refused by Alexander he having re enforced his troops, and coming forward to
fight with greater force then before, was informed how his wife had died in
pr^son, whose death he bewailed with exceeding great sorrow. And understanding
what courtesy Alexander had used toward her, he sent to use for peace, not
for any fear of his force, but allured (as he alleged) by his courtesy. This
suit being likewise rejected, he fought beside Arbella, with no better fortune
then before.

Yet for all these misfortunes, being of an invincible courage and despairing
of peace, he re-assembled all his forces which were augmented by the coming of
the Bactrians, and was coming forward, with intention at last either to dye,
or prevail. But in the mean time, two traitorous subjects of his own,
B^ssus, whom he had preferred to be governor of Bactria, and Nabarzanes, one
in special credit with him, conspired his death. Which danger, though it was
revealed to him by Patron, Captain of the Greeks, yet he could not, or rather
would not eschew. At length, those two Traitors took, and bound him with
golden chains, and cast him in an old Chariot, with purpose to present him to
Alexander. But they hearing how he would not accept their Present, and how he
was coming to invade them, threw their darts at Darius, and left him for dead.
In this estate he was found by Polystratus, and after the delivery of some few
words dyed. Alexander having exceedingly lamented his miserable and undeserved
end, directed his body to his mother Sisigambis to be honor ably buried.

The persons names that speak.
DARIUS. SISIGAMBIS, his Mother. STATIRA his Wife. STATIRA his Daughter.
TIRIOTES their Eunuch. NABARZANES. two Traitors BESSUS. two Traitors. PATRON,
Captain of the Mercenary Greeks. NUNTIUS. ALEXANDER. PARMENTO, his
Lieutenant. HEPHESTION, his Minion, POLYSTRATUS, a Soldier. ARTABAZUS, A Noble
man of Persia. CHORUS, all Persians.
The Scene supposed in Babylon.

THE TRAGEDY OF DARIUS.
Act 1.
Darius. WHat thundering power grown jealous of my state,
Which (having daunted the earth) perchance heaven fears
Thus armed with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with disdain, high indignation bears?
Long smoothed of all, whilst I (pale cares despised)
In fortunes lap asleep, of greatness dreamed,
Even in that calm, my state a storm surprised,
And ere I wak't, my ruin was proclaimed;
Thus I, whose only name did terror give
(As Idol of the world,) adored over all,
(With crosses compassed,) such a wretch do live,
That who admired my might, admire my fall;
Ah, then indeed I fell, when gallants stood,
And Phoenix like renewed their lives by death;
Who having sealed their force, and faith, with blood,
Would rather dye, then draw a borrowed breath;
Yet I, not I, did view, not venge (though near)
Those monstrous mountains of my Subjects slain,
Though even my enemies must my courage clear,
Which flames of fury lightened forth in vain;
Through greatest dangers, death I did pursue,
Till heaps of slaughtred bodies barred my way,
And changed my Chariot to a scarlet hue,
Ere wounded honor could be drawn away;
O how I envy yet their happy Ghosts,
Who died whilst hope of victory remained,
And in the presence of two famous hosts,
To praise their valor, even their foes constrained:
Shall I survive that memorable shame,
Which Persia's glory with disgrace confined?
No, rather let me dye, and let my name
As vain, quite vanish, razed from every mind.
Starre-boasting Babylon, all Asia's Queen,
Blush to behold thy King in such a state,
That by the gazing world he now is seen,
(A scorned futer) humbly to entreat;
But not turned vassal, as by power appalled;
Though all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none shall vaunt that ever I was thrall'd:
"Hearts holding courage, are not quite o're-come.
Should I whose Sovereignty so often was sworn,
Be seen submisse to escape a minutes pains,
No, let them bow, who but to bow were borne:
For Darius this indignity disdaines,
Since I was once judged worthy to command,
Shall I descend a Subjects state to try?
No, whilst a sword yields homage to this hand,
I scorn to grant a greater man then I.
Brave sprites, who now possess the pleasant bowers,
And glorious Gardens of th'Elysian Plains,
(For, (if deserts may move the infernal powers)
That happy shade your shadows now contains)
Those fatal fields where I did lead you forth,
Your bodies bury, but enlarge your fames,
Men shall adore the relickes of your worth,
And Trophies rear to your immortal names;
I Will sacrifice as Incense to your souls,
His dying sighs, and sorrowing Parents tears,
Who now, whilst none his prospering pride controules,
Our conquered Ensigns in his triumph bears:
For, it may ease your Ghosts to hear his groans,
Whilst burdened earth rebounding back does send
A wailing echo (raised from woods and stones,)
With wounded words to show that Armies end.
Why spend I speeches to disturb your rest,
As but with words (an idle speaker) pleased?
A mighty fury has enflamed my breast,
And I will rage, till by revenge appeased.
Did I that strong Cadusian first afront,
Who durst advance himself to brave our bands,
Then turned applauded, and in high account,
Charged with his spoils, the honor of my hands?
What, could I then (all kind of doubt removed)
Alone adventure to an Armies shame?
And should I now (that ancient praise disproved)
With squadrons compassed, lose that glorious name?
Blind fortune, O! thy stratagems are strange!
Which spoil my power, and stain my honor too,
And (having made my state the stage of change)
Have acted all was in thy power to do;
Lo, I, who late of swarming troops did boast,
Near left alone, have fortunes fraud disclosed;
And those made captives whom I fancy most,
To vaunting Victors are by fates exposed:
O torment but to think, death to believe,
That any may my dearest part annoy,
And I, wretch'd I, not able to releeve
Mine eyes chief jewel, and my hearts chief joy,
Dear object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet Spring of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright image of th'excellencies above,
What? do thou breath, and come not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Has heaven the force me from thy face to bar?
Or are my hands grown traitors to my heart?
That they should shrink from doing what it dare:
O! could my mind but distribute a space
Those emulating thoughts which toss my breast,
To pointlesse ciphers, who but spend a place,
Then I alone might animate the rest;
Since in this great disgrace, I chanced to fall,
Now nothing rests to raise my fame forlorn,
But by some desperate course to hazard all;
I Will live with praise, or by my death fly scorn;
Some prosperous issue afterward may purge
This crime which fortune has imposed on me,
This crime that carries with it self a scourge:
No greater torment then the want of thee;
"But fortunes course, what mortal can restrain,
"Who Diadems through dust for sport does roll?
A stranger now over my delights does reign,
And may extort the treasures of my soul;
Now, not till now, I apprehend my harms,
When I imagine how my best beloved
Must entertain mine enemy in her arms,
And I so far from offering ay de removed;
A host of furies in my breast I find,
Which do my soul with dreadful horrors fill,
Whilst Melancholy musters in my mind
Strange apprehensions that affright me still;
And this surmiz'd disgrace, grown thoroughly strong,
Reads hourly in mine ears a hateful scroule
Of an imagined, yet a helpelesse wrong,
Such poisoned thoughts like Serpents sting my soul;
Blind love beguiles me not, sharp sighted fears
With reason fed, do make suspicion live:
Would God that I had neither eyes nor ears,
Which to the heart intelligence might give;
This aggravates the weight of my despair,
When doubt objects to break loves last defense,
How he is young and fierce, she young and fair,
He to offend, she subject to offense;
From wronging me, both cannot long abstain:
Her beauty is sufficient to allure,
His bravery is sufficient to obtain.
"Captains will force, and Captives must endure.
O Alexander, tender my renown,
Though thus thou travel to usurp my throne,
"I rage to have a rival in my Crown,
"But in my love I can comport with none,
That boundless flame which in thy bosom boyles,
If quenched with ought save blood (as base) I blame:
My fortunes take, but spare her honors spoils,
Which not thy glory, yet must breed our shame.
But pardon dear that which grieved thoughts burst ^orth,
More bright thy fame, that darkened is my state,
"By many means men may approve their worth*
"A woman only with a wretched mate:
"Chaste minds still pure, do then most firmly stand,
"When fortified with wedlockes sacred band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love,
"To fear the worst it is affections part:
I doubt not of thy truth; yet it may prove
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy heart;
But on thy worth my confidence relyes,
This does dissolve suspicions power again;
I will repel reports as stand'rous lies,
Which would my judgment, or thy virtue stain.
Though fortune now my ruin does design,
Yet, with that traitresse scorn to be conjured,
She soon may help her fault, thou never thine:
"No help for honors wounds, all else are cured.

Chorus.
"O More then miserable mind,
"Which of all things it self worst knows!
"And through presumption made quite blind,
"Is puffed up with every wind,
"Which fortune in derision blows.
"The man no stable bliss can find,
"Whose heart is guided by his eye,
"And trusts too much betraying shows,
"Which make a cunning lie;
"Often short prosperity
"Breeds long adversity:
"For, who abuse the first, the last o'rethrowes.
"What thing so good which not some harm may bring?
"Even to be happy is a dangerous thing.
"Who on himself too much depends,
"And makes an Idol of his wit:
"For every favor fortune sends,
"Selfe-flatterer still himself commends,
"And will no sound advice admit,
"But at himself begins and ends,
"And never takes a moments leisure
"To try what fault he may commit:
"But, drunk with frothes of pleasure,
"Thirsts for praise above measure,
"Imaginary treasure,
"Which slowly comes, and flies at every fit;
"And what is most commended at this time,
"Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A mighty man who is respected,
And by his Subjects thought a God,
Thinks as his name on high erected,
Has what he list at home effected,
It may like wonders work abroad,
O how this folly is detected!
For, though he sit in Royal seat,
And as he list his vassals lode,
Yet others who are great,
Live not by his conceit,
Nor weigh what he does threat,
But plague his pride often ere he fear therod;
There are rare qualities required in Kings,
"A naked name can never work great things.
They who themselves too much esteem,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Often find not fortune as they deem,
And with their treasure would redeem
Their error past; bebold even so
Our King of blame does worthy seem,
His adversary who did scorn
And thought who in his name did go,
The laurel should have worn,
His triumphs to adorn,
But he with shame has shorn
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe:
"An enemy (if it be well advised)
("Though seeming weak,) should never be despis
But what? the Minions of our Kings
Who speak at large, and are believed,
Dare brag of many mighty things,
As they could fly, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be achieved;
But time at length their lies to light,
Their Sovereign to confusion brings:
Yet Sovereign to confusion brings:
But charm their Princes sight,
And make what is wrong, seem right,
Thus ruin they his might:
That when he would, he cannot be relieved,
"More Kings in chambers fall by flatteries charms,
"Then in the field by the adversaries Arms.
Lo, though the success has approved
What Charidemus had fore-showne,
Yet with his words no man was moved,
"For good men first must be removed,
"Before their worth can well be known;
The King would hear but what he loved,
And what him pleased not, did despise,
So were the better sort o'rethrowne,
And Sycophants unwife,
Who could the truth disguise,
Were suffered high to rise,
That him who raised them up, they might cast down:
"Thus Princes will not hear, though some deceive them,
"Things as they are, but as themselves conceive them.
Act 2.
Alexander, Parmenio. BEhold, the heavens with a benign aspect,
To prosper this brave enterprise intend,
And with propitious Stars seem to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
"Who would be famous, must of force aspire,
All those (astorish'd) who my Troops do view,
Doubt of these two, which most they should admire,
My coming, or my conquering with so few;
"So mighty minds whilst for great actions bent,
"Force fortune often to favor them in all,
"Where breasts more base divining bad event,
"Through superstitious fears procure their fall.
O how I wonder, when I call to mind
That monstrous camp, which not so much as doubted,
Dim seemed the sun, while as their armor shined,
Men had not heard the thunder, whilst they shouted.
Avant-couroures advanced to examine,
W en they so mean my numbers had perceived,
Did think them small to satisfy the famine
That their huge host of slaughter had conceived,
And yet in end this proved a poisoned food,
Which of their own to their confusion yields,
Huge mounts of murdered corpse; and seas of blood:
Unburied bodies buried all the fields.
So now, that few whom they contemned so far,
(See how mortality it self deceives)
Have quite o're-match'd their multitudes in war;
And made the world near waste to people graves.
Then, dear Parmenio, since the fates afford
So fair an entry to our first designs,
Let us go follow (lantern'd by the sword,)
That fortune which the heavens our hopes assigns.
Parm. This high attempt, as we would wish succeeds,
What hosts have we overthrown, what Cities razed?
Lo, populous Asia trembles at our deeds,
And martial Europe does remain amazed;
Greece, (which both Mars and Pallus did defend:)
A humble supplicant before thee falls,
Rebellious Thebes, which durst with thee contend;
Lies now entombed within her broken walls;
That Sea-commanding Tire, reposing much
In liquid Towers that Neptune reared in vain,
Has now confirmed thy forces to be such,
That nothing can resist thy just, disdain.
No doubt the ancient Grecians, Ghosts are glad
To see the fierce Barbarians brought so low,
Yet are for envy of thy fortune sad,
And though un-bodied blush at this o're-throw:
Miltiades by all men was admired,
Who once in Greece their flying troops pursued,
And he who with a stratagem retired,
And Salamina's straits with blood imbrued;
But yet for all the Captains of that age,
The eastern Monarchs Empire was enlarged,
Who in their Country (flaming all with rage,)
The Sea with ships, the land with Armies charged*
He with more swarms of men then Autumnes clusters,
Drank Rivers dry, and marched on Neptunes back,
By measure, not by number, made his musters,
Did scourge the winds, strived mountains plains to make;
All Europe feared then to be forced to bow,
Whilst the earth did groan to bear so great an host,
But thou have come, seen, and over-com'd them now,
Even in the bounds wherein their power was most.
That haughty foe, who vilipended often
Our predecessors force, and scorned our own,
Now laid as low, as he was once aloft,
With his disgrace, must make thy valor known;
He does by this acknowledge his distress,
In laboring thus to have his friends restored,
This message (mighty Prince) imports no less,
By his request thy conquest is decor'd;
For the recovery of his captived Queen,
He offered has innumerable gold;
A mass so great, that such was never seen,
More (as they brag) then Maccdon can hold:
My counsel is, that you aceept his offers,
And with his daughters render her again,
"Who would make war, must not have empty coffers,
"Where one for glory, thousands sight for gain;
And if those Ladies guarded Captives stay,
It cost and trouble breeds to fit their state;
Thus more to charge, or charges to defray;
To vex or ease, advise, and not too late.

Alex. If come to traffic in a servile sort,
And like a Merchant bent but to embrace
(All else despised) that which might gains import,
Then your opinion purchase might a place:
But soon I surfeit of such melting things,
And famish but for fame, and Crowns of Kings.

Parm. If Alexander, I, so would I do.


Alex. If I Parmenio were, so would I too.


Parm. So you bind Soldiers, let them Dames redeem.


Alex. Save thanks, or praise, no treasure I esteem.


Parm. Even good pro^es ill when done unto a foe.


Alex. What greater glory then to conquer so?


Parm. "Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.


Alex. "True magnanimity does ravish hearts.


Parm. "Wars sinews treasures are which most not fail.


Alex. "Stout breasts, strong hands (not basely given) prevail.


Parm. "The want of wages makes a mutinous band.


Alex. "But who dare disobey when I command?


Parm. "Those are thought fools, who riches do disdain.


Alex. "A gallant mind likes glory more then gain.


Parm. But who delights in such an eiery store:


Alex. If I be ^^gular, I seek no more.


Parm. "The truth by Princes is not understood:
But yet I hear your Soldiers often exclaim,
That your ambition but ex^^austs their blood,
Who perish all to purchase you a name;
Yet careless what they lose, so you may win,
That like your mind, your kingdom may want bounds,
One battles end, another does begin,
Whilst you the glory gain, they naught but wounds;
Such rash reports often blown in every ear,
Do breed base grudge, and lofty tumults too,
"When leaving reverence, duty, love and fear,
"What dare not mutinous troops attempt to do:
Retire in time while as the heavens are clear;
You have performed, performed, and that even soon,
More then your own could hope, your foes could fear,
Yea (yet more strange) then some can trust, though done;
Your worth in war (as bright as glory) shown,
Which even by envy never could be stained,
Your skill in peace would likewise now be known:
Calm virtue guiding, what stern valor gained:
"A State well ruled, the same of Kings does raise,
"No less then foughten fields, or battered Towns.
"More hard it is, and does deserve more praise
"To guide, then get, to keep, then conquer Crowns:
In Fortunes spheres chief height your glory placed,
Can now not move unless it be more low,
And if it once descend, then quite disgraced,
Each Artizan your Statues will o're-throw;
For in the war as you may well perceive,
There does no little part depend on Fame;
If we but once the least small check receive,
The world will gather to procure our shame;
Then tempt not Fortune further then you need,
Your rashly mounting thoughts let reason rain,
Lest whilst your hopes with Trophies feigned you feed,
A moment lose what many days did gain.
Let Darius prove all Monarchs pattern now
(What wand ring Star does sway the course of Crowns)
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
Him only now his misery renownes.
Scarce moved to call you King, though twice o're-throwne,
At last to match with you he does agree,
And with his daughter has for dowry shown
That great Euphrates shall your border be;
Or otherwise he condescends to give
Great store of gold, or what your self desires
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rendered, as he often requires:
And let not lofty thoughts cloud Reasons eyes,
Remember what strange Realms will him embrace,
Which scarce he knows, by name, nor never tryes,
Where if he fled, your troops would tire to chase.

Alex. Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou make me rage,
With those thy words not worthy of our ears;
It seems the coldness of declining age
Has killed thy courage with a frost of fears:
Did I abandon thee my native soil,
And made my Ensigns shadow foreign fields,
As feared for danger, or else flying toil,
That I should turn whilst yet our foe not yields:
Then all my labors, are but lost at last,
Which have but bred an appetite of praise,
That I might dye displeased, the time once past,
When means remained, a state like Jove's, to raise*
No, I will reign, and I will reign alone,
Disdaining to admit of more Commanders:
For (as the Heavens can hold no Sun but one)
The Earth cannot contain two Alexanders;
The spacious circuit of this peopled Round,
Seems not sufficient to confine my thought,
And, O, would God there could more worlds be found,
That many might to grace our deeds be brought;
O! I could wish that the ocean were firm Land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in strife did stand
Against the gods for the etheriall seat:
These could encourage martial minds to strike,
Who when subdued, would yield eternal praise.
I conquer men, but many did the like,
And after-ages may my equal raise:
But since none such my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are, I Will to subjection bring,
And as a pest, I vow to fly all peace,
Till all the world adore me for their King:
Let them retire in time who danger dread,
Yet think on this (whilst glory bent to wed)
That ye abandoned me in time of need,
And that I stayed to fight when as ye fled;
Pass home in darkness, servile rest to find,
I measure not my courage by my numbers.

Par. Your majesty does much mistake my mind,
You know what I endured, what cares, what cumbers;
And for my part, I to your eyes appeal,
Which well can witness what my hands have wrought.
All what I spoke, proceeded of clear zeal,
And not of cowardice, or fear of ought;
Nor match I vile repose with honest pains,
My courage (oft-times tried) is not grown cold,
Nor yet that vigor has not left my veins,
Which spurred my sprite in youth, though I be old.

Alex. It Is not enough, that you your self be so,
To be the same you should the rest exhort;
Is he returned, who was ordained to go
And view the captives? what does he report?

Parm. As we have heard of him who thither went,
While they as yet not of support despaired,
And courteously were led unto a Tent
Which we of purpose caused to be prepared:
Even in the way one fortuned there to spy
The Diadem which Darius ear'st had borne,
(Though glorious once) which low on the earth did lie;
As erst for pomp, then wondered at with scorn.
Straight they imagined from his Royal head,
Whose dignity it sometime did decore,
None could it cast except himself were dead,
And if so were, they wished to live no more:
When they had entered in the Tent to weep,
Your Servant came, and at the entry knocked,
Who (finding them so quiet) thought a sleep
Had closed their eyes, or else that he was mocked,
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanced them lovingly to greet,
When (lo) the Ladies prostrated all lay,
And with a flood of tears be-dew'd his feet.
Then said (by death expecting to be free)
Let us entombe great Darius like a King;
Then when we first his funeral honor see,
Death must to us a great contentment bring;
This often they urged, though he attested there
That Darius was not dead (as they supposed)
But lived with hope, his ruins to repair,
And in the power of other Realms reposed.
Then did he urge what comfort and relief
They might attend, depending on your Grace;
Thus having toiled to mitigate their grief,
It seemed they longed to see my Sovereigns face,

Alex. I pity still, and not insult over such,
(Though once mine Enemies) who are humbled so,
And lest weak fear oppress their minds too much,
To comfort them, straight to their Tent I Will go.

Exeunt. Chorus.
"OF all the passions which possess the soul,
"None so disturbes vain Mortals minds,
"As vain Ambition which so blindes
"The light of them, that nothing can control,
"Nor curb their thoughts who will aspire;
"This raging vehement desire
"Of Sovereignty no satisfaction finds,
"But in the breasts of men does ever roll
"The restless stone of Sisyph to torment them,
"And as his heart who stole the heavenly fire,
"The Vulture gnaws, so does that monster rent them:
"Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemn the state wherein they stand,
And save themselves, would all command;
"As one desire is quenched, another buds,
When they have traveled all their time,
Heapt blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is an higher power that guides their hand:
More happy he whom a poor Cottage shrouds
Against the tempest of the threatening heaven;
He stands in fear of none, none envies him;
His heart is upright, and his ways are even,
Where others states are still twixt six and seven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blown,
Then whilst be turns the wheel about,
Thrown high, and low, within, without,
In striving for the top is tumbling down.
"Those who delight in climbing high,
"Often by a precipice do dye,
So do the Stars skie-climbing worldlings slout;
But this disease is fatal to a Crown:
Kings, who have most, would most augment their bounds,
And if they be not all, they cannot be,
Which to their damage commonly redounds,
"The weight of too great states themselves confounds.
"The mighty toyling to enlarge their state,
"Themselves exceedingly deceive,
"In hazarding the thing they have
"For a felicity which they conceive;
"Though their Dominions they increase,
Yet their desires grow never less,
"For though they conquer much, yet more they crave,
"Which fatal Fortune does attend the great,
"And all the outward pomp that they assume
"Does but with shows disguise the Minds distress;
"And who to conquer all the earth presume,
"A little earth shall them at last consume.
And if it fortune that they dye in peace,
(A wonder wondrous rarely seen)
Who conquer first, heavens find a mean
To raze their Empire, and oft-times their race,
Who coming to the Crown with rest,
And having all in peace possessed,
Do straight forget what bloody broils have been,
Ere first their Fathers could attain that place;
"As Seas do flow and ebb, States rise, and fall,
"And Princes when their actions prosper best,
"For fear their greatness should oppress the small,
"As of some hated, envied are of all.
We know what end the mighty Cyrus made,
Whom whilst he strived to conquer still,
A woman (justly grieved) did kill,
And in a bloody vessel rolled his head,
Then said (whilst many wondering stood)
Since thou did famish for such food,
Now quench thy thirst of blood with blond at will;
Some who succeeded him, since he was dead,
Have reigned a space with pomp, and yet with pain,
Whose glory now can do to us no good;
And what so long they labored to obtain,
All in an instant must be lost again.
Lo, Darius once so magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemned o're-come,
For all his bravery now made dombe,
With down-cast eyes must signify his shame;
Who puffed up with ostentive pride,
Think Fortune bound to serve their side,
Can never escape, to be the prey of some;
Such spend their prosperous days, as in a dream,
And as it were in Fortunes bosom sleeping,
Then in a dull security abide,
And of their doubtful state neglect the keeping,
Whilst fearful ruin comes upon them creeping.
Thus the vicissitude of worldly things
Does often to us it self detect,
When heavenly powers exalt, deject,
Confirm, confound, erect, and ruin Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquished world does bow,
With all submission, homage, and respect,
Does fly a borrowed flight with Fortunes wings;
Nor enters he his dangerous course to ponder;
Yet if once Fortune bend her cloudy brow,
All those who at his sudden success wonder,
May gaze as much to see himself brought under.
Act. 3.
Scene 1.
Sisigambis, Statira, Regina Statira virgo. O Dismal day detested be thy light,
And would the Gods (but Gods neglect our case)
The world were wrapped in a Cymmerian Night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our disgrace.
Why did the Heavens reserve my feeble age
To make my burden more, when strength grows less?
Could nothing but my harms their wrath assuage,
Thus offered up on The Altar of distress?
Ah! have I spent my youth in pomp, and pleasure,
And had my springtime graced with pleasant flowers
That th'Autumne which should reap the Summers treasure*
Might be distempred with such stormy showers?
And did smooth calmes and Sunne-shines for a space,
Make all my voyage through the world a sport,
That I should fall when near to end my race,
(And tossed with storms) even perish at my port?
Yet for all this, were I exposed alone,
The wretched object of Jove's thundering arms,
I should not think I had just cause to moan,
When I but wail'd mine own, not others harms;
Ah me! on those whom more then life I love
The state-disturbing blasts of Fortune fall,
Yet each of them some several loss does move,
But I in anguish bear a part with all:
I suffered when I saw Oxatres slain,
My loving Son, and most entirely loved;
I died in Darius, when he tried in vain
What Fates would do, yet still their hatred proved;
The heavens to plague me more, yet make me breath,
O rigor rare! what tortures rack my breast?
Who feel the sour; but not the sweet of death,
Still cours'd, not killed, lest that should breed me rest;
Yet, Jove, if this may dis-enflame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon my head,
To be consumed with a celestial fire,
Some comfort were, since that I must be dead.
Sta. Reg. Leave mother those complaints, as fit for me,
Who still must grieve my friends, and grace my foes:
Whose fortune is so wretched still to be,
That all the world may wonder at my woes.
Lo, that dear Lord and treasure of my thought,
Whose presence I my Paradise esteemed,
To such a precipice is headlong brought,
That he from ruin cannot be redeemed;
Ah! on what prop can I repose my trust,
When of his state I first the greatness ponder?
Next, how his Diadem (drencht in the dust)
Was Fortunes Trophee, and all Asia's wonder?
He whose imperious speech the world respected,
And as an Oracle had in regard,
He vanquished now, and with contempt neglected,
(Even as a supplicant) can scarce be heard;
And yet I know this more does grieve his soul
Then all the harm which happned to his state,
His power over me that any can controull,
Who (as his Idol) was adored of late;
Shall he (pure quintessence of my best part)
Then only testify the love he bears?
No, by mine eyes I will distill my heart,
And for his sake dissolve my self in tears;
Would God my breast might still transparant be,
That as through Crystal all might mark my mind,
And of my loyal thoughts the secrets see,
Whose great affection cannot be confined.
This prisons worst has bounded but mine eyes,
And banished them the object of their joy,
My fiery heart well winged with fancies flies,
And where thou go do still thy steps convoy;
Dear, whilst thou do enjoy this common air,
Those who me captive think, do grossly err:
For whilst thou liv'st, how can thy Queen despair,
Whom thou to soul, and Scepter, do prefer;
Yet flatter I my self who am accursed?
Of those mishaps which make my thoughts to stray,
The memory may serve to make me burst,
Ah, ah, I faint, I feel my sprits decay.

Sis. Help, help, alas, alas the Empress falls.


Stat. Vir. O day of darkness! what a world of woes?


Sis. This heavy sight my panting heart appalls:
Heaven, earth, and all, are now become our foes.

Stat. Vir. No creature has more cause to moan then I,
Whose Fathers Fortune often afflicts mine ears,
Whilst I my mothers misery must spy,
So that of both my breast the burden bears.

Stat. Reg. What inhumane humanity is this,
With such a cruel pity to oppress,
To bring pale ghosts back from the fields of bliss,
Yet to be plunged in the ocean of distress?
O unkind kindness that by saving slayes,
And would with lovelesse love, my love controull:
Ah! of this braving Sun the loathsome rays
Do clear mine eyes, but to confound my soul.

Sis. Dear daughter, strive your passions to restrain,
Lest that the torrent of your grief grow such,
That both it carry you where horiours reign;
And him o're-whelme for whom you mourn so much;
No doubt but he, if we rest captives thus
Disdaining those indignities of ours,
To venge himself in reobtaining us,
Will hazard all his oriental powers;
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afford,
Whose care-worne breast the worst of woe contains:
Yet though my heart would feign impugn my word,
I hopeless speak of hope, to ease her pains.

Stat. Reg. Plagued with what is, what may be never pause,
Since we must hold our grief our greatest good,
And do not feed false hopes, for we have cause
Even to sigh out our souls, and weep our blood.

Sis. I wail my Son.


Stat. Reg. And I my husbands fall.


Stat. Vir. I wail my Father, and in him us all.


Sis. No woe like mine, mine cannot be releev'd,
I wail his woe who should my woe assuage,
Who lives by me, by whom I should have lived,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.

Stat. Reg. No woe like mine, who for my Mate mourn here,
For love ot whom, I had all others left;
But what a Mate? my self, or one more dear,
Yet from my self, my self by force am reft.

Stat. Vir. So woe like mine, who born a Monarchs child,
Hoped by my birth of Fortunes best to boast,
Yet are my hopes even at the height beguiled,
And what I hoped in most, has harmed me most.

Sis. I mourn for him who in my womb was formed.


Stat. Reg. I mourn for him in whom love me transformed.


Stat. Vir. I mourn for him who did give form to me.


Sis. Shall I no more in him my Image see?


Stat. Reg. Ah! shall I never in his joy rejoice?


Stat. Vir. Ah! shall I never hear his cheerful voice?


Sis. Would God my ruin might his ransom be.


Stat. Reg. Would God my life my life's life might set free.


Stat. Vir. Would God the life he gave him life might give.


Sis. Must those gray hairs my Sons green youth furvive?


Stat. Reg. Lest twice made dye, I Will first prevent his fall.


Stat. Vir. Shall I live last to suffer for you all?


Sis. But whilst our wretched state we justly moan,
We may lament this Infant too a space,
Who in mishap inferior were to none,
If he could apprehend his Tragic case.

Stat. Reg. O then how can my heart but bursted be,
Whom Nature moves most to bemone his harms?
I think the hosts of heaven I thundering see
On me, my husband* and him in my arms:
Dear Image of my self, in whom I live,
Thy shape not shames the greatness of thy Sire,
But of thy birth clear evidence does give,
Thy sowre-sweet sight adds coals to my desire.
Thou who should comfort most, torment'st thou me?
Huge hosts of passions now my soul assembles;
O how I grieve, and yet am glad to see
Thee, though not him, whom thy sweet face resembles!
Go bear this Babe from hence, a wound too deep
Has piere'd me with compassion of his part,
Yet let him stay, I joy to hear him weep;
This mothers passion melts my bursting heart;
Of many woes this last is not the least,
That unbegun thy glory thus must end:
Thy Fortunes Sun (my Son) set in the East,
Whilst all the world thy rising did attend;
Ah! must this Innocent taste of mishap,
Whose tender age cannot discern his state,
And thus be plagued, yea, in his Nurses lap,
Inherit woe by birth? ah cruel fate!
If thou could hope, what great hopes have thou lost
Who art defrauded of so high a Throne?
Ah! in thy cradle must I see thee crossed
Whom I designed so great when we were gone?
Yet happy hapless child, who can not know
From whence the fountain of our sorrow flows,
Nor what it is that men call high, or low,
Nor on what thorn the rose of honor grows.
Yet have thou felt the prick before the smoll;
Is this the benefit thy birthright brings,
A captive here in misery to dwell?
Then better not be borne, nor come of Kings.
O! what a noise is this that thus affrights?
I think of tears the torrent to restrain,
(Since souls when sad a just complaint delights)
They still would plague, yet stop me to complain;
Or is it one who does lament our case,
And is (a rare thing) in affliction kind?
Who would behold how we can death embrace!
Death sovereign physic for a troubled mind.

Sis. By many signs we may our selves assure
It Is Alexander whom we longed not for.

Stat. Reg. What? ah I die, and must mine eyes endure
That hateful object which I most abhor?

Sis. Spare, spare such speeches now, lest all go wrong,
We are environed with outrageous hosts;
Those who are weak must yield unto the strong:
For, Victors rage when as the vanquished bosts;
I will entreat him too, not for my self
(Age bows my body to embrace pale death)
But that you yet may shun this wrackfull shelfe,
Whose youth and beauty worthy are of breath.

Act. 3. Scene 2.
Alexander, Sisigambis, Statira Regina, Hephestion. RIse Mother, rise, and
calm those needless cares,
I come to cure, not to procure your woe;
The duty which I owe those silver hairs,
Does grieve my mind to see you humbled so.
Sis. Most gracious Prince, forgive me if I erred
In taking him for you, who stands you by.

Alex. I find no fault to see my friend preferred,
Even to my self; this is another I.

Sis. My sorrows so confounded have my mind
That scarce I know my self, another less;
My soul in such an agony I find,
As words, nor tears, nor groans cannot express.

Alex. I pray you mother set those plaints apart,
They vex me more then stern Bellona's broils.

Sis. This tender name of Mother wounds my heart,
Whilst named by him, who of that name me spoils:
I was (woe that I was) a Mother late
Of two fair Sons (fair Suns) lights of my life,
But one is dead, and in a worse estate,
The other lives, involved in woe, and strife;
Like to the trunk of some disbranched tree
Which Aeolus has to confusion brought,
Since spoiled of those brave Impes which sprung from me
Unprofitable stock, I serve for naught.

Stat. Reg. I serve for naught, since serving him no more,
Who only may my blasted hopes revive,
Lo (quite confounded) far from what before,
Who him of me, me of my self deprive.
I live without my half, without my whole,
Prodigious Monster, whom the world admires,
I want the point, the pilot, and the pole
Which drew, addressed, and bounded my desires:
Tossed by sad sighs in floods of bitter tears,
I (save from ruin) look for no relief,
By what I feel still plagued, but worse with fears,
All comfort loathed, my glory is my grief:
My soul feemes to presage disastrous chances,
And warring with it self has never peace,
My heart surcharged does faint in deadly trances,
My eyes must grace the ground of my disgrace.
Hell has assembled all her horrors here;
Ah! in the dungeons of this desperate breast,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appear
A thousand shadows to bereave my rest.

Alex. Fair Princess, spare those passionate complaints,
Which may augment, but not amend your harms;
This voice which with your woe the world acquaints,
Does move me more then all the Persians Arms.
Take courage (Madam) be afraid of none:
That you may hope what help I can afford,
I swear by Jove's inviolable Throne,
And do protest by my Imperial word;
Though for a while barred from your royal seat,
You compassed here with troops of strangers stand,
Yet shall you still be used as fits your state,
And may (as erst in your own Court) command,

Stat. Reg. Ah! how can I command whilst I am thrall?
What can I have, who wanting one, want all?

Alex. Though brave it seem in some proud victors sight,
To plague their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I labor to rest rain my will.
What can be feared by them whom I defend?
Foes have not power, and who with me remain.
They dare not wrong, nor offer to offend
The least in rank who does attend your train;
If any would impugn what I appoint,
Or would in ambush for your honor lie,
Or discontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch shall dye.

Stat. Reg. O what an host of evils where ere I go
Are still encroaching to o're-throw my state?
Ah! must I be beholding to my foe,
And owe him love, to whom my love owes hate?
Should he help me who still his ruin plyes?
Heavens curse my heart, if stained with treason thus,
Let death in darkness first entombe mine eyes,
Ere such a sight accepted be by us.
I (Lord) am thine, and thine I will remain,
Thy love was planted in a fertile field,
Which grateful now thee to reward again
From flourished faith chaste flames for fruits does yield.
Yet does misfortune this good fortune bring,
My constancy shall now be clearly known;
Another might have loved an happy King:
But I will love thee, though thou be o're-throwne.

Alex. I labor much to comfort in some measure
This grieved Queen, that was a Monarch's choice,
Whose woe does make my victory no pleasure,
For whilst she mournes, I cannot well rejoice.

Sis. Most mighty King thou do deserve indeed,
That (as for Darius) we should pray for thee,
Who do so much in clemency exceed,
That thou bewail'st our loss, no less then he;
Not only thou surmount'st all other Kings,
In glory rising from thy labors gone;
And for those benefits which Fortune brings,
But in all virtues worthy of a Throne;
Thou do vouchsafe on me (more then I crave)
The title of a Queen, and Mother still,
But I confess my self thy humble slave,
Whose life has now no limits but thy will;
The dreamed good, that Greatness gave, forgot,
My countenance shall be free from clouds of cares,
And I Will allow of this my present lot,
As one who for my fate my force prepares;
Yea, if this woeful woman here were free,
Who has no heaven except her husbands face;
I could content my self (great Prince) to be
The meanest hand-mayd that attends your Grace.

Alex. As if your Sons, command all that is mine,
And I will seek to second your desire.

Sis. Heavens recompense this courtesy of thine,
Which in all ages thousands shall admire.

Alex. Those captived Princesses have pierced my soul,
Which even amid'st our heaven, have found a hell.

Hep. His passions so what Stoic could controull,
Whom now to weep, their tears would not compel?
What age could erst such stately beauties show,
Which of perfection hold the highest place,
And borne to bring, though now they be brought low,
Do Beauty beautify, give Grief a grace?
Sir, such a victory has not been seen
As you have gained, since conquering (as appears)
The largest kingdom, and the fairest Queen,
That Asia vaunted of, these many years.
Durst Leda's, or Agenors brood compare
With that sweet Queen, the honor of her kind?
But as she is above all others fair,
As far her daughters make her go behind;
It seemed at first that sorrow had been sleeping,
Then whilst those Virgins in their Grand-dames bosom,
With weeping beauty, and with beauteous weeping,
Did with a hail of pearl, blast Beauties blossom:
So large a power, no Prince on Earth can have,
As has Loves Empire in their face confined.

Alex. What, what. Hephestion, what does thee deceive?
Dare folly seek to brag so brave a mind?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed Camp,
And them who Mars have matched for sport appall?
Must his soft seal even through hard metal stamp,
And make who conquer men, to women thrall?

Hep. We dare resist (whilst many a thousand dies)
The steely tempests of a world of men,
But if from yvorie orbs two Sunnie eyes
Do charge the soul (I know not how) O then
A secret power (composed of hopes and fears)
So charms the mind, that it strange thoughts conceives,
And straight the heart (quass'd drunk by the eyes and the ears)
Does staggring reele, and full of fancies raves.

Alex. But yet, in my conceit, I scorn all such,
And do disdain to yield my self at all;
Yea, in that sort to bow I loath so much,
Let rather Mars then Cupid make me fall:
Should I be bound with frail affections chains,
As one oblivious of my former fame?
No, no, this purpose still my soul retains,
To balance nothing with a noble name;
O! what a great indignity is this?
To see a Conqueror to his lust a slave!
"Who would the title of true worth were his,
"Must vanquish vice, and no base thoughts conceive:
"The bravest Trophee ever man obtained
"Is that, which over himself, himself has gained.

Hep. I Am glad (my Sovereign) that as you excel,
Not only men, but Mars himself in arms,
That from your mind, you likewise may repel
The flattering power of loves alluring charms,
That virtue rare, whose rays shine in your words,
With generous ardour does inflame my soul,
And over my self to me such power affords;
That some brave deeds must straight this course control*

Act 3. Scene 3
Bessus, Narbazanes. NArbazanes, now ere the time be gone,
Let us accomplish that which we intend,
And join our wit, our force, and all in one,
(Ere known begun) that it may quickly end
You see the occasion (if our course we, keep)
To raise rare fortunes, points us out the way,
Yea, blames our sluggishnesse that as a sleep,
So great a purpose do so long delay.
Lo, angry Jove our Princes part disproves:
For, Fortunes worst what ever he attempt
From following him, the peoples mind removes:
"Distress still is attended by contempt,
A ground for so great hopes who ere did see,
As heavens so happily breed in our mind,
For, since our King confounded is to be,
We by his fall, a means to rise may find.
Nar. I will most willingly perform my part,
For, I the same exceedingly allow:
Dear wealth and honor, Idols of my heart,
If you I may enjoy, I care not how;
Yet that this course may best be kept obscure,
Our care must seem all for our Country bent;
"When masked with zeal; crimes are reputed pure,
"A show of good does vulgar minds content,
"In dangerous plots where courage joins with Art,
"Let slow advice, a quick dispatch be used:
"What can (save success) justify our part,
"Who must command, or come to be accused?

Bes. To Alexander one was sent of late,
To speak of peace, whose speech was spent in vain,
So that (thus tossed) most desperate is his state,
Who peace cannot obtain, nor war maintain;
To clear his thoughts which many doubts do sway,
He now craves each man's mind who squadrons leads;
This for our purpose must prepare the way:
"Those who would compass Kings, need crafty heads:
And that to gain which we so much esteem,
We can upon no means more safe conclude,
Then crooked counsels that do upright seem
To mask our selves, and others to delude;
He must (advised by some) renounce a space
The show of power, and from affairs retire,
That for a fashion one may use his place,
Not as usurped, but at his own desire:
So may he try if others can bring back
That which his fortunes ebb has borne away,
Then he again his Diadem shall take,
And (as before) the regal Scepter sway.

Nar. Well, then amongst our selves to fly debate,
Which such great actions oft-times under-mines,
I yield that you possess the highest seat,
And will my faction frame for our designs.

Bes. All that is one, which of us two receive it,
Since every thing does equally belong us,
I Will take it for the form, it is one who have it,
For we will part his kingdoms all among us.
But if he condescend to this we crave,
To judgments rash, which would at first seem good,
Let him not think us two such fools to leave,
That which so many else have bought with blood;
"Who once advanced, would willingly go down,
"And (prop'd with power,) not love in state to stand?
"This not the custom is to quite a Crown,
"When one has known how sweet it is to command;
"This name of faith but to get credit feigned,
"Is (weighed with kingdoms) lighter then a Crown,
"And even in them whose thoughts are most restrained,
"A Scepters weight would press all goodness down.

Nar. Yet of my thoughts some doubt new counsel claims,
And with huge honor aggravates disgrace:
The stain of treason still attends our names,
And with our error burdens all our race;
Our purpose must accomplished be with pain,
And we (though pomp a space appease our souls)
Shall find afflictions to disturb our reign,
And be when dead, defamed by famous scroules.
The sacred title of a Sovereign King
Does work a terror more then can be thought,
And Majesty to brave my mind does bring,
Whose countenance only strange effects has wrought.

Bes. To idle sounds and frivolous reports,
Give straight a pasport, for they last not long,
And what thou do allege, not much imports:
"A Crown may cover any kind of wrong;
"What heinous thing so odious is by nature,
"Which for a Kingdom not committed is?
"To be a King, let me be called a traitor,
"Faith (if for ought) may broken be for this.
"Those are but feeble brains which fancies load,
"With timorous dreams which bare surmising brings;
"Who fear vain shadows, must not walk abroad,
"Too wary wits dare never work great things.
If our brave project happily succeed,
(As now I doubt not but it shall do soon)
We straight will numbers find to praise our deed,
And sooth us up in all that we have done.

Nar. Now that the time and manner may be sure,
The Bactrian bands shall all attend in Arms,
Yet feign a cause that he may live secure,
And be surprised not looking for alarmes.
Then through the camp a rumor must be spread,
That hopeless Darius has despair'dly gone,
By violence to dwell amongst the dead,
Which (as much grieved) we must appear to moan:
The Persians may promises be pleased,
So to disarme him of his native powers,
Then taking him, our thoughts may all be eased,
For whilst he is his own, we are not ours:
Till strong with titles, we with power command,
His shadow shrouds, while rights are forced, or feigned,
And his to daunt, or strangers to gaine-stand,
To raise our state, his show must be, maintained.
To Alexander after we will send,
And offer him his foe to bondage bought,
Then crave that us his favor may defend,
As those who all things for his good have wrought;
Then if we thus his grace cannot procure,
But that he us with rigor do pursue,
With Darius death we will our states assure,
Then first our force, and next the wars renew.

Bes. Let us henceforth for nothing be dismayed,
But strive our selves courageously to bear.
This dangerous action would not bedelay'd,
Least time make him to doubt, and us to fear.

Exeant. Chorus.
TIme, through Jove's judgment just,
Huge alterations brings:
Those are but fools who trust
In transitory things,
Whose tails be are mortal stings,
Which in the end will wound;
And let none think it strange,
Though all things earthly change:
In this inferior round
What is from ruin free?
The Elements which be
At variance, (as we see)
Each the other does confound:
The Earth and Air make war,
The fire and water are
Still wrestling at debate,
All those through cold and heat,
Through drought and moisture ja^re.
What wonder though men change and fade,
Who of those changing Elements are made?
How dare vain worldlings vannt
Of fortunes goods not lasting,
Evils which our wits enchant?
Exposed to loss and wasting?
Lo, we to death are hasting,
Whilst we those things discuss:
All things from their beginning,
Still to an end are running,
Heaven has ordained it thus;
We hear how it does thunder,
We see the earth burst asunder,
And yet we never ponder
What this imports to us:
These fearful signs (...) prove,
That the angry pow'r^ above
Are moved to indignation
Against this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a pass of breath
Who live assured of nothing but of death?
Who was so happy yet
As never had some cross?
Though on a Throne he sit,
And is not ut'd with loss,
Yet fortune once will toss
Him, when that least he would;
If one had all at once
Hydaspes precious stones,
And yellow Tagus gold;
The Oriental treasure,
And every earthly pleasure,
Even in the greatest measure,
It should not smake him bold:
For while he lives secure,
His state is most unsure;
When it does least appear,
Some heavy plague draws near,
Destruction to procure.
Worlds glory is but like a flower,
Which both is bloomed, and blasted in an hour.
In what we most repose,
We find our comfort light,
The thing we soonest lose
That Is precious in our sight;
For honor, riches, might,
Our lives in pawn we lay;
Yet all like flying shadows,
Or flowers enamelling meadows,
Do vanish and decay.
Long time we toil to find
Those Idols the mind,
Which had, we cannot bind
To bide with us one day:
Then why should we presume
On treasures that consume,
Difficult to obtain,
Difficult to retain,
A dream, a breath, a fume?
Which vex them most, that them possess,
Who starve with store, and famish with excess.
Act 4.
Scene 1.
Darius, Tiriotes. AH! must I poison now my Princes ears,
With news the worst that ever burdened fame:
Had I as many tongues as I have tears,
All would not serve my sorrows to proclaim.
Dar. Great signs of grief I in thy face discern,
And spare not to report this heavy cross
To one (I fear) whom it does most concern:
Is It death, disgrace, destruction, treason, loss?
Tell on the sum of horror at the first;
With no ambiguous words my pain prolong;
"A wretch for comfort craves to know the worst,
And I have learned to be unhappy long;
What least I speak, and yet suspect too much,
Art thou the Trumpet to proclaim my scorn
Which must wound me? (but ah) no torment such
As this to her who that disgrace has borne.

Tir. She was not wronged, as you have wrong conceived;
The Gods from harm did study to preserve her;
She from your foe such favor has received,
As from her Subjects who were bound to serve her;
But what a volly does my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your cares? woes full of dread,
Would God ere I my message can declare,
That I may dye in saying she is dead.
And was it not enough (poor wretch alas)
That I beheld her dye, and would have died?
But that I must (armed with sad tidings) pass
To wound all them who hear what I have spied?
See how he stands (moved with those words of mine,)
As if by grief arrested unto death.

Dar. Yet does the Sun on my affliction shine,
And clear the air though tainted by my breath?
And can I live, and look them in the face,
Who have my overthrow (shameful overthrow) seen?
And how I vanquished, vanquished with disgrace,
Did lose at once my Kingdom and my Queen?
Heaven bruise me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remain
The object of thy wrath, and fortunes wonder,
Spoiled of all hope, yet kept for greater pain.
Ah, art thou dead? and do I live behind thee?
Thy faulty husband, think thou so to fly?
If it be thin, then know I where to find thee,
This only grieves me that too late I dye.
O Alexander, what such heinous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'st me thus?
Whom of thy friends or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeserved of us,
Though justly thou intended had this war,
Mars from his rage made women always free,
This tyranny shall all thy Trophies mar,
And still to thy reproach reported be.

Tir. Thus of that Prince, you without cause esteem,
I know her death him grievously displeased,
A woodrous thing which few or none would deem,
He wail'd it long, and could not be appeased.
Even as my Sovereign now, then did he smart,
And when he came to calm your mothers grief,
As acting not his own, but even your part,
He seemed to need, and not to give relief.

Dar. If any sparks of that respect remain,
Which much with thee should (duly weighed) import,
I pray thee (Tiriotes) now be plain,
Or else strange torments shall the truth extort;
I loath to let this question escape my mouth,
Which both I blush to crave, and long to know,
And can it be, that this transported youth
Not urged to have that which I only owe?
Could this fierce Prince even in his flaming age,
Have such a beauty purchased by his toiles,
And yet not seek (forced by affections rage)
Her honors ruin, and my pleasures spoils?
Speak frankely now, and tell what fatal shelfe
Has crushed my treasures Bark, and me defaced:
The fear of ill is worse then ill it self,
"They twice do dye, who dye, and dye disgraced.

Tir. Let not those love-bred fears abuse your thought;
By all the world no fable I contrive;
If partially I speak, or lie in ought,
Earth open wide, and swallow me alive:
He whom your grace so wrongfully suspects,
Has not in any sort your Queen abused,
But as his sister still (in all respects)
As chastely and as honorably used;
When angry Jove subverted had our state,
And viewed our thundered troops disordered flight,
Light fortune then who flattered us of late,
Did make our state a mirror of her might,
For, having found a Crown foiled on the ground.

Dar. O endless shame which never can be cured*


Tir. We straight imagined that some cruel wound
Had killed our Lord, and wail'd it as assured.

Dar. Would God I then had died, as I desired,
To have prevented those ensuing barmes,
Whilst ere my hohour and my hap expired
A Crown my head, a Queen enriched my arms.

Tir. But Alexander having heard our cries,
Sent one to learn the cause that moved our woe;
Who finding whence our error did arise,
Gave full assurance that it was not so.
Then he himself did to our Tent resort,
And with the mildest words he could conceive,
Your Mother, Wife, and Children did exhort
Such terrors vain (since but surmiz'd) to leave;
And he protested that they should expect
No harm of him their courage to appall,
Then all things did with great regard direct,
That no man might endammage them at all.
Thus when they were against all dangers armed,
(I think, for fear (for who would not have feared*)
Lest such rare graces might his mind have charmed)
He never more before her face appeared;
Else generous virtue, jealous of each thing,
Which (tempting reason) senses might allure,
(What rare restraint in a victorious King)
He fled what fault, or scandal could procure.
He does his fame above all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemish find,
Nor give his eyes commodity to err,
Lest thoughts impure might strive to stain his mind.
He whilst that she was sick, did loath delight,
And (gravely griey'd) all pomp and pleasure left.

Dar. O hateful heaven! that with such hellish spite
The worlds chief treasure, Natures glory reft.

Tir. When he beheld deaths triumph in that face,
Which had triumphed over such a Monarchs heart,
With witnessed woe, even passionate a space,
The lookers on did much commend his part;
And when some time his dolor had o're-come,
Her funeral rites solemnly to decore,
He used such honor, as might well become
The Persian pomp in prosperous times before.

Dar. O power supreme that of great states disposest,
And ratifi'st thy will with fearful thunder,
Who as thou please, placest, and deposest
Uncertain worldlings, now above, now under:
I pray thy Deity in my souls distress,
If that the inhabitants of heaven can hear
The plaints of them who this low point possess,
Or that the immortals can give mortals care,
This favor last I only do require,
Establish first the Scepter in my hand;
But if through my desert, or thy desire,
The race of Cyrus must no more command,
Since angry heaven so high a hate contracts,
That I must needs my Diadem forgo,
Let him succeed, who proves in all his acts,
So mild a Victor, and so just a foe.

Act 4. Scene 2.
Darius, Artabazus, Nabarzanes, Patron, Bessus. IF joined by fates with men of
dastard minds,
Who to a noble death, base life preferred,
I should not waste my words amongst the winds,
But labor would that time might be deferred;
Though still resolved, your course confirms me much,
Whom no disaster could divorce from me,
What man can doubt whom heavens do back by such,
When (bragged with bondage) fighting to be free?
My courage swells to see you marching forth,
Whose force and faith, which all the world does sing,
(Often cleared by proof, though fortune envy worth)
Might serve to make, far more to keep a King.
He gives our rebels Towns, not moved by love:
"Each Prince (though using them,) all traitors hates.
But that their course to take, this might you move,
His turn once served, so forfeiting your states.
Ye to my fortune have not had regard,
As of my peace, so partners of my wars,
Which, though that I might not, Jove would reward,
And all the world extol you to the stars.
How long shall I a vagabond remain,
And fly a stranger who my right would reave,
Since by one battle we may re-obtaine
All that we lost, or lose all that we have?
Like some vile traitors, whom I will arraigne,
To hold me up, shall I go cast me down?
Must Darius only by entreaty reign?
No, none has power to give, or take my Crown.
I shall not my authority survive,
Nor will I proffer a submissive breath,
My hand shall hold a Scepter while I live,
My hand shall bear a Diadem till death;
If those frank thoughts which do possess my soul,
Such flames of courage kindled have in you,
A Macedonian shall not us control,
Nor with disdainefull smiles brag whilst we bow:
My state may testify frail fortunes change,
May she not him o're-whelme, as well as me?
At least our hands bear death, if not revenge,
"Brave minds when no more rests may still dye free.
Now call your valorous ancestors to mind,
Whom from the Grecians tribute still required,
And of whose deeds rare monuments we find,
Whose merits make their memories admired;
Shall of your deeds, posterity be dumb,
Which does your fathers names (though dead) adore?
I am resolved, my triumph, or my tomb,
A Laurel, or a Cypress shall decore.
Art. What doubtful silence thus your thoughts detaines?
We need advise with naught but with our swords;
He who the Persians wonted worth retains,
Will answer now with deeds, and not with words.
Let us accompany our King in Arms,
Through bloody squadrons to this fatal strife:
"No profit can be had without some harms,
By slaughter only we must look for life;
And when our host (as I hope) does prevail,
Our Country shall have peace, we praise of right;
And if our fortune (not our courage) fail,
We dye with honor in our Sovereigns sight;
Let us (if vanquished) scorn base breath to buy,
A noble death may greater glory give,
Do to o're-come, and yet not fear to dye:
It Is needful that we fight, not that we live.

Nar. My words will first your Majesty displease,
Yet duty makes me speak where silence spilles;
"The best Physician cures a sharp disease,
"With some sour potion that corruption killes;
"And skillful Pilots when they fear a storm,
"To save the ship, will cast out precious things,
You in some sort may imitate their form,
For else a tempest total ruin brings.
Since bent against the Gods, how can we speed?
To all our actions, fortune is opposed,
We must of force some other way proceed,
So have the heavens of our affairs disposed:
Give (Sir,) the state, at least your titles place
On some more happy man, not in effect,
But with your shadow cloth him for a space,
Till he your Realms from ruin may protect.
This storm once calmed, that now disturbes your state,
And Asia free from any foreign host,
He shall with haste resign the Sovereign seat,
These Kingdoms gained again, which you have lost:
All Bactria yet abides at your command,
The Indians, lo, would dye to do you good,
Yea, many thousand thousands armed stand,
Bent for your State to offer up their blood;
What? should we rush like beasts to needless strife?
Be well prepared, and then your fortune try,
"Brave minds should death despise, not loathing life:
"For fear of danger cowards crave to dye.
"But virtue first all hopes accounts does cast,
"And of each mean to help maturely thinks,
"Then, when all else is done, death is the last,
"The which to meet true courage never shrinkes.
Now for the time, let Bactria be our seat,
To Bessus for the form your Crown resign,
Who, when he once has re-advanc'd your state,
Shall with your foes overthrow his charge confine.

Dar. Wretch travell'st thou thy Sovereign to betray?
Such treason dare thou to our ears impart?
Such treason under trust? stay traitor stay,
My sword shall search what lurkes within thy heart.

Art. Sir, reyne your rage: this but new trouble breeds;
And weigh well what they are, what is the time;
It may be this from ignorance proceeds,
"In thought, and not in word, consists a crime;
Since that against your enemies you go,
Be not severe in cens'ring Subjects parts,
But tolerate your own, to grieve your foe,
Now must we strive to gain, not lose men's hearts.
It by all means shall be exactly tried,
How first his brain such fancies did embrace,
And if but simply, not puffed up with pride,
He must be pardoned, and restored to grace.

Dar. And of my Subjects I would rather have
Then one to punish, them to guerdon all.

Nar. If I have erred, no pardon (Sir) I crave.
First hear, and if I fail, then let me fall;
I call the Gods to testify my part,
Who can (commenting thoughts) clear truth afford,
If ever treason harbored in my heart,
Straight let me dye, not pitied, but abhorred;
I counsel gave according to my skill,
It was my upright mind that made me bold,
And though my wit not answered to my will,
"Still zeal what it conceives, must needs unfold.
"We should be loath to speak in great affairs,
"Where words are damned, or balanced by the event:
"For, if things fail, the fault is still thought theirs,
"Who gave advice, though of a good intent,
Great Prince forget this not well grounded grudge*
Who dare be free if thus for words rejected?
At least examine first before you judge,
I rather dye absolved, then live suspected.

Dar. Your fond opinion justly might be feared,
Which seemed indeed sinistrously inclind;
For, at the first your speech to me appeared
The poisoned birth of some malicious mind.
But your purgation now has taken place,
And of your faith I will no further doubt,
But hold you in the same degree of grace,
That you enjoyed, before those words chanced our.
I think that Patron looks with speaking eyes,
As if his mind were mightily perplexed,
Come, Patron, tell what in thy bosom lies,
By which thou seem so wonderfully vexed.

Pa. Sir, I would speak in private if I could,
That which affection fired with zeal affords,
"Let silence seal what friends with fear unfold,
Take you my thoughts, none else shall have my words:
Though only bound by voluntary choice,
We follow you (all other hopes quite lost)
Your bodies shadows, the Echoes of your voice,
As faithful now as when you flourished most;
For where you are, we must remain with you,
Since both our lots are in one vessel thrown,
I wish our Tent were made your lodging now,
For, we will save your life, or lose our own.
We have abandoned Greece our native soil,
And our retreat no Bactria now attends,
But those who us would of your person spoil,
Spoil us of all, whose all on you depends.
Would God all yours were bent to do their due,
"Fame big by fear does bring forth rumors rife;
I grant it gross, if that his own were true,
To trust a strange with a Monarchs life.

Dar. What sudden danger does of late dismay you,
Such inconveniences that you forecast?

Pa. Sir, Bessus and Narbazanes betray you,
This day to you, or them will be the last:
They feign repentance only for the form,
Till every thing be for the fact prepared,
The clouds are gathering which do boast a storm,
And they ere night, mind to invade your guard.

Dar. I trust thy words, but yet I cannot wrong
Those who by nature love to me should bear,
Shall I leave them who followed me so long?
Then they may think, I merit what I fear.
I will await on what the heavens will send,
For, who can stand when fates his fall conspire,
And with mine own, at least, least grieved will end;
I live too long if they my death desire.

Bes. Take heed in time (Sir) to this subtle Greek,
The Grecian faith to all the world is known,
I am enform'd he by all means does seek
To gratify your foe, as borne his own;
"And marvel not, though mercenary men,
"Who sell themselves, sell all, this is not strange,
"They have no God but gold, nor house, how then
"Can they be constant, who do live by change?
Though this vain man pre-occupy you thus,
And such as would themselves abuse your grace,
Faith shall be found untainted still in us,
When our accuser dare not show his face.

Dar. Of Alexander those who hope for gain,
By traitorous means do but themselves deceive,
Since none in earth does Traitors more disdain,
Nor treason can in greater horror have.

Bes. Well, Sir, you shall know shortly what we are,
I will go see your Ensigns all displayed.

Dar. It better is since things are gone so far,
Then seem but to mistrust, to be betrayed.
Lo, Artabazus I have acted here
My part of greatness, and my glass is run,
Now Patrons speech does evident appear,
I see my end, yet can their course not shun.

Art. The Bactrians only have embarked in this,
Go to the Greeks, which if with courage done,
When once your danger manifested is,
The Persians all will follow after soon.

Dar. And what if I were gone to Patrons Tent,
And had the Greeks for guard as you desire?
He h th but thousands four which are well bent,
T^^y thirty thousand who my fall conspire;
And (doing this) I should their deed excuse,
In giving them a cause who have most might;
They may indeed my lenity abuse,
But by my deed they shall pretend no right.

Art. O Prince to be bemoaned, who can but weep
To ^ee thee thus involved in such a state?

Dar. Retire you all, and seek your selves to keep,
^^ere attend the issue of my fate.
Y^ ^on^^^ that a wretch yet breathing stands,
^o whom the heavens no comfort can impart:
F^^^e shall not make me fall by mine own hands,
No, let another sin though I must smart;
None of you all have falsifi'd your truth,
But loyal still unto the end abide,
Now I you all disburthen of your oath,
Leave me alone, and for your selves provide.

Act. 4 Scene 3.
Darius. O Stormy state of Kings, vain Mortals choice,
The glorious height whence greatness groans to fall!
Ah! we (who courting fame, do hunt each voice)
To seem but Sovereign must be slaves to all:
"Yet blown like bladders, with Ambitions wind,
"On envied Scepters weakly we rely;
"And (whilst swollen fancies do betray the mind)
"Not only the earth, but heavens themselves defy.
"Whilst lostie thoughts tumultuous minds do toss,
"Which are past up with popular applause,
"A state extended by our Neighbors loss,
"For further trouble but procures a cause;
"If Fortunes dark eclipse cloud glories light,
"Then what avails that pomp which pride does claim?
"A mere illusion made to mock the sight,
"Whose best was but the shadow of a dream;
"Of glassie Scepters, let frail greatness vaunt,
"Not Scepters, no, but reeds, which (raised up) break,
"And let eye-flatt'ring shows our wits enchaunt,
"All perished are, ere of their pomp men speak,
"Those golden palaces, those gorgeous Halls,
"With furniture superfluously fair,
"Those stately Courts, those skie-encountring walls
"Do vanish all like vapors in the air.
"O! what affliction jealous greatness bears,
"Which still must travel to hold others down,
"Whilst all our guards not guard us from our fears,
"Such toil attends the glory of a Crown?
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
Whilst I was made the Idol of so many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Of all once honored, and now scarce of any.
"Our painted pleasures but apparel pain:
"We spend our nights in fear, our days in dangers,
"Balls tossed by Stars, thrals bound to Fortunes reign,
"Though known to all, yet to our selves but stranges.
"A golden Crown does cover leaden cares;
"The Scepter cannot lull their thoughts asleep,
"Whose souls are drowned with floods of cold despaires,
"Of which base vulgars cannot sound the deep.
"The Bramble grows, although it be obscure,
Whilst lofty Cedars feel the blustering winds,
"And mild Plebeian souls may live secure,
"While mighty tempests toss Imperial minds;
"What are our days but dreams, our reign a glance,
"Whilst Fortunes fever makes us rage and rave,
"Which with strange fits does to a height advance,
"Till, ere pain us, we first our life must leave?
For glist'ring greatness by Ambition loved,
"I was the wonder of all gazing eyes,
"But free from shadows (real essence proved)
"States just proportion ruin only tryes.
Lo, charged with chains which (though they be of gold)
My states distress diminish not the more,
When this prepost'rous honor I behold,
It but upbraids me what I was before,
And what was I before (as now I see)
(Though what afflicted was not clearly known)
But still in fetters, whilst appearing free,
And in a labyrinth of labors thrown.
Was I not forced to serve a thousand humors,
To escape the censure of a Critic story,
Still clogged with cares, enraged with many rumors;
O glorious bondage, and o burd'nous glory!
That dignity which deifi'd me late,
And made the world do homage to my name,
Does not oppose that which pursues my state,
But by fall gives feathers unto fame;
My best was but a momentary bliss,
Which leaves behind this ever-lasting sting,
That of all woes no woe is like to this,
To think I was, and am not now a king.
No man with me in all th'accomplish'd joys
That satisfy the soul, could once compare;
No man may match me now in sad annoyes,
Or any cross which can provoke despair.
Thrice fortune did my gallant troops entrap,
And I to fall did desperately stand,
Yet could not be so happy in mishap,
As to have di'd by some renowned hand;
But for my greater grief, disgrace, and scorn
(The minds of men so apt are to deceave)
They whom aloft my favors wings had borne,
Ev^^ they have made their Master thus a slave.
Ah! did nor death in prison from me reave,
The ^^^^red Sovereign of my souls desires?
And I (wretch'd I) not present to receave,
The (...) ^ol^ kiss that should have quenched my fires?
Yet, o thrice happy thou, who have not lived
To bear a burden of this great disgrace!
More then a thousand deaths this had thee grievd,
To know I di'd, and di'd in such a case.
Ah! do the pledges of our mutual love,
(The only comfort that the fates have left)
Rest imprisoned yet? and may I not remove
M^ mother thence, as of all power quite reft?
My pains are more then with my pleasures even,
Since first my head was burdened with a Crown;
Was I exalted once up to the Heaven,
That to the Center Jove might throw me down?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vain excess,
All cannot yield my mind one minutes mirth,
To ease me now in this my great distress.
Lo here reduced unto the worst of ills,
Past help, past hope, and only great in grief,
Two abject vassals make me wait their wills,
Not looking, no, nor wishing for relief.
If that my honor had been first repaired,
Then what though death had this fraild fortress won?
I wail my life (since for disgrace prepared)
Not that it ends, but that it was begun:
What fatal conflict can my countenance mar,
Though me to brag, death all his horrors bring?
I never shall wrong Majesty so far,
As ought to do that not becomes a king.
Chorus.
SOme new disaster daily does fore-show
Our coming ruin: we have seen our best:
For, fortune bent as wholly to overthrow,
Throws down our king from her wheels height so low,
That by no means his state can be redrest:
For, since by arms his power has been represt,
Both friends and servants leave him all alone;
Few have compassion of his state distressed,
To him themselves a number false does show;
So foes and faithless friends conspired in one,
Frail fortune and the fates with them agree:
"All run with Hatchets on a falling tree:
This Prince in prosperous state has flourished long,
And never dreamed of ill, did think far less,
But was well followed whilst his state was strong;
Him flattering Sirens with a charming song
Strived to exalt, then whilst he did possess
This earthly dross, that with a vain excess
He might reward their mercenarie love;
But now when fortune drives him to distress,
His favorites whom he remained among,
They straight with her (as hers) their faith remove;
And who for gain to follow him were wont,
They after gain by his destruction hunt.
"O more then happy ten times were that king,
Who were unhappy but a little space,
"So that it did not utter ruin bring,
"But made him prove (a profitable thing)
"Who of his train did best deserve his grace;
"Then could, and would of those the best embrace;
"Such vulturs fled as follow but for prey,
"That faithful Servants might possess their place.
"All gallant minds it must with anguish fling,
"Whilst wanting means their virtue to display;
"This is the grief which bursts a generous heart;
"When favor comes by chance, not by desert.
Those minions often to whom kings do extend
Above their worth, immoderate good will,
(The buttes of common hate often hit in end)
In prosperous times they only do depend,
Not upon them, but on their fortune still,
Which if it change, they change, them though they fill
Their hopes with honor, and their chests with Coin;
Yet if they fall, or their affairs go ill,
Those whom they raised will not with them descend,
But with the side most strong all straight do join,
And do forget all what was given before,
When once of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end this strange event,
In Bessus and Narbazenes has proved,
On whom their Prince so prodigally spent
Affection, Honor, Titles, Treasure, Rent,
And all that might an honest mind have moved.
So bountyfull a Prince still to have loved.
Who so benignely tendered had their state;
Yet Traitors vile (all due respects removed)
They him to strike the strength he gave have bent,
So as he now may rue, although too late,
That sly Camelions changing thus their hue,
To servants were preferred, who still were true.
But though those Traitors for a space do speed,
No doubt the Heavens once vengeance will exact;
The very horror of this heinous deed,
Does make the hearts of honest men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The Heavens no higher choler can contract,
Then for the forcing of a sacred king,
Whose state (if rage do not their minds distract)
Must fear and reverence in inferiors breed,
To whom from him all what is theirs does spring;
But though on the earth men should neglect this wrong*
Heavens will those Traitors plague ere it be long.
Act 5.
Scene 1.
Hephestion, Alexander, Polystratus. WHAT Story or what fable can record
Of such a numb'rous troop so strangely lost?
I know they quaked to know it was my lord,
Whose name alone is worth another host:
It scarce can trusted be in many parts;
"But Traitors fear, though all the world them back,
They were but bodies destitute of hearts:
More prisoners they were then men to take.
Who would believe so few durst strive to meet
So great an Army, and the Army shrinkes?
"But Glories flattery, and fames sounds are sweet:
"True valor dare attempt all that it thinks.
Alex. In this encounter to have had the best,
It would content more then a common mind;
But since we want the chief, what of the rest?
I must in all a satisfaction find;
Those Traitors thought to finish thus the war,
By giving me their Lord whom they have bound,
But I who march with confidence so far
Do scorn to build upon so base a ground;
To venge my wrongs dare others then design?
Since Darius was ordained my prey to be,
How durst they but have aimed at ought of mine?
His o'rethrowes glory did belong to me.
Whilst in himself he only did confide,
I by all means did strive to make him bow,
But since his hard estate abates that pride,
My fury turned is to compassion now;
Though he contemned me often, and did me wrong,
Yet am I grieved that he was thus deceav'd,
If but acknowledged once to be more strong,
I not his blood, nor yet his kingdom craved;
And if those Traitors have not killed him straight,
Yet his delivery shall my name renown,
I would not lose a Subject of such weight,
By which my clemency might be made known.

Po. Sir, now your coming cannot do him good.

Alex. What? all are fled, none have my force withstood?

Po. Yet can not Darius be redeemed again.

Alex. Why, have they set him free, or is he slain?

Po. Now he enjoyes a liberty at last;
But ransomed is by offering up his breath.

Alex. Then is all Asia's expectation past?
Tell on at length the manner of his death.

Po. The boiling ardor of the rising Sun
(All moisture gone) did breed so great a drouth,
That from the way I had a little run,
To find some fountain to refresh my mouth;
There, by the borders of a rising brook,
Which shadowed was from Titans rising beams,
From liquid crystalls I a tribute took,
Which seemed to murmr, that I forced their streams:
When (lo) I saw (a lamentable sight)
Two wounded horses draw a bloody Coach,
Which clad with skins, show horror at the height;
And it to spy when as I did approach,
One was within, who could not long time escape,
The fatal passage of the infernal gates;
Yet Majesty triumphing over mishap,
He seemed to brag both fortune and the fates,
And to so base a state as first not borne,
Then whilst his blood abundantly did fall,
He bursted forth those words in fortunes scorn,
As one whose courage nothing could appall:
You gaze to see (and have good cause wherefore)
A man no man, a king no king: what change?
Now less then naught who once was both, and more;
This would seem wondrous; but no state is strange;
And yet a midst my evils I must rejoice,
That this last comfort does forgo my end.
I speak to one who can conceave my voice,
And not in vain my dying speeches spend;
I am, but how? in name, and not in power,
That wretched Darius (which I should suppress)
Once happy (as was thought) but at this hour,
A lively pattern of extreme distress.
Then having paused (he said) my grief is great,
Tell Alexander (as the world may spy)
That though of me he never had but hate,
Yet am I forced far in his debt to die:
The favor past extended to my Queen,
And that poor remnant my surviving rest,
(When weighing well what I to him have been)
I wish continued, but can scarce request;
They to his foe belong, and yet he strives
To have them honored now, as in times past;
But those who held of me both states, and lives,
Of state and life have me deprived at last.
Entreat him too that unrevenged below
I wander not as hapless in all things:
Let men his justice, and their treason know;
This (as a common cause) does touch all kings.
Beside the honor which he shall acquire
In plaguing them who have betrayed my trust,
His magnanimity men shall admire,
And fear to grieve him whom they find so just.
"As watrie rounds which rise and reele in rain,
"Do swell, and flote, yet when they break (though bright)
"Last, leave (when fallen) no token save a stayne,
Pomp quickly thus both courts and scorns the sight:
And since my glass is run, my glory gone,
I dead unto the world, the world to me,
I wish (save his) that the earth adore no throne:
For, from his reign what subject would be free?
Then drowping down, faint, bloodlesse, and half dead,
He prayed me for some water that ran by,
(A small request by such a monarch made)
Which when that he had got: yet, ear I die
This cross must come (said he) to kill me quite;
Though Nations once to me as Sovereign sought,
I have not now the power but to requite
This little benefit, that thou have brought:
But Alexander shall reward thee well,
And him the Heavens, still yielding his desires,
Since that his foes (though envy burst) must tell
That courtesy which all the world admires.
Now none has power his pleasure to control,
But if he use them well whom he retains,
It will procure contentment to my soul,
And make him famous whilst the world remains.
When breath abandoned has this brittle clay,
Then cause some friend defray my funeral cost,
That churlish Charon force me not to stray
Where darkness dwells, an unregarded Ghost.
Last, give my corpse to her who brought it forth,
Who may it with my Ancestors entombe,
And since she loved me much, though little worth,
May wail this burden which once graced her womb;
And to that Prince whose state I wish to stand,
In sign of love which all my thoughts do send,
My soul gives him my heart, it thee my hand:
Thus though I lived his foe, I die his friend.
I had but held his hand a little space,
When dying like a Torch whose wax is spent,
In spite of pain, even with a princely grace,
His hands still seemed directing as he went.

Alex. Who could refrain from tears to hear declared
The huge mishapps, which all at once did light;
Have subjects slain their Prince, whom strangers spared?
Us has he fled, that perish thus he might!
I for his fall am wonderfully sorry,
Whom first I forced, but last would have maintained:
I envy death, because it robbed the glory
Which I (by giving him his life) had gained.

Hep. Since death has put a period to his woes,
That favor which to him you would extend,
Let it with fury flame against his foes,
For your designs can have no fairer end:
So shall you both the peoples love obtain,
Whilst by your means revenged their Sovereign rests,
And likewise may the more securely reign,
The state well purged from such contagious pests,
"If but one virtue did adorn a king,
"It would be justice; many great defects
"Are veiled thereby, whereas each virtuous thing
"In one who is not just, the world suspects.

Alex. Though this your Counsel, nor yet his request,
Had not the power to penetrate my ear,
A generous stomach could not well digest,
So great a wrong which courage storms to bear.
My sprite (impatient of repose) disdaines,
That they so long their infamy survive:
But I will punish with most grievous pains
The monstrous Treason that they did contrive.
What? do they think (though backed with numbrous bands)
That Bactria is a bulwark for mine Ire?
Fly where they list, they cannot escape my hands,
My wrath shall follow like consuming fire.
Such damned souls the heaven cannot receave,
I Will force Hells dungeons, as Alcides did,
And they on the earth no bounds but mine can have,
I Will search them out though in the center hid,
And when as threatening now I once may strike,
Betwixt the bending boughs of some strong tree,
To Traitors terrors who intend the like,
They shall by violence dismembered be.

Poll. Sir, may it please you to extend your care,
That some his funeral offices perform.

Alex. Go presently, and every thing prepare,
As best becomes the military form.

Act 5. Scene 2.
Sisigambis, Nuntius, Chorus. THIS look alas, has charged my soul with
fears:
Speak, for my life does on thy lips depend,
Thy countenance (ah) a doleful copy bears
Of some sad summons to denounce my end.
Starve not my ears, which famish for thy words,
Though they when swallowed may but make me burst.
Nun. The message (madame) which my soul affords
Must once be known, and once known still accursed.

Sis. Be not a niggard of ill news.


Nun. And why?


Sis. Fame will tell all the world.


Nun. But first to you.


Sis. Tell soon.


Nun. Your son is dead.


Sis. Then let me die.


Cho. Her joys and pleasures all are perished now.


Sis. Why opens not the Earth straight to devour
A hopeless caitive who all good has lost?
The longer that I live, my grief grows more,
As but to mischief borne, kept to be crossed;
Would God this mass where misery remains,
A weight of Earth from sight of men might keep;
Or that the Seas all raging through the plains
Would make my tomb amid'st their tumid deep.
O Alexander! have thou robbed his life,
Yet entertained me still in hope to find him?
Why did thou not first kill this poor old wife,
Who was not worthy to have lived behind him?
That I should live till thou my Son had slain,
Was all thy kindness for this cause imploi'd?

Nun. You wrong that Prince, for he with have in vain
Came him to help whom others had destroi'd.

Sis. What impious thoughts durst dream so vile a deed,
A monarchs murder, Asia's glories end?

Nun. Two whom he raised did his confusion breed,
He found his friend his foe, his foe a friend.

Sis. Tell on thy message, messenger of death,
And load my mind with mountains of distress,
That tears may drown my sight, sighs choke my breath,
Whilst sorrow all my senses does possess.

Nun. When Alexander (who at peace repined)
Did (save submission) hold all offers vain,
Bent of stern Mars to try the doubtful mind;
A general muster Darius did ordain,
And (in one battle bent to venture all)
He caused his will be publicly proclaimed,
Whilst two vile Traitors did conspire his fall,
Who Bessus and Narbazanes were named;
Those two in council did discover first
Some portion of the poison of their heart,
Which caused the king suspect, but not the worst,
Yet with a sword he sought to make them smart.
But having escaped what first was feared from rage,
They seemed so much their error to lament,
His indignation that they did assuage,
(False hypocrites) pretending to repent.
Whilst Artabazus as an honest man
Who judged of others by his upright mind,
(No fraud conceav'd) sought more to escape then scan,
What they with craft to compass Crowns designed.

"Cho. A mind sincere is ever least suspicious:
"These think all faulty, who themselves are vicious.

Nun. They urged him with the king to interceed,
That in his favor he would give them place,
And did protest that by some valorous deed,
They labor would to gain again his grace;
Then Artabazus came and told the king,
That in the battle he might try their faith,
And both before his majesty did bring,
Who (when submisse) did quickly calm his wrath.
With hands stretched up to Heaven, and humbled knees,
With tears like those which Crocodiles do shed,
Woe in their face and pity in their eyes,
Did for compassion (though from rigor) plead.
The king of nature mild did them receave,
And them (who thus but for the form complained)
Not only all (relenting) quite forgave;
But wept in earnest too whilst they but feigned;
When in his Coach from all suspicion free,
With countenance sad long following on behind
(As still pretending supplicants to be)
They bowed to him whom they were bent to bind;
The Grecian Captain curiously near
(When marked a suter) craved what he required,
By pregnant proofs did evidently clear,
What treason was against his state conspired:
He told what way their purpose might be tried,
And how the Bactrians were for trouble bent,
Then for his safety prayed him to provide,
By straight with him retyring to his Tent;
But in the King who did neglect his state,
No kind of care this friendly offer bred:
So that (it seemed) he by some powerful fate
Was headlong forward to confusion led:
The Greek past thence despairing him to save,
Who thus all means to help himself refused;
With subtle words then Bessus there did crave
To purge himself, and errors past excused;
Old Artabazus happ'ning to approach,
The King to him did Patrons speech report,
Who then perceived what danger did encroach,
And wished he would where Greeks were strong resort.
But in his breast this purpose firmly placed,
That from his Subjects he would never fly,
With mutual tears they tenderly embraced,
And parted there, like two who went to dye.
Now silent night in pitchie vapors cled,
Had must'red mysts, and marched out of the West;
(Days beauties darkning, shadowie horrors spread)
The Sentinels were set, and all at rest,
When (lo) a terror did distract the host!
Whose bands to murmr were dispersed in parts,
With sounds resembling ships in storms near lost,
Whilst each to other cause of fear imparts.
Those who their King appointed were to guard,
From what was due by fraud or fear did stray;
And (to his danger having no regard)
His Fortunes Minions fled with heraway.
The desolation then grown wondrous great,
With some few Eunuchs Darius left alone,
(No strength remaining, nor no sign of state)
He thus them spoke, who for his fall did moan:
Go, part in peace ere further harm be had,
Lest that my ruin likewise you surprise.
They hearing those sad words (as men gone mad)
Went howling through the host with dolorous cries;
So that all those who heard what plaints they made,
Thought that they had their Sovereigns death bewailed;
And (forcing trust) some forged reports were spread,
That he had killed himself, all hope quite failed.
The Persians grieved whilst these things did occur,
Did first encourage all their Country bands
To help their Prince, but yet they durst not stir
For fear of falling in the Bactrians hands;
Even in the time when this confusion was,
The Traitors to defer the fact no more,
Did to their Sovereigns Tent with Squadrons pass,
And took, and bound, him whom they served before;
Who in a golden Coach once proudly rode,
Was thrown in one for common carriage used,
And who of late was honored like a God,
Two of his own (as if their slave) abused:
Those royal hands to bear a Scepter borne,
Were basely bound, and which the more him grieved,
"(Thus misery can hardly escape from scorn)
"With bands of gold, which burdened, not relieved.
When Alexander (great with courage) spied
Our Armies fly, he (who in hope them chased)
To follow us with diligence did ride,
"Base seemed the Conquest which no danger graced;
But when at last at length by some informed
How he was made a captive to his own,
At this indignity he highly stormed,
As if by it his hopes had been o're-throwne.
Out of his host he did select a few
Who were best horsed, and fit for such a fight,
With whom his foes he did so fast pursue,
That e're they could suspect, he came in sight;
The Traitors vexed when spying him appear,
Came to the Cart whereas the King did stay,
And called to horse in haste, since foes were near,
Lest that they else might find him for a prey.
He looked aloft, and cried aloud, I see
That Nemesis is frowning from above;
Should I with Traitors as a captive be?
And fly from him, who but brave wars does move?
Then those in whom impiety abounds,
Throw'd Darts at him (vile beasts to be abhorred)
And hurt the horses with an hundred wounds,
Then men more trusty, dying for their Lord;
As false in hearts, so feeble with their hands,
When Guilt and Danger doubled had despaires,
The Traitors first, then all their traitorous bands
Fled from a number less by half then theirs.
But to the bounds of Deaths pale kingdom brought.
The King retired where least by people spied,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did leave the world, whose folly he had tried;
The last divorce which lasts, was scarcely made
Twixt soul and body whilst the eyes grew dim,
When Alexander came and found him dead,
Who labored had so long to ruin him,
And (whilst his tears a general mourning moved)
That stately vesture which himself arrayed,
(Much feared for valor, more for virtue loved)
With his own hand on Darius corpse he laid;
Then wailing long as for a brother lost
To have his funerals furnished like a Kings,
He bids you use his wealth, and spare no cost;
For, you shall want no necessary things.
He has his body hither sent by me,
And sunerall rites solemnly bent to do,
He thinks that they may best accomplished be,
Whilst who him bred does see him buried too*

Cho. Behold how griese has her of sense bereft,
Whilst breath for passage struggling is with groans,
No will, nor power to live, just grief has left,
Since what she value vanished is at once.

Sis. Ah! shall I see (no, let me first be blind)
That body breathless, which I brought to light?
Where would my soul a force sufficient find
That could encounter with so sad a sight?
O flinty heart! what hinders thee to break,
Since (crushed with cares) a stranger to repose?
Why part'st thou not (poor soul) that whilst I speak
In opening of my lips, mine eyes may close?
This heritage of death, this withered stock
Is but a place appointed for despaires,
A torture to it self, a stumbling block,
Whose aged furrows fertile are in cares.
Once for good Fortunes, now for bad designed,
(To state betrayed) drawn forth from calm repose,
To have been happy most afflicts my mind,
Who, raised to fall, got much, the more to lose.
Ah me! malicious fates have done me wrong,
Who first come to the world, should first depart,
And ah! why should the old o're-live the young?
This Nature wrongs by a prepost'rous art;
Ah! why should Death so indiscreet be found
To spare a caitive, and to spoil a Prince?
My halfe-dead body, bending to the ground,
Through grief is grown ripe for the grave long since.

Chorus.
WHat makes vain worldlings so to swell with pride,
Who come of the earth, and soon to the earth return?
"So hellish furies with their firebrarnds burn
"Proud and ambitious men, that they divide
"Them from themselves, and so turmoyle their minds;
"That all their time they study still
"How to content a boundless will,
"Which never yet a full contentment finds;
"Who so this flame within his bosom smothers,
"He many fancies does contrive,
"And even forgets himself alive,
"To be remembered after death by others;
"Thus while he is, his pains are never ended,
"That whilst he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happiness of Kings
So to subdue their Neighbors as they do?
And make strange Nations tributaries too?
"The greater state, the greater trouble brings;
Their pompes and triumphs stand them in no stead;
Their Arches, Tombs, Pyramides high,
And statues are but vanity:
They dye, and yet would live in what is dead;
And while they live, we see their glorious actions
Often wrested to the worst, and all their life
Is but a stage of endless toil, and strife,
Of tumults, uproares, mutinies, and factions;
"They rise with fear, and lie with danger down,
"Huge are the cares which wait upon a Crown.
And as Ambition Princes under-mynes;
So does it those who under them rule all:
We see in how short time they rise and fall,
How often their light eclipsed but dimmely shines;
They long time labor by all means to move
Their Prince to value much their parts,
And when advanced by subtle arts,
O what a danger is it to be above!
For, straight exposed to hatred, and despite,
With all their skill they cannot march so even;
But some opprobrious scandal will be given:
For all men envy them who have most might;
"And if the King dislike them once, then straight
"The wretched Courtiers fall with their own weight.
^^me of a sprite more poor, who would be praised,
And yet have naught for which to be esteemed,
What they are not in deed would feign be deemed,
And indirectly labor to be raised.
This crew each public place of honor haunts,
And (changing garments every day)
Whilst they would hide, do but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants;
And men of better judgment justly loath
Those, who in outward shows place all their care,
And deck their bodies, whilst their minds are bare,
Like to a shadow, or a painted cloth,
The multitude which but th'apparrell notes,
Does homage, not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes must be served, and with all sorts:
Some both to do, and co^nsell what is best,
Some serve for Ciphers to set out the rest,
Like life less pictures which adorn the ports;
"Fair Palaces replenished are with fears,
"Those seeming pleasures are but snares,
"The royal robe does cover cares;
"The Assyrian dye dear buys he who it bears;
"Those dainty delicates, and farre-fetch'd food,
"Often (through suspicion) savor out of season,
"Embrodred beds, anatapestries hatch treason;
"The golden Goblets mingled are with blood.
"Such shows the shadows are when Greatness shines,
"Whose state by them the gazing world divines.
O happy he who far from Fame at home,
Securely sitting by a quiet fire,
(Though having little) does not more desire,
But first himself, then all things does overcome;
His purchase weighed, or what his parents left,
He squares his charge to his store,
And takes not what he must restore,
Nor eats the spoils that from the poor were reft:
Not proud, nor base, he (scorning creeping Art)
From jealous thoughts and envy free,
No poison fears in cups of tree;
No treason harbors in so poor a part:
No heavy dream does vex him when he sleeps,
"A guiltless mind the guardlesse cottage keeps*
He does not study much what storms may blow,
Whose poverty can hardly be impaired;
He fears no foreign force, nor craves no guard;
None does desire his spoil, none looks so low,
Whereas the great are commonly once crossed,
As Darius has been in his flower,
Or Sisigambis at this hour,
Who has escaped long, and now at length is lost:
But how comes this, that Potentates often fall,
And must confess this trouble of their soul?
There is some higher power that can controull,
The Monarchs of the Earth, and censure all:
Who once will call their actions to account,
And them repress who to oppress were prompt.
FINIS.
THE ALEXANDRAEAN TRAGEDY.
THE ARGUMENT.
When Alexander the Great, after all his Conquests (shining with the glory of
innumerable victories) was returned back to Babylon, where the Ambassadors of
the whole world did attend his coming, as one who was expected to command over
all: there, being admired by the Grecians, adored by the Barbarians, and as it
were drunk with the delights of an extraordinary prosperity, he suffered
himself to be transported with an inundation of pleasure; till sitting at one
of his feasts by the means of the son of Antipater, one of his Cup-beares,
in the best both of his age and fortune, he was suddenly poisoned.

Incontinent after his death, those who were in greatest estimation with
himself daring his life, and then with the Army, assembled themselves
together neglecting for a long time his funerals, whilst busied about the
disposing of his Empire: at last (after diverse opinions) it was concluded, that
if Roxane, the widow of their Sovereign, (who was then at the point to be
delivered of her birth) happened to bear a son, he should succeed in his
Fathers place, and till he were come to some maturity of age, Perdiccas,
Leonatus, Craterus, and Antipater were appointed to be his Tutors: But the
footmen in a disdain, that their advice was not required, proclaimed Arideus,
Alexanders bastard brother, King, and gave him a guard, of which Meleager
procured himself to be made Captain. At this sudden alteration, the horsemen
being troubled, following Perdiccas, pitched their Camp without the City, yet
(...) the end, this tumult being by the eloquence of Perdiccas appeased, all
the Captains re-assembled themselves, and having divided the Provinces, ^^ade
an agreement, which lasted not long.

For, such was the vehement ambition of those great men, that with all manner
of hostility, they studied how to undermine one another, and first of all
Meleager after a pretende^ recon^^^a^^on though ^av^ig ^e^^^ (...) e^^ple for
refuge) was slain by the appointment of Perdiccas, who (after aspiring to a
superiority over the rest) whilst he went to war against Prolomie in Eagypt,
by a sudden mutiny of his own Soldiers, was miserably murdered. Then the
only Captain of his faction who remained alive, was Eumenes, a man singularly
valorous, who encountering with Craterus and Neoptolemus, by the death of
themselves defeated their Army, whereby being highly advanced, he was greatly
envied: and ( Leonatus having lately before dyed in a conflict betwixt him and
the Athenians.) Antigonus in the nam^ o^ the rest, was sent against him with a
great Army, betwixt whom there having passed diverse skirmishes with a variable
success, and some private conference without agreement: In the end, he was
betrayed by his own Soldiers, and delivered bound to Antigonus, who shortly
after caused to take his life.

Then Antigonus (his rivals in the authority being removed out of his way) did
aspire to that himself, from which he was sent to seclude others, and having
murdered diverse of the governors, he disposed of their Provinces as he
pleased: whereof Cassander, Ptolomie, and Lysimachus, advertised by Seleucus,
who fled for fear of incurring the like danger; did enter together in a league
against Antigonus.

Now at this time Olympias plagued all the faction of Cassander in Macedonie,
having caused Arideus and his Queen Eurydice to be put to death; by which, and
by some other cruelties (having lost the favor of the people) she was
constrained, when Cassander came against her, to retire her self within a
Town; which (by reason of the scarcity of victuals (not being able to defend)
she rendered, together with her self to Cassander, by whom notwithstanding of
his promise to the contrary) she was violently deprived of life, and so having
proceeded so far in wickedness, he thought it no time to retire till he had
extinguished all his Masters race; whereupon he caused Roxane and her son to
be murdered, and soon after, Hercules, Alexanders bastard son; which
multitude of murders, gave to him the Crown of Macedonie, and to me the
subject of this Polytragicke Tragedy.

The persons names who speak.
The Ghost of ALEXANDER, OLYMPIAS his mother, ROXANE his wife, ARISTOTLE his
master, PHOCION his old friend, PHILASTRUS a Chaldean, CHORUS, PERDICCAS, his
greatest Captains. MELEAGER, his greatest Captains. PTOLOMIE, his greatest
Captains. ANTIGONUS, his greatest Captains. EUMENES, his greatest Captains.
LYSIMACHUS, his greatest Captains. SELEUCUS, his greatest Captains.
CASSANDER, his greatest Captains.
THE ALEXANDRAEAN TRAGEDY.
Act 1.
The Ghost of ALEXANDER the Great. BAck from th'umbragious caves (still robbed
of rest)
Must I return, where Phoebus guilds the fields,
A Ghost not worthy to be Pluto's Guest,
Since one to whom the world no burial yields?
O what a great disgrace is this to me,
Whose Trophies Fame in many a kingdom keeps.
That I (contemned) cannot transported be
A passenger for the Sulphurean deeps?
Dare churlish Charon (though not used to bow)
The raging torrent of my wrath gain-stand?
Must I succumbe amidst hels dungeons now,
Though all the world accustomed to command?
But it may be that this has wrought me harm,
What bloud-lesse Ghosts do stray on Stygian banks,
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Gave terror often to many martial ranks?
Yet (for a prey exposed to ravenous beasts)
Could never have the honor of a Tomb;
But (though for such rude guests too precious feasts)
Were basely buried in a brutish womb.
Thus (as it seems) the horror of such deeds,
With like indignity attends my sprite;
What stormy breast this thirst of vengeance breeds,
To plague for that which valor did acquit?
Ah! might Alcmena's son (as son of Jove)
Once force the driery forts of endless night,
To match stern Dis in the Tartarian grove,
And draw forth foaming Cerberus to light?
Then leading Theseus through the dungeons dark,
A second rape aimed for their ravished Queen,
Durst he (hels terror) force the fatal Bark,
By squadrons pale (an envied victor) seen*
And in my rage may I not toss this Round,
Till roaring Earthquakes all the world affright,
Heaven stained, hell cleared, earth torn, all to confound
Enlightening darkness, or else darkning light?
What, though I from terrestrial Regions swerve,
Whom in this state (it may be) some mistake?
May not the voice of Alexander serve
To make the earth tremble, and the depths to shake?
Or, straight returned, shall I my fortune trust,
And The Earth dispeople, slaughtring scatt'red hosts;
Then Pluto plague, all charged with blood and dust,
When men are killed to be a King of Ghosts?
O how I burst to think how some above,
Who for their glory did my steps attend,
My offsprings title proudly do disprove,
And to my Chair by violence ascend:
"Ingratitude does grieve a generous sprite,
Would God therefore that with a body stored,
I might return these Traitors to acquit,
My back with Arms, my hand charged with a sword:
As when I entered in a populous Town,
To war alone with thousands in my wrath,
Whilst (prizing honor dearer then my Crown)
Each of my blows gave wounds, each wound gave death:
Then thundering vengeance on rebellious bands,
I would make them redeem my grace with groans,
Where now my Ghost (empall'd with horror) stands,
Less graced then those whom I commanded once;
And yet the glory by those Captains had,
Whom first my Ensigns did acquaint with fame,
Does make my soul (whilst hating them) more sad,
Then all the sufferings that the hells can claim.
O now I see what all my Minions blindes,
To grace my funerals that they take no pain!
My state (betraying me) distracts their minds,
Who have forgot all love, save love to reign;
But Ptolomie does yet by time intend
To Alexandria to transport me once,
Not moved by love, no, for another end,
In hope my Fortune will attend my bones.
And must I then so great a trouble have
(To whom the Earth did all belong before)
For some few foots of Earth to be a grave,
Which mean men get, and great men get no more.
Though many thousand at my sign did bow,
Is this the end of all my Conquests then
To be thus barred that little circuit now,
A benefit even common unto men*
But of those kingdoms which were thrall to me,
Lest that a little part my body bound,
The Earth arched with heaven my fatal bed should be,
Still unconfined, and even when dead, yet crowned.
O blind ambition! great minds viprous brood,
The scourge of mankind, and the foe to rest,
Thou guilty art of many millions blood,
And whilst I reigned, did reign within my breast;
This to my soul but small contentment brings,
That I some Cities reared, and others razed:
And made Kings captives; captives to be Kings,
Then whilst the wondering world did stand amazed.
All that does now but torture after death,
Which raised my Fame on pillars more then rare;
O costly conquest of a little breath,
Whose flattring sounds both go and come with the air!
Can I be he who thought it a disgrace
To be but weighed with other mortals even,
Who would be held of an immortal race,
The offspring of great Jove, the heir of heaven?
By many means I all men's minds did move,
For Altars (as a God) with offerings stored,
Till of his glory Jove did jealous prove:
"All kings should reverenced be, but not adored.
Ah! whilst (transported with a prosperous state)
I toiled to raise my Throne above the Stars,
The thund'rer straight (who still does pride abate)
Did wound my fame with most infamous wars.
Made I not grave Calistenes to smart,
Who did disdain a mortal to adore,
(What known unknowing) bent by foolish art,
Though but a man to be imagined more?
All feared the danger of my roaring wrath,
(Like Lions when asleep) which none durst wake;
My fury was the Messenger of death,
Which when enflamed, made flaming squadrons quake:
Ambition did so far my thoughts engage,
That I could not abide my Fathers praise,
But (though my friend) killed Clitus in a rage,
Who Philips Fami durst in my presence raise.
Thus though that I mine Enemies did abate,
I made my greatest friends become my foes,
Who did my insolence (as barbarous hate)
And for the like afraid wail'd others woes.
Those tyrannies which thousands chanced to see
As inhumane a multitude admired:
And my familiars strangers grown with me,
As from a Tyrant for distrust retired:
Yea, there were many too who did conspire
By base ambushments to have snared my life,
Of all my labors, lo, this was the hire!
"Those must have store of toils who toil for st^^^e*
And I remember that amid'st my joys,
(Even whilst the chase of Armies was my sport)
There wanted not a number of annoyes
To counter-poise my pleasures in some sort.
"Of those on the earth most happy that remain,
"(As aged Experience constantly records)
"The pleasures far exceeded are by pain:
"Life greater grief then comfort still affords.
What grief, no, rather rage did feaze my soul.
Whilst big with hopes a battle bent to prove!
That sudden sickness did my course controull,
Which (cold when kind) embracing floods did move.
From the Physician then (though deemed for ill)
I took his potion, gave him scandalous lines;
Then whilst he red did drink, yet eyed him still,
And by accusing looks sought guilty signs;
Not that suspicious fears could make me sad,
This was the ground whence did proceed my pain,
Lest death my victory prevented had:
For, I was sure still where I fought to gain,
But when that I extended had my state
From learned Athens to the barbarous I^des,
Still my tumultuous troops my pride did hate,
As monstrous mutinies unmasked their minds.
I (so my name more wonderful to make)
Of Hercules, and Bacchus past the bounds,
And (whilst that Memnons Sunne-burnt bands did qu^ke)
Did write my worth in many a Monarchs wounds.
Kings were my Subjects, and my servants Kings,
Yet my contentment further did require,
For, I imagined still more mighty things,
And to a greater greatness did aspire.
The spacious carriere of the speedy Sun,
(All quickly thrall'd) like lightning I o're-ran:
Yet wept, and wished more worlds to have been won,
As this had wanted room to ease one man,
No wonder I was thought a God by some,
Since all my aims (though high as heaven) prevailed,
And what man (save my self) did still o're-come?
Of all my fancies, never project failed.
This made me thought immortalized to be,
Which in all minds amazement yet contracts:
I led blind Fortune, and she courted me,
As glad to grace the greatness of my acts.
Yet I have found it a more easy thing,
To conquer all whereon the Sun ere shined,
Then mine own self, and (of my passions King)
To calm the tumults of a stormy mind.
What comfort justly could my soul receive
Of all my Conquests past, if that even then
Whilst I triumphed (to wrath and wine a slave)
I escaped not scandal more then other men;
Ah! (seazing without right on every state)
I but my selte too great a Monarch made,
Since all men gaped to get the golden bait
Which by my death seemed easy to be had;
Whilst from humanity too much divorced,
My deeds all hearts with fear, and horror filled,
I who by foes could never have been forced,
By friends did fall, yet not over-com'd, but killed.
But now I see the troublous time draws near,
When they shall keep my obsequies with blond:
No wonder too, though such a warriors beer,
At last does swim amidst a scarlet flood:
For, as my life did breed huge broils over all,
My death must be the cause of monstrous cumbers,
And it does best become a strong man's fall,
To be renowned by ruining of numbers.
The Snake-tress'd Sisters now shall never need
Their fatal firebrarnds, loathsome Pluto's pests,
Nor inspirations strange whose rage does breed
A thirst of murder in transported breasts.
Ambitions flames may from my ashes shine
To burn my Minions minds with high desires,
Each of their sprits that has a spark of mine,
To ruin all the world, may furnish fires.
The Beauties of the Earth shall all look red,
Whilst my Lievtenants through that pride of theirs,
With Arms unkind huge streams of blood do shed,
By murdering of my heirs, to be my heirs.
Is this that Greatness which I did design,
By being eminent, to be o're-throwne,
To ruin first my self, then root out mine;
As conquering others, but to lose mine own?
O happy I, more happy far my race!
If pleased with that which was our ancient rent,
I managed had the Aemaethian power in peace,
Which was made lawful by a long descent:
Then far sequestered from Bellona's rage,
I had the true delights of Nature tried,
And aged with honor, honored in my age,
Had left my Son secure before I died;
And he inheriting a quiet state
(Which then because less great had been more sure)
Had (free from envy) not been harmed by hate,
Which of most States the ruin does procure;
But since they will en-earth my earthly part.
Which now no badge of majesty retains,
To roaring Phlegeton I must depart
Far from the lightsome bounds of th'aiery plain^^
And must I there who did the world surmount
(Arrested by the Monarch of the Ghosts)
To Rhadamanthus render an account
Of all the deeds done by my ravenous hosts*
There whilst with Minos Aeacus sits down,
A rigorous Judge in hels most horrid Court,
With me who pass his Nephew in renown,
(Though of his race) he no way will comport.
O what pale Ghosts are here together brought,
Which were of bodies spoiled by my Decree!
And first Parmenio without whom I naught
But who did many great things without me:
At the tribunal of Tartarian powers,
He aggravates ingratitude too great,
And (whilst the raging Tyrant foaming lowres)
All whom I wronged, for vengeance do entreat:
Yet guilty thoughts torment me most of all,
No sprit can be by plaguing furies pined,
(Though charged without with snakes, within with gall)
As by the stings of a remording mind.
If it be true that drowsy Lethes streams
In dark oblivion drown all things at last,
There, let me bury far from Phoebus beams,
The loathed remembrance of my labors past.

Exit. Chorus.
What strange adventures now
Distract distressed minds
With such most monstrous forms?
When silence does allow
The peace that Nature finds,
And that tumultuous winds
Do not disturb with storms
An universal rest:
When Morpheus has represt
The Impetuous waves of cares,
And with a soft sleep binds,
Those Tyrants of the breast,
Which would spread forth most dangerous snares
To sink affliction in despaires:
Huge horrors then arise
The Elements to mar,
With most disastrous signs:
Armed Squadrons in the skies,
With lances thrown from far,
Do make a monstrous war,
Whilst fury naught confines:
The Dragons vomit fire,
And make the Stars retire
Cut of their Orbs for fear,
To satisfy their ire,
Which heavens high buildings not forbear,
But seem the Crystal Towers to tear;
Amidst the air, fierce blasts
Do boast with blustering sounds,
To crush this mighty frame,
Which (whilst the tempest lasts)
Does rent the stately rounds,
To signify what wounds
To all her offsprings shame,
Shall burst the earths veins with blood,
And this all-circling flood,
(As it the heavens would drown)
Does pass the bounding bounds,
And all the scaly brood,
Rear roaring Neptunes foamie Crown,
Whilst the earth for fear seems to sink down,
Those whom it hid with horror!
Their ashy lodgings leave,
To re-enjoy the light,
Or else some Panicke terror
Our judgment does bereave,
Whilst first we misconceive,
And so prejudge the sight;
Or, in the bodies stead,
The genius of the dead
Turns back from Styx again,
Which Dis will not receive,
Till it a time engendring dread,
Plague (whilst it does on the earth remain)
All else with fear, it self with pain.
These fearful signs fore-show
(All nations to appall)
What plagues are to succeed.
Since death has laid him low,
Who first had made us thrall,
We heard that straight his fall
Our liberty would breed;
But this proves no relief:
For, many (O what grief!)
The place of one supply;
And we must suffer all;
Thus was our comfort brief:
O! rarely do usurpers dye,
But others will their fortune try.
Act 2.
Scene 1.
Perdiccas, Meleager, Ptolomie, Antigonus, Eumenes. WHat eye (not big with
tears) can view this host,
Which has in one (ah, as the end does prove)
A King, a Captain, and a brother, lost,
Crowned, followed, tried, by right, for worth, in love?
I think amongst us all, there is not one,
Whom diverse favors do not justly bind
To please that Heroes Ghost (though from us gone)
With all the offerings of a thankful mind.
Ah, had the fates been subject to my will,
So great a loss should not have crossed our life;
But we had kept great Alexander still,
And he those kingdoms which procure this strife.
"Yet heavens decrees can never be recalled,
"And thoughts of harm past help, breed double pain,
"Though once to grief a space, by passions thrall'd,
"The living must embrace the world again.
As one whose intrest in that Prince was chief,
A sorrow singular my soul affects,
But I will not defraud the general grief,
To wail apart particular respects.
Though all the air still Eccho^s plaintive sounds
Of widowed hopes now wedded to despaires,
Yet time must cicatrize our inward wounds,
And to the public good draw private cares.
Let us give physic to the sickned state,
Which at this present in great danger stands,
Whilst grudging Subjests that our greatness hate,
By blood would venge their violated lands.
"Those who by force are thrall'd, to be made free,
"Precipitate themselves in dangers still,
"And this of Nature seems a rule to be:
"What Realm not scorns to serve a strangers will?
"From forced obedience, naught but hate proceeds;
"The more we have subdu^d, the more our foes:
A sovereign head this States huge body needs,
That might make us securely to repose:
And who more meet to have that great man's place,
Of those whose states he took who gained the hearts,
Then one descended from that Regal race,
Whose birth both worth and right to reign imparts?
If heavens enrich Roxane with a Son,
That longed-for birth a lawful Sovereign brings,
And ^ill that course of doubtful hopes be run,
Let some be named who manage may all things.
Anti. The Macedonians (swollen with wrath) would scorn,
That to their King a stranger should succeed:
Can men obey a Babe, a Babe not borne?
What fancies strange would this confusion breed?
This could not well become our grave foresight,
A doubtful birth so long t'^^tend in vain,
Which may abortive be, and brought to light,
(Through natures error) made not apt to reign.
But if affection carry us so far,
That of that race we must be ruled by some,
Though neither trained by time in peace, nor war,
As those who must indeed by kind o're-come:
Then have we Hercules the eldest son,
To our great Prince by fair Bar^ines borne,
Who fourteen years of age, has now begun
His Princely birth by virtue to adorn.

Ptol. To think of this, it makes my soul ashamed,
That we should serve a base Barbarians brood,
What* should we bear the yoke that have framed?
To buy disgrace, have we bestowed our blood?
Our ancestors whose glory we obscured,
Would get some vantage of their offspring thus:
That peoples bondage they would have procured,
And have we warred to make them Lords over us?
Ah, bury this as a most odious thing,
Which may bring danger, and must breed our scorn.
Though (in effect) descended from our King,
They (come of Captives) are (...) basely borne.
O! brave Leonides, I like thy strife,
Who with so few performed so glorious things,
And death preferr^d before the infamous life,
Which bondage still from a Barbarian brings.
Those (loath to take a stranger for their Lord)
Did with their blood renown a foreign field,
And shall we honor them whom they abhorred,
And even (though victors) to the vanquished yield?
To what did tend that eminent attempt,
Which makes the Persians yet abase their brow?
But to our countries scorn (in a contempt)
To take by force that which we offer now.
Was this the scope of all our conquests then,
Of abject Captives to be made the prey?
No, let us still command like valorous men,
And rule our Empire by some other way.
May we not use this policy a space,
Till Time afford, or we a course devise?
Least dangerous discord do disturb our peace,
Still when we would of serious things advi^e;
With Majesty let us assembled be,
A sacred Senate with a chair of state,
That of the Sovereign power all signs may see,
Then whilst we compass that respected seat:
There, those who were in credit with the King,
Whose merits in men's minds have reverence bred,
Shall (weighed by judgment) balance every thing:
How kingdoms should be ruled, how armies led;
"And what the greatest part has once approved,
"To that the rest will willingly incline;
By such a harmony the Army moved,
Will execute what ever we design.
This concord would prove happy for us all,
Which each man's state free from all danger renders:
And by this means our Macedonie shall
In place of one, have many Alexanders.

Eum. Though silence (I confess) becomes me best,
Who, am a stranger, and the less believed,
Yet of your toils since I a partner rest,
I must unfold my mind, a mind much grieved:
And think you that a Babe repaires our loss?
How can good wits so grossly be beguiled?
This in all Countries has been thought a cross:
"Woe to that soil whose Sovereign is a child.
Nor would these great men (as is thought) agree,
They be too many bodies for one mind:
Ah (pardon Ptolomie) it cannot be,
This union would disjoyne us all I find:
Thus would the Army from good order swerve,
"If many might forgive, all would offend,
"As thinking well though they did death deserve:
"No man so bad, but some will him befriend.
And when so many Kings were in one Court,
One Court would then have many humors too,
Which fostring factions for each light report,
Would make them jarre as neighboring Princes do;
No, let this strange design be quite suppressed,
"Whilst equal all, all would unequal be,
So that their minds (by jealousy possessed)
From pale suspicion never could be free.
But ah! what needs contention at this time,
To cloud a matter that was made so clear:
And do you now account it not a crime,
To damn his will, who once was held so dear?
When that great Monarch marched to match with death,
Whilst all his Captains were assembled there,
And did demand (whilst he disposed of breath)
Whom he himself adopted for his heir:
Then (that none might such doubtful questions breed)
As loving valor more then his own race:
He (that a brave man, brave men might succeed)
Said: let the worthiest have the worthiest place.
Nor did he speak this in a secret part,
With double words which might more doubt have moved,
As breathing thoughts in each ambitious heart,
To have his worth in Vulcans furnace proved:
For* whilst ye hedged the fatal bed about,
(With an unpartiall care distracted long)
Then he amongst you all did choose one out,
Who for so great a charge did seem most strong.
He to Perdiccas did present the Ring
That used to seal the secrets of the State,
By which it seemed that he designed him King,
And so would seize him of the regal seat.
Thus made this worthy man a worthy choice,
That further strife might not the state deforme,
And all the world now justly may rejoice,
That who raised many, did prevent this storm.
For, if he had not thus declared his will,
Ye ( Mars his Minions) should have lived at jarres:
Whilst emulation amongst equals still,
Had made stern Trumpets thunder civil wars;
What huge disorders threatened to burst forth,
If that our Sovereign had no Prince designed,
Who often has been a witness of our worth,
And can weigh virtue in a virtuous mind?
I see consenting signs applaud my speech:
Rise, do, Perdiccas, that which they decree,
Whilst modesty does Majesty impeach,
Though thou crav'st not this Crown, this Crown craves thee.

Meleag. I wonder not though thus Perdiccas shrink,
To take this place, still bragged with new alarmes:
The Sun must make nights ugly bird to wink:
This Scepter weighs, too much for so weak arms.
The Gods will never grant, nor men agree,
That such a one should tyrannize over us:
Though vulgar minds might yield his thralls to be,
His betters scorn to bow so basely thus.
He would have us Roxanes birth to attend,
Which though it come to pass as some expect,
He can exchange, or cause be brought to end,
As bent to like all means, when one effect.
Thus would he temporize to our great scorn,
Till time might help to further his designs:
No Kings Perdiccas likes, but babes unborne;
He labors well in undiscovered Mines.
I need not now insist to tell at large,
What brave men are amid'st this martial band,
Who better do deserve so great a charge,
Both for their skill, and courage to command;
Yet are the best not worthy to succeed,
That man admired who never can be matched,
The thought of whom must make our minds to bleed,
Whose adversaries this advantage watch^d.
But, if that great man did consent so soon,
That our obedience should be thus abused,
Of all that ever yet he would have done,
I think this only ought to be refused.
That valorous band, whose worth the world often proved,
Then, whilst their glory shin^d through silver shields:
By all that Monarchs deeds when no way moved,
(As conquered) would have left the conquered fields.
And when despising such a Princes throne,
To whom his ancestors their Scepter brought.
What reverence would they bear to such a one,
Who all this time was as their equal thought?
"To those who over their equals raise their state,
"Advancement envy breeds, and envy hate;
"If such with all would rest familiar still,
"This in contempt the Sovereign title brings:
"And if they second not their Subjects will,
"Men cannot bear with them, as with borne Kings.
Our lofty bands some lofty mind must tame,
Whose Princely birth does procreate regard;
Whose Country may confound each slandrous claim,
As one with whom none else can be compared.
Lo, Alexanders brother, Philips son,
Who always was a partner of our pain:
Can there be any else below the Sun,
Over Macedonians who deserves to reign?
And I must wonder what so strange offense
Has forfeited his title, maym^d his right?
That any now with a disguised pretense
Dare wrong him thus, even in his peoples sight.

Ptol. None needs to wonder much, though we neglect
One whose election might procure our shame:
His mothers baseness, justice might object,
Whom bastardy secludes from such a claim.
But yet had Nature purged the spot she made,
We with his birth the better might comport,
If (like his Sire, fierce squadrons fit to lead)
His parts were such as might the State import;
He falsifies his race, of wit so weak,
That all his inward wants are soon perceiv^d,
All of his judgment in derision speak,
By which great things can hardly be conceived:
And though his body might from pains be spared,
Whose constitution is not very strong;
But with infirmities so far impaired,
That it alive cannot continue long;
"Yet since in State he never has been schooled,
"His ignorance would rack him still with fears:
"Whilst he who ruled, still needing to be ruled,
"Spoke but with others tongues, heard with their ears.
"A K ng inconstant, great con^usion makes,
"Wh^m ^ll mistrust, and most amid'st a Camp:
"Whilst (soft like wax) he each impression takes,
"A l^^tle labor changing still the stamp;
"Ah, should our lives depend upon his breath,
"Who of himself cannot discern a crime:
"But for each rash report damnes men to death,
"Then yields a fruitless pity out of time.
"Thus whilst some always must his judgment sway,
"Which still does harbor in another head,
"Of Sycophants this Prince may be the prey,
"Who where they list him (as quite blind) will lead.
"And since but base, that they may be the best,
"Such still will toil, that we may be o'rethrowne:
"And to the credu ous King may means suggest,
"To taint our fame, lest it obscure their own.
What grief were this to us, whilst such as those
Might make their vantage of the all-pow'rfull breath?
And that our actions balanced by our foes,
Were guerdon'd with disdain, or else with death?

Me. Since private hopes your judgments do bewitch,
I Will leave this counsel where no good can please:
Come follow me all those who would be rich:
Few have regard (poor soldiers) to your ease.

Perd. That shall prove best which first I went about,
Though some would wrest my words from what I thought:
Lo, Meleagers spite does now burst out,
Like flaming fires which burn themselves to naught.
Thus, naughty minds which never dream but ill,
Do construe all things to a crooked sense:
What I proposed, reposing on your will,
He would interpret for a great offense.
And (thus puff d up) this parting hence of his,
To many former faults has added one:
By his seditious words incensed ere this,
The soldiers are to sack the treasure gone.

Ant. With one consent then let us all conclude,
That Alexanders race (when borne) must reign:
So shall we stablish still that sacred blood,
Which raised our state, and may it best maintain.
And let us now (before we part) appoint
Who shall command till that the babe be borne:
And circumspectly ponder every point,
That success so our Council may adorn.

Eum. I hear a tumult raised amongst the Tents,
And Arideus is proclaimed King:
To which the multitude (soon changed) consents,
As bent for all whose course a change may bring,
The footmen are to indignation moved,
In this assembly that they want a seat,
Where our proceedings they might have approved,
As knowing all that did concern the state.
They soon forget their Prince (exspecting spoils)
That dare revolt from what we all advised:
"Thus too much liberty breeds many broiles,
"And makes the giver still to be despised.
"The want of discipline all things confounds.
Their deeds want order, and their pride all bounds.

Perd. And dare they then against that fortress rise,
Where Alexanders Ensigns are displaid?
Or violate the walls where as he lies?
May not his shadow make them all afraid?
What? how comes this? and dare they then presume,
To brag their Captains, and abuse their Arms?
Arms* arms, just wrath these Rebels must consume,
Our countenance will them curb, sound, sound th'alarmes.

Exeunt. Act 2. Scene 2.
Lysimachus, Seleucus. Lo, here a great and more then sudden change!
All men for mirth were like to have gone mad,
So that of late it would have been thought strange,
In all this City to have seen one sad.
Each wall resounded some melodious song,
To ravish curious ears with rare delight;
Strange Tapestries were stretched the streets along,
And stately objects made to charm the sight;
As if our King his conquests so would crown,
Of all the world a Parliament to hold,
He (placed with pomp in this imperial town)
Did of magnificence the height unfold.
Here glory (in her richest robes arrayed)
Should have shown all that Greatness could expect.
Yet were our hopes even at the height betrayed:
To death those Trophies fortune did erect.
A tragic end this triumph quite confounds,
All our applauses vanish in complaints,
Our Music marred by melancholy sounds,
Lo, by the Cypress pressed, the laurel faints.
To funeral shrikes, our shouts of joy we turn,
(With gorgeous garments, Grief cannot comport,)
We that so much rejoiced, far more must mourn,
"Days spent with woe are long, with pleasure short.
This breeds most anguish, when that one compares
The present time with others that are past,
Whilst wonted hopes are balanced with despaires,
Which all heroicke minds with woe do waste.
Betwixt these two, what difference find we forth,
The rising Sun, and it that is declined?
Where is that Zodiac (lodging of all worth)
Whence valors beams (still lightning courage) shined?
Now desolation spreads it self over all:
A solitary silence, grief allows,
Ah, (as quite cr^sh'd by that great Monarchs fall)
How many malcontents cast down their brows?
A strange suspicion has possessed the streets,
Whilst every man his neighbors fall conspires,
Each one who unawares another meets,
(As fearing treason) with distrust retires.
Of rumors strange each ear is greedy grown,
Which (though but doubtful) move the mind to rue,
And (doting still on that which is their own)
What they conjecture, all affirm for true.
Sell. With eyes that flame for rage, our deeds heaven viewes,
And (moved for us) a high disdain does bear;
Lo, all men's heads are heavy for ill news,
And though we know not what, yet still we fear:
For, since the widowed world does want a head,
Each member now does labor to be chief,
Which (whilst they diverse ways the body lead)
May give beginning to some endless grief;
Some (like the fool who thunder fayn'd like Jove)
Would make their fame like Alexanders sound,
And (all brought low) to be themselves above,
Would order all, or else would all confound;
Then some vain wits which only would seem wise,
(By flattering mirrours of their shape deceived)
Do every thing that is not theirs despise,
And perish would, ere them another saved.
A number too whom all things do content,
What each one thinks, are still resolved to do:
They make a choice, then do the choice repent,
And straight repent of that repentance too.
The public good is spoiled by private hope,
Whilst many thus high dignities do claim;
This discord gives to rash ambition scope:
"For, all would fish within a troubled stream.
See how dissension has dissolved so soon,
All kind of order, and confusion brought:
Our Council quite this variance has undone,
"Whilst one would have done all, all have done naught*
Although Perdiccas (as it would have seemed)
Whilst for his masters race he only stood,
Sought (by that means more virtuous to be deemed)
His Princes honor, and his Countries good;
Yet his companions having in contempt,
He did by subtle means himself advance:
And so to shadow his disguised attempt,
Aimed at the royal place as but by chance;
He toils that the unborne none should beguile,
As by the heavens for the Orphans good reserved:
Yet wanting of a King naught but the style,
He would not want that when the occasion served.
And Meleager partially disposed,
To hinder others, does pretend a love
To bastard Philip, by effect disclosed,
Since he but seeks Perdiccas to disprove;
And if that foe, whom he does fear, but fail,
He cares not much what Emperor they proclaim:
And his design with many may prevail:
"A cloak of right, apparels any claim;
"They whose descent some title does disclose
"(As by their birth made capable to reign:)
"Must be preferred by reason unto those,
"Who of all right without the bounds remain.
The furious footmen (insolently stout)
A title to maintain, did brave our band,
And (indignation thundering threatenings out)
Would with our blood have bathed this barbarous land.
O! what indignity would this have been,
Whilst those whom we subdued with such great toiles,
Had in this sort their victors vanquished seen,
So of their spoilers purchasing the spoils*
Thus darkening all that we had done before,
(Our swords first stayn'd by ignominious wounds)
We, of our conquests could have kept no more,
But burials base (if those) in the enemies bounds.
O! what excellency consists in the one,
(Though often not marked till missed) clear at this hour:
"Some with a word, or look, do more alone,
"Then thousands joined with policy and power.
When squadrons armed with Ensigns full displaid,
As of their Prince all due regard quite lost,
His generous course would (obstinate) have staid,
By them abandoned, when endangered most;
Then of disorder yielding bitter fruits,
They boldly marched with bragges before his Tent,
And charged their Sovereign with unlawful suits,
To innovations violently bent;
Of duty then, they by no band detained,
First grudged, grew factious next, last rebels plain,
Like waters for a time (by Art restrai'd)
Their bounds once passed, which do all bounds disdain:
But from that pattern of accomplished worth,
Whom imitate none may, all must admire,
Through just ^isdaine when fury spark'led forth,
These troops (astonished) trembling did retire;
His stately countenance calmed tumultuous sounds,
And lightened Majesty through clouds of wrath,
That (even as if his words had given them wounds)
They fell, afraid of him, though not of death:
Those lofty bands which were of late so proud,
That they disdained to wait their Emperors will:
Then (by his look all at an instant bowed)
Did beg but leave that they might serve him still;
And yet what wonder though he gained all hearts;
Which to his presence happened to repair,
With that perfection of all virtuous parts,
As large in him, as in all others rare?
Lo, when we meet to treat, by peace or wars,
How all our conquests may be best secured,
The Soldiers do burst out in public jarres,
Even by their Captains no respect procured.
And who can call that valorous Prince to mind,
That unto virtue any reverence bears,
But he must be constrained, or prove unkind,
To offer up a tribute of some tears?

Lysi. His death does make my soul faint sorrows prey,
Though many thought that I for it had longed;
For, if by any whom he should obey,
One can be wronged, then I indeed was wronged.

Sell. Though fame abroad by diverse tongues did bring,
To what huge danger you were once exposed;
It did not paint out each particular thing,
Which by your self I long to hear disclosed.

Lysim. When wise Calistenes for no request,
With superstitious customs could comport,
But with frank words all flattery did detest,
He was abused, and in a barbarous sort:
"So plaguing him (no doubt) the King did ill,
"Yet to prosperity we must impute
"Those fatal faults which follow fortune still,
"As of great minds a kind of bastard fruit;
"We should in Kings, as loath their state to touch,
"Speak sparingly of vice, praise virtue much.
But I whose soul that wise man dearly loved,
Whilst his perfections spying thus injured,
(To tender passions by compassion moved)
Would his relief have willingly procured.
But when my credit failed, all hope quite past,
That I could purchase grace in any sort:
I desperate physi^ke did afford at last,
That if his life was ill, it might be short.
The King ^nrag'd, that I had thus presumed
To limit his revenge by giving death,
That by a Lion I should be consumed,
Did throw my doom out of the depths of wrath;
But when with rolling eyes the Lion roared,
He, by my strength (as strengthlesse) was o're-thrown,
Which to the King whose did then remord,
My constancy and courage both made known,
So that incontinent I was set free,
By this rare proof esteemed amongst the strong,
And with a mind from inward rancour free,
As he his wrath, so I forgot the wrong:
For, whilst alone he through a Forest ranged;
A prey exposed, yet did no danger dream,
Some at that time had former wrongs revenged,
If but for mischief bent to gain a names;
Yet that which others did attempt in vain,
And (tyr^d by travel) of a surfeit died,
I did perform, and brought him back again,
As swiftly running as his horse could ride;
And of that deed my sprite rests well appaid:
For, since that time my Sovereign held me dear,
Which afterward he to the world bewraid,
Whilst by this means his favor did appear.
When unawares my brow he chanced to wound,
To stay my blood which strived to dye his Lance,
He with his Diadem my Temples crowned,
A happy sign though coming but by chance;
And O! who knows but once before I dye,
Some good event may second the presage?

Seleu. What hinders us but we should fortune try,
And for a Crown our travels straight engage?
Those bended minds which aim at Greatness still,
"(Grown popular, of purpose to be praised:)
"Do wind themselves every man's good will,
And would seem humble, that they may be raised.
"What counterfeited friends seal trustlesse bands,
"Whilst in the general cause that wit pretends,
"Though never joining hearts, all join their hands*
"And work one way, yet work for diverse ends?
Yea, those whose minds move in the sphere of State,
Have purchased powers, as purposed for the fields,
With jealous minds their rivals to abate,
Whilst (equals all) none to another yields;
Yet with suspended thoughts they doubtful stand,
And their designs to venture do forbear,
Least all the rest joined by a general band,
Do him o're-throw, who first gives cause of fear;
But he may speed who for a Crown does thirst,
And (free from fear) with courage does advance:
Some to be second, doubting to be first,
Will make their course depend upon his chance;
And by a battle if that one prevail,
There will rich hopes at easy rates be sold,
Whilst those seek help, whose Fortune then does fail,
As first by hope, last by despair made bold;
All this to me great cause of fear affords,
Lest that we two protract the time too long;
And wounded be before we draw our swords:
"All at such times must do, or suffer wrong.

Lysi. No chance of late has brought me so to bow,
But I have thrown some thoughts at those high hopes:
"Yet in my mind that man do most allow
"Who does with judgment mother are fancies scopes:
Those Provinces which are to us assigned,
As calm in mind, we manage must a space:
Till all attempt that which they have designed,
By enterchanging damage and disgrace:
Then living but like those whose force is small,
From which the world no great thing can expect:
We shall profess a favor to them all,
As who naught else, save public peace affect;
Yet then, our thoughts shall not have leave to sleep,
But subtle plots must circumspectly frame,
Those whom we fear at variance still to keep,
So always strengthening us, and weakening them;
If wrongs provoke, or when occasion claims,
Like cunning wrestlers at th'Olympick games,
Who exercise themselves to be more strong;
And when themselves have thus prepared the way,
Whilst that their pomp does bear a lower sail.
(For at the last their force must much decay,
Since all must always lose, though one prevail)
Then prompt to tempt that which we now contrive,
(By ruining the remnant that remains)
We may possess the state for which they strive;
Thus they the toils, and we shall get the gains.

Exeunt. Chorus.
O Happy was that guiltless age,
When a^ Astraea lived below:
And that Bellona's barbarous rage
Did not all order quire overthrow
Then whilst all did themselves content
With that thing which they did possess,
And gloried in a little rent,
As wanting means to make excess;
Those could no kind of want bemone,
For, craving naught, they had all things:
And since none sought the regal Throne,
Whilst none were Subjects, all were Kings:
"O! to true bliss their course was set,
"Who got to live, not lived to get.
Then innocence naked lived,
And had no need, nor thought of Arms,
Whilst spightfull sprits no means contrived,
To plague the simple sort with harms;
Then snaring laws did not extend
The bounds of Reason as they do,
Strife often begun where it should end,
One doubt but cleared to foster two:
By conscience then all order stood,
By which dark things were soon discerned,
Whilst all behooved there to be good,
Where as no evil was to be learned:
And how could any then prove naught,
Whilst by example virtue taught?
Then mortals minds all strong and pure,
Free from corruption lasted long,
(By innocence kept secure)
When none did know how to do wrong;
Then sting'd with no suspicious thought,
Men mischief did from none expect:
For, what in them could not be wrought,
In others they would not suspect;
And though none did stern laws impart,
That might to virtue men compel,
Each one by habit in his heart,
Had engraved a law of doing well:
And all did wickedness forbear
Of their free will, and not for fear.
The first who spoiled the public rest,
And did disturb this quiet state,
Was Avarice, the greatest pest
Which does of darkness fill the seat:
A Monster very hard to daunt,
Lean, as dried up with inward care,
(Though full of wealth) for fear of want,
Still at the borders of despair;
Scarce taking food for Natures ease,
Nor for the cold sufficient clothing,
She whom her own could never please,
Thinks all have much, and she has nothing:
This daughter of stern Pluto, still
Her fathers dungeon strives to fill.
That Monster-tamer most renowned,
The great Alcides, Thebes glory,
Who (for twelve several labors crowned)
Was famous made by many a story,
As one who all his time had toiled
To purge the world of such like pests,
Who robbers robbed, and spoylers spoyld,
Still humbling hauty Tyrants crests,
He by this Monster once o're-throwne,
Did pass in Spain over lands and floods,
And there took more then was his own,
What right had he to Gerions goods*
Thus Avarice the world deceives,
And makes the greatest Conquerours slaves.
Ah! when to plague the world with grief,
This poore-rich Monster once was borne:
Then weakness could find no relief,
And subtlety did conscience scorn:
Yet some who labored to recall
That bliss which gilded the first age,
Did punishment prepare for all,
Who did their thoughts to vice engage;
And yet the more they laws did bring,
That to be good might men constrain,
The more they sought to do the thing
From which the laws did them restrain:
So that by custom altered quite,
The world in ill does most delight.
Exeunt. Act. 3
Scene 1.
Perdiccas, Eumenes. NOw Fortune smyles upon my rising State,
And seems to promise more then I require;
Lo, by degrees my glory does grow great,
And by their death who did my death conspire.
Proud Meleager who disdained to bow,
And my advancement always did mislike,
Has with his blood sealed my assurance now,
To fright all those who would attempt the like.
Eum. Yet of his fall the form my mind appalls,
Even at Jove's Altar, and without regard;
We were too rash to violate those walls
Which the most impious could not but have spared.
Lascivious Ajax by Minerva's spite,
Erst for profaning such a sacred place,
On the Capharian Rocks did lose the light,
And all hi^ Navy too for ones disgrace.
"We should not irritate celestial powr's;
"And, all beginnings are considered most:
Such horror breeds this odious act of ours,
That we (I fear) opinions power have lost.

Per. Let others seek to keep such points as those,
I am not scrupulous, for, I protest,
Over all, and by all means I Will kill my foes,
And then thereafter argue of the rest.
"They wrong the Gods who think their Church should be
"A refuge free for Malefactors still:
"For, with their justice this cannot agree:
"Who guard ill doers, guilty are of ill.
Was he not stained with many a monstrous crime,
And Salamander-like amidst the fire
(Contentiously disposed) did spend his time,
And (never pleased)did still some change required?

Eum. "One hum'rous head that does in brawls delight,
"May poison thousands with the gall of spite.

Per. As still seditiously affecting strife,
He but abused the credit of his King:
And sent some of his slaves to take my life,
Such bitter envy did his stomach sting.

Eum. I saw, how that advanced before our band,
You first did check, then chase the them in the end:
And did with courage resolutely stand,
Our Sovereigns corpse (though dead) bent to defend,

Per. "He but a dastard is who basely yields,
"And in no conflict: has his Fortune tried,
We (^f in time not ventring to the fields)
Like beasts (all sacrificed) had poorly died:
But when without we masters did remain,
(Lest Babylon had straight been barred from food):
I those proud squadrons quickly did constrain
Even as we pleased, a Treaty to conclude.
Graced whilst my foe (as in some kind compared)
A chief in charge, he many minds did sway,
But (found inferior) when a friend declared,
My credit did increase, and his decay.

Eum. Yet in this course all (who observe) do see,
That of the multitude the mind prevailed:
He whom they did elect our Prince must be,
And our design has altogether failed:
But how comes this? that every Captain gets
A certain Realm committed to his charge,
And with an Army bravely forward sets,
Their bounds allowed to guard, or to enlarge?

Per. I by my means have every great man crowned,
That from my greatness great things might proceed:
Yet by that means to make my power renowned,
The Alexandra an Tragedy.
The doing liked me better then the deed;
I this division chiefly did procure
To h^ve those great-men from the Court removed,
Where they might be employed, yet I secure,
Their favor purchased, or at least thus proved:
For, him who has them to such honor brought,
They must be bound to hold in high account,
And their advancement for this end I sought,
That by their means I with more ease might mount.

Eum. O! but your fancies may be much deceived,
"There is no bond can bind unthankful minds:
I fear the favor that they thus received,
Has shown them ways to sail by other winds.
So long, of late, as they had need of you,
To seem your friends they (courting kindness) sought:
But since their greatness is well grounded now,
They will disdain what derogates in ought.
"To those all great men friends most frankly prove,
"Whom (for their pleasure) freely they affect,
"And (loathing bands) cannot be forced to love,
"As braved by worth, when merits urge respect.
"Few mark from whence they rose, when once aloft,
"None can endure that they should owe their state:
"Deserts grow odious when upbraided often,
"And are depraved, not guerdon'd, when too great.
"Yea, in my judgment you have greatly erred,
"Them to exalt, whose state you would surprise:
"Their common custom is who are preferred,
"That they may stand, not to let others rise.

Per. "To ruin lofty minds when least afraid,
"Whilst careless carriage jealous censures sift,
"By spies abroad to foes at Court betrayed,
"Then by preferrement what more subtle drift?
Their hearts with hate are parted all by pride;
One is already to confusion gone:
I long to learn how Leonatus died,
Not that I mind his funerals to bemone.

Eum. That Prince magnanimous whom all admire,
(As was his custom) clemently proclaimed,
That banished Grecians might to Greece retire,
Save only such whom murder had defamed;
But who them banished, grieved for their return,
Did fear what just revenge might have designed,
As knowing well (whilst wrongs make wrath to burn)
"How misery does irritate a mind;
The indignation which they had conceived,
Did breed rebellion bursting out with rage,
The which our King (deep in his mind ingrav'd)
By Athens spoils did purpose to assuage:
But since that death afforded them relief,
Grown bold to prosecute their proud attempt,
The Athenians, and the Aetolians were the chief
Who brought Antipater first in contempt;
And by their power constrained to quite the field,
He (in a little Town enclosed) at last,
Was once reduced in danger near to yield,
And stain the glory of his actions past;
But yet by accident as often it falls,
"(It better is to happy be, then wise)
An unsuspected shaft thrown from the walls,
Their foes chief Captain happened to surprise;
Then did Antipater his courage rear,
Which had almost his stagg'ring hopes betrayed:
Yet still in doubt, and not quite free from fear,
He Leonatus did entreat for aid;
And he who seemed his friendship to affect,
To further him desirous did appear;
But (if he had prevailed) some do suspect,
Antipater had bought his succors dear.
Yet by the end his purpose bent to show
(How ever in effect) he seemed a friend;
But when the Athenians did his coming know,
They him to fight did all directly tend.
And though their thoughts in depths of doubts did fleet,
They when alone, to match him thought it best,
And whilst they marched th'adventrous troops to meet,
Did hardly welcome the unwelcome Guest:
When both the Armies were to battle1 brought,
And show with what bright flames their breasts were stored,
Brave Leonatus like a Lion fought,
So to prove worthy of his wonted Lord:
But whilst he bravely did his charge acquit,
Yet lost himself, who others came to save,
And by their Captains fall discouraged quite,
His scatt'red troops great damage did receive;
When old Antipater was surely told
Of their mishap, who came for his relief,
He not one sign of sorrow did unfold:
"A little gain does mitigate much grief:
Well did he know that though his foes prevail'^,
Yet this great fight enfeebled had their host,
And then he took to him which much availed
Those beaten bands who had their Captain lost;
Yet that in which he did most comfort find,
Was his delivery from a secret foe,
Who did with jealousy torment his mind,
Though outwardly not seeming to be so.

Per. Thus, we who erst below one ensign warred,
Slept in one Tent, and all one Fortune proved,
And (with a friendship then, that never jarr'd)
Like Pilades, and mad Orestes loved,
Since that we want a Lord, and all are Lords;
We (lo) renounce all kind of kindness now,
And (secret rancour budding in discords)
Do others harms procure, at least allow.
"Such is the sacred famine of a Crown,
"That it to satisfy, before we fail,
"What in our way does stand, all must go down,
"And bands of blood, or friendship not avail-
"These glory-ravish'd souls that would be great,
"No means omit, although they be unjust,
"None bears with patience partners in the state;
"What jealous lover can his Rivals trust?

Eum. Well, I perceive Antipater does tend
With all his power to gain that sacred prey,
Whose means (of late enlarged) to reach his end:
Through every danger may enforce a way;
And Alexander sometimes spoke at large,
Then whilst Antipater with Agis strived,
That he (without the limits of his charge)
More like a King, then a Lieutenant lived.
Antigonus, and Ptolomie in Arms
Are joined in one, our ruin bent to breed;
I fear that friendship procreate our harms,
Unless their spite prevented be with speed.

Per. I Will lodge you how (Eumenes) in my breast,
And let you see the ground of my intent:
Since that we both alike must toil, or rest,
As those whose courses must have one event.
Since at his death, I by our dying Lord,
Was in his place appointed to succeed,
And that my Fortune does a means afford,
How I may compass that which he decreed.
To leave that place I cannot well agree,
As if I wanted courage to command,
I Will take that which the fates do force on me:
For, if without a Throne I cannot stand.
"And those who would perform difficult things,
"Must not regard what way, so they prevail:
"Often fraud, then force, greater furtherance brings,
The Fox must help, if that the Lion fail.
So old Antipater to have betrayed,
His daughter I in marriage did require,
That so the time might but have been delayed,
Till that I had accomplished my desire:
For, wi h the shadow of pretended love,
And hoped affinity which seemed designed,
I from his bounds some bands aimed to remove,
By raising me that he might have declined;
"But who can snare a mind all eyed with fears*
He quickly did mistrust the purposed wrong,
And from my Messengers straight barred his ears,
As did Ulysses from the Sirens song.

Eum. Yet this, (if rightly weighed) might much import,
If that you match your self with such a Mate,
Whose beauty, pleasure, birth might bring support,
And both concur in one to bless your state,
If you to make your high attempts more sure,
By Hymen's means with some your self allie,
Thus of some Prince you may the power procure,
On whom for help you boldly may rely.
What grief were this if you have hap to gain,
That fair Idea which your fancies frame,
If after you, none of your own remain
To keep your Conquests, and revive your name?
"Kings live most s^fe who of their own have heirs,
"Whose sacred persons none dare seek to wound:
"Since, though they dye, yet there rest some of theirs,
"Who are to venge their death, by Nature bound.

Per. All shall be tried which may enlarge my might;
I mind to match my self with such a one,
Who (if she have my power to prove her right)
May be thought worthy of her Fathers Throne.
I with Olympias have devised a thing,
Which may secure her state, and make mine strong,
And (if accomplished) prove a prosperous spring,
From whence may flow great acts ere it be long:
By Cleopatra may a means be caught,
Which to a glorious end our course may bring,
She whom at first her Father Philip matched
With Alexander of Epirus King,
Who having heard great Alexanders fame,
(In emulation of that Monarchs praise)
Went with his troops th'Etrurians bent to tame,
Which enterprise did but abridge his days:
In marriage with that widowed Queen combinde,
(If that her Mother thus her course assist)
Whilst I perform that which I have in mind,
Who dare presume my purpose to resist?
For, whilst this friendship does my name renown,
It may my thoughts from further fear seclude:
Since having thus a title to the Crown,
As one engrafted in the royal blood.

Eum. I fear that this your purpose to prevent,
A number now take arms all in one form,
As those whose fears conjecture your intent,
And by the lowering clouds foreknow a storm.
Already many do together run,
Who for our ruin wonderfully thirst.

Per. Where do you think that we should then begin,
And exercise hostility at first?

Eum. Though we our selves in strangers Thrones enstall,
And (having Asia to subjection brought)
Make Nibus, Indus, and Euphrates thrall,
Yet all those victories would serve for naught,
Whilst Macedonie does continue free,
(A fertile field to bring brave Armies forth)
Which (till first forced) can now not subject be,
And ere they love a King, must prove his worth,
"Then unto those who seek a Prince in Arms,
"His chiefest Realm the greatest vantage gives,
"Where wars (held out) are always with his harms,
"Since that his foe still at his charges lives;
"And wars protracted with a peoples loss,
Do from their Sovereign alienate their love;
They lose their hearts, whom Fortune once does cross,
And foiled at home, can no where else remove:
Who Macedonie has, still the best,
Which of our state the stately Mistrisse is:
As which with courage conquered all the rest,
And but depends on Mars, as only his:
If you were Lord of that undaunted soil,
And by Olympias countenanced but a time,
Straight front Antipater all would recoyle,
And, bent t'undo him, we would find a crime;
To you who are a Macedonian borne,
(If matched with Cleopatra, great in powers)
The Macedonians gladly would be sworn,
And (if commanding them) then all were yours.

Per. Yet this opinion partly I disprove,
Which would not (as you think) our troubles end:
For, if we do from hence our force remove,
And to the Aemathian bounds directly tend,
There must at first a doubtful war be proved,
With those brave bands whose valor is well known:
Of whom Craterus dearly is beloved;
Antipater is borne, and bred their own.
And though indeed (as kindly to those parts)
My friendship may affected be by some,
Yet those who start in time by many arts,
May under-myne their minds before we come.
Then whilst we trouble Macedony most,
And leave those Realms unarmed which now are ours,
Straight Ptolomie when strengthened is his host,
May (like a tempest) swallow Asia's powers.
I, for the time most willingly would take
The course which seems to make our state most sure:
"A foe is dangerous, when behind ones back,
"(Who whilst not looked for) may our harm procure*
My purpose is, though yet to none made known,
That Egypt first shall burdened be with war:
For, if that Ptolomie were once o'rethrowne,
Then that from Greece all hope of help would bar.

Eum. Hold still with you those of the sacred blood,
Whom to protect you always must pretend:
"The countenance of the great, may do much good,
"Whom still (though weak) all glory to attend.

Exeunt. Act. 3. Scene 2.
Olympias, Roxane. LEt sorrow prove a tyrant to my soul,
Whose rage with reason now no measure keeps;
What of my tears the torrent can controull,
Since flowing from afflictions deepest deeps?
How can my breast but burst whilst sobs rebound,
Since on^e the seat of joys now not the same?
May not huge horrors press me to the ground,
In thinking what I was, and what I am?
I was a great man's wife, a g^eaters mother,
Even she to whom the heavens their best did give;
Yet, I, even I, more plagued then any other,
In dungeons now of desolation live.
My son who was the glory of his time,
Stain of times past, and light of t^mes to come,
(O frail mortality! O slipper ^yme!)
Though having all o're-com'd, death did o're-come.
And I (dejected wretch) whole dying eyes
(By Natures custom bound) he should have closed,
Was not to shut his stars with th'yvory skies,
Which curtain'd once where Majesty reposed:
But ah! his falling in a foreign part
Has (if ought can enlarge) enlarged my grief,
Or else on him I melted had my heart,
And spent my self to purchase his relief.
Yet though I was not present at his death,
He shall not be defrauded of my tears:
But for his funeral fires my flaming breath
Shall smoke, and to his Ghost a tribute bears.
Rox. Ah! to what corner rolls my watrie sight,
Where it not finds some matter to bemone?
O foolish eyes! why lose ye not your light,
Since your delight is lost, your object gone?
Once of all Queens I might the fortune scorn,
To whom just love that great man did engage,
Whose match in worth the world has never borne,
Nor never shall enrich another age.
When those perfections do transport my mind,
Which admiration does disclose too late;
I curse the fates that did his judgment bind,
To make me partner of so high a state.
And I repent that to his sight I past
(Though highly graced) once on a festuall day,
A feast which many a time must make me fast,
And with flow woe that flying mirth defray;
Then if my fortune had not blinded me,
But ah! whose judgment had it not bereaved?
Whilst that great Monarch daign'd to like of me,
Of my high flight I had the fall conceived.
Of Asia's Prince whose state did then decline,
He both the wife, and daughters had at will,
Whose beauties luster might have darkened mine,
Yet free from snares restrained his fancies still.
And when my father chose out from the rest
Those Virgins all whom Fame affirmed for rare;
Though having viewed them all, he loved me best,
Then thought most fortunate, if not most fair;
And when this match his Nobles all dismayed,
That he himself with captives had allied:
That act, he then (as love had dited) said
Took from the vanquished shame, from victors pride;
Yet me (as Empress) all did entertain,
Though his inferior far in all respects,
Till I from him by death divorced remain,
Whom with his Son now all the world neglects.

Olymp. Although this will but aggravate my woe,
From whom the fates all comfort now seclude,
Yet I do tender his remembrance so,
That of my Son to hear, it does me good;
And (daughter) now to double my distress,
Make me at length acquainted with his death,
That sorrow may each part of me possess,
Sad news mine ears, tears eyes, and sighs my breath.

Rox. Though grief to me scarce liberty affords,
To press forth passions which oppress my mind,
Yet would affection wrestle out some words
To speak of him who all my thoughts confined;
When he had conquered all that could resist
(A Monarchy not equal with his mind)
Still in his haughty course he did insist,
And searched the Ocean other worlds to find:
But when from it his Navy was redeemed,
He stood in doubt where Trophies next to rear:
The world (though large) for him too little seemed.
His mind could more conceive, then Nature bea^e*
Last (ah!) this Emperor purposed was in the end,
At Babylon his glories hight to show,
Where all the world his coming did attends;
As Jove above, who only reigned below.
When he drew near that then thrice Monarchs seat,
The Astrologians by their skill foretold,
What danger huge was threatened to his state,
The which elsewhere might better be contrould:
But he who was not capable of fear,
And could not muse of misadventures then,
Would triumph there, and the worlds Scepter bear,
Backed with more Kings then other Kings with men.
There (as a God) transporting mortals sights,
(Which mirth with mourning I must still record)
He spent, or lost a time, in all delights,
Which Fortune could (when flattering most) afford,
Till Thessalus, for mischief but reserved,
Once to his house invited him to dine,
Where false Cassander at the Table served,
And as he used with water mixed his wine.

Olymp. Alas, alas, and so it proved in the end,
"But who could fear a benefited friend?

Rox. There were all creatures valued for their worth,
As wholesome, dai^ty, sumptuous, stately, rare,
Which (forced by Phoebus) th'Easterne Realms bring forth,
To live by Sea, by Land, or in the air.
Then when that Reason drunk with pleasure slept,
Which all the senses with abundance stored,
And whilst (save Music) nothing measure kept,
With Ceres, Bacchus only was adored.
Even when the King beginning was to drink,
(As strangely moved) he thund'red forth a groan:
And from the Table suddenly did shrink,
His wonted vigor at an instant gone;
Whilst he was softly to a Chamber led,
That death a title to his body claimed,
The sorrowing Soldiers swarmed about his bed;
With looks once fierce, then for compassion framed:
But he whom victory had still arrayed,
With others past this battle bent to even,
Did look like one whom all the world obeyed,
And boasted shortly then to take the heaven:
Whilst (lightning comfort to afflicted bands)
He stretched them forth to kiss in several parts,
By Sword then Scepter his more honored hands,
On which, it seemed, they melted all their hearts.
Last, unto them those generous words he told:
Yet to my life my death does bring no blot:
Thus, to dye young in years, in glory old,
Of all our Family is still the lot;
And since no worlds are resting to o're-come,
Life serves for naught; I did an Empire found:
Lived, warred, and reigned (all done) for which I come:
Then go great Ghost (not grieved) below the ground.
No further Weighing what belonged to life,
He with a countenance constant even in death,
(As too victorious in that fatal strife)
The air perfuming, spent the imperious breath.
But through the Camp when that it once was known,
That from the world that world of worth was gone,
What anguish was, it cannot well be shown,
I had my part, yet had not all alone.
O! let that day which makes my days all night,
Be registered amongst the dismal days,
Whose melancholy, and portentuous light
With some disaster still the world dismayes.
And Babylon, cursed be thy fatal towers,
Once seat of Monarchs, Mistress of the earth,
But from henceforth (a slave to foreign powers)
Still burdened be thy bounds with blood and dearth*

Olym. You need not use those execrations more,
Though Babylon of breath that Prince deprived,
Yet (as an Oracle had told before)
In Macedonie was his death contrived;
Antipater had heard, how diverse times
The King against him had been moved to wrath,
And damned (as guilty of opprobrious crimes)
His son in law Lincestes unto death.
Then he was told, the King did strictly try
How his Lievtenants had their places used,
Still making all as traitors straight to dye,
Who had the same in any sort abused;
Thus, he who well did know his own misdeeds,
Had learned by others what he might expect,
As whose ambitious breast in pride exceeds,
And always did a Sovereignty affect:
But when Craterus was to have his place,
And he required the Army to attend,
He thought that thus Time would some means embrace,
To plague his pride with a deserved end;
Then to prevent that which I think was still
More feared by him, then purposed by the King,
With guilty thoughts often exercised in ill,
He sought what might to death his Sovereign bring;
And this the traitor compassed at the last,
As I (alas!) have learned (although too late)
When to my son, his son Cassander past,
As to congratulate his prosperous state;
Then in his company he did retain
A poison powerful where it was employed,
Whose violence no metal could restrain,
But in a hors^s hoof was still conveigh^d*
He and his brother fit occasion watch^d,
And for their Prince a cup of poison made;
Thus he who never could by force be matched,
By treason, lo (O cruel fate!) lies dead.

Rox. And could, or durst those traitors be so bold,
The pillar of all worth to undermine?
But (Madame) ah, Antipater of old,
Against your greatness always did repine.
And (I remember) on a time he sent
A messeng^r of mind to make you bow,
Who to your Son a letter did present
Full of invectives to discredit you;
The King whilst reading what it did comprise,
Did smile with scorn, then to Hephestion say:
In writing of such things he is not wise,
Which straight one mothers tear will wipe away.

Olym. I often informed my son (strange ways devised)
How that disloyal man strived to be great:
But as a woman's wit, mine was despised,
And construed still unto the sense of hate.
Yet of my Son (I thought) the deeds were such,
That all men them admired, none envy could;
And that none durst his sacred person touch,
Whom men adored, and Jove as his did hold.
How often have I those bitter throws allowed,
By which I brought that demi-god to light?
And well I might of such a birth be proud,
Which made me glorious in the peoples sight;
Though diverse too (as I have some time known)
To draw his love from me did ways prepare,
Yet were their slights by dutious love o're-throwne,
And I respected with a reverend care.
His tender love to me was much extold,
Then when he sought to stablish a decree,
That with Immortals I might be enrold,
And (as a Goddess) honors have to me.
Ah! how can I this tragic time survive,
Who lost a son so great, a son so kinder?
And all the means which make me now to live,
Is with revenge a hope to ease my mind.

Rox. His love to you it could not but abound,
(By nature, parents of their own are loved)
Since those to whom he by no band was bound,
Of his humanity the fruits have proved.
His clemency did make his state more sure,
Then all the terrors rising from his name,
Which whilst he lived, did public love procure,
And after death a never dying fame.
Old Sisigambis lifting up her heart,
(Of her own sons the death who bad survived)
To Alexander did that love impart,
Which was to Darius due while as he lived;
But when these tidings wounded had her ears,
That heaven from the earth had robbed that praise of men:
(Whilst all dissolved in floods of bitter tears)
She hated life, as never spoiled till then.
Her widowed nephew groaning at her feet,
Who of Hephestion did the death bewail,
In depths of woe she (drowned with tears) did fleet,
Till that o're-whelm'd, her strength began to fail;
Then barred from food, she grovelling did abide,
Till that life's course (then hastened fast) was run:
Thus she survived her son, yet with him died,
In whom she found the kindness of a son.

Olym. If but when hearing this his tragic end,
A stranger (once his Captive) died for grief,
Ah, shall his mother yet on hope depend,
As such a loss might look for some relief?
And yet I will, for 't were a great disgrace
To me the mother of that matchless man,
(Like other women) to give fortune place,
And faintly yield as vulgar wretches can.
Though grief at first must mollify me once,
Or (as unnatural) I might be admired
Yet will I not still burst my breast with groans;
Then that, of me more courage is required,
I Will not degener from my generous kind,
"(Faint-hearted Hindes brought never Lion forth)
"Nor yet a Mother of an abject mind,
"Had never borne a Monarch of such worth.
And O! who knows, but once the time may come,
That I to venge my self a means may have?
Whilst those vile traitors ruined are by some,
Who with their blood may bath their Sovereigns grave.
Now on Perdiccas I repose my trust,
Who with Eumenes would our wrongs red resse;
Their valor (ventring in a cause so just)
By all appearance, promise does no less.

Rox. Lo, now of late delivered of a son,
I to those Captains scarce dare make it known,
His kingdoms all to part who have begun,
And might (by killing him) make them their own.
Ah! (Madame) this does move me most to pause,
Who of those great men the ambition fear,
Lest by pretending but a public cause,
They seek themselves the Diadem to bear*
Thus, they of my young babe (fraud masking wrath)
Would but be Tutors first, and Traitors then,
Far from obedience, duty, love or faith:
"No things more dear then Diadems to men.

Olym. As those whose courage cannot be dis^a^^,
Let us now strive what way a force to find;
And whilst that pity does procure for aid,
The peoples passions tune unto our mind.
If that their love not vanished with his life,
Of Alexander (in a high degree)
I think the Son, the Mother, and the Wife,
By Macedonians still must reverenced be.
And this does with disdain my soul consume,
That Arideus amongst other wrongs,
And proud Euridice his wife presume
To take the honor which to us belongs.
O! they shall find my fortune not so changed,
But I am able yet to curb their pride:
What? what? Olympias must be revenged,
And (save her self) no Queen she can abide.

Exeunt. Chorus.
Lo, how all good decays,
And ills do now abound;
"In this sky-compass'd round,
"There is no kind of trust:
"For, mankind whilst it strayes
"In pleasure-paved ways,
"With floods of vice is drowned;
And does (far from refuge)
In endless shadows lodge,
Yet strives to rise no more:
"No doubt (as most unjust)
"The world once perish must,
And worse now to restore,
Then it was of before,
When at the last deluge,
Men by Deucalion once
Were made again of stones;
And well this wicked race
Bewrayes a stony kind,
Which bears a stubborn mind,
Still hardened unto sin.
Lo, now in every place
All virtuous motions cease,
And sacred faith we find,
Far from the earth is fled,
Whose flight huge mischief bred,
And filles the world with wars,
Whilst impious breasts begin
To let base Treason in:
Which common concord marres,
Whilst all men live at jarres,
And nets of fraud do spread,
The simple to surprise,
Too witty, but not wise,
Yet those who in deceit
Their confidence repose,
A thing more dear do lose
Then can by guile be gained;
Which when repented late,
May ruin once their state,
Whilst purer sprites disclose
With what their breasts are stored;
For, though they would remord,
They get not trust again;
But, having honor stained,
And covenants profaned,
Are held in high disdain,
"And do in end remain,
"Of all the world abhorr^d;
"Not trusty when they should,
"Not trusted when they would:
But ah! our Nobles now,
Lo, like Lysander still,
So that they get their will,
Regard not by what way,
And with a shameless brow,
Do of the end allow,
Even though the means were ill,
Which all the world may see,
Disgraceth their degree,
Who (changing every hour)
Do all base slights assay;
What can brave minds dismay,
Whose worth is like a Tower,
Against all fortunes power,
Still from all fraud whilst free?
"These keep their course unknown,
"Whom it would shame if shown:
Who not from worth digress,
To slights which fear imparts,
Do show heroicke hearts,
The which would rather far
An open hate profess,
Then basely it suppress:
"No glory comes from fearful Arts:
But those who do us lead,
As for dissembling made,
Even though that they intend
Amongst themselves to war,
Seem in no sort to jarre,
But friendship do pretend,
Not like their Lord now dead,
Who trusting to his worth,
Still what he meant spoke forth;
The great men not for naught,
Do seek the peoples love:
Their deeds that to approve,
They may their minds allure:
But Perdiccas is thought,
Too slowly to have sought
Their doubtful minds to move,
As one who still conceits
He may command the fates;
His pride so great is grown,
That none can it endure;
Yet stands his state unsure,
Since odious to his own:
"He must be once o're-throwne,
"Whose humor each man hates,
"Pride does her followers all,
"Lead head-longs to a fall.
Act 4.
Scene 1.
Antigonus, Eumenes. THough stormy discord, and tumultuous wars,
Do fire the minds of men with flames or rage,
That (having haughty thoughts, as heaven has Stars)
Their indignation nothing can assuage:
Yet lo, amongst the Soldiers waving bowres,
The Heralds cries do calm the Trumpets sounds;
And peace dare inter-pose unarmed powers,
To limit for a time Bellona's bounds;
And whilst of fury they suspend the effects)
The seeming-friended foes together treat,
And every one shows what his soul affects,
Of peace a shadow: the essence must be great.
Thus men magnanimous amidst the field,
Dare of their enemies to the promise trust,
And (loathing what disloyalty does yield)
Not violate their vows, nor prove unjust.
"Though love be past, yet truth should still remain,
"I virtuous parts even in my foes applaud;
"A gallant mind does greater glory gain,
"To dye with honor, then to live by fraud;
And why (Eumenes) as mistrusting me,
Or standing on your reputation long,
Did you disdain to seek (as all men see)
A greater then your self, and one more strong?
Eum. Though we come not to plead our birthright here,
Let him (tor warriors so should take their place)
In whom best signs of Nobleness appear,
Be graced, as first who does adorn a race;
Most Noble he who still by virtue strives,
To leave his name in minds of men engraved,
And to his offspring greater glory gives,
Then from his ancestors he has received.
Erst, we by birth in war not marshaled stood,
As at the Table, upon Ivory beds;
"A Soldiers worth consists not in his blond,
"But in their blood which (as his foes) he sheds,
What ever others of my lineage try,
I am Eumenes, and will not accord;
That there can be a greater man then I,
While as I have a heart, a hand, a sword.

"Anti. Lo, when prosperity too much prevails,
"Above the judgment thus of vulgar minds,
"As little Barges burdened with great Sails,
"They move in state, all swollen with fortunes winds*
"And as adversity the sprite refines
"From th'abject: dross of pride, and passions base,
"That in affliction, virtue clearest shines,
"And makes one all the ways of wit to trace:
"So does good success make the judgment dye,
"Then whilst the fortunate their ease do take,
"And lulled asleep in pleasures meadows lie,
"As for the Slaughter fat, and ripe to shake;
"Yet this the nature is of gallant men,
"To rest (as in no state too much involved)
"When prosp'ring wary, and most humble then,
"If crossed courageous, when embarked, resolved.
What though your first attempts renowned are,
By which you in two fields victorious stood,
And did o're-throw two thunderbolts of war,
Who lost their lives amid'st a crimson flood:
Yet is that course of victory contrould,
And you have tried what force your force exceeds,
Then, faded Laurels should not make you bold,
As still reposing on your bypast deeds:
For, by the same to indignation moved,
The Macedonians all abhor your name,
Who at that time so proud a Conqueror proved,
Their great men's slaughter having winged your fame.

Eum. No fortune past so puffes up my conceit,
That it contempt of further danger brings;
Nor am I now dejected so of late,
But I intend to do far greator things.
"He (by prosperity made never proud)
"Who knows the f^^ilty of this ^arthly frame,
"Can hardly by adversity be bowed:
"The Sun (although eclipsed) remains the same.
"Worth should by th'events not be thrall'd to wit,
"On the accidents as th'essence did depend:
"The fault of fortune cannot blemish it,
"On which often times disasters may attend;
"Though fortune (stumbling right) concur with worth,
"Or yet, if crosses brag a gallant mind,
"Both like themselves are always sparkling forth,
"In every state some tokens of their kind.
Now at this time o're-match'd by numerous powers,
I kept my courage, though I lost the field:
And vaunt no more of this, for some few hour's
May once to me the like advantage yield.
Nor is it long since that to fortune dear,
The world had never me but victor spied,
Though I protest by all The Immortals here,
Pressed by necessity, not moved by pride.
Proud Neoptolemus that traitor still,
(Not worthy of a Macedonians name)
He to betray the host, and me to kill,
Had labored long to his eternal shame.
But I of Craterus lament the fall,
Whom for his virtue I did dearly love,
And was constrained (I Jove to witness call)
For my defense that refuge last to prove.

Anti. How fortuned you your forces to dispose,
So well to escape that storm of threatened harms?
For, then you had to deal with mighty foes,
Who were in war grown hoarie under arms.

Eum. When Neoptolemus did clearly spy,
That all his treason to the light was brought,
He, where our foes were camp'd, with haste did fly:
"A foolish traitor who was false for naught.
There he informed, or mis-inform'd my foes,
That (by good success grown secure of late)
I in my Tent did carelessly repose,
Though not by force, to be o're-com'd by fate.
And to Antipater he further told,
That Macedonians, if they at that time,
Of Craterus the countenance did behold,
All willingly would yield themselves to him:
Now they had labored earnestly before,
That I abandon would Perdiccas part,
And did protest that they would give me more
Then yet I had, or hoped for in my heart.
"But love (born free) cannot be thrall d nor bought,
"More then a shameful peace I like just strife;
"To generous minds more dear then honor naught;
"And ere I leave my faith, I Will lose my life:
Thus when despaired that I would prove their friend,
They sought in time to plague me as a foe,
Where love could not begin, that hate might end,
And came in haste to have surprised me so:
But Neoptolemus to cross by slight,
The Macedonians I for him did bend,
And Craterus concealing from their sight,
To match with him, caused troops of strangers tend.
This policy which none could justly blame,
I with my self in secret did conspire,
And had my shirt been privy to the same;
It should have been an offering to the fire.
When deaths first game (with danger played) was past,
I Neoptolemus did toil to find,
And he me too, which happened at the last;
"Two will do much to meet, when of one mind.
Then whilst we met for whom both th'armies warred,
Whose fortune did depend upon our hands,
All was performed that force or fury dared,
Whilst both were bent to abate the others bands.
And yet the heavens would not betray my trust,
("Foul treason never had a fairer end)
But smiled upon my cause (as which was just)
And did destruction to the traitor send:
For, forced by him, whose force he did despise,
(Though fighting fiercely long) he lost his breath,
As one more strong then true, more stout then wise,
Whose greatest honor was his honest death.
But weakened with huge wounds, almost I dived
In seas of blood, even quite from knowledge strayed;
Yet by so great a victory revived,
My courage grew more then my strength decayed.
I (having finished thus this fatal strife)
Did come where Craterus his course had run,
Even in the confines placed 'twixt death and life,
The one near gone, the other not begun:
He with great valor had resisted long,
As all Briareus hands had moved his sword,
And did his Masters memory no wrong,
Whilst with his courage, not his fortune stored.
"What life refused, to gain by death he thought:
"For, life and death are but indifferent things,
"And of themselves not to be shunned, nor sought,
"But for the good or ill that either brings.
With endless glory bent to change his breath,
Of desperate valor all the power was proved,
"And for great Captains no more glorious death,
"Then to die fighting with a mind unmoved.
When it appeared where victory did tend,
That armies courage with their Captain fell*
And whilst I safely might be seen a friend,
I went where death his Spirits did expel;
And whilst I told how both to be betrayed,
By Neoptolemus were brought about,
My woe with tears I to the world bewrayed:
"Mild pity and true kindness must burst out.
Ah, if the news of this that I express
Had come in time unto Perdiccas ears,
He might have lived their pride now to repress,
Who by his fall were first divorced from fears.

Ant. The humor of that man was too well known,
Could he have parted other men from pride,
Whose soul was sold a slave unto his own,
And for the same (forced by his followers) died?

"Eum. The proud must still be plagued by prouder ones,
"There must be had sharp steel to smooth rough stones,

"Ant. No vice then pride does greater hate procure,
"Which foes do scorn, and friends cannot endure.

"Eum. Yet Majesty must not it self deject;
"A lofty carriage does procure respect.

"Ant. A haughty gesture shows a tyrants heart;
"All love a courteous countenance, void of Art.

"Eum. Yet manners too submisse as much condemned,
"Do make Kings scorned, and Captains be contemned.

"Ant. A humble port, kind looks, words smooth and soft,
"Are means by which great minds may mount aloft.

"Eum. Those are indeed for such as raise their flight,
"They may do more whose course is at the height:
"Imperious forms an Empire must defend.

Ant. Thus hastened was Perdiccas to his end.


Eum. That worthy man had many fair designs,
"But virtue still by envy is pursued,
"Though (as a Candle in the night best shines)
"It in a vicious age may best be viewed.
There was a man who scorned secure delights,
As still despising pain, attemptive, bold,
A brave observer of the ancient Rites,
Steel strictly grasping, prodigal of gold;
He loved to have the Soldiers of his band,
Chus'd at the Musters, not in markets bought,
And would not flatter where he might command;
More meet to have, then seek that which he sought;
But Soldiers now in this degener'd age,
Are (fawned on by faint minds) bribed in such sort,
That all the reins enlarged unto their rage,
They with so straight a course cannot comport.
What was misfortune known unto them all,
Their malice as some great neglect did cite:
"All things must help the unhappy men to fall,
Thus forth they spu'd the poison of their spite,
For, hating his frank form, and naked words,
By that occasion whetting their desires,
They in his body boldly sheathed their swords,
A deed which even barbarity admires.
Those traitorous troops may spot the purest bands,
If for a fact so vile they be excused:
This will set swords all our soldiers hands,
Against us, and not for us, to be used.

Ant. I wish that Soldiers never could be brought
To prove so mut'nous as they often have been,
And that they durst not violate in ought,
Those who by them (as sacred) should be seen:
Nor like I Captains who (like blustering winds)
Would over their troops insult (as tyrants still),
Not weighing merits, nor respecting minds,
As carried headlong with a blinded will.
"Pride by presumption bred (when at a height)
"Encount'ring with contempt both match in ire,
"And 'twixt them bring base cruelty to light,
"The loath-some offspring of a hated Sire.
Such of Perdiccas was the monstrous pride,
(The vice from which that vice more vile proceeds)
That it strange ways for his advancement tried,
And did burst forth in most prodigious deeds;
At first by Meleagers death when stained,
He showed what tyrants harbored in his heart,
To whom faith given, nor yet the Church he gained,
(Though sacred both) no safety could impart.
The Cappadocians (when all else was tried)
Choos'd (rather then his insolence to bear)
By mass^^ring themselves to escape from pride:
"Pride, spite and horror, death breeds only fear.
Yet what against his foes he did perform,
From martial minds might plead for some excuse,
Since irritated thoughts which (wronged) do storm,
In minds offended, fury do infuse:
But yet why sought he in a servile sort,
To play the tyrant, braving his best friends,
Who with disdainefull forms could not comport?
"More then an enemies yoke, a friends offends.
And when of late by Ptolomie constrained,
He brought his bands with disadvantage back,
How by the same his government was stayn'd,
The world can witness by his Armies wrack:
"But hate made judge, each error seems a crime,
"Whilst present ils do aggravate things gone:
His Soldiers moved by fortune and the Time,
Did by his death venge all their wrongs in one.

"Eum. As naught smells well to a distempered taste,
"So to conceits pre-occupy'd before;
"Even good seems bad in them whom they detest:
"Men must mislike where they can like no more.
To you who loathed Perdiccas and his state,
What ever came of him could not seem good:
And I not wonder though your soul did hate
One who had right and power, to take your blood:
For, fled from him to whom you once belonged,
His Trumpet still breathed terror in your ear:
"Then all men hate those whom they once have wronged,
"And by no means can love them whom they fear.

"Ant. That which you speak of hate, in love I spy,
"Love cannot find an imperfection forth,
"But does excuse, extenuate, or deny,
"Faults (where it likes) with shadows of no worth:
I left Perdiccas, but did him no wrong,
Who first to take my life, all means did prove;
I told Antipater how he so long
Had been abused by a pretended love:
For, as I frankely love, whilst loved again,
If the ingrate, ingrately me acquit,
Straight kindling fury with a just disdain,
I by love past, proportion then my spite;
And yet (Eumenes) I commend thy mind,
Who to defend thy friend, have proved so free,
And since in love so constantly inclined,
A friendship firm I would contract with thee;
Then where that now thy state has been brought low,
(Since spoiled of him in whom thou did repose)
Whilst aided by our power, thou great may grow,
And raise thy hopes of kingdoms to dispose.

Eum. I Will be your friend, whilst friend to right you rest:
"For, without virtue, friendship is but vain,
"Which cannot lodge in a polluted breast,
"Whose impious thoughts do sacred things profane.
While as the oath is kept, which once was sworn
To Alexanders self, and to his race,
Still shall this sword for your defense be borne,
But in my heart they hold the highest place;
And do not thus, as over one vanquished, vaunt,
Nor think me thrall'd, though once by chance o'rethrowne,
"The world must perish ere advent'rers want,
"Who toss all States to stablish once their own.
"Whilst bravely taking or yet giving place,
"How ever fear (objecting danger) comes,
"Misfortune, bondage, torment, death, disgrace,
"And all things else, a mind resolved o're-comes.

Act. 4. Scene 2.
Cassander, Lysimachus. "ANd must we buy our pomp at such a rate,
"Who bear the authority, or whom it bears?
"O, O! how thorny are the ways of State,
"With open dangers paved, and secret fears;
"Each of our steps is waited with some snare,
"Whilst from our selves we all repose repel,
"And (in frail Barks) pressed by tempestuous care,
"Do seek a haven, whose heaven is but a hell.
Lysim. "Whilst Eolus and Neptune joined in all,
With winds, and waves, beat the earth, and brag the skies,
"The tumbling Mountains do not rise and fall,
Though each of them another does surprise:
"As do the aspiring powers which are with doubt
"Tossed through the waving world on stormy Thrones,
"And are (as in a Circle) hurled about,
"Ascending, and descending, both at once.
"Lo, some whose hopes would at their birth have seemed,
"By Fortunes strictness, with contempt confined,
"Have from the vulgar yoke themselves redeemed,
"To do far more then such durst have designed;
"And they who once might life to thousands give,
"When some great period revolutions brings,
"Brought down even low cannot have leave to live,
"Made less then Subjects, who were more then Kings.

Cass. What once they scarce could dream, some thus procur,
Whose power though naught at first, last, Scepters swayes;
And some whose states seemed once to be secure,
Thrown from their Fortunes height lose glorious Bays:
My Father, lo, to gain that sovereign place,
Through many dangers boldly marched of late,
And, then the greatest, greater for a space,
Did manage all the Macedonian State:
But I his Son who (as some would suppose)
Might keep whith ease, that which he got with pain,
Can by no means my rest-lesse thoughts repose,
such raging Tyrants over my fancies reign.

Lysim. And yet I think you have an easy part,
To whom his State your Father did resign,
For, it may make you smile, which made him smart:
"Some press the grape, and others drink the wine.

Cass. I Will not believe that ever any ill
Was bred for me within my Fathers breast,
Since children must suppose their Parents will
(Though seeming bad) still purposed for the best.
And yet my Fathers Ghost must pardon me,
Though when from us he minded to remove;
I think the tenor of his last Decree,
Showed lack of judgment, or at least of love:
For, what base course had ever been begun
To make me seem not worthy of his place,
That he preferred a Stranger to his Son,
As bent to cloud the glory of his race?
Thus since in such a sort he did neglect,
The Son who should his name from death exempt,
(As dis-regarded for some great defect)
All other men may have me in contempt.
But ere his age attained the fatal date,
He saw my brows with laurel boughs arrayed,
And spied my skill in war, and wit in state,
Which grew as much as his had then decayed.
Nor can my courage so be brought to bow,
But Polypercon shall by proof find soon,
That in my Fathers will, I Will allow,
Not what he did; but what he should have done;
And since by him high dignities were won,
I mind to prosecute what he began;
"For (though I would) so great a Fathers Son
"Can not securely live a private man.
Lo, Polypercon by our power repelled
From Macedonie has retired dismayed,
And for the fear of us has been compelled
To rest beholding for another aid.
Let him not think that shadows (though of Kings)
Can match my power with these his borrowed bands:
A doubtful flight all framed with others wings
Will never bear him from Cassanders hands;
And though Olympias count'nanc'd once his cause,
As from Epirus come to ruin me:
Now of her own misfortune she must pause,
Since brought of late unto a low degree.

Lysim. And yet Olympias once did prosper well,
When first she touched the Macedonian bounds,
Whilst Polypercon proudly did repel
all those who durst resist with words, or wounds.
Though Philip and Euridice his Queen,
(To give them battle bent) in time arrived,
The Macedonians when they had her seen,
As their own Queen to do her honor strived.
And hapless Philip whilst constrained to yield,
There, for a Kings did take a captives state:
And with his mate (though flying from the field)
Was followed by their force, and by her fate.
Then ^id her husband and her self give place,
Whose brows of late a Diadem had borne:
But then thrown down in depths of black disgrace,
Were made of pride the prey, the butt of scorn.

Cass. Those were the means which did them first entrap,
But have you heard how after they were thrall,
To plague the world with horror, and mishap,
The proud Olympias tyrraniz'd over all?

Lys. Some doubtful rumors did frequent each (...)
Such as rash Fame confusedly durst unfold:
But yet by favor hid, or else for fear,
The truth of all (it may be) was not told.

Cass. When thus the Tygresse happened to surprise
Those wretched souls (as ravished in a dream)
Her heart at first seemed scarce to trust her eyes,
She surfetted her sight so with their shame;
But when she saw (by reason of her power)
That she might safely let her rage burst out:
She them about caused build a lightlesse Tower,
Pressed by whose walls, they scarce could turn about;
And in that dungeon (as entombed) they stood
With high disgrace to appease more high disdaines,
Far from all comfort, whilst a little food
Their life prolonged, but to prolong their pains.
"But for misfortune pity last does plead,
"As envy does prosperity oppose;
The Macedonians (then indifferent made)
On murmured rumors doubtfully did gloss.
The peoples grudge Olympias did perceive,
And of just fury fearing the effect,
She straight resolved life's remnant to bereave,
From weakened powers which did no less expect.
And when some Thracians basely bent for blood
(As she had charged) with mercenary spite,
Had murdered Philip, and his Queen imbrued
With these red streams that drowned her life's delight.
She sent to her whose soul in grief did sink,
(As messengers of death to brag her breast)
A sword, a cord, and an empoyson'd drink,
A Tyrants presents, yet a wretches best.
Those seen, the Queen unmoved this speech did make,
(As one who had embraced some great relief)
Fit gifts for her to give, for me to take,
Since she exceeds in hate, and I in grief.
And tell the Tyrant that I gladly dye,
That once the angry gods to venge my death,
May thunder forth that judgment, which I spy
With blood must choke that bloody woman's breath.
Last, looking on her Lord who there lay slain,
Once partner of his joy, then, of his woe,
Whilst that his Roses did her Lillies stain,
She kissed his wounds, as taking leave to go;
Lest Time her Resolution had betrayed,
Her snowie neck (not used with such a chain)
Her girdle grasped; then died no way dismayed;
And if she sighed, she sighed but for disdain.

Lysi. This barbarous act my breast with grief dot^ s^ing;
Can spite so much transport the meekest kind?
"And yet on the earth there is no more cruel thing
"Then malice raging in a woman's mind?

Cass. But yet this sacrifice could not assuage
The boiling thoughts of her unbounded will:
For, entering thus she rioted in rage,
(As dogs that once get blood, would always kill)
Each light occasion kindling still her wrath,
The Sovereignty she shamefully abused;
And put my brother Nicanor to death,
Though for no crime condemned, no, not accused.
To some (when dead) an hate by her was borne,
Whose cruelty no flood of blood confined:
(Of Iolas the Tomb profanely torn)
She (robbing the earth) with ashes stained the wind;
To be Cassanders friend was such a crime,
As none could escape who ever favored me;
Thus huge disorders did abound a time:
"Where laws not valued are, all things are free;
When having heard of this outrageous pride,
Which made my native soil contemned to be,
I those indignities could not abide,
Whose shame and danger did aim most at me.
So that at last (moved by my Countries care)
(As much as by particular respects)
I with great speed an Army did prepare
To punish, or prevent the like effects.
But when I was to Macedony come,
To fortify a Town she did design,
Which I enclosed, and quickly did o're-come,
Whilst famine forced the Fortress to resign.
Then to necessity weak pride gave place,
Her lofty courage was constrained to bow:
So that she rests depending on our grace,
To be disposed, as it shall please us now.

Lysim. This chance the world to wonder may invite;
Lo, there a Queen who had (though now distressed)
The rarest Fortune, and the greatest sprite
That ever any of her sex possessed.
The widowed Empress who first bragged the Indes,
Or proud Thomiris though both praised have been,
Or the Amazons all borne with martial minds,
Have never been more stout then was this Queen;
Her life's first progress did but prove too sweet,
Whom once the world with treasures strived to bless:
But now sad soul (foiled under Fortunes ^eet)
Her misery no creature can express.

Cass. Those were but Fortunes gifts which made her great,
Whilst treacherous shows by shallow wits were praised,
Her imperfections did but stain the State,
Where her not hers, but others merits raised:
When first that Dame with famous Philip matched,
Her cunning carriage was not free from blame:
But though she then with Argos eyes was watched,
(As was supposed) soon forfeited her Fame;
At least (shame-fear'd) he did her first disdain,
"And of that sex the precious fame is such,
"Their tender honor any breath may stain,
"If tainted, foul, if but suspect'd, too much;
Yet this at last did his destruction breed,
For which her spightfull thoughts had labored long:
She by Pausanias privy to his deed,
Had spurred him to perform th'intended wrong;
And by such means long sought, that to her will,
Her husbands murder might enlarge the raynes,
Whilst backed by power she boldly did the ill,
Of which, too late, the troubled Realm complains.
Though loathed of all (long suffered for her Son)
She played the Tyrant safely as she pleased:
But by the course that I have now begun,
I hope those whom she plagued, shall be appeased.

Lysim. Yet of Olympias (though cast down by you)
The fight her Son and Husband will revive,
And so may make the Macedonians now,
For her relief strange courses to contrive.
"Of those whose greatness does regard extort,
"The miseries entender every mind,
"And still the affections of the vulgar sort,
"Are (headlong led) too cruel, or too kind.

Cass. O!but I can precipitate her fall,
Even by the means which might support her most:
For, pity shall bar pity, whilst they all
Wail for their friends, who through her pride were lost.

Lysim. "As those to whom all other things are free,
"Must have their life and reign both of one date,
"So private men who pass their own degree,
"Can hardly turn to take their former state.
"Your Fortune thus is trusted to the fates;
"None can retire who enters in such things:
"All those who dare attempt against great States,
"Must dye as Traitors, or else live as Kings;
"And though you would but some disorders stay,
"You deal with those who (borne not to be thrall)
"As torrents bear away what stops their way,
"And must of force (if not undone) do all.
"Such (though set free) will storm when they are gone,
"Who scorn to take the thing, that they should give;
"All those must dye who dare but touch a Throne:
"Who may endanger Kings, they must not live.

Cass. Since in this course I only once can err,
I shall be sure ere she her self withdraw.

Lysim. And yet what surety can you have of her,
"Can laws bind them who are above the law?
"Who can a concord make betwixt the two,
"Whereas the one must hate, the other fear?

Cass. O, but I mind to use the matter so
That both from hence shall further strife forbear.

Lysim. What can her freedom, and your peace procure?


Cass. Death both can make her free, and me secure.


Lysim. And would you do such ill to shed her blood?


Cass. Yea, ill to others, so it do me good.


Lysim. The Macedonians will abhor this wrong.


Cass. And yet obey me if I be most strong.


Lys. But who shall have the Realm amidst those broils?


Cass. "Who ever winnes the field, does owe the spoils.


Lysim. So to possess the Realm you have no right.


Cass. But I have more, so long as I have might.


Lysim. This State does to it self an heir afford.


Cass. "All kingdoms rights are pleaded by the Sword.


Lysim. The people all will grudge against your state.


Cass. But d^re not stir, whilst fear exceeds their hate.


Lysim. And in their hearts they will detest you too.


Cass. Think what they will, who have no power to do.


Lysim. What t^ough Olympias in a little space
May lose her power, together with her breath?
Yet there remains another of her race,
Who is by Nature bound to venge her death.

Cass. "The raging streams of a tempestuous flood,
"Which drowns the old, not yields the young relief?
"What fool who of his foes victorious stood,
"Would spoil an Army, and yet spare the chief:
No, since I must my self with murder stain,
I Will by the roots raze all the Royal race,
So that no power shall spring from thence again,
That may my self, or yet my plants displace.
The strength has left great Alexanders arm,
Whose mothers fatal thread is now near spunne;
And I have means to keep my self from harm,
Both of Roxane, and her tender Son.
But since this course may much our states advance,
By which a ground for great attempts is laid:
I m^^t entreat you now (what ever chance)
To lend us your applause, though not your aid.

Lysim. I Will be your friend, yet wish you would refrain,
From doing this; but, ere you be undone,
Since by your guiltnesse I thus may gain,
I Will suffer that which I would not have done.

Exeunt. Olympias alone. CAn I be she whom all the world admired,
As the most happy Queen that reigned below,
Whom all the Planets have to plague conspired,
Of fickle Fortunes course the power to show?
No, no, not I, for what could me controull,
Or force me thus to attend another will,
Since I despise this prison of my soul,
Where it disdaines to abide in bondage still?
Ah! whilst vain pomp transported fancies fed,
The jealous gods my state to grudge did tempt,
My state which Envy once, and Reverence bred,
Though now it breed but pity, and contempt:
Olympias once high as Olympus stood,
The wife Philip, Alexanders Mother,
Who matched Alcides, and Achilles blood,
To breed a man more worth then both together.
Am I the woman whose majesticke state
Seemed once so happy to deceived conceits?
I, I am she, and never yet more great
Then at this present, even in spite of fates.
A double bondage long did burden me,
I to my self, my self to Fortune thrall:
But now captivity has set me free,
Who could not rise till first I had a fall;
"A sprit whilst it prosperity benummes,
"Scarce like the self can to the world appear:
"But then when virtue every cross o're-comes,
"True Greatness shines most bright in Glories sphere.
"Our treasure now (I see) consists no more
"Without our selves in th'eye-betraying shows,
"But in the breasts inestimable store,
"Which neither Time entombes, nor Power o're-throws.
O never were my thoughts enlarged till now
To mark my self, and quintessence my mind:
For, long (a prey to pride) I know not how,
A mist of fancies made my judgment blind.
As those who dream sweet dreams, whilst wak't at last,
Do find their error when their eyes find light:
Free from the slumbering of my Fortune past,
I now arise to judge of all things right.
"That cloud of pomp, whose smoke me shadowed once,
"Lo, now removed, unmasks my life too late:
"And now I see, that Scepters, Crowns, and Thrones,
"Are burd'nous badges of a dangerous state.
O happy woman, of true pleasure sure,
Who in the Country lead'st a guiltless life!
From Fortunes reach retired, obscure, secure,
Though not a Queen, yet a contented wife.
Thy Mate more dear to thee then is the light,
(Thongh low in state) loves in a high degree,
And with his presence still to bless thy sight,
Does scorn great Courts whilst he lives courting thee.
And as thou wound'st him not with hid disgrace,
He with no jealous thought does rack thy breast:
Thus both lie down to rest, and rise in peace,
Then (if they strive) they strive who should love best;
What? though thou have not as the mighty ones,
Thy neck surcharged with chains (ah chains indeed!)
Nor ears weighed down with oriental stones,
Nor Robes, whose worth may admiration breed;
So want thou that which we have ever had,
Sad mis-contentments, jealousy, and spite;
And though thy back be not with purple clad,
Thy thoughts are decked with Innocencies white.
As birds (whose cage of gold the sight deceives)
Do seem to sing, whilst they but wail their state:
So, with the mighty matched, (made glorious slaves)
We happy seem, whilst we but curse our fate.
That bliss whose show in us vain eyes does please,
Makes thee indeed with pleasures spend thy breath,
Who liv'st while young in mirth, whilst aged in ease,
And know not what it is to dye till death;
Ah! since I lived, I always did but dye,
When seeming happy, then most wretched still;
Whilst dazeling with vain pomp each vulgar eye,
What strange mishaps did me with anguish fill?
The fates with fortune from my birth conspired
To make my life, a pattern of their might:
For both my parents from the world retired,
When I had scarcely looked upon the light:
The world may judge how I was justly grieved,
Whilst angry Philip sought for my disgrace,
(A thing which once I scarce could have believed)
And unto Cleopatra gave my place.
Then though I long (as desperate of relief)
For his offense afflicted had my mind,
Yet did his sudden death augment my grief:
He was my husband, though he was unkind;
And when my Sons rare deeds which fame does sound,
The world with wonder, ravished me with joy,
Those (as himself) who would all his confound,
To compass me, did spite and power employ;
Yet stood my courage when my Fortune fell,
And still I toiled to persecute his foes,
That some might fall down who too much did swell,
Their blood in Marble registring my woes.
That which I purposed, long so prosp'red too,
That some of them did try (by torments strange)
All what a woman's just disdain could do,
Whilst spurred by jealousy, spite, and revenge:
But this Arch-traitour, Ruler of the rest,
Who thirsts to drink the blood of all our Race,
Even then, with us when all succeeded best,
Did compass me with ruin and disgrace.
Such was the tenor of my Fortune past,
Whose least mishap had made another burst:
First, orphan'd, widowed, and unchilded last,
A daughter, wife, and mother, all accursed.
Heavens plague Cassander, let that base wretch try
That Jove his judgment but a while deferres;
And let his wife bewail as well as I,
I murdered for my Son, and she by hers.
Even as th'incestuous Thebans monstrous brood,
So may thy Sons contend with mutual wounds,
And never let thy house be free from blood,
Till banished quite from this usurped bounds;
Thus, notwithstanding of my wonted power,
To me (save wishes) nothing does remain:
But though condemned to dye, yet at this hour
Should I begin to curse, and to complain?
No, no, that custom best becomes poor souls,
Whose resolution cannot climb more high;
But I whose courage that base course controuls,
Must triumph still what ever State I try.
"Death is the port where all may refuge find,
"The end of labor, entry unto rest;
"Death has the bounds of misery confined,
"Whose Sanctuary shrowds affliction best.
"To suffer (often) with a courageous heart,
"It does deserve more praise then deeds most known:
"For, in our actions Fortune has some part,
"But in our sufferings, all things are our own:
Lo, now I loath the world, and worldly things,
Of which I both have proved the best and worst:
The apprehended death great comfort brings,
And has no cross, but that it should be forced.
O hear me now (dear Son) if that thy Ghost
May leave th'Elysian fields to look on me:
Of all things else this does content me most,
That from this time I may remain with thee.
And blush not now to see thy Mothers end,
My death in glory with thy life shall strive:
It (as a captive) Fortune shall attend,
That (as thy fellow) followed thee alive;

Chorus.
AH, ah! though man the image of great Jove,
And, the only creature that gives Reason place,
With reverence due unto the powers above,
His heavenly progeny should seek to prove,
By still resembling the Immortal kind;
Yet makes the world our better part so blind,
That we the clouds of vanity embrace,
And from our first excellency decline;
This does distinguish that celestial grace,
Which should make souls to burn with Virtues love,
Whose fancies vice luxuriously now feasts;
"Vice is the Circe that enchants the mind,
"And does transform her followers all in Swine;
"Whi^st poisoned pleasures so corrupt our tastes,
"That of halfe-gods, we make our selves whole-beasts:
And yet of ruthlesse Pluto's raging host,
The v^ce which does transport presumptuous hearts,
And makes men from the Gods to differ most,
Is cruelty, that to the sufferers cost,
And actors both, is oftentimes appeased:
The gods delight to give, and to forgive,
By pardoning, and not by plagueing pleased;
And why should men excogitate strange Arts,
To show their tyranny, as those who strive
To feed on mischief, though the Author smarts,
Often for the deed of which himself did boast,
Whilst whence the blow first came, the grief does turn?
"For, that by which the mind at first was eased,
"May it in the end the greatest burden give;
"Often those whose cruelty makes many mourn,
"Do by the fires which they first kindled burn;
"Of other tyrants which oppress the mind,
"With pleasure some delight it, in such sort
"That first the honey* then the gall we find;
"And others though from Honors Court declined)
"Some comfort yield (but base) by hope of gain;
"And, though some make us to be loathed of one,
"We by their means another love obtain;
"But cruelty, with which none can comport,
"Makes the authors hated when the deed is done,
"Often even by those whom it did most support,
"As that which altenates men from their kind;
"And as humanity the mind enchaunts,
"So barbarous souls which from the same refrain,
"More fierce than lavage beasts, are loved of none:
"Since with such beasts one with less danger haunts,
Then with the man whose mind all mercy wants;
Yet though the mind of man, as strong, and rude,
Be ravished often with violent desire,
And must, if fired with rage, be quenched with blood,
How can this tender sex whose glory stood
In having hearts inclined to pity still
It self delight in any barbarous deed?
For, Nature seems in this to use her skill,
In making women's minds (though weak) entire,
That weakness might, love, and devotion breed;
To which their thoughts (if pure) might best aspire,
As aptest for th'impressions of all good,
But from the best to worst all things do wear;
Since cruelties from feeble minds proceed,
"In breasts where courage fails, spite, shame and fear
"Make envy, hate, and rigor rule to bear.
Our Queen Olympias, who was once so great,
And did such monstrous cruelties commit,
In plaguing Philip, and his Queen of late,
Lo, now brought low to taste the like estate.
Must take such entertainment as she gave,
And yet good reason that it should be so,
"Such measure as we give, we must receive.
Whilst on a Throne she proudly erst did sit,
And with disdainefull eyes looked on her foe,
As only vanquished by her power, and wit,
She did not weigh what does proceed from fate:
O, O! The Immortals which command above,
Of every state in hand the Rudder have,
And as they like, can make us stay or go;
"The grief of others should us greatly move,
"As those who sometime may like Fortune prove;
"But as experience with rare proofs has shown,
"To look on others, we have Linx- his eyes,
"Whilst we would have their imperfections known;
"Yet (like blind Moles) can never mark our own.
"Such clouds of selfe-regard do dim our sight;
"Why should we be puffed up when foes do fall?
"Since what to day does on another light,
"The same to morrow may our state surprise.
"Those that on this inconstant constant Ball
"Do live environed with th'all-circling skies,
"Have many means whereby to be o're-throwne:
"And why should dying worldlings swollen with wrath,
"So tyrannize over an afflicted wight,
"Since miseries are common unto all?
"Let none be proud who draw a doubtful breath,
"Good hap attends but few, unto their death.
Act. 5.
Scene 1.
Aristotle, Phocion. LOg have I used that light which cleares my mind,
On Natures labors curiously to look,
And (of all creatures finding out the kind)
Have read strange wonders in the worlds great book:
I mark her course by contraries maintained,
Whose harmony does most subsist by strife,
And of all creatures in the same contained,
How various is the mystery of life?
But as all things are subject unto change,
Which partners are of th'elementall powers,
So (rolled about with revolutions strange)
"The state of man rests constant scarce for hours.
"Lo, what does fame more frequently report,
"Then sudden risings, and more sudden falls?
"I think the world is but a Tenis-court,
"Where Fortune does play States, toss men for Balls.
Pho. And never any age showed more then this,
The wavering state of soule-ennobled wights,
Who soar too high to catch an aerie bliss,
Whilst lowest falls attend the highest flights.
That matchless Monarch who was borne (it seemed)
To show how high mortality attaines,
Has not from death th'adored flesh redeemed;
But pain has made an end of all his pains.
And those brave bands which furnished Fame with breath,
Whilst all the world their valorous deeds did spy,
Rest now (confounded since their Sovereigns death)
Like Polyphemus having lost his eye.
And they are like that teeth-ingendred brood,
Which took their life out of a Monster dead,
Whilst each of them would drink the others blood,
Since that great Dragons death who was their head.

Ar. "So change all things which subject are to sight:
"Disorder order breeds, and order, it:
"Next light comes darkness, and next darkness light,
"This never-changing change transcends our wit.
"Thus health and sickness, poverty and state,
"Dishonor, honor, life and death, with doubt,
"Still inter-changing (what a true deceit!)
"All linked together, slide by turns about;
"To worldly states the heavens a height appoint,
"Where, when they once arrive, they must descend,
"And all perfections have a fatal point,
"At which Excellency it self must end.
"But as all those who walk on the earth, are crossed
"With alterations, happ'ning often, and strange,
"The greatest States with greatest storms are tossed,
"And (sought of many) must make many a change.
Nor speak I this by speculation moved,
(As gathering credit out of ancient scroules)
"No, I have lived at Court, and often have proved
"Nothing below more vexed, then great men's Souls;
"The Tyrant honors thralls, while as they moan,
"Their plaints to vulgar ears loath to impart,
"They all the weight of woes must bear alone,
"Where others of their grief lend friends apart.
"Their very rising over us to the height,
"Which seems their best is worst, for, being Lords,
"They never know the truth that comes to light,
"When frank society speaks naked words.
"Whilst sadness often seems Majesty, Time tells
"How dear they buy their pomp with loss of rest:
"Some but three furies feign in all the hels;
"There are three thousand in one great man's breast.

Phoc. I think all Monarchies are like the Moon,
Which now eclipsed, now under cloud, now clear,
Grows by degrees, and is (when full) undone:
Yet Aeson-like renewed does re-appeare:
For, lo they first, but small begin to shine,
And when they once their Spherick form obtain,
Do coldly languish, and (till changed) decline,
Yet (fallen) in other realms do rise again.
Assyria once made many nations bow,
Then next, all power was in the Persians hand,
And Macedonians last (grown Monarchs now)
Amongst themselves divided cannot stand.

Ar. "A secret fate (alternatly) all things
"Does in this circle circularly lead:
"Still generation from corruption springs,
"That some may live, of force some must be dead;
"Each Element another strength devours;
"The Air to the fire succumbes, the fire to rain,
"The waters strive to drown the Earth with showers,
"Which it by vapors vomits out again;
"Thus (with a Gordian knot together bound)
"All things are made, un-made, and made again:
"Whilst ruin founds, perfection does confound:
"Free from some change no State can long remain;
"But what in the earth more dangerously stands
"Then Sovereignty (though r^ted at such worth)
"Which like the stormy Gods tumultuous bands,
"Does fly from The East to West, from South to North?

Phoc. A long experience now makes this not strange,
That mighty States whose reins one only leads,
Be often distracted, and constrained to change,
As too great bodies for so little heads,
Since every commonwealth (where all men's wits
Do join in one to breed the public ease)
Has many fevers and pestiferous fits,
Which physic often, often poison must appease:
For (ah) the multitude more rash then wise,
A Hydra-headed beast which humor blindes;
Does passionately praise; or else despise,
As some prepost'rous fancies move their minds;
"From vice and virtue often like danger flows;
"Whilst the one breeds envy, and the other hate:
"As jealousy, or emulation grows,
"Those often are crushed who do support a state.

Ar. "Whilst some their betters, others equals scorn;
"The popular authority decays,
"And when it dies the Monarchy is borne,
"Whose violence disorders fury stays;
"The raines of state it with most ease does swaie,
"Of power (as joined in one) the strongest kind:
"Still whilst it (humbly high) does bold a way
"Twixt tyranny and too remiss a mind;
"But though States ruled by one, may flourish long,
"Whilst one can well command, and all obey,
"Whilst guerdon goodness, vengeance follows wrong,
"That (virtue cherished) vice is made decay:
"Yet (if naught else) Time does great States overcome:
"And all are bounded by some fatal hour;
"What mis-adventures many ways may come
"To dissipate the most united power?
"O! huge mishaps a Monarchy may mar,
"When prosperous Times do (forced by fates) expire,
"To further which often strangers must make war,
"And mut'nous subjects som-time may conspire?
"As jealous fear (when braved by danger) moves,
"All princes would suppress asp^rers still:
"And then a subjects course most dangerous proves,
"When either fear, or hope transports his will.
"But though that first to rise, last to descend,
"Great States are guided by a secret fate:
"Yet, still the cause which does forgo their end,
"Springs from contempt, or is enforced by hate;
"The first in kings the lack of courage breeds,
"Encouraging Ambition to rebel;
"The other does attend tyrannicke deeds,
"That violence may violence deeds,

Phoc. "Yet never did so many Monarchs fall
"By foreign battles, nor by civil broiles,
"As by themselves who (seeming free) were thrall,
"Whilst smooth-toogu'd Minions gloried of their spoils.
"Those who have reigned by choice, by birth, or worth,
"Or did encroach on Crowns by chance, or crime,
"Often suffer vices to burst freely forth,
"Which virtues colors gilded till that time.
"Men clearly show what harbors in their breast,
"Whilst (Envies object) free from any fear:
"That which is eminent is marked best,
"And highest fortunes hardest are to bear.
"Low States to censure Critics do despise,
"Whilst often gross faults for virtues fame esteems,
"The stupid, patient, and the fearful wise,
"Will, constancy, and softness goodness seems.
"But on the Stage of State when one must stand
"A public Actor placed in all men's sight,
"And (swaying power) with an imperious hand.
"Does hold the balance both of wrong and right,
"Then, he for every action that is his
"The censure of a thousand tongues must have,
"Not only damned for doing things amiss,
"But for not doing all that all men crave;
"That Prince but undermines the Sovereign seat,
"Who cares not who be weak so he be strong,
"More studious for himself then for the state,
"Or (if for it) that he may hold it long:
"For, were Jove him for all men's good ordaines,
"He thinks both them, and theirs, made him to please,
"As if a charge of weight, a place of pains*
"Were but a bed of rest, a Heaven of ease.
"The worlds great weight with Atlas shoulders beat,
"Is not so weighty all to weigh one down,
"As that which on his head a king does wear:
"No burdens charge more heavy then a crown.
" Th'aegean waves Time may more soon appease,
"Then restless thoughts whose course for state prepares:
"Can they have rest who toil for all men's ease?
"The purple ever must be lined with cares.

Ar. "Good kings are like the fire which (flaming bright)
"Does waste it self to serve another turn:
"And sovereignty is like fires glancing light,
"Which (if but viewed) delights, if touched, does burn;
"I like for warmenesse to stand Vulcan by,
"But not to burn amid'st the Lemnian flame:
"In Cedars shadows men more safely lie,
"Then on their tops, the roaring deities game:
"All th'eie-attracting pomp and glorious shows,
"Do merit scorn, though they amazement breed:
"The world them pity more then Envy owes,
"Who to seem happy wretched are indeed.
"What alterations strange attend a Throne,
"As if the sphere of fortune were a crown*
"The great still tossed like Sysiphus his stone,
"When raised most high, rest ready to fall down.
Of this what greater proof can fame afford
Then mighty Philips memorable fall,
Who daunted had the Grecians by the sword,
Though till that time by strangers not made thrall?
He, he, then whilst he solemnized with state,
His daughters marriage, suddenly was lost:
It seemed when Heaven that Monarchs days would date,
That Hymen's torch gave light to Pluto's post.
When strong regards had engraved within my heart,
The miseries that proper were to Court,
I thought them happy who (retired apart)
Could never know such things, but by report.
I might have lived with Alexander still,
To virtuous men, whose favors were not scarce:
Yet rather choos'd (though having both at will)
To serve with Pallas, then command with Mars.
And whilst he toiled of others Lord to be,
I of my self did labor to be Lord;
Yet made as great a conquest too as he;
My pen shall be as famous as his Sword.

Phoc. And had I willingly engaged my rest,
The way to trace which to vain glory tends,
I might have lived (respected with the best)
A special one of Alexanders friends.
Though I of him did never merit ought,
He entertained my friendship till his death,
And when he once our Cities overthrow sought,
At my request did pacify his wrath.
Then once to me a mass of gold he sent,
And offered too a stately Asian Town,
Which I refused, more pleased with my poor rent,
Then he with all the treasures of a Crown:
I told, that such a sum but served to make
Him a corrupter, me corrupted thought,
And foul for him to give, for me to take,
Is used, shamed both, unused, did serve for naught;
But all those baits I never daign'd to touch,
Least I (who all my life had lived so free)
Might be possessed too much, possessing much,
If taking Riches, it had taken me.
No, I would rather learn to live with less,
Then for superfluous furniture to strive:
"Who seeks out substance but to nurse excess,
"To use it lives, not it that he may live.
"My fortune does afford sufficient means,
"That may preserve all natures powers in force;
"And he who on a golden Scepter leanes,
"Can not have more, but may well use it worse.
"Then since abundance, but abuses brings,
"Why seek men more then how to be well eased?
"And (ah!) why toil they for so many things,
"Since with a little nature can be pleased?

Ar. Lo! how the Heavens, whose love to man exceeds,
Have made his body strong, his mind divine,
And have made the earth to furnish all his needs,
Least curbing Cares might make his thoughts decline:
So that he has a means to raise his flight
(If winged with virtue) and may (mounting hie)
By time approach to the celestial light,
And deifie himself before he die,
Yet does he straight forgo that glorious way,
To toil for things which the earth not forced affords,
The which his wants first framed were to defray,
By by himself are of his life made Lords.
"O! how unworthie of the worth of man,
"Are many labors which delight him most,
"Since that corruption boldly first began
"To make men nurse vile vice at virtues cost.
And now what has great Alexander gained
By endless travel, and excessive cares?
(Of whom (lo) now, they only say he reigned)
But death unto himself, worse to his heirs.
And for the guiltless blood which he has spilled,
His conquests partners (lo) do now begin
To die even by the swords by which they killed,
And all his offspring expiates his sin.

Phoc. "Strange revolutions sway all worldly things:
"The wheel of fortune still must slipperie prove,
"And chiefly then when charged it is with kings,
"Whose states (as weighty) quickly make it move.
Yet Alexander I must say was blessed,
Who (still a victor) from distress estranged
The worlds chief Monarch when his state was best,
Did did in time before his fortune changed:
And for his favor which I often did try,
Whom earnestly he labored to advance;
It grieves me that himself so soon did die,
And that his offspring has so hard a chance.
His Successors have set all Greece on fire,
Of which I fear to perish by some spark;
For, Polypercon does my death conspire,
"And who can escape when made a great man's mark?
Yet for my Countries cause I Will give my blood,
"Whilst safely praised all follow virtue can,
"But (when by danger bragged) then, to do good,
"O! that is worthy of a worthy man.
Nor do I tender so this puff of breath,
But I can yield that Nature it expel?
"A mind that is resolved, triumphs over death,
"He has lived long enough who has lived well.

Exeunt Act 5. Scene 2.
Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolomie, Seleucus. NO doubt (great Heroes) whom the
Heavens have loved,
(What ever countenance duty does pretend)
Your minds are glad, since those (by me removed)
Who might have made you end, have made an end.
Loath not the means if pleased with the effect,
For though by this I have a realm obtained,
It yields you more, whose course none can suspect:
I only guilty am, ye all have gained.
Yet to pursue my life they first began,
For my defense this refuge last I proved:
"What then himself can be more near to man?
"When bragged by danger who would not be moved?
And if Olympias had not di'd in time
By offering up her blood to work my peace,
Then mine had been the harm, and hers the crime,
I but prevented her a little space;
And if her offspring had survived her death,
Whose rising could not but procure our fall,
Ye, now who naught but sovereignty do breath,
Had breathed obedience, or not breathed at all.
Lysim. You from a dangerous yaoke have us releev'd,
Which (I suspect) we should have tried too soon:
"And why then should we labor to seem grieved
"At that thing done, which we wish not un^one?
No, no, since all for sovereignty do strive,
And have once tasted what it is to reign,
Each one of us would rather die, then live
To bear a subjects servile yoke again.
And though perchance with Alexander Son;
(If heir to him in worth, as of his state)
We might have most respected places won,
As special pillars of the Princes seat.
"Though greater then the rest, as of before,
"It would have vexed us, less then one to fall:
"The fall from first to second grieves one more,
"Then from the second to the last of all;
Our envied glory had destruction brought,
And would have made us odious to remain:
"It dangerous is for subjects to be thought
"Such as desire, or yet deserve to reign.
When any Tempest threatened had his Throne,
He would have sought for surety at our cost:
"When Jealousy (minds worm) has seaz'd on one,
"The greatest virtues are suspected most.
"Yea, though we could to quite our state consent,
"Us from suspicion naught but death could purge:
"Still greatness must turmoile, or then torment,
"If borne a burden, if laid down a scourge.

Ptol. But when we have within our bosom weighed
The ruin of all Alexanders race,
Whom without blushing we might have obeyed,
By right succeeding in our Sovereigns place.
How can our souls but highly be ashamed,
If one below them far emboldned thus,
Does seek by wrong that which by right they claimed,
And by their o'ret^row would insult over us?
Nor need I more as in suspense remain,
To mask my meaning with ambiguous words,
No, no, our words may as his deeds be plain,
Which fame (and that not whi^ ^ring) now records:
Ye hear how that Antigonus of l^te,
(Whose thoughts (winged with good succes) soar too high)
Does strive above the rest to raise his State,
And by all means does fortune frankely ply.
Since to his hands Eumenes was betrayed,
Lo quite transported by praepost'rous pride,
(As if in naught adebted to our aid)
To yield our due he cannot now abide.

Lysim. "Thus time let truth of all things does proclaim:
"Man is a crafty Creature, had to know,
"Who can a face for every fortune frame:
"No trust in mortals, no; nor faith below,
"As our particulars do sometime move,
"We, what we wish for most, seem to mislike,
"And often of others do the course disprove,
"Whilst we want only means to do the like.
Then whilst Perdiccas did attempt before
To make the rest who were his equals thrall,
Who, then Antigonus detested more
The foolish pride of one that would have all?
But since Perdiccas and his faction fell,
Whom he (as Traitors of the State) pursued,
He, in his place succeeding to rebel,
Has what he seemed to end, again renewed;
And yet I may times have mused of this,
How from the world he did Enmenes send.

Sell. How? but by Treason as his custom is,
False at the first, and cruel in the end.

Lysim. I know, that after many doubtful fights,
He has o'rethrowne Eumenes at the last:
But by what Stratagems, or treacherous slights,
I would be glad to hear how all has past.

Sell. Antigonus was at the first afrai'd,
To match Eumenes by plain force in fight,
And therefore all that fear affords assai'd,
For valor frank, still using wary slight.
Amongst Eumenes troops (their minds to prove)
He scattred letters with allurements stored,
By promised treasures, and protested love,
Some to corrupt who might betray their Lord;
But he (still wise) his Troops in time advised
To clear their virtue by their enemies vice,
And gave them thanks, who would not be entis'd
To sell their faith at such a bloody price;
Then said, that he himself those scroules procured,
That when they spied such practices again,
They still might think them (by this means allured)
Their Captains trial, not their Enemies train.
Thus by the course which should have him entrap'd,
His adversary did deluded stay:
Whilst both the from that present danger escaped,
And to prevent the like, prepared a way,
Then when he saw this policy had failed,
And that there had some doubtful ^^^licts past,
Antigenus who had at one prevailed
(As having had some vantage at the last)
Did with Eumenes straight procure to speak,
And (as the one vanquished) offered him good will,
But he (whose mind could not be brought to break)
Would only talk as to his equal still:
For, when a band (between them made) did bear,
He to Antigonus should help impart,
That form reformed he first of all would swear,
With Alexanders offspring to take part.
Thus where they his submission did attend,
Imperiously conditions he imposed:
So that thereafter to procure his end,
The other by all means his mind disposed;
And shortly of his bands a vain debate,
For his confusion fit occasion brought;
"Still as by concord small things do grow great,
"By discord great things are reduced to naught;
While-as Eumenes fortunately lived,
The Ag^raspides to him gave place,
Till that for state two of their Captains strived,
And his authority would not embrace.
Such as that spite of theirs to have him spoiled,
That though of valor he rare wonders proved,
And often by force Antigonus had foiled,
Yet from their mind it could not be removed,
For (by their means allured) the other bands,
To get some baggage which they lost again,
Did take their Captain, with outrageous hands,
Their glory darkning by that odious stayne:
And though Eumenes trusting to new hopes,
By flying labored succor to have found,
He was prevented by his Traitorous Troops,
And (like to some base fugitive) was bound.
Scarce could his stormy stomach bent to break,
Daigne to entreat those who had him betrayed,
Yet, having hardly purchased leave to speak,
He stretched them forth his fettred hands, and said:
Lo, what apparel now your General wears,
Since with your faith his liberty was lost;
Yet he those bands not given by the enemy bears;
No, but by you in whom he trusted most:
And must he thus be led, who should you lead?
Is this the triumph which I should receave
For all my victories, thus to be made
Of Captain, Captive; of a Conqueror, slave?
How often (my Soldiers) have ye all of late
To me by solemn oaths sworn to be true?
"But it becomes none in a captives state
"With lofty words his keepers to pursue;
Nor crave I further favor at this hour,
Then that ye bath your weapons in my breast;
Let not my life be in mine enemies power,
Lo all that your Commander does request*
I know Antigonus does take no care
Who get my body, so he get my head;
And he regards not, neither when, nor where,
Nor in what sort I die, so I be dead.
But if through horror of so vile a deed
Your eyes look down, your hair erected stands,
Which in your minds this much remorse does breed,
That as your hearts ye will not stain your hands;
Then as your Captain, since not force I may,
I (as your friend) entreat, that now in time
I may but have a Sword my self to stay,
You to excuse, whilst partner of your crime.
But when he saw that words could not assuage
Their barbarous thoughts which nothing could control,
Then having turned his Courage all in rage,
He thus flamed forth the fury of his soul:
O damned rascals who have lost all faith,
Whom neither duty, nor yet merit binds!
How often was Alexander moved to wrath
By those your mut'nous and malicious minds?
And, O! what could I at those hands attend,
Which yet were smo^king with Perdiccas blood?
Of those who by like Treason did intend
With old Antipaters to be imbrued.
Heaven thunder on you from th'aetheriall Rounds,
And make you live (abominable band)
Base vagabonds, barred from your native bounds,
Then die detested in a harb'rous Land;
And as ye have the world with murder filled,
So may your blood by the same Swords be shed,
By which you have more of your Captains killed
Then of your foes, from whom (like beasts) ye fled.
But neither courteous, nor outrageous words
Could change his soldiers from their first intent;
Who forward led their Captain chained with cords,
(A scorned Captive) to his Rivals Tent,
Where to the end that he might quickly end,
He asked, what stayed Antigonus to go
By setting of him free to gain a friend,
Or by his death to rid him of a foe;
And soon Antigonus did have his fall,
By this great magnanimity not moved;
And the Agiraspides (dispersed over all)
As murderers, murder from the world removed.
"Thus often have Traitors been dispatched in time,
"By those whom their upbraiding looks dismay:
"That loathed remembrance of the Authors crime
"The actors death can only wipe away.
Now claims Antigonus when fame does feast,
Above his Sovereigns self in rank to sit;
For Alexander but subdued the East,
And he has conquered them who conquered it.

Cass. No doubt, but he will do the best he can,
And has within himself high things designed:
"For whilst prosperity transports a man,
"Naught seems difficult to a lofty mind.

Sell. Of those in whom he did suspect a sprite,
Whose courage served his courses to resist,
He has himself by diverse means made quite:
In others wreakes his safety does consist;
Thus martial Pithon who no danger spared,
(Whom Alexander held in high account)
Did at the last receave a hard reward,
For helping him Eumenes to surmount.
His sprite to tempt, and power fit to perform
Made jealousy Antigonus torment;
And yet he feigned to love him for the form,
Till he his Court did love him to frequent,
Where whilst he did (mistrusting naught) abide,
He publicly in all the peoples sight
(Though seeming justly) damned unjustly di'd:
"No wrong more vile then wrong that looks like right.
Thus diverse Governors within short space,
Their Government, or then their life have lost,
And others are preferred unto their place,
Who did depend upon his favor most;
Often likewise me he labored to surprise,
By policy whom he would have o'rethrowne:
But I, whom Pythons danger had made wise,
Learned by his ruin to prevent mine own;
To save my life abandoned is my state,
And I have fled with danger as you see:
That you may know, how that man does grow great,
Whose pride may plague you all, as well as me.

Cass. Then let us see what course we should intend,
Least (out of time made wise) we rue too late.

Lysim. "I rather first pursue, then last defend.


Ptol. "A fire would still be quenched ere it grow great.


Cass. Then let us from Antigonus in haste
Demand our share of what he did attain;
Since in this war we did our Treasure waste,
We should be likewise partners of the gain:
But if against our suite his ears he bar,
And do with scornful words contemn our claim,
Then may our messenger denounce the war,
And we shall shortly prosecute the same.

Ptol. A mutual band must made amongst us be,
To make one fortune common to us all,
And from henceforth we must all four agree
To stand together, or together fall.
And since the Princely buds for which we cared,
(How ever dead) are dead, what ere we do,
So to procure from men the more regard,
We with the state must take the title too.
And we must both be crowned, and known for kings,
"The diadem of Greatness is the Tower:
"All vulgar judgments lean on the outward things,
"And reverence State, where they obey but power.

Exeunt. Nuntius, Philastrus, Chorus. IS there a Heaven? and are there Heavenly
Powers
To whose decree terrestrial things are thrall?
Or would the Tyrant that begets the hours,
(Eternity not spared) extinguish all?
Lo, Nature travels now, as big with change,
Since mortals all humanity have lost,
And in the old Chaos, or some mass more strange
To leave their essence all things earthly boast.
Can reasonable souls (from reason barred)
Even strive which most in cruelty exceeds?
What eye has seen? or yet what ear has heard
Such monstrous chances, and prodigious deeds?
The Arabian Robbers, nor the Scythians wild,
With savage beasts, which do (as barbarous) haunt
With such foul facts have not themselves defiled,
As those who of civility do vaunt.
Since Greeks (grown barbarous) basely are inclined,
All virtue vanished is, all good forgot.
O careless Heavens! wretch'd Earth! Cho. what loads thy mind?

Nun. A multitude of murders. Cho. what? Nun. what not?


Cho. We know that since our Sovereign lost his breath,
The Earth has been bathed with many a crimson flood;
Perdiccas did procure Meleagers death,
And his own Soldiers drowned his breath with blood,
Th'Athenians prey Leonatus did remain,
And (by Eumenes subtlety dismayed)
Neoptolemus and Craterus were sl^ine,
Then by his own Eumenes was betrayed.

Phil. "Man with his skill against his knowledge strives,
"Where death his way attends, that way he tends,
"And to Atropos the fatal razor gives,
"To cut the thread on which his life depends.
"When Asia's victor after all his wars,
Great Babylon to view had bent his mind;
Both I, and others, studious of the Stars,
Did show that there his ruin was designed;
And to his successors we often have shown
The means by which their fate might be controlled,
Yet was our skill contemned, and they o'rethrowne,
As we foretold, and as they now have told.

Nun. They have told much, and yet I must tell more,
Their news were evil, yet were they not the worst.

Cho. And have the Heaven reserved more plagues in store?
As if we yet were not enough accursed.

Nun. "As the earth in pride, the Heavens in plagues abounds;
Our highest hopes have perished but of late.

Cho. Then wound our ears by hearing others wounds,
That pity now may tread the steps of hate.

Nun. Our Queen Olympias (raging with revenge)
All Macedonie did with murders fill,
Which from her part the people did estrange,
Whilst rigor only limited her will.
So that when fierce Cassander sought her wreake,
She did mistrust the Macedonians minds,
And for the time the nearest strength did take,
There, till the storm was past, to wait fair winds.
But soon Cassander did the Town enclose,
And as she held him out, did hold her in,
That (like a Captive guarded by her foes)
She knew not by what way a way to win;
And when lives scant provision did decay,
Then did bare walls but small refuge afford:
"She Scylla escaped to be Charybdis prey,
"Who fell on famine flying from the sword.
Straight like pale Ghosts, faint Soldiers did remain,
Whose bowels hunger like a Harpie tears,
And with courageous words, the Queen in vain
Did raise their sprite (the belly has no ears)
All languishing did then begin to fade,
As if too weak to bear themselves about.
Legs failed the body, and the neck the head,
Then whilst the flesh fell in, bones bursted out;
And when that meats which common are were spent,
Then Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, all served for food,
Of which, no horror th'eaters did torment,
For what not poison was, all then seemed good:
Some mouths accustomed once with dainty meats,
Wished what they often had loathed, vile crumbs, soul floods,
And Ladies which had lived in pompous states,
Fed, as brought up with wolves amidst the woods.
Yea, must by those whom they themselves had nursed,
Often by the offsprings death the Parent lived:
And which was worst, whilst breasts were like to burst,
None could give comfort, all themselves were grieved.
Such was their state, no friend be wail'd his friend,
No wife her husband, no, nor Sire his son;
For apprehending their approaching end,
All with compassion of themselves were won.
The dead men's smell empoyson'd them who lived,
Whilst first made faint by a defrauded womb;
Heaps were of breath and but all both deprived,
That all the town in end was but a tomb.

Cho. Life is the subject of distress and grief,
"That still affords us matter to be moan;
"And we by death can only have relief:
"To live, and to be wretch'd, are both but one.
"Yet foolish worldlings tossed with endless care,
"(Though at too dear a rate) would still buy breath,
"And following feathers wavering through the air,
"Love life (though wretch'd) more then a happy death.

Nun. When thus the world Olympias plagued did spy,
All sought Cassander though for several ends.

Cho. All as a pest them who are wretch'd do fly:
"Ecclipsed fortune threatens loss of friends.

Nun. And she considering that she could not long
Hold out the siege, since victuals were grown scant,
Did send (as weak) for peace unto the strong.

Cho. "Thus time and travel all things once may daunt.


Nun. Then did Cassander know that need constraind
Her so to bow, as every way diseased:
And, though he her request not quite disdained,
Yet the appointment was such as he pleased:
For, all the favor that she could procure,
Was leave to live a private person still;
And yet of that she could not be made sure,
Which did depend upon the Victors will.
Then whilst Cassander sought his enemies ends,
Huge numbers with him always did abide.

Cho. Yet might have many followers, and few friends:
"Friends by the touchstone of distress are tried.

Nun. But though the Queen was rendered in this sort,
A promise given that life should be preserved,
The tyrant with her sprite could not comport,
But from his faith, for her confusion swerved:
The Macedonians were together brought,
There to consult what did concern their Queen:
Of whom when as a number deeply thought,
Both what she was, and what she once had been;
Even as Cassander had suborned them all,
Their parents came whom she had damned to death,
And did her rigor to remembrance call,
By which the multitude was moved to wrath.
Whilst from their breasts all pity quite was barred,
They did conclude, their Queen behooved to dye.

Cho. Durst Subjects damn their Sovereign? and not heard?
So still may clouds obscure the worlds bright eye.

Nun. Yet did Cassander put (false every way)
A mask of pity on a cruel mind,
And offered her a ship to fly away,
As if to death against his will assigned;
Nor was this course for her delivery framed,
But only as by chance that she might drown:
So for her death that he might not be blamed,
But only Neptune who had drunk her down:
Yet she (a Princess of a mighty spright,)
Whose lofty courage nothing could o're-come,
Said, ere she escaped by such a shameful flight,
That she would hear the Macedonians doom.
But when Cassanders counsel was contemned,
Lest that the multitude had changed their mind,
When they remembered whom they had condemned,
And did the fullness of his purpose find,
To rid her soon from pain, and him from fear,
He sent some bands from pity most estranged:
Yet she' against fortune did a banner bear,
And not her heart, no, not her countenance changed.
She constant still, though mon'd, would never moan,
Whose stately gesture braved their bold attempt,
And did unite her virtues all in one,
To grace disgrace, and glorify contempt.
She on two Ladies shoulders leaned her arms,
And with a Majesty did march to death,
Like Alexander once amid'st the altarmes,
As if in triumph to abandon breath.
"The height of virtue admiration brings,
At this great magnanimity amazed:
As at the image of their ancient Kings,
Or then some Goddess all the Soldiers gazed:
But (ah) some (forced by the tyrant) strived
To spoil (unnatural) Natures fairest frame,
And twixth the Alabaster Balls, they driv'd
The unwilling swords that straight grew red for shame.
Then, she in worth who did all else excel,
Would neither word, nor tear, nor sigh forth send,
But spread her garments over her, whilst she fell,
As of her honor jealous to the end.

Cho. O strange barbarity, most monstrous deed!
Could men a woman, Subjects kill their Queen:
And could her fortune past no pity breed?
Who ever gave the wound, that not her seen.
The ugly Author of those odious evils,
(Of punishment afraid) must still be sad,
His breast a hell, his thoughts all turned to devils,
(Through horror of himself) must make him mad.

Nun. And yet the plague of these detested times,
Does by more mischief aggravate our groans.

Cho. "No end in sin, crimes are maintained by crimes,
"Who fall in depths, must touch the bottom once:
"The path of honor has but narrow bounds,
"On which who step, attentive must remain:
"Since raised so high above the vulgar grounds,
"That who thence fall can never rise again.

Nun. Thus now Cassander (since he cannot win
True reputation, but lives tainted still)
Embarked in mischief, sails the depths of sin,
So if not loved as good, yet feared as ill.
Though (by his means) his ruthlesse eyes have seen
Fates (as it were from fortunes bosom) take,
His King by poison, by the sword his Queen,
Even yet himself more guilty still to make,
He (prosp'ring in impiety) grew proud,
And murdered both his Masters Son and Wife;
Thus he, who all the world by birthright owed,
Could have no part of it, no, not his life.
Yet could Roxanaes death not ease his mind,
Nor her young son, too soon made Platoes gues^:
But to undo all Alexanders kind,
That to revenge the rest, there might none rest.
By treason he (as all his deeds are done)
Cau's Hercules his brothers steps to trace,
Who was great Alexanders bastard son,
And the only remnant of that great man's race,
Lo, thus Cassander, enemy to all good,
Whose soul so much for Macedonie longs:
Has to the Scepter swim'd through Seas of blood,
Yet, O weak right, since builded but on wrongs!

Cho. O, how ambition does abuse the great!
Who with enough not pleased, still strive for more:
Lo, how our Sovereign seemed to raise his state,
Yet made it but to fall whilst starved with store.
And since his Trophies reared in several fields,
Both him and his have to confusion brought,
"Then, what is all the good that greatness yields,
"Which makes it self seem much to be made naught?
"Thus, though the mountains make a mighty show,
"They are but barren heaps borne up aloft,
"Where Plains are pleasant still, though they lie low,
"And are most fertile too, though trod on often.
"Greatness is like a cloud in thy'ayrie bounds,
"Which some base vapors have congealed above:
"It brawles with Vulcan, thundering forth huge sounds,
"Yet melts and falls there whence it first did move.

Phil. Since that worlds conqu'ror then whilst far from fear,
(By too much power pressed) so soon was dead:
Why do his Captains strive who now should bear
The Diadem that crushed so strong a head?
O! when my mind is ravished through the stars,
To search the secret secrets of the fates:
What treasons, murders, mutinies and wars,
Are threatening to overthrow usurped seats?
That false Cassander who betrayed his Lord,
And spoiled the princely race, in mischief chief,
(A traitor both of heaven and earth abhorred)
Shall live but with disgrace, and dye with grief.
His sons (in wickedness himself t'exceed)
Shall make the woman dye whom ade them live;
Then both (when drunk with blood) to death shall bleed,
And none of theirs their funerals shall survive:
When rash ambition should be cooled by age,
Lysimachus shall by Seleucus dye;
Nor shall Seleucus long enjoy the Stage,
But by like violence shall breathless lie;
And subtle Pt^l^mies degener'd race,
(Long only famous for infamous things)
Shall end and to the pride of foes give place,
Whilst a lascivious Queen confusion brings;
Amigon^^ shall be in battle killed,
His Son a captive perish with disgrace
And after that it Greece with blood has filled,
In the end, destruction does attend that race;
The last in power (though of their line not bred)
A niggard, and a dastard, beaten down,
Shall (through a strangers town, a Captive led)
Of Macedonie bound the old renown.

Chorus.
"What damned furies thus toss mortals minds,
"With such a violent desire to reign?
"That neither honor, friendship; duty, blood,
"Nor yet no band so sacred is as binds
"Ambitious thoughts which would a kingdom gain:
"But all is buried in black Lethes flood,
"That may the course of Sovereignty restrain,
"Which from the breast does all respects repel,
"And like a torrent cannot be gaine-stood:
"Yea many would, a Scepter to obtain,
"In spite of all the world, and loves own wrath,
"March through the lowest dungerons of the hels,
"And from a Diadem would breath with power,
"Though all deaths engines bragged them every hour,
Yet, though such restless minds attain in the end
The height to which their haughty hearts aspired,
They never can embrace that dreamed bliss,
Which their deluded thoughts did apprehend;
Though by the multitude they be admired,
That still to power does show it self submisse;
Yet by the soul still further is required,
Which should seal up the accomplishment of joy;
"Thus partial judgments blindely ^yme amiss,
"At things which stand without our reach retired,
"Which whilst not ours, as treasures we define,
"But not the same whilst we the same enjoy;
"Some things a far do like the Glow-worme shine,
"Which looked too near, have of that light no sign.
"No charge on the earth more weighty to discharge,
"Then that which of a kingdom does dispose:
"O! those who manage must the reins of state,
"Till their pale Ghost imbarke in Charons Barge,
"They never need to attend a true repose:
"How hard is it to please each wans conceit,
"When gaining one, they must another lose?
"Thus, hardly Kings themselves can evenly bear,
"Whom if severe (as cruel) subjects hate;
"Contempt dare to the mild it self oppose;
"Who spare in time, as niggards are despised,
"Men from too frank a mind, exactions fear,
"Though in all shapes ( as Proteus used) disguised,
"Kings by some scandal always are surprised.
Yet one might well with every thing comport,
Which on opinion only does depend,
If further danger followed not by deeds,
But every Monarch (Lo) in many a sort
Death (laid in ambush) always does attend;
Of some by mut'nous swords the life forth bleeds;
By unsuspected poison others end,
Which whilst they always labor to prevent,
A thousand deaths within their breasts life breeds;
Lo, this is all for which the great contend,
Who, (whilst their pride themselves and others spoils)
With their dominions do their cares augment:
"And O vain man who toyl^st to double toils,
"Though still the victory the Victor foiles:
Thus Alexander could not be appeased,
Whilst be to raise his state did ways prepare,
Which when made most, diminished most remained,
Where (with his fathers bounds had he been pleased)
He might have left our Crown sure to his heir,
Who by his conquest naught but death has gayn'd;
Yet for no pains a number now does spare,
To work for that by which his wreake was wrought,
Which (though from it they rage to be restrained)
Would (if possessed) their pleasures but impair;
Yet they by harm of others seek the thing
Which by their harm of others will be sought:
"To him and his, each of them death would bring,
"That it might once be said he was a King.
"We may securely sitting on the shore,
"Whilst great men do (as tossed on the Ocean) gr^ne,
"Taught by their toils, esteem much of our rest:
"For this does thousands with affliction store,
"Which of the world as most unhappy moan,
"If they but chance to view some few more blessed,
"Where if they would but mark, how many a one
"More wretch'd then they in misery does live,
"It straight would calm the most unquiet breast;
"The Cottage often is happier then the Throne;
"To think our own state good, and others ill:
"It could not but a great contentment give:
"There much consists in the conceit and will:
"To us all things are as we think them still.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF JVLIVS CAESAR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AT that time when the Romans traveled with an unsatiable ambition to subdue
all Nation^, by whose overthrow they could conceive any expectation, either of
glory or profit: Caius Julius Caesar, a n^n of a lofty mind, and given to
attempt great things, ascending by several degrees to the Consulship, procured
a power to war against the Gauls: amongst whom, after a number of admirable
battles and victories (by the approbation of all the world, having purchased a
singular reputation both for his courage and skill in Arms) he being long
accustomed to command, was so drunk with a delight of sovereignty, that
disdaining the simplicity of a private life, he was so far from denuding
himself of the authority which he had, that altogether transported with a
desire of more, he sent to the (...) the Gauls prorogated for five years:
which suit being repugnant to the Laws (as directly tending to tyranny) was by
the people publicly repelled. By which occasion, and some others rising from
an emulation between him and Pompey the great, pretending a high indignation,
he incontinent crossed the Alps, with such forces (though few) as he had in
readiness, and with a great celerity came to Rome, which he found abandoned by
Pompey, in whom the Senate had reposed their trust, whom shortly after, by a
memorable battle in the fields of Pharsalia he discomfited: and having by the
overthrow of Scipio, death of Cato, and flight of Pompeyes sons, as it were,
rooted out all the contrary faction, hereturned to Rome and indirectly by the
means of Antonius, labored to be proclaimed King: which having rendered him
altogether odious; Caius Cassius, Marcus Brutus, Decius Brutus, Publius Casca,
and diverse others (Noble men) conspired his death, and appointed a day for the
same: at which time, notwithstanding that Caesar was dissuaded from going
forth, by many monstrous apparitions, and ominous presages; yet being persuaded
by Decius Brutus Albinus, he went toward the fatal place, where the Senate
was assembled.

The Conspirators in like manner had many terrors: amongst others, Portia the
wife of Marcus Brutus, although she had insinuated her self in her husbands
secret by a notable proof of extraordinary magnanimity, yet on the day
dedicated for the execution of their design, through the apprehension of his
danger, she fainted diverse times, whereof Brutus was advertised, yet shrinked
not, but went forwards with his confederates to the appointed place, where they
accomplished their purpose, every one of there giving Caesar a wound, and me a
ground whereupon to build this present Tragedy.

The persons names who speak.
JUNO. CAESAR. ANTONIUS. CICERO. DECIUS BRUTUS. CAIUS CASSIUS. MARCUS BRUTUS.
PORTIA. CALPHURNIA. NUNTIUS.
The Some in Rome.

THE TRAGEDY OF JVLIVS CAESAR.
Act I.
Juno. THough I (a Goddess) grace the azure round,
Whilst birds (all bright with eyes) my Coach do move,
And am with radiant stars, heavens Empress crowned,
The thunderers sister, wife of mighty Jove,
And though I banquet in th'ethe riall bowres,
Where Ambrosie and Nectar serves for meat,
And at the meeting of the Immortal powers,
And still advanced unto the highest seat:
Yet by those glorious shows of boundless bliss,
My burdened mind can no way be relieved:
Since immortallity affords but this,
That I live ever to be ever grieved.
In vain, vain mortals seek for help at me,
With sacred odours on my Altars thrown:
What expectation can they have to see
One venge their wrongs, who cannot venge her own?
May Pallas then drown thousands if she please,
Who metamorphos'd Diomedes mates?
And must my enemies always live at ease,
As me to spite appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race which lives below,
With such indignities none could comport,
As wound my breast, whom Gods and men do know,
To be abused by Jove in many a sort.
Though known to me, from others if concealed,
His faults might breed me grief, but yet not shame;
Where, lo, now both through heaven and earth revealed,
Each slandrous Theater does his scorn proclaim.
If divine souls divinely lived aloft,
The world below would imitate them then,
But humaniz'd by haunting mortals often,
Where men should grow like Gods, Gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauties pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with so many hewes,
As Jove in diverse shapes himself can hide,
When he poor Maids (by Cupid spurred) pursues;
He Danae (a golden shower) deceived;
And did (a Swanne) in Ledaes bosom light;
Then (turned a Bull) Agenors daughter reav'd;
And Io made a Cow to mock my sight:
But O! I wish that with such wanton Dames,
He still to sport would as with me remain;
Not able then to touch celestial flames,
All (like the drunkards mother) might be slain.
Then such a troop as Rheas bosom stores,
Would not hold him and me at endless jarres;
The heavens are pestred with my husbands whores,
Whose lights impure do taint the purest stars.
"Though wrongs, when gross, are heavy to digest,
"An Actors greatness does some grief remove,
"Of whom to suffer wrong it shames one least:
"If I were wronged 'I would be wronged by Jove;
But (ah) this long, tormented has my breast,
A Man, a Boy, a shepherd, yea, and worse,
The Phrygian firebrand, the adultrous guest,
Who first wrought wrong by fraud, and then by force;
He, he was he, whose verdict moved me most,
Whilst partial fancies judged of beauties right;
Nor was it strange though one all judgment lost,
Who had three naked Goddesses in sight;
And yet I know, had not his wandering eyes
The Cyprian bribed by some lascivious smiles,
My pompous birds (in triumph) through the skies,
Had borne the gold which often her Nymphs beguiles;
And am I she whose greatness is admired,
Whom Jove for wife, whom thousands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion to embrace desired,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove?
And what made me a matter to submit,
Where my authority might have availed?
Whilst though I promised wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a young man, Venus most prevailed;
"But how durst he of one the glory raise,
"Where two contemned would needs the wrong repair?
"It spites our sex to hear another praise,
"Of which each one would be thought only fair.
To venge my self no kind of pain I spared,
And made his greatest gain his greatest loss:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greatest cross;
Nor did he long with joy her love enjoy,
Whose fatal flames his Country did confound,
Wh^^st Armies armed for her did Troy destroy,
And Neptunes labors levelled with the ground;
Whilst Simois seemed to be a burial field,
Whose streams as streets) were with dead bodies paved,
All Zanthus Plain (as turned a Sea) did yield
A flood of blood, from Heroes wounds received;
Whilst braving thousands once, though much esteemed,
By dust and blood deformed, of Hector slain,
(Not like Patroclus by the sword redeemed)
The body basely was bought back again;
Then, by the same man's son who killed his son,
Old Priamus surpised, sighed forth his breath,
And even most harmed where he for help had run,
The Altar taking, taken was by death.
Though wrestling long to escape the heavens decree,
(Blood quenching lust) last parted from the light,
He who loved Helen, and was loathed by me,
Did (as a Sacrifice) appease my spite.
Then, having lived (if wretches have a life)
Till in all hers ere dead, often buried spied)
Though once known both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecuba (mad childelesse) died.
Thus, by those means it would have seemed to some
That scorned beauty had been well revenged:
But whilst they were o're-com'd, they did o're-come,
Since they their states for better states have changed.
I in one part that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
All warlike Nations through the world renowned,
From Phrygian ruins strive to raise their race.
And yet two traitors who betray the rest
O! that the heaven on treason sometime smiles!
Though having worst deserved, did chance the best,
More I appy then at home in their exiles;
Did not Antenor (stealing through his foes)
Near to the Euganian Mountains build a Town,
Of which so^e nurslings once shall seek repose,
Amidst the waves, and in the depths sit down:
Their City (spousing Neptune) shall arise,
The rarest Commonwealth that ever was,
Whose peo;e, if as stout as rich and wise,
Might boast to bring miraculous things to pass.
Then false Aeneas, though but borne to obey,
Did (of a fugitive) become a King:
And some of his near Tibers streams that stay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles soaring over all lands,
By violence a mighty prey have won,
That bastard brood of Mars with martial bands,
Have conquer^d both the Mansions of the Sun;
Their course by mountains could not be controld,
No; Neptune could not keep his bosom free:
The parching heat, nor yet the freezing cold,
Their Legions limits no way could decree;
Yet, of that City there can come no good,
Whose rising walls with more then barbarous rage,
The builder first bathed with his brothers blood,
Which their prodigious conquests did presage.
Often has that Town my soul with anguish fi^li'd,
Whose newborn state did triumph over my wrath,
Like my old foe who in his Cradle killed
The Serpents which I sent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuscans, often assailed,
Even in her infancy I tossed Romes state,
Yet still Laomedons false race prevailed,
And angry Juno could do naught but hate.
Then when the gallant Gauls had vanquished Rome,
Who basely bought her liberty with gold,
A banished man Camillus chanced to come,
And her imballanc'd state redeemed of old;
Great Hanniball our common cause pursued,
And made his bands within their bounds remain,
With Consuls and with Pretors blood, imbrued,
At Thrasimene, and at Cannas slain;
In Romans minds, strange thoughts did doubt infuse,
But whilst they feared the taking of their Town,
He who could vanquish, victory not use,
Was by their brazen fate (when high) thrown down;
O what a torrent of Barbarian bands,
In inundations once their walls did boast,
Whilst Teutons huge, and Cymbers from their Lands,
Like Giants marched, a more then monstrous host?
But though from parts unknown to ruin Rome,
I led those troops which all the word admired,
Yet did fierce Marius me with them o're-come,
And I in vain to venge old wrongs aspired;
By means more base I likewise sought her harms,
Whilst Ianus Church imported never peace,
I raised up abject Spartacus in Arms,
Who near eclipsed Romes glory with disgrace.
Though I who all the world for help have sought.
From Europe, Afric, and from Asia thus,
Gauls, Carthaginians, and the Cymbers brought,
Yet did the damage still redound to us:
Of heaven and earth I all the powers have proved,
And for their wrack have each advantage watched,
But they by foreign force cannot be moved:
By Romans, Romans only may be matched.
And I at last have kindled civil war,
That from their thoughts (which now no reason bounds)
Not only laws, but Natures laws does bar;
The Son the Sire, the brother brother wounds;
Whilst th'Eagles are opposed to th'Eagles so,
O what contentment does my mind attain!
No wound is wrong bestowed, each kills a foe,
What ever side does lose, I always gain.
But this my soul exceedingly annoyes,
That all at one time cannot be suppressed:
"The war helps some, as others it destroys,
And those who hate me most, still prosper best.
Whilst with their blood their glory thousands spend,
Ah! ones advancement aggravates my woe,
Who vaunts himself from Venus to descend,
As if he claimed by kind to be my foe.
I mean the man whose thoughts naught can appease,
Whilst, them too high a blind ambition bends,
Whom (as her minion) Fortune bent to please,
Her rarest treasures prodigally spends;
Not only has he daunted by the Sword
The Gauls, the Germans, and the Egyptians now,
But of all Lords pretends to be made Lord,
That who command the world to him may bow;
Thus dispossessing Princes of their Thrones,
Whilst his A^^^^tion nothing can assuage,
That the subjected world in bondage groans,
The prey of pride, the sacrifice to rage,
"Men rail on Jove, and sigh for Saturnes time,
"And to the present, Ages past prefer,
"Then burden would the Gods with every crime,
"And damn the heavens, where only the earth does err.
Though Jove (as stupid) still with Cupid sports,
And not the humor of proud Caesar spies?
Who may (if forcing thus the worlds chief Forts)
Then Titans erst, more powerful, scale the skies.
Yet lest he thrall him too, who none free leaves,
We from the bounds above him must repel,
To brawle with Pluto in th'umbragious Caves,
There since he will be first, made first in hell.
What? with that Tyrant I will straight be even,
And send his soul to the Tartarian grove*
Though Jove will not be jealous of his heaven,
Yet Juno must be jealous of her Jove;
And though none in the heavens would do him ill,
I Will raise up some in the earth to haste his death:
Yea tho^^^ both heaven and earth neglect my will,
H^ll (...) me Ministers of wrath*
I Will cro^^ (...) and the smoking lakes;
To borrow ^^enc^^^y brothers damned bands,
The furies armed with fire-barands, and with Snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome so stately stands;
Whilst Furies furious by my fury made,
Do spare the dead to have the living pined:
O! with what joy will I that Army lead?
"Naught then revenge more calmes a wronged mind;
I must make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance which I have conceived:
But what though thousands dye to appease my rage?
'So Caesar perish, let no soul be saved.
Exeunt. Chorus.
"WE should be loath to grieve the gods,
"Who hold us in a balance still;
"And as they will
"May weigh us up, or down;
"Those who by folly foster pride,
"And do deride
"The terror of the Thunderers rods,
"In seas of sin their souls do drown,
"And others them abhor as most unjust,
"Who want Religion do deserve no trust:
How dare frail flesh presume to rise
(Whilst it deserves heavens wrath to prove)
On the earth to move,
Lest that it opening straight,
Give death and burial both at once?
How dare such ones
Look up unto the skies,
For fear to feel the Thunderers weight?
"All The Elements their Makers will attend,
"As prompt to plague, as men are to offend.
All must be plagued who God displease,
Then whilst he Bacchus rites did scorn,
Was Pentheus torn;
The Delians high disdain
Made Niobe (though turned a stone)
With tears still moan,
And (Pallas to appease)
Arachne weaves loathed webbes in vain:
Heaven has prepared ere ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a punishment for sin.
Lo, Juno yet does still retain
That indignation once conceived,
For wrong received
From Paris as we find;
And for his cause (bent to disgrace
The Trojan race)
Does hold a high disdain,
Long laid up in a lofty mind:
"We should abstain from irritating those
"Whose thoughts (if wronged) not till revenged repose.
Thus, thus for Paris fond desire,
Who of his pleasures had no part,
For them must smart:
Such be the fruits of lust;
Can heavenly breasts so long time lodge
A secret grudge?
Like Mortals thrall to ire,
Till justice sometime seems unjust?
"Of all the furies which afflict the soul,
"Lust and revenge are hardest to controull^
The Gods give them but rarely rest,
Who do against their will contend,
And plagues do spend,
That fortunate in naught,
Their sprits (quite parted from repose)
May still expose
The stormy troubled breast
A prey to each tyrannicke thought:
"All selfe-accusing souls no rest can find,
"What greater torment then a trouble mind?
Let us adore the immortal powers,
On whose decree, of all that ends,
The state depends,
That (far from barbarous broiles)
We of our life this little space
May spend in peace
Free from afflictions showers;
Or at the least from guilty toils;
"Let us of rest the treasure strive to gain,
"Whithout the which naught can be had but pain.
Act. 2.
Scene 1.
Julius Caesar, Marcus Antonius. NOw have my hopes attained the longed for
heaven,
In spite of partial Envies poysnous blasts:
My Fortune with my courage has proved even;
No Monument of miscontentment lasts.
Those who corrival'd me, by me o're-throwne,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I in some corner rather live unknown
Then shine in glory, and not shine most bright;
What common is to two, rests no more rare,
In all the world no Phoenix is save one,
That of my deeds none challenge might a share,
Would God that I had acted all alone:
And yet at last I need to mourn no more
For envy of the Macedonians praise,
Since I have equaled all that went before;
My deeds in number do exceed my days.
Some erst (whose deeds rest registered by Fame)
Did from their Conquests glorious titles bring,
But Greatness to be great, must have my name,
To be a Caesar is above a King.
Ant. Those warre-like Nations, which did Nations spoil,
Are by thy Legions to our laws made thrall;
"What can brave minds not do by time and toil?
"True magnanimity triumphs over all.

Caes. Th'out-ragious Gauls who in most monstrous swarms
Went wasting Asia, thundering down all things,
And ( Macedony quaking at their Arms)
Did insolently make, and un-make Kings:
Those Gauls who having the worlds Conquerours foiled,
(As if the world might not have matched them then)
Would sacrilegiously have Delphos spoiled,
And warred against the Gods, contemning men;
Yea, those whose Ancestors our City burned,
(The only people whom the Romans feared)
By me ( Romes nursling) matched, and o're-match'd mourned:
So what they first eclipsed, again they cleared.
Then, as to Subjects having given degrees,
The Gauls no more presuming of their might,
I (wounding Neptunes bosom with winged trees)
Did with the world-divided Britains fight;
The Germans from their birth inured to war,
Whose martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred,
Whilst neither men, nor walls, my course could bar,
(Masked with my banners) saw their Rhene run red;
The Eastern Realms when conquering now of late,
My coming, and o're-comming was but one;
With little pain ear'st Pompey was called great,
Who fought soft bands whose glorious days were gone:
But what though thousands set ones praises forth,
For fields which shadows, and not swords, obtained;
The rate (too easy) vilifies the worth:
"Save by great pains, no glory can be gained:
From dangers past, my comfort now proceeds,
Since all who durst gaine-stand I did o're-come:
And, in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquered all the world, and Caesar, Rome.

Ant. Lo those who strived your virtue to suppress,
(As whose great actions made them jealous still)
Whilst laboring but too much to make you less,
Have made you to grow great against your will:
Great Pompeys pomp is past, his glory gone,
And rigorous Cato by himself lies killed;
Then dastard Cicero more you^ honors none,
Thus all your foes are with confusion filled.
The Senators who could not be asswag'd,
Long to your prejudice their power abused,
Till at their great ingratitude enraged,
I swore our swords would grant what they refused*
When having escaped, endangered, and despised,
Brave Curio and I did to your Camp resort,
In old bare gowns (like some base slaves) disguised,
All sighed to see us wronged in such a sort.

Caes. The highest in the heaven who knows all hearts,
Do know my thoughts as pure as are their Stars,
And that (constrained) I came from foreign parts
To seem uncivil in the civil wars.
I moved that war which all the world bemoanes,
Whilst urged by force to free my self from fears;
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groans;
No Romans blood was shed, but I shed tears:
But how could any elevated spright,
Who had for honor hazarded his blood,
Yield willingly (by foes outrageous spite)
To be defrauded of the expected good:
When as a multitude of battles won,
Had made Romes Empires, and my glory great;
And that the Gauls (often vanquished) had begun
To bear the yoke which they disdained of late.
Then glorious Pompey, my proud sonne-in-law,
And Cato (who still crossed what I designed)
From favoring me the people did withdraw,
And had a successor for spite assigned;
Not that he should succeed in dangerous broils,
But (even through envy) as they had ordained,
That he might triumph so of all my toils,
And rob the glory which I dearly gained;
With such indignity who could comport,
When prizing honor dearer then the light?
No (whilst my soul rests soverainge of this fort)
None shall have power to rob me of my right:
And yet by Jove who all the world commands,
To use such violence I did mislike:
And would have often abandoned all my bands,
If that mine enemies would have done the like;
But yet the multitude, which floting still
(As waves with winds) are carried with conceits,
With naught but my disgrace would bound their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I stood perplexed,
And weighed the horror of my high attempt,
My stormy soul a thousand fancies vexed,
Which resolution buried in contempt.

Ant. "Naught in a Captain more confounds his foes,
"Then of a ventrous course, the swift effects,
"Since (so quite crushed) ere they their thoughts dispose,
"All good advice a care confused neglects.
Though when you marched to Rome, your power was small,
The sudden news so thundered in each ear,
That (as if heaven had fallen upon them all)
If bred amazement, and th'amazement fear.
"Some secret destiny (as then was seen)
"Does guide men's actions, and their judgment bounds:
"Those who by hosts could not have frighted been,
"A shadow, or a rumor often confounds:
"All hasty dangers so surprise the mind,
"That fear prevents the resolutions power,
"Or else the fates make curious Reason blind,
"When heavens determined have a fatal hour.
Great Pompey (lo) who was grown aged in arms,
And had triumphed over all the worlds three parts,
Whilst (quite discouraged, by imagined harms)
Fled Rome, though without reach of the enemies darts.
As to a torrent all gave place to you,
And whom they called a rebel made their Lord;
Your successor Domitius (forced to bow)
Did trust your favor, more then fear your sword.
When in the Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There, Adversaries (who did vainly vaunt)
Had all the advantage that the ground could give,
Of victuals plenty, which with us were scant.
Yet the celerity that you had used,
Did so discourage their disordred band,
That (as Jove in their breasts had fear infused)
They had no strength against our strokes to stand.
And when Romes General with brave legions stored,
Seemed to possess all that his soul required,
Whilst us to daunt, both famine and the sword,
The Sea, the Land, and all in one conspired;
Then, for your offices they did contend,
As those who of the victory were sure,
And (where they might the affairs of state attend)
In Rome for lodgings fondly did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remains,
When all the world was in two Armies ranged,
Whilst Mars went raging through the Aemathian plains,
And to despaires high expectations changed;
When Pompeys party had the battle lost;
(As Lions do their prey) you did pursue
The scattred remnant of that ruined host,
On which new heads still (like a Hydra) grew
Though victory in Afric fatal seemed
To any Army that a Scipio led,
Yet, you showed there (for worth in war esteemed)
That Rome a better then a Scipio bred;
And all our Enemies were confounded thus,
Who us in number ever did surmount;
But Caesar and his fortune were with us,
Which we did more then many thousands count.

Caes. The sweetest comfort which my conquests gave,
Was that I so might do to many good:
For, every day some Romans life I save,
Who in the field to fight against me stood,
Thus, may my mind be judged by the event,
Who (even when by my greatest foes assailed)
To win the battle never was more bent,
Then prompt to pardon when I had prevailed.
Not covetous of blood, of spoils, nor harms,
I (even when victor) did insult over none,
But laid aside all hatred with my Arms,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone*
"Of clemency I like the praise, more then
"Of force, which mortals with affliction lodes;
"Strength often may prove the worst thing that is in men,
"And pity is the best thing in the Gods.
Stern Cato (still affecting to be free)
Who either death or life (if given) disdained,
Thy death I envy, who did envy me,
The glory that I (saving thee) had gained.
Yet I to Rents and dignities restore,
Even those who long my ruin had designed:
And O! it does delight my mind far more,
By benefits, then by constraint to bind.

Ant. I would have all my foes brought to their ends,


Caes. I rather have my foes all made my friends.


Ant. Their blood whom I suspect'd should quench all strife.


Caes. So might one do who liked of naught but life.


Ant. Still life would be redeemed from dangers forth.


Caes. Not with a ransom then it self more worth.


Ant. Then life to man, what thing more dear succeeds?


Caes. The great contentment that true glory breeds.


Ant. Men by all means this blast of breath prolong*


Caes. Men should strive to live well, not to live long.
And I would spend this momentary breath
To live by fame for ever after death:
For I aspire in spite of fates to live.

Ant. I fear that some too soon your death contrive.


Caes. Who dare but lodge such thoughts within their minds?


Ant. Those whom the shadow of your Greatness blindes.


Caes. The best are bound to me by gifts in store.


Ant. But to their Country they are bound far more.


Caes. Then loath they me as The Enemy of the state?


Ant. Who freedom love, you (as usurper) hate.


Caes. I by great battles have enlarged their bounds.


Caes. By that they think your power too muchy abounds.


Caes. From doing wrong, yet I refrain my will.


Ant. They fear your powe'r, because it may do ill.


Caes. The present state still miscontentment brings
To factious minds affecting matters strange,
Which (burdens to themselves) do loath all things,
And so they change, regard not what they change.
In populous Towns where many do repair,
(Who at their meeting what they please do touch)
They further then their bounds extend their care:
"The idle who do nothing, must think much.
Lo, Rome (though wasted all with raging wars)
Whilst private grudge pretended public good,
Equality (still rude) engendring jarres,
Did prove too prodigal of Roman blood.
Though yet now at the last attaining rest,
Whilst all (obeying one) may banish tears:
It (if constrained) even scorns (as bad) the best,
This word necessity so wounds the ears.
The insolent with vile seditious words,
(Who trembled whilst they heard the Trumpets sound)
Stir now their tongues, as we did then our swords,
And what Mars spared, make Mercury confound.
"The people thus in time of peace agree
"To curb the great men still, even in that form,
"As in calm days they do disbranch the Tree,
"Which shrouded them of late against a storm.
But now I looked (brave deeds appeasing spite)
That bursted Envy should for anguish dye,
Dark shadows (as ashamed) do vanish quite,
When at his height bright Phoebus cleares the sky.
And though their hatred deeply they disguise,
Yet can they not so hide enflamed desires,
But that their spite rests sparkling through their eyes,
And boasts to burst out straight in open fires.

Ant. Since first (great Caesar) I discerned thy worth,
On all thy actions I did still attend;
And what some whisper must speak freely forth:
"Frank admonitions do become a friend.
The men who do suspect that you aspire
Of government the present form to change,
All in their souls your ruin do conspire,
And their affections far from you estrange.
Since chaste Lucretia (by proud Tarquin stained)
Washed with her blood the violated bed,
Whilst by his power Rome basely was constrained,
All to obey which his cursed brain had bred.
This government which some tyrannicke call,
Does sound so odious in the peoples ears,
That they as Tyrants vile, detest them all,
Whose greatness gives them any cause of fears*

Caes. I not affect the title of a King
For love of glory, or desire of gain,
Nor for respect of any private thing,
But that the State may by my travels gain,
You know Sibylla's books which never fail;
In many minds have an opinion bred,
That over the Parthians Rome cannot prevail,
Till by a Prince her valorous Bands be led:
"For, as confusion is the fruit (we find)
"Of those affairs which diverse thoughts dispose,
"So Sovereignty matched with a gallant mind,
"Breeds reverence in ones own, fear to his foes.
And O! it grieves me, that these steps of ours
Have trod so often on many a millions necks,
Whilst yet the Parthian vilipends our powers,
And all our victories (not vanquished) checks;
Ah! should a General of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians killed? and not revenged?
And should his Ensigns, signs of our disgrace,
Rest in the rank of conquered relicts ranged?
No, no, (wretch'd Crassus) now thy self content,
I Will pacify thy Ghost with Parthians spoils,
My boiling fancies have been always bent
To match the matchless, daunt th'undaunted soiles.

Ant. With victories quite cloi'd, will you not then
Your safety once, more then new wars respect?

Caes. No, though I have surmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of my self at last,
I even with envy look on my own deeds;
And (bent to make the new surpass things past)
Now to my mind stale praise no pleasure breeds.

Ant. The world has seen thee (great man) for Romes good,
In danger often of many a dangerous shelfe,
Whilst for her glory thou engaged thy blood,
Of others careful, careless of thy self.

Caes. Though whilst in th'Aprill of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeemed my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of Fame,
Yet since the coldness of declining years,
Boasts to congeale the blood which boiled of late,
Whilst lo, my life the Sun of glory cleares,
Who now of all the world am known most great;
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honor that can be required:
And now (as that which wants) would only crave
To taste the pleasures of a life retired:
But (save to serve the State) for naught I strive,
For, O! (neglecting th'ecchoes of renown)
I could content my self unknown to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gown:
Since (Anthony) thus for the state I care,
And all delights which Nature loves disdain,
Go, and in time the peoples minds prepare,
That, as the rest, I may the title gain;
Yet indirectly at the first assay
To what their doubtful minds do most incline,
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All mark your mind, and yet not think of mine.

Exeunt. Act. 2. Scene 2.
Cicero, Decius, Brutus. DId I survive the impetuous Scilla's rage,
And in a torrent of destruction stood,
Whilst Tyrants did make Rome a tragic stage
Through a voluptuous appetite of blood?
Escaped I confusion in a time so bad,
Of liberty and honor once to taste,
That bondage now might make my soul more sad
By the remembrance of my fortunes past?
What though I once (when first by Fame made known)
From Catilines strange treason did preserve
This Town (when free from foes) thrall'd by her own,
Since now the world from equity does swerve?
A spark of that conspiracy I spy
As yet not quenched to have our state imbroil'd,
Which Rome to burn makes many flames to fly:
Thus one was spared, that we might all be spoiled.
O worthy Cato, in whose matchless mind
Three (rarely matched) things Nature did reveal,
Wit, Honesty, and Courage, which designed
A Citizen for Plato's commonweal:
Whilst courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiseman spoke, and still foretold
To what all Caesar's deeds would turn in the end,
If that his pride were not in time controld.
And had we him (as wisely thou advised)
Given to the Germans whom he had injured,
We had not now been thus like slaves despisd,
To see Rome's glory, and our own obscured:
But yet I may (disbending former cares)
A space comport with that proud Tyrants power;
Age gives assurance by my hoarey hairs,
Ere he Romes freedom, death will me devour.
But all whose youth and sprite might have attained
Those dignities which Caesar has undone:
O! ye have lost as much as he has gained,
Whose rising hopes must be retrenched so soon.
Dec. Though if novations at the first seem strange,
Yet often experience approbation brings,
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
From thence the safety of our City springs;
As does a ship, when tossed by several winds,
More danger run whilst Pylots do contest,
So was our City vexed by differing minds,
Who did interpret laws as pleased them best;
Whilst for one sickness diverse drugges are used,
Whose powers (repugnant) in digestion jarre,
The Impatient patients perish, when abused,
So did we long whilst crossed by civil war;
But now great Caesar from tempestuous winds,
Romes scattered ruins recollects of late:
A Pilot meet to calm tumultuous minds*
A fit Physician for an aguish State.

Cic. The State from storms secure by drowning proves,
Now whilst despair does doubtful fears appease;
He (with the life) the sickness quite removes:
Thus is the Physic worse then the Disease.
This Commonweal (as all the world did spy)
Was by proud spirits in civil wars involved,
Yet like black Clouds which would obscure the sky,
These tumid humors suddenly dissolved;
And no disgrace unto the state redounds,
But to The Ambitious men that it abused,
Who (had their power like Caesar's wanted bounds)
Would (whilst they ruled) have greater rigor used.
All parts (we see) bred people of all kinds,
And as advanced some bad men did abide,
In power their equals, and of better minds,
Some always virtuous were to curb their pride,
But since that sacred liberty was lost,
The public power to private ends one turns:
And (as his lawless ways did always boast)
The Commonweal by violence o're-turnes.

Dec. Though what you burden Caesar with were true,
Necessity has purged his part from crime,
Who was (foes force to shun) forced to pursue,
And urged by danger to attempt in time.
To the enemies envy more obliged he rests,
Then to his wit which no such courses scanned:
For when quite barred from using of requests,
The Occasion then invited to command.
His thoughts when calm, to storm fond foes did tempt:
"True worth disdaines to suffer open wrong:
"A gallant courage kindled by contempt
"Burns with revenge, whilst fury makes one strong.

Cic. O Decius, now a wrong account you cast,
The purpose, not the event, declares the mind:
Tread back the steps of all his actions past,
And what he compassed had been long designed.
As by some sprite inspired, proud Scilla said,
That there in Caesar many Marians were,
And Rome in ti^e was warned to be afraid
Of that evill-girded youth, with smooth-comb'd hair;
Then when (as still to quietness a foe)
The memory of Marius he renewed,
By re-erecting Tyrants statues so,
His thoughts all bent to tyranny were viewed.
That people-pleaser might have been perceived,
By courteous complements below his rank,
Who (lavishing forth gifts) the world deceived,
And to gain more then his, of his proved frank.
Though naught at all indulgent to his wife,
By prostrated pudicity disgraced;
Yet did he save th'adultrous Clodius life,
To sooth the multitude, whose steps he traced.

Dec. "These be the means by which Ambition mounts,
"Without most humble, when within most high,
"As if it fled from that things which it hunts,
"Still wasting most, when it for most does plie.

Cic. Then he (still tyranny bent to embrace)
Was thought conjoined with Catiline to be,
And, had wise Cato's counsel taken place,
Might with the rest have suffered death by me.
Yet having deeply dived in some men's souls,
With factious followers being pined often,
He got the Consul-ship which naught controuls,
And matching pride with power, did look aloft;
To flatter them who now must flatter him,
His power to make unlawful laws prevailed,
And those to cross who scorned he so should clime,
He furnished was with force, where reason failed:
But yet because he could not be assured
To rule alone according to his will,
To govern France, he craftily procured,
So to be strengthened with an Army still.
As Rome first warred at home, till being strong,
She thought her power might foreign Realms o're-co
So Caesar warred against strange Nations long,
Till that he thought his Might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate assigns,
Of coffeehouse he did cause pretend,
So to dissemble fore-conceiv'd designs:
"One soon may find a fault that would offend:
But when he first in a prodigious dream,
His mother seemed incestuously to use,
It might have shown to his eternal shame,
How of his birth the bounds he did abuse.

Dec. And yet I think (avoiding threatened harms)
He by constraint embarked in civil broils:
Did he not covenant to quite his Arms,
As not desirous of his Countries spoils?

Cic. Durst he with those who had his charge confined,
Stand to capitulate, as if their mare,
Where (as his Sovereign) to obey their mind,
It was his duty, and their due of late,
What? what? durst he whom (bound to keep the law)
The people in authority did put
The sword which they had given, against them draw;
When it was sharpened ^^^st their throat to cut?
That had not come which all o^^ anguish breeds,
If he unforced when as his charge expired;
Till that the Senate censured had his deeds,
Had from his Province peaceably retired.
No, he has but betrayed his native Town,
Those bands, by which she did him first prefer,
T'enlarge her borders, and his own renown
Those has he used to tyrannize over her.
My passions (ah! transported as you see
With an excessive love to my dear soil)
Of my hearts store have made my tongue too free,
By flaming forth what in my breast does boil.

Dec. That Caesar's part might justly be excused,
Lo, with the cause alleged, his course accords,
Of which that mildness which he since has used,
A testimony to the world affords.
Though forced to fight, he always had great care
To save our Citizens as each man knows,
And willed his Captains Romans still to spare;
Barbarians bodies objects were for blows,
Of th'adversaries after bloody strife,
When often he might have made some Captives smart,
Not only was he liberal of their life,
But pardoned them, even to take Pompeys part;
At that unfortunate Pharsalian field,
When he securely might have used the sword,
He both did spare all the enemies that would yield,
And them to rents and dignities restored:
Then when The Egyptians (so to get relief)
Brought to his sight pale Pompey's bloud-lesse head,
He testified with tears h^s inward grief,
And graced his Statues after he was dead.
Those his proceedings plainly may approve,
That he against his will did make this war;
And to his Country bears a tender love,
Who could comport to reyne his rage so far.

Cic. Those favors feigned, by him bestowed, or due,
(As is ones custom whose high heart aspires,)
Were spent on many that who them did view
Might love his course, so kindling their desires:
But where he thus pleased some, he spoiled whole hosts,
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harm as he, who, of his goodness boasts,
Yet her best men has to confusion brought;
That great man, whom erst fortune never did fail,
Who still prevailed, though warring without right,
Now in a good cause, for the commonweal
With Caesar did infortunately fight.
Whilst fled from Lesbos with his wretched wife,
Three base-borne Grooms (can fortune change so soon?)
Stood to consult upon great Pompeys life,
And did what thousands durst not once have done;
Then he whose knees had often been kissed by Kings,
(Most highly happy, had he died in time)
By one of his own slaves, with abject things
His funerals had performed; what monstrous crime
Romes greatest Captain to entombe alone?
The Roman who arrived with reason said:
The fatal glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that last honor staid;
The tears bestowed by Caesar on his head,
Forth from a guilty mind, remorse had thrown:
Or else he wept to see his enemy dead
By any others hands then by his own.
That constant Cato, who even death did scorn,
And for a coward once had Caesar braved,
(Who lived as if to grace all mortals borne)
Would rather perish then by him be saved.
He justly whilst more just, himself more strong
Then Caesar thought, who for no justice cared:
And since discovering what he cloak'd so long,
Said, that the other, and not he was snared.
Thus Caesar conquered all but Cato's mind,
Who to a tyrant would not owe his breath:
But in such sort his famous course confined,
Then Caesar's life, more glorious was his death:
Those great men thus brought to disastrous ends,
The author of their death make me despise,
Who to usurp all power while as he tends,
By treading good men down, does strive to rise.
Now made most great by lessening all the great,
He proudly does triumph in Rome, over Rome:
And we must seem to like the present state,
Whose doubtful breath depends upon his doom.
Yet had I not enlarged my griefs so long,
To you whom Caesar does pretend to love;
Save that (I know) touched with the common wrong:
"A just disdain all generous minds must move.

Dec. Had Caesar willingly resigned his Arms,
And rendered Rome her liberty at last,
When as from fores he feared no further harms,
But had repaired his just displeasures past,
More then for all that could be done for me,
He should have had and Altar in my best,
As worthy (for his virtuous deeds) to be
Feared by the bad, and honored by the best:
But since (though conquering all the world by might)
He (to himself a slave) would make Rome thrall,
His benefits are loathsome in my sight,
And I am grieved that he deserves to fall;
My fancies move not in so low a sphere,
But I disdain that one Romes Crown requires;
Yet it is best that with the time we bear,
And with our power proportion our desires.
Though first dissembling, so your mind to try,
I told what fame to Caesar's praise relates;
Yet was I pleased, that more were grieved then I:
"All miscontented men are glad of Mates.

Cic. Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We must our sleves (no more our selves) disguise;
Then, learn to mask a mourning mind with smiles,
And seem to like that which we most despise.
Yet all our deeds not Caesar's humor please,
Who (since mistrusting once) esteems us still,
When dumb disdainefull, flatterers when we praise,
If plain, presumptuous, and in all things ill:
Yea, we, whose freedom Caesar now restraines,
As his attenders all his steps must trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his disdaines,
But still pretend an interest in his grace:
Though all my thoughts detest him as a foe,
To honor him, a thousand means I move,
Yet but to save my self, and plague him so:
"No hate more harms then it that looks like love.
His pride is by prepost'rous state grown such,
That by the better sort, he is abhorred;
The gods are jealous, and men envy much
To see a mortal man so much adored.

Dec. Well, Cicero let all means be entertained,
That may embarke us in his bosoms deepes,
Till either willingly, or then constrained,
He justly quite what he unjustly keeps.

Exeunt. Chorus.
"THis life of ours is like a Rose,
"Which whilst rare beauties it array,
"Does then enjoy the least repose;
"When Virgin-like make blush (we see)
"Of every hand it is the prey,
"And by each wind is blown away;
"Yea, though from violence escaped free,
"(Thus time triumphs, and leads all thrals)
"Yet does it languish and decay:
"O! whilst the courage hottest boiles,
"And that our life seems best to be,
"It is with dangers compast still;
"Whilst it each little change appalles,
"The body, force, without often foiles,
"It the own distemp'rature often spoils,
"And even, though none it chance to kill,
"As nature fails, the body falls,
"Of which save death, naught bounds the ioyles;
"What is this moving Towr in whith we trust?
"A little wind closed in a cloud of dust.
And yet some sprites though being pent
In this frail prisons narrow bounds,
(Whilst what might serve, does not content,)
Do always bend their thoughts too high,
And aim at all the peopled grounds;
Then whilst their breasts Ambition wounds,
They feed as fearing straight to dye,
Yet build as if they still might live,
Whilst famished for fames empty sounds:
Of such no end the travel ends,
But a beginning gives, whereby
They may be vexed worse then before;
For, whilst they still new hopes contrive,
"The hoped good more anguish sends,
"Then the possessed contentment lends;
As beasts not taste, but do devour,
They swallow much, and for more strive,
Whilst still their hope some change attends:
"And how can such but still themselves annoy,
"Who can acquire, but know not how to enjoy?
Since as a ship amidst the deepes,
Or as an Eagle through the air,
Of which no way the impression keeps,
Most swift when seeming least to move:
This breath of which we take such care,
Does toss the body every where,
That it may hence with haste remove:
"Life slips and sleeps always away,
"Then hence, and as it came, goes bare,
Whose steps behind no trace do leave;
Why should heaven-banish'd souls thus love
The cause, and bounds of their exile,
As restless strangers where they stray?
And with such pain why should they reave
That which they have no right to have,
Which with them in a little while,
As summers beauties must decay,
And can give naught except the grave?
"Though all things do to harm him what they can,
"No greater enemy then himself to man;
Whilst often environed with his foes,
Which threatened death on every side,
Great Caesar parted from repose,
( As Atlas holding up the Stars,)
Did of a world the weight abide;
But since a prey to foolish pride,
More then by all the former wars,
He now by it does harmed remain,
And of his fortune does diffide.
Made rich by many Nations wreake,
He (breaking through the liquid bars)
In Neptunes arms his Minion forced;
Yet still pursued new hopes in vain:
"Would the ambitious looling back
"Of their inferiors knowledge take,
"They from huge cares might be divorced,
"Whilst viewing few, more power attain,
"And many more then they to lack:
"The only plague from men that rest does reave,
"Is that they weigh their wants, not what they have.
Since thus the great themselves involve
In such a labyrinth of cares,
Whence none to escape can well resolve,
But by degrees are forward led,
Through waves of hopes, rocks of despaires
Let us avoid ambitions snares,
And far from storms by envy bred,
Still seek (though low) a quiet rest,
With minds where no proud thought repaires,
That in vain shadows does delight;
Thus may our fancies still be fed
With that which Nature freely, gives;
Let us iniquity detest,
And hold but what we owe of right;
The eyes treasure is the all-circling light,
Not that vain pomp for which pride strives,
Whose glory (but a poysnous pest)
To plague the soul, delights the sight:
"Ease comes with ease, where all by pain buy pain,
"Rest we in peace, by war let others reign.
Act 3.
Scene 1.
Caius Cassius, Marcus Brutus. NOw (Brutus) now we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blind hopes our judgment to suspend,
That flatt'rers credit (lo) is quite worn out;
We must in time attempt, and not attend:
That race of victors which did Realms appall,
Ah (vanquished by their victories at last)
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their strength but down themselves does cast;
And we who by our birth aimed at great things,
Of the worlds mistress mighty minions once,
Who might have labored to give laws to Kings,
Laws from a King, must look for now with groans:
For, such of Caesar is the monstrous pride,
That though he domineers even at this hour,
And to his Clients kingdoms does divide
With an unlimited tyrannicke power;
Yet of Dictator he disdaines the name,
And seeks a tyrants title with the place,
Not for his honor, no, but for our shame,
As only bent brag of our disgrace.
Marc. Brut. I thought to see that man (as others are)
Walk re-apparrell'd with a private gown,
As one who had unwillingly made war,
To stand himself, not to cast others down:
So Silla (though more inhumane then he)
Whilst having all to what his heart aspired,
The Sovereignty resigned, and set Rome free,
When expectations date was quite expired.
By Caesar's worth we must think that he too
Will render freedom to this captived state,
When first the world has viewed what he might do,
His thoughts are generous, as his mind is great.
Though insolences often from courage flow,
His dying fury sparkles but a space:
"High thoughts which Mars inspires, naught can bring low,
"Till one have used the purity of peace.
"Those who by violence to all things tend,
"Sc^r^^ can themselves to quietness conform;
"Their stately carriage, and frank words, offend,
"Whilst peace cannot comport with wars rude form,
I hope that Caesar settling civil broils,
When worn by custom from intestine rage,
Will strive to mitigate his Countries toils,
And all those flames which burned his breast, assuage.

Ca. Cassius. Thus, of his course you by your own conceived,
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
"Ah, honest minds are with least pain deceived,
"Those who themselves are good, dream not of ill.
"To sound of some the still unsound device,
"Their inclination must your judgment sway:
"The square of virtue cannot measure vice,
"Nor yet a line when straight, a crooked way.
So Caesar rising may usurp the State,
He cares not by what force, nor by what slight:
"O! one may soon deceive men, and grow great,
"Who leaves religion, honesty and right.
When as the Senators (no more their own)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blindes,
And by high honors showed how they had shown^
To gratify his greatness, grateful minds;
He (in a Chair imperiously placed,)
Not daign'd to rise, nor bow in any sort,
As both of them had but their due embraced,
When he a haughty, they a humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be thoroughly thrall'd,
Dare so disdainefully such great men use,
When in a regal Throne by us enstall'd,
Then will he break that which he now does bruise.
Was he not first who ever yet began
To violate the sacred Tribunes place,
And punished them for punishing a man
Who had transgressed the laws in time of peace?
The laws which do of death all guilty hold,
Whose actions seem to tyranny inclined,
So earnest were our Ancestors of old,
To quench a tyrants light before it shined:
And shall our Nephews (heirs of bondage) blame
Us dastard parents who their hopes deceived,
Who saw, who suff'red, who survived such shame,
Not leaving dead, what we when borne received?
By Caesar's friends, to an assembly brought,
The Senators intend to call him King.

Brut. I Will not be there.


Cass. But what if we be sought.
To aid (as Pretors) such a public thing?

Brut. I will resist that violent decree;
None of Romes Crown shall long securely boast:
For, ere that I live thrall'd, I Will first dye free,
"What can be kept when liberty is lost?

Cass. O! with what joy I swallow up those words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But (Brutus) do not fear, this cause affords
In danger many, but few mates in fame;
When Anthony proud Caesar's image crowned,
By silent sorrow all the people told
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drowned,
That bondage-bragging Comet to behold.
What do those scroules thrown in thy chair import:
Which, what thou art, to brave thy courage, brings?
Be those the fancies of the vulgar sort?
No, none but noble minds dream of great things;
Of other Pretors people look for shows,
And distributions whose remembrance dies,
Whilst bloody Fencers fall with mutual blows,
And Africkes monsters do amaze their eyes;
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
(By birthright due) the glory of thy race,
And bent for thee, their blood will frankely spend,
So thou succeed in thy great Parents place.
He ( Rome redeeming) Tarquin did overthrow,
Though from his birth obeyed, and without strife;
A rising tyrant then bring boldly low,
To what extinguished was, who would give life.

Brut. I weigh thy words with an afflicted heart,
Which for compassion of my Country bleeds:
And would to God that I might only smart,
So that all others escaped what mischief breeds;
Then, never man himself from death did free,
With a more quiet and contented mind,
Then I would perish, if I both could be
To Caesar thankful, to my Country kind:
But though that great man's grace to me enlarged,
May challenge right in my affections store,
Yet must the greatest debt be first discharged,
I owe him much, but to my Country more.
This is my breast has great dissension bred:
I Caesar love, but yet Romes enemy hate,
And as Jove lives, I could be moved to shed
My blood for Caesar, Caesar's for the State.
I for my fathers death loathed Pompey long,
Whilst just disdain did boil within my breast:
Yet when he warred to venge the common wrong,
I joined with him, because his cause was best.
A mind to reign if Caesar now reveal,
I will in time precipitate his end:
Thus (never armed but for the Commonweal)
I helped a foe, and now must hurt a friend.

Cas. Lest of his favor thou the poison prove,
From swallowing of such baits in time now spare,
"No tyrant (trust me) can entirely love,
"Nor none who for himself does only care:
He by this course does cunningly intend
(Thy virtue slack'd) to undermine thy mind:
Thy well-knowne courage purposed to disbend,
Thus (though with silken bonds) he would thee bind;
This of each tyrant is the common tread,
To wreake all those in whom most worth he finds;
Or (whilst that terrors toss his jealous head)
By subtilty to snare the greatest minds:
As, for the Pretor-ship when we did strive,
Then both were held in hope, that so deceived,
Each the others harms might study to contrive
Through emulation and disdain conceived.
Thus subtle Caesar by such sleights has toild
To sow dissension, that we both might pause
Of private wrongs, and (by such means imbroil'd)
Still courting him, neglect the common cause.
But naught must make us the one t'another strange,
Who should in time the tyrants course restrain:
Let other men lament, we must revenge,
I scorn to bear a sword, and to complain.

Brut. Though Caesar (now) I must conspire thy fall,
My heart to thee yet never harbored hate;
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus must redeem the state.
Of this my course what ever others judge,
Here, I protest it is for good designed;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For, reason and not fury moves my mind;
Nor does ambition now inflame my breast,
With a prodigious appetite to reign,
That when I have made Caesar Pluto's guest,
I in his room a Monarch may remain:
No, if that glory did my fancies charm,
To which (blind-folded) tyrants do aspire,
I needed not to do, nor suffer harm,
But with less pain might compass my desire:
For, if I would but temporize a space,
Till time or death diminish Caesar's might,
He thinks that I deserve to have his place,
And I could make my day succeed his night;
Yet do I not for glory seek so much
As to attain it by my Countries shame:
But, O! I would (my zeal to it is such)
That it may escape, incur a kind of blame.
Yea, so that I may free with honored wounds
My soil that is dearer then my soul to me,
I could my self live banished from that bounds,
Which at so dear a rate I would set free.

Cas. What man does breath of Mars his martial race,
But will with Brutus sacrifize his blood,
And (charged with Arms) ere tyranny take place,
Dare venture all things for his Countries good,
Can any judgment be deceived so far,
But it already clearly may behold,
How that this change Romes greatness soon will mar,
And raze the Trophies which she reared of old.
Of old in Rome, all those who once had worn
The peace-importing gown, or warlike shield,
(Of dignities as capable all borne,)
Durst aim at ought that liberty could yield;
Those in affairs to deal, who would set forth;
Were not discouraged by their birth, though base;
And poverty could not hold back true worth,
From having honor both by war and peace:
Then emulation violently driv'd
All gallant minds to tempt great actions still;
In virtues love, who friendly rivals lived,
Whilst in their bosoms Glory balm did still:
Fabricius first was from the Plow advanced,
The Rudder of the Commonweal to hold,
Yet by no means his private wealth enhanc'd,
As rich in virtue still, as poor in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame,
Forth from the vulgar dross his race removed,
And lo, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now has proved.
Each abject mind disdained to be obscure,
When still preferment followed lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers past, procure
Fame for himself, and honor to his heirs:
But since that state by Caesar is o're-turn'd,
Whilst all our lives upon ones lips depend,
Of breasts which once with love of glory burned,
The soaring thoughts this wholly does disbend;
Advancement now does not attend desert,
But flows from fancies of a flatt'red mind;
Which to base hirelings, honor does impart,
Whilst envied worth no safe retreat can find.
"All proud usurpers most addicted prove,
"To them whom without cause they raise too high,
"As thinking those who stand but by their love,
"To entertain the same, all means must try.
"Where they, whose virtue reapes a due reward,
"Not building only on the givers grace,
"Do by deserts not gain so great regard,
"Whilst they maintain, as they obtain their place.
"And if a worthy man to work great things,
"VVing'd with a tyrants favor, raise his flight,
"The highest course to him most harm still brings,
"Who till he fall, cannot have leave to light.
"Those who by force would have the affection moved,
"When willingly men hold such gallants dear,
"Do rage that any should be freely loved,
"Whose virtue makes their vice more vile appear.
The man who now to be preferred aspires,
Must by base flattery in a servile form,
So soothing Caesar, seal all his desires,
And in some shadow lurk to escape a storm.
A number now of that proud Rebels foes,
Who grieve to see the ground whence grows their grief,
Would in obscurity entombe their woes,
So waiting, and not working for relief.
But we whose lofty minds disdain to lowre,
Like them who seek but their own safety thus;
When shall we use high indignations power,
Which (as brave Romans) worthy is of us?

Brut, Since no indignity you will endure,
I see our minds do sympathize in this;
Should we by suffering, seek to live secure,
Whose action must amend what is amiss?
No, no such abject thought must stain our breast,
Whose active thoughts reach further than discourse,
Whilst but like beasts, affecting food and rest,
Where men by reason should direct their course;
Like those of other parts, not raised by strife,
If Caesar had been born, or chus'd our Prince,
Then those who durst attempt to take his life,
The world of treason justly might convince.
Let still the States which flourish for the time,
By subjects be inviolable thought,
And those (no doubt) commit a monstrous crime,
Who lawful Sovereignty profane in ought:
And we must think (though now thus brought to bow)
The Senate King; a subject Caesar is;
The Sovereignty whom violating now,
The world must damn, as having done amiss.
We will (dear Cassius) for our Countries sake,
(What ever follow) give, or suffer death,
And let us now advise what course to take,
Whilst naught but the air can bear away our breath.

Cas. I think this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bound the common shame;
In Caesar's body we must sheath our swords,
And by his death our liberty reclaim;
But since his fortune did confound them all,
Who in the fields to match him did begin;
Whilst he by thousands made their bands to fall,
With hoary legions always used to win:
As Pompeys, Scipio's, and Petreius ghosts,
In lightlesse shades can by experience tell,
Who after fatal proofs of num^rous hoasts,
All famous (though infortunately, fell:)
And since (provided for the Parthian war)
His Army armed attends on his decree,
Where we (sequestered from such forces far)
Would (if suspected) soon prevented be:
With some few friends whom all things to assay,
A love to us, or to their Country binds,
We to his wreake must walk another way,
Whilst, ere our tongues, our hands do tell our minds:
Now when most high, and therefore hated most,
The gathered Senate seeks to make him King,
We must go give the blow before we boast,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.

Brut. In all this course I only one thing blame,
That we should steal, what we may justly take,
By clothing honor with a cloak of shame,
Which may our cause (though good) more odious make.
O! I could wish with honorable wounds
To match Romes enemy in the battles dust:
No sweeter Music then the Trumpets sounds,
When right and valor keep a consort just:
Then, free if quick, else dead, no harm more feared,
I always so contentment might attain;
What tomb to men more glorious can be reared,
Then mountains made of foes whom they have slain?
But how are my transported thoughts grown such,
That they disdain a measure to admit?
Whilst (bent not what to do, but to do much)
On Glories Throne, Ambition strives to sit.
No, to the State me from my self I give,
Free from particulars, as who expose
Fame, life, and all for it, and whilst I live,
So Rome may gain, I care not what I lose.
I Will never rest till he for ever rest,
Who gives my Country such a cause of grief:
And that to do no form I will detest,
Nor for my fame endanger Romes relief:
But (worthy Cassius) ere we further do,
Let our friends minds first well be understood,
Of which I hope to have assistance too,
Who will not venture for his Countries good?

Cas. Now whilst my soul rests ravished in a trance,
I think I see great Rome her courage raise,
Then beat the air with songs, the earth with a dance,
And crown thy virtues with deserved praise.

Act. 3. Scene 2.
Marcus Brutus, Portia. MY dearest half, my comfort, my delight,
Of whom one smyle may sweeten all my sow'rs:
Thou in my bosom used to power thy spright,
And where I was did spare afflictions powers.
When broils domesticke did disturb thy rest,
Then still (till finding) faining some relief;
Thou with calm words disguised a stormy breast,
Joys frankly sharing, and engrossing grief;
Still tend'ring me with a respective care,
What might offend, was by no means made known:
But (with loves colors all things painted fair)
What might have made me glad, was gladly shown.
How come thou then thy courage thus to lose,
That thou can look so sad, and in my sight?
Lend me (dear Love) a portion of thy woes;
"A burden (when divided) does grow light;
I see the Roses fading in thy face,
The Lilies languish, Violets take their place.
Port. Thou have (dear Lord) prevented my design,
Which was to ask of thee, what makes me pale;
If Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe shine?
No, with the cause of force the effects must fail.
The mirror but gives back as it receives,
By just resemblance the objected form,
And what impression the ingraver leaves,
The wax retains, still to the stamp conform.
I am the mirror which reflects thy mind,
As forced from thoughts, or flowing from thine eyes;
I take the state in which thy state I find;
Such is my color as thy countenance dies.
Then how can I rejoice, whilst thou art sad,
Whose breast of all thy crosses is the scroule?
I am still as thou art, if grieved, or glad,
Thy bodies shadow, th'essence of thy soul:
On that great Planet which divides the years,
Of fields inferior as the fruit depends,
And as it vanish does, or pleased appears,
In the earths cold bosom, life begins, or ends;
Sun of my soul, so I subsist by thee,
Whose shining virtue leads me as a thrall:
From care-bred clouds if that thy face be free,
I rise in joys, but if thou faint, I fall.

Brut. With all my course this countenance best accords,
Who as you know, yet never from my birth,
Light gestures used, nor did delight in words,
Whose pleasant strains were only tuned to mirth.
My melancholy Nature feeds on cares,
Whilst smothred sorrow by a habit smokes:
"A thought-full breast (when burdened with affairs)
"Does make a silent mouth, and speaking looks;
As for my palenesse, it imports but good:
"The bodies humbling does exalt the mind,
Where fatness (come from food) but serves for food:
In fattest bodies, leanest sprits we find.
Ah! since I saw th'abhorr'd Thessalia's bounds,
All drenched with blood of Senators and Kings,
(As if my soul yet smarted in their wounds)
A secret sorrow oftentimes me stings:
But since thy Father (braving pain with blows)
In the most hideous form affronted death,
To him my mind a sad remembrance owes,
Which sorrow shall exact whilst I have breath;
Yet grieve I that I gave thee cause of grief,
Who thoughtst some new mishap did me dismay;
To such old sores one worst can give relief;
But Time in end may wear my woes away.

Por. Why should thou so from me thy thoughts conceal?
From thine own soul between whose breasts thou sleep'st,
To whom (though shown) thou do them not reveal,
But in thy self more inwardly them keep'st?
And thou can hardly hide thy self from me,
Who soon in thee each alteration spy,
I can comment on all that comes from thee:
"True love still looks with a suspicious eye:
Within our bosom rests not every thought,
Tuned by a sympathy of mutual love?
Thou marr'st the Music if thou change in ought,
Which (when distempered) I do quickly prove.
Soul of my soul, unfold what is amiss,
Some great disaster all my thoughts divine,
Whose curiousness may be excused in this,
Since it concerns thy State, and therefore mine.

Brut. I wonder that thou do thy frailty show!
"By Nature women have been curious still,
And yet till now thou never craved to know
More then I pleased to speak of my free will.
"Naught save the wife a man within the walls,
"Nor ought save him without she should embrace:
"And it not comely is, but the one enthralls,
"When any sex usurpes another place.
Dear, to their wonted course thy cares inure,
I may have matters which import the State,
Whose opening up might my disgrace procure,
Whose weight for femall thoughts would be too great.

Port. I was not (Brutus) matched with thee, to be
A partner only of thy board, and bed:
Each servile whore in those might equal me,
Who but for pleasure, or for wealth did wed.
No, Portia spous'd thee minding to remain
Thy Fortunes partner, whether good or ill:
"By loves strict bonds whilst mutual duties chain,
"Two breasts must hold one heart, two souls one will;
"Those whom just Hymen voluntar'ly binds,
"Betwixt them should communicate all things,
"But chiefly that which most does move the minds,
"Whence either pleasure, or displeasure springs.
If thus thou seek thy sorrows to conceal
Through a disdain, or a mistrust of me,
Then to the world what way can I reveal,
How great a matter I would do for thee?
And though our sex too talkative be deemed,
As those whose tongues import our greatest powers,
For secrets still bad Treasurers esteemed,
Of others greedy, prodigal of ours;
"Good education may reform defects,
And this may lead me to a virtuous life,
(Whilst such rare patterns generous worth respects)
I Cato's daughter am, and Brutus wife.
Yet would I not repose my trust in ought,
Still thinking that thy cross was great to bear,
Till I my courage to a trial brought,
Which suffering for thy cause can nothing fear:
For first to try how that I could comport
With stern afflictions sprit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would seek to vex thee in this sort,
To whom my soul a dutious reverence owes.
Lo, here a wound which makes me not to smart,
No, I rejoice that thus my strength is known:
Since thy distress strikes deeper in my heart,
Thy grief (life's joy) makes me neglect mine own.

Brut. Thou must (dear love) that which thou sought'st receive,
Thy heart so high a sail in storms still bears,
That thy great courage does deserve to have
Our enterprise entrusted to thine ears;
This magnanimity prevails so far,
That it my resolution must control,
And of my bosom does the depths unbarre,
To lodge thee in the center of my soul.
Thou see in what estate the State now stands,
Of whose strong pillars Caesar spoiled the best,
Whilst by his own, preventing others hands,
Our famous Father fell amongst the rest.
That proud usurper fondly does presume
To re-erect detested Tarquins throne,
Thus the worlds Mistress all-commanding Rome,
Must entertain no Minion now but one.
All those brave minds who mark where he does tend,
Swell with disdain, their Countries scorn to see;
And I am one of those who soon intend
(His death or mine procured) to be made free.

Port. And without me, can thou resolve so soon,
To try the danger of a doubtful strife?
As if despaired, and always but undone,
Of me grown weary, weary of thy life.
Yet since thou thus thy rash design have shown,
Leave Portia's portion, venture not her part,
Endanger naught but that which is thine own,
Go where thou lik st, I will hold still thy heart.
But lest by holding of thy best part back*
The other perish't, aggravate my groans:
Who would be so thought guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy Treasure to the Seas at once.
Like Asia's Monarchs wife, who with short hairs,
(Sad signs of bondage) past still where he past,
To wear away, or bear away thy cares,
I Will follow thee, and of thy fortune taste.
These hands which were with mine own blood imbrued,
To strike another, may more strength afford,
At least when thou by the enemies art pursued,
I Will set my self betwixt thee and each Sword;
But if too great a privilege I claim,
Whose actions all should be disposed by thee,
Ah! pardon (Brutus) and but only blame
This stream of passions that transported me.

Brut. Thou ask'st what thou should give, forgive dear Mate,
This ventrous course of mine, which must have place,
Though it make Fortune Tyrant of our State,
Whose fickle footsteps Virtue grieves to trace.
And wonder not though thus to thee I prove,
Since private duties now all power have lost;
I weigh not glory, profit, pleasure, love,
Nor what respect may now import me most:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may perform that work which I intend,
Let me be called unkind unto my wife:
Yea, worst of all, ingrate unto my friend.
"As an instinct by Nature makes us know,
"There are degrees of duty to be past,
"Of which the first unto the Gods we owe,
"The next to our Country, to our friends the last.
From Rome of old proud Tyrants bent to drive,
Did the author of my race with ardent zeal,
Make those to dye, whom he had made to live,
And spoiled himself to raise the Commonweal*
To settle that which Caesar now o're-throws,
(Though virtues nurserie, stately whilst it stood)
He with the Tyrant inter-changing blows,
On Glories Altar offered Fame his blood.
And did that man to cross the common foe,
Then damn his Sons to death? and with dry eyes,
And is his special heir degener'd so,
In abject bondage that he basely lies?
No, his posterity his name not stains,
But even to tread his steps does fast draw near;
Yet, of his sprit in us some spark remains,
Who more then life, our liberty hold dear.

Port. Then prosecute thy course, for I protest,
Though with some grief, my soul the same approves;
This resolution does become thy breast,
In honors sphere where heavenly Virtue moves:
And do this enterprise no more defer,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings,
I to my life thy safety do prefer,
But hold thy honor dear above all things.
It would but let the world my weakness see,
If I sought my delights, not thy desires,
Though grief it give, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy Fame requires.
Though Nature, sex, and education breed,
No power in me, with such a purpose even,
I must lend help to this intended deed,
If vows and prayers may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancy finds,
Naught, save the success, can defray my fear:
"Ah! Fortune always frowns on worthy minds,
"As hating all who trust in ought save her.
Yet I despair not but thou may prevail,
And by this course to ease my present groans,
I this advantage have which cannot fail:
I Will be a free-mans wife, or else be nones:
For, if all prosper not as we pretend,
And that the Heavens Romes bondage do decree,
Straight with thy liberty my life shall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from t^^^*
My Father has me taught what way to dye,
By which if hindered from encountering death,
Some other means, I (though more strange) must try:
For, after Brutus none shall see me breathe.

Brut. Thou for my cause all others erst did leave,
But now forsak'st thy self to join with me,
"Ore generous love no power weak passions have,
Against thy mind thou do with mine agree.
I Will (since by thee approved) securely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life:
Heavens make my enterprise to prosper so,
That I may once prove worthy such a wife:
But ah! of all thy words those grieve me most,
Which brag me with the dating of thy days;
What? though I in so good a cause were lost,
"None flies the fate which stablish'd for him stays.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love;
From this fair prison strive not to break forth,
Till first the fates have forced thee to remove.

Port. The heavens (I fear) have our confusion sworn,
Since this ill Age can with no good accord,
Thou and my Father (ah!) should have been borne,
When Virtue was advanced, and Vice abhorred.
Then, ere the light of Virtue was declined,
Your worth had reverenced been, not thrown away,
Where now ye both have but in darkness shined,
As Stars by night, that had been Suns by day.

Brut. My treasure, strive to pacify thy breast,
Lest sorrows but sinistrously presage
That which thou would not wish, and hope the best,
Though Virtue now must act on Fortunes Stage.

Exeunt. Chorus.
THen liberty, of earthly things
What more delights a generous breast?
Which does receive,
And can conceive
The matchless treasure that it brings;
It making men securely rest,
As all perceive,
Does none deceive,
Whilst from the same true courage springs,
But feared for naught, does what seems best:
"Then men are men, when they are all their own,
"Not, but by others badges when made known:
Yet should we not mispending hours,
A freedom seek, as often it falls,
With an intent
But to content
These vain delights, and appetites of ours;
For, then but made far greater thralls,
We might repent
As not still pent
In stricter bounds by others powers,
Whilst fear licentious thoughts appalls:
"Of all the Tyrants that the world affords,
"Ones own affections are the fiercest Lords:
As Libertines those only live,
Who (from the bands of vice set free)
Vile thoughts cancel,
And would excel
In all that does true glory give,
From which when as no Tyrants be
Them to repel,
And to compel
Their deeds against their thoughts to strive,
They blessed are in a high degree:
"For, such of fame the scrouls can hardly fill,
"Whose wit is bounded by another will.
Our Ancestors of old such proved,
( Who Rome from Tarquines yoke redeemed)
They first obtained,
And then maintained
Their liberty so dearly loved;
They from all things which odious seemed
(Though not constrained)
Themselves restrained,
And willingly all good approved,
Bent to be much, yet well esteemed;
"And how could such but aim at some great end,
"Whom liberty did lead, Glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
(Though wanting Kings) triumphed over Kings,
And still aspired,
By Mars inspired,
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending fame their Eagles wings,
They all acquired
That was required,
To make them rare for rarest things,
The world made witness of their worth:
Thus those great minds who domineered over all,
Did make themselves first free, then others thrall,
But we who hold naught but their name,
From that to which they in times gone
Did high ascend,
Must low descend,
And bound their glory with our shame,
Whilst on an object Tyrants Throne,
We (base) attend,
And do intend
Us for our fortune still to frame,
Not it for us, and all for one:
"As liberty a courage does impart,
"So bondage does disbend, else break the heart,
Yet, O! who knows but Rome to grace
Another Brutus may arise?
Who may effect
What we affect,
And Tarquines steps make Caesar trace;
Though seeming dangers to despise
He does suspect
What we expect
Which from his breast has banished peace,
Though fairly he his fears disguise:
"Of Tyrants even the wrong, revenge affords,
"All fear but theirs, and they fear all men's swords.
Act. 4.
Scene 1.
Decius Brutus Albinus, Marcus Brutus, Caius Cassius. Dear Cousin, Cassius did
acquaint mine ears
With a design which tossed my mind a space;
"For, when strange news, a strangers breath first bears,
"One should not straight to rash reports give place.
I would not then discover what I thought,
Lest he to trap my tongue, a snare had framed,
Till first with thee I to confer was brought,
Whom he for Patron of his purpose named.
"One should look well to whom his mind he leaves,
"In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
"Men make themselves unnecessar'ly slaves,
"Of those to whom their secrets they unfold.
Mar. Brut. As Cassius told thee, grieved for Romes distress,
Which to our shame in bondage does remain,
We straight intend what ever we profess,
With Caesar's blood to wash away this stain.
Though for this end a few sufficient are,
To whom their virtue courage does impart,
Yet were we loath to wrong thy wroth so far,
As of such glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cause, yea, and thy name thee bind,
In this adventrous band to be comprised,
There needs no Rhetoric to raise thy mind,
To do the thing which thou should have devised.

Dec. Brut. I thought no creature should my purpose know,
But he whose intrest promised mutual cares:
"Of those to whom one would his secret show,
No greater pledge of trust then to know theirs;
As when two meet whilst masked (though most dear friends)
With them (as strangers) no respect takes place,
But straight when friend-ship one of them pretends,
The other likewise does un-cloud the face.
So as thou first, I Will now at last be bold:
My breast with the same birth long big has gone,
But I to others durst it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compass it alone;
But since this course, at which I long did pause,
On such great pillars now so strongly stands,
Whose countenance may give credit to a cause,
It has my heart, and it shall have my hands.

Ca. Cass. To our designs propitious signs are sent,
So that the Gods would give us courage thus:
For, all who ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themselves with us:
Let other men discourse of virtuous rites,
Ours but by action only should be shown:
"Bare speculation is but for such sprits
"As want of power, or courage keeps unknown.
"In those who virtue view, when crowned with deeds,
"Through Glories glass, whose beauties long have shined,
"To be embraced an high desire she breeds,
"As load-stones iron, so ravishing the mind:
What though a number now in darkness lies,
Who are too weak for matters of such weight?
We who are eminent in all men's eyes,
Let us still hold the height of honor straight.

Mar. Brut. Erst (that our faction might be strengthened thus)
I labored much to purchase all their powers,
Whom hate to Caesar, love to Rome, or us,
Might make imbarke in those great hopes of ours;
By sickness then imprisoned in his bed,
Whilst I Ligarius spied whom pains did prick,
When I had said with words that anguish bred:
In what a time Ligarius art thou sick?
He answered straight as I had Physic brought,
Or that he had imagined my design,
If worthy of thy self thou would do ought,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine:
Since he by Caesar was accused of late
For taking Pompey's part, yet at this hour
He (though absolved) does still the Tyrant hate,
Since once endangered by his lawless power:
Thus (of great sprits exasperating spites)
Heaven of our course the progress does direct,
One inspiration all our souls incites,
Who have advis'dly sworn for one effect.

Dec. Brut. So I with Cicero did confer at length,
Who (I perceive) the present state detests,
And though old Age diminished has his strength,
In him a will to free his Country rests.

Mar. Bru. That man whose love still to his country shined,
Would willingly the commonwealth restore:
Then he (I know) though he conceals his mind,
None Caesar more dislikes, nor likes us more:
Yet to his custody I Will not commit
The secrets of our enterprise so soon:
"Men may themselves be oftentimes not fit
"To do the things which they would wish were done.
He still was timorous, and, by age grown worse,
Might chance to lay our honor in the dust;
"All Cowards must inconstant be of force,
"With bold designs none fearful breasts should trust.
Then, some of ours would hold their hands still pure,
Who (ere they be suspected) for a space,
Amid'st the tumult may remain secure,
And with the people mediate our peace:
But who then Tullius fitter for that turn,
Whose eloquence is used to charm their ears?
His banishment they in black Gowns did mourn,
Whom all do honor for his worth and years.

Cai. Cass. Those studious wits which have through dangers gone,
"Would still be out, ere that they enter in:
"Who muse of many things, resolve of none,
"And (thinking of the end) cannot begin.
"The mind which looks no further then the eye,
"And more to Nature trusts, then unto Art,
"Such doubtful fortunes fittest is to try:
"A furious actor for a desp'rat part.
We have enough, and of the best degree,
Whose hands unto their hearts, hearts t'us are true,
And if that we seek more, I fear we be
To hide, too many, if disclosed, too few;
Let us advise with an industrious care
(Now ere the Tyrant intercept our minds)
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where
We should en-trust our Treasure to the winds;
And since our states this does in danger bring,
Let every point be circumspectly weighed,
"A circumstance, or an indifferent thing,
"Does often mar all, when not with care conveyed.

Mar. Brut. As for the time, none could be wished more fit,
Then is the present to perform our vow,
Since all the people must allow of it,
By recent anguish moved extremely now.
When represented in his triumph past,
Great Cato's mangled intrails made them weep,
And desp'rat Scipio whilst he leap't at last
To seek a Sanctuary amidst the deep.
Then all those great men whom in several parts,
Bent for Romes freedom, Caesar did o're-throw,
Did by their pictures pierce the peoples hearts,
And made a piteous (though a pompous) show;
How could they but conceive a just disdain
To be upbraided in so strange a sort,
Whilst he who only by their loss did gain,
Of their calamity did make a sport?
But yet his purpose grieves them most of all,
Since that he strives to be proclaimed a King:
And not contents himself to make us thrall,
But would even all our heirs to bondage bring.
Thus whilst the people are with him displeased,
We best may do what to our part belongs:
For, after this they may be best appeased,
If, whilst their wrath does last, we venge their wrongs;
And (since we naught intend but what is right,
Whilst from our Country we remove disgrace)
Let all be acted in the Senates sight,
A common cause, and in a common place.
Let those whose guilty thoughts do damn their deeds,
In corners like Minerva's birds abide,
That which our Country good, us glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be tried.
The Senators by our example moved,
Pleased with this action which imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyranny removed,
May at the least confirm that which we do;
So all the Senators were said of old,
King Romulus in pieces to have torn,
Who then to tyrannize was grown too bold,
And, ere turned God, humanity did scorn.

Dec. Brut. Yea, what though Caesar were immortal made,
As Romulus, whose deity him revives?
I rather as a God adore him dead,
Then as a King obey him whilst he lives.

Cai. Cass. That place indeed, most for our glory makes,
A Theater worthy of so great an act,
Where in their sight from whom most power he takes,
We of the Tyrant vengeance may exact;
But I must recommend unto your mind,
A course (though strict) of which we must allow,
Lest it o're-throw all that we have designed,
Since past recovery, if neglected now:
There is Antonius, Caesar's greatest friend,
A man whose Nature tyranny affects,
Whom all the Soldiers daily do attend,
As one who naught but to command respects;
I fear that he when we have Caesar slain,
The grieved faction furnish with a head:
So when we end, we must begin again
With one who lives worse then the other dead;
And in my judgment I would think it best,
When sacrificed the proud usurper lies,
That this seditious enemy of rest
Should fall with him, with whom he first did rise:
Thus, of our liberty we now may lay
A solid ground, which can be shook by none:
"Those of their purpose who a part delay,
"Two labors have, who might have had but one.

Mar. Brut. I cannot (Cassius) condescend to kill
(Thus from the path of justice to decline)
One faultlesse yet, lest after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltiness by mine;
No, no, that neither honest were, nor just,
Which rigorous form would but the world affright;
Men by this mean, our meaning might mistrust,
And for a little wrong damn all that is right:
If we do only kill the common foe,
Our Countries zeal must then acquire due praise,
But if (like Tyrants) fiercely raging so,
We will be thought that which we raze to raise;
And where we but intend to aid the State,
Though by endangering what we hold most dear,
If slaying him (as armed by private hate)
We to the world all partial will appear,
Ah, ah! we must but too much murder see,
Who without doing ill cannot do good:
And, would the Gods, that Rome could be made free
Without the shedding of one drop of blood!
Then, there is hope that Anthony in end,
Whilst first our virtue does direct the way,
Will (leagued with us) the liberty defend,
And (when brought back) will blush, as once astray.

Ca. Cass. Well Brutus, I protest against my will,
From this black cloud, what ever tempest fall,
That mercy but most cruelly does kill,
Which thus saves one, who once may plague us all.

Dec. Brut. When Caesar with the Senators sits down,
In this your judgments generally accord,
That for affecting wrongfully the Crown,
He lawfully may perish by the Sword:
No greater harm can for our course be wrought,
Then by protracting the appointed time,
Lest that, which acted would be virtue thought,
Be (if prevented) construed as a crime;
Can one thing long in many minds be pent?
"No, purposes would never be delayed,
"Which judged by th'issues Fortune does comment,
"If prosp'ring, reason, treason if betrayed.
There may amongst our selves some man remain,
Whom (if afraid) his pardon to procure,
Or (if too greedy) for the hope of gain,
Time to disclose his consorts may allure.
Then for our recompense we ruin reap,
If ought our course thus made abortive mar,
For, if discovered once, we cannot escape:
"As tyrants ears hear much, their hands reach far.

Ca. Cassius. The breast in which so deep a secret dwells,
Would not be long charged with so weighty cares:
For, I conjecture, as their countenance tells,
That many know our minds, though we not theirs:
Even but of late one, Casca came to see
Who curious was to have our purpose known,
And said to him, that which thou had from me,
To me by Brutus has at length been shown.
Then Laena once came to us in like sort,
And wished that our design might prosper well;
But yet to haste did earnestly exhort,
Since others told what we refused to tell.
Whilst strangers rest familiar with our mind,
And ere we them, do all our purpose spy,
Make forward fast, or we will come behind:
"Fame (winged with breath) does violently fly.

Mar. Brut. Their words but burst from tales uncertain forth,
For, whilst considering of their bondage thus,
Of Caesar's tyranny and of our worth,
They think this should be done, and done by us.
Such conjurations to confirm of old,
Some drinking others bloods, swore on their swords,
And cursing those who did their course unfold,
Used imprecations, execrable words;
And yet, then this, though voluntar'ly vowed,
Free from all bonds, save that which virtue binds,
More constantly no course was ere allowed,
Till that the end must manifest our minds.
And since so many frankely keep their faith,
What first intended to accomplish bent,
No doubt in spite of sickle fortunes wrath,
A happy success shall our souls content.
Might some few Thebans from the Spartans pride,
By diverse tyrants deaths redeem their Town?
And one Athenian who his virtue tried,
By thirty tyrants ruin, get renown?
And to the Greeks are we inferiors grown,
That where they have so many tyrants spoiled,
There cannot one be by us all o'rethrowne,
Whose state yet staggering may be soon imbroil'd?
I am resolved, and with my thoughts decree,
What ever chance to come, or sweet, or sour,
I shall my soil from tyranny set free,
Or then my self free from the tyrants power.

Dec. Brut. By Lepidus invited this last night,
Whilst Caesar went to suppe, and I with him,
Of all deaths shapes to talk, we took delight,
So at the table to beguile the time:
And whilst our judgments all about were tried,
Straight Caesar, (as transported) to the rest,
With a most sudden exclamation cried:
O! of all deaths, unlooked for death is best:
It from our selves does steal our selves so fast,
That even the mind no fearful form can see,
Then is the pain ere apprehended past;
"Sour things ere tasted, would first swallowed be.
The threatened destiny thus he divined:
(It would appear) divinely then inspired;
For, now I hope that he shall shortly find
That form of death which he himself desired.

Cai. Cas. Whilst of our band the fury flames most hot,
And that their will to end this work is such,
Lest Caesar's absence disappoint the plot,
Which would of some abate the courage much;
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addressed your way,
Him by all means to further forward soon,
Lest him some sudden chance may move to stay.

Dec. Brut. There, where the Senate minds this day to sit,
Stand all prepared, not fearing danger more,
And for the Sacrifice when all is fit,
I Will bring an offering hallowed of before.

Exeunt. Act 4. Scene 2.
Caesar, Calphurnia, Decius Brutus. LOng-lookt-for Time that should the glory
yield,
Which I through Neptunes trustlesse reign have sought;
And through the dust of many a bloody field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy coming now those lowering shadows cleares,
My hopes horizon which did long o're-cast;
This day defrayes the toils of many years,
And brings the harvest of my labors past.
The Senators a Messenger have sent
Most earnestly entreating me to come
And hear my self discerned by their consent
To wear a Crown over all, excepting Rome;
Thus, they devise conditions at this hour
For him, of whom Mars has made them the prey,
As Subjects limit could their Sovereigns power,
Who must have mind of naught but to obey;
But having pacified those present things,
I mind to lead my valorous legions forth
To the oriental Realms (adoring Kings)
Who can afford all that is due to worth.
Then swim my thoughts in the ocean of delight,
Whilst on the pillow of soft praise reposed;
Those eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
Which Envy opened, Admiration closed.
Call. Ah, though your fancies great contentment find,
Whilst thus the world your virtue does advance;
Yet a prepost'rous terror stings my mind,
And braggs me with I know not what mischance;
My wavering hopes o're-ballanc'd are with fears,
Which to my soul sinistrous signs impart;
And om'nous rumors so assault mine eats,
That they almost make breaches in my heart.

Caes. What? do foiled Pompeys floting followers strive
To recollect their ruins from the dust?
Dare they who only by my tollerance live,
More to their strength, then to my favor trust?
Or do thou fear his sons dejected state,
Who steals infamous flying through those floods,
Which his great father, Admiral of late,
Did plant with ships, till all their waves seemed woods;
Or makes his brothers death his hopes grow more,
Since (by them straited in a bloody strife)
I who in all the battles given before,
Did fight for victory, then, fought for life;
Or, whilst to march to Parthia I prepare,
Does a suspicion thus afflict thy sprite:
By Crassus fortune moved, who perished there,
The scorned prey of the Barbarians spite?
To those with Cassius who from thence retired,
Amongst my bands a place I will allow,
Whose foes shall find (bad fate at last expired,)
Though the same sheep, another sheep-heard now:
Do not imagine matters to bemone,
For, whilst there stands a world, can Caesar fall?
Though thousand thousands were conjured in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.

Call. No, none of those my mind does miscontent,
Who undisguis'd still like themselves remain:
Vnlook't-for harms are hardest to prevent:
There is no guard against concealed disdain;
But, in whom further can your trust repose,
Whom danger now over all by all attends?
"Where private men but only fear their foes,
"Often Kings have greatest cause to fear their friends,
"For, since most trusted, fittest to betray,
"Those unto whom ones favor force affords,
"Most dangerous ambushes with ease may lay,
"Whilst falsest hearts are hid with fairest words.
And some report (though privately) yet plain,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your destruction do intend to gain
That which you keep by making all men bow.

Caes. No corpulent sanguinians make me fear,
Who with more pain their beards then th'en'mies strike,
And do themselves like th'Epicurians bear
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike;
Their hearts do always in their mouths remain,
As streams whose murmuring shows their course not deep,
Then still they love to sport, though gross, and plain,
And never dream of ought but when they sleep:
But those high sprites who hold their bodies down,
Whose visage lean their restless thoughts records:
Whilst they their cares depth in their bosoms drown,
I fear their silence more then the others words.
Thus Cassius now and Brutus seem to hold
Some great thing in their mind, whose fire often smoaks;
What Brutus would, he vehemently would;
Think what they list, I like not their pale looks:
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom bright virtue seems so much to shine:
Can those who have received their lives from me,
Prove so ingrate, that they do thirst for mine?
Dare Cassius (matched with me) new hopes conceive,
At the Hellespont, who fortune durst not try,
And (like a dastard) did his Galleys leave,
In all (save courage) though more strong then I?
Shall I suspect that Brutus seeks my blood,
Whose safety still I tendered with such care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me seclude,
Is only worthy to be Caesar's heir?

Call. "The corners of the heart are hard to know;
Though of those two the world the best does deem,
Yet do not trust too much to the outward show,
For, men may differ much from what they seem.
"None often more fierce then those who look most mild,
"Impiety sometime appears devout,
And (that the world the more may be beguiled)
"Even vice can cloth it self with virtues cote.
Though it would seem (all hatred now laid down)
They on your favor only should depend,
Yet no respect can counterpoise a Crown:
"Ambition has no bounds, nor Greed no end.
Moved by vindictive hate, or emulous pride,
Since some your person, some your place pursue;
All threatened dangers to prevent, provide,
And use for safety, what to State is due.

Caes. No armor is that can hold treason out.


Call. To fright your foes with bands be backed about.


Caes. So dastard tyrants strive themselves to bear.


Call. It better is to give, then to take fear.


Caes. No guard more strong then is the peoples love.


Call. But naught in the earth does more inconstant prove.


Caes. Guards (showing fear) to charge me men might tempt.


Call. Guards would put them from hope, you from contempt.


Caes. My breast from terror has been always clear.


Call. When one least fears, often danger lurks most near.


Caes. I rather dye then fear: at last life goes.


Call. Yet, death must grieve, when forced by vaunting foes.


Caes. I will not cross my present pleasures so,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much cause for woe;
And sorrows still must harbored be by some.
By joys in time we must embrace relief,
That when they end, we in some measure may
By their remembrance mitigate the grief
Which still attends all those on the earth that stay.
I think the Senate is assembled now,
And for my coming does begin to gaze,
Let me condignely once adorn my brow,
And feast mine ears by drinking in due praise.

Call. Stay, stay (dear Lord) retire thy steps again,
And spare a space to prorogate whole years;
Let not this ominous day begin thy reign,
WHich fatal and unfortunate appears.
An Astrologian through the world renowned,
Thy horoscopes just calculation lays,
And does affirm (as he by signs has found)
That Marches Ides do brag to bound thy days;
Walk not abroad where harms may be received
(By great necessity since no way forced)
For, (though his judgment may be far deceived)
"In things that touch thy life, suspect the worst.

Caes. Whilst I reformed the Calendar by fits,
Which did confound the order of the year;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
Who of the stars the mysteries would clear.
Those pregnant sprites who walk betwixt the Poles,
And lodge at all the Zodiackes several signs,
Do read strange wonders wrapped in th'azure scroules,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By speculation of superior powers,
Some Natures secrets curious are to know,
As how celestial bodies rule over ours,
And what their influence does work below.
Yea, they sometime may brave conjectures make
Of those whose parts they by their birth do prove,
Since naturally all inclination take
From Planets then predominant above;
And yet no certainty can so be had,
Some virtuously against their Stars have strived,
As Socrates, who grew (though borne but bad)
The most accomplished man that ever lived.
But of the hour ordained to close our lights,
No earth-clog'd soul can to the knowledge come,
For, O! the destinies far from our sights,
In clouds of darkness have involved our doom!
And some but only guess at great men's falls,
By bearded Comets, and prodigious Stars,
Whose sight-distracting shape the world appalls,
As still denouncing terror, death, or wars.
The time uncertain is of certain death,
And that fantastic man far past his bounds:
"With doubt and reverence they should manage breath,
"Who will divine upon conjectured grounds.

Call. But this all day has preyed upon my heart,
And from the same of cares a tribute claimed;
Do not despise that which I must impart,
Though but a dream, and by a woman dreamed.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breast,
Then whilst we both (as those whom Morpheus weds)
Lay softly buried (with a pleasant rest)
I in thy bosom, thou within the beds:
Then from my soul strange terrors did withdraw
The expected peace by apprehended harms;
For, I imagined, no, no doubt I saw,
And did embrace thee bloody in mine arms.
Thus whilst my soul by sorrows was surcharged,
Of which huge weight it yet some burden bears,
I big with grief, two Elements enlarged,
The air with my sighs, the water with my tears.

Caes. That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilst thou all seemed dissolved in grief at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted often by tragic groans.
The memory, but not the judgment frames
Those raving fancies which disturb the brain,
Whilst night dissolves all days designs in dreams,
"The senses sleeping, souls would stir in vain.
From superstitious fears this care proceeds,
Which still would watch over that which thou do love,
And in thy mind thus melancholy breeds,
Which does those strange imaginations move.

Call. Ah, in so light account leave off to hold.
Those fatal warnings, which our minds should lead
To search dark matters, till we may unfold
What dangers huge do hang above thy head.
With sacred Garlands he who things divines,
By the intrails of the consecrated beast,
Does in the offering see sinistrous signs,
And I entreat thee do not hence make haste.

Caes. When I in Spain against young Pompey went,
Thus, the diviner threatened me before,
Yet did I prosecute my first intent,
Which with new laurels did my brows decore.

Call. And yet you hardly there (as I do hear)
From danger (far engaged) redeem^d your life;
But tokens now more monstrous do appear,
And I suspect far worse then open strife.

Caes. Lest I too much seem wedded to my will,
(As others counsels scorning to allow)
With jealous eyes I Will search about me still,
And even mistrust my self to trust thee now;
Yet if I stay, the Senators deceived,
May my beginning straight begin to hate;
So might I perish, seeking to be saved:
"By flying it, some fall upon their fate.
But here one comes who can resolve me much,
With whom I use to weigh affairs of weight;
Whence come thou Decius, that thy haste is such?
Is ought occurred that craves our knowledge straight?

Dec. I come to tell you how the Senate stays,
Till that your presence bless their longing fight,
And to conclude what is proposed, delays,
Since your applause can only make it right:
They your contentment to procure intend,
And all their thoughts seem at one object bent,
Save that amongst themselves they do contend,
Who you to please, shall rarest ways invent.

Caes. Then that, no treasure to my soul more dear,
Which to enjoy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arrests me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart;
From thee (dear friend) I never do conceal
The weightiest secrets that concern me most;
And at this time I likewise must reveal,
How ^^avens by signs me with destruction boast:
To superstition though not erst inclined,
My wife by dreams does now presage my fall,
It a sooth-sayer likewise has divined:
The Sacrifice prodigious seems to all,
So that till this disastrous day be gone,
All company I purpose to disuse,
And to the Senators will send some one,
To paint my absence with a fair excuse.

Dec. Brut. Do not repose on superstitious signs,
You to suspect the people thus to bring,
Whilst Soveraigne-like you limit their designs,
Seem not a tyrant, seeking to be King:
How can we satisfy the worlds conce^t,
Whose tongue still in all ears your praise proclaims?
Or shall we bid them leave to deal in state,
Till that Calphurnia first have better dreams?
If that this day you private would remain,
The Senate to dissolve your self must go,
And then incontinent come back again,
When you have shown to it some reverence so.

Caes. With thy advise (as powerful) I agree,
The Senators shall have no cause to grudge:
A little space, all part a space from me,
And I Will be shortly ready to dislodge.

Caesar alone. Whence comes this huge and admirable change,
That in my breast has uncouth thoughts infused,
Does the earth then erst yield terrors now more strange,
Or but my mind less courage then it used?
What spightfull fate against my state contends,
That I must now to fancied plagues give place,
By toes not moved, afraid amongst my friends,
By war secure, endangered but by peace?
When strongest troops to fight with me did come,
Then did my heart the highest hopes conceive,
I warred with many, many to o're-come;
The greatest b^ttels, greatest glory gave.
As the enemies numbers, still my courage grew;
Through depths of dangers often times have I past,
Yet never did those boundless labors rue,
To have none greater first, none equal last:
When bragging Gauls moved by their neighbors falls,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled;
And hid themselves with Arms, their Arms with walls,
Whilst I my troops before Alexia led;
Then, though there swarmed forth from the bounds about,
Huge hosts to compass me enflamed with wrath,
That the besiegers (all besieged about,)
Seemed drawn by danger in the nets of death.
No way I who could with the pride comport,
That those Barbarians by vain vaunts bewrayed,
Did re-assault the assaulters in such sort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repayd.
Of those within the town (to ease their toils)
Till quite o're-com'd, their coming was not known,
Who straight (upbraided by the barbarous spoils)
Did yield themselves, as if with them o're-throwne,
By liquid legions whilst with tumid boasts
The Trident-bearer strived my spoils to bear;
Though threatened thrice amid'st his humid hosts,
Still courage scorned to think of abject fear.
I used those Pirates who had me deceived,
Still as my servants (thundering threatenings forth)
And gave them money more then they had craved,
Whose ignorance too meanly prized my worth:
Yet gathering ships, I stayed not long a shore,
But traced their steps, though they not paved the way,
And taking them (as I had vowed before)
By naught but death their ransom would defray;
Then when (without the advice of others minds)
Through hoary waves I past alone by night,
Whilst in a little Bark against great winds,
That even the Pilot look^t not for the light;
The waves themselves asunder seemed to tear,
That in their gravel I might choose a grave,
And cry stall arches did above me rear,
That I a Tomb fit for my state might have.
Whilst dangers seemed to merit Caesar's death,
As Neptune raised his head, I raised my heart;
And she wing what I was with constant breath,
To weak Amiclas courage did impart.
Was I not once amid'st large Nilus slote,
Whilst me to wound, a wood of darts did fly,
Yet swim'd so careless of my enemies shot,
That in my hand I held some papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I (whilst often compassed both by Sea and Land,)
Did undismayed look horror in the face,
As borne for naught, but only to command.
But since a world of victories have filled
With Trophies Temples, Theaters with my praise,
That bathed with balm which glories bays had stilled,
With friends in peace, I looked to spend my days;
The chambers music now afrights me more,
Then Trumpets sounds when marching in the field,
And Gowns (though signs of peace) worse then before
The pompous splendor of a flaming shield.
Those thoughts of late which had disdained to doubt,
Though I alone had marched amongst my foes,
Lo, whilst amongst my friends well backed about,
They, then the eyes more danger now disclose.
If any chance, to meet a number brings,
I insurrections fear from common wrath,
Yea, if two talk a part of private things,
Straight I suspect that they conspire my death;
^^en sudden rumors rise from vulgar smoke;
(^^ilst the inward motions roll my restless eyes,)
I at ^^^ch corner for an ambush look,
A^^^start astonished, lest some tumult rise.
When light (first lightning) does encourage toils,
I still despair to re-enjoy the night,
And when mine eyes the umbragious darkness spoils,
I never look to grace them with the light;
For, when the light with shadows makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dream of rest,
What ugly Gorgons, what Chimera's strange
Do brag the little world within my breast?
The time which should appease impetuous cares,
Does double mine, who view most when quite blind;
I apprehend huge horrors and despaires,
Whilst the outward objects not distract my mind:
Now of my conquests what delight remains?
Where is the peace pursued by many a strife?
Have I but taken pain to purchase pains?
And sought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aspiring powers,
In promised calmes to be most plagued by storms?
Lurk poisonous Serpents under fairest flowers,
And hellish furies under heavenly forms?
It will not grieve my ghost below to go,
If circumvented in the wars I end,
As bold Marcellus by Romes greatest foe,
Who gave his ashes honor as a friend;
Or like to Epaminondas in his death,
O! would the Gods I had amidst alarmes,
When charged with recent spoils, been spoiled of breath,
Whilst I to Pluto might have marched in arms;
Yet, life to end, which naught but toils affords,
I Will pay to death the tribute that it owes;
Straight with my blood, let some come dye their swords,
Whose naked breast encounter shall their blows:
But ah! how have the furies seaz'd my breast,
And poisoned thus my sprite with desperate rage?
By horrid Serpents whilst quite barred from rest,
No kind of comfort can my cares assuage;
No, Atropos, yet spare my thread a space,
That to the Stygian streams ere walking down,
I may of honor have the highest place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a Crown.
Whilst ears are bended to applauding shouts,
My thoughts divided are within my breast,
And my tossed soul does flote between two doubts,
Yet knows not on what ground to build her rest.
The Senators, they have this day designed,
To show the world how they esteem my worth;
Yet do portentuous signs perturbe my mind,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth:
The Gods from me with indignation gone,
In every thing charact'red have my death:
And must both heaven and earth conspire in one,
To quench a little spark of smoking breath?
My safety would that I should stay within
Till this disastrous day give darkness place,
But daring honor would have me begin
To reap the glory of my painful race,
And I Will advance in spite of threatened broils,
For, though the fates accomplish what we dream,
When only death has triumphed of my spoils,
I then (though breathless) still shall breathe with fame.

Exit. Chorus.
What fury thus does fill the breast
With a prodigious rash desire,
Which banishing their souls from rest,
Does make them live who high aspire,
(Whilst it within their bosom boyles)
As Salamanders in the fire;
Or like to Serpents changing spoils,
Their withered beauties to renew?
Like Vipers with unnatural toils,
Of such the thoughts themselves pursue,
Who for all lines their lives do square,
Whilst like Camelions changing hue,
They only feed on empty air:
"To pass ambition greatest matters brings,
"And (save contentment) can attain all things.
This active passion does disdain
To match with any vulgar mind,
As in base breasts where terrors reign,
Too great a guest to be confined;
It does but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a spacious field may find,
It self with honor to content,
Where reverenced fame does lowdest sound;
Those for great things by courage bent,
(Far lifted from this lumpish round)
Would in the sphere of Glory move,
Whilst lofty thoughts which naught can bind,
All rivals live in virtues love;
"On abject preyes as the Eagles never light,
"Ambition poisons but the greatest sprite,
And of this restless Vultures brood,
(If not become too great a flame)
A little spark does sometime good,
Which makes great minds (affecting fame)
To suffer still all kind of pain:
Their fortune at the bloody game,
Who hazard would for hope of gain,
Unless first burned by thirst of praise?
The learned to a higher strain,
Their wits by emulation raise,
As those who hold applauses dear;
And what great mind at which men gaze,
It self can of ambition clear,
Which is when valued at the highest price,
A generous error, an heroicke vice?
But when this frenzy flaming bright,
Does so the souls of some surprise,
That they can taste of no delight,
But what from Sovereignty does rise,
Then, huge affliction it affords;
Such must (themselves so to disguise)
Prove prodigal of courteous words,
Give much to some, and promise all,
Then humble seem to be made Lords,
Yea, being thus to many thrall,
Must words impart, if not support;
To those who crushed by fortune fall;
And grieve themselves to please each sort:
"Are not those wretch'd, who over a dangerous snare,
"Do hang by hopes, whilst balanced in the air;
Then when they have the Port attained,
Which was through Seas of dangers sought,
They (lo) at last but loss have gained,
And by great trouble, trouble bought:
Their minds are married still with fears,
to being forth many a jealous thought;
With searching eyes, and watching ears,
To learn that which it grieves to know,
The breast that such a burden bears,
What huge afflictions do overthrow?
Thus, each Prince is (as all perceive)
No more exalted then brought low,
"Of many, Lord, of many, slave;
"That idol greatness which the earth does adore,
"Is gotten with great pain, and kept with more:
He who to this imagined good,
Did through his countries bowels tend,
Neglecting friendship, duty, blood,
And all on which trust can depend,
Or by which love could be conceived,
Does find of what he did attend,
His expectations far deceived;
For, since suspecting secret snares,
His soul has still of rest been reav'd,
Whilst squadrens of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breast extort deep groans:
Thus Caesar now of life despaires,
Whose lot his hope exceeded once;
And who can long well keep an ill won State?
"Those perish must by some whom all men hate.
Act. 5.
Scene 1.
Marcus Brutus, Chorus, Antonius, Caius Cassius, Marcus Tullius Cicero. ARe
generous Romans so degener'd now,
That they from honor have estranged their hands?
And, used with burdens, do not blush to bow,
Yea (even though broken) shake not off their bands;
This glorious work was worthy of your pain,
Which now ye may by others dangers have;
But what enchaunts you thus, that ye abstain
That which ye should have taken, to receive?
Where be those inundations of delight,
Which should burst out from thoughts o're-flow'd with joy,
Whilst emulous Virtue may your minds incite,
That which we give you bravely to enjoy,
Or quite conformed unto your former state,
Do still your minds of servitude allow,
As broken by adversity of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Lo, we who by the Tyrants favor stood,
And grieved but at the yoke which you out-rag'd,
Have our advancement, riches, rest, and blood,
All liberally for liberty engaged.
Chor. Thou like thy great Progenitour in this,
Have glory to thy self, t'us freedom brought;
"Then liberty what greater treasure is?
"Ought with it much, without it much seems naught:
But pardon us (heroicke man) though we
To high perfection hardly can aspire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus bell*
"What none can imitate, all must admire.
At this strange course (with too much light made blind)
We our opinions must suspend a space,
"When sudden chances do dismay the mind,
"The Judgment to the Passion first gives place.

Ant. What wonder now though this most barbarous deed
Have with amazement closed your judgment in,
Which O (I fear) shall great confusion breed?
When Caesar's toyls did end, Romes did begin:
The most suspicious minds had not believed,
That Romans reverenced for their worth by us,
Would have presumed to kill, or to have grieved
An hallowed body inhumanely thus;
Who would have once but dreamed of such despite?
What strange hostility! in time of peace
To kill, though not accused, against all right,
A sacred man, and in a sacred place?

Cai. Cass. If Caesar as a Citizen had lived,
And had by Law decided every strife,
Then I would grant those treason had contrived,
Who went without a Law to take his life;
But to pervert the Laws, subvert the State,
If all his travels did directly tend,
Then I must say, we did no wrong of late:
"Why should not Tyrants make a Tragic end?

Cho. Since destinies did Caesar's soul enlarge,
What course can we for his recovery take?
Ah! th'unrelenting Charons restless Barge
Stands to transport all over, but brings none back:
"Of life's frail glass (when broken) with vain groans,
"What earthly power the ruins can repair;
"Or who can gather up, when scattred once,
"Ones blood from the earth, or yet his breath from the air?
Let us of those who pass oblivions flood
Oblivious be, since hope of help is gone,
And spend our cares where cares may do most good,
Lest Rome wail many, where she wailes but one.

Ant. Still concord for the Commonweal were best,
To reconcile divided thoughts again:
"Then discord to great Towns, no greater pest,
Whose violence no reverence can restrain.
Yet oftentimes those wary wits have erred,
Who would buy wealth and ease at any cost:
"Let honesty to profit be preferred,
"And to vile peace war when it wounds us most;
But seeking peace, what surety can we find?
Can faithless men give faith, just fears to stay?
"No sacred band Impiety can bind,
"Which swears for trust, seeks trust but to betray;
What helped it Caesar, that we all had sworn
His body still from dangers to redeem?
"Those who are once perjured, hold oaths in scorn?
"All are most frank of what they least esteem.

Mar. Brut. None needs in States which are from Tyrants free,
Loathed execrations to confirm his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might despise all ill;
All odious oaths by those are only craved,
Whose suit from Reason does a warrant want,
Whilst who deceive (afraid to be deceived)
Seek of men thrall'd, what none whilst free would grant.
When Caesar had prevailed in France and Spain,
His Fortune building on his Countries wrack,
(Of liberty a shadow to retain)
We gave him all that he was bent to take.
The Senate had reserved naught but a show,
Whose course to it by Caesar was imposed,
Who lifted up, by bringing others low,
Of Offices, and Provinces disposed:
Then that our faded hopes might never spring,
When bent to try the Parthians wooden shower,
He for five years disposed of every thing,
Even in his absence leaving us no power.
O how some aggravate our deed with hate!
Who durst his body wound, or with blood stain,
Though consecrated by constraint of late,
Yea, but reputed holy, yet prophaine,
And did forget how he (a wondrous case)
The Tribuneship did violate with scorn,
Which our forefathers (free) in time of peace
Advis'dly had inviolable sworn.
Did he not once appropriate (swollen with wrath)
The public treasure to his private use?
And to the Tribune boldly threatened death,
Who did resist, grieved at that great abuse.
Twixt Romans and a Tyrant what availes
A Covenant whilst Right rests trod on thus?
"Who can build further when the ground once fails?
Could we save him who sought to ruin us?

Cic. So absolutely good no man remains,
Whose natural weakness may not him o're-come;
"Even Virtues dye from Vice may take some stains,
"And worthy minds may of gross faults have some:
"As in fine fruits, or weeds, fat earth abounds,
"Even as the Laborers spend, or spare their pain,
"The greatest sprits (disdaining vulgar bounds)
"Of what they seek the highest height must gain;
"They (that bright glory may be so enjoyed)
"As only borne to be in action still,
"Had rather be (then idle) ill employed:
"Great sprits must do great good, or then great ill;
The worlds chief treasure which bright Rays do arm,
Huge evil procured (though only framed for good)
Till that fond youth whom his own wish did harm,
Was killed by fire, and buried in a flood.
By rules of Reason whilst he rightly lived,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caesar were achieved,
Which all the world as wonders must relate?
But when of right he buried all respects,
(As blind Ambition had bewitched his mind)
What harm ensued, by pitiful effects,
We at the first* he at the last did find;
Whilst like Narcissus with himself in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his sight,
And for a while (uncertain joys to prove)
With all our woes would sweeten his delight*
How could brave men (with virtuous minds) as tho^^
Who of their Countries weal are jealous still,
But stoutly to all storms their States expose,
The States destroyer resolute to kill?
But since our freedom flows from Caesar's blood,
Let us embrace that which too long we lack:
"Peace gives to justice power, it, to all good,
"Where war breeds wrong, and wrong all kind of wrack.
This City has experienced with great pain,
What guilty troubles rise from civil strife,
Which by her ruins registered remain,
Since first the Gracchi gave contention life.
When Scilla once, and Marius (mad through pride)
Did strive who should the most tyrannicke prove,
What memorable miseries were tried,
From Romans minds no time can e're remove?
Then last by Caesar, and his Son in law,
What thousands Ghosts to Pluto were dispatched?
Ah! that the world those hosts divided saw,
Which, joined in one, no world of worlds had matched.
Yet with this wit which we have dearly bought,
Let us abhor all that may breed such broils,
Lest when we have our selves to ruin brought,
In end Barbarians bear away our spoils.

Cho. Rome to those great men hardly can afford
A recompense, according to their worth,
Who (by a Tyrants o're-throw) have restored
The light of liberty which was put forth;
Yet (by due praises with their merits even)
Let us acknowledge their illustrious minds;
And to their charge let Provinces be given:
"Still virtue grows, when it preferrement finds.

Ant. Those barbarous Realms by whose respective will,
Of Caesar's Conquests monuments are shown:
As if they held them highly honored still,
Who warred with Caesar though they were overthrown,
Can this disgrace by their proud minds be borne,
Whilst we dishonor, whom they honor thus?
And shall we not (whilst as a Tyrant torn)
Give him a tomb, who gave the world to us?
Must his Decrees be all reduced again,
And those degraded whom he graced of late.
As worthy men unworthily did gain
Their rooms of reputation in the State?
As if a Tyrant we him damn so soon,
And for his murd'rers do rewards devise,
Then what he did, must likewise be undone,
For which I fear, a foul confusion rise.

Cho. Ah! (brave Antonius) sow not seeds of war,
And if thou always do delight in arms,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praise, and us no harms.
Detest in time th'abhominable broils,
For which no Conqueror to triumph has com'd,
Whilst this wretch'd Town (which still some party spoils)
Must loath the Victor, and lament th'ore-com'd:
And shall we still contend against all good,
To make the yoke where we should bound abide?
Must still the Commons sacrifize their blood,
As only borne to serve the great men's pride?

Ant. Whilst I the depths of my affection sound,
And read but th'obligations which I owe,
I find my self by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caesar's foes, or then my self t'ore-throw.
But when I weigh what to the State belongs,
The which to plague no passion shall get place,
Then I with grief digesting private wrongs,
War with my self to give my Country peace.
Yet whilst my thoughts of this last purpose muse,
I altogether dis-assent from this,
That Caesar's fame, or body we abuse,
To deal with Tyrants as the custom is:
Lest guilty of ingratitude we seem,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caesar's body from disgrace redeem,
And let his acts be ratified by us.
Then for the publike-weale which makes us pause,
Toward those that have him killed t'extend regard,
Let them be pardoned for their kinsmens cause:
"Remission given for evil is a reward.

Ca. Cass. We stand not vexed like Malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorsefull mind,
So in your presence supplicants t'appeare,
As who themselves of death do guilty find;
But looking boldly with a lofty brow,
Through a delight of our design conceived,
We come to challenge gratefulness of you,
That have of us so great a good received.
But if you will suspend your thoughts a space,
Though not the givers, entertain the gift;
Do us reject, yet liberty embrace:
To have you free (lo) that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus and let Cassius banished live;
Thus banishment would breed us greater joy,
Then what at home a Tyrants wealth could give.
Though some misconstrue may this course of ours,
By ignorance, or then by hate deceived;
"The truth depends not on opinions powers,
"But is it self, how ever misconceiv'd.
Though to acknowledge us, not one would daigne,
Our merit of it self is a reward,
"Of doing good none should repent their pain,
"Though they get no reward, nor yet regard.
I Will venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws;
And as for me, how ever others yield,
I Will naught obey, but Reason, and the Laws.

Cic. What fools are those who further travel take,
For that which they even past recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
That can no creature who does live below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world still weeps,
Lies low, neglected on a barbarous shore;
Selfe-slaughtered Scipio flotes amidst the deeps,
Whom, it may be, Sea Monsters do devour.
Of Libyan Wolves grave Cate feasts the wombes,
Whose death, of worth the world defrauded leaves;
Thus some that did deserve Mausolean tombs,
Have not a title engraved upon their graves.
And yet may Caesar who procured their death,
By brave men slain be buried with his race;
All civil war quite banished with his breath,
Let him now dead, and us alive have peace.
"We should desist our thoughts on things to set,
"Which may harm some, and can give help to none,
"Learn to forget that which we cannot get,
"And let our cares be gone of all things gone.
"Those who would strive all crosses to o're-come,
"To present times must still conform their course,
"And making way for that which is to come,
"Not meddle with things past, but by discourse.
"Let none seek that which does no good when found;
Since Caesar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our grief go with him to the ground,
For, sorrow best becomes a lightlesse shade;
It were the best, that joined in mutual love,
We physic for this wounded State prepare:
"Neglecting those who from the world remove.
"All men on earth for earthly things must care.

Cho. O how those great men friendship can pretend,
By soothing others thus with painted winds;
And seem to trust, where treason they attend,
Whilst love their mouth, and malice fills their minds;
Those but to them poor simple souls appear,
Whose countenance does discover what they think,
Who make their words, as is their meaning, clear,
And from themselves can never seem to shrink.
Lo, how Antonius faines to quench all jarres,
And whom he hates with kindness does embrace,
But as he furthered first the former wars,
Some fear he still will prove a foe to peace.
Now where Calphurnia stays our steps address,
Since by this sudden chance her loss was chief.
"All visit should their neighbors in distress,
"To give some comfort, or to share in grief.

Act 5. Scene 2.
Calphurnia, Nuntius. Chorus. WHen darkness last imprisoned had mine eyes,
Such monstrous visions did my heart affright,
That (quite dejected) it as stupid dies
Through terrors then contracted in the night;
A melancholy cloud so dimmes my breast,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well disposed for such a Guest,
Where naught of sorrow but the impression lackes;
And I imagine every man I see
(My senses so corrupted are by fears)
A Herald to denounce mishaps to me,
Who should infuse confusion in my ears.
O! there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I see;
Thy message is charactred in thy face,
And by thy looks directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes rest rolling for relief,
As lately frighted by some uglie sight;
Thy breath does pant as if grown big with grief,
And straight to bring some monstrous birth to light.
Nun. The man of whom the world in doubt remained,
If that his mind or fortune was more great,
Whose valor conquered, clemency retained
All Nations Subject to the Roman State;
Fraud harmed him more then force, friends more then foes;
Ah! must this sad discourse by me be made?

Call. Stay, ere thou further go defray my woes,
How does my love? where is my life? Nun. dead. Call. dead?

Cho. Though apprehending horrors in her mind,
Now since she has a certainty received,
She by experience greater grief does find:
"Till borne, the passions cannot be conceav'd.
When as a high disaster force affords,
O how that Tyrant whom affliction bears,
Bars the ears from comfort, and the mouth from words,
And when obdur'd scorns to dissolve in tears!

Call. Ah! since the lights of that great light are set,
Why does not darkness spread it self over all?
At least what further comfort can I get,
Whose pleasures had no period but his fall?
O would the Gods I always might confine
Flames in my breast, and floods within my eyes
To entertain so great a grief as mine,
That thence there might fit furniture arise;
Yet I disdain (though by distress o'rethrowne)
By such external means to seek relief:
"The greatest sorrows are by silence shown,
"Whilst all the Senses are shut up with grief:
But misery does so tyrannick grow
That it of sighs and tears a tribute claims;
"Ah! when the cup is full, it must overflow,
"And fires which burn must offer up some flames;
Yet though what thou have said my death shall be,
(Since sunk so deeply in a melted heart)
Of my lives death report each point to me,
For every circumstance that I may smart.

Nun. What fatal warnings did foregoe his end,
Which by his stay to frustrate some did try?
But he who scorned excuses to pretend,
Was by the destinies drawn forth to die.
Whilst by the way he chanced to meet with one,
Who had his deaths-day named, he to him said:
The Ides of March be come; but yet not gone
The other answered, and still constant stayed:
Another brought a letter with great speed,
Which the conspiracy at length did touch,
And gave it Caesar in his hand to read,
Protesting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where still it rests,
As do the great whom blessed the world reputes,
Who (grieved to be importuned by requests)
Of simple supplicants neglect the suites:
Or he of it the reading did defer,
Still troubled by attendants at the gate,
Whilst some to show their credit would confer,
To flatter some, some something to entreat.
Not only did the Gods by diverse signs
Give Caesar warning of his threatened harms;
But did of foes disturb the rash designs,
And to their troubled thoughts gave strange alarmes;
A Senator who by some words we find,
To the conspirators (though none of theirs)
Had shown himself familiar with their mind,
Then chanced to deal with Caesar in affairs.
That sight their souls did with confusion fill,
For, thinking that he told their purposed deeds,
They straight themselves, or Caesar thought to kill:
"A guilty conscience no accuser needs;
But marking that he used (when taking leave)
A suitors gesture when affording thanks,
They of their course did greater hopes conceave,
And ranged them seven according to their ranks.
Then Caesar marched forth to the fatal place;
Near Pompeys Theater where the Senate was,
Where (when he had remained a little space)
All the confederats flocked about. Calph. Alas.

Nun. First for the form, Metellus Cimber craved
To have his Brother from exile restored,
Yet with the rest a rude repulse received,
Whilst it they all too earnestly implored:
Bold Cimber who in strife with him did stand,
Did strive to cover with his Gown his head:
Then was the first blow given by Casca's hand,
Which on his neck a little wound but made.
And Caesar (starting whilst the stroke he spied)
By strength from further striking Casca stayed,
Whilst both the two burst out at once, and cried:
He Traitor Casca, and he, Brother aid;
Then all the rest against him did arise
Like desp'rat men, whose fury force affords,
That Caesar on no side could set his eyes,
But every look encountered with some Swords;
Yet, as a lion (when by nets surpised)
Stands struggling still so long as he has strength,
So Caesar (as he had their power despised)
Did with great rage resist, till at the length
He thus cried out (when spying Brutus come)
And thou my Son! then grief did back rebound:
"Naught but unkindnesse Caesar could overcome,
"That, of all things, does give the deepest wound.

Cho. "Ah! when unkindnesse is, where love was thought,
A tender passion breaks the strongest heart:
"For, of all those who give offense in ought,
"Men, others hate, but for unkind men, smart.

Nun. Ah! taking then no more delight in light,
As who disdainfully the world disclaimed,
Or if from Brutus blow to hold his sight,
As of so great ingratitude ashamed,
He with his Gown when covered first over all,
As one who neither sought, nor wished relief,
Not wronging majesty, in state did fall,
No sigh consenting to betray his grief.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell)
Even at the place, where Pompey's statue stood,
(As if to crave him pardon,) Caesar fell,
That in revenge it might exhaust his blood;
But when his corpse abandoned quite by breath,
Did fortunes frailties monument remain,
That all might have like interest in his death,
And by the same, look for like praise or pain:
Then Cassius, Brutus, and the rest began
With that great Emperors blood to die their hands;
"What beast in the earth more cruel is then man,
"When over his reason passion once commands?

Call. Whilst brutish Brutus, and proud Cassius thus
Romes greatest Captain under trust deceived,
Where was Antonius (since a friend to us)
That he not lost himself, or Caesar saved?

Nun. The whole conspiratours remained in doubt,
Had he and Caesar joined, to be undone,
And so caused one to talk with him without,
Who feigned a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in such tumultuous broiles,
That the first danger always is the worst,
He fled in have, disguised with borrowed spoils,
For rage and for disdain even like to burst.

Call. The Senators which were assembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought to end,
What was their part? to what inclined their care?
I fear affliction could not find a friend.

Nun. Of those who in the Senate House did sit
(So sad an object sorry to behold,
Or fearing what bold hands might more commit)
Each to his house a several way did hold;
This act with horror did confound their sight,
And unawares their judgment did surprise:
"When any hasty harms un-lookt-for light,
"The resolution has not time to rise:
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all long reverenced, and adored by some,
None to attend him had but two and I.

Cho. To what an ebb may fortunes flowing come?
Why should men following on the smoke of pri^e,
Leave certain case to seek a dreamed delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tried,
They neither can with safety keep nor quite?
"The people who by force subdued remain,
"May pity those by whom oppressed they rest;
"They but one Tyrant have, whereas there reign
A Thousand Tyrants in one Tyrants breast;
What though great Caesar once commanded Kings,
Whose only name whole Nations did appall?
Yet now (let no man trust in worldly things)
A little earth holds him who held it all.

Call. Ah! had he but believed my faithful cares,
His State to stablish who have always strived,
Then (scaping this conspiracy of theirs)
He, honored still, and I had happy lived.
Did I not spend of supplications store,
That he within his house, this day would waste,
As I by dreams advertised was before,
Which showed what was to come, and now is past;
Whilst the Soothsayers sacrificed did find
A beast without a heart, their Altars stain,
By that presage my soul might have divined,
That I without my heart would soon remain;
But all those terrors could no terror give
To that great mind, whose thoughts too high still aimed;
He by his fortune confident did live,
As, if the heavens, for him had all things framed;
Yet though he ended have his fatal race,
To brag for this, let not his Murderers strive:
For, O! I hope to see within short space,
Him dead adored, and them abhorr^d alive.
Though now his name the multitude respects,
Since murdering one who him had hel^ so dear,
Whilst inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monstrous shape to Brutus must appear.
Just Nemesis must plague proud Cassius soon,
And make him kill himself, from hopes estranged;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caesar done,
May by themselves be on themselves revenged.

Cho. "Some, Sovereign of the earth, would fortune prove,
"As if, confusedly, Gods did men advance;
"Naught comes to men below, but from above,
"By providence, not by a staggering chance:
"Though to the cause that last forgoes the end,
"Some attribute the course of every thing,
"That cause, on other causes does depend,
"Which chained 'twixt heaven and earth due ends forth bring;
"Of those decrees the heavens for us appoint,
"(Who ever them approves, or does disprove)
"No mortal man can disappoint a point,
"But as they please here moves, or does remove;
"We, when once come the worlds vain pomp to try,
"(Led by the fates) to end our journey haste:
"For, when first borne, we straight begin to dye,
"Life's first day is a step unto the last.
"And is there ought more swift then days, and years,
"Which wear away this breath of ours so soon,
"Whilst Lachesis to no request gives ears,
"But spinnes the threeds of life till they be done?
"Yet foolish worldlings following that which flies,
"As if they had assurance of their breath,
"To frail preferrement fondly strive to rise,
"Which (but a burden) weighs them down to death.

Nun. There Is none of us but must remember still,
How that the Gods by many a wondrous sign,
Did show (it seemed) how that against their will,
The destinies would Caesar's days confine.
A monstrous star amidst the heaven has been,
Still since they first against him did conspire;
The solitary birds at noone were seen,
And men to walk environed all with fire:
What wonder though the heavens at such a time,
Do brave the earth with apparitions strange,
Then whilst intending such a monstrous crime,
"Unnatural men make Natures course to change?

Cho. Though all such things seem wonderful to some,
They may by Reason comprehended be,
For, what, beyond what usual is, does come,
The Ignorant with wondering eyes do see.
Those bastard Stars, not heritours of the air,
Are first conceived below, then borne above,
And when fore-knowing things, sprits take most care,
And by illusion, superstition move.
Yet this, no doubt, a great regard should breed,
When Nature has brought forth a monstrous birth,
In secret Characters where men may read
The wrath of heaven, and wickedness of the earth.
The Naturallists, and th'Astrologians skill
May often, encountering, manifest like care:
Since the one looks back, the other forward still,
One may tell what, the other why things are.

Nun. Shall sorrow through the waves of woes to sail,
Have still your tears for Seas, your sighs for winds;
To misery what do base plaints avail?
A course more high becomes heroicke minds.
"None are o're-come, save only those who yield,
From froward Fortune though some blows be borne,
Let Virtue serve Adversity for shield:
"No greater grief to grief then the enemies scorn;
This makes your foes but laugh to see you weep,
At least these tears but for your self bestow,
And not for that great sprit, whose spoils heavens keep;
For, he no doubt, rests deified ere now.

Call. I only wail my life, and not his death;
Who now amongst the immortals does repose,
And shall so long as I have blood or breath,
To furnish forth the elements of woes.
I care not who rejoice, so I lament,
Who do to darkness dedicate my days,
And since the light of my delight is spent,
Shall have in horror all Apollo's rays.
(I will retire my self to wail alone,
As trusty Turtles mourning for their Mates)
And (my misfortune always bent to moan)
Will spurn at pleasures as empoyson'd baits;
No second guest shall press great Caesar's bed,
Warmed by the flames to which he first gave life;
I think there may be greater honor had,
When Caesar's widow, then another wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harms,
If I (ere chanced abandoned thus to be)
Had had a little Caesar in mine arms,
The living picture of his Sire to me.
Yet does that Idol which my thoughts adore,
With me of late most strictly matched remain,
For, where my arms him sometimes held before,
Now in my heart I shall him still retain.
That (though I may no precious things impart)
Thy deity may by me be honored often,
Still offering up my thoughts upon my heart,
My sacred flame shall always mount aloft.

Exeunt Chorus.
WHat fools are those who do repose their trust
On what this mass of misery affords?
And (bragging but of th'excrements of dust)
Of life-lesse Treasures labor to be Lords:
Which like the Sirens songs, or Circes charms,
With shadows of delight hide certain harms.
Ah! whilst they sport on pleasures y^ie grounds,
Often poisoned by Prosperity with Pride,
A sudden storm their floting joys confounds,
Whose course is ordered by the eye-lesse guide,
Who so inconstantly her self does bear
Th'unhappie men may hope, the happy fear.
The fortunate who bathe in floods of joys,
To perish often amidst their pleasures chance,
And mirthlesse wretches wallowing in annoye*
Often by adversity themselves advance;
Wh^l'st Fortune bent to mock vain worldlings cares,
Does change despaires in hopes, hopes in despaires*
That gallant Grecian whose great wit so soon,
Whom others could not number, did o're-come,
Had he not been undone, had been undone,
And if not banished, had not had a home;
To him fear courage gave (what wondrous change!)
And many doubts are solution strange.
He who told one who then was Fortunes child,
As if with horror to congeale his blood:
That Caius Marius farie from Rome exiled,
Wretch'd on the ruins of great Carthage stood;
Though long both plagued by grief, and by disgrace,
The Consul-ship regained, and died in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the worlds delight)
Whom of his Theater then th'applauses pleased,
Whilst praise-transported eyes endeer'd his sight,
Who by youths toils should have his age then eased,
He by one blow of Fortune lost far more
Then many battles gained had before.
Such sudden changes so disturb the soul,
That still the judgment balanced is by doubt;
But, on a Round, what wonder though things roll?
And since within a Circle, turn about?
Whilst heaven on earth strange alterations brings,
To scorn our confidence in worldly things.
And chanced there ever accidents more strange,
Then in these stormy bounds where we remain?
One did a sheep-hooke to a Scepter change,
The nurceling of a Wolf over men did reign;
A little Village grew a mighty Town,
Which whilst it had no King, held many a Crown.
Then by how many sundry sorts of men,
Has this great State been ruled? though now by none,
Which first obeyed but one, then two, then ten,
Then by degrees returned to two, and one;
Of which three States, their ruin did abide,
Two by Two's lusts, and one by Two men's pride.
What revolutions huge have happened thus,
By secret fates all violently led,
Though seeming but by accident to us,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breasts first bred,
As arguments demonstrative to prove
That weakness dwells below, and power above.
Lo, prosperous Caesar charged for a space,
Both with strange Nations, and his Countries spoils,
Even when he seemed by war to purchase peace,
And roses of sweet rest, from thorns of toils;
Then whilst his mind and fortune swelled most high,
Has been constrained the last distress to try.
What warnings large were in a time so short,
Of that dark course which by his death now shines?
It, speechless wonders plainly did report,
It, men revealed by words, and gods by signs,
Yet by the chains of destinies whilst bound,
He saw the sword, but could not escape the wound.
What curtain over our knowledge error brings,
Now drawn, now opened, by the heavenly host,
Which makes us sometime sharp to see small things,
And yet quite blind when as we should see most,
That curious brains may rest amazed at it,
Whose ignorance makes them presume of wit;
Then let us live, since all things change below,
When raised most high, ^s those who once may fall,
And hold when by disasters brought more low,
The mind still free, what ever else be thrall:
"Those (Lords of Fortune) sweeten every State,
"(Who can command themselves, though not their fate.
FINIS.

