THE BALM OF GILEAD PREPARED FOR THE SICK.

THE WHOLE IS DIVIDED INTO THREE PARTS: 1. THE SICK MAN'S SORE. 2. THE SICK
MAN'S SALVE. 3. THE SICK MAN'S SONG.


Published by Mr. ZACHARY BOYD, PREACHER of GODS WORD, at GLASOGW*

AUGUST* Latet vltimus dies vt observentur omnes dies: Sero parantur remedia,
quum mortis imminent perscula.

EDINBVRGH Printed by JOHN WREITTOVN. 1629

Psalm. 102.6.

I am like a Pelican of the Wilderness. TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD
JAMES BY THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD, ARCHBISHOP OF GLASGOVV.
RIGHT REVEREND,
THE Preacher speaking of himself, said, that for his preachings he sought to
find out acceptable words, Eccles. 12. v. 10.
words of delight, which in the same verse he calls words of truth: where I
observe that words of truth, may be words of delight, delight not being
contrary to truth, neither pleasure unto profit: Such words are compared to
goades and nails, Eccles. 12. v. 11.
which CHRIST the great Pastor gives unto his Ministers, the Masters of
Assemblees, who are appointed by him for to fasten; Bernar. super Cant.
yea, and to nail men's souls unto him self: Such words are full of
substance: Qu^rit a^^^a^ ver^u^, cui consentiat a^ corre^i^^em, (...)
illumi^n^^ur ad cognitione^, cui innitatur ad virtutem, quo res. ^nctur ad
sipienti^m cui (...) tur ad de^^rem, cui ^^^^tetur ad s^^u^^illa^^^, (...)
s^uatur (...).
they are fair without faird.

As it is not good in preaching to make use of swelled hydropick words of man
his invention, neither must man take that for simplicity of the Gospel, which
diverse call simplicity, viz. words wanting a due and painful meditation,
which is the very digestion of the spirit: Ill studied words can not be these
acceptable words of Solomon: Of them can be made no nails for the fastening
of loose and v^stable souls.

I ever thought this part of the Ministry a painful part, not to be done
without great pains: Some speak of a Book day, but all our days should be
Book days. If a Pagan could be moved for any thing to say, Ab perdiat diem,
alace I have left a day, what shall he say, who is a labourer in the Lords
Vineyard?

They who would do this work as they should, must with earnest prayers,
painful reading, and serious meditations empty their veins of their blood,
till palenesse the STVDDIE MARK be printed upon their face: They must watch
while others sleep, and labor at the candle: They must forsake the feathers
and the downs at the chirping of the birds. Eccles. 12. v. 4.


In some measure I strive to this, though not as I would: Happy is the servant
that is vigilant, having ever his loins girded and his candle in his hand,
Luke 12. v. 35.
waiting for the coming of his LORD.

Let it please your Lo. to take in good part this part of my labors, wherein
is a box of balm, a little testimony of my thankfulness for the great
kindness, whereof in my great affliction it pleased you to make me partake:
The bloody persecution in France did scatter many Churches, and mine amongst
others: At my coming here you refreshed me with your comforts, and placed me
besides your self, where I find the LORD'S blessing upon my labors: To Him
alone belongs the glory.

And seeing it is the LORDS will that man be thankful unto man, let me here
name three special friends to whom neither name not blood have bund me, but
great love and kindness in time of mine adversity, the bond whereof as I hope
shall never be broken. At my first coming to Edinburgh, good Doctor SIBBALD,
the glory and honor of all the Physicians of our Land, would have me to abide
with him: Note.
But afterward, a preaching at a fast having made mine acquaintance with Sr.
William Scot of Eli, that great Scots MECENAS, Patron to great ROLLOCVS, he
after that did keep me with him, as one of his own Children: 2. Tim. 1. v. 18.
the LORD grant unto him that he may find mercy in that day: From Sr.
William you brought me to Glasgow; of that your favor let me not forget a
special instrument, even that wise and godly man, Mr. James R^bertoun,
Comisser of Hamiltoun, with whom I wish that I might both live and die.

I here in the dedication of this treatise acknowledge your bounty with a
thankful profession.

And seeing our Books are our Children, the bi^sb of our brains, Libri Liberi.
it is most convenient, that you who have the Patronage of the FATHER, should
also vouchsafe a blessing to the Children. Which looking after. I entreat the
Most High to preserve you unblameable both in Soul and Body, until the day of
his appearing.

At Glasgow the 23 of December, 1628. Your Lo. in all duty Mr. ZACHARY BOYD
Preacher of GODS WORD, at GLASGOW.

TO THE READER.
THERE was never an age more fertile in reproves and reproaches than this: We
are come to the dregs of days, where it is counted virtue to point out the
imperfections of our brethren: Many are like the Flee, that can not rest but
upon a scabbe. Charitable Reader, take in good part these my pains taken for
thy profit: As for thee, whose countenance is cast down, because of GODS
graces in others, If thou do well shall it not be accepted? Genesis 4. v. 7.
but if not, sin lies as the door: Do better thy self and that shall be
my reproof. It was well said by St. Jerome: Hieron. ad Pam^nach. Epist. 5.
cap. 8.
Aut profer meliores epula^ and me conviva v^ere, aut qualicu^que nostra
coe^ula contentus esto: that is, if thou can prepare better cheer let ^nce
partake: if not, be content with such as I have.

THE SICK MAN'S SORE
Psalm. 107. v. 17. Fools because of their transgressions and because of their
iniquities are afflicted.

V. 18. Their soul abhors all manner of meat and they draw near unto the
gates of death.

V. 19. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he saves them out of
their distresses.

V. 20. He sent his word and healed them; and delivered them from their
destructions.

V. 21. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the Children of men.


THis text may be called the sick man's text.

The division of the words.

The text divides it self in three special parts.

In the first is: the sick man's sore. In the second is: the sick man's salve.
In the third is: the sick Man's song.
The sick man's sore is in these words, Fools because of their
transgressions, and because of their iniquities are afflicted: their soul
abhors all manner of meat etc.

The sick man's salve is in these words, Then they cry to the Lord in their
trouble: he saves them out of their distresses: he sent his word and healed
them, and delivered them from their destructions.

The sick Man's song is a Song of praise in these words: Oh that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
Children of men.

1. PART. THE SECKE MAN'S SORE.
IN the words of the Psalmist here: first the ordour is to be considered:
Judgments here go before mercy, (or for to speak so) take the fore-gate of
Mercy: when God was desired by Moses to show him his face, God said unto him
that no man could see his face and live. Exodus 33. ^1. v. 22.
But behold, said he, there is a place by me, and thou shall stand on a rock:
and it shall come to pass, while my glory passes by that I will put thee into
the clift of a Rock, and will cover thee with my hand: I will make all my
goodness pass before thee, v. 19. v. 23.
and I will cover thee with my hand whiles I pass by: After I will tak away
mine hand: and thou shall see my back parts but not my face: Now as the Lord
said, so he did: he passed by, and while he passed he made a Proclamation. The
Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, Exodus 34 v. 6.
long suffering and abundant in goodness and truth: keeping mercy for
thousands forgiving iniquity, v 7.
transgression and sin: Behold how in the Lords coming to Moses, mercy came
before, and after judgment in the words following that will by no means
clear the guilty visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. Note.
The Lords sluggorne in his coming to Moses was merciful and righteous: first
was Mercy and then Justice: this was the order of David's Song: I will, said
he, Psalm. 101 v. 1.
sing of Mercy and of Judgment: First of mercy and then of Judgment, like Gods
passing by Moses.

But here in my Text Gods order is inverted, for there is first a song of
Judgment and after of mercy: what should be the cause of this?

This is as the Apostle calls it (...) Multiformis ^lla sapientia Dei, Ephesians
3 v. 10
that is, the manifold wisdom of God, or the wisdom of God that is of many
forms: as there be diverse faces and forms of men, so there be diverse hearts
and diverse dispositions: some be thrown faced, and some be thrown hearted:
with with the pure thou will show thy self pure, Psalm. 18 v. 26.
froward with the froward: Note.
To one that is of a meek disposition and of a gentle nature like Moses, let
the Pastor preach first of mercy, as God came to Moses: making all his
goodness to go before him: But having to do with fools; such as are into my
Text, it shall be wisdom first to sing to them of Judgment and thereafter
of mercy: Note.
Gods coming to Elias declared with what method he had to preach to that
rebellious people with whom he had to do: while he was into the cave of
Horeb the mount of God; the Lord bade him come out, and stand upon the mount
before the Lord, and behold while God was coming to him, there came from
before him three mighty Messengers for to make away to the King of Glory.

The first Messenger was called the WIND: 1. King. 1^ v 11,
A mighty strong wind rent the mountains and brake the rocks before the Lord:
but the Lord was not in the wind: After the wind, came another Post called
an EARTHQUAKE; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: After the Earthquak came
yet one more furious called FIRE; but the Lord was not in the fire: After the
fire, came a still and foft voice wherein was the Lord: By this God teached
Elias how he should teach that stiffnecked people and how he should bring the
Lord to them: viz. that first he should preach Judgments; whereby as by a wind
the proud hearts like hie Mountains might be shaken: and the hard hearts
like rocks might be rent: If that did not the turn, let him yet threaten
Judgments like earthquaks which might make all hearts to quak: If that did not
the turn, that he should preach Hell fire, death and damnation against the
Sons of men: Now if men did tremble at the fire, Gods will was that he
should preach with a soft and still voice the mercyes of God, the promises of
the Gospel: This order and Method is plainly set down by Saint Jude,
Jude. v. 22.
Of some have compassion, making a difference; that is, to some first preach
mercy: But others save with fear, v. 23.
pulling them out of the fire; there is a preaching of Judgment: Note. Act. 4.
v. 36. Mark. 3.^7.
To some, preachers should be as Barnabas, sons of consolation: to others
they should be as James and John: Boanerges; duo fulmi na belli; * Note.
two sons of thunder. Ill men like nettles must be first gripped left they
burn thee. Gods natural dealing with men is first to offer mercy unto them if
they will repent. Note.
This was a Law of war prescribed by God himself unto his people, when thou
come night unto a City, Deuteronomy. 20 v. 10. v. 1^.
says God, to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. But if it will
not make peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shall be
beseidge it. As it was ordained by God in that war, so should it be practiced
in the Christian warrefare: while Pastors come from God to a people, they must
first proclaim peace unto them: But if they will not make peace: then they must
beseige them with the Cannons of Gods Judgments. Note.
If Barnabas cannot win the Citadell of men's hearts by consolations; let
James and John Boanerges Sons of thunder besiege their hearts: with the
thunders of Gods Judgments they must shoot down the strong holds of sin, 2.
Cor. 10, v. 4.
that every thought and imagination may be taken and brought captive to the
obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I know that preaching of Judgment is unpleasant preaching to flesh and blood:
Note.
But here is the command, Leut. 19. v. 17.
Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him:
Ezekiel. 33. v. 3^
Most men will hear only the piping of mercy, Songs of Loves; but ditte
their ears from the dinne of Judgments. Note.
They like well of Barnabas with his consolations: but cannot abide the
thunders of Boanerges: Note.
None so fain as fools would have their head clapped: fools fed on folly
would be fed in their folly. Note.
Infelix Felix, more unhappy in deed than he was happy in name, could not
hear Faul preach: Act. 24 v. 25.
Paul's Text was of righteousness, of temperance and of Judgment: As he reasoned
upon the point of Judgment, Felix interrupted him crying unto him in a fear;
God thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for
thee. Note
There be many unhappy like Felix sold under sin, 1. King 22, v. 8.
like Ahab, who could not hear Mecaiah Gods Prophet: I hate him said Ahab, for
he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil: Note.
But who can speak good to him that does evil and be a Trumpeter of Truth?
The word of God be it of Judgment or of Mercy, should not be concealed from
them to whom it is ordained: while a man is become a fool in his sins, a
Sermon of Judgment is for him: the faithful Pastor must denounce against him
what ever is in his Roll, not keeping up a word, were it to call him a fool in
his face. Note.
This was Jobs great comfort in his distress that he had not concealed the
words of the holy one: Job. 6. v. 10.
the office of teachers, Ezekiel. 33 v. 3.
the Lords servants is to blow the Trumpet and warn the people with alarmes:
Note.
They are compared to the hewers of wood I have hewed them by my Prophets says
the Lord: Hose. 6. v, 5.
Note.
As a man that is for to cut a hard oak will first sharpen his axe: so he that
is ordained for to hew down the old oken hard iniquities of a people, must
sharpen his reproves and therewith strike at them, till the spailes flee off:
yea till at last the highest Cedars of of sins, were they Caesar's sins, may
fall down upon their sides. Note.
Jf a King be afoole against God, fear not to call him a fool that he may
become wise: Guard up thy loins said the Lord to his Prophet, Jere. 1. v 17.
arise and speak all that I command thee, be not dismayed at their faces, left
I confound thee before them: woe to dumme dogs, ye that make mention of the
Lord keep not silence. Note. Isa. 62* v. 16.
Sometimes Pastoures are so branded with the reproaches of fools, because they
hurt their galled backs, that they will resolve to preach no more of
Judgment, but to remain silent: This is their weakness, but when the spirit
of their calling begins to stir within them; it shall not lie in their hearts
to hold their peace. Note.
This was Ieremiahs resolution once: because he saw the word of the Lord made
a reproach to him, and daily derision, he said, Ierem. 20. v. 9.
I will not make mention of God nor speak any more in his Name: But did he
so? O no: not: The spirit of his calling kindled such a fire within him, that
he could no more forebeare: His word, said he, was in mine heart as a burning
fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not
stay: A Man of God will call a fool a fool. Note.
it is his calling to sing as well of Judgment as of mercy: If by want of
discretion he spill the tune of GODS music, preaching Judgment, when he
should preach mercy, or preaching mercy, where he should preach Judgment, he
himself shall be found the greatest fool in the day of comptes.

This consideration made Paul to pray for wisdom to his disciple, who was
become a teacher: The Lord said he, give thee wisdom in all things: Note.
By this wisdom while we preach to hauty or humbled sinners: we are teached to
practice that precept of S. Jude: which is, to make a difference. The Lord give
us the spirit of discretion.

This much concerning the method of the Words which we have read in your
audience: wherein first mention is made of Judgments, and after of mercy.

Now let us come to our sick Text, or Text of Sickness.

In the sick man his sore, which is the first part of this Treatise upon the
five Verses here set down, we have these three things particularly to
consider.

First, who are those who are said here to be afflicted; Secondly, what is
the cause of all their afflictions: Thirdly, what is the particular affliction
set down in this Text.

1. Who is said to be afflicted here.
Note.
IN this part of Scripture we have a visitation of the sick: look to your
books, and the first word of my Text shall tell you who is sick: who? fools,
fools says the Psalmist, because of their transgressions, and because of
their iniquities are afflicted.

Note
I read in Scripture of four sorts of fools: of these two be wise, and two be
fools indeed.

First these are called fools in Scripture, that acknowledge their
ownefoolishnesse: 1. Cor. 3 v 18.
If any man among you, says the Apostle, seems to be wise in this world, let
him become a fool th^^ be may be wise: Note.
This was wise Agurs confession which he made to Ithiel and V^^l, surely, said
he, Prou. 30 v. 2.
I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man: I
neither learned wisdom nor have the knowledge of the holy. v. 3.


Note,
Secondly, these are called fools in Scripture, who are so in the wickeds
estimation: According to this the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 4 v. 10.
we are fools for Christ's sake: but ye are wise, we are fools, that is, we
are so esteemed to be by the worldly wise: After that a Prophet of God had
anointed Iehu to be King, one said to Iehu, wherefore came this mad fellow to
thee? 2. Kings 9. vi. 1. Act. 26 v. 24.
Godliness to wicked men is not only foolishness but madness. The great
knowledge of letters has made thee mad: (said Festus to Paul) what wonder
seeing the wisdom of God himlsefe is esteemed folly. 1. Cor. 1. v. 25. Note.
In Scripture ye read of the folly of God, ye read in Scripture of the
folly of preaching, in a word all spiritual wisdom is folly: 1. Cor. 1. v,
21.
But to whom? S. Paul says that it is to them that perish.

Thirdly, these are said to be fools who are Gods Elect and chosen ones, but,
as we all do, 1. Cor. 1 v. 18.
fail in many things, when they either turn in any point from the truth
which once they did embrace, or when they are slow of heart to believe, or when
they run away from God by any sin, then are they said to be fools: their
failing is their folly: For the first S. Paul called the Galathians foolish
Galathians: for the second; Christ called his two disciples going to Emans
fools, Luke 24. v. 2,.
and slow of heart to belee^e: for the third, it is said that the forlorn
son was mad or by himself: Luke 15. v. 17.
because when he repented, it is said that he came to himself again.

1. Cor. 1. v. 18.
Fourthly, the wicked to whom the wisdom of God is folly are called fools:
Note
According to this the rich man in the Gospel that made greater provision for
his belly in his Barns, than for his Soul in the Heavens, is called a fool.
O foul, this night thy Soul shall be taken from thee! Luke 12 v. 20.
This was his folly, he never thought of Heaven till he was in hell.

It is of these two, viz. of the Godly sinning by weakness, and of the wicked
sinning by wickedness that mention is made here: while they sin they are
both fools and as they are both but fools, and as they are, so here are they
called, viz. fools.

The Hebrewe word here is Guilim, a word that comes from a root that is not
in use, having no signification which is the life of a word: a root worthy
of such branches: the root is not in use, neither are the branches: wherefore
serves the root of folly? what are the fruits of folly? They are like the
apples of Sodom. They may have some show outwardly; but have nothing but
rottenness for the in-meate. He that tastes them will do best to spitt them
out again. Note. Heb. 6. v. 4.
As the wicked will taste the good gift of God, and after spit it out, so that
it does them no good: so should the godly having tasted the fruits of folly
incontinent spitt them out, and after spitt at them with despite, so should
they not be able to do them evil.

Note.
Though fools be called from a root that has no use in God his word, they
seem to themselves to be most fast rooted: in their prosperity they both
think, and say that they shall never be moved. They will also seem unto
others of all men to have the strongest roots. Psalm. 37 v. 35.
To David who was on of Gods Seers they appeared for a space like green
Baytrees. All such greenesse, and greatness, is but in things earthly: as
health, wealth, houour and preferment. But because they are not rooted in the
heavens, the earth is not able to furnish substance for the upholding of such
things: Ps. 129. v. 6.
and therefore like grass upon the house tops they wither before they grow up.

Job. 5. v. 3,
I have seen, said Eliphaz, the foolish taking root: but took he root for
to continue? No, not: Suddenly, said he, I cursed his habitation:
incontinent his children for whose standing and preferment he sold himself
to wickedness were crushed in the gate; Job. 5. v. 4.
neither was there any to deliver them. As for their harvest and expected crop,
others did devour it, not leaving them the miserable stalks which grew among
the thorns. v. 5.


* Thus God does with the wicked as he did with the Amorite. Though in
appearance he high like a Cedar, and strong like an Oak, yet he destroys
his fruit from above, Amos. 2. v. 9.
and his roots from beneath. The folly of sin is like a foolish tale, which as
men commonly say, has neither top nor root. The Iesson is this: all sinners
are but fools: The doctrine.
a wicked man were he never so wise in the world ^is but a fool before God: 1.
Cor. 3. v. 19.
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: wisdom in evil is
nothing but guile and craftiness, guile gilded with wisdom like a tomb
covered with the foil of gold, having nothing within but a contagious
corruption.

The use.
The use let all men that would be wise indeed study to an innocent life.
Note. Tit. 2 v. 12.
This is our wisdom that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts w^e live
soberly, righteously and godly in this pr^sent world, soberlie for our selves,
righteouslie for our neighbors, and godly for our good God. What is beyond
that is no thing but foolishness: Note.
he that exceeds the square of that rule in Scripture language, is a fool.

Objection.
Here some may object and say, how is this that Scripture speaks thus? does
not Scripture forbid us to speak so? Christ speaks plainly, whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of judgment. And
whosoever shall say to his brother Racha shall be in danger of the Counsel;
but whoseouer shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Note.
Behold their three injuries which the Jews thought to be venial sins of
the Papists: the least is a motion of anger keept close within the breast,
which I may call a warded wrath: for such a fault Christ says, that a man is
in danger of judgment, that is, as though we should say, in danger to be
brought before the Commissionar an inferior Judge: for the least sin is the
least punishment.

Note.
The second injury is, Racha, that is, wrath broken out of ward into words:
the word is a word of injury, which signifies, vacuus, a man as we say that
has not harnes, or brain, a toome headed man. Note.
Beza out of Chrysostom makes it as the French word Tutoyer, which we call to
Thou a man. This greater injury came before the Sanhedrin, which were the
Counsel of seventie and two. The third and last injury is greatest, viz. when
a man not only Thou's his brother, but says Thou fool. Some distinguish
these three injuries after this manner: Note.
The first, say they, is ira restricti animi, that is, a warded wrath within
the heart. The second is, ira effervescens, an anger breaking forth. The third
they call ira erumpens in apertum convitium, that is, scoffing or railing: for
this word, says Christ, a man shall be in danger of hell fire: how is it then
that in the first part of my Text sinners are called fools?

The answer.
I answer, that to call a man fool is not simply forbidden; Luke. 34 v. 25.
for Christ called two of his Disciples fools: S. Paul called the Galatians
foolish. Note.
That threatening then is against them that out of wrath and malice bring this
word of railing against their brother. It is in this sense said that the
Archangell while he disputed against Satan about the body of Moses durst not
bring against him arayling accusation: Jude. v. 9.
that is, he durst not in anger call him a fool, knave or lowne, as one by
way of railing will call his brother. Note.
Their is no railing in my Text: my Text is rather a teaching whereby fools may
learn to be wise. The doctrine I gather here is this: The doctrine.

Note.


If he that calls his brother a fool deserves Hell: what shall he deserve
that is a fool indeeede? A man may call his brother a fool, and yet not be a
fool: the one is but a simple act, the other is an habit purchased by
custom: the greater the sin be, the greater must be the punishment. Note.
If God scourged his people, Isay. 66. v. 17.
for eating swines flesh, the abomination, and the Mouse, what shall he do to
these that eat up the poor and the widows house? great sins and great
judgments.

The use.
The use. Note:
Let us beware to be that indeed whereof the simple naming of another to be,
puts the Soul in danger of hell fire. Note.
The Apostle his precept is that fornication, and all uncleanness, Ephesians. 5.
v. 3.
or covetousness be not once named among us as becomes Saints: seeing to
name such things with a filthy tongue is forbidden, how much more should we
be careful for to avoid to be that, which is not to be named?

2. What is the cause of the affliction of fools.
WE have already heard who is afflicted viz. fools: Now follows into the
order of my Text the cause of their afflictions: the cause is sin, and
iniquity: Fools because of their transgressions and because of their
iniquities are afflicted.

It is an ordinary question made by the most part while they see any in
affliction, what could be the cause of such a judgment? wherefore has GOD
thus wise done? Note.
God told this to Jerusalem when he threatened to destroy. Many nations, said
he, Ier. 22. v. 8.
shall pass by this city, and they shall say every one to his neighbor,
wherefore has the Lord done this unto this great City. Note.
See how of nations of passers by, there is not one but he says, wherefore?
Every man says unto his neighbor, where fore? Now what is the answer that
God makes to their wherefore? It is into the verse following; v. 9.
Then they shall answer because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord
God: that is, as my text says, because of their transgressions, and because of
their iniquities. The lesson is this. The doctrine.
Our sins are the cause of all our plagues: so long as rebellious Jonah was
in the Ship the tempest increased: It is said, Note.
that the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous; what could be the cause of such
tempestuous working? Jonah. 1. v. 11. v. 12.
The rebellion of Jonah flying from the presence of the Lord: Take me up said
he, and cast me into the Sea, for I know that for my sake this great tempest
is upon you. When Joshua saw Israel beaten before the men of Ai, he put dust
upon his head, crying, Oh Lord what shall I say, Josh. 7. v. 8.
seeing Israel has turned their back before their enemies: now what could be
the cause of that flight? Israel has sinned and have also transgressed said
the Lord: therefore they could not stand before their enemies: v. 12, Note.
There must ever be a wherefore of sin before the therefore of affliction:
Job. 8. v. 11.
Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flagge grow without water? no more
can affliction grow without sin. Note.
Sin to affliction is like mire to the rush and like water to the flagge: it
makes a division between our God and our Soul: God cannot shine upon the
Counsel of the wicked: Note.
So soon as men begin to sin; the clouds of his glowmes begin to gather.
Job. 10. v. 14.
then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity: v.
15.
if I be wicked woe unto me. As a man sows, so shall he reap: Even as I
have seen, Job. 4 v 8.
said Eliphaz, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness reap the same.
Who ever he be that takes pleasure in sin, Job. 7 v. 3.
shall possess months of Vanity: wearisome nights are appointed for him. The
use.
The use of all this is, that we study to sincerity of life if we would be
free of afflictions. The wicked while they are afflicted are bound with
afflictions, Note.
like a murderer cast in the stocks; but godly Joseph in the stocks is a
free man. Note.
The sakelesse Soul is ever in libettie: their is no such buckler for holding
off afflictions as innocence of life. Note.
If because of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities be away,
the words following are afflicted, should be as scraped out.

Note.
Let a man keep himself from sin unspotted of this World, and hardly shall
affliction come near him. Do what Balaam could do he could not curse
Israel, though he was waged for the same. The reason thereof is declared by
himself, God has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23. v. 21
neither has he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lord God is with him, and
the shout of a King is among them. Note.
So long as God beholds not iniquity into a man, a house, or a nation, the
Lord God is there, and they shout as Kings: that is, they triumph over all
their enemies. If afflictions come for to try their forces, they likewise
shout as Kings triumphing over Death it self, and the grave, whom they boast
with doubled interrogations; 1. Cor. 15. v. 55
O Death! where is thy sting? O Grave! where is thy victory?

Note.
What wonder that fools be afflicted for their folly; seeing other innocent
creatures smart for the same? Note.
Does not Scripture record that senseless creatures sicken for our sins?
Thus we see the walls of an house became leper of a freting leprosy: Levit.
14. v. 44
a wonderful thing to think how hard stones of the house wall where the sinner
dwelt could become sick. Because of the transgressions and iniquities of fools
in an house, the dead stones in the wall were afflicted. Note.
Yea, which is more for the sins of man, Romans 8. v. 23.
the whole creation groneth, travelleth in pain together; as if it were a
Woman in her shewers; their sickness is vanity caused by our iniquity. *
Seeing then other creatures that cannot sin are afflicted because of man's
sins, what wonder if fools because of their transgressions, yea, and also
because of their iniquity he affl^cted?

Observe here how the word because is doubled: First, because of their
transgressions, and again because of their iniquities. Is not this all one?
what need was it then that he should have thus doubled the word Because and
again because? Note.
I answer that this form of speech is, as were the dreams of Pharaoh of the
kine and of the corn: of one thing he had two dreams: Gen, 41. v 25.
The dream of Pharaoh is one, said Joseph; But wherefore was it doubled?
Joseph ^aith that it was to show Pharaoh what he was about to do: that is for
to assure him that the matter should surely come to pass; God of one thing
doubled Pharaohs dreams; for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, v
23.
it is because the thing is established by GOD: and God will shortly bring it
to pass. So for to assure us here that sin is the cause of all our
afflictions it is said that men are afflicted, because of their
transgressions, and again because of their iniquities. Note.
The word doubled is like two witnesses for to confirm the truth.

The first lesson I observe here is, The 1. doctrine.
of the great stupiditie of man, that very hardly can rightly take up the
cause of his troubles: It must be told him again and again: line after line,
commandment after commandment, because after because. Note.
The first bell ringes to the preaching and yet we slumber: The second ringes
yet we are not ready: The third must ring also with a doubled sound and yet we
come behind: Either preface or prayer is past before we come to our place.
Note.
We come to the Lords house as to a place of girth or as to a city of refuge
for to save the the life of our souls: and yet behold how sluggish we are
like Lot, who would not leave his house till he was pressed out by the Angel:
So here behold thy senslese nature that can not take up the cause of thy
troubles till it be told again and again Note.
Because of transgressions will not waken the sleeping sinner till it be
doubled into an other word, because of iniquities like the doubled crow of the
Cock to Peter: Let all men learn here the cause of all their woes. The use

Note.


Now O man would thou know the cause of thy afflictions, it is because of thy
transgressions; Have thou not hard that? Was thou sleeping while I said it?
Hear me again, it is because of thy iniquities: If the because of thy
transgressions has not weakened thee, Note. 1. Sam. 3.14.
let the because of thy iniquities rouse thee up, GOD cried once Samuel, but
he made no answer to GOD; v. 6.
he cried again Samuel, but yet he answered not to God; The third time he
cried Samuel neither as yet could he answer unto God: v. 8.
Last of all, the Lord doubled his cry Samuel Samuel: v. 10.
Then Samuel said, Speak Lord forthy servant hears: Many preachings have
many heard, and yet have not learned the cause of their afflictons. Note.
Many strokes have many gotten, and as yet never could take up the cause of
their strokes, and so they continue into their sins like the drunkard in his
drinking, who though in his drunknesse he has gotten many a sore fall and many
a sore stroke, yet can not refrain. Proverb. 23. v. 35.
They have stricken me, will he say, and I was not sick, they have beaten me,
and I felt it not: when I shall awake yet will I till it again. Woe to him
that is not sensible to his afflictions for to seek out the cause thereof that
it may be removed. Note.
If a sinner has been stricken and has not been sick, if also he has
been beaten with the drunkard and has not felt it, it is a sure token that he
will yet to it again: Let all men learn here in their afflictions to seek
out the cause of their trouble.

Note.
When the Philistims saw them selves miserably plagued with a filthy and
shameful disease, they took counsel how it might be tried, wherefrom their
affliction came: They had the Ark of God a prisoner among them: This was the
sum of all the counsel. Now therefore make a new cart, 1. Sam 6. v. 7.
and take two milk kine on which there has come no yoke, and tie the kine to
the Cart, and bring the calves home from them: And take the Ark of the Lord
and lay it upon the cart, v. 8.
and send it away that it may gee: And see if it goes up by the way of his
own coast to Beth-Shemesh, if that be, then he has done us this great evil:
but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us, but a
chance that happened unto us. Note.
There be many Christians in their afflictions worse then these Philistims,
though they see things more than two kine drawing a cart by his own coast, yet
can not say that it is God that has done it, less can they tell that their
sins have been the cause of it, but such a thing fell forth, such a thing
has chanced to be: it happened so unto me: such was my fortune. Note.
This is Philistimes language worthy to be banished with buffets; Nehem. 13. v.
25.
as Nehemiah buffeted the little children of the Israelites, and plucked off
their hair when he heard them speaking the language of Ashdod: It so happened:
Such was my chance; It was my fortune, is not Christian but Ashdodian language.
Lam. 3 v. 39.
This is Gods question, Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? This is also
Gods answer, Man suffers for his sins; They are worthy to be scourged and
buffeted who while they are afflicted speak of fortun or chance: Note.
Satan in his words may teach many Christians to speak: when he desired God
to scourge Job, he said not God send him an hard weird an evil fortoun, or God
send him a sudden chance, Job. 1. v. 11.
or ill must he happen: But, Streach out thy hand and touch all that he has:
And again the second time: Job. 2. v. 5.
Put forth thine hand now and touch his bone and his flesh: The Magicians of
Egypt called the plague the finger of God, Exodus 8. v. 19.
or Gods send. What a shame then should this be for Christians to speak of
fortune or chance or hap, seeing the devil and his magicians can call
afflictions the hand of God, or the finger of God. Note.
Let the liars of Ephraim, say they are not Ephramits, but Shibboleth shall
prove then to be Ephramits. Note.
Let the ungodly deny that they are wicked, and give thanks with the Pharisee
that they are not like other men, but by their very language incontinent ye
shall know: Some filthy words or bloody oaths, for town, hap, chance, or such
words will bewray them: By their accent ye shall know, that they are of
Galile, that is of this world. Surely said one to Peter, Mark. 14. v. 70.
thou also art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees thereto. Note.
The tongue between man and man, is like an interpreter between two
strangers: The heart of every man is a stranger to every other man: But out of
the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks be it good, be it evil: The
words are the interpretation of the heart. Note.
If Words beguile works, dummy can not lie.

Again in the doubling of the name of finne before affliction, The second
doctrine.
I observe that God is loath to afflict till he be provoked by transgressions
and by iniquities in the plural number that is again and again. Note.
Till sins be multiplied God scourges not the fool: Amos. 2 v. 13.
Gods wrath comes not out upon man till he be pressed with men's sins, as
a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues.

The doctrine.
The doctrine then is this, God is slow and loath to come to strokes till he
be provoked again and again, yea, and again also. Note.
This is well set down by the Prophet Amos, who declaring Gods judgments
against diverse peoples, sets down first men sinning again and again,
once, twice, thrice, yea, four times before that God began to afflict. Amos.
1. v. 6.
The first is Gaza, Thus says the Lord for three transgressions of Gaza and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof. The second is Tyrus:
Amos. 1. v. 9.
Thus says the Lord, for three tarnsgressions of Tyrus, and for four I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: Amos. 1. v. 16.
The third is Edom: Thus says the Lord for three transgressions of Edom, and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof. v. 13.
The fourth is Ammon: Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Ammon
and for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof. Amos. 2. v. 1.
The fifth is Moab: Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Moab and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof. The sixth is Judah: v. 4.
Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah and for four I will
not turn away the punishment thereof. v. 6.
The seventh is Israel: Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Israel
and for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof. The eight is
Britans: Thus says the Lord, for thirty transgressions of Britane and for
forty I will not turn away the punishment thereof: Our transgressions are
thirty for three, forty for four. See how God delights to afflict: One
man sins and God forgiveth, again man sins and God forgiveth, again yet
man sins and God forgiveth: But at last when men multiply their
transgressions God punishes, saying, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof.

The use.
The use is, let men beware of doubling and tripling of sins: If iniquities
come after transgressions, it is to be feared that God say for three
transgressions and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof:
They are but fools that say, Let us sin that grace may abound: Though while
men sin, God seems to them to be enclosed up into the heavens, yet he sees
men into their sins.

Note.
Though he come to judgment softly with foot of wool, when he is come he
strikes with arms of iron. The longer the stroke be in coming it comes
down the sadder. Note.
A sudden or hasty blow is not of such force as a stroke fetched from neck to
heel: Let no man therefore sooth him self up in his sins, thinking that
there is nothing in God but mercy, no, Exodus 33 v. 19.
not: As he is merciful and gracious, long suffering, abundant in goodness
and truth: He is also a righteous Lord, a God of justice, who will in no
ways clear the guilty: Be what men will be, if they be fools, because of
their transgressions, and because of their iniquities they shall be afflicted:
Otherwise where should be the GOD of justice.

Objection.
Here some man may object that this seems not ever to be true, viz. that
man is afflicted for his transgressions, and that for two reasons: first,
because there be some afflicted without cause, Secondly, because there be
many transgressions, who among all men are most free of affliction: Psalm. 34.,
v. 19
Many are the troubles of the righteous: while the wicked are at their ease in
Zion: That some are afflicted without cause, it seems to be clear in
Scripture: God seems to say it him self, after that he had permitted Satan
to scourge Job with many plagues, while he perceived that in all these
troubles Job had still keept fast his integrity, He said to Satan, Job. 2.
v. 3.
Thou have moved me against him to destroy him without cause: This seems to
be against the doubled words of my text, viz. Because of their
transgressions and because of their iniquities they are afflicted.

The answer.
Note.
J answer that while God says to Satan that he had afflicted Job without
cause, it is clear, Job of these sins that Satan laid most falsely to his
charge, viz. that he was but an hypocrite and an hireling that served God but
for rewards: Thus in these words without cause: Job is justified by God only
in these sins whereof Satan did accuse him. Note.
It is said of the borne blind that he was afflicted, neither for his fathers
sins nor for his own sins, but for the glory of God: It is certain that if
he had had no sin he could not have been made miserable by blindness,
but the chief cause of that blindness, John. 9. v. 3.
was, that the works of God might be made manifest in him: The question is
moved by Jeremie, Lam. 3. v. 39.
wherefore is the living man sorrowful? The answer is subjoyned, Man
suffers for his sins. Note.
There be many for's in man's afflictions, 1. For the manifesting of Gods
glory. 2. For to stir us up to prayer. 3. for to make men beware of sin the
cause of woe. 4. for to distaste us of this earth and to waine us from these
transitory pleasures, least we should say with Peter on Tabor, it is good for
us to be here: These all be the ends of afflictions, But the cause wherefore
men are afflicted, are their transgressions and their iniquities. Note.
There is no ludgeing for affliction but where their is transgression. Note.
Though thy father should eat the sour grape of sin, it shall not be able
to set thy teeth on edge: Ezekiel. 18 v. 4.
The soul that s^nneth it shall die: God shall grind the faces of these that
are fatted into their pleasures: but as for the righteous, Isa. 3. v. 10.
Say ye to him that it shall he well with him.

The use.
The use of all this is, that we study to sincerity of life, that when this
life shall be spended and ended, we may hear that joyful voice of our
master, Faithful servant enter into thy masters joy: Math. 25. v. 21.
To God be glory for ever.

The other difficulty is in this, viz that fools are not ever afflicted
because of their transgressions: Are fools ever afflicted? But will ye say:
What then are the wicked, who are often of greatest health, so that their eyes
stand out for fatness? The prosperity of the world seems so be theirs.

Jndeede often this is true: Esth. 3. v. 15.
while the King and Esther sit down to drink, the city Sushan is perplexed:
How then is it said here that fools are afflicted?

Note.
I answer the godly have all their troubles and tears here, but it is not so
of the wicked; In that God spares so many of them in this world, it is a
clear argument that there is a judgment to come.

Note.
Though incontinent God scourges not wicked men for their sins, yet he thinks
upon them, as Nehemiah in his prayer desired him to think upon wicked Tobjah
and Sanballat: Neh. 6. v. 14.
My God, said he, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these
their works: Let sinners think upon this, that God though he spare for a
space, yet he thinks upon them: If these who are fools by transgressions
and iniquities are not in this world afflicted because of them, they shall be
afflicted into the world to come.

Note.
If thou be a hid sinner and yet is in no wise afflicted, thy day is coming. So
long as this world lasts. Isa. 13. v. 21. Z^im and Ochim doolefull creatures
will rejoice: one devil will dance to another: But when the dance is ended,
then shall be misery for evermore. Note.
Again, let us remember here that all these that are afflicted here for
their sins, are not thereby exeemed: It may be, thou be pyned and pinched
with poverty, with gouts, and with gravels, and at the end of all go to hell:
Many are deceived, thinking that if they suffer much in this world, God will
challenge them no more hereafter: this is a common folly worthy of affliction.

Note.
Take heed to thy self, O man how thy afflictions work upon thee: If they make
thee to groan and to cry unto the Lord, if thou find them spurs unto prayer,
and to all exercises of godliness: If in a word they make thee become a new
man for to detest that which once thou loved best, well is thee: God has
sanctified thy affliction: But if thy disease be so that it refuse the remedy,
if thy afflictions work not upon thee for to purge out the pride of life or
for to chase out the spirit of uncleanness, thy fornications and adulteries.
Note.
It is a token that GOD is keeping thee for a more fearful judgment. Note.
It is written of King Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28. v. 22.
that in the time of his distress he did more yet trespass against the Lord:
that said, he is poynted out with a Nota, This is that King Ahaz.

For to draw to an end, Let us observe two general things in the words of the
first verse: First I observe that the sins of these fools are not
particularized here, but in general it is said, because of their
transgressions and iniquities.

This is for to be an aw-band above the heads of all men, least they should
sin in any particular manner against God, we fail all in many things: If it
had been said here, Fools because of their extortions or of adulteries are
afflicted, the proud Pharisee would think to go free: Luke. 18. v. 11.
Lord I thank thee, said he, that I am not like other men, who are
adulterers, extortioners, etc. Note.
But was he free of pride or of hypocrisy? That was his transgression, for
being free of one sin or other he was not without the compass of
trangressours: David was not an idolater, but he was an adulterer, that was
his transgression. I read not of Ashan that he was an adulterer, Ioshu. 7. v.
21.
but because he was a thief, he was stoned, and burnt for that
transgression: Genes. 4. v. 8.
Cain was not a thief, but because he was a murderer, the Lord made him a
vagabond. Genesis 9 v. 2^.
Cham was not a murderer, but because he was a scorner God cursed him. Genesis
9. v. 21.
Noah he was not a scorner, but because he was a drunkard God scourged him with
scorning. Act. 5. v. 3.
Ananias and Saphirah were not drunkards, but because they were liars, they fell
both down dead at the Apostles feere. Judas and Julian were not guilty of all
these foresaid transgressions, yet because they were traitors and Apostate
they died shamefully. Many of our weemen if they can say, J am neither whore
nor these think that all is well.

The second general observation J make here, is, that in general sinners are
said to be afflicted in this verse: indeed thereafter the affliction is
specified: viz, sickness.

Note.
But in this general word afflicted, I find as it were a meeting of Gods
judgments with men's transgressious: as all sorts of sins may be included
into these words transgressions and iniquities: so all sorts of judgments may
be contained into that word afflicted: If one affliction be not fearful to
the sinner another will be terrible This is Gods awband above the heads of men.

The doctrine.
The doctrine J gather here: is, that as there be diverse sorts of
transgressions and of iniquities, so there be diverse sorts of judgments
that are all in readiness at the first call to help the Lord, to help the
Lord against the iniquities of men. Note.
If God but cry upon his plagues: ^aying, whom shall I send and who will go
for us? There is not one but it will come our before the Lord, saying, with
that evil Spirit, send me when God is angry against man for sin, 1. King 22.
v. 21
the famine will say send me, and I shall eat him up: Send me faith the
pestilence and I shall destroy him: send me says the sword and I shall hew
him in pieces. Note.
These be Gods three great Captains, which are appointed by him to run
through the world for to scourge men, because of their transgressions and
because of their iniquities.

Note.
Not only those three, but all the creatures of God are in readiness in coats
of arms for to execute his will against transgressors.

Note.
There is no creature of God either above or below, but when they see God angry
for sin they will desire to be sent for to revenge the Lords quarrel against
sinners: The fire says, Genesis 19.
send me and I shall burn Sodom: v. 24. Exon. 14 v. 27. Number. 16 v. 31. Iona.
1. v. 4. Dan. 6. v. 24. 2. King. ^. v. 24. 2. King. 2. v. 3^. Act. 1^. v. 23.
send me says the water, and I shall drown Pharaoh and his host: Send me
says the earth, and J shall swallow up Dathan and Abiram: The winds cry send
us, and we shall chase and chastise Jonas for his rebellion: The lions cry
send us and we shall roar and devore the enemies of Daniel: The Deares cry
send us, and we shall destroy the mockers of Elisha: The dagges cry send us
and we shall eat the flesh of Iozahel: the lyce cry send us, and we shall
bring down the pride of Herod.

Note.
Again, there be legions of disenses waiting upon his nod, for to afflict
sinners: Send me says one, and I shall strike him blind: Send me says
another, and I shall make him dease: Send me says another and I shall make
him dumb: Send me says another, and I shall lame him: Send me says another
to his head: Send me to his heart will another say: Send me to his lights and
to his lever will others say: Thus migrims and phrenesies, fevers, and fluxes,
gouts, gravels, catarres, quartaines, and cataractes, armies of diseases will
at Gods command run upon miserable man, Isa. 1. v. 6.
till from the sole of his feet to the crown of his head there be nothing
without or within but boils, botches and putrifieing sores.

See what diseases, feesters, fevers, fluxes, etc. See what beasts, and
vnbeasts, Bears, dogs, lions, lyce, etc. These with all the elements are
ready to afflict man, because of his transgressions and because of his
iniquities.

Note.
Moreover, not only will other creatures be in readiness for God for to
afflict and execute his vengance against sinners, But even sinners them selves
will run as Posts this earand for to be against them selves for the Lord.

Math. 27. v. 5. 1. King. 16. v. 18 2 Samuel 17. v. 23.
Send me, said Judas and I shall hang that traitor Judas, that betrayed his
master: Send me said Zimri and I shall cast Zimri into a fire: Send me says
Achitophel and I shall hang Achitophel for abuseing of his wisdom: Send me
says King Saul and I shall put a sword through King Saul, to teach all the
Kings of the earth obedience to the King of Heaven: See what armies God has
for to afflict all men in all sorts of afflictions, because of his
transgressions, and because of his iniquities. The use.
The use of all this is, that we stand in awe and fear to offend so great and
so high a Majesty: Jf any man be guilty of many transgressions, and of many
iniquities, God as ye see he are has many judgments ready at his nod, for
the afflicting of such fools: Proverb. 26. v. 13.
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and many strips for the fools
back. The Lord give us wisdom in all things, to God be glory for ever.

THE SICK MAN'S SORE. THE SECOND SERMON.
PSALM. 107. verse 18. Their Soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw
near the gates of death.

Verse 19. Then they cry unto the Lord in their troubles, and he delivers
them out of their distresses.


IN my former sermon: (Beloved in the Lord) the cause of the sick man's sore
has been declared in these words, that because of their transgressions and
because of their iniquities they are afflicted. Note.
I wish from my heart that all sinners could think well upon this, that sin
is the very seed of affliction for the godly, and of fearful judgment for
the wicked. Note.
Every man while he sins thinks to escape, even as God could be false: As
God is a righteous Lord he will not suffer sinners to escape unpunished.

Note.
As the shadow follows the body, so there is a thing that follows sin,
which Job calls a rod, Job. 9, v. 34. Dan. 5. v. 4,
which the wicked man never thinks of before he has done: when the lowne
has faulted then is he beaten: When Belshazzar is drinking, then God is
writing his dittay upon the wall, Note.
After the wicked has sinnsed the hand of Gods justice shall catch him by the
hairie scalpe, Psalm. 68. v. 21.
which shall make all his joints to tremble.

The particular affliction wherewith the sinners of this Text are said to be
afflicted.

NOW according to my division made in the former sermon: It follows that we
know with what particular affliction fools in this text are said to be
scourged for their sins: The rod is sickness, sore sickness, deadly
diseases: This is plainly set down into these words: Their soul abhors
all manner of meat, and they draw near the gates of death.

The sickness as ye see, is not some light trouble, a tooth ache, or an
head-worke; as we say, but a deadly disease declared in these words, Their
soul abhors all manner of meat, etc.

Behold here J say the description of a deadly disease: First it begins with
want of appetite: after that the sick man draws near the gates of death.

Note.
The first doctrine J observe here is, The doctrine.
toward man, in that he makes sickness to come before death, that man
being forewarned may strive to be fore-armed: Behold how God steals not a
dint upon these fools that are here sick.

Note.
God in justice might strike the sinner dead in an instant, as if he were an
ox felled with the housle of an axe: If God should slay us all upon the
sudden, and as we say make us even shoot to dead, he should be righteous and
we should get shame and confusion of face: But such is the mercy of God that
often he forewarnes sinners, making them to sicken by degrees: first by taking
away their appetite, and thereafter by making them to abhor all manner of
meat: then their hands become feeble and their knees wax weak as water, thus
all their joye by little and little does wither away: After that they are thus
warned, God draws them near the doors of death: This is Gods custom to
send some forerunners to tell that the decree is coming forth against sinners,
Zeph. 2. v. 2.
except that they gather them selves, and search them selves for to prevent his
judgments: He sent unto Ninive his Prophet to give them a charge of forty
days either to Iona. 3. v. 4.
repent or to be destroyed: Note.
Kings hornings get but commonly fix days, God gave them forty days
leisure to consider whether it was good or no to return home again to God:
After that God had sent unto Jerusalem his Prophets both great and small for to
receive the fruits of his vineyard whom they abused: He sent at last his own
Son, saying, They will reverence my Son, but they killed him, and cast him
out of his own vineyard as being the heir: yet for all that God would not
destroy them: Thereafter he sent the Apostles to preach, and to do miracles
amongst them, yet for all that they would not repent. Note.
After as Joseph their own writer records they got warning from God of their
woe to come: First a Comete before the destruction of Jerusalem was seen into
the air, having the form of a sword; for all this they would not yet repent:
After that a voice was heard into the temple, saying, Let us gee out of this
place: for all this they would not yet repent: Last of all there was a certain
man that night and day ran about the temple, crying Voice from the cast, and
voice from the west, voice from the four winds: woe to the City and to the
Temple: As at last he was crying woe unto me, he was slain by the cast of some
stone, and incontinent thereafter the temple was burnt and the City taken and
destroyed. Note.
What need J bring testimonies from foreign nations: have we not eyes to see
what God has done to Britan? What cried the famine unto us into this land,
when in the most glorious streets of this Kingdom it made the poor to fall
flatlings to the ground? Psalm. 91. v. 6.
What cried the Pestilence that walks in darkness? while the best cities of
this land were almost laid waste? And now what cries the sword drawn our of
the scabert? Can we say but that we are well forewarned?

Note.
Though God should come this year, and sweep us quite away, none of us can say
that our God has been too hasty to take vengeance.

Such forewarnings by sickness, by famine, by pestilence, by sword, are given
to sinners to let the world see that God is true in his oath, viz. that as he
lives he takes no delight into the death of sinners. Note.
But because, if GOD should give to all such forewairnings the wicked world,
yea, the best of us would become secure: Therefore the Lord often will take
away both godly and ungodly into a moment, that every man may be continually
upon his watch, least he should be taken away upon the sudden, and so dye
without preparation: while the Philistims were seeking to see Samson sport,
Judge. 16 v. 27.
the house fell down upon them, and they died into an instant: Levit. 10. v. 2
While Nadab and Abihu brought in strange fire before the Lord the fire of God
consumed them into a moment: 2. King. 1. v. 10. v. 11.
Fifty men with their Captain, and again other fifty men with their
Captain that came to lay hands upon Elias were consumed into an instant with
fire from heaven: Job. 1. v. 19.
All Jobs children were smothered at a feast: The Egyptians in their greatest
rage against God his people were all drowned into a moment. Ezod. 14 v. 27.
Act. 5. v. 5.
Ananias and Saphirah shot to dead, while they were lyeing against GOD: Lots
wife in an instant was turned into a pillar of salt. Genesis 19. v. 26.

Note.


All these are set out in scripture to give warning unto sinners, not to lippen
to the last, as if one Gods mercy at the last gasp were enough for all their
sins. Note.
Not one of all these fore said persons got once leisure for to say Lord have
mercy upon me.

What can thou tell O man but thou may die under the fall of an house with
Samson and the Philistims? It may be thou be burnt with a blast of powder as
Nadab was with fire? Judge. 16. v. 29. Levit. 10. v. ^.
What if Satan get license from God to raise a wind, which shall smite the
corners of the house, whereby in an instant thou shall be overwhelmed? Exodus
14. v. 21.
The LORD may drown thee with the Egyptians into the sea. Note.
J knew a man in France fall down dead as he was washing his hands into the
basen, for to go to dinner after the Communion. I knew a man in Scotland, who
died at the dinner having the cup in his hand not feeling any sickness of
before. What do all these cry unto us but that we ever be prepared. Note.
Is not our life a vapor, a breath into our nostrils, which departs so soon
as the Lord but says, Iam. 4. v. 14. Isan. 22 Psalm. 90. v. 3.

The use.


Return ye children of men? The use of this for great comfort to these that
are afflicted with long diseases. Note.
Ye that have such sick persons at home, whose names are prayed for here,
take home to them this comfort, that they are much beholden to Gods mercies
that proceeds in such a manner with them, whereby they may have time to repent
and reckon with their God, What if God had slain them upon an evil thought,
word, or work? * It is a fearful thing to go directly from sin to judgment.
Note.
Well is the man that has time to crave mercy from his Judge. Comfort your
sick with this: let them see how they are beholden unto God for his delays.
After that, tell them what has made them sick. Note.
The Physicians can discourse and tell diverse natural causes: But alas, this
is too sparingly told to the sick that they suffer for their sins. The
Physician will say the humor must first be purged: but the Minister must say,
sin must first be purged.

Many never send for the minister till the physician can do no more. This they
will verify, Note.
vbi medicus desinit, ibi Deus incipit: where man leaves off, there God
begins. O fool, God should be begun at in thy sickness. Seek first the
minister the interpreter one of a thousand, that he may cry to God for
remission of thy sins the cause of thy sickness. If this cause be not
removed, the physician shall by his drogges waste both thy health and thy
wealth. Note.
My counsel is, that thou proceed orderly into thy cure: Be first friends
with thy God, and he shall direct the Physician: Otherwise the time shall come
that thou shall say to all wordly means, as Job said to his fectlesse friends:
Job. 13. v. 4.
we are all Physicians of no value.

Let us now visit this sick man into his bed, let us see what aileth him: my
text says that his soul abhors all manner of meat: the Hebrew word Taban
signifies properly abomino^, that is to abhor, avoid or scunner at a thing
that stands against our heart. Note.
His sickness is so sore, that all sorts of meat stand against his stomach:
^ewe men in health can eat of all (...) of meat: Some like not flesh some
ca^e not fish, some abhor one thing, and some abhor another. But for a man
to abhor all manner of meat, so that he can taste nothing, as the sick man
of my text, it declares the greatness of the disease: This is then the
affliction here sent against man, because of his transgressions his soul
abhors all manner of meat, that is GOD takes the appetite from him.

The doctrine I observe here, is this, The doctrine.

Note.


God has many whips wherewith he can chastise his own children and scourge
the wicked: Let all other plagues be removed, let us see what GOD can do to
man in matter of meat.

Note.
First God can give thee meat enough, and yet scourge thee with such a niggard
heart, which like an hungry steward will not vouchafe upon the stomach its
own due: Such a man we call a wretch, or worlds worm, that is feared to ear
of the earth least the whole earth be not sufficient for it.

Note.
J compare such a man to a currish dog, lyeing upon a heap of hay, that
neither can eat himself, neither suffer the beast to eat that would eat. *
Here is the plague of poverty, or rather plague of plenty, magnas inter opes
inops, to be poor in the midst of wealth.

Note.
Secondly God can scourge a man in his meat, when he both gives him meat and
a heart, and a hand to take it, and a stomach to digest it, but he beseigeth
the heart with hunger, by taking the passage of his throat; there he will set
down a squinacie, crowels, or boils for to hinder all sort of victual for to
be carried to his enemies that are lying into the heart, rebellious imaginations
that have lifted up a banner against the Lord: God will take this passage of
the throat, Judge. 12. v. 5.
as Iephre took the passages of Jordan for the overthrowe of the Ephracaits,
Note.
Thirdly God will give meat unto men, but will take away the strength and
foison of it, which is called, Levit. 26. v. 26.
to break the staff of bread: According to this he said to his people
threatening them for sin, ye shall eat much and shall not be satisfied,
Note.
When Gods plague after this manner is on meat, men are like these lean and
evil favored kine that Pharaoh saw in his dream eat up the fatre fleshed
kine that were fed in a meadow, who after they had fed so fatly, Genesis 41 v. 21.
it could not be known that they had eaten them, they remained as lean and
evil favored as ever they were before. Note.
See how God can plague his creatures with leanuesse, even while they feed in
fattest meadows. Note.
But again let the Lord be pleased: let him bless a little portion were it
of pulse, it shall have greater force to feed thy body then all the Kings
dainties with Gods displeasure. Note.
Thus Daniel and his fellows, whose portion was but pulse, Din. 1. v. 15.
were fatrer and fatter in flesh then all the children, which didcate the
portion of the Kings meat.

Note.
Fourthly, God can plague man in meat, when he suffers a man to become
foolish, either for to tarrowe of his meat, because he geteth not such meat
as he would have he w^ll take no meat at all, and so depriveth him self of
Gods comforts: this we see often into little children. Note.
Others more foolishly will make vows not to eat till they have done an evil
turn, like these Jews, who banded together, and bound them selves under a
curse, A^t. 23. v. 12.
that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul: This was
Saul's folly, he discharged the people all sort of meat ti^l the battle was
ended, he band them under a curse: but what came of it? The people vexed with
hunger, did eat flesh with blood: 1. Sam. ^^. v. 37.
Thus Gods command was broken by occasion of such a foolish injunction.

Note.
Fifthly God can scourge man in meat while he cursed the meat, which man
desire against his will: It is said of Israel, Psalm. 78. v. 18. v. 19.
that they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust: yea,
they spoke against God: they said, can God furnish a table in the wilderness:
Thereafter it is said that the Lord heard this and was wroth: v. 21.
What did he into his wrath? By his power he brought in the south wind. v. 26.
He rained flesh upon them as dust: and feathered fowls like as the sand of
the sea: v. 25.
So that they did eat and were filled: But how soon came judgment, the
Psalmist says, that while their meats was in their mouths, v. 30
the wrath of God came upon them and slew the fattest of them, v. 31.
and smote down the chosen men of Israel.

Behold the end of all their good cheer: Behold how shortly their greening was
cooled,

Note.
Sixthly God can scourge man in meat, when he makes meat to discord with man:
From this is the proverb, That which is one man's meat, is an others man's
poison: It is a righteous thing with God to put discord between man and his
creatures, when man has sinned against his God: The least discord between man
and food, declares that man is at feade with his God.

Note.
Seventhly, God can afflict man in meat, by withdrawing all meat from man: This
is famine, a fearful plague: Jeremie calls it a punishment greater then the
punishment of the sin of Sodom: Lam. 4. v. 6.

Note.

Lam. 2. v. 20. Lam. 2. v. 12.


In that famine of Jerusalem the tender hearted weemen for lack of bread did
eat their children of a spanne long: The little children came to their
mothers, crying, where is bread? And after that they swooned and fell down
dead, and their mothers did eat them: Lam. 4. v. 7.
These who in time of abundance were Nazarits, purer then the snow, v. 8.
and whiter then milk, in time of famine their visage became blacker than a
cole, their skin withered, and became like a stick. Jn Samariah two weemen
made paction for to eat their two children, first the one and then the other.
Note.
Eighthly God can scourge man in meat, while he lets him eat till he
surfeit: Thus when Israel lusted after flesh, the Lord gave them flesh and they
did eat until it came out at their nostrils: Numb 11. v. 20 v. 23.
But while the flesh was between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of
the Lord wat kindled and smot the people with a very great plague: v. 34.
from thence the place was called Kibroth-Hattavah, that is, the graves of lust.

Note.
These that surfeit either in meat or drink till they sicken are plagued in their
meat and drink: Isa. 5. v. 22.
woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle
strong drink. Last of all God scourges man in meat, when by sore sickness
he makes a man to loss his appetite, or when he makes his soul (as my text
says) abhor all manner of meat.

Note.
The Lord in his justice can put a man at variance and discord with that meat,
which once he loved best: yea, he will sow such seed of discord between man
and his meat, that man will be at deadly feade with his food: yea, and abhor
it, of whatsoever sort it can be: were thy fare never so dainty or delicate,
the Lord can make the soul of the sick man to abhor it,

Note.

The doctrine.


The doctrine I observe here is, that there is no such love and friendship
amongst the creatures, but if the creature offend God, God can set them at
variance. * God that put an evil spirit of dissension betwixt Abim^lech and
the men of Shechem, Judge. 9. v. 23.
can put strife and contention between a man and the meat he loves best.
Note.
He can make the best meat to be unto man after he has abused it, as he
made Tamar to be to Amnon after his lust was satisffied: 2. Sam. 13. v. 15
his last hatred was greater then his former love: He abhorred her at last
after whom he sickned for lust: Here is such hatred against meat: Their soul
abhors all manner of meat: yea, of meat, which once they lusted most after.
Note.
God will not suffer his enemies to have the use of his creatures. Jf man cast
out with GOD, God can make man cast out with his meat: yea, and cast it: yea,
and make his drink to cast him upon his back. Note.
God may for a space delay, and suffer sins to have a stomach: But what
says he into the Psalm? when I see a convenient time then will I execute
judgment. Psalm 37. v. 2.
GOD is not slack while he delayeth, but he stays till sin be ripe.

The use of this is, The use.
let us never offend God in our meat. Note.
Let us beware to make of our bellyes Kibroth Hatavab, graves of lust. ^umb.
11. v. 34*
What is a gluttons belly but a grave of lust, wherein he burieth the good
creatures of God? Let all men learn here not to set their affection too much
upon that which shall go to the draught. Note.
He that loves his meat or drink better then his God, God shall make him hate
his love: yea, and abhor it. What is a man given to his belly, but a
belly-god? Stink must he, whose God is his belly. Fie on the folly of that
fool that for meat forsakes God, and cleaves unto his belly, which God one
day shall destroy: yea, and shall make of it a nest of worms. Note.
Often in this life has it been seen that God has marked the abused belly
with some judgment, for to be a prophecy of torment unto others, least they
should be like unto them. Note.
Gods judgments upon others should be unto us, as if a messinger had been
sent from the dead for to give warning to the gluttons, Brethren, least they
also should fall into the like torment.

The second doctrine I gather here is this: The doctrine.
It is a great benefit of GOD to man to have his appetite, so that he may
eat of all manner of meat.

The use: The use.
Thou have a stomach, thank God for it: abuse it not in gluttony or
drunkenness: St Paul has a notable speech: Tit. 2. v. 11. v. 12,
viz, that the grace of God has appeared unto all men, teaching us. what is
the lesson? That denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteouslie, and godly in this present world. Note.
Soberly, in regard of our selves: Righteously, in regard of our neighbors:
and Godly in regard of our God. Note.
See how in these three several duties, fobrietie is sent before, for to
prepare a place in the heart for the Lord, who can not dwell into an heart full
of surfeit.

The doctrine.
The third lesson J observe here is, that sin is the cause which makes a man
to loss his appetite.

The use. The use.

Note.


Let every man that sindeth a decay in this benefit, considder how this evil
is come upon him: I remember of a comfortable laying, which that worthy and
learned man my Lord of Plessis Morney, whom I knew in Sanmur, was wont to say
concerning the sight of his eyes almost lost, Note.
Is say a quel ieu ie les ay pardus; J know (said he) at what play I have lost
them. Note.
He had worne-them away with great reading: He was not bleare eyed as many
amongst us by much drinking Well is the man that has such bosom and secret
comfortes while he is afflicted.

Health is a great benefit and would be meekill made of: Let us so spend it
that while it is spent we may have some comfort to remember how we have spent
it.

Seeing my text is of health and of sickness, let me say something against
these that are enemies both of their own health, and of other men's.

To you first J address my speech, who are drinkers of strong drink, Note.
or rather strong in drinking. Men of strength to mingle strong drink, Isa. 1.
V. 22.
to scoll as we say: How call ye such scols? Note.
Scols of health. What folly is this, that a man should loss his health by
drinking the scolls of health? what sickness is this when a man is sick of
healths: the very names of this sin declares the madness of men. What means
thou o man, to say before a drink, that will make the sick: This is to such a
man's health? A scoller, whose school is the tavorne, is not a scholar of
Christ that says learn of me. Math. 1^ v. 29.
J never heard tell that Christ scolled to any man's health: and yet he is the
man that only can in all things say learn of me: J will not follow St Paul
him self in all things: he desired not to be followed in all things: But be
ye follow^rs of me, (said he,) as I am of Christ: Note.
Take my counsel O man, follow not the fashions of this world: If thou would
be a man of health be not a drinker of healths.

Note.
Be a scholar of Christ, but be not a scoller of strong drink: Drink
soberly, but scoll not. Note.
A scoll is a thing sacrificed to idols: viz. to bellyes that are drunken men's
gods, belly gods. Note.

1 ^or. 10 v. 27.


The counsel of St Paul is wise: If any of them that believes not, (says
he,) bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before
you, ea^e, asking no question for conscience sake: v. 28.
But if any man say unto you, this is offered in sacrifies unto idols, eat not
for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake?

Note.
That which he said of eating that may J say of drinking: Drink of any drink
that is set down before you, but if a scoll come to the table, drink it not,
because it is a sacrifice offered unto the stinking idol of the belly. Let us
not only flee all evil, but all appearance of evil. Note.
What hurt to health such scolls have been, the conscience of many will bear
me record: I wish that the force of Gods word could sweep that out, which
man's corruption has brought in.

Note.
When the brazen serpent made by Gods command was abused; good Hezekiah brake it
in pieces and called it Nehushtan, 2. King. 18. v. 4.
that is a lump of brass. Seeing scols have been so vilely abused, let us
break them in pieces: away with all appearance of evil: This much concerning
these enemies of health, who by excessive drinking, drown their spirits and
the gifts of GOD within them.

There be now another sort of drunkards Note.
who spoil their health with reeke and smoke: Tobacca-men, who go about to
smoke the soul out of the body, as if it were a fox chased out of his hole:
this fire may be called as the fire of Nadab was called: Levit^^ v. 1.
viz. strange fire. Note.
I speak not of the use but of the abuse of Gods creatures: Note.
my reproof is against these that spend the time with plussing of reeke, which
should be better employed. Note.
What count should such fiery pipers make to God if death in an instant should
feaze upon them with that fire pipe at their mouth? If God should say to that
man, what was thou doing while I sent my servant death for thee? Will that be
a gracious answer: Lord I was spending the time that thou gave me for
repentance, at such and such an exercise. Note.
I will not insist against this sin that was once a great streanger in this
land.

Note.
Only this will J say for the present: this taking of reeke seems to be a
graceless thing. Jf a man come in into a house and take but a drink: he will
first pray to God for a blessing

Note.
But there is no grace for Tobacca, as if it were not a creature of God: Every
creature of God is good, 1. Tim. 4. v. 14.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: Away with
such new inventions, whereof the event is this, the soul abhors all manner
of meat. Away with these creaturs which are nor received with thanksgiving.
Let us now proceed in our text.

And they drew near the gates of death.

WE have heard how all the sick man's appetite, is lost: That which follows
is, that they draw near the gates of death.

Note.
See how the living man sickneth and decays: See how his sin goes down by
degrees: first he can not eat, after that, all natural strength failing him,
he draws near the gates of death: yea, so near that with Job he is not
able to swallow down his spittle. Job. 7. v. 19.


The doctrine.
The doctrine J observe here, is, that sickness comes formest, and death
follows after. Note.
There is no disease that comes to a man, but it is like a warning piece of
preparation for death.

The use.
The use when ever we find our appetite decay: Note.
let us remember the doors of death.

The doctrine.
Again let us observe here that the Psalmist speaks not here of any light
disease: as of a toothache, or of some little throwing of the belly, but of a
deadly disease, wherein all the cunning of the physician is gone.

Note.
See what doloures the sin of man is able to bring upon him.

Note.
Sin while it is in doing goes merrily on, like a ship falling into calm
waters with flaunting fails; but tarry till the revenging tempest of Gods wrath
come and rush upon the sinner, and tumble him up and down, then is he forced
to know that there be some great power provoked: but let us see what is
understood here by the gates or doors of death.

By the gates or doors of death, some understand the grave: when your graves
are opened for to receive your bodies then are the gates or ports of death
opened, that ye may enter in. Note.
The grave maker is deaths porter. A man is said to be near the gates of
death, when he is so sick that there be more appearance of death then of life.
Some are so sick that they must make their Testament: Some are yet nearer:
yea, so near that no hope of life being left, the living will cut off their
winding-sheete.

The last year, Note. 1^ September
when J came out of that fever in all men's opinions deadly, Anno 1626.
I found my winding sheet cut off, lying in my study amongst my books: In
such a case man may well be said to be near the gates of death, when at every
moment we think that his breath should go out.

The doctrine.
In this drawing near the grave, J observe also the weakness of man.

Note.
Were he never so strong, death at last will draw him with sickness to her
ports. Note.
Samson for all his force yielded unto this draught. Let me dye, Judge. 16 v. 30.
(said he,) with the Philistims: there is neither force nor beauty, nor
wisdom able to resist this draught. Note.
Man in his name may learn his weakness: The Hebrews call him Enosh,
quasi^^ger di^^us ^^ mortifera agritudine in quam (...) peccatum incidit, that
is, from ^iseases whereunto he has been made subject by sin. Note.
Eliphaz speaking of man's weakness, faith that we dwell in houses of clay,
whose foundation is in the dust, Ioh. 4. v. 19.
which are crushed before the moth. Note.
See what an house thy soul, o man dwells into: It is but a little lodge so
ruinous, that if a moth but creep up upon it with the weight thereof it will
be crushed.

The use, The use.
let no man lippen to his strength or youth. Note.
While thou art into thy greatest force, remember that God can cause thee to be
crushed before a moth, which shall draw thee perforce in at the doors of
death, for to dwell amongst the crawling worms.

Others by the gates of death here understand the power that death has over
all the living. Note.
They call the power of death, gates of death, quia judicia olim in portis
exercebantur, because the magistrates in whose hand was the civil power, sat
into the ports of the City, while they did exercise judgment. In this sease
Christ said that the gates of hell should not prevail against his Church:
Math. 16. v. 18
By the gates or ports of Hell is to be understood the power of hell: Note.
So here by the gates of death, learned interpreters understand the power of
death.

The doctrine.
The doctrine J observe here, is, that great was the power of death before the
coming of Christ. Note.
It is here set forth, as a King or a magistrate, sitting with great power,
rule, and dominion. This impire it keept ever till Christ came, who took part
of our flesh and blood, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, Heb. 2. v. 14. v. 15.
that is the devil; and deliver these, who through fear of death were all
their lifetyme subject unto bondage: Let us remember, then that death before
Christ's death had ports of power: But so soon as the Captane of our salvation
came, Heb. ^. v. 10.
he cast down the ports and dang death from the ports: yea, he beseiged
death: yea, he overcame death even into the grave, deaths dungeon and
strongest hold: yea, not only that, but also he put the devil, that had the
power of death to such a strait, that he was forced to quite his castle, for
to go lodge into swine.

The use of this is our great comfort against the fear of death: The use.
What need we now to fear death, seeing Christ our fastest friend has
conquessed the ports of death.

Note.
When a Christian sees Christ he grows bold: yea so, that he will boast
death and the grave, saying, O death! 1 Cor. 15 v. 55.
where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory?

Here again I observe, The doctrine.
that he says, that the sick fools draw near the gates of death: they
draw near and yet enter not in. Note.
The lesson is this, so long as there is life in a man there is hope: all is
not lost that is in perrill: Philip. 2 v. 27.
Epaphroditus was sick nigh unto death, yet GOD had mercy on him.

The use.
The use of this is, so long as there is life in man in sickness, Note.
let both spiritual and bodily duties be done: let prayers be made and other
lawful means sought, whereby the precious life of man may be preserved: Say
not there is no remeed, all hope of life is past, and therefore we need not
care what be done to him. Note.
Man's extremity is Gods opportunity: when man lest looks for it, GOD at his
will can bring back the sick man from the doors of death.

The use.
The best use we can make of that, that sinners sicken, Note.
and at last draw near the doors of death, is, that we remember that we all
have this voyage to make. Note.
We are all daily drawing nearer and nearer unto death, Eccles. 12. v. 2.
unto our long home, as Solomon says: and therefore the nearer our bodies
draw to the doors of death, let our souls draw nearer the ports of Heaven.
Note.
All things give us warning that we must flit and remove: thy beard, thy face,
thy skin, thy acquaintance, the season of the year: are all crying we are
subject to changes. Note.
The hours, the days, the nights, are all as it were upon horseback posting
to their end. Note.
The Heavens cry unto us our powers are shaken and we wax old as does a
garment: Psalm. 102 v. 26.
See ye not that sand running out of my hour glass: Note.
It cries unto you that time is running away with your life: As ye see that
sand running out, so is also the time of your life running away: and now ye
have near by an hour of life less since J read my text: and shortly shall
ye go out with less natural life than ye came in: The Lord increase our
spiritual life. J wish J could let you see the vanity of this life, that ye
may learn to look for a better. Note.
There is a swift motion into man from life to death: My days, Job. 7. v. 6.
said Job, are swifter then a weevers shittle: yea, swifter then a post: yea,
Job. 9. v. 2^. v. 26.
they are swift as ships, as the Eagle that hastes to the preye. Note.
What is man but a broken leaf driven to and fro with days of trouble, as
with mighty tempests? And yet for all thi^, while he is driving swiftly unto
death he dreameth that he is drawing near to the doors of life.

Note.
Put thy house to an order, ye must make your testament, are fearful words
to a natural man. Note.
Most men even while they are a-dyeing desire to dream of life, neither
without some wrath will they suffer them selves to be wakned out of this
dream: and yet do what they can they are ever drawing nearer and nearer the
doors of death. I wish that these doors were ofter into our memory then they
are. Note.
If ye will take heed and considder, I shall let you know two pages that God
has commanded ever to be watches in man, so long as he has life for to
advertise him that he must die: The one is called the pulse, which God has
set into the arm of man, knocking night and day, for to tell him, that at the
last knock he must enter in at the doors of death.

The other page is called the breath which God has set into the breast of man:
Note.
this reciprocation of the breath is like reciprocatio serrae, the drawing to
and froo of a saw.

Note.
This breath O man is night and day going to and froo like a savve: man is the
tree: when the tree is cutted then must it fall: and where it falls there
shall it lie, Eccl. 11. v. 3.
whether in a mire or upon the clean: As a man dies so shall he be for ever:
If being well prepared he enter in at the doors of death, happy shall his
life be for evermore. Note.
Ye who of before did never observe these two watching pages: the pulse and
the breath; take warning by them that daily ye draw nearer to the gates of
death.

THE SECOND PART. THE SICK MAN'S SALVE.
WE have hard in the first part of the verses, which we have read concerning
the sick man's sore: Now it follows that we hear of the second part, wherein
is the sick man's salve: it is contained in these words: v. 19.
Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: He saves them out of their
distresses: v. 20.
He sent his word and healed them: and delivered them from their destructions.
In the words J see two special things, first the sick man crying to God for
help, secondly GOD delivering the sick man.

The first is in these words: Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: the
second is in these words, He saves them out of their trouble. etc. Here then
is both man's part and Gods part: Man's part is in these words, then they cry
unto the LORD: Gods part is in these words, He saves them. etc.

Here first in man's part let us observe, The doctrine.
that while he is near the doors of death, he cries unto God for life:
Note.
where we may learn that it is lawful for a man, being in danger of death to
beg his life from his GOD: Isa. 38. v. 10.
This Hezekiah did while he was sick of his boil: He weept before God in his
bed, and besought him that he would spaire him for a space. Deuteronomy. 3 v. 25.
Moses had a great desire to live and to enter into Canaan: Psalm. ^0^ v. 24.
This was the prayer of him that compiled the hundredth and two psalm, that GOD
would yet let him live: I said O my GOD take me not away in the midst of my
days: In the Kings Psalm the Prophet says unto GOD, He asked life of thee,
thou gave it him. I confess that men had great need to be wise in this
suit: Note.
For if a man desire life for to eat and drink and make good cheer of his
provisions laid up for many years, it were better for him to die before such
riots. Note.
Lord keep me from the gift of life, except it be that J may amend my life:
life should be desired that it may be better spended.

The use
The use of this doctrine is, that every man in his sickness try, wherefore he
desires his life. Note.
Jf it be for to glorify God, and to redeem evil spent time, to do some
more good in the world; such a desire is godly: such a request is holy, whether
it be granted or not. Note.
Well is the man that has gotten life, and thereafter so lives and learneth
to die that he may dye to live. Let him whom God has afflicted with sore
sickness, and thereafter has brought even from the doors of death: let him I
say learn to be circumspect in his ways. Note.
When Christ met afterward with the sick man, whom he had cured at the poole
of Bethesda, he gave him a godly counsel: Behold, John. 5. v. 14.
(said he) thou art made whole: sin no more lest a worse thing come unto
thee. Note.
It is a token of a deadly disease, when the physic can not work.

Again here I observe the sluggishnesse of man's heart in prayer. The second
doctrine.
He will not pray till he be at the extremity, even at the doors of death:
Note.
then, and not till then, says my text, they cry unto the Lord. Note.
Why would they not cry, while they perceived their appetite decaying? why
would they not cry, while their soul began to abhor all manner of meat? Job.
6. v: 5.
Does the wild ass bray when he has grass? Or loves the ox over his
fodder? No not. Note.
So long as a man has the grass of prosperity, and the fodder of wealth, he
can neither love, nor bray, nor pray.

Proverb. 7. v. ^3.
The young man will not quite the harlot, till a dart struck through his liver.
Note.
If the untamed colt be not sore ridden and beat^^ he can not be broken: Hard
hearts like hard knots must have hard wedges.

Note.
A small wind is notable to fan away meakell chafe: A hautie heart will not
stoop for a little distress. It is not the little touch of affliction that
will waken a snorting sinner. Except it be an imperious cross, which cause
him smart, hardly will he yield; so head strong a thing is sin.

Note.
So long as the Mariners can work among^t their cords, they run, ra^^le,
reele, and sweat in the tempe^t: But after that they have reeled to etc fro,
and staggered like drunken men, when all their running is gone, then as it is
said in the psalm, they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: Psalm. 107 v. 28.
yea, though the ship reele and crack, as thought it should be crushed: Note.
yet Jonas will not waken, till a Pagan pull him up and buffet him with
rebukes. Ion. 1. v. 6.
what meanest thou O sleeper? Arise call upon thy God.

The use. The use.

Note.


While God gives us warning by any disease, let us take it as a precept of
warning from GOD, and prepare our selves for death.* It is to be too venturous
not to cry till thou be at the doors of death: that is, to put craig in
perrill: wise Solomon forbids a man to delay a day. Note.

Proverb ^7. v. 1


This was his watchword: Boast not thy self of to morrow, for tho^ know
not what a day may bring forth: Age hodie quod moriturus agas, Do that to
day that thou would desire to be doing in the day of thy death.

But alas! what order for all this have we taken with our souls, though we
know not how near we are to the doors of death? Who amongst us can say with
the Psalmist, Psalm. 108 v. 1.
My heart is prepared, my heart is prepared? Alas for our heart, it is like the
field of the sloathfull, Note.
and like the vineyard of the man void of understanding: Proverb 24. v. 31
I went by it (says Solomon,) and lo it was all grown over with thorns, and
nettles had covered the face thereof. Our hearts for the most part are either
pricked with the thornie cares of the world, or burnt so with the burning
nettles of lust, that we remember not our latter end. Note.
So soon as we come out of the burning nettles of youth, we fall into the
pricking thorns of worldly cares, the sickness of cold and old age.

Except that we take heed to our selves in time, our damnation shall come, as
one that travaileth, and our destruction like an armed man.

Note.
For this cause, let every man rouse up him self at the first touch of
affliction, and no more put the Lord, as it were to pains, for to stretch out
his arm still. Why should ye be stricken any more? Isa. 1. v. 5,
said God to his people: Note.
Though God spare man in his sins for a space, yet at last shall he not
disdain to be crossed of dust and asses. Note.
I will tell thee o man, that if thou sit the Lords first summonds, He will
send to thee a new charge, which shall make thy grief to grow. Levit. 26. v 81.
If ye walk stubbornly against me, (said the LORD) I will bring seven times
more plagues upon you according to your sins: If seven will not work, God
has seventie seven at his command, every one readier than another, to say with
that spirit, send me. Jf for the gentle corrections of his rod thou will not
turn, He shall scourge thee with scorpions, till he cause thee c^y: If a
sinner overcome a little affliction, and come out of it, not being bettered
thereby, Gods army shall be stretched out still by some greater judgment.
After that Hananiah had broken the yoke of wood, which was about Jeremiah his
^ecke, for to be a token of a great judgment, God commanded to tell Hananiah,
Ier. 28 v. 13.
Thou have broken the yokes of wood, but thou shall make for t^^m yokes of
iron. Note.
If yokes of wood can not da^ton stif-necked sinners, Note.
the Lord shall change wood into iron: malo nodo malus cuneus, for a hard knot
he can make a hard wedge: nill we will we, God will have his blows felt.

The 3 doctrine.
Again here in that a sick man at the doors of death, is said to cry to God,
I observe a powerful working of the spirit of God in his own children. Note.
While they are at the doors of death and can not speak unto man for
weakness, yet are they said to cry unto the Lord.

Note.
At such a time all the force of nature is spent, and words are said to be
swallowed up: Job. 6. v. 3.
yet such are said here to cry unto the Lord. Wherefrae comes this force to
cry? Not from nature: It is from the spirit within. Note.
While the godly man is at his last gaspes, and has laid speech before men,
even then is a voice of power within him, crying through the heavens unto God.

The use. The use.

Note.


In confidence of Gods assisting power, let us comfort our selves against the
hour of death, the hour of our greatest weakness: Here is the ground, while
all natural strength will fail his own children, yet Gods strength will not
fail them: Psalm. 73. v. 26.
My flesh and my heart fails (said David,) but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever. What can make a man cry at his last gaspes, but
this strength of GOD in the heart? Note.
This is a great mercy, that while there is no force in nature to make a man
but speak unto man, there shall be into his heart a spiritual force, which
shall make him cry unto his God. The wicked also, Note.
when they draw near the doors of death, will cry unto the Lord: that is,
they will gasp, gaze, grinne, glowre, and groan: yea, Job. 3. v. 24.
power out their roarings as waters: And such is the great mercy of God that
for plain pity he will grant unto the wicked man his life. So he pitied
Ahab clothed with sackeclothe, having nothing but the outward skin of
repentance: Because the Lord saw him rent his clothes and put sackcloth upon
his flesh, and fast, and lie in sackcloth, he said to Elijah, 1 King. 21. v. 29
See thou how Ahab humbles him self before me? Therefore I will not bring
the evil in his days: See what God did to a wicked man but outwardly humbled.
Note.
Such is the mercy of our God, that hardly can he punish sinners in his
justice.

Note.
As he did to Ahab, so will he do to a wicked sick fool: when he hears
him groaning, and sees him gaping for life, like a hungry dog gaping for a
smush bone, he will cast unto him that bone of life, and let him gnawe upon it
for a number of years. Note.
The wicked man loves not God, but looks for health as a dog will look
for a bone that he sees into a strangers hand: as the dogs eye is ever upon
the bone, and not upon the stranger, so is the wicked man's eye ever upon his
life and not upon God. Note.
When the dog has gotten the bone, he runs to some corner and gnaweth
upon it, and never regards any more the stranger that cast it to him: even so
the wicked man, as it were, gnaweth upon a number of years, which God has
cast to him, but after he has once gotten that which he glowred so meekill
for, he looks no more upon God.

The gift of natural life as J see is a gift both given to the godly and the
wicked: they will both come to the doors of death, and God will bring them
back again to life. Note.
But would thou know whether or not thou have gotten that gift in mercy or
but for a greater judgment? Try whether or not thou amendeth thy bygone life.
If thy love be greater to God then of before: If thou depends more upon his
providence then of before: Jf thou walk more circumspectly, and more carefully
into thy calling then of before: Jf thou make greater conscience of thy
thoughts then of before thou did of thy words and works: If that be, well is
thee; The Lord in mercy has added as unto Hezekiah that time to thy days.
Note.
But if after thou have made so many fair promises to God in thy sickness: so
many vows to redeem that evil spent time: yet if after thou have gotten
health, thou forget thy misery and remember it, as waters that pass away, and
so return to thy old bayas again to be friends with thy old sins,
neglecting thy former vows; assure thy self that thy life is prolonged but
for a curse, that thou may see the evil to come: Isa. 57. v. 1 Isa 63. v. 4.


Note.
Though God spare the wicked for a space, yet the day of vengeance is in his
heart. God is fully minded to break him with his tempest, and to make him
perish, like his own dung for ever. Note.
A wicked man in his greatest glory is like Amal^cke of whom Balaam
prophesied, saying Amaleke was the first of nations, Numb. ^4. v. 20
but his latter end shall be that he perish for ever. Note.
Many never weep for sin till their soul is in hell.

The 4 doctrine.
Again here observe to whom the sick fools are said to cry: i^ is to the
Lord: Then they cry unto the Lord. Here vv^e have to learn to whom we
should cry in our trouble: It is unto the Lord. August. in ^sal. 74.
St. Augustine says very well: N^n est quod fugias a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum
placatum: there is no refuge from an angry God, but unto God being pacified:
whom have I in Heaven but thee? Psalm. 37. v. 25. Ier. 17. v. 5. v. 6.
said David. Cursed be the man, (says Jeremie,) that trusts in man, and
whose heart departs from the Lord: for he shall be like the heath in the
wilderness, and shall not see when GOD comes: But blessed is the man that
can say to God with Jeremie, Ier. 17. v. 7.
thou art my hope in the day of evil.

The use.
The use, let us learn wisdom at these sick fools come to their wits
again: In all our distresses let us run to the LORD. Note.
Who is so powerful to help as he? who is so merciful to help as he? It
shall therefore be our best in the time of out prosperity to make our
acquaintance with him, Note.
that in affliction we may the more boldly go and cry for his help. * If God
be a stranger unto us, we will think shame to imploye him: but if he be our
friend, Proverb. 18. v. 24

The 5 doctrine.


we shall find that of Solomon to be true, There is a friend that sticks
closer than a brother.

Again in that the afflicted are said here to cry unto the Lord, Note.
but not until they be so straited with sickness that there is no more
appearance of life: J observe the profit of affliction: yea, of sorest
sickness: It is a powerful means for to chaise a man home to his God. Note.
While the Mariners of the ship, wherein Jonah was, perceived the tempest
arise, Jonah. 1. v. 5,
they were busy in doing what men could do: they cast out the wares that were
in the ship to lighten it of them, but seeing that the sea wrought still and
was more and more tempestuous, they took them to their prayers: Every man
cried unto his God. Note.
When their Gods could not answer they wakened sleeping Jonas, who should have
been the cock of the ship for to craw day unto others: him they exhorted to
cry and to try what his God could do: Arise, said the poor pagan, v. 6.
Call upon thy God, if so be that he will think upon us that we perish not.

There was no crying unto God into that ship, until the ship was like to be
broken: Jn the great distress the pagans that knew not God before, seeing the
peril, boasted the Prophet to his prayers, saying, what meanest thou O
sleeper! Arise and call upon thy God? Note.
When there is no appearance of help from any creature, then men are forced to
run to God.

Note.
So long as man can see a creature, that can help him, he will run to it as
to his best refuge. Note.
Jf he be minded to conquesse houses or lands, he will cry unto his coffers:
Come out thousands of silver and gold and buy this: But if he be drowned into
deb^e, and cast into prison, then and there he will cry unto the Lord. Note.
So long as the forlorn son had a penny into his purse, he thought never of
home; but when he was forced to feed with the swine, he said, Luke 15 v. 7.
I will return to my father again. Note.
So long as we have peace in our land, and Barnes full of corn and purses
full of money, we ly in security like these of L^ish: Iud. 18. v. 7.
But if the foraine enemy come and deprive us of such comforts, then we shall
cry unto the Lord. Note.
So long as Iehoshaphat in the battle saw his party to be equal, he fought
as he could: But so soon as he saw him self near straited by the enemy, 1
King. ^2. v. 32
then he cried unto the Lord. Note.
So long as Hagar had water into the bottles, she and Ismael drank together,
enjoying the creature: But so soon as all was spent, then she weept and cried
unto the Lord. Genesis 21. v. 16.

Note.


So ^long as the Raven can find a fleshy carrion, he will quietly feed upon
it: But while he is straited with hunger, he beggeth his meat from God: Psalm
104 v. 21.
The young Lions, (says the Psalmist) roar after their prey: and seek their
meat from God. Note.
All things, men, beasts, fowls: yea, Papists in their greatest pinch are
forced to quite all other vain hopes for to cry unto the Lord.

Note.
I remember that in the time of the French persecution, J came by sea to
Flanders, and as I was sailing from Flanders to Scotland, a fearful tempest
arose, which made our Mariners reele to and fro, Psalm. 107 v. 27.
and stagger like drunken men: In the mean time, th^re was in our ship a Scots
papist, who lay near me, while the ship gave a great shake, his ordinary cry
was O Lord: J observed the man, and after the Lord had sent a calm, I said to
him, Sir, now ye see the weakness of your religion: so long as ye are in
prosperity, ye cry unto this Saint and that Saint; Jn our greatest danger J
heard you cry often, Lord, Lord, but not a word ye spoke of our Lady. J
compare a Papist in his pilgrimages to creatures, to a sheep that is hunted of
a fly: it runs from bush to bush: every bush catches a l^ck, till the
silly sheep be threed-bare and tirred of all his fleece, sin like a
cleg-flee makes the soul to startle like a beast: there is no sure refuge but
in God. Away then with Papistrie and with all that draws a man from the Lord
unto any other: The highest point of tribulation, or some great danger of
death, wakning a man, will tell a man that there is none that can help but the
Lord, and that he only is to be called upon: Call upon me in the day of
trouble, (said the Lord:) Whom have I in heaven but thee? said the Psalmist:
All things are for the Lord, and from the Lord, and all things in their
troubles must come to the Lord, as the hunger-bitten Aegiptians came all to
Joseph for meat. Thus ye see the great good of greevous afflictions: They
chase the creature till it cry to the Creator: I will go, Hosea 5. v. 15.
(says the Lord,) and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: In their affliction they will seek me early. This
is hee^e declared in these words of my text, Then they cry unto the Lord in
their trouble.

The use.
The use, let us rejoice in tribulation, seeing God has made it a spnrre unto
prayer. Note.
Man is like waters: Putrescunt ni movcantur aquae, waters spill and stink if
they stand without any motion; so will the soul stink without affliction.
Before I was afflicted, (said David,) I went astray, but now I learn thy
statutes: Indeed it is true, Heb. 12 v. 11.
that no affliction for the present seem^th to be joyous but grievous:
Nevertheless afterward it yields the p^^c^able f^uit of righteousness to
these that are exercised thereby.

Note.
This is a quiet fruit of righteousness when the soul is moved to cry unto
God. Cries in prayer unto God are the quietness of righteousness. I confess
that both the wicked and the godly will cry in their distress: but the wicked
cry like dogs beaten with a staff: the godly cry into their hearts, like
children with Moses, to whom God said, why cryest thou unto me? Let us pray
the Lord that he would rouse up these sleepie souls of ours that sleep so
oftin sin, like Jonah in the hatches: Note.
Well is the man to whom God shall send some affliction crying to the sinner as
the Ship-master cried to Jonah: Ion. 1. v. 6,
what meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, cry and call upon thy God. Note.
It is good that man while he is forewarned by any affliction strive to be
friends with his God. Men may rebel for a space, and may turn the grace of
God into wantonness, yea and harden their hearts with Pharaoh against his
plagues: But at last when all their excellency is swept away like a spiders
web, Job. 4. v. 21.
as Eliphaz says, they die without wisdom: As a man lives ordinarily, so
dies he: No^e.
He that lives a fool shall readily die without wisdom: a fore-warning
affliction does good to the godly man: it makes him to be fore-armed: But as
for the wicked man though God send sickness after sickness, and delay his
death, yet he is not a whit the better. Note.
But while he lives he lets the debt run on, like a spender or waster,
who carelessly puts more and more upon the score. It were good for the wicked
that he had never been borne, as Christ said of Judas: Mat. 2^. v. 2^.
or that he had died in the birth: yet seeing life in itself is a benefit,
while it is abused by those that have gotten it by crying unto the Lord, it is
righteous with God to punish them in rigor for the abuse of his benefit,
which should have been to them a large time well employed in repentance,
wherewith as with a brush they should have cleansed their hearts from the
scailles of wickedness.

Again here some may object, how is it that the godly man being sick,
Objection
and near the doors of death should cry so earnestly for life? Should not a
godly man be glad to go to GOD his Father, Eccl. 12. v. 5 Psalm. 16. v. 11.
to his long home, where are pleasures for evermore?

What see we here, but the back-parts of Jehovah? Are we not in this world
as David was in Kedar, Ps. 120. v 5.
and in Meshech, or as Israel were captives in Babylon? Is not this earth a
strange land, Ps. 137. v. 4.
wherein we can not sing the praises of our God? Are not our Harpes here hung
upon the willowes? v. 2.
Our Music is dumb.

I answer that indeed if the godly well prepared as they should be when
sickness comes unto them, they would not cry for health of body: but their
chief cry should be, Rev. 22, v. 20.
Come Lord Jesus, come, and fetch away my soul that pants after thee like a
cha^ed Heart, Ps. 4^. v, 1.
desiring the rivers of waters: The chief desire of a godly heart is all in
this wish, v. 2.
when shall I come and appear before God? Item, I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ.

Note.
But for some reasons the most godly whiles will seek life from God: some desire
to live, because they desire yet to do some better service for God, than
hitherto they have done: they are sorry that in their calling they have not
been so busy as it became them to be: the desire of their life is only
that they may redeem the time by doing some one good turn or other for their
God.

Note.
Jn my judgment this chiefly made Hezekiah to weep, Isa. 38. v. 14.
to croude, and to chatter while he heard the message of death. This chiefly
made the Psalmist cry, Ps. 102. v. 24:
Take me not away in the midst of my days.

* Others even of the number of the godly will cry for life, because they
find not themselves so well prepared for to come before the face of their
Judge: they see that as yet they have not put the affairs of their Soul to an
order.

It is likely that this also made Hezekiah to weep so fore, that he chattered
at the words of the messinger of death: God by Isaiah bade him put his house in
order: 2. King. 20. v. 1.
if that had been already done it had not needed Gods command: seeing then his
house was not set in order, which is but an easy matter, it would seem that
his soul was not so set in order as that he found it ready to compeare before
the judgment seat of God: O how fearful is that tribunal for an unprepared
soul! Note.
What terrors are these, sin, and sickness, death, the grave, and an
unprepared soul.

The use.
The use of all this is seeing there is nothing more certain than death, and
nothing more uncertain than the time and place thereof, let us ever be upon
our guarde ready to flitte and remove out of our tabernacles of clay: Job. 4.
v. 19.
My time is in thine hand said David: Ps. 31 v. 16.
We cannot tell how soon our glass shall end. Note.
Let us therefore resolve with Hezekiah in all the way of our pilgrimage, Isa.
38. v. 15.
to go softly in the bitterness of our soul.

The doctrine.
Again, in that it is said that the sick men cry unto the Lord in their
trouble let us observe the perverseness of our nature. Note.
Troubles make us to cry, bodily afflictions rouse us up to cry: but alas
while we sin we keep silence: while the Thief is cutting a purse he is
quiet: but while he is scourged for his fault, he will shoute for every
stripe: Note.
While Satan is forcing us with his tentations to offend our God, we often
yield thereunto without any cry to our God: It is then especially that we
should cry unto him when we find sin coming against us to force us to
offend our God. Note.
God in his word has set down a notable Law for a Damsel betrothed to a
husband: I will let you hear the Law.

If a Damsel, Deuteronomy. 22 v. 23.
says the Lord, that is a virgin^ be betrothed to an husband, and a man find
her in the City, and lie with her: v. 24.
Then ye shall bring them both out to the gate of that City, and ye shall
stone them with stones that they die: the Damsel because she cried not: and
the man because he humbled his neigboures wife. v, 25.
But if a man find a betrothed Damsel in the field, and the man force her,
and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her, shall die. But in the
Damsel there is no sin worthy of death: v, 27.
for he found her in the field, and the betrothed Damsel cried, and there was
none to save her.

Now what is to be inferred upon this? This is the matter. Note.
The soul of a Christian is as a Damsel, a virgin betrothed unto Christ the
blessed Bridegroom of our souls: Job. 3. v. 27.
Satan the tempter is like a Russian coming to force and defile this Damsel:
Jf the soul cry not while Satan is using violence, the Soul and Satan
shall die: the soul because it cried not, and Satan because he forced the
Soul: But if while Satan is using violence the soul cry unto God for help,
then Satan shall only die: yea though in that case the soul in something
should be defiled, yet shall she not die, because she cried unto the Lord.

The use. Note.
The use of this is, that whenever we shall perceive Satan coming with
force for to deflore, or defile our soul Christ's Damsel, we incontinent cry
with all our force unto GOD. Lord help me: Lord lead me not into tentation:
O God of my m^^^^ prevent me and keep m^ from these snares: be thou a
shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. This was Paul's doing when
he feared to be forced with that body of death, he cried, Romans 7. v. 24.
Miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Note.
This was the practice of Joseph while his Mistress said to him; lie with me;
Genesis 39. v. 9
he cried unto God. How should I do this wickedness; and sin against God?

* He that will not cry to God before he sin, Gods plagues at last shall
cause him cry for his sins.

* Well is that man and that woman, that can cry to God for to save them from
the hour of tentation, Note.
If a Damsel was forced in the field, her sin was not thought worthy of
death: because it was supponed that she cried, but that there was none to help
her. But it is not so with our soul, whether it cry in the City, or in the
field: if she cry she shall find that there is a God for to help her, and
therefore if she be forced, she can have no excuse: Well is that soul that
is continually crying to God in prayer. Note.
Jf a palliard know that a woman will cry he will fear to make an onset:
but if he see her smyle, he knows that he has found his match: It is so
with Satan that great palliard, and the soul of man. If Satan know thy
soul to be a crying soul, a soul that will tell all his te^tations to
Christ her husband, he will fear to tempt that soul: Satan is feared for
Christ, he believes and he trembles. Iam. 2 v, 19
But if he see a soul that is quiet, Note.
a soul that hears his filthy language and smileth upon him with a wanton
eye, there the unclean Spirit knows that he has found his match.

Note.
Well is that soul that Satan finds weeping for offending Christ her husband.
Note.
O what a difference is between a soul whose eyes are drumly with tears of
repentance and a soul whose eyes are wanton' light and smyling, eyes filled
with spiritual adultery? Note.
Remember this use O man, when ever Satan shall come to tempt thee unto sin,
then cry thou unto the Lord unto Christ thy husband, and Satan that filthy
Russian shall fly away in haste: so long as we breath let us pray that the
Lord would lead us into the land of righteousness. Ps. 143. v. 10


Last of all, The doctrine.
in that these that are troubled cry to God, J observe a comfort for these
that cry in trouble: when a man can once cry to God in his trouble, it is a
token that God shortly will deliver. Note.
One that is pined with the stone gravel, so long as he but whineth for the
difficulty he has in making water, the Surgeon will not cut him, but will
say let him be till he cry: from the time once he begins to cry then is
it time to cut: that once done he is delivered from his pain.

Note
There is in man a stone harder than the Stone of the bladder, viz. the stone of
the heart: The heart stone is of sin: the bladder Stone is but of sand. Sin
gravel is a stone gravel: for hardness there is no flint so hard as a hard
heart. Note.
As the Stone gravel is from sand, one pickle joining to another, till at last
many pickles being knit together in a lump become a confirmed stone; even so
the heart gravel is from one sin joined to another, till they be in an huge
number together like a cluster. At last in length of time by custom they
harden together: from thence is the confirmed stone of the heart. Note.
So long as this stone is not very painful in affliction, but only makes
the sinner to whine, the Lord will let that sinner suffer still: for a space
he will delay his cure: but if once the pain be so* that it cause the sinner
to cry, God that most cunning Surgeon will cut out the cause of his cry.

Note.
Behold the truth of this into my text, Then they cry unto the Lord: there is
the cry: and he delivers them: there is the cure.

The use: The use.
Let us try our souls in trouble whither they cry or but whine: if the soul
but whine in afflictions, it is a token that deliverance is yet far off but if
the soul once begin to cry, God is ready to deliver. Note.
By our prayer to God we shall know the mind of our God in our troubles, and
the working of our afflictions:. Note.
In this crying to God there is a great difference, the wicked cries more for
his sore than his sin: the godly man cries more for his sin than his sore.
Note.
So to do is not the practice of a prentise. The Lord teach us both how we
should cry to our God, and wherefore chiefly we should cry. To God be glory
for ever, Amen.

A SHORT MEDITATION against man's security in life.
Note.
AS intensive cold in time of frost makes water to congeale and binds all
up; so that the earth is neither fit for plowing, or sowing: so into the hearts
of many there is a frost, yea a lying frost, so that the fallow ground of
their hearts cannot be riven up. Note.
An excessive cold at Gods service stays the pleugh of Gods ^grace. Note.
Ye all would think it an uncouth thing to see pleughsly in frost in the
month of May, and yet more into August.

Note.
The year is but of the age of twelve months, May is but the youth thereof:
and yet if in that month there should be no appearance of fruits, what would
you think of such a year? Note.
And yet alas many of us who have past the June, yea the August of our age are
as yet frozen in the dregs of our sins, as though the beams of Christ the
Sun of righteousness had never shined upon our souls.

Note.
What is this that we cannot remember our mortality? * One sithe cutteth down
both Prince and people. Note.
How many Kings of this land are dead, and but one alive? The rest are gone
for to give account how they have swayed the scepter, when they sustained the
person of God. Note.
All the glory of the greatest, except they be godly shall perish like the
snuff of a candle that is trodde underfoot. Let us therefore so live to die,
that we may die to live. Note.
If we dig not the Mine we shall never find the treasure. Note.
If we could lay this to our heart, we should be swifter than Hazael in
running to our God.

THE SICK MAN'S SALVE. THE THIRD SERMON.
Psalm. 107. v. 19. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he saved
them out of their distresses.

V. 20. He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions.


IN my former Sermon it has been declared, what the sick fools did while
they were near the doors of death: it is said: Then they cried unto the
Lord: Jn this Sermon we shall hear Gods part: It is in these words ^ee saved
them out of their distresses: he sent his word and healed them: and delivered
them from their destructions.

The division of these words.
Jn these words I see two things: first, God after he has heard afflicted
sinners saves them, and delivers them out of their distress: secondly, it
is set down by what means he delivered these sick persons, in these words,
he sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their graves, or
destructions.

The doctrine.
As for that it is said in the first part of my d^yes Text, that God saved
these sick out of their distresses J observe the great mercy of God: there is
no sin, or sickness I see so great, but if the sick sinner can cry to him,
God has mercy for him: as it is of sickness, so of all other affliction. If
man can cry unto God, Note.
God is ready to send succor. This Moses declared well unto Jsrael: Deuteronomy. 4.
v. 27.
The Lord, said he, shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number: and there ye shall serve gods, v. 23.
the works of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither hear nor see, nor
eat nor smell: there is Gods judgment against man's sin: But shall the LORDS
arm be stretched out still? Will not God be any more merciful? hear what
is subioyned: v. 9
But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God thou shall find him, if
thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Note
Many a time had the sick fools of my text offended his Majesty, yet here
is mercy; they cried: and he saved.

Note.
God sometimes indeed while he has been often provoked by the sins of men
after diverse deliverances, will seem to be more hard to be entreated, that
men may beware to be relapses from such he will hide his face for a space:
Verily, said Jsaiah, Exodus 33 v. 6.
thou art a God that hides thy self, O God of Israel the Savior: he may hide
himself for a little, but not long. Note.
While he hears the heart-cryes of his creature, he is forced to draw the
curtain, and show himself unto it.

Note.
He that forbade man to hide himself from his own flesh, can not long deny
himself to a sick sinner crying in his distress. Of this we have a notable
speech in the Psalm, I sought the Lord and he heard me, Psalm. 34. v. 4.
and delivered me from all my fears: They looked unto him, and were
lightened, and their faces were not ashamed. v. 5.
Now let us see the kirnell of that comfort in the verse following; v. 6.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his
troubles. Note.
Behold a progress of seeking, and of deliverance: first he sought God:
secondly he looked unto God: thirdly the poor man cried: So first God met
man's seeking with deliverance from the fear of trouble, secondly, while man
looked unto him he made him to be enlightened, so that he knew both who did
afflict, and wherefore he did afflict him. But last of all, while God saw this
sinner humbled like a poor man and heard him cry, then he saved him from his
troubles. This poor man cried, says the Psalmist, and the Lord heard him, and
saved him out of all his troubles. See how the Lord at the first saved him not
from all his troubles, but by degrees till he cried unto him like a poor man
crying for an alms. Note.
The harder health is more come by, the more it is set by: a disease easily
cured, is easily incurred. The sooner a sinner be helped, if he return
again to his sins, he shall find God the slower to come to his help
again: God will let him seek and look and cry, yea, and cry again to teach
him better manners.

This we see in the book of Judges to have been Gods doing with Israel. Note.
The Israelites being oppressed by the Philistimes, and Ammonites in their
misery they sought unto God: they looked unto him: yea, and they cried: but
what answer got they at the first? God sent them unto their false gods at the
first and yet upon their repentance he he pitied them: The words are so
weighty that they are worthy to be heard: these be they even as they were
written by Gods penman: when the Israelites saw that they were so sore
afflicted by their enemies, it is said: Judge 10. v. 10
They cried unto the Lord, saying, we have sinned against thee, both because
we have forsaken our God; and also served Balaam: let us now hear what answer
God made unto them: v. 11.
He said unto them, Did I not deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the
Ammorits and from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistimes? The
Zidonians also, v. 12
and the Amalelikites, and the Maonites did oppress you, and ye cried unto
me, and I delivered you out of their hands: v. 13.
yet ye have forsaken me and served other Gods: Behold their relaps: what
says the Lord to that? v. 14.
I will deliver you no more: Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen,
let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation hear what a hard answer:
Now what did the Jsraelites? v. 15.
They said to God, We have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good
unto thee, deliver us only we pray thee this day: as if they should have said
Lord but for this one time: Thus after they had cried they amended their life
by putting away the strange Gods from among them and served the Lord: what did
God then? Note.
It is said that his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel: v. 16.
So at last they got help, but after many prayers and after the amendment of
their life. O the great mercy of our God! Job 7. v. 20. The use.
O the preserver of man!

Let us make use of this by applying it to our present purpose which is
concerning these that are so sick that they seem to be near the doors of
death Note.
While God delayeth to bring them from their sickness notwithstanding of all
their prayers, and of all our prayers private or public, let us not grudge,
neither let the sick murmr. God while he delayeth their health, he as it
were says to them, Judge. 10. v. 13.
as he said to Israel, I will deliver you no more: yet if the poor patient
persist to murne before him God will not fail to give him full contentment at
last. Note,
God afflicts not willingly the children of men: no not: his soul often is
grieved for the misery of Israel. Note.
How can he but deliver repenting sinners, seeing their misery grieveth his
very soul?

It is not wonder that God repented himself to have made man, because that he
is the chief matter of his grief. Note.
As for the Devils they grieve GOD by their sins; but he is not grieved for
their torments: God gladly shall cause scourge them with scorpions: Note.
But as for his own children here he is grieved, and grieved again, first
for their sins but most for their sufferings: he is grieved for their
sins, as a father for his childrens faults: and again he is grieved to
strike them. Note.
Last of all he is most grieved after that he has stricken them. Note.
These be wonderful words, his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel:
God that forgave David his sin could as gladly have spared him in his
judgments: but the wicked were looking on wondered how God did spare: and
therefore ^or his honor, and for his names sake he could not let David go
unpunished: So soon as David had said, 2. Sam. 12. v. 13
I have sinned against the Lord: Nathan answered that the Lord had put away his
sin: but as for afflictions and troubles he could not put them away,
because by that deed he had given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme. v. 14. Note.
Jf all the wicked were blind God would often spare to afflict his Children.

An objection.
Here some may object and say that this our Text is not ever true: Js it not
clear that God delivers not all men from the gates of death, though they cry
unto him?

The answer.
It is certain that it is not aye done: Note.
For if men by crying to God were ever brought back from the doors of death;
death should be a rare thing among men. Note.
If life could be had for crying to GOD, the World should be deafned with din:
for all that a man has he will give it for his life It is but one of a
thousand that can say with S. Paul I desire to be dissolved: what then shall we
say to our Text wherein is said that when the sick man cries then God
delivers? Note.
Surely this is not ever done, but if it be once done to a man in his life,
they be few here of any age but once in their lifetime God has brought them
from the doors of death: If God once has done this to thee by thy own
experience subscribe to the truth of my Text.

Note.
Neither does my Text say that this is done to all, left that any should
beguile himself, saying, I may sin, seeing as yet I have never been so sick
as to be at the ports of death: before J die I must first be near these ports
and be brought back again to health and so shall live a space and afterward
die: No not, God has not astricted himself by promise to any that he shall
get but an hours sickness before he die. Levit. 20.1.
If a Nadab and an Abihu come in with strange fire before the Lord, Act. 5
9.3. Numb. 16. v. 32 Note. Genesis 19. v. 26.
God in an instant will slay them with fire from heaven. Ananias and Saphira
dyed having a lie against God in their mouth: Dathan and Abiram were swallowed
up into an instant: These are set down in scripture as Pillars of Salt to tell
to the Passengers of this world that they look not back to Sodom but have
ever their eyes upon their God.

Note.
As for the godly in their sickness if at last when their glass is at the
running out they cry to God for life, God shall give them an answer that
shall content them: he shall let them see that death is better then life: Note.
Moses desired to live and to go to Canaan, Gods desire was that he should die
for to go to the heavens: Note.
Behold how God desired better for Moses, then Moses for him self: The death
of the righteous was the wish of Balaam: let me die, Numb. 23. v. 10
said he, the death of the righteous: The death of the saints is a Precious
thing: It is promised to them as a releese of all their distresses, Job. v. 17.
as a rest from their labors, a refreshment to their wearied bones: there the
weary be at rest says Job, speaking of the grave: they rest in their beds
says Isaiah: Isa. 3. v. 2.
This was Gods promise to good Josiah made by Huldah the Prophetess: I will
gather thee to thy father, 2. Chron. 34. v. 28.
said the Lord, and thou shall be gathred to thy grave in peace: Note.
Thus the godly man (except it be that God will have him near to him self as
Enoch, Isa. 57. v. 1.
or that he should not see the ill to come) gets his full of days: such a
man shall come to his grave with his gray hairs in a full age like as a shocke
or ricke of corn comes in his season: Job. 5 v. 26. Note.
What is a gray headed goodly man but as a field that is ripee for the Lord
John. 4. v. 35.
The country says Christ is all white speaking of the corns in their
rypnesse: Note.
A gray headed godly man is like ripe corn ready for the Lords Barne-yeard,
that is up into the heavens. Note. Prou. 16. v. 3.
According to this, Solomon speaking of the hoarie head, says that it is A
crown of glory if it be found in the way of righteousness.

The last thing I shall touch here concerning Gods deliverance from sickness
or from any other troubles is, a counsel I would give to these that have been
delivered: Note.
The counsel is this, has God once brought thee from the doors of death to
life? or has he delivered thee from any imminent danger? Be wise in times to
come: Be thankful and sin no more: sin no more for fear of worse. Note.
This was Christ's counsel to the man whom he had healed at the poole; while
afterward he found him into the Temple he said unto him, (...) 5. v. 14.
Behold now thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

Note.
There was never a man delivered from so filthy or from so fearful a disease,
but if he return to his sin like a dog to his vomit, 2. Pet. 2. v. 22.
God can make a worse thing come unto him: Note.
This like a wakener cries to all; stand in awe and sin not.

Sin at the first is like a little chet or young plant of the first years
planting, ye may easily nip it in two with your nail: Note.
sin doubled is like a plant of two yeeares growth which requires the
strength of the hand: But sin tripled is like a tree of three years growth,
of faster roots then of before: Last of all it comes to pass that that which
with thy singer most easily thou might have plucked up once, can not now be
shaken with all the force of thy body.

Note.
It is good to correct and rebuke sin while it is young and will blush for
shame. Note,
A little correction of the rod will chase away folly out of the heart of the
young child: Note.
But old folly, hardened folly, brazen browed folly returned after many
deliverance, after many mercyes must have a tit in a towe: such a one will
prove a wagstring: Prove. 27.22. Bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
pestell, yet will he not quite his foolishness. After that the Thief is
burnt on the cheek or behind the shoulder for his pickerie, because he
escapes with his life, so soon as he is free he says as the drunkard says
after that his winesicknesse is past, yet will I till it again. Note.
But how is he answered? Gods judgment, yea a worse than of before makes an
answer like an Echo, yet will I till him again: thus as Christ said of the
man that was repossest with ma^s ye Devils, so may be said of him, The last
state of that man is worse than the first.

By what means God is said here to heal deadly diseases.
NOW it follows that we see particularly with what salve God heals the
sick man's sore. It is set down into these words: He sent his word and healed
them, and delivered them from their destructions.

Note.
The Word here as you see is Gods malagma, or healing plaster. Note.
Gods word sent to the sick man is the messinger of health, a medicine sent
from God for curing of all diseases.

Upon this part of my Text, J shall gather eight, or nine several doctrines.

First, The 1. doctrine.
in that God is said to send his word for healing of sick men, J observe the
great Majesty of God: he heals men by a Messinger, so that he needs not
to come himself, but only to send a Messinger, called his word: A noble man
in the bed of sickness near unto the doors of death having sent for the
Physician would not be content that he should send a messenger, and not come
himself; the most wnderstanding have no more knowledge then is needful: Note.
Elisha Gods Prophet was beguiled in this: he sent Gehazi his servant with a
staff for to quicken the dead child of the Shunamite, but all in vain: It
behoved him to come him self: and when he was come what pains had he before
life could be gotten? King. 4. v. 33. v. 34.
First, he went into the chamber where the dead child was, and shut the door
upon them twain, and prayed unto the Lord: he began with prayer Then he went
up upon the bed and lay upon the Child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and
his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and he stretched him
self upon the child: what wrought that, will ye say? after that done, it is
only said that the flesh of the child waxed warm: v. 34.
there was no appearance of life yet, but only that the cold dead flesh grew
a little warm. After Elisha returned and walked in the house to and fro: v. 35.
See what difficulty he had: after that the went up again upon the bed and
stretched himself upon him.

At that last action it is said that the child neesed seven times, and the
child opened his eyes: See what toes-and froes the man of God had before life
could be gotten: Note.
Though he should have walked to and fro and streatched himself until now,
except that God had sent his word, v. 31.
Elisha should have said as Gehazi said that was sent with his staff The child
is not awaked:

Note.
There is no force in man against death to make either voice or hearing.

Here then let us observe the great power of God who by the message of his
word cures such deadly diseases: A Physician may help a sick man by
application: Note.
but what can he do by explication. Note.
Men's words are but wind: words can not work: Note.
Men's words are but of dead letters: But the word of god is quick and
quickening: Heb. 4. v. 12.
it is mighty in operation, the Power of God to salvation both of soul and of
body: Romans 1. v. 16.

Note.


That which is able to save both soul and body from Hell fire may easily be a
power for to heal the sick body: Note.
The Centurion after that he had sent a man for Christ to come and cure his
sick servant, he bethought himself what power was in Gods word, and therefore
he sent back word again to Christ that he should not come him self but only
send his word. Tell him said the Centurion to his friends whom he sent to him,
Luke. 7. v. 6.
tell him; Lord trouble not thy self: for I am not worthy that thou should
enter under my roof: wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto
thee: but say in a word, and thy servant shall be healed: v. 7.
Say in a word that is, Note.
send a word, and it shall heal him.

I read of Joseph that he was cast into the stocks in a prison: But by what
means was he delivered. Note.
It was by Gods word: Psalm. 105. v. 18.
The psalmist says that they hurt his feet with stocks, and that he was
laid in iron: v. 19.
But how was he delivered? there he lay until the time that his word came:
Note.
God had given to Joseph the word of his promise in a dream that he should be
a sheafe before whom all others sheaues should bow: Genesis 37. v. 7.
yea that before him the Sun and Moon and elleuen stars should do
reverence. Note.
So soon as the time of that word came the stocks could keep Joseph no more:
Note.
As Joseph lay in the stocks so must the sick man ly in his bed, until the
the time that his word came; then shall he go free: Here behold the great
power of the word of the Lord.

Note.
Turn thee yet again and behold the power of this word in a greater cure In
Ezekiel J see a strange work wrought by this word: In a valley there was a
huge great number of bones both bare and dry: Ezekiel. 34. v. 2.
lo, says the Prophet, they were very dry: God having shown them to his
Prophet said unto him, Son of man can these bones live? The Prophet said Lord
thou know, as if he had said there is very little appearance: Note
J will make them live said the Lord: v. 4.
But how? By my word: I will send my word unto them: Prophecy upon these
bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones hear the word of the Lord: v. 5. v. 6.
Behold I shall cause breath enter into you, and ye shall live: And I will lay
sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you and cover you with skin, and
put breath in you, and ye shall live: Note.
As soon as the Prophet had given the bones this first charge of Gods word, at
that first prophecy there was a noise, and behold a shaking and the bones came
together every bone to its own bone: v. 4.
But there was no breath in them: Note.
Behold how the first charge of the word made only the bones to be conueened,
and to be covered with flesh and skin: Note.
But how shall life be gotten? God must send his word again: God sent his word
to the wind for to fetch breath for the quickening of these dead men: Prophecy
unto the wind said the Lord, Prophecy Son of man, v. 9.
and say to the wind: Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O
breath; and breath upon these slain that they may live. At that second charge
of the word the wind fetched breath which entered into them and all those bones
lived and stood up an exceeding great army. Note.
He who by his word prophesied made dry bones to creep together, and by this
word made the wind to breath life into them, may easily send unto sick men a
word that will heal them thought they were even at the doors of death.

The^ doctrine.
Secondly in that the word of God is said here to be the means whereby God
heals the sick, J observe the diversity of the operation of his word: what
ever God has to do, let him but send his word and it shall be done. Note.
When he made the world he used no other hand but his word: Genesis 1. v. 3. v. 6.
let there be light: let there be a firmanent. Note.
Gods word LET wrought all the creatures: He said, and it was; and as he said,
so it was. Note.
The word of God is like a Mine of diverse veins either for to help Gods
friends or for to hurt his foes, as the cloudy pillar was darkness by day
unto the Egyptians, Exodus 13. v. 21
and light in darkness unto the Jsraelites. Note.
As that Pillar was a dark cloud by day behind Israel for to hide them from
the Egyptians; and a burning Pillar of fire by night going before Israel for to
let them see the way. Note.
So the word that God sends is ever for the good of Israel. It is a quickening
spirit and savor of life to life unto these that are saved, 2 Cor. ^. v. 16.
but it is a killing letter and a sauon of death to these that perish. When
Christ had a will to ding his enemies upon their back he sent his word to do
it: John. 18. v. 6.
I, with I am he, he made them go backward to the ground. Note.
With his word he dang his enemies upon their back and with his word he raised
up Lazarus his dead friend out of the grave. John. 11. v. 44.


Gods greatest wonders were done by his word. Note.
When Israel at Massah and Meribah tempted God in their thirst for to get
water: God directed Moses to find water: But how? was it by sending him for to
delue down in the ground for to find some water spring? No not: Note.
He sent him to a Place where naturally was rather fire then water even to a
hard flint Rock. But how was that water gotten? Note.
God sent his word unto the Rock: Numb. 20. v. 8.
speak unto the Rock said the Lord to Moses, and it shall give forth his
water. Thirdly seeing Gods word is of such power that for all things it is a
sovereign remedy: The doctrine.
let us beware to doubt of its power Note.
These gluttons that cried for flesh are branded with this blot: Psalm. 48. v. 19
They spoke against God, saying Can God furnish a table in the wilderenesse?
Note.
Beware to say Can God? were the difficulty never so great in appearance.
Numb. 2^. v. 11.
Moses his doubt made him double his stroke against the Rock, while he should
have spoken to the stones, who for a word would have wept and shed tears to be
drink unto Jsrael, he in stead of speaking to the Rock scourged the Rock
once and again. Cor. 10. v. 4.


That Rock was CHRIST, and who would have thought that ever Moses would have
scourged Christ? for that deed particularly he never bow the Lord by his
prayer for once to let him set his foot in Canaan, the type of Heaven? Because
he dishonored the word of faith with doubting he never entered into the land of
promise. Numb. 20.10.
The words of his doubt were these, Here now, ye rebels; must we fetch you
water out of this Rock. Hezekiel his answer to God was better, when the Lord
inquired of him if the dead bones could live? O Lord said he thou know.
Hezek. 37.3.
O but God thinks much of his word. Note.
God has said a great word, Heaven and earth shall pass away but my word
shall not pass away. Mark. 13. v. 3^
Christ speaking of the power of this word said that a word spoken with as
great of faith as a grain of mustard seed Mat. 13. v. 20. Luke 17 v. 6.
should remove a mountain hence to yonder place S. Luke says that such a word
should be able to pluck up by the roots a sycamine tree and plant it into the
Sea, a most unfit place for planting. * See how Gods word can cause a tree take
root in an element which naturaly is more bent to pluck up trees by the roots:
shall we doubt of the power of this word were our distress never so great? No
not: Note.
There is such a power in this word that in time of miracles it made the
shadow of the Messinger to heal these that were sick: while Peter passed by:
Act. 5. v. 15
The people brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds
and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by, might
ouer-shddowe some of them. Such was their faith that they strove for the
shadow of Peter, and all that but for to be cured of a bodily disease, O if
men now a days were as bent for to come to this word of God, as they were for
the shadow of a man! Note.
The power of this word within S. Paul put such virtue into his napkins that
wypt the sweat from his body, Act. 16. v. 12.
or the tears from his eyes that these to whom they were brought, were cured
of all their diseases, yea, and thereby evil spirits were cast out of some:
Note.
Such virtue came from the shadows and clothes of such men that men might
believe that they were sent with this word that heals the soul. These
miracles were done by the word and are written for our learning that we may
believe Gods word to be true.

Fourthly, The 4 doctrine.
seeing this word sent by God should be received by faith, it must also be
preached with faith, let him that speaks it, Note.
speak it with boldness not fearing the face of man: The 5 doctrine.
he must not be like the Trumpeter who trembles while he foundeth alarmes
for to stir up the courage of others. Fifthly, seeing it is Gods word, that
is the word of power: let him that hears a word preached consider well whose
word it is: Note.
The touch stone of spoken words is the written word: This was the nobility of
the men of Berea, they tried the word after it was preached: they searched the
scriptures daily, Act. 17. v. 11.
whether these things that were preached were so, or not.

The 6 doctrine.
Sixthly, in that it is said in my Text, that the word is a messenger of health,
a messenger sent from God for to cure diseases, we should make it welcome. When
Eglon a Pagan King heard Ehud say, Judge. 3 v. 20. I have a message from God
unto thee, it is said, that he arose out of his seat, that is, he stood upon
his feet for to bear reverence to the word of the Lord. When Hezekiah heard
many sore words of threatening sent to him from God, All that he said, was,
Good is the word of the Lord: what then should we say of the word of health,
the healing word, which is sent for to cure both soul and body viz. the word
of the Gospel? Good is the Gospel, good is the Gospel, the word of health,
may all sick sinners now say: This is that word sent for to cure the diseases
that would not yield unto the dead letters of the law; Note.
Blessed are the feet of these that fetch Gospel, the word of good tidings.
Seuently seeing the word sent from God; The 7 doctrine.
is God his appointed means for the recovering of health, Note.
when ever we are sick: if we pray for health let us entreat God to send his
word unto us, but seeing the word now comes not down from heaven in a voice
through the air, but is committed to a messenger, we must not look for
revelations, but seek that word from the messenger, Gods interpreter to whom
it is betrusted: we must look for a blessing from the word spoken by him who
is called of God. Note
If God had not bidden Ezekiel prophecy unto the bones, the bones had never
stirred for all his preachinges. Note.
If profit had called him to be a Prophet, his prophecy had never been able
to quicken these slain: But because he prophesied not till God bade him
prophecy, so soon as he prophesied, the sent word unto the scattered dead
bones, they all got life and stood up an exceeding great army. Note.
Men that run and speak unsent, find that their speech take no effect: Note.
Certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, and among others, Act. 19. v. 15.
seven sons of Sceua who was chief of the Priests took upon them to adjure
a devil that was in a man and that by Jesus whom Paul preached: But what said
the devil? Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? Note.
Thus God as ye see has appointed certain men for to carry the word that he
sends, such a man the sickness of a man will know: Note.
But if men run unsent, though they should preach Jesus whom Paul preached,
the diseases like devils shall say to them But who are ye? yea the disease
shall leap on them and overcome them and prevail against them as the devil
did to the exorcists. Note.
When Gods word is sent for to heal: most ordinarily it is sent by a rare man,
a pastor whom Elihu calls one of a thousand: I know that by the word that God
in my Text is laid to send may be understood the power of God: Note.
God indeed can heal men without a pastor either to speak to them or to
pray for them: but ordinarily he sends this word of healing by the mouth of
some rare interpreter: The words of Elihu are plain for the clearing of my
Text: Note
Behold first how he brings in the sick man in his sickness. Job. 33 v. 16.
He is chastened with p^ine upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with
strong pain: v. 20.
So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat: v. 21.
His flesh is consumed away that it can not be seen, and his bones that were
not seen stick out: v. 22.
His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the buriers. Behold
his sickness. Note.
But how shall he be cured?

Let him send for a faithful minister: If there be a messenger with him, v. 23.
an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness; v. 24.
Then he is gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from going down to the
pit. I have found a ransom. v. 25
His flesh shall be fresher then a child's: he shall return to the days of his
youth. Consider well these words and they shall give light to these words of my
Text, He sent his word and healed them, from this may be gathred that he must
be a rare man that caryeth the word sent for health: He must be a man sent of
God that caryeth the word which God sends for the healing of the sick.

Note.
Little good may be looked from the preaching of many, because they preach
unsent: they preach not the word that is sent, which is the word of power: they
may preach Gods word but they preach not a sent word: they take Gods statuts in
their mouth, but God shall reprove them saying what have thou to do to declare
my statutes, Psalm. 50. v. 16.
or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? Note.
When God was angry at Ahab he desired to send out some against him: while he
was upon this thought he looked to all his creatures saying, 2. Chro. 18. v. 19.
whom shall I send? and who will go for us? that said; An ill spirit came out
and said send me. Note.
There be many like the ill-spirit who will not wait till God send them, but
will preueen him saying, send me. Note.
The world now runs to be sent. Note.
There be none so ready to preach as these whom God never sent. Note.
Jn this they are worse then the devil who before he went out; heard God first
say Go forth and do so 1. King. 22. v. ^2.
See how the devil would not go to the Lords work without a commission and
a warrant. Note.
These who run and speak unsent shall find their speech take no effect: It is
the sent word that is the word of conversion, and of health. Note.
A people had great need to bequeath themselves to God, that he would keep
them from a Pastor that comes unsent.

Note.
I will give you two tokens of a Pastor that carries the sent word of God: the
one is inward into the man's self, the other is outward and appears amongst
the people.

Note.
First the Pastor himself must have in his own bosom a warrant from God that
he is called to bear the word that God sends: this warrant he shall know in
two things: Note.
First he shall find within him a drawing desire to serve God in such a calling:
this is for the general. Note.
Secondly he shall have a privy particular draught within him moving him to
desire to be with such a flock. Note.
Not so much for to cloth him self with their wool and feed him with their
rents, whereby he may have a life by them, as that he may win some poor
soul to the love of Jesus, or draw some clogged heart out of the snares of
the devil: that when he has ended his ministry he may say, Behold here I
am, and the children that God has given me:


Note.
This is the inward calling without which if a man go to speak the word, Sam.
6. v. 7.
he shall be like Vzza who putting his hand to help Gods ^^^Arke was stricken
dead with a breach into an instant. Because he wanted a calling, God slew him
for doing that which otherwise was good in it self.

The second token of a Pastor sent with Gods word to any particular people,
Note.
is an vncorrupt desire of him by the flock, not because he is their carnal
friend or of their blood or because he is such a man's son, or because some
guider of the parochin favors him: but because they see him furnished with
gifts and graces whereby their souls may be helped unto God: Act. 16. v. 6
When S. Paul was at Troas A vision appeared unto him in the night: There
stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him saying, Come over into Macedonia and
help us: Note.
We must not now J confess look for visions: But certanely if God has called
a man effectually to bring his word for the well of a people, he will make
these of the flock that are most godly to pray him to come and help them as
the man of Macedonia did unto Paul. Note.


Jf these things be away it shall prove at last that such a man was never a
Pastor but a hireling: what ever words he preached, shall in end appear not
to have been words sent from God.

The 8 doctrine.
Eighthly let us observe here whose word it is, that being sent heals the sick
folks of my Text. It is the word of God: It is in my Text called his word He
sent his word and healed them: his word then and not man's word. Note.
Long shall a man continue jogging before that he waken a sinner by words of
man's brain.

Note.
The words of men being but wind can no more waken these that are soule-sicke of
the lethargy, then the tempest could waken Jonas. Note.
But the word of God like that ship master will rouse up a sinner with
reproves and chase him with glowmes to his God: Note.
The flowers of eloquence never so sweet smelling are not able to reviue the
dying soul: Note.
what are men's words, though written in letters of gold, but words of no
virtue: Such words may be like Agrippa clothed with great fantasy, but they
shall never almost persuade a man to be a Christian: they may skippe about a
dead soul as the Priests of Baal skipped and cried about their dead
sacrifice, but all in vain, their god was on his iourneye, or asleep, there
was none to make answer: there is no comfort to the soul from the words of
man? Note.
Papists traditions are but men's words, and words that God never sent unto
men, and therefore are not able to comfort a man upon his sick bed: they are
liveles without any power or force: but the word of God is lively and mighty in
operation: John. 6. v. 63.
My words, said Christ, are spirit and life.

The use.
The use of this doctrine is, let all these that are sent by God to carry his
word to a people to sick or to whole, Note.
let them take heed that they deliver Gods word as Gods word with the mind of
the sender: Note.
Such must never feign nor flatter under the pain of damnation. Note.
When it was told to Micaiah that he should prophecy good things to wicked
King Ahab because all the rest of the prophets had done so, King 22. v. 14.
what said Micaiah? As the Lord li^eth, said he, what the Lord says unto me
that will I speak. Note
All the rest of the prophets made preachings of their own head for to please
the King: But Micaiah only preached the word that was sent: Note.
In this Baalam shall condemn many that preach as their humor carry them in
feed or in favor as the matter touches their particular: Numb. 24. v. 12. v.
13.
said I not unto thy messenger said Baalam to King Balak: if Balak would give
me his house full of gold and silver, I can not go beyond the commandment of
the Lord to do either good or bad of mine own mind? But what the Lord says,
that will I speak Note,
Because he had a covetous heart and loved the wages of iniquity, though he
transgressed not in his words, he was but a villain: Note.
He carried the sent word and spoke the word that was sent, but because he
spoke it not as it was sent in sincerity of heart, Baalam is branded with
infamy for ever.

Note.
Jn this last age many are become worse then Baalam: his greatest fault was that
he loved the wages of iniquity, but as for his doctrine amongst the Moabits,
it was sincere, he f^attered not the King: he would not curse where the King
commanded, but blessed where he was commanded to curse; till the King in wrath
did smite his hands together, commanding him to flee to his own place: Numb.
24.10
1 called thee to curse mine enemies said the King, and behold thou have
altogether blessed them these three times: Note.
Who amongst us in open view before a King dare thrice transgress a Kings
command for the honor of his God? Note.
Men's preachings to great men are become like the Echo's of their affections,
the last syllabe at least must be theirs. Note.
Others great flatterers are like these greater Echos of longer breath that
will go out the whole verse in repetitions. What is an Echo? vox, sonus,
aura, nihil: Merciful God what shall become of this age wherein the sent word
of God the word of reproof is concealed, smothred and chocked, as though God
durst not be angry at the sins of grands? Note.
Merciful God what shall become of this age, wherein the sent word of God is
thus despised, except it be decked with words of man's wisdom? J take this to
be a fearful plague upon this land: It is righteous with God that so he
repaye home again the loathing of his sent word: Note.
It is justice on his part that these that delight not in the word of God
which is the only sent word, should be given over to ears itching after
humane eloquence, and delicate phrases made of words that are but wind. Note.
Such words like sweetest meats may well make men sick, but shall never
make the sick to become whole.

Ninthly, The 9 doctrine.
in these words of the Text, Note.
he sent his word, I observe that the word that a faithful minister
speaks either in preaching to sick or to whole or in praying for the sick
are words sent from God: Note.
Such words are not in us by nature, but by grace: they are sent unto us and
by us unto you: how shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10. v. 15.
says the Apostle: yea how shall they speak except that the word be sent unto
them? O Lord said Moses, Exodus 4. v. 10.
while God was sending him to speak to Pharaoh, I am not eloquent, or as in
the Hebr^w, I am not a man of words: but I am slow of speech and of a slow
tongue: because he vvanted words of his own he doubted: But GOD that
sends words to his own in need told him, that it was he that had made
man's mouth Note.
When God sends a man he will send words into that mouth that he has
appointed for his service. The use.
The use seeing it is so whenever in our preachinges or in our prayers any
good word come not of our mouth that be sent for to do good t^ your souls,
remember that the word is not ours, but a present that GOD has sent to you by
us, who are nothing but the Lords stewardes, to whom the dispensation of his
mysteries is committed. Note.
Now for so many good words that he has sent unto us in sickness and in
health, in poverty and in riches, in joy and in sorrow, let us give unto this
God all glory, praise and honor for now and evermore. Amen.

THE SICK MAN'S SALVE, THE FOVRTH SERMON.
PSALM. 107. v. 20. He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from
their destructions.

V. 21. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.


IN the last part of my former Sermon, we have heard what salve the Lord sends
for to heal the sick man's sore: it is set down in these words, he sent his
word and healed them. Out of these words we did gather diverse doctrines. 1.
That great is the Majesty of God, that makes his word a worthy messenger for
all his affairs. 2. That great is the power of Gods word that cures all sorts
of sickness. 3. Seeing God is so powerful by his word, that we doubt never
of his power, or of his promise. 4. That seeing this word should be received by
faith it should also be preached by faith. 5. Seeing it is only Gods word, that
is this word, let him that hears the word consider well whose word it is. 6.
Seeing Gods word, is a messenger of health, we should make it welcome, and
bless the feet of these that carry it. 7. Seeing Gods word is his appointed
ordinary means, when we sicken let us pray God to send unto us this
messenger of health. 8. It has been observed that there is no word, but GODS
word, that can make the sick man whole: there is no health in the words
that are forged in man's brain. 9. It is God that preaches orpraveth, in and
by his faithful servants. Note.
He that has made the mouth, is he that puts his word into the mouth.
This far have we proceeded in the doctrines upon these words, he sent his
word, and healed them.

And healed them
Let us now consider what is it that God healed by his word: It is said here
that he healed them, viz. these that were sick, without any exception of
disease, he healed them says the Text.

Let us first here observe the great power of GODs word, The doctrine.
No man by a word can heal any disease, but there is no sort of disease but
God can heal it by his word. Note.
If it had been said, fools because of their folly had the fever, and God
by his word healed them. Some would have doubted if this word could have healed
also of the fluxes: No, not: while it is said that God healed them in
general; it is to be understood of all sorts of diseases. Note. 1. King. 20.
v. 23
Our God is not only a God of the mountains, but also of the valleys. Note.
The Papists that run to Saints for health, not finding any that can cure of
all diseases, have appointed them slaves to run to diverse Saints for diverse
diseases, to one they must go for S. John's ^ll, to another they must go for
frenzy, to another for leprosy, to another for barrenness, to another for
sick horse, to another for sick kine, to another for their swine: Note.
I need not go far: Behold into the same house where J preach, that place
of S. (...) mooles: in my time J saw a deep hole at the side of that stone,
where the miserable ignora^ts of this land had dug for to get the dust of
that pretended Saint: as if it had had power for to give health. Merciful God
what blindness of ignorance was that? What could be the cause of this? Note.
This was the cause; The poor people could not find the word, Gods messenger
for health: The Bible was a clasped book then: the Antichristian seals were
as yet not loosed: they heard nothing but mumbling of Masses, words that they
understood not: words that could not heal their hearts sick of sin, Note.
and what wonder that like hens they came seraping and scarting among the
graves, seeking if they could find any pickle of comfort to their comfortless
souls? Note.
Blessed be our God that has sent his word to this place for healing of sick
sinners, whereas of before they were wont to be sent to seek comfort from the
dead, that had no comfort for themselves.

Notes.
Gods word is a salve for all sorts of sores. To come to my doctrine there is no
disease incurable to the word, when it shall please God to send it. Note.
I confess that there be diseases like devils, some of a kind that are more
hardly driven away than others. This sort of devils said Christ, Mat. 17. v. 21.
cannot be cast out, but by fasting and prayer, to the word of prayer fasting
behoved to be joined,

Note.
Not that the word wanted force for to chase out these Devils, but because of
us whose prayers are sluggish while the belly is full. A full belly makes
the spirit lumpish: fullness of food sends up such thick vapors, which become
clouds between the face of God and our prayers, so that they can not pass
through.

The doctrine. Note.
Again seeing Gods word is his appointed mean whereby he not only gives
health to the body, but also to the souls of his children, let us not wonder
that Satan the enemy of man's salvation be a great enemy to this word, to
the teachers, and to the hearers. Note.
There is not a Sermon made to a people, but Satan is affraide to loss a
soul, for this cause especially he bears a great ill will at Pastors,
because they carry the word of health. Note.
Such men are the Lords Ensigne-bearers, against whom Satan shoots his
greatest pieces. Note.
If they fall, the men of health fall: the sick can no more get salve for his
sore: for this cause let no man wonder that Satan raises slanders upon
Preachers. Note.
This makes that Dragon often to stretch out his tail that hereby he may
sweep down the lights of the World, which show unto us the way of salvation.
Note.
Jf once he can make this word of God to be ill spoken of, and by the reeke
of calumny darken the light, or make it to be loathed, he thinks that he
has won a field. Note.
As for you who take upon you any profession of godliness by frequenting
Sermons and often hearing of this word.

Beware that by a scandalous life ye make others to loath that which is Gods
also appointed means for the healing of souls: Note.
Woe to them that make the word of God to be ill spoken of.

The doctrine.
Again seeing the word is so powe^full a mean for to recover the health that
is lost, it must also be a most powerful preservative of health.

The use.
The use: seeing it is so, let us make meekle of Gods word in our health: for it
is the word of health, the messenger of health, the word of good tidings: What
better tidings would a sick man have than that he should be healed. * There
was such a desire of health in Christ's days, that the people thro^ged so about
him, that some not being able to enter in at the door of the house where he
was, clambe up upon the house, and uncovered the roof above his head, Mar. 2.
v. 4.
and let down the sick into beds by the hole they had broken up.

Note.
Jf we knew the virtue of Gods word: before that we were debarred therefrom by
a multitude, we should uncover the roof of the house where it is preached,
that we might be let down by cords: as we love our health, we should love
this word of health. Note.
All men wish for health, here is the best preservative, fear God: and hear
his word diligently. Note.
If thou loss a preaching needlessly, it is a wonder if thou contract not some
disease:

Note.
If thou also be sluggish to come to Gods house, or if thou come, but yet hears
carelessly and receives not the word with greediness, that is a spiritual
lumpishnesse of heart, a forerunner of some painful disease: Note.
Men ordinarily before some sickness find a certain heaviness with want of
appetit: There is no surer token of a fearful disease to come, then a lumpish
loathing of Gods word. It is of the word as of the Sacrament, Jf the Sacrament
of the supper be eaten unworthily by the children of God, though God after
their repentance forgive them the sin yet he will chastise them with diverse
diseases: Cor. 11. v. 30.
for this cause, said the Apostle, many are weak and sickly amongst you and
many sleep, Even so when the word is heard negligently without due preparation
for this cause many are plagued with diverse diseases:

Note.
There is no such token that God will keep the health of a people as when a
people has appetit of the word and hears it with greediness:

Note.
These delicate souls that are not content with the sincere word of God, except
that it be saused into the entising words of man's wisdom can not be but sickly
souls: Note.
Such men must be filled with some filthiness within, which bursteth out into
scabs which scripture calls the itching of the ear: 2. Tim. 4. v. 3. Prou.
27. v. 7.
Thus as Solomon faith The full soul lotheth the honi^ comb, even Gods word
that is sweeter then the honey comb: But to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet. Note.
A morsel of dry bread is more pleasant to a hungry man then wild foul is to
him that is Blewe burstex as we say: Note.
This land, (let me be familiar) is as it were Blewe bursten with abundance of
Gods word: Note.
We are well fed but it is not seen on us: Because we are filled we loath the
honey comb: Note
J see no greater token of great diseases to come upon this land then this,
Scotlands appetite of Gods word is lost.

Let us here also observe the craft of Satan who in all things goes about to
counterfeit God in his doings: The doctrine.
Here in my Text it is said that God heals the sick with words: he sent
his Word and healed them: Satan goes about to make men believe that he can
heal diseases also with words which we call Charms. Note.
In my judgment it it is from this place that by an Apish imitation he has
learned the first invention of charms or of healing by words. Note.
This of before did I never observe: Often did I wonder where frae he had taken
the use of healing by words: Note.
All that Satan does in draweing ^oules unto him, he has learned it out of
GODS wisdom by counterfeiting the Lords works as the Magitians that turned
their rods into Serpents as Moses turned his rod into a Serpent: Exodus 7. ^.
12. Note. Exodus 7. v. 12.
But as Moses his Serpent swallowed up the serpents of the Magicians, ^o Gods
word shall at last swallowe up and destroy the devils charms: Note.
Satan is an Apish creature striving ever to counterfeit God in all his
actions: Note.
So from God he learned to teach men to make sacrifices to himself, as if he
had been the God of the world: Note.
As God is ever turning evil unto good so Satan is ever turning good unto
evil.

Out of this place in my judgment are all witches charms by imitation. Note.
Jf ye would have the definition of a Charm take it in these words, It is a
word sent from the devil for healing of these that put not their trust into
God.

O, but will ye say, they do good and help us, O folly, if God in such a
case remove his heavy hand, it is for to lay it on again with a greater
burden: such a deliverance is by breaking the prison to be clogged with more
fearful fetters: Here is Gods precept Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble: Here is a promise; and I will deliver thee O but will ye say, in all
that they say, J hear no thing but good words: O fool, if the bait were not
sweet the fish would not pluck: the poisond gloves must be most sweetly
perfumed, The most deadly drink must be most sugared: There is no such liquour
for the mouth as the devils posset, sweet in the mouth, but death into the
belly. Observe also that it is a righteous thing with God to suffer Satan's
words have power, to give such a bodily benefit to these that love their
health better then God: He that seeks his health by unlawful means loves
his health better then God: And therefore just and righteous is he, Romans 1. v.
28.
when he gives over to a reprobate mind these that like not to retain God in
their knowledge. Note.
A mind void of all judgment, is a plague ordained for all these that desire
not to retain God in their knowledge: Because they received not the love of
the truth that they might be saved, 1 Thessalonians. ^. v. 10.
for this cause God sent them strong delusion, v. 1^.
that they should belieue^ a lie: Note.
If men and women will not desist from seeking such unlawful means, but
leaving the word that God has sent for health, will beetake themselves to the
word that the devil has sent, let them know that God has plagued them with
strong delusion, because they have not the love of the truth: Note.
What rage is this for a man to go and seek health from the devil in his
sickness? Is it not as Elijah said concerning Ahazia who in his sickness
sent unto Baalzebub, 2 King. 1. v. 3.
because there is not a God in Israel: Note.
These that think that there is a God in Israel will never seek to be healed
by the deuiles words. Note.
So long as God would speak to Saul, Saul sought not to Satan: Note.
After that God was departed from him and would answer him no more, then he
ran to the devil of Endor: 1 Samuel 28. v. 7.
But what comfort got he there? even that which the devil himself
abhors, viz. torment before the time. Which made him fall straight way all
along on the earth. v. 20.
These were the chief words of the devils comfortes Tomorrow thou shall be
with me. Note.
So must they be heal^^ that desire the devil to send words for their health.

An objection.
Here some curious spirit may object that where as it is said here that God
sends his word and heals the sick, and that therefore in sickness this
word should be sought unto, that seems not to be needful: My days are they
not numbered? a man can not dye before his days, what needs a man then in
sickness seek his life from God?

The Answer.
It is certain that man's time is determined: man's days are bounded like the
sea* Note.
To man's age God says as he says to the waves of the Sea. (...). v. ^^.
Hitherto shall thou come but no further: and here shall thy proud ^a^es be
stayed. Note.
The proudest days of man's age are s^ayed at a certain hitherto: when they
are come to that, they can w^nn^ no further. Note.
But yet till they come there, man must use the means where by his life may be
preserved: Note.
God promised to add to Hezekiahs years other fifeteene: Isa. 38. v. 15.
Hezekiah knew well that God would keep his promise and yet for all that he
left not off to eat and to drink whereby his life might be preserved. Note.
This is most forcible against these that obiecting against predestination, say
most profanely, that if they know they were predestinate to life eternal they
should not care what ill they do: why? because they would be assured not to
go to Hell: Note.
First that were great ingratitude to give the goodness of God such a meeting:

Note.
What ignorance is this, that a man should not know that the goodness of God
leads him to repentance and not to sin more and more? Romans 2. v: 5.
Again though God has promised to him life eternal and that God can not lie,
yet man should no more neglect the means of his spiritual life then Hezekiah
neglected the means for keeping of his natural life: Note.
As for us though we know that our life can not ouerreach our spanne, yet
seeing the day of our death is concealed from us we may lawfully c^y to God for
help in our troubles: Jf we be sick let us entreat God to send his word the
messenger of health, that with the living as Hezekiah said, we may praise his
name? Isa. 38. v. 19
But if so be that our day be come, that God say to us concerning life, as he
said to Moses concerning Canaan, let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of
this matter, Deuteronomy. 3. v. 26.
then let us resolve to pray with Simeon that the Lord would let his servant
depart in peace.

Luke. ^. v. 29.
And delivered them from their destructions.
IN the former words we have heard what good the sick persons have gotten
from God by their prayers, viz health. He sent his word and healed them. Jn
these words the spirit of God lets us see from what ill by his word he has
delivered them, viz. from destruction, and delivered them from their
destructions. Behold in the coherence of the words two things, first a positive
good viz. health Secondly a deliverance from a great, ill viz. from their
destructions. The doctrine.
Here observe the great wisdom of GOD, who for to stir up men to
thankfulness lets men first see what great good he has done to them;
Secondly from how great a misery he has delivered them: Note.
The misery wherefrom a man is delivered, being set in view besides the
benefit received is a commendation of the gift. Note.
As a candle seems clearest in the darkest house: and as the stars are
brightest in the darkest night, so good received appears most, when we see
from what ill we have been delivered.

Note.
The greater the danger has been, we esteem the more of GODS deliverance.
Note.
If any man has saved our life by drawing us out of the water, we being
almost at the last gaspes, we would think of it so long as we live: but to
be helped out of some shallow place, where was no danger of the death, for
such a benefit a light grand-mercy is thought to be enough. Let us behold
here in the word destructions the greatness of Gods deliverance. Note.
The word destructions like death or darkness commending life or light,
sets out the greatness of the positive benefit in those words: He sent
his word and healed them.

Let us consider the word in the original: the word which is here turned
destructions signifies ditches or graves, which are deaths lodgings.

The grave in the first language has diverse names. 1. the most proper is
Keber. 2. Bor, that is a pit or ditch: ^arcer subterraneus, a prison under the
earth. Note.
The estate of all the dead by nature is miserable: they are all in prison, and
there must they lie, till the trumpet of the resurrection blow the blast of
liberty. Note.
At that sound the earth shall open, and in its own language shall say to the
dead, go out my prisoners I am not able to keep you any longer. 3. the grave
is called Sheol, a petendo from ^eeking, quod ore hiant, and dilatato repleri
expetat. Note.
Of all begga^s, death and the grave are the greatest: they ever see^e and are
never satisfied.

They are the two daughters of the Horse-^^ach, Note. Proverb 3^ v. 15. ^. 16.
which evermore cry, bring, bring: The grave is one of these that never says,
^t is enough. 4. Jn the text which J have read, it is called Shechithah, from
a word that signifies to kill, or corrupt, or destroy: According to this the
word here is turned destructions: He delivered them from their destructions,
that is, from their graves.

The doctrine.
The lesson J observe, of all the names of the grave, and particularly of this
in my text, is, great is the horror of the grave: naturally all flesh
abhors it. Note.
When the wicked man that is in God his debt book is buried, he is like one
caught and clapped up in prison: The bars of death are about him as about a
Thief in a pit. Note.
This is a part of wicked men's penalty, the grave is unto them the very porch
of the prison of Hell.

Note.
This is the prison appointed for all desperate banquerupts laden with debt and
danger, unable to satisfy the l^ast farthing. Note.
Many may go to the grave free of all worldly debts, whom God shall challenge
and arrest of an infinite sum, which they shall not be able to pay, though
they had all this world at their dispose.

Note.
Such shall be the end of all prodigal ding-thrifts, who while they lived,
turned the grace of God in wantonness: while they are carried to the grave,
they are carried to their destructions.

Seeing the grave is naturally to all men a destruction; The use.
let the consideration thereof stir us up to a godly life: It is a place most
fearful to flesh and blood. Note.
Job speaking to God concerning the grave, for which he was preparing him
self, declares in most powerful words what a dwelling place it is, Job 10.
v. 20. v. 21.
Cease then, (said he,) and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,
before I go, whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the
shadow of death; v. 22.
a land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death
without any order, and where the light be as darkness. Note.
Those be the most pleasant fields of the grave, viz. a land of darkness,
where the light, (as Job says) is as darkness it self: Job. 7. v. 5.
There shall all flesh be clothed with worms, and with clods o^ dust. Note.
There is the place of silence: Many there be lying together heaps upon
heaps, Judge. 15 v. 16.
as Samson said, but there is not a word of conference.

Note
So long as men live together on earth, they have both company and conference,
Eccles 9 v. 9.
whereby they may sweeten the da^es of the life of their vanity. O but so
soon as they are gone to their destructions, such perishing shad^owes of
pleasures flee away: Eccles. 9 v. 10.
There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the gra^e
whether they go. Note.
Job is very plain concerning this: As the cloud, (says he, Io^. 7. v 9. v.
10.
) is consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave, shall
come up no more: he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his
place know him any more.

Note.
Bildad considering man's mortality and his necessity of going down ^o the
grave, said, we are but of yesterday, Job. 8. v. 9.
and know nothing, because our days on earth are a shadow, that past man must
go to his destruction, viz. to the grave: Thus as ye see, the grave of its
own nature is properly a destruction: Such is it also to all those who in
their life were not partakers of grace. Note.
To go to the grave without grace, is to go to destruction.

Men may strive by artifice to make the grave pleasant by painted and carved
stones, Note.
but when men have done their best it is nothing indeed but a painted
destruction. Note.

Ion. 2. v. 2.


While it glistereth like the Heavens with^^t. ^t is but the belly of Hell
within.

Note.
As for the man of grace, though he should be deprived of the grave, he has
one thing to cover him, which the whole world can not take from him, Coelo
tegitur qui non habet vrnam: he is covered with the Heavens, who wants a
grave: Isa. 57. v 2.
the godly in their graves rest in their beds.

Note.
Behold what a merciful God we have, whose cursings by grace become blessings.
Note.
The grave at the first was appointed by God as a ward house for malefactors,
and now behold how it is turned by grace into a bed of down, a resting place
for the wearied bodies of the Saints. Note.
See how God in his most fearful judgments has ever some comfort infolded
for the comfort of his Saints, as a kirnell within a h^ske. Note.
For them he can keep light in darkness, and also bring light out of
darkness. Note.
For them he can in that which is not, find out that which is, by calling
things which are not as though they were: yea, which is most for his own, even
in destruction, he will keep salvation. Note.
In the graves of the godly, which by nature are destructions, there is a sort
of salvation, which shall be seen at the great and last day of the
resurrection.

The use of this doctrine is t^^o sold, The use:
first for ^^se godly, secondly for the wicked: As for the godly let them be
thankful unto God, who has changed their destructions into beds of rest,
where they shall sleep most softly until the great blast of the last trumpet.
Note.
This is one of the special comforts which God has prepared for the godly man
in his bed of languishing, that God will make all his bed in his sickness:
Psalm. 42. v. 3.
Beh^ld here a greater comfort: In death God will make all the godly man's bed:
The grave to him is but a bed made for him by the Lord. O man of GOD for thy
grave be thankful unto God.

Note.
When death is drawing near, comfort thy self with this, that God is preparing
a well made bed for thee in the grave. Note.
Bless him who has turned thy destruction into rest.

Note.
As for the wicked, let the fearful word of my text, viz. destructions; let it
be as it were a Remembrancer unto them, that there is a thing after this life
prepared for them which God his word calls destruction. Note.
While they hear of it let them come out of their chair of ease for to be
friends with God in time. O merciful God, Note.
what terror must this be, while a man on his death bed perceives nothing
but GODS wrath, a gape^ng grave, and an v^prepared soul? Let this memorandum
rouse up all slippry souls so to live in this life, that they loss not that
life which is to come. Note.
No man can tell how soon his glass shall run out. Note.
What a folly is this for a moment of pleasures to loss eternity, and to go
to destruction. Happy then (I see) is the man that lives well he^re: Blessed
is he whose GOD is the Lord: Thrice happy is he that has faith in Christ, for
in the very grave he shall find salvation. Note.
He has a cordial antido^ against the poison of destruction, who has Christ
to be his salvation: Christ our salvation has destroyed this destruction.
Note.
He has gotten such a victory not only for him self, but also for all his
Saints, that the least and weakest of them may defye both death and destruction
with those words of boast: 1. Cor. ^ 5 v. 55
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Note.
Death like that viper of Malta may hang upon a godly man's hand: (...). ^8. v. 3
but in the day the Lord shall purge the world with fire: the godly man shall
shake death from him, as St. Paul cast the v^per from him into the fire without
any hurt: But as for the wicked that are not in Christ their graves are their
destructions: Psalm. 49 v. 14.
death in the grave feeds on them as on sheep: Note.
To every one of them death may say as Christ said to death I shall be thy
death. H^s. 1^. v. 14.


While Christ's friends with Lazarus are said to sleep into the grave, John.
11. v. ^1.
the wicked man there is but a destroyed creature: While he is there he is in
destruction, Note.
he is in abstracto mall into evil it self, Note.
he is nothing there but the Carrion of a creature.

VVoe be to him to whom the grave is a destruction: Let therefore all men st^^e
so to live, that while they go to their graves, their graves may be a bed of
rest unto them. Isa. 57.^ v. 2.


Note.
Jf the grave be a destruction to thy body, the place of damnation is prepared
for thy soul. Note.
Let Epicures, while they live, sport, and say, Hell is not so ^^te, nor sin
so heavy, nor the devil so black, nor GOD so severe as Preachers prattle: The
day shall come, when they shall find it far other ways. Note.
Shall GOD suffer the whole creation to groan under the burden of our sins?
R^^. 8. v. 20.
Shall GOD him self be pressed under the weight thereof, Amos. 2 v. 13.
as a cart laden with sheaues? and shall he not be avenged of us in death
except we repent?

Let us therefore, least our graves after death be our destructions amend our
life in time: Let us abhor the filthy shape of our sins: Let us lay hold
on GOD his mercy and CHRIST his merits, which are two shoulders that shall
carry away all the weights of wickedness.

Note.
Well is that soul, Col. 2. v 14.
whose Bill and Bond before death is cancelled and crossed: Note.
With great joy may he go to the grave, to whom the LORD has said, Isa. 44.
v. 21.
I have put away thy transgression like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist: Lord
make our eyes nimble to rip our hearts to the bottom that we may bring out
our sins from thence, that they may get a dead stroke before we dye.

Here let us observe who is he that is said here to have delivered the sick
from their destructions, The doctrine.
it is the Lord: The greatness of the work declares plainly that it could
be no other then the Lord: when John and Peter went a fishing after Christ's
resurrection, Christ appeared unto them; after they had toiled the whole night
in vain, at last at Christ's command they cast the nets: Christ at the first
they knew not, but by the great draught of fishes they began to know him: the
disciple, whom Jesus loved considering the draught, John. 21 v. 7.
said unto Peter, it is the Lord: So may a man who has been delivered from
his destructions easily know that none could deliver him but the LORD: the text
is plain here, and he delivered them from their destructions.

Here is a lesson of the great power of God, the angel of the covenant said
well, when he saw Sarah laughing at the promise, is any thing too hard for the
Lord. Not^.

The doctrine.

^en. 18 v 14.


Christ speaking of the hard entry of rich men into God his kingdom, N^^.

Mark. 10. v, 27


compared it to the passing of a Camel through the eye of a needle: this
thereafter he made more clear, saying, with men it is impossible but not with
God, for with GOD all things are possible: This great power here appears in
that, The.use

Note.


when the sick man is hard at the doors of death upon the very brime of
destruction, yet the Lord by his infinite power delivers him from his
destructions.

The use is this, when ever we find our selves perplexed, The use.

Note.


let us have recourse to him that is only able to help us: Who can deliver
from destruction the abstract of ill, but God who is salvation, essentially
that which is good, yea goodness it self? No man can deliver his friend from
fear in the days of evil, when the iniquities of his heels shall compass
him about.

Though men were never so wealthy boasting them selves in the multitude of
their riches; Psalm. 49. v. 7.
none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor gius to God a ransom
for him: All the gold of ^ndia is not able to deliver a man from his
destructions, no not to prolong his life but an hour. N te.
He only who ga^e the life is able to preserve the life: He only who gave the
life is able for to take away the life: Psalm. 68. v. 20.
unto God the Lord alone belong the issues from death, and also the issues unto
death. Note.

Psalm. 90 v. 3.


In his mouth alone are the quickening or killing words, return ye children of
men, either from life to destructions, or from destruction unto life: and
therefore in all our distresses and greatest sickness, let us have our
recourse unto him, Psalm. 37 v. 2^. v. 25.
saving with the Psalmist, whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on
earth whom I desire besyds thee: my fi^sh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever.

We have heard how those that were sick drew near to the doors of death,
and how GOD, while none could help them delivered them from their destructions
in bringing them from death to life, from sickness to health. Note.
Before I pass foreward to the last part of the text, I desire you all to
consider well, that albeit God in great sickness by his word recall us from
the grave, once or twice, yet for all that we must carefully remember our
mortality: Note
for though at diverse times God either in sickness or in dangers, by sea or
by land has by his power delivered us from the grave, wherein long since we
had been rotten; yet for all that at last these bodies of ours must come to
the hands of the buriers, who shall lay us down into our destructions.

Consider and weigh well the matter O man, Note.
though God should prolong thy days, so that every one of them should be like
that day o^ losual^, when the sun stood still upon Gibeon and the moon in
the valley of At^lon, (...) 10 v. 12.
yet should all those days come to an end. Note.
The standing sun at last must go down: Note.
yea though God should bring back the shadow of thy life many thousand
degrees, at last it shall go down in the dial of thy mortality. Note.
Though the house were never so strong, at last it must decay and drop through.

Note.
There is no ludging for eternity in things below. Note.
Methuselah with his nine hundred three score and nine years is followed with,
Genesis 5. v. 27.
he died, as well as he who lived but an hour.

I wish that this my sermon could be to you like the house of mourning, which
Solomon calls better then the house of feasting: his reason is, Eccl^s. 7 v.
2.
for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his hear^: A
feast is made for laughter, Eccl. 10 v. 19.
which will not admit the company of so grave mediations. N^^e.
Laughter will not suffer the living to lay his end to his heart.

Oh that ye all could lay well this my sermon to your heart, Note.
before that death by sickness come and make a breach, and by that breach
run away with your souls! Note.
Alas it is hard for men in prosperity to be moved to think that they shall
be moved: Psalm. 3 v. ^.
I said in my prosperity, (said David,) I shall never be moved. Note.
O how hard it is for men and weemen that have hearts desire, and wealth at
will, to desire to be dissolved. Note.
They are so taken up with their pleasures in this life that they have no
leisure to think upon death. Note.
Men take no heed to the grave that is before them: though they be even upon
the brinke or brimme thereof, they can not think that they shall fall therein,
though thousands have fallen before them.

J compare the most part of this world to men walking over a field so covered
which f^o^, that they can not perceive the way: when they think to run they
fall into a pit with a jumpe.

Note.
It is even so of men in prosperity, while their eyes are dazeled with the
brightness of their pleasures and profits, which as s^ow cover all the way,
before that ever they be aware, they rush down into the ditch of death.

Note.
Many like Mariners in a mist make ship wrack in the calm sea. Note.
The Lord be our Pilot and so direct our souls into this perilous
navigation; that at last by death we may arrive into the haven of the Heavens,
where we may live with GOD for ever. Well is the man that is ever wating for
his GOD. Note.
Well is him that can say with David, Psalm. 13^ v. 18.
when I awake I am still with thee.

THE THIRD PART: THE SICK MAN HIS SONG.
WE have heard of man's misery in the sick man his sore, we also have heard
of God his mercy in the sick man's salve: Man being sore sick cried unto God
by prayer, and God heard him and he sent his word and healed him: Now it
follows that we see what man his duty should be toward his GOD, for
delivering him from such misery: The duty is set down into those words, Oh
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works
to the children of men: this is the sick man his song.

Here let us observe what is the duty of him who has received health and
life from God in a most dangerous sickness, it is here set down, viz. that
he should praise God for his goodness, etc. Note.
God seeks nothing from man for his benefits but thanks and praise:

The doctrine.

Math. 11. v. 30.


The doctrine is this, GOD his yoke is easy; if by our own wickedness we make
it not uneasy: there is no yoke so easy as God his yoke. See how for all his
blessings he requires but thanks. Note.
After that the Physician of the body has used his cure, whether it cure thee
or not, thou must give him gold: after that thy God has cured both thy soul
and body; He seeks but thanks, He craveth but a grandmercy from the heart:
Note.
And yet alas, he who does most, and seeks least, is least considered, and
worse paid of his due.

First here obsetue that the duty of him who has received his health from
God is to praise God for his goodness, and for his wonderful works: our GOD
for all requires nothing but thanks: Note.
He has no need of our gifts: As he has no need, so neither does he
seek any thing from us: Psalm. 50 v. 8
I will not, (says he,) reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt
offerings to have been continually before me^: v. 9.
I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy foldes: v.
10.
for every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.
v. 11.
I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field are
mine: v. 12.
If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine and the
fullness thereof.

Behold how God will not seek any worldly thing from man, Note.
for all the world is his, and the fullness thereof. What is it then that he
would have for all his benefits? The Lord declares him felfe what he would
have: Offer unto God thankesgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high v. 14.
Thankfulness as ye see, is the only impost that God requires of us. Note.
So soon as man has received a benefit from God, he is bund to repare to
his GOD with thanks: Note.
Every new benefit should be unto his soul like Sela in music, a note of
intention, Sela from Salal to lift up. Vatable
or a lifting up the voice.

The use.
The use, seeing the Lord for all his blessings given unto men requires nothing
but praise, let us praise him from our hearts Note.
Seeing God thinks more of thanks then of the world and of the fullness
thereof, let us be careful in this point of duty. Note.
As the bird upon the bush welcometh the day with a song, so soon as it
begins to spring, so should we welcome our God with thanks, so soon as
we see the least of his benefits begin to spring.

Note.
For to enforce this duty upon us, we must consider that GOD above all things
respects his praise, he will reveal great secrets to a man. Note.
This made him reveal all his heart unto Abraham: for the love Genesis 18. v. 17.
of his praise he will save a people that is worthy to be destroyed: for my
names sake, Isa. 48. v. 9.
(said he,) will I defer my wrath, and for my praise will I refrain it from
thee that I cut thee not off. Note.
Moses his strongest argument, while he interceeded for the people, was
grounded upon God his praise, while he had a purpose to destroy his people:
Lord, (said he,) Numb. 4. v. 13.
what will the Egyptians say? By this we may see how dear God his praise is
unto him. Note.
Behold how before he should want praise he will defer his wrath, and
refrain it from sinners that deserve to be cut off.

Seeing then we know that our The use.
God above all things it most desirous of praise, Note.
we should be most desirous to do that which he desires: My father, (said
the servant of Naaman,) 2 King. 5. v: 13
If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done
it? How much more may I say to you, if GOD had bid you do some great thing
would ye not have done it? And now seeing he requires nothing but praise,
who should refuse it. Note.
Js it not more easy for us to praise GOD then it was for Naaman to wash him
self seven times in the Jordan? Note.
Man may praise God, in his hot bed, at his table, in the fields, in his
garden. Note.
If the heart were sanctified it should be no pain but pleasure to praise the
LORD JAH. Note.
In this is the chief happiness of Saints and Angels above, they praise God
continually.

Praise as ye see is that which GOD chiefly requires of man for all his
gifts, whether of wealth or of health. Note.
But how J pray you is this duty paid? The words of my text give notice: Oh
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; etc.

Note.
The word Oh declares plainly the unthankfulness of man.

When fools because of their transgressions were afflicted, it is said: Then
they cried unto the LORD in their trouble. Note.
But after that God has delivered them, is it said that they thanked GOD for
their health? Not: what than? Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, etc.

Learn the lesson: The doctrine.
It is a common thing to cry to God in any adversity: the reprobate will cry
to God in his distress: Note.
but only those who are truly godly give thanks for benefits received. Note.
Ten lepers in their misery, lifted up their voices, crying, Luke. 17 v. 13.
Jesus master have mercy on us: But at the thankesgiving nine were absent. v.
17.
Were there not ten cleansed, said CHRIST; but where are the other nine? Note.
The Buttler in the prison was comforted by Joseph, but while he was restored,
was he thankful? Not: While he enjoyed his prosperity according to Joseph
his prophecy, it is said, Yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph, Genesis
40 v. 23.
but forgate him Note.
Fools in my text were healed: In their afflictions they prayed earnestly;
they all cried for salve to their ^ore: But what was their song? J hear it
not: but the Psalmist regrating their unthankfulness cries out, Oh that men
would praise the Lord, etc.

The use.
The use, seeing unthankfulness is a disease whereunto nine or ten are subject;
Note.
let us so much the more take heed unto it. Note.
Let us inure our selves to be thankful to God for the least of his blessings:
Let us pray before we get them; and let us praise God after we have gotten
them, before we take meat let us pray, after meat let us praise: before we
preach let us pray, after preaching let us praise while we put on our clothes
in the morning let us pray, while we put them off at night let us praise: while
we enter into a water to pass through let us pray, while we are come to the
yonder side let us praise: while we begin a journey let us pray: while we are
come home again let us praise: while merchands go to a market let them pray:
while they are returned let them praise: while children are borne into the
world, let parents pray: if GOD take them to him self, let them praise. Note.
Let us all strive to be as cheerful to praise GOD for a benefit received,
as we were earnest in prayer to receive the same. Note.
Let us not follow the ill example of the sick of my text: they all cried unto
the Lord in their trouble, but J hear not a word of their thanks: only the
Psalmist says: Oh that men would praise the Lord, etc. this is the burden of
the song four several times in the Psalm.

Note.
I like not men that pay their duties with an OH. Note.
This is a sure token of ill payment, when the godly man here is forced to
cry: Oh that men would praise the Lord Note.
Away with rents that are paid with an Oh Note.
Man his praises are the LORD his rents, God will not be praised with those
that praise him with an Oh. God loves a cheerful giver. As He gives
cheerfully, so will he be praised cheerfully: God must not be praised with
regrate. It is good that the godly lament, that men will not praise the LORD
for his goodness, but God will not be praised of those that praise him
unwillingly. Note.
Such a praise will prove like that doing of Ananias and Saphirah a part of
the price will be kept back, Act. 5. v. 2.
such men can not fail but they shall lie to the holy Ghost.

The 2 use.
The second use we have to make here is, that we learn humility in the
consideration of our ill nature. What a misery is this that man by the mercy
of GOD should be healed of a deadly disease, and yet not do so much as to give
thanks to him from whom he has received the benefit.

Note.
Jn the wicked we may see the corruption of our nature, like swine they gather
greedily the acorns of God his benefits, but being animalia prona; creatures
that have the face headlong down, they snatch up the gifts, but can not look
up to the giver with a thankful heart.

The wicked while they are in distress will have some form of praying, but
while they have gotten Note.
their desire they have not so much as a show in praising. Note.
Praise is a sort of godliness, whereof the wicked have not so much as a show.

Note.
Pharaoh could cry for help in time of plagues; but after nine several
deliverances I never read that he said once God be thanked.

Note.
Many while they are sick will give GOD many fair words, Psalm. 78. v. 36.
which scripture calls to flatter with their lips, but all that form of
devotion is nothing but a wyle for to win out of GOD his hands. Note.
This is clear, for so soon as once they are free of their trouble, at once
they grieve the spirit of grace: yea, often they become worse, like that man
that was but for a space delivered from that devil, which was but gone out for
to bring in other seven worse then him self, Math. 12 v. 45.
for to make his party the stronger.

Note.
Let those that after so many mercies give liberty to their lusts consider well
how the deceit of spirit over-reacheth them: let such weigh well in the
balance of the sanctuary, whether or not they have praised the LORD for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works toward them.

Here some men will say, what is this that is required in praising the Lord?
Is it not enough for to say with our mouth, the Lord be thanked? What would
the LORD have more?

J answer to that, GOD must have more: Prove. 23 v. 26.
My son. (says he,) give me thy heart. Note.
God indeed must be praised with the tongue, for which cause it is called our
glory: Psalm. 57 v. 8.
Awake my glory, said the Psalmist unto his tongue. Note.
God also must be praised with the heart, without which all the praise of the
mouth is but a pranke, the sacrifice of fools: Isa. 29. v. 13.
This people draw near me with their mouth, but their hearts are far from
me, said the Lord.

Note.
A near mouth, with a heart a far off is an abomination to the LORD. Note.
Those who in singing Psalms are led away more by sound, than by sense,
respect the music more than matter: Such sing to man, but not to GOD: GOD his
praises must be sung both with heart and tongue. Note.
Here is a reproach for those, who in the congregation join not their voices
with others for to praise the Lord for his goodness, but sit as if they were
dumb. Note.
The book is too dear for singing of GOD his praise. Note.
O what secreet atheism ^urketh into the hearts of men!

Jf men thought that the LORD should be praised for his goodness, and that
God were present in the congregation of his Saints, they durst not come in
before him without the book of the Psalms.

Note.
We often forget our book, because we forget that God is in his Church; but
who forgets to put his hat on his head while he comes to the Church? Who
forgets his clothes? No man; because before he goes forth, he remembereth
that man will see him by the way. N^te.
The wine and aile will command many to speak who are dumb at the service of
their God. Note.
Many never want words but when they should praise the Lord for his goodness.

Note.
Filthy ballads and love songs are vain men's delight, but OH that men would
praise the LORD for his goodness, etc.

It is not enough that men praise the LORD with their heart and tongue, Note.
but also they must praise him with their life, the true trial of the other
two. Note.
After that the Psalmist had said that he would praise God that had chastned
him sore, but had kept him from death, he cried, Open to me the gates of
righteousness, Psalm. 118. v. 19.
I will go into them and praise the Lord. Note.
To go into the gates of righteousness, is to lead a good life; such only are
fit for to praise the Lord.

Note.
As for those that praise not God in life, while they are holy in words, they
are but monstrous persons, all mouths, and tongues, and voices without hearts
to think well, without hands to do well.

Note.
When the for^orne fool come to his wits again, he said not only, Luke 15.
v. 18
I will return to my father, but he did as he said. Note.
The sluggard is ever in fear of lions: The imagination of a beast in the way
hind^eth him from doing.

Note.
The Pharisees could say well but because their works belyed their words, Mat
2^. v. 27.
Christ called them painted tombs or whited sepulchers.

Note
Many would content the Lord with a part of his service: Some like the Pharisee
will paint the outward profession, but hold back their heart from GOD: Note.
Others like N^aman will bow into the house of ^immon, 2 King. 5 v. ^8.
but keep their heart as they imagine unto God: But O fools, Note. 1 King. ^
v. ^^
God will not like the pretended mother have his service divided: God that made
all must have all. Note.
Seeing he has made the heart as well as the hand, he must have both our
thoughts, and our actions for to praise him.

Note.
The whole man that is a continual receiver is little enough for to set forth
the glory of the giver: Do not the favors of GOD follow the whole life of man?
Why then should not his whole life be framed for to express his
thankfulness. Note.
Well is the man whose tongue, heart, and hand can sing to GOD with Jeremie,
Ier. 17. v. 14.
thou art my praise.

Again in those words, The doctrine.
Oh that men would praise the Lord, I observe the fervent zeal of the godly,
Note.
for not only praise they God, but they are grieved when men whom God has
blessed with wealth, or health are slow to praise the Lord for his goodness.
This word OH here vox dolentis a word of mourning is an evident demonstration
of sorrow. Note.
In my judgment true zeal is not better known then in sorrow for the offense
of God.

The use. Note.
The use: let every man try himself, whether he be a godly man or not: If
true godliness be in thy heart thou shall be grieved to see GOD offended,
thou shall strive to keep thy brother from sin. Note.
This was the cursed man his language, am I my brothers keeper? Genesis 4. v. 9.
When ever we see God dishonored or deprived of his praise, we must mourn
for that sin. Note.
Well is that soul that can cry, Oh for GOD his dishonor: Woe to him that
rejoices while God is offended.

Note.
Many think the vices of others commendations of their virtues. If they stand
while others fall either into whoredom, or drunkenness, they have a ce^taine
joy of such filthy falls, which they take to be praisers of their sobriety, and
chastity: Note.
But Oh is not the Lord offended by such sins?

Note.
Js not the profession ill spoken of: Note.
Js not every sin a scandale. Note.
Is not every scandale a woe? Mat. 18. v. 7.
woe to the world for scandals.

Note.
Woe to him that is not sorry for sin, whether it be in him self or in
others, seeing that God thereby is dishonored. Note.
J will tell thee O man, if thou cry not Oh for GOD his dishonor, God shall
cause thee cry Oh in thy distress.

Again in those words: The doctrine.
Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness. I observe how sensible
the godly are, when the least point of GOD his service is neglected.

Note.
If a godly man cries, Oh that men would praise the Lord, because he sees
them flow unto it, how grieved will his heart be, when he shall see men not
only not praising God, but dishonouring GOD for his goodness. Note.
Many have gotten health from God, God in great mercy has brought them from
the gates of death, 1. Pet. 2 v. 22.
and has restored unto them their former strength, Note.
but what thanks? They have like the dog returned to their ^^nite again:
The drunkard resto^ed, runs back to the tavern, and the harlot to his old
acquaintance, Luck. 11: v 24.
like that devil returning from dry places unto his house whence he came out.
Note.
The last of such persons is worse then their first. Note.
Good had it been for many that they had never been brought back from the
doors of death, because that after a new t^^ke of their life they dishonor
God more then ever they did before. Note.
As Jacob said of Simeon, and Levi, so say I of such: O my soul come not thou
into their secret: Gen 4^ v. ^.
unto their assembly mine honor be thou not united.

The use, The use.
let us strive to be sensible of sin, so that we make conscience of the
least sin. Many think unthankfulness to GOD no sin. Note.
The leav^n of the Pharisees has sowred the whole lump of many men's hearts:
Jf they be not Adulterers; but can fast and give alms, at once they will
thank GOD that they are not like other men. Note.
GOD desires no such thanks, when man praises GOD for his own goodness:
But OH that m^^ would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men. Note.
Let man praise GOD for his goodness, but in his own goodness there is no
matter of praise. Note.
What can be said to the praise of a m^^st^u^us cloth? Isa. 64. v. 6.
Such is all our righteousness.

The doctrine.
Let us also observe here another lesson: The deliverance from death is said to
be from the goodness of God, and it is also called a wonderful work: for
while it is said, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, it is
clear that the deliverance from death in sickness is from the goodness of
our GOD.

The 1 use.
The use: let all those who are sick have recourse unto the goodness of God,
Note.
by which only we have health. Note.
When we seek health from God, let us say, for thy goodness sake O Lord.

The 2 use.
The second use I make of those words is for them that are recovered of their
sickness. Note.
Let such learn to be good seeing their health is from the goodness of God.

Note.
A life given in goodness should not be spent in wickedness: The goodness
of God inviteth all men to repentance. Romans 2. v. 4.


Again observe here that great must be that goodness of God, whereby he
brings man back from the doors of death: The preservation of man's life in
his sickness, is also called a wonderful work. Js it not a great goodness
of God, and a wonder, that he should spare the life of a rebellious fool?
What a wonder is this in God his goodness, that the life of man should be so
precious in his sight? Note.
Is not man naturally the enemy of God? It must be a great goodness that
will make a man spare his enemy his life: And who, (said Saul to David,) 1 Samuel
24. v 19.
) finding his enemy will let him go well away? Note.
O but in God then must be a wonderful goodness, in that not only he spares
his enemy, but* which is more even preserves the life of his enemy. Did not
God dye for his enemies? did he not suffer for them by whom he suffered? Note.
By this means (such was his goodness) he heaped upon their heads coals of
fire, Romans 12. v. 20.
that is, as St. Augustine says, vrentes poenitentiae gemitus, the burning
sighs of repentance.

Note.
Who can not be but burnt with sighs, while he considers the goodness of
GOD that has rendered him so mekle good for so mekle ill? What a great mercy
is this, that GOD should prolong the life of a sinner but an hour.

The use.
The use: seeing the deliverance from death and destruction is called a
wonderful work, and seeing it is so indeed, let us wonder at it: when J arose
out of that deadly fever; Anno 1626 in the month of September, and J fand my
winding sheet wrapped together into my study amongst my books, J began to
wonder at GOD his great work, I thought it wonderful. Note.
But alace we wonder at God his works of mercy, as at other common worldly
things but for a little space. Note.
From thence is the proverb, A wonder lasts but nine nights into a city: Fie
upon us that can not wonder still at the wonderful works of our GOD.

The Hebrew word Pala in Niphal signifies both admirabile and occuitum, that
is both secret and wonderful, a fit word for to declare the work to be
wonderful: indeed David speaking of his making in the belly, uses this word:
I will praise thee, Psalm. 139 v. 14
(said he,) for I am fearfully and wonderfully mad^: Likewise in another
Psalm, speaking how Christ the stone, which the builders refused, was become
the head stone of the corner, Psalm. 118 v. 23.
he said, This is the Lords doing it is marveilous or wonderful in our eyes:
So here the bringing from the doors of death is called a wonderful work of
GOD tovvard the children of men.

Observe the lesson: The doctrine.
only the works of God are wonderful. Note.
Men may wonder at some works of men, but no works of men are wonderful: No
created wisdom can fill a work with wonder. There is nothing that man can
do, but man may come after and do better: plus vident oculi quam oculus: many
eyes see better than one: This is true amongst men. Note.
But all the eyes of men can not perceive that God in any work has either
been defectuous or superfluous: Note.
Look up to the Heavens, and consider the sun in his goings: Behold how in
the spring he comes slowly by degrees till our day be at the longest: Behold
and wonder at such slownesse in such a swiftness: If he were not slow in such
swiftness, what fearful changes should ensue? If from the elleventh of
December in the space of a day the sun should be into that part of Heaven,
whereinto he is seen into the elleventh of June, what discorder should be in
the creatures below? All men know how dangerous are sudden changes from heat
to cold, and from cold to heat. Note.
Behold then and wonder how the Creator has so ruled that Bridgroome of light,
Psalm. 19. v. 5.
that no man can imagine how his course could be changed for a better.

What shall I speak of the sea tide, Note.
which made that most subtle searcher of secrets, as some think to have
drowned him self in the creature, whose motion he could not understand? Note.
As for the earth it is a work so wonderful that no man tell whereupon it
has been founded. Tell me O thou most learned Philosopher, what can uphold
such a heavy mass? Thou will say that is founded upon its Center. But what is
that center but a point? What bears up that point that bears up all the
rest? But how can a point be a fundation of so hudge a mass? Note.
But imagine a man standing in the center, tell me what should be his
situation? According to the rules of Philosophy, both his head should be
upward, and his feet should be upward? Now what brain is able to conceive
this? Some may think all this to be very easy: but God did propound it unto
Job, as a great argument: Job. 38. v. 6.
Whereupon, (said He,) are the fundations of the earth fastened?

Note.
We must therefore confess, that this work of GOD, which is but earthly, is so
wonderful, that it overfloweth all humane capacity. Note.
When a vessel is filled to the brimme, it must at last overflow. When our
heart is filled with that which is wonderful, the wonders which we can not
contain must run over.

What shall J say more? Behold O man all the par^es of the mekle world, bend
thy wits, and see where thou can correct God his wisdom. Come fo^ward I pray
thee, and teach him a lesson if thou can: If not, confess that his works are
wonderful, and that thou is filled with wondering, so that GODS wonders in thy
heart do overflow.

From the mekle world, let us come to man, the little world. Note.
Behold the fabric of his body, his brows, his ears, his eyes, his nose,
his mouth: Behold the wonderful work of God: Teach GOD a lesson if thou can.
Note.
Will thou say, that his mouth had been best in his brow, and that his nose
had been best behind his ear, and that his eyes had been more fitly into his
chinne? No not. There is no part, which can be devised to b^^ better then it
is: the work is vvonderfull, and therefore say that thou art filled with
wondering: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

To come from the body to consider God his workings in the soul, they are so
wonderful, that no man can declare them. Who shall not wonder to consider the
workings of the soul? Note.
J admire the mind and understanding, the will and the affections agreeing,
discording, considering, judging, loving, or hating, making the body to laugh,
or to weep, according as the spirit is disposed Note.
Consider the spirit of man furnishing the body with five watches, as with a
guard for its preservation: viz, hearing, seeing, smelling, feeling, tasting,
and touching, all set about the body for its preservation, for as many watches,
to tell who is a foe, and who is a friend.

Note.
The work is so wonderful, that while I consider it, my spirit does overflow
with wondering: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men.

Note.
Last of all, seeing the curing of the sickness of the body is called a
wonderful work, how wonderful must the curing of the sick soul be? For
this cause, and for others also CHRIST the Savior of souls, was called
Wonderful: Unto us a child is borne, Isa. 9. v. 6.
(said the Prophet,) and his name shall be called WONDERFVLL: This is he, who
has not only filled the earth, but the Heavens with wondering. Note.
The Heavens at the first could not well perceive, Isa 53. v. 5.
how by God his stripes man should have health.

Note.
The Cherubins, which represented the Angels had their heads ever bowed toward
the Mercy-seat, for to see the calling and healing of the Gentiles: The
fellowship of that mystery had been hid in God from them, and that from the
beginning of the world: But so soon as it was revealed unto them by the
Church, Ephesians. 3. v, 10.
that is, so soon as they saw God his promise accomplished in the Church, as
in a glass, they all with one voice praised God for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men: All the spirits of Heaven did praise
Him that day with that divine song: Luke ^. v. 14.
Glory be to GOD in the highest Heavens, peace on earth, and toward men good
will.

Note.
But what shall J say of men, who are so much beholden unto God? Has not God
created us? Has he not redeemed us with the blood of his son? Has he not
delivered us from many dangers at home and a field? Psalm. 41. v. 3.
Has be not made all our bed in our sickness? Has he not brought us back
from the doors of death? But where is our thankfulness? I say again, OH
where is our thankfulness? Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

To the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be glory and Majesty, Dominion, and
power; for ever and ever, AMEN.


